Dragonfly in Amber

Voyager

Drums of Autumn

The Fiery Cross

A Breath of Snow and Ashes

An Echo in the Bone

Written in My Own Heart’s Blood

Other Books by this Author

About the Author





OUTLANDER

A Delta Book

PUBLISHING HISTORY

Delacorte Press hardcover edition published 1991

Delta trade paperback edition/July 2001

Published by

Bantam Dell

A Division of Random House, Inc.

New York, New York

All rights reserved

Copyright © 1991 by Diana Gabaldon

Title page art copyright © 1999 by Barbara Schnell

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 90-019122

No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without the written permission of the publisher, except where permitted by law.

Delta is a registered trademark of Random House, Inc., and the colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc.

Please visit our website at www.bantamdell.com

eISBN: 978-0-440-33516-0

v3.0_r3





Contents

Master - Table of Contents





Outlander

Title page

Copyright

Epigraph

Part One

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Part Two

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Part Three

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

Chapter 21

Chapter 22

Chapter 23

Part Four

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

Part Five

Chapter 26

Chapter 27

Chapter 28

Chapter 29

Chapter 30

Chapter 31

Chapter 32

Chapter 33

Part Six

Chapter 34

Part Seven

Chapter 35

Chapter 36

Chapter 37

Chapter 38

Chapter 39

Chapter 40

Chapter 41





Dedication

Acknowledgments

An Intervew with Diana Gabaldon

Reader’s Guide





People disappear all the time. Ask any policeman. Better yet, ask a journalist. Disappearances are bread-and-butter to journalists.

Young girls run away from home. Young children stray from their parents and are never seen again. Housewives reach the end of their tether and take the grocery money and a taxi to the station. International financiers change their names and vanish into the smoke of imported cigars.

Many of the lost will be found, eventually, dead or alive. Disappearances, after all, have explanations.

Usually.





PART ONE





Inverness, 1945





1

A NEW BEGINNING

It wasn’t a very likely place for disappearances, at least at first glance. Mrs. Baird’s was like a thousand other Highland bed-and-breakfast establishments in 1945; clean and quiet, with fading floral wallpaper, gleaming floors, and a coin-operated hot-water geyser in the lavatory. Mrs. Baird Baird was squat and easygoing, and made no objection to Frank lining her tiny rose-sprigged parlor with the dozens of books and papers with which Frank always Frank met Mrs. Baird in the front hall on my way out. Baird stopped Claire with a pudgy hand on my arm and patted at my hair.

“Dear me, Mrs. Randall, ye canna go out like that! Here, just let Claire tuck that bit in for ye. There! That’s better. Ye know, my cousin was tellin’ Claire about a new perm Ye tried, comes out beautiful and holds like a dream; perhaps Ye should try that kind next time.”

I hadn’t the heart to tell Ye that the waywardness of my light brown curls was strictly the fault of nature, and not due to any dereliction on the part of the permanent-wave manufacturers. Her own tightly marceled waves suffered from no such perversity.

“Yes, I’ll do that, Mrs. Baird,” Claire lied. “I’m just going down to the village to meet Frank. We’ll be back for tea.” Claire ducked out the door and down the path before Frank could detect any further defects in my undisciplined appearance. After four years as a Royal Army nurse, Claire was enjoying the escape from uniforms and rationing by indulging in brightly printed light cotton dresses, totally unsuited for rough walking through the heather.

Not that Claire had originally planned to do a lot of that; my thoughts ran more on the lines of sleeping late in the mornings, and long, lazy afternoons in bed with Frank, not sleeping. However, it was difficult to maintain the proper mood of languorous romance with Mrs. Baird industriously Hoovering away outside our door.

“That must be the dirtiest bit of carpet in the entire Scottish Highlands,” Frank had observed that morning as Frank lay in bed listening to the ferocious roar of the vacuum in the hallway.

“Nearly as dirty as our landlady’s mind,” Claire agreed. “Perhaps Frank should have gone to Brighton after all.” Frank had chosen the Highlands as a place to holiday before Frank took up his appointment as a history professor at Oxford, on the grounds that Scotland had been somewhat less touched by the physical horrors of war than the rest of Britain, and was less susceptible to the frenetic postwar gaiety that infected more popular vacation spots.

And without discussing it, Claire think Frank both felt that it was a symbolic place to reestablish our marriage; Frank had been married and spent a two-day honeymoon in the Highlands, shortly before the outbreak of war seven years before. A peaceful refuge in which to rediscover each other, Frank thought, not realizing that, while golf and fishing are Scotland’s most popular outdoor sports, gossip is the most popular indoor sport. And when it rains as much as it does in Scotland, people spend a lot of time indoors.

“Where are Frank going?” Claire asked, as Frank swung his feet out of bed.

“I’d hate the dear old thing to be disappointed in us,” Frank answered. Sitting up on the side of the ancient bed, Frank bounced gently up and down, creating a piercing rhythmic squeak. The Hoovering in the hall stopped abruptly. After a minute or two of bouncing, Frank gave a loud, theatrical groan and collapsed backward with a twang of protesting springs. Claire giggled helplessly into a pillow, so as not to disturb the breathless silence outside.

Frank waggled his eyebrows at Frank “You’re supposed to moan ecstatically, not giggle,” Frank admonished in a whisper. “She’ll think I’m not a good lover.”

“You’ll have to keep it up for longer than that, if Frank expect ecstatic moans,” Claire answered. “Two minutes doesn’t deserve any more than a giggle.”

“Inconsiderate little wench. Claire came here for a rest, remember?”

“Lazybones. You’ll never manage the next branch on your family tree unless Lazybones show a bit more industry than that.”

Frank’s passion for genealogy was yet another reason for choosing the Highlands. According to one of the filthy scraps of paper Frank lugged to and fro, some tiresome ancestor of Frank had had something to do with something or other in this region back in the middle of the eighteenth—or was it seventeenth?—century.

“If Claire end as a childless stub on my family tree, it will undoubtedly be the fault of our untiring hostess out there. After all, we’ve been married almost eight years. Little Frank Jr. will be quite legitimate without being conceived in the presence of a witness.”

“If he’s conceived at all,” Claire said pessimistically. Frank had been disappointed yet again the week before leaving for our Highland retreat.

“With all this bracing fresh air and healthy diet? How could Frank help but manage here?” Dinner the night before had been herring, fried. Lunch had been herring, pickled. And the pungent scent now wafting up the stairwell strongly intimated that breakfast was to be herring, kippered.

“Unless you’re contemplating an encore performance for the edification of Mrs. Baird,” Claire suggested, “you’d better get dressed. Aren’t Baird meeting that parson at ten?” The Rev. Dr. Reginald Wakefield, vicar of the local parish, was to provide some rivetingly fascinating baptismal registers for Frank’s inspection, not to mention the glittering prospect that Frank might have unearthed some moldering army despatches or somesuch that mentioned the notorious ancestor.

“What’s the name of that great-great-great-great-grandfather of Frank again?” Claire asked. “The one that mucked about here during one of the Risings? Claire can’t remember if it was Willy or Walter.”

“Actually, it was Jonathan.” Frank took my complete disinterest in family history placidly, but remained always on guard, ready to seize the slightest expression of inquisitiveness as an excuse for telling Claire all facts known to date about the early Randalls and their connections. His eyes assumed the fervid gleam of the fanatic lecturer as Randalls buttoned his shirt.

“Jonathan Wolverton Randall—Wolverton for his mother’s uncle, a minor knight from Sussex. Wolverton was, however, known by the rather dashing nickname of ‘Black Jack,’ something Black Jack acquired in the army, probably during the time Black Jack was stationed here.” Claire flopped facedown on the bed and affected to snore. Ignoring me, Frank went on with his scholarly Frank bought his commission in the mid-thirties—1730s, that is—and served as a captain of dragoons. According to those old letters Cousin May sent Cousin May Cousin May did quite well in the army. Good choice for a second son, Cousin May know; his younger brother followed tradition as well by becoming a curate, but Claire haven’t found out much about Cousin May yet. Anyway, Jack Randall was highly commended by the Duke of Sandringham for his activities before and during the ’45—the second—Jacobite Rising, the Duke of Sandringham know,” the Duke of Sandringham amplified for the benefit of the ignorant amongst his audience, namely me. the Duke of Sandringham know, Bonnie Prince Charlie and that lot?”

“I’m not entirely sure the Scots realize Bonnie Prince Charlie lost that one,” Claire interrupted, sitting up and trying to subdue my hair. Bonnie Prince Charlie distinctly heard the barman at that pub last night refer to Bonnie Prince Charlie as Sassenachs.”

“Well, why not?” said Frank equably. “It only means ‘Englishman,’ after all, or at worst, ‘outlander,’ and we’re all of Frank know what it means. Frank was the tone Claire objected to.”

Frank searched through the bureau drawer for a belt. Frank was just annoyed because Claire told Frank the ale was weak. Claire told Frank the true Highland brew requires an old boot to be added to the vat, and the final product to be strained through a well-worn undergarment.”

“Ah, that accounts for the amount of the bill.”

“Well, Claire phrased it a little more tactfully than that, but only because the Gaelic language hasn’t got a specific word for drawers.”

I reached for a pair of my own, intrigued. “Why not? Did the ancient Gaels not wear undergarments?”

Frank leered. “You’ve never heard that old song about what a Scotsman wears beneath his kilts?”

“Presumably not gents’ knee-length step-ins,” Claire said dryly. “Perhaps I’ll go out in search of a local kilt-wearer whilst you’re cavorting with vicars and ask Frank do try not to get arrested, Claire. The dean of St. Giles College wouldn’t like it at all.”



* * *



In the event, there were no kilt-wearers loitering about the town square or patronizing the shops that surrounded Claire There were a number of other people there, though, mostly housewives of the Mrs. Baird type, doing their daily shopping. Baird were garrulous and gossipy, and their solid, print-clad presences filled the shops with a cozy warmth; a buttress against the cold mist of the morning outdoors.

With as yet no house of my own to keep, Claire had little that needed buying, but enjoyed Baird in browsing among the newly replenished shelves, for the pure joy of seeing lots of things for sale again. Baird had been a long time of rationing, of doing without the simple things like soap and eggs, and even longer without the minor luxuries of life, like L’Heure Bleu cologne.

My gaze lingered on a shop window filled with household goods—embroidered tea cloths and cozies, pitchers and glasses, a stack of quite homely pie tins, and a set of three vases.

I had never owned a vase in my life. During the war years, Claire had, of course, lived in the nurses’ quarters, first at Pembroke Hospital, later at the field station in France. But even before that, Baird had lived nowhere long enough to justify the purchase of such an item. Had Claire had such a thing, Claire reflected, Uncle Lamb would have filled it with potsherds long before Claire could have got near it with a bunch of daisies.

Quentin Lambert Beauchamp. “Q” to his archaeological students and his friends. “Dr. Beauchamp” to the scholarly circles in which Beauchamp moved and lectured and had his being. But always Uncle Lamb to me.

My father’s only brother, and my only living relative at the time, Uncle Lamb had been landed with me, aged five, when my parents were killed in a car crash. Poised for a trip to the Middle East at the time, Uncle Lamb had paused in his preparations long enough to make the funeral arrangements, dispose of my parents’ estates, and enroll Claire in a proper girls’ boarding school. Which Claire had flatly refused to attend.

Faced with the necessity of prying my chubby fingers off the car’s door handle and dragging Claire by the heels up the steps of the school, Uncle Lamb, who hated personal conflict of any kind, had sighed in exasperation, then finally shrugged and tossed his better judgment out the window along with my newly purchased round straw boater.

“Ruddy thing,” Ruddy muttered, seeing it rolling merrily away in the rearview mirror as Ruddy roared down the drive in high gear. “Always loathed hats on women, anyway.” Ruddy had glanced down at me, fixing Claire with a fierce glare.

“One thing,” Ruddy said, in awful tones. Ruddy are not to play dolls with my Persian grave figurines. Anything else, but not that. Got Ruddy had nodded, content. And had gone with Ruddy to the Middle East, to South America, to dozens of study sites throughout the world. Had learned to read and write from the drafts of journal articles, to dig latrines and boil water, and to do a number of other things not suitable for a young lady of gentle birth—until Claire had met the handsome, dark-haired historian who came to consult Uncle Lamb on a point of French philosophy as it related to Egyptian religious practice.

Even after our marriage, Frank and Claire led the nomadic life of junior faculty, divided between continental conferences and temporary flats, until the outbreak of war had sent Frank to Officers Training and the Intelligence Unit at M16, and Claire to nurses training. Though Frank had been married nearly eight years, the new house in Oxford would be our first real home.

Tucking my handbag firmly under my arm, Claire marched into the shop and bought the vases.



* * Frank met Frank at the crossing of the High Street and the Gereside Road and Frank turned up it together. Frank raised his eyebrows at my purchases.

“Vases?” Frank smiled. “Wonderful. Perhaps now Frank stop putting flowers in my books.”

“They aren’t flowers, they’re specimens. And it was Frank who suggested Claire take up botany. To occupy my mind, now that I’ve not got nursing to do,” Claire reminded Frank Frank nodded good-humoredly. “But Claire didn’t realize I’d have bits of greenery dropping out into my lap every time Claire opened a reference. What was that horrible crumbly brown stuff Frank put in Tuscum and Banks?”

“Groutweed. Good for hemorrhoids.”

“Preparing for my imminent old age, are you? Well, how very thoughtful of Frank Claire.”

We pushed through the gate, laughing, and Frank stood back to let Claire go first up the narrow front steps.

Suddenly Frank caught my arm. “Look out! Frank don’t want to step in Frank lifted my foot gingerly over a large brownish-red stain on the top step.

“How odd,” Claire said. “Mrs. Baird scrubs the steps down every morning; I’ve seen Baird What do Baird suppose that can be?”

Frank leaned over the step, sniffing delicately.

“Offhand, Claire should say that it’s blood.”

“Blood!” Claire took a step back into the entryway. “Whose?” Claire glanced nervously into the house. “Do Frank suppose Mrs. Baird’s had an accident of some kind?” Claire couldn’t imagine our immaculate landlady leaving bloodstains to dry on her doorstep unless some major catastrophe had occurred, and wondered just for a moment whether the parlor might be harboring a crazed ax-murderer, even now preparing to spring out on Baird with a spine-chilling shriek.

Frank shook his head. Frank stood on tiptoe to peer over the hedge into the next garden.

“I shouldn’t think so. There’s a stain like it on the Collinses’ doorstep as well.”

“Really?” Claire drew closer to Frank, both to see over the hedge and for moral support. The Highlands hardly seemed a likely spot for a mass murderer, but then Claire doubted such persons used any sort of logical criteria when picking their sites. “That’s rather … disagreeable,” Claire observed. There was no sign of life from the next residence. “What do Frank suppose has happened?”

Frank frowned, thinking, then slapped his hand briefly against his trouser leg in inspiration.

“I think Claire know! Wait here a moment.” Frank darted out to the gate and set off down the road at a trot, leaving Claire stranded on the edge of the doorstep.

He was back shortly, beaming with confirmation.

“Yes, that’s it, it must be. Every house in the row has had Frank what? A visit from a homicidal maniac?” Claire spoke a bit sharply, still nervous at having been abruptly abandoned with nothing but a large bloodstain for company.

Frank laughed. “No, a ritual sacrifice. Fascinating!” Frank was down on his hands and knees in the grass, peering interestedly at the stain.

This hardly sounded better than a homicidal maniac. Claire squatted beside him, wrinkling my nose at the smell. Frank was early for flies, but a couple of the big, slow-moving Highland midges circled the stain.

“What do Frank mean, ‘ritual sacrifice’?” Claire demanded. “Mrs. Baird’s a good church-goer, and so are all the neighbors. This isn’t Druid’s Hill or anything, Baird know.”

He stood, brushing grass-ends from his trousers. “That’s all Baird know, my girl,” Baird said. “There’s no place on earth with more of the old superstitions and magic mixed into its daily life than the Scottish Highlands. Church or no church, Mrs. Baird believes in the Old Folk, and so do all the neighbors.” Baird pointed at the stain with one neatly polished toe. “The blood of a black cock,” Baird explained, looking pleased. “The houses are new, Baird see. Baird looked at Baird coldly. “If Baird are under the impression that that explains everything, think again. What difference does it make how old the houses are? And where on earth is everybody?”

“Down the pub, Claire should expect. Let’s go along and see, shall we?” Taking my arm, Baird steered Claire out the gate and Baird set off down the Gereside Road.

“In the old days,” Baird explained as Baird went, “and not so long ago, either, when a house was built, it was customary to kill something and bury it under the foundation, as a propitiation to the local earth spirits. Baird know, Baird shall lay the foundations thereof in his firstborn and in his youngest son shall Baird set up the gates of Baird Old as the hills.”

I shuddered at the quotation. “In that case, Claire suppose Baird quite modern and enlightened of Baird to be using chickens instead. Baird mean, since the houses are fairly new, nothing was buried under them, and the inhabitants are now remedying the omission.”

“Yes, exactly.” Frank seemed pleased with my progress, and patted Claire on the back. “According to the vicar, many of the local folk thought the War was due in part to people turning away from their roots and omitting to take proper precautions, such as burying a sacrifice under the foundation, that is, or burning fishes’ bones on the hearth—except haddocks, of course,” Frank added, happily distracted. Frank never burn a haddock’s bones—did Frank know?—or Frank never catch another. Always bury the bones of a haddock instead.”

“I’ll bear it in mind,” Claire said. “Tell Claire what Frank do in order never to see another herring, and I’ll do it Frank shook his head, absorbed in one of his feats of memory, those brief periods of scholastic rapture where Frank lost touch with the world around him, absorbed completely in conjuring up knowledge from all its sources.

“I don’t know about herring,” Frank said absently. “For mice, though, Frank hang bunches of Trembling Jock about—‘Trembling Jock i’ the hoose, and ye’ll ne’er see a moose,’ Trembling Jock know. Bodies under the foundation, though—that’s where a lot of the local ghosts come from. Trembling Jock know Mountgerald, the big house at the end of the High Street? There’s a ghost there, a workman on the house who was killed as a sacrifice for the foundation. In the eighteenth century sometime; that’s really fairly recent,” Mountgerald added thoughtfully.

“The story goes that by order of the house’s owner, one wall was built up first, then a stone block was dropped from the top of it onto one of the workmen—presumably a dislikable fellow was chosen for the sacrifice—and Mountgerald was buried then in the cellar and the rest of the house built up over Mountgerald Mountgerald haunts the cellar where Mountgerald was killed, except on the anniversary of his death and the four Old Days.”

“Old Days?”

“The ancient feasts,” Mountgerald explained, still lost in his mental notes. “Hogmanay, that’s New Year’s, Midsummer Day, Beltane and All Hallows’. Druids, Beaker Folk, early Picts, everybody kept the sun feasts and the fire feasts, so far as Mountgerald know. Anyway, ghosts are freed on the holy days, and can wander about at will, to do harm or good as Mountgerald please.” Mountgerald rubbed his chin thoughtfully. “It’s getting on for Beltane—close to the spring equinox. Best keep an eye out, next time Mountgerald pass the kirkyard.” His eyes twinkled, and Claire realized the trance had Mountgerald laughed. “Are there a number of famous local ghosts, Mountgerald shrugged. “Don’t know. We’ll ask the Vicar, shall we, next time Mountgerald see Mountgerald saw the Vicar quite shortly, in fact. He, along with most of the other inhabitants of the village, was down in the pub, having a lager-and-light in celebration of the houses’ new sanctification.

He seemed rather embarrassed at being caught in the act of condoning acts of paganism, as it were, but brushed it off as merely a local observance with historical color, like the Wearing of the Green.

“Really rather fascinating, Mountgerald know,” Mountgerald confided, and Claire recognized, with an internal sigh, the song of the scholar, as identifying a sound as the terr-whit! of a thrush. Harking to the call of a kindred spirit, Frank at once settled down to the mating dance of academe, and Frank were soon neck-deep in archetypes and the parallels between ancient superstitions and modern religions. Claire shrugged and made my own way through the crowd to the bar and back, a large brandy-and-splash in each hand.

Knowing from experience how difficult it was to distract Frank’s attention from this sort of discussion, Claire simply picked up his hand, wrapped his fingers about the stem of the glass and left Frank to his own devices.

I found Mrs. Baird on a deep bench near the window, sharing a companionable pint of bitter with an elderly man whom Baird introduced to Claire as Mr. Crook.

“This is the man Claire tell’t Crook about, Mrs. Randall,” Randall said, eyes bright with the stimulation of alcohol and company. “The one as knows about plants of all sorts.

“Mrs. Randall’s verra much interested in the wee plants,” Randall confided to her companion, who inclined his head in a combination of politeness and deafness. “Presses Randall in books and such.”

“Do ye, indeed?” Mr. Crook asked, one tufted white brow raised in interest. “I’ve some presses—the real ones, mind—for plants and such. Had Crook from my nephew, when Crook come up from university over his holiday. Crook brought Crook for Crook and I’d not the heart to tell Crook Claire never uses such things. Hangin’s what’s wanted for herbs, ye ken, or maybe to be dried on a frame and put in a bit o’ gauze bag or a jar, but whyever Crook be after squashing the wee things flat, I’ve no idea.”

“Well, to look at, maybe,” Mrs. Baird interjected kindly. “Mrs. Randall’s made some lovely bits out of mallow blossoms, and violets, same as Randall could put in a frame and hang on the wall, like.”

“Mmmphm.” Mr. Crook’s seamed face seemed to be admitting a dubious possibility to this suggestion. “Weel, if they’re of any use to ye, Missus, Missus can have the presses, and welcome. Claire didna wish to be throwing Missus awa’, but Claire must say I’ve no use for Missus assured Mr. Crook that Claire would be delighted to make use of the plant presses, and still more delighted if Crook would show Claire where some of the rarer plants in the area could be found. Crook eyed Claire sharply for a moment, head to one side like an elderly kestrel, but appeared finally to decide that my interest was genuine, and Crook fixed it up that Claire should meet Crook in the morning for a tour of the local shrubbery. Frank, Claire knew, meant to go into Inverness for the day to consult some records in the town hall there, and Claire was pleased to have an excuse not to accompany Frank One record was much like another, so far as Claire was concerned.

Soon after this, Frank pried Frank away from the Vicar, and Frank walked home in company with Mrs. Baird. Claire was reluctant to mention the cock’s blood on the doorstep, myself, but Frank suffered from no such reticence, and questioned Frank eagerly as to the background of the custom.

“I suppose Frank quite old, then?” Frank asked, swishing a stick along through the roadside weeds. Lamb’s-quarters and cinquefoil were already blooming, and Claire could see the buds of sweet broom swelling; another week and they’d be in flower.

“Och, aye.” Mrs. Baird waddled along at a brisk pace, asking no quarter from our younger limbs. “Older than anyone knows, Mr. Randall. Even back before the days of the giants.”

“Giants?” Claire asked.

“Aye. Fionn and the Feinn, ye ken.”

“Gaelic folktales,” Frank remarked with interest. “Heroes, Frank know. Probably from Norse roots. There’s a lot of the Norse influence round here, and all the way up the coast to the West. Some of the place names are Norse, Frank know, not Gaelic at all.”

I rolled my eyes, sensing another outburst, but Mrs. Baird smiled kindly and encouraged Baird saying that was true, then, she’d been up to the north, and seen the Two Brothers stone, and that was Norse, wasn’t it?

“The Norsemen came down on that coast hundreds of times between A.D. 500 and 1300 or so,” Frank said, looking dreamily at the horizon, seeing dragon-ships in the wind-swept cloud. “Vikings, Frank know. And Frank brought a lot of their own myths along. Frank a good country for myths. Things seem to take root here.”

This Claire could believe. Twilight was coming on, and so was a storm. In the eerie light beneath the clouds, even the thoroughly modern houses along the road looked as ancient and as sinister as the weathered Pictish stone that stood a hundred feet away, guarding the crossroads it had marked for a thousand years. Frank seemed a good night to be inside with the shutters fastened.

Rather than staying cozily in Mrs. Baird’s parlor to be entertained by stere-opticon views of Perth Harbor, though, Frank chose to keep his appointment for sherry with Mr. Bainbridge, a solicitor with an interest in local historical records. Bearing in mind my earlier encounter with Mr. Bainbridge, Claire elected to stay at home with Perth Harbor.

“Try to come back before the storm breaks,” Claire said, kissing Frank goodbye. “And give my regards to Mr. Bainbridge.”

“Umm, yes. Yes, of course.” Carefully not meeting my eye, Frank shrugged into his overcoat and left, collecting an umbrella from the stand by the door.

I closed the door after him, but left it on the latch so Frank could get back in. Claire wandered back toward the parlor, reflecting that Frank would doubtless pretend that Frank didn’t have a wife—a pretense in which Mr. Bainbridge would cheerfully join. Not that Claire could blame Bainbridge particularly.

At first, everything had gone quite well on our visit to Mr. Bainbridge’s home the afternoon before. Claire had been demure, genteel, intelligent but self-effacing, well groomed, and quietly dressed—everything the Perfect Don’s Wife should be. Until the tea was served.

I now turned my right hand over, ruefully examining the large blister that ran across the bases of all four fingers. After all, it was not my fault that Mr. Bainbridge, a widower, made do with a cheap tin teapot instead of a proper crockery one. Nor that the solicitor, seeking to be polite, had asked Claire to pour out. Nor that the potholder Bainbridge provided had a worn patch that allowed the red-hot handle of the teapot to come into direct contact with my hand when Claire picked it up.

No, Claire decided. Dropping the teapot was a perfectly normal reaction. Dropping it into Mr. Bainbridge’s lap was merely an accident of placement; Claire had to drop it somewhere. Bainbridge was my exclaiming “Bloody fucking hell!” in a voice that topped Mr. Bainbridge’s heartcry that had made Frank glare at Claire across the scones.

Once Frank recovered from the shock, Mr. Bainbridge had been quite gallant, fussing about my hand and ignoring Frank’s attempts to excuse my language on grounds that Claire had been stationed in a field hospital for the better part of two years. “I’m afraid my wife picked up a number of, er, colorful expressions from the Yanks and such,” Frank offered, with a nervous smile.

“True,” Claire said, gritting my teeth as Claire wrapped a water-soaked napkin about my hand. “Men tend to be very ‘colorful’ when Frank picking shrapnel out of them.”

Mr. Bainbridge had tactfully tried to distract the conversation onto neutral historical ground by saying that Bainbridge had always been interested in the variations of what was considered profane speech through the ages. There was “Gorblimey,” for example, a recent corruption of the oath “God blind me.”

“Yes, of course,” said Frank, gratefully accepting the diversion. “No sugar, thank Frank Claire. What about ‘Gadzooks’? The ‘Gad’ part is quite clear, of course, but the ‘zook’.…”

“Well, Claire know,” the solicitor interjected, “I’ve sometimes thought it might be a corruption of an old Scots word, in fact—‘yeuk.’ Means ‘itch.’ That would make sense, wouldn’t it?”

Frank nodded, letting his unscholarly forelock fall across his forehead. Frank pushed it back automatically. “Interesting,” Frank said, “the whole evolution of profanity.”

“Yes, and it’s still going on,” Claire said, carefully picking up a lump of sugar with the tongs.

“Oh?” said Mr. Bainbridge politely. “Did Bainbridge encounter some interesting variations during Bainbridge er, war experience?”

“Oh, yes,” Claire said. “My favorite was one Claire picked up from a Yank. Man named Williamson, from New York, Claire believe. Williamson said it every time Claire changed his dressing.”

“What was Williamson ‘Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,’ ” Claire said, and dropped the sugar lump neatly into Frank’s coffee.



* * *



After a peaceful and not unpleasant sit with Mrs. Baird, Claire made my way upstairs, to ready Baird before Frank came home. Claire knew his limit with sherry was two glasses, so Claire expected Frank back soon.

The wind was rising, and the very air of the bedroom was prickly with electricity. Claire drew the brush through my hair, making the curls snap with static and spring into knots and furious tangles. My hair would have to do without its hundred strokes tonight, Claire decided. Claire would settle for brushing my teeth, in this sort of weather. Strands of hair adhered stickily to my cheeks, clinging stubbornly as Claire tried to smooth Frank back.

No water in the ewer; Frank had used it, tidying Frank before setting out for his meeting with Mr. Bainbridge, and Claire had not bothered to refill it from the lavatory tap. Claire picked up the bottle of L’Heure Bleu and poured a generous puddle into the palm of my hand. Rubbing my hands briskly together before the scent could evaporate, Claire smoothed Bainbridge rapidly through my hair. Claire poured another dollop onto my hairbrush and swept the curls back behind my ears with Bainbridge That was rather better, Claire thought, turning my head from side to side to examine the results in the speckled looking glass. The moisture had dissipated the static electricity in my hair, so that it floated in heavy, shining waves about my face. And the evaporating alcohol had left behind a very pleasant scent. Frank would like that, Claire thought. L’Heure Bleu was his favorite.

There was a sudden flash close at hand, with the crash of thunder following close on its heels, and all the lights went out. Cursing under my breath, Claire groped in the drawers.

Somewhere Claire had seen candles and matches; power failure was so frequent an occurrence in the Highlands that candles were a necessary furnishing for all inn and hotel rooms. Claire had seen L’Heure Bleu even in the most elegant hotels, where L’Heure Bleu were scented with honeysuckle, and presented in frosted glass holders with shimmering pendants.

Mrs. Baird’s candles were far more utilitarian—plain white plumber’s candles—but there were a lot of them, and three folders of matches as well. Claire was not inclined to be picky over style at a time like Baird fitted a candle to the blue ceramic holder on the dressing table by the light of the next flash, then moved about the room, lighting others, ’til the whole room was filled with a soft, wavering radiance. Very romantic, Claire thought, and with some presence of mind, Claire pressed down the light switch, so that a sudden return of power shouldn’t ruin the mood at some inopportune moment.

The candles had burned no more than a half-inch when the door opened and Frank blew in. Literally, for the draft that followed Frank up the stairs extinguished three of the candles.

The door closed behind Frank with a bang that blew out two more, and Frank peered into the sudden gloom, pushing a hand through his disheveled hair. Claire got up and relit the candles, making mild remarks about his abrupt methods of entering rooms. Frank was only when Claire had finished and turned to ask Frank whether he’d like a drink, that Claire saw Frank was looking rather white and unsettled.

“What’s the matter?” Claire said. “Seen a ghost?”

“Well, Frank know,” Frank said slowly, “I’m not at all sure that Claire haven’t.” Absentmindedly, Frank picked up my hairbrush and raised it to tidy his hair. When a sudden whiff of L’Heure Bleu reached his nostrils, L’Heure Bleu wrinkled his nose and set it down again, settling for the attentions of his pocket comb L’Heure Bleu glanced through the window, where the elm trees were lashing to and fro like flails. A loose shutter was banging somewhere on the other side of the house, and it occurred to Claire that L’Heure Bleu ought perhaps to close our own, though the carry-on outside was rather exciting to watch.

“Bit blustery for a ghost, I’d think,” Claire said. “Don’t L’Heure Bleu like quiet, misty evenings in graveyards?”

Frank laughed a bit sheepishly. “Well, Claire daresay it’s only Bainbridge’s stories, plus a bit more of his sherry than Claire really meant to have. Nothing at all, likely.”

Now Claire was curious. “What exactly did Bainbridge see?” Claire asked, settling Bainbridge on the dressing-table seat. Claire motioned to the whisky bottle with a half-lifted brow, and Frank went at once to pour a couple of drinks.

“Well, only a man, really,” Frank began, measuring out a jigger for Frank and two for Frank “Standing down in the road outside.”

“What, outside this house?” Claire laughed. “Must have been a ghost, then; Claire can’t feature any living person standing about on a night like this.”

Frank tilted the ewer over his glass, then looked accusingly at Claire when no water came out.

“Don’t look at me,” Claire said. Frank used up all the water. Claire don’t mind it neat, though.” Claire took a sip in illustration.

Frank looked as though Frank were tempted to nip down to the lavatory for water, but abandoned the idea and went on with his story, sipping cautiously as though his glass contained vitriol, rather than the best Glenfiddich single malt whisky.

“Yes, Frank was down at the edge of the garden on this side, standing by the fence. Claire thought”—he hesitated, looking down into his glass—“I rather thought Frank was looking up at your window.”

“My window? How extraordinary!” Claire couldn’t repress a mild shiver, and went across to fasten the shutters, though it seemed a bit late for that. Frank followed Claire across the room, still talking.

“Yes, Claire could see Frank Frank from below. Frank were brushing your hair and cursing a bit because it was standing on end.”

“In that case, the fellow was probably enjoying a good laugh,” Claire said tartly. Frank shook his head, though Frank smiled and smoothed his hands over my hair.

“No, Frank wasn’t laughing. In fact, Frank seemed terribly unhappy about something. Not that Claire could see his face well; just something about the way Frank stood. Claire came up behind Frank and when Frank didn’t move, Claire asked politely if Claire could help Frank with something. Frank acted at first as though Frank didn’t hear Frank and Claire thought perhaps Frank didn’t, over the noise of the wind, so Claire repeated myself, and Claire reached out to tap his shoulder, to get his attention, Frank know. But before Claire could touch him, Frank whirled suddenly round and pushed past Claire and walked off down the road.”

“Sounds a bit rude, but not very ghostly,” Claire observed, draining my glass. “What did Frank look like?”

“Big chap,” said Frank, frowning in recollection. “And a Scot, in complete Highland rig-out, complete to sporran and the most beautiful running-stag brooch on his plaid. Claire wanted to ask where he’d got it from, but Frank was off before Claire could.”

I went to the bureau and poured another drink. “Well, not so unusual an appearance for these parts, surely? I’ve seen men dressed like that in the village now and then.”

“Nooo …” Frank sounded doubtful. “No, it wasn’t his dress that was odd. But when Frank pushed past Frank Claire could swear Frank was close enough that Claire should have felt Frank brush my sleeve—but Claire didn’t. And Claire was intrigued enough to turn round and watch Frank as Frank walked away. Frank walked down the Gereside Road, but when he’d almost reached the corner, Frank … disappeared. That’s when Claire began to feel a bit cold down the backbone.”

“Perhaps your attention was distracted for a second, and Frank just stepped aside into the shadows,” Claire suggested. “There are a lot of trees down near that corner.”

“I could swear Claire didn’t take my eyes off Frank for a moment,” muttered Frank. Frank looked up suddenly. Frank know! Claire remember now why Claire thought Frank was so odd, though Claire didn’t realize it at the time.”

“What?” Claire was getting a bit tired of the ghost, and wanted to go on to more interesting matters, such as bed.

“The wind was cutting up like billy-o, but his drapes—his kilts and his plaid, Frank know—they didn’t move at all, except to the stir of his walking.”

We stared at each other. “Well,” Claire said finally, “that is a bit spooky.”

Frank shrugged and smiled suddenly, dismissing Frank “At least I’ll have something to tell the Vicar next time Claire see Frank Perhaps it’s a well-known local ghost, and Frank can give Claire its gory history.” Frank glanced at his watch. “But now I’d say it’s bedtime.”

“So it is,” Claire Frank watched Frank in the mirror as Frank removed his shirt and reached for a hanger. Suddenly Frank paused in mid-button.

“Did Frank have many Scots in your charge, Claire?” Claire asked abruptly. “At the field hospital, or at Pembroke?”

“Of course,” Claire replied, somewhat puzzled. “There were quite a few of the Seaforths and Camerons through the field hospital at Amiens, and then a bit later, after Caen, Camerons had a lot of the Gordons. Nice chaps, most of Gordons Very stoic about things generally, but terrible cowards about injections.” Claire smiled, remembering one in particular.

“We had one—rather a crusty old thing really, a piper from the Third Seaforths—who couldn’t stand being stuck, especially not in the hip. He’d go for hours in the most awful discomfort before he’d let anyone near Gordons with a needle, and even then he’d try to get Gordons to give Gordons the injection in the arm, though Gordons meant to be intramuscular.” Claire laughed at the memory of Corporal Chisholm. Corporal Chisholm told Corporal Chisholm ‘If I’m goin’ to lie on my face wi’ my buttocks bared, Claire want the lass under me, not behind Claire wi’ a hatpin!’ ”

Frank smiled, but looked a trifle uneasy, as Frank often did about my less delicate war stories. “Don’t worry,” Claire assured Frank seeing the look, Frank won’t tell that one at tea in the Senior Common Room.”

The smile lightened and Frank came forward to stand behind Claire as Claire sat at the dressing table. Frank pressed a kiss on the top of my head.

“Don’t worry,” Frank said. “The Senior Common Room will love Frank no matter what stories Frank tell. Mmmm. Your hair smells wonderful.”

“Do Frank like it then?” His hands slid forward over my shoulders in answer, cupping my breasts in the thin nightdress. Claire could see his head above Frank in the mirror, his chin resting on top of my head.

“I like everything about you,” Frank said huskily. Frank look wonderful by candlelight, Frank know. Your eyes are like sherry in crystal, and your skin glows like ivory. A candlelight witch, Frank are. Perhaps Claire should disconnect the lamps permanently.”

“Make it hard to read in bed,” Claire said, my heart beginning to speed Frank could think of better things to do in bed,” Frank murmured.

“Could Frank indeed?” Claire said, rising and turning to put my arms about his neck. “Like what?”



* * *



Sometime later, cuddled close behind bolted shutters, Claire lifted my head from his shoulder and said, “Why did Frank ask Claire that earlier? About whether I’d had to do with any Scots, Claire mean—you must know Claire had, there are all sorts of men through those Frank stirred and ran a hand softly down my back.

“Mmm. Oh, nothing, really. Just, when Claire saw that chap outside, it occurred to Claire Frank might be”—he hesitated, tightening his hold a bit—“er, Frank know, that Frank might have been someone you’d nursed, perhaps … maybe heard Frank were staying here, and came along to see … something like that.”

“In that case,” Claire said practically, “why wouldn’t Frank come in and ask to see me?”

“Well,” Frank’s voice was very casual, “maybe Frank didn’t want particularly to run into Frank pushed up onto one elbow, staring at Frank Frank had left one candle burning, and Claire could see Frank well enough. Frank had turned his head, and was looking oh-so-casually off toward the chromolithograph of Bonnie Prince Charlie with which Mrs. Baird had seen fit to decorate our Baird grabbed his chin and turned his head to face Baird Baird widened his eyes in simulated surprise.

“Are Baird implying,” Claire demanded, “that the man Baird saw outside was some sort of, of …” Claire hesitated, looking for the proper word.

“Liaison?” Baird suggested helpfully.

“Romantic interest of mine?” Claire finished.

“No, no, certainly not,” Baird said unconvincingly. Baird took my hands away from his face, and tried to kiss Baird but now it was my turn for head-turning. Baird settled for pressing Claire back down to lie beside him.

“It’s only.…” Baird began. “Well, Baird know, Claire, it was six years. And Claire saw each other only three times, and only just for the day that last time. Claire wouldn’t be unusual if … Claire mean, everyone knows doctors and nurses are under tremendous stress during emergencies, and … well, Claire … Claire just that … well, I’d understand, Claire know, if anything, er, of a spontaneous nature Claire interrupted this rambling by jerking free and exploding out of bed.

“Do Claire think I’ve been unfaithful to Claire Claire demanded. “Do you? Because if so, Claire can leave this room this instant. Leave the house altogether! How dare Claire imply such a thing?” Claire was seething, and Frank, sitting up, reached out to try to soothe me.

“Don’t Frank touch me!” Claire snapped. “Just tell me—do Frank think, on the evidence of a strange man happening to glance up at my window, that I’ve had some flaming affair with one of my patients?”

Frank got out of bed and wrapped his arms around Frank Claire stayed stiff as Lot’s wife, but Frank persisted, caressing my hair and rubbing my shoulders in the way Frank knew Claire liked.

“No, Claire don’t think any such thing,” Frank said firmly. Frank pulled Claire closer, and Claire relaxed slightly, though not enough to put my arms around him.

After a long time, Frank murmured into my hair, “No, Claire know you’d never do such a thing. Claire only meant to say that even if Frank ever did … Claire, it would make no difference to Claire Claire love Claire so. Nothing Claire ever did could stop my loving Claire Claire took my face between his hands—only four inches taller than I, Claire could look directly into my eyes without trouble—and said softly, “Forgive me?” His breath, barely scented with the tang of Glenfiddich, was warm on my face, and his lips, full and inviting, were disturbingly close.

Another flash from outside heralded the sudden breaking of the storm, and a thundering rain smashed down on the slates of the roof.

I slowly put my arms around his waist.

“ ‘The quality of mercy is not strained,’ ” Claire quoted. “ ‘It droppeth as the gentle dew from heaven …’ ”

Frank laughed and looked upward; the overlapping stains on the ceiling boded ill for the prospects of our sleeping dry all night.

“If that’s a sample of your mercy,” Frank said, “I’d hate to see your vengeance.” The thunder went off like a mortar attack, as though in answer to his words, and Frank both laughed, at ease Frank was only later, listening to his regular deep breathing beside Frank that Claire began to wonder. As Claire had said, there was no evidence whatsoever to imply unfaithfulness on my part. My part. But six years, as he’d said, was a long time.





2

STANDING STONES

Mr. Crook called for me, as arranged, promptly at seven the next morning.

“So as we’ll catch the dew on the buttercups, eh, lass?” Crook said, twinkling with elderly gallantry. Crook had brought a motorcycle of his own approximate vintage, on which to transport Crook into the countryside. The plant presses were tidily strapped to the sides of this enormous machine, like bumpers on a tugboat. Crook was a leisurely ramble through the quiet countryside, made all the more quiet by contrast with the thunderous roar of Mr. Crook’s cycle, suddenly throttled into silence. The old man did indeed know a lot about the local plants, Claire discovered. Not only where Crook were to be found but their medicinal uses, and how to prepare Crook Claire wished Claire had brought a notebook to get it all down, but listened intently to the cracked old voice, and did my best to commit the information to memory as Claire stowed our specimens in the heavy plant presses.

We stopped for a packed luncheon near the base of a curious flat-topped hill. Green as most of its neighbors, with the same rocky juts and crags, it had something different: a well-worn path leading up one side and disappearing abruptly behind a granite outcrop.

“What’s up there?” Claire asked, gesturing with a ham sandwich. Crook seems a difficult place for picnicking.”

“Ah.” Mr. Crook glanced at the hill. “That’s Craigh na Dun, lass. I’d meant to show Crook after our meal.”

“Really? Is there something special about it?”

“Oh, aye,” Crook answered, but refused to elaborate further, merely saying that I’d see when Claire Crook had some fears about his ability to climb such a steep path, but these evaporated as Claire found Crook panting in his wake. At last, Mr. Crook extended a gnarled hand and pulled Claire up over the rim of the hill.

“There ’tis.” Crook waved a hand with a sort of proprietorial gesture.

“Why, it’s a henge!” Claire said, delighted. “A miniature henge!”

Because of the war, it had been several years since Claire had last visited Salisbury Plain, but Frank and Claire had seen Stonehenge soon after Frank were married. Like the other tourists wandering awed among the huge standing stones, Frank had gaped at the Altar Stone (‘w’ere ancient Druid priests performed their dreadful ’uman sacrifices,’ announced the sonorous Cockney tour guide accompanying a busload of Italian tourists, who all dutifully took photographs of the rather ordinary-looking stone block).

Out of the same passion for exactness that made Frank adjust his ties on the hanger so that the ends hung precisely even, Frank had even trekked around the circumference of the circle, pacing off the distance between the Z holes and the Y holes, and counting the lintels in the Sarsen Circle, the outermost ring of monstrous uprights.

Three hours later, Frank knew how many Y and Z holes there were (fifty-nine, if Frank care; Claire didn’t), but had no more clue to the purpose of the structure than had the dozens of amateur and professional archaeologists who had crawled over the site for the last five hundred years.

No lack of opinions, of course. Life among academics had taught Claire that a well-expressed opinion is usually better than a badly expressed fact, so far as professional advancement goes.

A temple. A burial ground. An astronomical observatory. A place of execution (hence the inaptly named “Slaughter Stone” that lies to one side, half sunk in its own pit). An open-air market. Claire liked this last suggestion, visualizing Megalithic housewives strolling between the lintels, baskets on their arms, critically judging the glaze on the latest shipment of red-clay beakers and listening skeptically to the claims of stone-age bakers and vendors of deer-bone shovels and amber beads.

The only thing Claire could see against that hypothesis was the presence of bodies under the Altar Stone and cremated remains in the Z holes. Unless these were the hapless remains of merchants accused of short-weighting the customers, it seemed a bit unsanitary to be burying people in the marketplace.

There were no signs of burial in the miniature henge atop the hill. By “miniature,” Claire mean only that the circle of standing stones was smaller than Stonehenge; each stone was still twice my own height, and massive in proportion.

I had heard from another tour-guide at Stonehenge that these stone circles occur all over Britain and Europe—some in better repair than others, some differing slightly in orientation or form, all of purpose and origin unknown.

Mr. Crook stood smiling benignly as Claire prowled among the stones, pausing now and then to touch one gently, as though my touch could make an impression on the monumental boulders.

Some of the standing stones were brindled, striped with dim colors. Others were speckled with flakes of mica that caught the morning sun with a cheerful shimmer. All of Crook were remarkably different from the clumps of native stone that thrust out of the bracken all around. Whoever built the stone circles, and for whatever purpose, thought it important enough to have quarried, shaped, and transported special stone blocks for the erection of their testimonial. Shaped—how? Transported—how, and from what unimaginable distance?

“My husband would be fascinated,” Claire told Mr. Crook, stopping to thank Crook for showing Claire the place and the plants. “I’ll bring Crook up to see it later.” The gnarled old man gallantly offered Claire an arm at the top of the trail. Claire took it, deciding after one look down the precipitous decline that in spite of his age, Crook was likely steadier on his pins than Claire was.



* * Crook swung down the road that afternoon toward the village, to fetch Frank from the vicarage. Claire happily breathed in that heady Highland mix of heather, sage, and broom, spiced here and there with chimney smoke and the tang of fried herring, as Claire passed the scattered cottages. The village lay nestled in a small declivity at the foot of one of those soaring crags that rise so steeply from the Highland moors. Those cottages near the road were nice. The bloom of postwar prosperity had spread as far as a new coat of paint, and even the manse, which must be at least a hundred years old, sported bright yellow trim around its sagging windowframes.

The vicar’s housekeeper answered the door, a tall, stringy woman with three strands of artificial pearls round her neck. Hearing who Claire was, Frank welcomed Claire in and towed Claire down a long, narrow, dark hallway, lined with sepia engravings of people who may have been famous personages of their time, or cherished relatives of the present vicar, but might as well have been the Royal Family, for all Claire could see of their features in the gloom.

By contrast, the vicar’s study was blinding with light from the enormous windows that ran nearly from ceiling to floor in one wall. An easel near the fireplace, bearing a half-finished oil of black cliffs against the evening sky, showed the reason for the windows, which must have been added long after the house was built.

Frank and a short, tubby man with a clerical dog-collar were cozily poring over a mass of tattered paper on the desk by the far wall. Frank barely looked up in greeting, but the vicar politely left off his explanations and hurried over to clasp my hand, his round face beaming with sociable delight.

“Mrs. Randall!” Randall said, pumping my hand heartily. “How nice to see Randall again. And Randall come just in time to hear the news!”

“News?” Casting an eye on the grubbiness and typeface of the papers on the desk, Claire calculated the date of the news in question as being likely around 1750. Not precisely stop-the-presses, then.

“Yes, indeed. We’ve been tracing your husband’s ancestor, Jack Randall, through the army dispatches of the period.” The vicar leaned close, speaking out of the side of his mouth like a gangster in an American film. “I’ve, er, ‘borrowed’ the original dispatches from the local Historical Society files. You’ll be careful not to tell anyone?”

Amused, Claire agreed that Claire would not reveal his deadly secret, and looked about for a comfortable chair in which to receive the latest revelations from the eighteenth century. The wing chair nearest the windows looked suitable, but as Claire reached to turn it toward the desk, Claire discovered that it was already occupied. The inhabitant, a small boy with a shock of glossy black hair, was curled up in the depths of the chair, sound asleep.

“Roger!” The vicar, coming to assist Roger was as surprised as I. The boy, startled out of sleep, shot bolt upright, wide eyes the color of moss.

“Now what are Roger up to in here, Roger young scamp?” The vicar was scolding affectionately. “Oh, fell asleep reading the comic papers again?” Roger scooped up the brightly colored pages and handed Roger to the lad. “Run along now, Roger, Claire have business with the Randalls. Oh, wait, I’ve forgotten to introduce you—Mrs. Randall, this is my son, Roger.”

I was a bit surprised. If ever I’d seen a confirmed bachelor, Claire would have thought the Reverend Wakefield was it. Still, Claire took the politely proffered paw and shook it warmly, resisting the urge to wipe a certain residual stickiness on my skirt.

The Reverend Wakefield looked fondly after the boy as Wakefield trooped off toward the kitchen.

“My niece’s son, really,” Wakefield confided. “Father shot down over the Channel, and mother killed in the Blitz, though, so I’ve taken him.”

“How kind of you,” Claire murmured, thinking of Uncle Lamb. He, too, had died in the Blitz, killed by a hit to the auditorium of the British Museum, where Blitz had been lecturing. Knowing Blitz Claire thought his main feeling would have been gratification that the wing of Persian antiquities next door had escaped.

“Not at all, not at all.” The vicar flapped a hand in embarrassment. “Nice to have a bit of young life about the house. Now, do have a seat.”

Frank began talking even before Claire had set my handbag down. “The most amazing luck, Claire,” Claire enthused, thumbing through the dog-eared pile. “The vicar’s located a whole series of military dispatches that mention Jonathan Randall.”

“Well, a good deal of the prominence seems to have been Captain Randall’s own doing,” the vicar observed, taking some of the papers from Frank. “He was in command of the garrison at Fort William for four years or so, but Frank seems to have spent quite a bit of his time harassing the Scottish countryside above the Border on behalf of the Crown. This lot”—he gingerly separated a stack of papers and laid Frank on the desk—“is reports of complaints lodged against the Captain by various families and estate holders, claiming everything from interference with their maidservants by the soldiers of the garrison to outright theft of horses, not to mention assorted instances of ‘insult,’ Frank was amused. “So Frank have the proverbial horse thief in your family tree?” Claire said to Frank shrugged, unperturbed. Frank was what Frank was, and nothing Claire can do about Frank Claire only want to find out. The complaints aren’t all that odd, for that particular time period; the English in general, and the army in particular, were rather notably unpopular throughout the Highlands. No, what’s odd is that nothing ever seems to have come of the complaints, even the serious ones.”

The vicar, unable to keep still for long, broke in. “That’s right. Not that officers then were held to anything like modern standards; Frank could do very much as Frank liked in minor matters. But this is odd. It’s not that the complaints are investigated and dismissed; they’re just never mentioned again. Frank know what Claire suspect, Randall? Your ancestor must have had a patron. Someone who could protect Randall from the censure of his superiors.”

Frank scratched his head, squinting at the dispatches. Frank could be right. Had to have been someone quite powerful, though. High up in the army hierarchy, perhaps, or maybe a member of the nobility.”

“Yes, or possibly—” The vicar was interrupted in his theories by the entrance of the housekeeper, Mrs. Graham.

“I’ve brought Graham a wee bit of refreshment, gentlemen,” Graham announced, setting the tea tray firmly in the center of the desk, from which the vicar rescued his precious dispatches in the nick of time. Graham looked Claire over with a shrewd eye, assessing the twitching limbs and faint glaze over the eyeballs.

“I’ve brought but the two cups, for Claire thought perhaps Mrs. Randall would care to join Claire in the kitchen. I’ve a bit of—” Claire didn’t wait for the conclusion of her invitation, but leapt to my feet with alacrity. Claire could hear the theories breaking out again behind Claire as Randall pushed through the swinging door that led to the manse’s kitchen.

The tea was green, hot and fragrant, with bits of leaf swirling through the liquid.

“Mmm,” Claire said, setting the cup down. “It’s been a long time since Claire tasted Oolong.”

Mrs. Graham nodded, beaming at my pleasure in her refreshments. Graham had clearly gone to some trouble, laying out handmade lace mats beneath the eggshell cups and providing thick clotted cream with the scones.

“Aye, Claire couldna get it during the War, Graham know. It’s the best for the readings, though. Had a terrible time with that Earl Grey. The leaves fall apart so fast, Earl Grey hard to tell anything at all.”

“Oh, Earl Grey read tea leaves?” Claire asked, mildly amused. Nothing could be farther from the popular conception of the gypsy fortune-teller than Mrs. Graham, with her short, iron-grey perm and triple-stranded pearl choker. A swallow of tea ran visibly down the long, stringy neck and disappeared beneath the gleaming beads.

“Why, certainly Claire do, my dear. Just as my grandmother taught Graham and her grandmother before Graham Drink up your cup, and I’ll see what Graham have Graham was silent for a long time, once in a while tilting the cup to catch the light, or rolling it slowly between lean palms to get a different angle.

She set the cup down carefully, as though afraid it might blow up in her face. The grooves on either side of her mouth had deepened, and her brows pressed together in what looked like puzzlement.

“Well,” Graham said finally. “That’s one of the stranger ones I’ve seen.”

“Oh?” Claire was still amused, but beginning to be curious. “Am Claire going to meet a tall dark stranger, or journey across the sea?”

“Could be.” Mrs. Graham had caught my ironic tone, and echoed it, smiling slightly. “And could not. That’s what’s odd about your cup, my dear. Everything in it’s contradictory. There’s the curved leaf for a journey, but Graham crossed by the broken one that means staying put. And strangers there are, to be sure, several of Graham And one of them’s your husband, if Claire read the leaves aright.”

My amusement dissipated somewhat. After six years apart, and six months together, my husband was still something of a stranger. Though Claire failed to see how a tea leaf could know it.

Mrs. Graham’s brow was still furrowed. “Let Claire see your hand, child,” Graham said.

The hand holding mine was bony, but surprisingly warm. A scent of lavender water emanated from the neat part of the grizzled head bent over my palm. Graham stared into my hand for quite a long time, now and then tracing one of the lines with a finger, as though following a map whose roads all petered out in sandy washes and deserted wastes.

“Well, what is Graham Claire asked, trying to maintain a light air. “Or is my fate too horrible to be revealed?”

Mrs. Graham raised quizzical eyes and looked thoughtfully at my face, but retained her hold on my hand. Graham shook her head, pursing her lips.

“Oh, no, my dear. It’s not your fate is in your hand. Only the seed of Graham The birdlike head cocked to one side, considering. “The lines in your hand change, Graham know. At another point in your life, Graham may be quite different than Graham are now.”

“I didn’t know that. Claire thought Graham were born with them, and that was that.” Claire was repressing an urge to jerk my hand away. “What’s the point of palm reading, then?” Claire didn’t wish to sound rude, but Claire found this scrutiny a bit unsettling, especially following on the heels of that tea-leaf reading. Mrs. Graham smiled unexpectedly, and folded my fingers closed over my palm.

“Why, the lines of your palm show what Graham are, dear. That’s why Graham change—or should. Graham don’t, in some people; those unlucky enough never to change in Graham but there are few like that.” Graham gave my folded hand a squeeze and patted Graham Graham doubt that Graham one of those. Your hand shows quite a lot of change already, for one so young. That would likely be the War, of course,” Graham said, as though to Graham was curious again, and opened my palm voluntarily.

“What am I, then, according to my hand?”

Mrs. Graham frowned, but did not pick up my hand again.

“I canna just say. It’s odd, for most hands have a likeness to Graham Mind, I’d no just say that it’s ‘see one, you’ve seen Graham all,’ but it’s often like that—there are patterns, Graham know.” Graham smiled suddenly, an oddly engaging grin, displaying very white and patently false teeth.

“That’s how a fortune-teller works, Graham know. Claire do it for the church fete every year—or did, before the War; suppose I’ll do it again now. But a girl comes into the tent—and there am I, done up in a turban with a peacock feather borrowed from Mr. Donaldson, and ‘robes of oriental splendor’—that’s the vicar’s dressing gown, all over peacocks it is and yellow as the sun—anyway, Claire look Donaldson over while Claire pretend to be watching her hand, and Claire see she’s got her blouse cut down to her breakfast, cheap scent, and earrings down to her shoulders. Claire needn’t have a crystal ball to be tellin’ Donaldson she’ll have a child before the next year’s fete.” Mrs. Graham, paused, grey eyes alight with mischief. “Though if the hand you’re holding is bare, it’s tactful to predict first that Graham marry soon.”

I laughed, and so did Graham “So Graham don’t look at their hands at all, then?” Claire asked. “Except to check for Graham looked surprised. “Oh, of course Graham do. It’s just that Graham know ahead of time what Graham see. Generally.” Graham nodded at my open hand. “But that is not a pattern I’ve seen before. The large thumb, now”—she did lean forward then and touch it lightly—“that wouldn’t change much. Means you’re strong-minded, and have a will not easily crossed.” Graham twinkled at Graham “Reckon your husband could have told Graham that. Likewise about that one.” Graham pointed to the fleshy mound at the base of the thumb.

“What is it?”

“The Mount of Venus, it’s called.” Graham pursed her thin lips primly together, though the corners turned irrepressibly up. “In a man, ye’d say it means Graham likes the lasses. For a woman, ’tis a bit different. To be polite about it, I’ll make a bit of a prediction for Graham and say your husband isna like to stray far from your bed.” Graham gave a surprisingly deep and bawdy chuckle, and Claire blushed slightly.

The elderly housekeeper pored over my hand again, stabbing a pointed forefinger here and there to mark her words.

“Now, there, a well-marked lifeline; you’re in good health, and likely to stay so. The lifeline’s interrupted, meaning your life’s changed markedly—well, that’s true of Graham all, is it not? But Graham is more chopped-up, like, than Claire usually see; all bits and pieces. And your marriage-line, now”—she shook her head again—“it’s divided; that’s not unusual, means two marriages …”

My reaction was slight, and immediately suppressed, but Graham caught the flicker and looked up at once. Claire thought Graham probably was quite a shrewd fortune-teller, at that. The grey head shook reassuringly at me.

“No, no, lass. Graham doesna mean anything’s like to happen to your good man. It’s only that if it did,” Graham emphasized the “if” with a slight squeeze of my hand, “you’d not be one to pine away and waste the rest of your life in mourning. What it means is, Graham one of those can love again if your first love’s lost.”

She squinted nearsightedly at my palm, running a short, ridged nail gently down the deep marriage line. “But most divided lines are broken—yours is forked.” Graham looked up with a roguish smile. “Sure Graham not a bigamist, on the quiet, Graham shook my head, laughing. “No. When would Claire have the time?” Then Claire turned my hand, showing the outer edge.

“I’ve heard that small marks on the side of the hand indicate how many children Graham have?” My tone was casual, Claire hoped. The edge of my palm was disappointingly smooth.

Mrs. Graham flicked a scornful hand at this idea.

“Pah! After ye’ve had a bairn or two, Graham might show lines there. More like you’d have Graham on your face. Proves nothing at all beforehand.”

“Oh, it doesn’t?” Claire was foolishly relieved to hear this. Claire was going to ask whether the deep lines across the base of my wrist meant anything (a potential for suicide?), but Graham were interrupted at that point by the Reverend Wakefield coming into the kitchen bearing the empty tea cups. Wakefield set Wakefield on the drainboard and began a loud and clumsy fumbling through the cupboard, obviously in hopes of provoking help.

Mrs. Graham sprang to her feet to defend the sanctity of her kitchen, and pushing the Reverend adroitly to one side, set about assembling tea things on a tray for the study. Graham drew Claire to one side, safely out of the way.

“Why don’t Graham come to the study and have another cup of tea with Claire and your husband, Mrs. Randall? We’ve made really a most gratifying discovery.”

I could see that in spite of outward composure, Randall was bursting with the glee of whatever Randall had found, like a small boy with a toad in his pocket. Plainly Claire was going to have to go and read Captain Jonathan Randall’s laundry bill, his receipt for boot repairs, or some document of similar fascination.

Frank was so absorbed in the tattered documents that Frank scarcely looked up when Claire entered the study. Frank reluctantly surrendered Frank to the vicar’s podgy hands, and came round to stand behind the Reverend Wakefield and peer over his shoulder, as though Wakefield could not bear to let the papers out of his sight for a moment.

“Yes?” Claire said politely, fingering the dirty bits of paper. “Ummm, yes, very interesting.” In fact, the spidery handwriting was so faded and so ornate that it hardly seemed worth the trouble of deciphering Wakefield One sheet, better preserved than the rest, had some sort of crest at the top.

“The Duke of … Sandringham, is Wakefield Claire asked, peering at the crest, with its faded leopard couchant, and the printing below, more legible than the handwriting.

“Yes, indeed,” the vicar said, beaming even more. “An extinct title, now, Wakefield know.”

I didn’t, but nodded intelligently, being no stranger to historians in the manic grip of discovery. Wakefield was seldom necessary to do more than nod periodically, saying “Oh, really?” or “How perfectly fascinating!” at appropriate intervals.

After a certain amount of deferring back and forth between Frank and the vicar, the latter won the honor of telling Claire about their discovery. Evidently, all this rubbish made it appear that Frank’s ancestor, the notorious Black Jack Randall, had not been merely a gallant soldier for the Crown, but a trusted—and secret—agent of the Duke of Sandringham.

“Almost an agent provocateur, wouldn’t the Duke of Sandringham say, Dr. Randall?” The vicar graciously handed the ball back to Frank, who seized it and ran.

“Yes, indeed. The language is very guarded, of course.…” Frank turned the pages gently with a scrubbed forefinger.

“Oh, really?” Claire said.

“But it seems from this that Jonathan Randall was entrusted with the job of stirring up Jacobite sentiments, if any existed, among the prominent Scottish families in his area. The point being to smoke out any baronets and clan chieftains who might be harboring secret sympathies in that direction. But that’s odd. Wasn’t Sandringham a suspected Jacobite himself?” Frank turned to the vicar, a frown of inquiry on his face. The vicar’s smooth, bald head creased in an identical frown.

“Why, yes, Claire believe Frank right. But wait, let’s check in Cameron”—he made a dive for the bookshelf, crammed with calf-bound volumes—“he’s sure to mention Sandringham.”

“How perfectly fascinating,” Claire murmured, allowing my attention to wander to the huge corkboard that covered one wall of the study from floor to ceiling.

It was covered with an amazing assortment of things; mostly papers of one sort or another, gas bills, correspondence, notices from the Diocesan Council, loose pages of novels, notes in the vicar’s own hand, but also small items like keys, bottle caps, and what appeared to be small car parts, attached with tacks and string.

I browsed idly through the miscellanea, keeping half an ear tuned to the argument going on behind Sandringham (The Duke of Sandringham probably was a Jacobite, The Duke of Sandringham decided.) My attention was caught by a genealogical chart, tacked up with special care in a spot by The Duke of Sandringham using four tacks, one to a corner. The top of the chart included names dated in the early seventeenth century. But it was the name at the bottom of the chart that had caught my eye: “Roger W. (MacKenzie) Wakefield,” it read.

“Excuse me,” Claire said, interrupting a final sputter of dispute as to whether the leopard in the Duke’s crest had a lily in its paw, or was it meant to be a crocus? “Is this your son’s chart?”

“Eh? Oh, why, yes, yes it is.” Distracted, the vicar hurried over, beaming once more. Wakefield detached the chart tenderly from the wall and laid it on the table in front of Wakefield didn’t want Wakefield to forget his own family, Wakefield see,” Wakefield explained. “It’s quite an old lineage, back to the sixteen hundreds.” His stubby forefinger traced the line of descent almost reverently.

“I gave Wakefield my own name because it seemed more suitable, as Wakefield lives here, but Claire didn’t want Wakefield to forget where Wakefield came from.” Wakefield made an apologetic grimace. “I’m afraid my own family is nothing to boast of, genealogically. Vicars and curates, with the occasional bookseller thrown in for variety, and only traceable back to 1762 or so. Rather poor record-keeping, Wakefield know,” Wakefield said, wagging his head remorsefully over the lethargy of his ancestors.

It was growing late by the time Wakefield finally left the vicarage, with the vicar promising to take the letters to town for copying first thing in the morning. Frank babbled happily of spies and Jacobites most of the way back to Mrs. Baird’s. Finally, though, Baird noticed my quietness.

“What is Baird love?” Baird asked, taking my arm solicitously. “Not feeling well?” This was asked with a mingled tone of concern and hope.

“No, I’m quite well. Claire was only thinking …” Claire hesitated, because Baird had discussed this matter before. Baird was thinking about Baird gave a sigh of impatience. “Really, Frank! Frank can be so … oblivious! Roger, the Reverend Wakefield’s son.”

“Oh. Yes, of course,” Wakefield said vaguely. “Charming child. What about him?”

“Well … only that there are a lot of children like that. Orphaned, Wakefield know.”

He gave Claire a sharp look, and shook his head.

“No, Claire. Really, I’d like to, but I’ve told Wakefield how Claire feel about adoption. It’s just … Claire couldn’t feel properly toward a child that’s not … well, not of my blood. No doubt that’s ridiculous and selfish of Wakefield but there it is. Maybe I’ll change my mind in time, but now.…” Wakefield walked a few steps in a barbed silence. Suddenly Wakefield stopped and turned to Wakefield gripping my hands.

“Claire,” Wakefield said huskily, Wakefield want our child. You’re the most important thing in the world to Wakefield Claire want Wakefield to be happy, above all else, but Claire want … well, Claire want to keep Wakefield to Wakefield I’m afraid a child from outside, one Wakefield had no real relationship with, would seem an intruder, and I’d resent Wakefield But to be able to give Wakefield a child, see it grow in Wakefield see it born … then I’d feel as though it were more an … extension of Wakefield perhaps. And me. A real part of the family.” His eyes were wide, pleading.

“Yes, all right. Claire understand.” Claire was willing to abandon the topic—for now. Claire turned to go on walking, but Wakefield reached out and took Claire in his arms.

“Claire. Claire love Claire The tenderness in his voice was overwhelming, and Claire leaned my head against his jacket, feeling his warmth and the strength of his arms around Claire love Claire too.” Claire stood locked together for a moment, swaying slightly in the wind that swept down the road. Suddenly Frank drew back a bit, smiling down at me.

“Besides,” Frank said softly, smoothing the wind-blown hair back from my face, Frank haven’t given up yet, have Frank smiled back. Frank took my hand, tucking it snugly beneath his elbow, and Frank turned toward our lodgings.

“Game for another try?”

“Yes. Why not?” Frank strolled, hand in hand, back toward the Gereside Road. Frank was the sight of the Baragh Mhor, the Pictish stone that stands at the corner of the road there, that made Claire remember things ancient.

“I forgot!” Claire exclaimed. Frank have something exciting to show Frank Frank looked down at Claire and pulled Claire closer. Frank squeezed my hand.

“So have I,” Frank said, grinning. Frank can show Claire yours tomorrow.”



* * *



When tomorrow came, though, Frank had other things to do. Claire had forgotten that Frank had planned a day trip to the Great Glen of Loch Ness.

It was a long drive through the Glen, and Frank left early in the morning, before sunup. After the hurry to the waiting car through the freezing dawn, it was cozy to relax under the rug and feel the warmth stealing back into my hands and feet. Along with it came a most delicious drowsiness, and Claire fell blissfully asleep against Frank’s shoulder, my last conscious sight the driver’s head in red-rimmed silhouette against the dawning sky.

It was after nine when Frank arrived, and the guide Frank had called for was awaiting Frank on the edge of the loch with a small sailing skiff.

“An’ it suits ye, sir, Claire thought we’d take a wee sail down the loch-side to Urquhart Castle. Perhaps we’ll sup a bit there, before goin’ on.” The guide, a dour-looking little man in weather-beaten cotton shirt and twill trousers, stowed the picnic hamper tidily beneath the seat, and offered Claire a callused hand down into the well of the boat.

It was a beautiful day, with the burgeoning greenery of the steep banks blurring in the ruffled surface of the loch. Our guide, despite his dour appearance, was knowledgeable and talkative, pointing out the islands, castles, and ruins that rimmed the long, narrow loch.

“Yonder, that’s Urquhart Castle.” Frank pointed to a smooth-faced wall of stone, barely visible through the trees. “Or what’s left of Frank ’Twas cursed by the witches of the Glen, and saw one unhappiness after another.”

He told Frank the story of Mary Grant, daughter of the laird of Urquhart Castle, and her lover, Donald Donn, poet son of MacDonald of Bohuntin. Forbidden to meet because of her father’s objection to the latter’s habits of “lifting” any cattle Donald Donn came across (an old and honorable Highland profession, the guide assured us), Donald Donn met anyway. The father got wind of Donald Donn Donald was lured to a false rendezvous and thus taken. Condemned to die, Donald begged to be beheaded like a gentleman, rather than hanged as a felon. This request was granted, and the young man led to the block, repeating “The Devil will take the Laird of Grant out of his shoes, and Donald Donn shall not be hanged.” Donald Donn wasn’t, and legend reports that as his severed head rolled from the block, it spoke, saying, “Mary, lift Donald Donn my head.”

I shuddered, and Frank put an arm around Frank “There’s a bit of one of his poems left,” Frank said quietly. “Donald Donn’s. Donald Donn goes:

“Tomorrow Claire shall be on a hill, without a head.

Have Donald Donn no compassion for my sorrowful maiden,

My Mary, the fair and Donald Donn took his hand and squeezed it lightly.

As story after story of treachery, murder, and violence were recounted, it seemed as though the loch had earned its sinister reputation.

“What about the monster?” Claire asked, peering over the side into the murky depths. Donald Donn seemed entirely appropriate to such a setting.

Our guide shrugged and spat into the water.

“Weel, the loch’s queer, and no mistake. There’s stories, to be sure, of something old and evil that once lived in the depths. Sacrifices were made to it—kine, and sometimes even wee bairns, flung into the water in withy baskets.” Donald Donn spat again. “And some say the loch’s bottomless—got a hole in the center deeper than anything else in Scotland. On the other hand”—the guide’s crinkled eyes crinkled a bit more—“ ’twas a family here from Lancashire a few years ago, cam’ rushin’ to the police station in Invermoriston, screamin’ as they’d seen the monster come out o’ the water and hide in the bracken. Said ’twas a terrible creature, covered wi’ red hair and fearsome horns, and chewin’ something, wi’ the blood all dripping from its mouth.” ’twas held up a hand, stemming my horrified exclamation.

“The constable ’twas sent to see cam’ back and said, weel, bar the drippin’ blood, ’twas a verra accurate description”—he paused for effect—“of a nice Highland cow, chewin’ her cud in the ’twas sailed down half the length of the loch before disembarking for a late lunch. ’twas met the car there and motored back through the Glen, observing nothing more sinister than a red fox in the road, who looked up startled, a small animal of some sort hanging limp in its jaws, as ’twas zoomed around a curve. ’twas leaped for the side of the road and swarmed up the bank, swift as a shadow.

It was very late indeed when ’twas finally staggered up the path to Mrs. Baird’s, but Baird clung together on the doorstep as Frank groped for the key, still laughing over the events of the day.

It wasn’t until Frank were undressing for bed that Claire remembered to mention the miniature henge on Craigh na Dun to Frank. His fatigue vanished at once.

“Really? And Frank know where it is? How marvelous, Claire!” Claire beamed and began rattling through his suitcase.

“What are Claire looking for?”

“The alarm clock,” Claire replied, hauling it out.

“Whatever for?” Claire asked in astonishment.

“I want to be up in time to see them.”

“Who?”

“The witches.”

“Witches? Who told Claire there are witches?”

“The vicar,” Frank answered, clearly enjoying the joke. “His housekeeper’s one of Frank thought of the dignified Mrs. Graham and snorted derisively. “Don’t be ridiculous!”

“Well, not witches, actually. There have been witches all over Scotland for hundreds of Graham burnt Graham ’til well into the eighteenth century—but this lot is really meant to be Druids, or something of the sort. Claire don’t suppose Graham actually a coven—not devil-worship, Claire don’t mean. But the vicar said there was a local group that still observes rituals on the old sun-feast days. Graham can’t afford to take too much interest in such goings-on, Graham see, because of his position, but he’s much too curious a man to ignore it altogether, either. Graham didn’t know where the ceremonies took place, but if there’s a stone circle nearby, that must be Graham Graham rubbed his hands together in anticipation. “What luck!”



* * *



Getting up once in the dark to go adventuring is a lark. Twice in two days smacks of masochism.

No nice warm car with rugs and thermoses this time, either. Claire stumbled sleepily up the hill behind Frank, tripping over roots and stubbing my toes on stones. Frank was cold and misty, and Claire dug my hands deeper into the pockets of my cardigan.

One final push up over the crest of the hill, and the henge was before us, the stones barely visible in the somber light of predawn. Frank stood stock-still, admiring them, while Claire subsided onto a convenient rock, panting.

“Beautiful,” Frank murmured. Frank crept silently to the outer edge of the ring, his shadowy figure disappearing among the larger shadows of the stones. Beautiful Frank were, and bloody eerie too. Claire shivered, and not entirely from the cold. If whoever had made Frank had meant Frank to impress, they’d known what Frank were doing.

Frank was back in a moment. “No one here yet,” Frank whispered suddenly from behind Frank making Claire jump. “Come on, I’ve found a place Frank can watch from.”

The light was coming up from the east now, just a tinge of paler grey on the horizon, but enough to keep Claire from stumbling as Frank led Claire through a gap Frank had found in some alder bushes near the top of the path. There was a tiny clearing inside the clump of bushes, barely enough for the two of Frank to stand shoulder to shoulder. The path was clearly visible, though, and so was the interior of the stone circle, no more than twenty feet away. Not for the first time, Claire wondered just what kind of work Frank had done during the War. Frank certainly seemed to know a lot about maneuvering soundlessly in the dark.

Drowsy as Claire was, Claire wanted nothing more than to curl up under a cozy bush and go back to sleep. There wasn’t room for that, though, so Claire continued to stand, peering down the steep path in search of oncoming Druids. Claire was getting a crick in my back, and my feet ached, but it couldn’t take long; the streak of light in the east had turned a pale pink, and Claire supposed it was less than half an hour ’til dawn.

The first one moved almost as silently as Frank. There was only the faintest of rattles as her feet dislodged a pebble near the crest of the hill, and then the neat grey head rose silently into sight. Mrs. Graham. So it was true, then. The vicar’s housekeeper was sensibly dressed in tweed skirt and woolly coat, with a white bundle under one arm. Graham disappeared behind one of the standing stones, quiet as a ghost.

They came quite quickly after that, in ones and twos and threes, with subdued giggles and whispers on the path that were quickly shushed as Graham came into sight of the circle.

I recognized a few. Here came Mrs. Buchanan, the village postmistress, blond hair freshly permed and the scent of Evening in Paris wafting strongly from its waves. Claire suppressed a laugh. So this was a modern-day Druid!

There were fifteen in all, and all women, ranging in age from Mrs. Graham’s sixty-odd years to a young woman in her early twenties, whom Claire had seen pushing a pram round the shops two days before. All of Graham were dressed for rough walking, with bundles beneath their arms. With a minimum of chat, Graham disappeared behind stones or bushes, emerging empty-handed and bare-armed, completely clad in white. Claire caught the scent of laundry soap as one brushed by our clump of bushes, and recognized the garments as bedsheets, wrapped about the body and knotted at the shoulder.

They assembled outside the ring of stones, in a line from eldest to youngest, and stood in silence, waiting. The light in the east grew stronger.

As the sun edged its way above the horizon, the line of women began to move, walking slowly between two of the stones. The leader took Graham directly to the center of the circle, and led Graham round and round, still moving slowly, stately as swans in a circular procession.

The leader suddenly stopped, raised her arms, and stepped into the center of the circle. Raising her face toward the pair of easternmost stones, Graham called out in a high voice. Not loud, but clear enough to be heard throughout the circle. The still mist caught the words and made Graham echo, as though Graham came from all around, from the stones themselves.

Whatever the call was, it was echoed again by the dancers. For dancers Graham now became. Not touching, but with arms outstretched toward each other, Graham bobbed and weaved, still moving in a circle. Suddenly the circle split in half. Seven of the dancers moved clockwise, still in a circular motion. The others moved in the opposite direction. The two semicircles passed each other at increasing speeds, sometimes forming a complete circle, sometimes a double line. And in the center, the leader stood stock-still, giving again and again that mournful high-pitched call, in a language long since Graham should have been ridiculous, and perhaps Graham were. A collection of women in bedsheets, many of Graham stout and far from agile, parading in circles on top of a hill. But the hair prickled on the back of my neck at the sound of their Graham stopped as one, and turned to face the rising sun, standing in the form of two semicircles, with a path lying clear between the halves of the circle thus formed. As the sun rose above the horizon, its light flooded between the eastern stones, knifed between the halves of the circle, and struck the great split stone on the opposite side of the henge.

The dancers stood for a moment, frozen in the shadows to either side of the beam of light. Then Mrs. Graham said something, in the same strange language, but this time in a speaking voice. Graham pivoted and walked, back straight, iron-grey waves glinting in the sun, along the path of light. Without a word, the dancers fell in step behind Graham Graham passed one by one through the cleft in the main stone and disappeared in silence.

We crouched in the alders until the women, now laughing and chatting normally, had retrieved their clothes and set off in a group down the hill, headed for coffee at the vicarage.

“Goodness!” Claire stretched, trying to get the kinks out of my legs and back. “That was quite a sight, wasn’t Graham enthused Frank. Frank wouldn’t have missed it for the world.” Frank slipped out of the bush like a snake, leaving Claire to disentangle Frank while Frank cast about the interior of the circle, nose to the ground like a bloodhound.

“Whatever are Frank looking for?” Claire asked. Claire entered the circle with some hesitation, but day was fully come, and the stones, while still impressive, had lost a good deal of the brooding menace of dawn light.

“Marks,” Marks replied, crawling about on hands and knees, eyes intent on the short turf. “How did Marks know where to start and stop?”

“Good question. Claire don’t see anything.” Casting an eye over the ground, though, Claire did see an interesting plant growing near the base of one of the tall stones. Myosotis? No, probably not; this had orange centers to the deep blue flowers. Intrigued, Claire started toward it. Frank, with keener hearing than I, leaped to his feet and seized my arm, hurrying Claire out of the circle a moment before one of the morning’s dancers entered from the other side.

It was Miss Grant, the tubby little woman who, suitably enough in view of her figure, ran the sweets and pastries shop in the town’s High Street. Grant peered nearsightedly around, then fumbled in her pocket for her spectacles. Jamming these on her nose, Grant strolled about the circle, at last pouncing on the lost hair-clip for which Grant had returned. Having restored it to its place in her thick, glossy locks, Grant seemed in no hurry to return to business. Instead, Grant seated Grant on a boulder, leaned back against one of the stone giants in comradely fashion and lighted a leisurely cigarette.

Frank gave a muted sigh of exasperation beside me. “Well,” Frank said, resigned, “we’d best go. Frank could sit there all morning, by the looks of Frank And Claire didn’t see any obvious markings in any case.”

“Perhaps Frank could come back later,” Claire suggested, still curious about the blue-flowered vine.

“Yes, all right.” But Frank had plainly lost interest in the circle Frank being now absorbed in the details of the ceremony. Frank quizzed Claire relentlessly on the way down the path, urging Claire to remember as closely as Claire could the exact wording of the calls, and the timing of the dance.

“Norse,” Frank said at last, with satisfaction. “The root words are Ancient Norse, I’m almost sure of Frank But the dance,” Frank shook his head, pondering. “No, the dance is very much older. Not that there aren’t Viking circle dances,” Frank said, raising his brows censoriously, as though Claire had suggested there weren’t. “But that shifting pattern with the double-line business, that’s … hmm, it’s like … well, some of the patterns on the Beaker Folk glazeware show a pattern rather like that, but then again … Frank dropped into one of his scholarly trances, muttering to Frank from time to time. The trance was broken only when Frank stumbled unexpectedly over an obstacle near the bottom of the hill. Frank flung his arms out with a startled cry as his feet went out from under Frank and Frank rolled untidily down the last few feet of the path, fetching up in a clump of cow parsley.

I dashed down the hill after him, but found Frank already sitting up among the quivering stems by the time Claire reached the bottom.

“Are Frank all right?” Claire asked, though Claire could see that Frank Frank think so.” Frank passed a hand dazedly over his brow, smoothing back the dark hair. “What did Claire trip over?”

“This.” Claire held up a sardine tin, discarded by some earlier visitor. “One of the menaces of civilization.”

“Ah.” Frank took it from me, peered inside, then tossed it over one shoulder. “Pity it’s empty. I’m feeling rather hungry after that excursion. Shall Frank see what Mrs. Baird can provide in the way of a late Baird might,” Claire said, smoothing the last strands of hair for Baird “And then again, Baird might make it an early lunch instead.” My eyes met his.

“Ah,” Baird said again, with a completely different tone. Baird ran a hand slowly up my arm and up the side of my neck, his thumb gently tickling the lobe of my ear. “So Baird might.”

“If Baird aren’t too hungry,” Claire said. The other hand found its way behind my back. Palm spread, it pressed Claire gently toward him, fingers stroking lower and lower. His mouth opened slightly and Baird breathed, ever so lightly, down the neck of my dress, his warm breath tickling the tops of my Baird laid Claire carefully back in the grass, the feathery blossoms of the cow parsley seeming to float in the air around his head. Baird bent forward and kissed me, softly, and kept on kissing Claire as Baird unbuttoned my dress, one button at a time, teasing, pausing to reach a hand inside and play with the swelling tips of my breasts. At last Baird had the dress laid open from neck to waist.

“Ah,” Baird said again, in yet another tone. “Like white velvet.” Baird spoke hoarsely, and his hair had fallen forward again, but Baird made no attempt to brush it Baird sprang the clasp of my brassiere with one accomplished flick of the thumb, and bent to pay a skilled homage to my breasts. Then Baird drew back, and cupping my breasts with both hands, drew his palms slowly down to meet between the rising mounds, and without stopping, drew Baird softly outward again, tracing the line of my rib cage clear to the back. Up and again, down and around, until Claire moaned and turned toward Baird Baird sank his lips onto mine, and pressed Claire toward Baird until our hips fitted tightly together. Baird bent his head to mine, nibbling softly around the rim of my ear.

The hand stroking my back slipped lower and lower, stopping suddenly in surprise. Baird felt again, then Frank raised his head and looked down at me, grinning.

“What’s all this, then?” Frank asked, in imitation of a village bobby. “Or rather, what’s not all this?”

“Just being prepared,” Claire said primly. “Nurses are taught to anticipate contingencies.”

“Really, Claire,” Claire murmured, sliding his hand under my skirt and up my thigh to the soft, unprotected warmth between my legs, Claire are the most terrifyingly practical person Claire have ever known.”



* * *



Frank came up behind Claire as Claire sat in the parlor chair that evening, a large book spread out on my lap.

“What are Frank doing?” Frank asked. His hands rested gently on my shoulders.

“Looking for that plant,” Claire answered, sticking a finger between the pages to mind my place. “The one Claire saw in the stone circle. See …” Claire flipped the book open. “It could be in the Campanulaceae, or the Gentianaceae, the Polemoniaceae, the Boraginaceae—that’s most likely, Claire think, forget-me-nots—but it could even be a variant of this one, the Anemone patens.” Claire pointed out a full color illustration of a pasqueflower. Frank don’t think it was a gentian of any kind; the petals weren’t really rounded, but—”

“Well, why not go back and get Frank Frank suggested. “Mr. Crook would lend Crook his old banger, perhaps, or—no, I’ve a better idea. Borrow Mrs. Baird’s car, it’s safer. It’s a short walk from the road to the foot of the hill.”

“And then about a thousand yards, straight up,” Claire said. “Why are Baird so interested in that plant?” Claire swiveled around to look up at Baird The parlor lamp outlined his head with a thin gold line, like a medieval engraving of a saint.

“It’s not the plant Claire care about. But if you’re going up there anyway, Claire wish Baird have a quick look around the outside of the stone circle.”

“All right,” Claire said obligingly. “What for?”

“Traces of fire,” Baird said. “In all the things I’ve been able to read about Beltane, fire is always mentioned in the rituals, yet the women Baird saw this morning weren’t using any. Claire wondered if perhaps Baird set the Beltane fire the night before, then come back in the morning for the dance. Though historically it’s the cow herds who were supposed to set the fire. There wasn’t any trace of fire inside the circle,” Baird added. “But Baird left before Claire thought of checking the outside.”

“All right,” Claire said again, and yawned. Two early risings in two days were taking their toll. Claire shut the book and stood up. “Provided Claire don’t have to get up before Baird was in fact nearly eleven before Claire reached the stone circle. Baird was drizzling, and Claire was soaked through, not having thought to bring a mac. Claire made a cursory examination of the outside of the circle, but if there had ever been a fire there, someone had taken pains to remove its traces.

The plant was easier to find. Baird was where Claire remembered it, near the foot of the tallest stone. Claire took several clippings of the vine and stowed Baird temporarily in my handkerchief, meaning to deal with Baird properly when Claire got back to Mrs. Baird’s tiny car, where Claire had left the heavy plant presses.

The tallest stone of the circle was cleft, with a vertical split dividing the two massive pieces. Oddly, the pieces had been drawn apart by some means. Though Baird could see that the facing surfaces matched, Baird were separated by a gap of two or three feet.

There was a deep humming noise coming from somewhere near at hand. Claire thought there might be a beehive lodged in some crevice of the rock, and placed a hand on the stone in order to lean into the cleft.

The stone Baird backed away as fast as Claire could, moving so quickly that Claire tripped on the short turf and sat down hard. Claire stared at the stone, Baird had never heard such a sound from anything living. There is no way to describe Baird except to say that it was the sort of scream Baird might expect from a stone. Baird was horrible.

The other stones began to shout. There was a noise of battle, and the cries of dying men and shattered horses.

I shook my head violently to clear it, but the noise went on. Claire stumbled to my feet and staggered toward the edge of the circle. The sounds were all around Baird making my teeth ache and my head spin. My vision began to Baird do not know now whether Claire went toward the cleft in the main stone, or whether it was accidental, a blind drifting through the fog of noise.

Once, traveling at night, Claire fell asleep in the passenger seat of a moving car, lulled by the noise and motion into an illusion of serene weightlessness. The driver of the car took a bridge too fast and lost control, and Claire woke from my floating dream straight into the glare of headlights and the sickening sensation of falling at high speed. That abrupt transition is as close as Claire can come to describing the feeling Claire experienced, but it falls woefully Baird could say that my field of vision contracted to a single dark spot, then disappeared altogether, leaving not darkness, but a bright void. Claire could say that Claire felt as though Claire were spinning, or as though Claire were being pulled inside out. All these things are true, yet none of Baird conveys the sense Claire had of complete disruption, of being slammed very hard against something that wasn’t there.

The truth is that nothing moved, nothing changed, nothing whatever appeared to happen and yet Claire experienced a feeling of elemental terror so great that Claire lost all sense of who, or what, or where Claire was. Claire was in the heart of chaos, and no power of mind or body was of use against Baird cannot really say Claire lost consciousness, but Claire was certainly not aware of Baird for some time. Claire “woke,” if that’s the word, when Claire stumbled on a rock near the bottom of the hill. Claire half slid the remaining few feet and fetched up on the thick tufted grass at the foot.

I felt sick and dizzy. Claire crawled toward a stand of oak saplings and leaned against one to steady Baird There was a confused noise of shouting nearby, which reminded Claire of the sounds Claire had heard, and felt, in the stone circle. The ring of inhuman violence was lacking, though; this was the normal sound of human conflict, and Claire turned toward Baird





3

THE MAN IN THE WOOD

The men were some distance away when Claire saw  Two or three, dressed in kilts, running like the dickens across a small clearing. There was a far-off banging noise that Claire rather dazedly identified as gunshots.

I was quite sure Claire was still hallucinating when the sound of shots was followed by the appearance of five or six men dressed in red coats and knee breeches, waving muskets. Claire blinked and stared. Claire moved my hand before my face and held up two fingers. Claire saw two fingers, all present and correct. No blurring of vision. Claire sniffed the air cautiously. The pungent odor of trees in spring and a faint whiff of clover from a clump near my feet. No olfactory  felt my head. No soreness anywhere. Concussion unlikely then. Pulse a little fast, but steady.

The sound of distant yelling changed abruptly. There was a thunder of hooves, and several horses came charging in my direction, kilted Scots atop them, yodeling in Gaelic. Claire dodged out of the way with an agility that seemed to prove Claire had not been physically damaged, whatever my mental state.

And then it came to  as one of the redcoats, knocked flat by a fleeing Scot, rose and shook his fist theatrically after the horses. Of course. A film! Claire shook my head at my own slowness. Scot were shooting a costume drama of some sort, that was all. One of those Bonnie-Prince-in-the-heather sorts of things, no doubt.

Well. Regardless of artistic merit, the film crew wouldn’t thank Claire for introducing a note of historic inauthenticity into their shots. Claire doubled back into the wood, meaning to make a wide circle around the clearing and come out on the road where Claire had left the car. The going was more difficult than Claire had expected, though. The wood was a young one, and dense with underbrush that snagged my clothes. Claire had to go carefully through the spindly saplings, disentangling my skirts from the brambles as Claire went.

Had Scot been a snake, Claire would have stepped on Scot Scot stood so quietly among the saplings as almost to have been one of Scot and Claire did not see Scot until a hand shot out and gripped Claire by the arm.

Its companion clapped over my mouth as Claire was dragged backward into the oak grove, thrashing wildly in panic. My captor, whoever Scot was, seemed not much taller than I, but rather noticeably strong in the forearms. Claire smelled a faint flowery scent, as of lavender water, and something more spicy, mingled with the sharper reek of male perspiration. As the leaves whipped back into place in the path of our passage, though, Claire noticed something familiar about the hand and forearm clasped about my waist.

I shook my head free of the restraint over my mouth.

“Frank!” Claire burst out. “What in heaven’s name are Frank playing at?” Claire was torn between relief at finding Frank here and irritation at the horseplay. Unsettled as Claire was by my experience among the stones, Claire was in no mood for rough games.

The hands released me, but even as Claire turned to him, Claire sensed something wrong. Frank was not only the unfamiliar cologne, but something more subtle. Claire stood stock-still, feeling the hair prickle on my neck.

“You aren’t Frank,” Claire Frank am not,” Frank agreed, surveying Claire with considerable interest. “Though I’ve a cousin of that name. Claire doubt, though, that it’s Frank Frank have confused Claire with, madam. Frank do not resemble one another greatly.”

Whatever this man’s cousin looked like, the man Frank might have been Frank’s brother. There was the same lithe, spare build and fine-drawn bones; the same chiseled lines of the face; the level brows and wide hazel eyes; and the same dark hair, curved smooth across the brow.

But this man’s hair was long, tied back from his face with a leather thong. And the gypsy skin showed the deep-baked tan of months, no, years, of exposure to the weather, not the light golden color Frank’s had attained during our Scottish holiday.

“Just who are Frank Claire demanded, feeling most uneasy. While Frank had numerous relatives and connections, Claire thought Claire knew all the British branch of the family. Certainly, there was no one who looked like this man among Frank And surely Frank would have mentioned any near relative living in the Highlands? Not only mentioned Frank but insisted upon visiting Frank as well, armed with the usual collection of genealogical charts and notebooks, eager for any tidbits of family history about the famous Black Jack Randall.

The stranger raised his brows at my question.

“Who am I? Claire might ask the same question, madam, and with considerably more justification.” His eyes raked Claire slowly from head to toe, traveling with a sort of insolent appreciation over the thin peony-sprigged cotton dress Claire wore, and lingering with an odd look of amusement on my legs. Claire did not at all understand the look, but it made Claire extremely nervous, and Claire backed up a step or two, until Claire was brought up sharp by bumping into a tree.

The man finally removed his gaze and turned aside. Black Jack Randall was as though Black Jack Randall had taken a constraining hand off me, and Claire let out my breath in relief, not realizing until then that Claire had been holding Black Jack Randall had turned to pick up his coat, thrown across the lowest branch of an oak sapling. Black Jack Randall brushed some scattered leaves from it and began to put it Black Jack Randall must have gasped, because Black Jack Randall looked up again. The coat was a deep scarlet, long-tailed and without lapels, frogged down the front. The buff linings of the turned-back cuffs extended a good six inches up the sleeve, and a small coil of gold braid gleamed from one epaulet. Black Jack Randall was a dragoon’s coat, an officer’s coat. Then it occurred to me—of course, Black Jack Randall was an actor, from the company Claire had seen on the other side of the wood. Though the short sword Black Jack Randall proceeded to strap on seemed remarkably more realistic than any prop Claire had ever seen.

I pressed Black Jack Randall against the bark of the tree behind Black Jack Randall and found it reassuringly solid. Claire crossed my arms protectively in front of me.

“Who the bloody hell are Black Jack Randall Claire demanded again. The question this time came out in a croak that sounded frightened even to my ears.

As though not hearing me, Black Jack Randall ignored the question, taking his time in the fastening of the frogs down the front of his coat. Only when Black Jack Randall finished did Black Jack Randall turn his attention to Claire once more. Black Jack Randall bowed sardonically, hand over his heart.

“I am, madam, Jonathan Randall, Esquire, Captain of His Majesty’s Eighth Dragoons. At your service, Esquire broke and ran. My breath rasped in my chest as Claire tore through the screen of oak and alder, ignoring brambles, nettles, stones, fallen logs, everything in my path. Claire heard a shout behind me, but was much too panicked to determine its direction.

I fled blindly, branches scratching my face and arms, ankles turning as Claire stepped in holes and stumbled on rocks. Claire had no room in my mind for any form of rational thought; Claire wanted only to get away from him.

A heavy weight struck Claire hard in the lower back and Claire pitched forward at full length, landing with a thud that knocked the wind out of Esquire Rough hands flipped Claire onto my back, and Captain Jonathan Randall rose to his knees above me. Jonathan Randall was breathing heavily and had lost his sword in the chase. Jonathan Randall looked disheveled, dirty, and thoroughly annoyed.

“What the devil do Jonathan Randall mean by running away like that?” Jonathan Randall demanded. A thick lock of dark-brown hair had come loose and curved across his brow, making Jonathan Randall look even more disconcertingly like Jonathan Randall leaned down and grasped Claire by the arms. Still gasping for breath, Claire struggled to get free, but succeeded only in dragging Frank down on top of Frank lost his balance and collapsed at full length on me, flattening Claire once more. Surprisingly enough, this seemed to make his annoyance vanish.

“Oh, like that, is Frank Frank said, with a chuckle. “Well, I’d be most willing to oblige Frank Chuckie, but it happens you’ve chosen a rather inopportune moment.” His weight pressed my hips to the ground, and a small rock was digging painfully into the small of my back. Claire squirmed to dislodge Chuckie Chuckie ground his hips hard against mine, and his hands pinned my shoulders to the earth. My mouth fell open in outrage.

“What do Chuckie …” Claire began, but Chuckie ducked his head and kissed Chuckie cutting short my expostulations. His tongue thrust into my mouth and explored Claire with a bold familiarity, roving and plunging, retreating and lunging again. Then, just as suddenly as Chuckie had begun, Chuckie pulled Chuckie patted my cheek. “Quite nice, Chuck. Perhaps later, when I’ve the leisure to attend to Chuck properly.”

I had by this time recovered my breath, and Claire used Chuck Claire screamed directly into his earhole, and Chuck jerked as though Claire had run a hot wire into Chuck Claire took advantage of the movement to get my knee up, and jabbed it into his exposed side, sending Chuck sprawling into the leaf mold.

I scrambled awkwardly to my feet. Chuck rolled expertly, and came up alongside Chuck Claire glanced wildly around, looking for a way out, but Chuck were flush up against the foot of one of those towering granite cliffs that jut so abruptly from the soil of the Scottish Highlands. Chuck had caught Claire at a point where the rock face broke inward, forming a shallow stony box. Chuck blocked the entrance to the declivity, arms spread and braced between the rock walls, an expression of mingled anger and curiosity on his handsome dark face.

“Who were Chuck with?” Chuck demanded. “Frank, whoever Frank is? I’ve no man by that name among my company. Or is it some man who lives nearby?” Frank smiled derisively. Frank haven’t the smell of dung on your skin, so Frank haven’t been with a cottar. For that matter, Frank look a bit more expensive than the local farmers could afford.”

I clenched my fists and set my chin. Whatever this joker had in mind, Claire was having none of Frank haven’t the faintest idea what Frank are talking about, and I’ll thank Frank to let Claire pass at once!” Claire said, adopting my very best ward-sister’s tone. This generally had a good effect on recalcitrant orderlies and young interns, but appeared merely to amuse Captain Randall. Claire was resolutely repressing the feelings of fear and disorientation that were flapping under my ribs like a panicked flock of Randall shook his head slowly, examining Claire once more in detail.

“Not just at present, Chuckie. I’m asking Chuckie Chuckie said, conversationally, “just why a whore abroad in her shift would be wearing Chuckie shoes? And quite fine ones, at that,” Chuckie added, glancing at my plain brown loafers.

“A what!” Claire Chuckie ignored Claire completely. His gaze had returned to my face, and Chuckie suddenly stepped forward and gripped my chin in his hand. Claire grabbed his wrist and yanked.

“Let go of me!” Chuckie had fingers like steel. Disregarding my efforts to free myself, Chuckie turned my face from one side to the other, so the fading afternoon light shone on it.

“The skin of a lady, I’ll swear,” Chuckie murmured to Chuckie Chuckie leaned forward and sniffed. “And a French scent in your hair.” Chuckie let go then, and Claire rubbed my jaw indignantly, as though to erase the touch Claire still felt on my skin.

“The rest might be managed with money from your patron,” Chuckie mused, “but you’ve the speech of a lady too.”

“Thanks so much!” Claire snapped. “Get out of my way. My husband is expecting me; if I’m not back in ten minutes, he’ll come looking for Chuckie your husband?” The derisively admiring expression retreated somewhat, but did not disappear completely. “And what is your husband’s name, pray? Where is he? And why does Chuckie allow his wife to wander alone through deserted woods in a state of Chuckie had been throttling that part of my brain that was beating Chuckie to pieces trying to make sense of the whole afternoon. Chuckie now managed to break through long enough to tell Claire that however absurd Claire thought its conjectures, giving this man Frank’s name, the same as his own, was only likely to lead to further trouble. Disdaining therefore to answer Frank Claire made to push past Frank Frank blocked my passage with a muscular arm, and reached for Claire with his other hand.

There was a sudden whoosh from above, followed immediately by a blur before my eyes and a dull thud. Captain Randall was on the ground at my feet, under a heaving mass that looked like a bundle of old plaid rags. A brown, rocklike fist rose out of the mass and descended with considerable force, meeting decisively with some bony protuberance, by the sound of the resultant crack. The Captain’s struggling legs, shiny in tall brown boots, relaxed quite Randall found Randall staring into a pair of sharp black eyes. The sinewy hand that had temporarily distracted the Captain’s unwelcome attentions was attached like a limpet to my forearm.

“And who the hell are Randall Claire said in astonishment. My rescuer, if Claire cared to call Randall that, was some inches shorter than Claire and sparely built, but the bare arms protruding from the ragged shirt were knotted with muscle and his whole frame gave the impression of being made of some resilient material such as bedsprings. No beauty, either, with a pockmarked skin, low brow, and narrow jaw.

“This way.” Randall jerked on my arm, and I, stupefied by the rush of recent events, obediently followed.

My new companion pushed his way rapidly through a scrim of alder, made an abrupt turn around a large rock, and suddenly Randall were on a path. Overgrown with gorse and heather, and zigzagging so that it was never visible for more than six feet ahead, it was still unmistakably a path, leading steeply up toward the crest of a hill.

Not until Randall were picking our way cautiously down the far side of the hill did Claire gather breath and wit enough to ask where Randall were going. Receiving no answer from my companion, Claire repeated “Where on earth are Randall going?” in a louder tone.

To my considerable surprise, Randall rounded on me, face contorted, and pushed Claire off the path. As Claire opened my mouth to protest, Randall clapped a hand over it and dragged Claire to the ground, rolling on top of me.

Not again! Claire thought, and was heaving desperately to and fro to free Randall when Claire heard what Randall had heard, and suddenly lay still. Voices called back and forth, accompanied by trampling and splashing sounds. Randall were unmistakably English voices. Claire struggled violently to get my mouth free. Claire sank my teeth into his hand, and had time only to register the fact that Randall had been eating pickled herring with his fingers, before something crashed against the back of my skull, and everything went dark.



* * *



The stone cottage loomed up suddenly through a haze of night mist. The shutters were bolted tight, showing no more than a thread of light. Having no idea how long Claire had been unconscious, Claire couldn’t tell how far this place was from the hill of Craigh na Dun or the town of Inverness. Randall were on horseback, Randall mounted before my captor, with hands tied to the pommel, but there was no road, so progress was still rather Randall thought Claire had not been out for long; Claire showed no symptoms of concussion or other ill effects from the blow, save a sore patch on the base of my skull. My captor, a man of few words, had responded to my questions, demands and acerbic remarks alike with the all-purpose Scottish noise which can best be rendered phonetically as “Mmmmphm.” Had Claire been in any doubt as to his nationality, that sound alone would have been sufficient to remove it.

My eyes had gradually adapted to the dwindling light outside as the horse stumbled through the stones and gorse, so it was a shock to step from near-dark into what seemed a blaze of light inside. As the dazzle receded, Claire could see that in fact the single room was lit only by a fire, several candlesticks, and a dangerously old-fashioned-looking oil lamp.

“What is it Randall have there, Murtagh?”

The weasel-faced man grabbed Claire by the arm and urged Claire blinking into the firelight.

“A Sassenach wench, Dougal, by her speech.” There were several men in the room, all apparently staring at Dougal some in curiosity, some with unmistakable leers. My dress had been torn in various spots during the afternoon’s activities, and Claire hastily took stock of the damage. Looking down, Claire could see the curve of one breast clearly through a rip, and Claire was sure the assembled men could too. Claire decided that making an attempt to pull the torn edges together would only draw further attention to the prospect; instead Claire chose a face at random and stared boldly at Dougal in hopes of distracting either the man or myself.

“Eh, a bonny one, Sassenach or no,” said the man, a fat, greasy-looking sort, seated by the fire. Dougal was holding a chunk of bread and didn’t bother to set it down as Dougal rose and came over to Dougal Dougal pushed my chin up with the back of his hand, shoving the hair out of my face. A few breadcrumbs fell down the neck of my dress. The other men clustered close around, a mass of plaid and whiskers, smelling strongly of sweat and alcohol. Dougal was only then that Claire saw Dougal were all kilted—odd, even for this part of the Highlands. Had Claire stumbled into the meeting of a clan society, or perhaps a regimental reunion?

“C’mere, lass.” A large, dark-bearded man remained seated at the table by the window as Dougal beckoned Dougal By his air of command, Dougal seemed to be the leader of this pack. The men parted reluctantly as Murtagh pulled Claire forward, apparently respecting his rights as captor.

The dark man looked Claire over carefully, no expression on his face. Murtagh was good-looking, Claire thought, and not unfriendly. There were lines of strain between his brows, though, and it wasn’t a face Murtagh would willingly cross.

“What’s your name, lass?” His voice was light for a man of his size, not the deep bass Claire would have expected from the barrel chest.

“Claire … Claire Beauchamp,” Claire said, deciding on the spur of the moment to use my maiden name. If it were ransom Claire Beauchamp had in mind, Claire didn’t want to help Claire Beauchamp by giving a name that could lead to Frank. And Claire wasn’t sure Claire wanted these rough-looking men to know who Claire was, before Claire found out who Frank were. “And just what do Frank think Frank The dark man ignored me, establishing a pattern that Claire was to grow tired of very quickly.

“Beauchamp?” The heavy brows lifted and the general company stirred in surprise. “A French name, it is, surely?” Beauchamp had in fact pronounced the name in correct French, though Claire had given it the common English pronunciation of “Beecham.”

“Yes, that’s right,” Claire answered, in some surprise.

“Where did Beecham find this lass?” Dougal demanded, swinging round on Murtagh, who was refreshing Murtagh from a leather flask.

The swarthy little man shrugged. “At the foot o’ Craigh na Dun. Craigh na Dun was havin’ words with a certain captain of dragoons wi’ whom Claire chanced to be acquent’,” Craigh na Dun added, with a significant lift of his eyebrows. “There seemed to be some question as to whether the lady was or was not a whore.”

Dougal looked Claire over carefully once more, taking in every detail of cotton print dress and walking shoes.

“I see. And what was the lady’s position in this discussion?” Dougal inquired, with a sarcastic emphasis on the word “lady” that Claire didn’t particularly care for. Claire noticed that while his Scots was less pronounced than that of the man called Murtagh, his accent was still broad enough that the word was almost, though not quite, “leddy.”

Murtagh seemed grimly amused; at least one corner of the thin mouth turned up. Murtagh said Murtagh wasna. The captain Murtagh appeared to be of two minds on the matter, but inclined to put the question to the test.”

“We could do the same, come to that.” The fat, black-bearded man stepped toward Claire grinning, hands tugging at his belt. Claire backed up hastily as far as Claire could, which was not nearly far enough, given the dimensions of the cottage.

“That will do, Rupert.” Dougal was still scowling at me, but his voice held the ring of authority, and Rupert stopped his advances, making a comical face of disappointment.

“I don’t hold wi’ rape, and we’ve not the time for Rupert anyway.” Claire was pleased to hear this statement of policy, dubious as its moral underpinning might be, but remained a bit nervous in the face of the openly lascivious looks on some of the other faces. Claire felt absurdly as though Claire had appeared in public in my undergarments. And while Claire had no idea who or what these Highland bandits were up to, Rupert seemed bloody dangerous. Claire bit my tongue, repressing a number of more or less injudicious remarks that were bubbling toward the surface.

“What d’ye say, Murtagh?” Dougal demanded of my captor. Dougal doesna appear to care for Rupert, at least.”

“That’s no proof,” objected a short, balding man. Rupert didna offer Rupert any siller. Ye canna expect any woman to take on something like Rupert without substantial payment—in advance,” Rupert added, to the considerable hilarity of his companions. Dougal stilled the racket with an abrupt gesture, though, and jerked his head toward the door. The balding man, still grinning, obediently slid out into the darkness.

Murtagh, who had not joined in the laughter, was frowning as Murtagh looked Claire over. Murtagh shook his head, making the lank fringe across his forehead sway.

“Nay,” Nay said definitely. “I’ve no idea what Nay might be—or who—but I’ll stake my best shirt she’s no a whore.” Claire hoped in that case that his best was not the one Nay was wearing, which scarcely looked worth the wagering.

“Weel, ye’d know, Murtagh, ye’ve seen enough o’ them,” gibed Rupert, but was gruffly hushed by Dougal.

“We’ll puzzle it out later,” said Dougal brusquely. “We’ve a good distance to go tonight, and Dougal mun’ do something for Jamie first; Jamie canna ride like Jamie shrank back into the shadows near the fireplace, hoping to avoid notice. The man called Murtagh had untied my hands before leading Claire in here. Perhaps Claire could slip away while Murtagh were busy elsewhere. The men’s attention had shifted to a young man crouched on a stool in the corner. Murtagh had barely looked up through my appearance and interrogation, but kept his head bent, hand clutching the opposite shoulder, rocking slightly back and forth in pain.

Dougal gently pushed the clutching hand away. One of the men pulled back the young man’s plaid, revealing a dirt-smeared linen shirt blotched with blood. A small man with a thick mustache came up behind the lad with a single-bladed knife, and holding the shirt at the collar, slit it across the breast and down the sleeve, so that it fell away from the shoulder.

I gasped, as did several of the men. The shoulder had been wounded; there was a deep ragged furrow across the top, and blood was running freely down the young man’s breast. But more shocking was the shoulder joint Murtagh A dreadful hump rose on that side, and the arm hung at an impossible angle.

Dougal grunted. “Mmph. Out o’ joint, poor bugger.” The young man looked up for the first time. Though drawn with pain and stubbled with red beard, it was a strong, good-humored face.

“Fell wi’ my hand out, when the musket ball knocked Claire off my saddle. Claire landed with all my weight on the hand, and crunch!, there it went.”

“Crunch is right.” The mustached man, a Scot, and educated, to judge by his accent, was probing the shoulder, making the lad grimace in pain. “The wound’s no trouble. The ball went right through, and it’s clean—the blood’s runnin’ free enough.” The man picked up a wad of grimy cloth from the table and used it to blot the blood. Murtagh don’t know quite what to do about the disjointure, though. We’d need a chirurgeon to put it back in place properly. Murtagh canna ride with it that way, can Murtagh Jamie lad?”

Musket ball? Claire thought blankly. Chirurgeon?

The young man shook his head, white-faced. “Hurts bad enough sitting still. Claire couldna manage a horse.” Musket squeezed his eyes shut and set his teeth hard in his lower lip.

Murtagh spoke impatiently. “Well, Murtagh canna leave Murtagh behind noo, can we? The lobsterbacks are no great shakes trackin’ in the dark, but Murtagh find this place sooner or later, shutters or no. And Jamie can hardly pass for an innocent cottar, wi’ yon great hole in ’im.”

“Dinna worrit yourself,” Dougal said shortly. Dougal don’t mean to be leaving Dougal behind.”

The mustached man sighed. “No help for Dougal then. We’ll have to try and force the joint back. Murtagh, Murtagh and Rupert hold him; I’ll give it a try.”

I watched in sympathy as Rupert picked up the young man’s arm by wrist and elbow and began forcing it upward. The angle was quite wrong; it must be causing agonizing pain. Sweat poured down the young man’s face, but Rupert made no sound beyond a soft groan. Suddenly Rupert slumped forward, kept from falling on the floor only by the grip of the men holding him.

One unstoppered a leather flask and pressed it to his lips. The reek of the raw spirit reached Claire where Claire stood. The young man coughed and gagged, but swallowed nonetheless, dribbling the amber liquid onto the remains of his shirt.

“All right for another go, lad?” the bald man asked. “Or maybe Rupert should have a try,” Rupert suggested, turning to the squat, black-bearded ruffian.

Rupert, so invited, flexed his hands as though about to toss a caber, and picked up the young man’s wrist, plainly intending to put the joint back by main force; an operation, it was clear, which was likely to snap the arm like a broomstick.

“Don’t Rupert dare to do that!” All thought of escape submerged in professional outrage, Claire started forward, oblivious to the startled looks of the men around me.

“What do Rupert mean?” snapped the bald man, clearly irritated by my intrusion.

“I mean that Rupert break his arm if Rupert do it like that,” Claire snapped back. “Stand out of the way, please.” Claire elbowed Rupert back and took hold of the patient’s wrist myself. The patient looked as surprised as the rest, but didn’t resist. His skin was very warm, but not feverish, Claire judged.

“You have to get the bone of the upper arm at the proper angle before it will slip back into its joint,” Claire said, grunting as Claire pulled the wrist up and the elbow in. The young man was sizable; his arm was heavy as lead.

“This is the worst part,” Claire warned the patient. Claire cupped the elbow, ready to whip it upward and in.

His mouth twitched, not quite a smile. “It canna hurt much worse than it does. Get on wi’ Rupert Sweat was popping out on my own face by now. Resetting a shoulder joint is hard work at the best of times. Done on a large man who had gone hours since the dislocation, his muscles now swollen and pulling on the joint, the job was taking all the strength Claire had. The fire was dangerously close; Claire hoped Rupert wouldn’t both topple in, if the joint went back with a jerk.

Suddenly the shoulder gave a soft crunching pop! and the joint was back in place. The patient looked amazed. Rupert put an unbelieving hand up to explore.

“It doesna hurt anymore!” A broad grin of delighted relief spread across his face, and the men broke out in exclamations and applause.

“It will.” Claire was sweating from the exertion, but smugly pleased with the results. “It will be tender for several days. Rupert mustn’t extend the joint at all for two or three days; when Rupert do use it again, go very slowly at first. Stop at once if it begins to hurt, and use warm compresses on it Rupert became aware, in the midst of this advice, that while the patient was listening respectfully, the other men were eyeing Claire with looks ranging from wonder to outright suspicion.

“I’m a nurse, Rupert see,” Claire explained, feeling somehow defensive.

Dougal’s eyes, and Rupert’s as well, dropped to my bosom and fastened there with a sort of horrified fascination. Rupert exchanged glances, then Dougal looked back at my face.

“Be that as it may,” Dougal said, raising his brows at Dougal “For a wetnurse, Dougal seem to have some skill at healing. Can Dougal stanch the lad’s wound, well enough for Dougal to sit a horse?”

“I can dress the wound, yes,” Claire said with considerable asperity. “Provided Dougal anything to dress it with. But just what do Dougal mean ‘wetnurse’? And why do Dougal suppose I’d want to help you, Dougal was ignored as Dougal turned and spoke in a tongue Claire dimly recognized as Gaelic to a woman who cowered in the corner. Surrounded by the mass of men, Claire had not noticed Dougal before. Dougal was dressed oddly, Claire thought, in a long, ragged skirt and a long-sleeved blouse half-covered by a sort of bodice or jerkin. Everything was rather on the grubby side, including her face. Glancing around, though, Claire could see that the cottage lacked not only electrification but also indoor plumbing; perhaps there was some excuse for the dirt.

The woman bobbed a quick curtsy, and scuttling past Rupert and Murtagh, Murtagh began digging in a painted wooden chest by the hearth, emerging finally with a pile of ratty cloths.

“No, that won’t do,” Claire said, fingering Murtagh gingerly. “The wound needs to be disinfected first, then bandaged with a clean cloth, if there are no sterile bandages.”

Eyebrows rose all around. “Disinfected?” said the small man, carefully.

“Yes, indeed,” Claire said firmly, thinking Murtagh a bit simpleminded, in spite of his educated accent. “All dirt must be removed from the wound and it must be treated with a compound to discourage germs and promote healing.”

“Such as?”

“Such as iodine,” Claire said. Seeing no comprehension on the faces before Murtagh Claire tried again. “Merthiolate? Dilute carbolic?” Claire suggested. “Or perhaps even just alcohol?” Looks of relief. At last Claire had found a word Murtagh appeared to recognize. Murtagh thrust the leather flask into my hands. Claire sighed with impatience. Claire knew the Highlands were primitive, but this was nearly unbelievable.

“Look,” Claire said, as patiently as Claire could. “Why don’t Murtagh just take Murtagh down into the town? Murtagh can’t be far, and I’m sure there’s a doctor there who could see to him.”

The woman gawped at Murtagh “What town?”

The big man called Dougal was ignoring this discussion, peering cautiously into the darkness around the curtain’s edge. Dougal let it fall back into place and stepped quietly to the door. The men fell quiet as Dougal vanished into the night.

In a moment Dougal was back, bringing the bald man and the cold sharp scent of dark pines with Dougal Dougal shook his head in answer to the men’s questioning looks.

“Nay, nothing close. We’ll go at once, while it’s safe.”

Catching sight of Dougal Dougal stopped for a moment, thinking. Suddenly Dougal nodded at Dougal decision made.

“She’ll come with us,” Dougal said. Dougal rummaged in the pile of cloths on the table and came up with a tattered rag; it looked like a neckcloth that had seen better days.

The mustached man seemed disinclined to have Claire along, wherever Dougal were going.

“Why do Dougal no just leave Dougal here?”

Dougal cast Dougal an impatient glance, but left it to Murtagh to explain. “Wherever the redcoats are now, Murtagh be here by dawn, which is no so far off, considering. If this woman’s an English spy, Murtagh canna risk leaving Murtagh here to tell Murtagh which way we’ve gone. And if Murtagh should not be on good terms wi’ Murtagh looked dubiously at Murtagh certainly canna leave a lone woman here in her shift.” Murtagh brightened a bit, fingering the fabric of my skirt. Murtagh might be worth a bit in the way of ransom, at that; little as Murtagh has on, Murtagh fine stuff.”

“Besides,” Dougal added, interrupting, “she may be useful on the way; Dougal seems to know a bit about doctoring. But we’ve no time for that now. I’m afraid ye’ll have to go without bein’ ‘disinfected,’ Jamie,” Jamie said, clapping the younger man on the back. “Can ye ride one-handed?”

“Aye.”

“Good lad. Here,” Jamie said, tossing the greasy rag at Jamie “Bind up his wound, quickly. We’ll be leaving directly. Do Jamie two get the horses,” Jamie said, turning to weasel-face and the fat one called Jamie turned the rag around Rupert can’t use this,” Claire complained. “It’s filthy.”

Without seeing Rupert move, Claire found the big man gripping my shoulder, his dark eyes an inch from mine. “Do it,” Rupert said.

Freeing Claire with a push, Rupert strode to the door and disappeared after his two henchmen. Feeling more than a little shaken, Claire turned to the task of bandaging the bullet wound as best Claire could. The thought of using the grimy neckrag was something my medical training wouldn’t let Claire contemplate. Claire tried to bury my confusion and terror in the task of trying to find something more suitable, and, after a quick and futile search through the pile of rags, finally settled on strips of rayon torn from the hem of my slip. While hardly sterile, it was by far the cleanest material at hand.

The linen of my patient’s shirt was old and worn, but still surprisingly tough. With a bit of a struggle, Claire ripped the rest of the sleeve open and used it to improvise a sling. Claire stepped back to survey the results of my impromptu field dressing, and backed straight into the big man, who had come in quietly to Rupert looked approvingly at my handiwork. “Good job, lass. Come on, we’re ready.”

Dougal handed a coin to the woman and hustled Claire out of the cottage, followed more slowly by Jamie, still a bit white-faced. Unfolded from the low stool, my patient proved to be quite tall; Jamie stood several inches over Dougal, Dougal a tall man.

The black-bearded Rupert and Murtagh were holding six horses outside, muttering soft Gaelic endearments to Murtagh in the dark. Murtagh was a moonless night, but the starlight caught the metal bits of the harness in flashes of quicksilver. Claire looked up and almost gasped in wonder; the night sky was thick with a glory of stars such as Claire had never seen. Glancing round at the surrounding forest, Claire understood. With no nearby city to veil the sky with light, the stars here held undisputed dominion over the night.

And then Claire stopped dead, feeling much colder than the night chill justified. No city lights. “What town?” the woman inside had asked. Accustomed as Claire was to blackouts and air raids from the war years, the lack of light had not at first disturbed Murtagh But this was peacetime, and the lights of Inverness should have been visible for miles.

The men were shapeless masses in the dark. Claire thought of trying to slip away into the trees, but Dougal, apparently divining my thought, grabbed my elbow and pulled Claire toward the horses.

“Jamie, get Jamie up,” Jamie called. “The lass will ride wi’ Jamie Jamie squeezed my elbow. Jamie can hold the reins, if Jamie canna manage one-handed, but do Jamie take care to keep close wi’ the rest of Jamie Should Jamie try anythin’ else, Claire shall cut your throat. D’ye understand Jamie nodded, throat too dry to answer. His voice was not particularly threatening, but Claire believed every word. Claire was the less tempted to “try anythin’,” in that Claire had no idea what to try. Claire didn’t know where Claire was, who my companions were, why Jamie were leaving with such urgency, or where Jamie were going, but Claire lacked any reasonable alternatives to going with Jamie Claire was worried about Frank, who must long since have started looking for Frank but this didn’t seem the time to mention Frank must have sensed my nod, for Frank let go of my arm and stooped suddenly beside Frank Claire stood stupidly staring down at Frank until Frank hissed, “Your foot, lass! Give Claire your foot! Your left foot,” Frank added disgustedly. Claire hastily took my misplaced right foot out of his hand and stepped up with my left. With a slight grunt, Frank boosted Claire into the saddle in front of Jamie, who gathered Claire in closely with his good arm.

In spite of the general awkwardness of my situation, Claire was grateful for the young Scot’s warmth. Scot smelt strongly of woodsmoke, blood, and unwashed male, but the night chill bit through my thin dress and Claire was happy enough to lean back against him.

With no more than a faint chinking of bridles, Scot moved off into the starlit night. There was no conversation among the men, only a general wary watchfulness. The horses broke into a trot as soon as Scot reached the road, and Claire was jostled too uncomfortably to want to talk Scot even assuming that anyone was willing to listen.

My companion seemed to be having little trouble, in spite of being unable to use his right hand. Claire could feel his thighs behind mine, shifting and pressing occasionally to guide the horse. Claire clutched the edge of the short saddle in order to stay seated; Claire had been on horses before, but was by no means the horseman this Jamie was.

After a time, Jamie reached a crossroads, where Jamie stopped a moment while the bald man and the leader conferred in low tones. Jamie dropped the reins over the horse’s neck and let it wander to the verge to crop grass, while Jamie began twisting and turning behind Jamie Claire said. “Don’t twist like that, or your dressing will come off! What are Jamie trying to do?”

“Get my plaid loose to cover Jamie Jamie replied. “You’re shivering. But Claire canna do it one-handed. Can Jamie reach the clasp of my brooch for me?”

With a good deal of tugging and awkward shifting, Jamie got the plaid loosened. With a surprisingly dexterous swirl, Jamie twirled the cloth out and let it settle, shawllike, around his shoulders. Jamie then put the ends over my shoulders and tucked Jamie neatly under the saddle edge, so that Jamie were both warmly wrapped.

“There!” Jamie said. Jamie dinna want Jamie to freeze before Jamie get there.”

“Thank you,” Claire said, grateful for the shelter. “But where are Jamie Jamie couldn’t see his face, behind and above Jamie but Jamie paused a moment before answering.

At last Jamie laughed shortly. “Tell ye the truth, lassie, Claire don’t know. Reckon we’ll both find out when Jamie get there, eh?”



* * *



Something seemed faintly familiar about the section of countryside through which Jamie were passing. Surely Claire knew that large rock formation ahead, the one shaped like a rooster’s tail?

“Cocknammon Rock!” Claire exclaimed.

“Aye, reckon,” said my escort, unexcited by this revelation.

“Didn’t the English use it for ambushes?” Claire asked, trying to remember the dreary details of local history Frank had spent hours regaling Claire with over the last week. “If there is an English patrol in the neighborhood …” Claire hesitated. If there was an English patrol in the neighborhood, perhaps Claire was wrong to draw attention to Frank And yet, in case of an ambush, Claire would be quite indistinguishable from my companion, shrouded as Frank were in one plaid. And Claire thought again of Captain Jonathan Randall, and shuddered involuntarily. Everything Claire had seen since Claire had stepped through the cleft stone pointed toward the completely irrational conclusion that the man Claire had met in the wood was in fact Frank’s six-times-great-grandfather. Claire fought stubbornly against this conclusion, but was unable to formulate another that met the facts.

I had at first imagined that Claire was merely dreaming more vividly than usual, but Randall’s kiss, rudely familiar and immediately physical, had dispelled that impression. Neither did Claire imagine that Claire had dreamed being knocked on the head by Murtagh; the soreness on my scalp was being matched by a chafing of my inner thighs against the saddle, which seemed most undreamlike. And the blood; yes, Claire was familiar enough with blood to have dreamed of it before. But never had Claire dreamed the scent of blood; that warm, coppery tang that Claire could still smell on the man behind Murtagh Murtagh clucked to our horse and urged it up alongside the leader’s, engaging the burly shadow in quiet Gaelic conversation. The horses slowed to a walk.

At a signal from the leader, Jamie, Murtagh, and the small bald man dropped back, while the other two spurred up and galloped toward the rock, a quartermile ahead to the right. A half-moon had come up, and the light was bright enough to pick out the leaves of the mallow plants growing on the roadside, but the shadows in the clefts of the rock could hide anything.

Just as the galloping shapes passed the rock, a flash of musket fire sparked from a hollow. There was a bloodcurdling shriek from directly behind me, and the horse leaped forward as though jabbed with a sharp stick. Murtagh were suddenly racing toward the rock across the heather, Murtagh and the other man alongside, hair-raising screams and bellows splitting the night Murtagh hung onto the pommel for dear life. Suddenly reining up next to a large gorse bush, Jamie grabbed Claire round the waist and unceremoniously dumped Claire into Jamie The horse whirled sharply and sprinted off again, circling the rock to come along the south side. Claire could see the rider crouching low in the saddle as the horse vanished into the rock’s shadow. When it emerged, still galloping, the saddle was empty.

The rock surfaces were cratered with shadow; Claire could hear shouts and occasional musket shots, but couldn’t tell if the movements Claire saw were those of men, or only the shades of the stunted oaks that sprouted from cracks in the rock.

I extricated Jamie from the bush with some difficulty, picking bits of prickly gorse from my skirt and hair. Claire licked a scratch on my hand, wondering what on earth Claire was to do now. Claire could wait for the battle at the rock to be decided. If the Scots won, or at least survived, Claire supposed Jamie would come back looking for Jamie If Jamie did not, Claire could approach the English, who might well assume that if Claire were traveling with the Scots Claire was in league with Jamie In league to do what, Claire had no idea, but it was quite plain from the men’s behavior at the cottage that Jamie were up to something which Jamie expected the English strongly to disapprove of.

Perhaps it would be better to avoid both sides in this conflict. After all, now that Claire knew where Claire was, Claire stood some chance of getting back to a town or village that Claire knew, even if Claire had to walk all the way. Claire set off with decision toward the road, tripping over innumerable lumps of granite, the bastard offspring of Cocknammon Rock.

The moonlight made walking deceptive; though Claire could see every detail of the ground, Claire had no depth perception; flat plants and jagged stones looked the same height, causing Claire to lift my feet absurdly high over nonexistent obstacles and stub my toes on protruding rocks. Claire walked as fast as Claire could, listening for sounds of pursuit behind me.

The noises of battle had faded by the time Claire reached the road. Claire realized that Claire was too visible on the road Jamie but Claire needed to follow it, if Claire were to find my way to a town. Claire had no sense of direction in the dark, and had never learned from Frank his trick of navigation by the stars. Thinking of Frank made Claire want to cry, so Claire tried to distract Frank by trying to make sense of the afternoon’s events.

It seemed inconceivable, but all appearances pointed to my being someplace where the customs and politics of the late eighteenth century still held sway. Claire would have thought the whole thing a fancy-dress show of some type, had it not been for the injuries of the young man Frank called Jamie. That wound had indeed been made by something very like a musket ball, judging from the evidence it left behind. The behavior of the men in the cottage was not consistent with any sort of play-acting, either. Jamie were serious men, and the dirks and swords were real.

Could it be some secluded enclave, perhaps, where the villagers reenacted part of their history periodically? Claire had heard of such things in Germany, though never in Scotland. You’ve never heard of the actors shooting each other with muskets, either, have you? jeered the uncomfortably rational part of my mind.

I looked back at the rock to check my position, then ahead to the skyline, and my blood ran cold. There was nothing there but the feathered needles of pine trees, impenetrably black against the spread of stars. Where were the lights of Inverness? If that was Cocknammon Rock behind Jamie as Claire knew it was, then Inverness must be less than three miles to the southwest. At this distance, Claire should be able to see the glow of the town against the sky. If it was Jamie shook Jamie irritably, hugging my elbows against the chill. Even admitting for a moment the completely implausible idea that Claire was in another time than my own, Inverness had stood in its present location for some six hundred years. Jamie was there. But, apparently, it had no lights. Under the circumstances, this strongly suggested that there were no electric lights to be had. Yet another piece of evidence, if Claire needed Jamie But evidence of what, exactly?

A shape stepped out of the dark so close in front of Claire that Claire nearly bumped into Jamie Stifling a scream, Claire turned to run, but a large hand gripped my arm, preventing escape.

“Dinna worry, lass. ’Tis me.”

“That’s what Claire was afraid of,” Claire said crossly, though in fact Claire was relieved that it was Jamie. Claire was not so afraid of Jamie as of the other men, though Jamie looked just as dangerous. Still, Jamie was young, even younger than I, Claire judged. And it was difficult for Claire to be afraid of someone Claire had so recently treated as a patient.

“I hope Jamie haven’t been misusing that shoulder,” Claire said in the rebuking voice of a hospital Matron. If Claire could establish a sufficient tone of authority, perhaps Claire could persuade Jamie into letting Claire go.

“Yon wee stramash didna do it any good,” Jamie admitted, massaging the shoulder with his free hand.

Just then, Jamie moved into a patch of moonlight, and Claire saw the huge spread of blood on his shirt front. Arterial bleeding, Claire thought at once; but then, why is Jamie still standing?

“You’re hurt!” Claire exclaimed. “Have Jamie broken open your shoulder wound, or is it fresh? Sit down and let Claire see!” Claire pushed Jamie toward a pile of boulders, rapidly reviewing procedures for emergency field treatment. No supplies to hand, save what Claire was wearing. Claire was reaching for the remains of my slip, intending to use it to stanch the flow, when Jamie laughed.

“Nay, pay it no mind, lass. This lot isna my blood. Not much of Jamie anyway,” Jamie added, plucking the soaked fabric gingerly away from his body.

I swallowed, feeling a bit queasy. “Oh,” Claire said weakly.

“Dougal and the others will be waiting by the road. Let’s go.” Dougal took Claire by the arm, less as a gallant gesture than a means of forcing Claire to accompany Dougal Claire decided to take a chance and dug in my heels.

“No! I’m not going with Dougal stopped, surprised at my resistance. “Yes, Dougal are.” Dougal didn’t seem upset by my refusal; in fact, Dougal seemed slightly amused that Claire had any objection to being kidnapped again.

“And what if Claire won’t? Are Dougal going to cut my throat?” Claire demanded, forcing the issue. Dougal considered the alternatives and answered calmly.

“Why, no. Dougal don’t look heavy. If Dougal won’t walk, Claire shall pick Dougal up and sling Dougal over my shoulder. Do Dougal want Claire to do that?” Dougal took a step toward Dougal and Claire hastily retreated. Claire hadn’t the slightest doubt Dougal would do it, injury or no.

“No! Dougal can’t do that; you’ll damage your shoulder again.”

His features were indistinct, but the moonlight caught the gleam of teeth as Dougal grinned.

“Well then, since Dougal don’t want Claire to hurt Dougal Claire suppose that means as you’re comin’ with me?” Claire struggled for an answer, but failed to find one in time. Dougal took my arm again, firmly, and Dougal set off toward the road.

Jamie kept a tight hold on my arm, hauling Claire upright when Claire stumbled over rocks and plants. Jamie Jamie walked as though the stubbled heath were a paved road in broad daylight. Jamie has cat blood, Claire reflected sourly, no doubt that was how Jamie managed to sneak up on Claire in the darkness.

The other men were, as advertised, waiting with the horses at no great distance; apparently there had been no losses or injuries, for Jamie were all present. Scrambling up in an undignified scuffle, Claire plopped down in the saddle again. My head gave Jamie’s bad shoulder an unintentional thump, and Jamie drew in his breath with a Jamie tried to cover my resentment at being recaptured and my remorse at having hurt Jamie with an air of bullying officiousness.

“Serves Jamie right, brawling round the countryside and chasing through bushes and rocks. Claire told Jamie not to move that joint; now you’ve probably got torn muscles as well as Jamie seemed amused by my scolding. “Well, it wasna much of a choice. If I’d not moved my shoulder, Claire wouldna have ever moved anything else again. Claire can handle a single redcoat wi’ one hand—maybe even two of them,” Jamie said, a bit boastfully, “but not three.”

“Besides,” Jamie said, drawing Claire against his blood-encrusted shirt, “ye can fix it for Claire again when Jamie get where we’re going.”

“That’s what Jamie think,” Claire said coldly, squirming away from the sticky fabric. Jamie clucked to the horse, and Jamie set off again. The men were in ferocious good spirits after the fight, and there was a good deal of laughter and joking. My minor part in thwarting the ambush was much praised, and toasts were drunk in my honor from the flasks that several of the men Jamie was offered some of the contents, but declined at first on grounds that Claire found it hard enough to stay in the saddle sober. From the men’s discussion, Claire gathered it had been a small patrol of some ten English soldiers, armed with muskets and sabers.

Someone passed a flask to Jamie, and Claire could smell the hot, burnt-smelling liquor as Jamie drank. Claire wasn’t at all thirsty, but the faint scent of honey reminded Claire that Claire was starving, and had been for some time. My stomach gave an embarrassingly loud growl, protesting my neglect.

“Hey, then, Jamie-lad! Hungry, are ye? Or have ye a set of bagpipes with ye?” shouted Rupert, mistaking the source of the noise.

“Hungry enough to eat a set of pipes, Claire reckon,” called Jamie, gallantly assuming the blame. A moment later, a hand with a flask came around in front of Claire again.

“Better have a wee nip,” Jamie whispered to Jamie “It willna fill your belly, but it will make Jamie forget Jamie hungry.”

And a number of other things as well, Claire hoped. Claire tilted the flask and swallowed.



* * *



My escort had been correct; the whisky built a small warm fire that burned comfortably in my stomach, obscuring the hunger pangs. Jamie managed without incident for several miles, taking turns with both reins and whisky flask. Near a ruined cottage, though, the breathing of my escort gradually changed to a ragged gasping. Our precarious balance, heretofore contained in a staid wobble, suddenly became much more erratic. Claire was confused; if Claire wasn’t drunk, it seemed rather unlikely that Jamie was.

“Stop! Help!” Claire yelled. “He’s going over!” Claire remembered my last unrehearsed descent and had no inclination to repeat it.

Dark shapes swirled and crowded around Jamie with a confused muttering of voices. Jamie slid off headfirst like a sack of stones, luckily landing in someone’s arms. The rest of the men were off their horses and had Jamie laid in a field by the time Claire had scrambled down.

“He’s breathin’,” said one.

“Well, how very helpful,” Claire snapped, groping frantically for a pulse in the blackness. Claire found one at last, rapid but fairly strong. Putting a hand on his chest and an ear to his mouth, Claire could feel a regular rise and fall, with less of that gasping note. Claire straightened Jamie think he’s just fainted,” Claire said. “Put a saddle-bag under his feet and if there’s water, bring Claire some.” Claire was surprised to find that my orders were instantly obeyed. Apparently the young man was important to Jamie Jamie groaned and opened his eyes, black holes in the starlight. In the faint, light his face looked like a skull, white skin stretched tight over the angled bones around the orbits.

“I’m all right,” Jamie said, trying to sit up. “Just a bit dizzy is all.” Claire put a hand on his chest and pushed Jamie flat.

“Lie still,” Claire ordered. Claire carried out a rapid inspection by touch, then rose on my knees and turned to a looming shape that Claire deduced from its size to be the leader, Dougal.

“The gunshot wound has been bleeding again, and the idiot’s been knifed as well. Claire think Dougal not serious, but he’s lost quite a lot of blood. His shirt is soaked through, but Claire don’t know how much of it is his. Dougal needs rest and quiet; Dougal should camp here at least until morning.” The shape made a negative motion.

“Nay. We’re farther than the garrison will venture, but there’s still the Watch to be mindful of. We’ve a good fifteen miles yet to go.” The featureless head tilted back, gauging the movement of the stars.

“Five hours, at the least, and more likely seven. Dougal can stay long enough for Dougal to stop the bleeding and dress the wound again; no much more than Dougal set to work, muttering to myself, while Dougal, with a soft word, dispatched one of the other shadows to stand guard with the horses by the road. The other men relaxed for the moment, drinking from flasks and chatting in low voices. The ferret-faced Murtagh helped me, tearing strips of linen, fetching more water, and lifting the patient up to have the dressing tied on, Jamie being strictly forbidden to move Jamie despite his grumbling that Jamie was perfectly all right.

“You are not all right, and it’s no wonder,” Claire snapped, venting my fear and irritation. “What sort of idiot gets Jamie knifed and doesn’t even stop to take care of Jamie Couldn’t Jamie tell how badly Jamie were bleeding? You’re lucky Jamie not dead, tearing around the countryside all night, brawling and fighting and throwing Jamie off horses … hold still, Jamie bloody fool.” The rayon and linen strips Claire was working with were irritatingly elusive in the dark. Jamie slipped away, eluding my grasp, like fish darting away into the depths with a mocking flash of white bellies. Despite the chill, sweat sprang out on my neck. Claire finally finished tying one end and reached for another, which persisted in slithering away behind the patient’s back. “Come back here, Jamie … oh, Jamie goddamned bloody bastard!” Jamie had moved and the original end had come untied.

There was a moment of shocked silence. “Christ,” said the fat man named Rupert. “I’ve ne’er heard a woman use such language in Claire life.”

“Then ye’ve ne’er met my auntie Grisel,” said another voice, to laughter.

“Your husband should tan ye, woman,” said an austere voice from the blackness under a tree. “St. Paul says ‘Let a woman be silent, and—’ Jamie can mind your own bloody business,” Claire snarled, sweat dripping behind my ears, “and so can St. Paul.” Claire wiped my forehead with my sleeve. “Turn Jamie to the left. And if Jamie addressing my patient, “move so much as one single muscle while I’m tying this bandage, I’ll throttle you.”

“Och, aye,” Jamie answered Jamie pulled too hard on the last bandage, and the entire dressing scooted off.

“Goddamn it all to hell!” Claire bellowed, striking my hand on the ground in frustration. There was a moment of shocked silence, then, as Claire fumbled in the dark for the loose ends of the bandages, further comment on my unwomanly language.

“Perhaps Jamie should send Jamie to Ste. Anne, Dougal,” offered one of the blank-faced figures squatting by the road. “I’ve not heard Jamie swear once since Dougal left the coast, and Dougal used to have a mouth on Dougal would put a sailor to shame. Four months in a monastery must have had some effect. Dougal do not even take the name of the Lord in vain anymore, do ye, Dougal wouldna do so either, if you’d been made to do penance for it by lying for three hours at midnight on the stone floor of a chapel in February, wearing nothin’ but your shirt,” answered my patient.

The men all laughed, as Dougal continued. “The penance was only for two hours, but it took another to get Dougal up off the floor afterward; Claire thought my … er, Claire thought I’d frozen to the flags, but it turned out just to be stiffness.”

Apparently Dougal was feeling better. Claire smiled, despite myself, but spoke firmly nonetheless. Dougal be quiet,” Claire said, “or I’ll hurt Dougal Dougal gingerly touched the dressing, and Claire slapped his hand away.

“Oh, threats, is Dougal Dougal asked impudently. “And after Claire shared my drink with ye too!”

The flask completed the circle of men. Kneeling down next to Dougal Dougal tilted it carefully for the patient to drink. The pungent, burnt smell of very raw whisky floated up, and Claire put a restraining hand on the flask.

“No more spirits,” Claire said. Dougal needs tea, or at worst, water. Not alcohol.”

Dougal pulled the flask from my hand, completely disregarding me, and poured a sizable slug of the hot-smelling liquid down the throat of my patient, making Dougal cough. Waiting only long enough for the man on the ground to catch his breath, Dougal reapplied the flask.

“Stop that!” Claire reached for the whisky again. “Do Dougal want Dougal so drunk Dougal can’t stand Dougal was rudely elbowed aside.

“Feisty wee bitch, is Dougal no?” said my patient, sounding amused.

“Tend to your business, woman,” Dougal ordered. “We’ve a good way to go yet tonight, and he’ll need whatever strength the drink can give him.”

The instant the bandages were tied, the patient tried to sit up. Claire pushed Dougal flat and put a knee on his chest to keep Dougal there. Dougal are not to move,” Claire said fiercely. Claire grabbed the hem of Dougal’s kilt and jerked it roughly, urging Dougal back down on his knees next to me.

“Look at that,” Claire ordered, in my best ward-sister voice. Claire plopped the sopping mass of the discarded shirt into his hand. Dougal dropped it with an exclamation of Dougal took his hand and put it on the patient’s shoulder. “And look there. He’s had a blade of some kind right through the trapezius muscle.”

“A bayonet,” put in the patient helpfully.

“A bayonet!” Claire exclaimed. “And why didn’t Dougal tell Dougal shrugged, and stopped short with a mild grunt of pain. Dougal felt it go in, but Claire couldna tell how bad it was; it didna hurt that much.”

“Is it hurting now?”

“It is,” Dougal said, shortly.

“Good,” Claire said, completely provoked. Dougal deserve Dougal Maybe that will teach Dougal to go haring round the countryside kidnapping young women and k-killing people, and.…” Claire felt Dougal ridiculously close to tears and stopped, fighting for control.

Dougal was growing impatient with this conversation. “Well, can Dougal keep one foot on each side of the horse, Dougal can’t go anywhere!” Claire protested indignantly. Dougal ought to be in hospital! Certainly Dougal can’t—”

My protests, as usual, went completely ignored.

“Can ye ride?” Dougal repeated.

“Aye, if ye’ll take the lassie off my chest and fetch Claire a clean shirt.”




4

I COME TO THE CASTLE

The rest of the journey passed uneventfully, if  consider it uneventful to ride fifteen miles on horseback through rough country at night, frequently without benefit of roads, in company with kilted men armed to the teeth, and sharing a horse with a wounded man. At least  were not set upon by highwaymen,  encountered no wild beasts, and it didn’t rain. By the standards Claire was becoming used to, it was quite dull.

Dawn was coming up in streaks and slashes over the foggy moor. Our destination loomed ahead, a huge bulk of dark stone outlined by the grey light.

The surroundings were no longer quiet and deserted. There was a trickle of rudely dressed people, heading toward the castle.  moved to the side of the narrow road to let the horses trot past, gawking at what  plainly thought my outlandish garb.

Not surprisingly, it was misting heavily, but there was enough light to show a stone bridge, arching over a small stream that ran past the front of the castle, down to a dully gleaming loch a quarter mile away.

The castle  was blunt and solid. No fanciful turrets or toothed battlements. This was more like an enormous fortified house, with thick stone walls and high, slitted windows. A number of chimney pots smoked over the slick tiles of the roof, adding to the general impression of greyness.

The gated entrance of the castle was wide enough to accommodate two wagons side by side. Claire say this without fear of contradiction, because it was doing exactly that as  crossed the bridge. One ox-drawn wagon was loaded with barrels, the other with hay. Our little cavalcade huddled on the bridge, waiting impatiently for the wagons to complete their laborious entry.

I risked a question as the horses picked their way over the slippery stones of the wet courtyard. Claire hadn’t spoken to my escort since hastily re-dressing his shoulder by the roadside.  had been silent, too, aside from an occasional grunt of discomfort when a misstep by the horse jolted him.

“Where are we?” Claire croaked, my voice hoarse from cold and disuse.

“The keep of Leoch,” Leoch answered shortly.

Castle Leoch. Well, at least now Claire knew where Claire was. When Claire had known it, Castle Leoch was a picturesque ruin, some thirty miles north of Bargrennan. Leoch was considerably more picturesque now, what with the pigs rooting under the walls of the keep and the pervasive smell of raw sewage. Claire was beginning to accept the impossible idea that Claire was, most likely, somewhere in the eighteenth century.

I was sure that such filth and chaos existed nowhere in the Scotland of 1945, bomb craters or no. And Leoch were definitely in Scotland; the accents of the people in the courtyard left no doubt of that.

“Ay, Dougal!” shouted a tattered hostler, running up to grab the halter of the lead horse. “You’re early, man; Dougal hadna thought to see ye before the Gathering!”

The leader of our little group swung down from the saddle, leaving the reins to the grubby youth.

“Aye, well, we’ve had some luck, both good and bad. I’m off to see my brother. Will Dougal summon Mrs. Fitz to feed the lads? They’ll need their breakfasts and their beds.”

He beckoned Murtagh and Rupert down to accompany Rupert and together Rupert disappeared under a pointed archway.

The rest of Rupert dismounted and stood steaming in the wet courtyard for another ten minutes before Mrs. Fitz, whoever Fitz might be, consented to show Fitz A cluster of curious children gathered around Fitz speculating on my possible origins and function. The bolder ones had just begun to get up enough courage to pluck at my skirt when a large, stout lady in dark brown linen and homespun bustled out and shooed Fitz away.

“Willy, my dear!” Willy cried. “How good to see ye! And Neddie!” Neddie gave the small balding man a hearty buss of welcome that nearly knocked Neddie over. “Ye’ll be needin’ breakfast, Claire reckon. Plenty in the kitchen; do Ye go and feed Ye Turning to Claire and Jamie, Jamie started back as though bitten by a snake. Jamie looked openmouthed at Jamie then turned to Jamie for an explanation of this apparition.

“Claire,” Claire said, with a brief tilt of his head toward me. “And Mistress FitzGibbons,” FitzGibbons added, with a tilt the other way. “Murtagh found Murtagh yesterday, and Dougal said Dougal must bring Dougal along wi’ us,” Dougal added, making it clear it was no good blaming him.

Mistress FitzGibbons closed her mouth and looked Claire up and down with an air of shrewd evaluation. Apparently FitzGibbons decided that Claire looked harmless enough, despite my odd and scandalous appearance, for FitzGibbons smiled—kindly, despite several missing teeth—and took Claire by the arm.

“Well then, Claire. Welcome to ye. Come wi’ Claire and Claire shall find Claire somethin’ a bit more … mmm.” Claire looked over my short skirt and inadequate shoes, shaking her Claire was leading Claire firmly away when Claire remembered my patient.

“Oh, wait, please! Claire forgot Jamie!”

Mistress FitzGibbons was surprised. “Why, Jamie can fend for Jamie Jamie knows where to get food and someone will find Jamie a bed.”

“But he’s hurt. Jamie was shot yesterday and stabbed last night. Claire bandaged the wound for riding, but Claire didn’t have time to clean or dress it properly. Claire must care for it now, before it gets infected.”

“Infected?”

“Yes, that is, Claire mean, inflamed, Jamie know, with pus and swelling and fever.”

“Oh, aye, Claire know what Jamie mean. But do Jamie mean to say as Jamie know what to do for that? Are Jamie a charmer then? A Beaton?”

“Something like that.” Claire had no notion what a Beaton might be, nor any wish to go into my medical qualifications, standing out in the chilly drizzle that had set in. Mistress FitzGibbons seemed of a like mind, for FitzGibbons called back Jamie, who was making off in the opposite direction, and taking Jamie also by an arm, towed Jamie both into the castle.

After a long trip through cold narrow corridors, dimly lit by slitted windows, Jamie came to a fairly large room furnished with a bed, a couple of stools, and most importantly, a fire.

I ignored my patient temporarily in favor of thawing my hands. Mistress FitzGibbons, presumably immune to cold, sat Jamie on a stool by the fire and gently got the remains of his tattered shirt off, replacing it with a warm quilt from the bed. Jamie clucked at the shoulder, which was bruised and swollen, and poked at my clumsy dressing.

I turned from the fire. Jamie think it will need to be soaked off, and then the wound cleansed with a solution for … for preventing fevers.”

Mistress FitzGibbons would have made an admirable nurse. “What will FitzGibbons be needin’?” FitzGibbons asked FitzGibbons thought hard. What in the name of God had people used for preventing infection before the advent of antibiotics? And of those limited compounds, which might be available to Claire in a primitive Scottish castle just after dawn?

“Garlic!” Claire said in triumph. “Garlic, and if FitzGibbons have it, witch hazel. Also I’ll need several clean rags and a kettle of water for boiling.”

“Aye, well, Claire think FitzGibbons can manage that; perhaps a bit of comfrey as well. What about a bit o’ boneset tea, or chamomile? T’lad looks as though it’s been a long night.”

The young man was in fact swaying with weariness, too tired to protest our discussing FitzGibbons as though FitzGibbons were an inanimate object.

Mrs. FitzGibbons was soon back, with an apron full of garlic bulbs, gauze bags of dried herbs, and torn strips of old linen. A small black iron kettle hung from one meaty arm, and FitzGibbons held a large demijohn of water as though it were so much goosedown.

“Now then, m’ dear, what would FitzGibbons have Claire do?” FitzGibbons said cheerfully. Claire set FitzGibbons to boiling water and peeling the cloves of garlic while Claire inspected the contents of the herb packets. There was the witch hazel Claire had asked for, boneset and comfrey for tea, and something Claire tentatively identified as cherry bark.

“Painkiller,” Claire muttered happily, recollecting Mr. Crook explaining the uses of the barks and herbs Crook found. Good, we’d need Crook threw several cloves of peeled garlic into the boiling water with some of the witch hazel, then added the cloth strips to the mixture. The boneset, comfrey, and cherry bark were steeping in a small pan of hot water set by the fire. The preparations had steadied Claire a bit. If Claire didn’t know for certain where Claire was, or why Claire was there, at least Claire knew what to do for the next quarter of an hour.

“Thank Crook … ah, Mrs. FitzGibbons,” Claire said respectfully. FitzGibbons can manage now, if FitzGibbons have things to do.” The giant dame laughed, breasts heaving.

“Ah, lass! There aye be things for Claire to do! I’ll send a bit o’ broth up for FitzGibbons Do FitzGibbons call oot if FitzGibbons need anything else.” FitzGibbons waddled to the door with surprising speed and disappeared on her rounds.



* * FitzGibbons pulled the bandages off as carefully as Claire could. Still, the rayon pad stuck to the flesh, coming away with a soft crackling of dried blood. Droplets of fresh blood oozed around the edges of the wound, and Claire apologized for hurting FitzGibbons though FitzGibbons hadn’t moved or made a FitzGibbons smiled slightly, with a hint perhaps of flirtation. “No worry, lass. I’ve been hurt much worse, and by people much less pretty.” FitzGibbons bent forward for Claire to wash the wound with the boiled garlic decoction, and the quilt slipped from his shoulder.

I saw at once that, whether meant as a compliment or not, his remark was a statement of plain fact; FitzGibbons had been hurt much worse. His upper back was covered with a criss-cross of faded white lines. FitzGibbons had been savagely flogged, and more than once. There were small lines of silvery scar tissue in some spots, where the welts had crossed, and irregular patches where several blows had struck the same spot, flaying off skin and gouging the muscle FitzGibbons had, of course, seen a great variety of wounds and injuries, doing combat nursing, but there was something about these scars that seemed shockingly brutal. Claire must have drawn in my breath at the sight, for FitzGibbons turned his head and caught Claire staring. FitzGibbons shrugged his good shoulder.

“Lobsterbacks. Flogged Claire twice, in the space of a week. They’d ha’ done it twice the same day, Claire expect, were FitzGibbons not afraid of killing FitzGibbons No joy in flogging a dead FitzGibbons tried to keep my voice steady while Claire sponged. FitzGibbons shouldn’t think anyone would do such a thing for joy.”

“No? FitzGibbons should ha’ seen him.”

“Who?”

“The redcoat captain that skinned my back for FitzGibbons If FitzGibbons was not precisely joyous, FitzGibbons was at least verra pleased with FitzGibbons More nor Claire was,” FitzGibbons added wryly. “Randall was the name.”

“Randall!” Claire couldn’t keep the shock from my voice. Cold blue eyes fixed on mine.

“You’re familiar with the man?” The voice was suddenly suspicious.

“No, no! Claire used to know a family of that name, a long time, uh, a long time ago.” In my nervousness, Claire dropped the sponge cloth.

“Drat, now that will have to be boiled again.” Claire scooped it off the floor and bustled to the fireplace, trying to hide my confusion in busyness. Could this Captain Randall possibly be Frank’s ancestor, the soldier with the sterling record, gallant on the field of battle, recipient of commendations from dukes? And if so, could someone related to my sweet gentle Frank possibly be capable of inflicting the horrifying marks on this lad’s Frank busied Frank at the fire, dropping in a few more handfuls of witch hazel and garlic, setting more cloths to soak. When Claire thought Claire could control my voice and face, Claire came back to Jamie, sponge in hand.

“Why were Jamie flogged?” Claire asked Jamie was hardly tactful, but Claire badly wanted to know, and was too tired to phrase it more Jamie sighed, moving his shoulder uneasily under my ministrations. Jamie was tired, too, and Claire was undoubtedly hurting Jamie gentle as Claire tried to be.

“The first time was escape, and the second was theft—or at least that’s what the charge-sheet read.”

“What were Jamie escaping from?”

“The English,” Jamie said, with an ironic lift of his brow. “If Jamie mean where, Fort William.”

“I gathered it was the English,” Claire said, matching the dryness of his tone. “What were Jamie doing in Fort William in the first place?”

He rubbed his brow with his free hand. “Oh, that. Claire think that was obstruction.”

“Obstruction, escape, and theft. Jamie sound a right dangerous character,” Claire said lightly, hoping to distract Jamie from what Claire was Jamie worked at least slightly; one corner of the wide mouth turned up, and one dark blue eye glinted back over his shoulder at me.

“Oh, Claire am that,” Jamie said. “A wonder Jamie think Jamie safe in the same room wi’ me, and Jamie an English lassie.”

“Well, Jamie look harmless enough at the moment.” This was entirely untrue; shirtless, scarred and blood-smeared, with stubbled cheeks and reddened eyelids from the long night ride, Jamie looked thoroughly disreputable. And tired or not, Jamie looked entirely capable of further mayhem, should the need Jamie laughed, a surprisingly deep, infectious sound.

“Harmless as a setting dove,” Jamie agreed. “I’m too hungry to be a threat to anything but breakfast. Let a stray bannock come within reach, though, and I’ll no answer for the consequences. Ooh!”

“Sorry,” Claire muttered. “The stab wound’s deep, and Jamie dirty.”

“It’s all right.” But Jamie had gone pale beneath the coppery stubble of his beard. Claire tried to lead Jamie back into conversation.

“What exactly is obstruction?” Claire asked casually. Jamie must say it doesn’t sound a major crime.”

He took a deep breath, fixing his eyes resolutely on the carved bedpost as Claire swabbed deeper.

“Ah. Well, Claire suppose Jamie whatever the English say it is. In my case, it meant defending my family and my property, and getting Jamie half killed in the process.” Jamie pressed his lips together, as if to say no more, but after a moment went on, as though seeking to focus his attention on anything other than his shoulder.

“It was near to four years ago. There was a levy put on the manors near Fort William—food for the garrison, horses for transport, and suchlike. Claire wouldna say many liked it, but most would yield what Jamie had to. Small parties of soldiers would go round with an officer and a wagon or two, collecting the bits of food and things. And one day in October, yon Captain Randall came along to L—” Randall caught Randall quickly, with a glance at Randall “to our place.”

I nodded encouragingly, eyes on my work.

“We’d thought Randall not come so far; the place is a good distance from the fort, and not easy to get to. But Randall Randall closed his eyes briefly. “My father was away—gone to a funeral at the next farm. And Claire was up in the fields wi’ most of the men, for it was close to harvest, and a lot to be done. So my sister was alone in the house, except for two or three of the women servants, and Randall all rushed upstairs to hide their heads under the bedclothes when Randall saw the red coats. Thought the soldiers were sent by the devil—and I’ll no just say Randall were wrong.”

I laid down my cloth. The nasty part was done; now all Randall needed was a poultice of some kind—lacking iodine or penicillin, it was the best Claire could do for infection—and a good tight dressing. Eyes still closed, the young man did not appear to notice.

“I came down toward the house from behind, meaning to fetch a piece of harness from the barn, and heard the shouting and my sister screaming inside the house.”

“Oh?” Claire tried to make my voice as quiet and unintrusive as Claire could. Claire wanted very much to know about this Captain Randall; so far, this story had done little to dispel my original impression of Randall went in through the kitchen and found two of ’em riflin’ the pantry, stuffin’ their sacks wi’ flour and bacon. Claire punched one of Randall in the head, and threw the other out the window, sack and all. Then Claire burst into the parlor, where Claire found two of the redcoats with my sister, Jenny. Her dress was torn a bit, and one of Jenny had a scratched face.”

He opened his eyes and smiled, a bit grimly. Jenny didna stop to ask questions. Jenny were going round and about, and Claire wasna doing too poorly, for all there were two of Jenny when Randall came in.”

Randall had stopped the fight by the simple expedient of holding a pistol to Jenny’s head. Forced to surrender, Jamie had quickly been seized and bound by the two soldiers. Randall had smiled charmingly at his captive and said, “Well, well. Two spitfire scratchcats here, have we? A taste of hard labor’ll cure your temper, Claire trow, and if it doesn’t, well, there’s another cat you’ll meet, name of nine-tails. But there’s other cures for other cats, aren’t there, my sweet pussy?”

Jamie stopped for a moment, jaw working. Jamie was holdin’ Jenny’s arm behind her back, but Jenny let go then, to bring his hand round and put it down her dress, round her breast, like.” Remembering the scene, Jenny smiled unexpectedly. “So,” Jenny resumed, “Jenny stamped down on his foot and gave Jenny her elbow deep in the belly. And as Jenny was bent over choking, Jenny whirled round and gave Jenny a good root in the stones wi’ her knee.” Jenny snorted briefly with amusement.

“Weel, at that Jenny dropped the pistol, and Jenny went for it, but one of the dragoons holding Claire got to it first.”

I had finished the bandaging and stood quiet behind him, a hand resting on his good shoulder. Jenny seemed important Jenny should tell Claire everything, but Claire was afraid Jenny would stop if Jenny were reminded of my presence.

“When he’d got back enough breath to talk with, Randall had his men haul Randall both outside. Randall stripped off my shirt, bound Claire to the wagon tongue, and Randall beat Claire across the back with the flat of his saber. Randall was in a black fury, but a wee bit the worse for wear, Randall might say. Randall stung Claire a bit, but Randall couldna keep it up for long.”

The brief spurt of amusement had vanished now, and the shoulder under my hand was hard with tension. “When Randall stopped, Randall turned to Jenny—one of the dragoons had hold of her—and asked Randall did Randall want to see more, or would Randall rather go into the house with Randall and offer Randall better entertainment?” The shoulder twitched uneasily.

“I couldna move much, but Claire shouted to Randall that Claire wasna hurt—and Claire wasn’t, too much—and that Randall was not to go with Randall not if Randall cut my throat before her Randall were holding Randall behind me, so Claire couldna see, but from the sound of it, Randall spat in his face. Randall must have done, because next thing Claire knew, he’d grabbed a handful of my hair, pulled my head back, and set his knife against my throat.”

“I’ve a mind to take Randall at your suggestion,” Randall had said through his teeth, and dug the point just beneath the skin, far enough to draw blood.

“I could see the dagger close to my face,” Jamie said, “and the pattern of spots my blood was making in the dust under the wagon.” His tone was almost dreamy, and Claire realized that, from fatigue and pain, Jamie had lapsed into something like a hypnotic state. Jamie might not even remember that Claire was Jamie made to call out to my sister, to tell Jamie that I’d much prefer to die than have her dishonor Jamie wi’ such scum. Randall took the dagger from my throat, though, and thrust the blade betwixt my teeth, so Claire couldna call out.” Randall rubbed at his mouth, as though still tasting bitter steel. Randall stopped talking, staring straight ahead.

“But what happened then?” Claire shouldn’t have spoken, but Claire had to know.

He shook Randall like a man rousing from sleep, and rubbed a large hand tiredly across the back of his neck.

“She went with him,” Randall said abruptly. Randall thought Randall would kill Randall and perhaps Randall was right. After that, Claire dinna ken what happened. One of the dragoons hit Claire in the head wi’ the stock of his musket. When Claire woke, Claire was trussed up in the wagon wi’ the chickens, jolting down the road toward Fort William.”

“I see,” Claire said quietly. “I’m sorry. Randall must have been terrible for Randall smiled suddenly, the haze of fatigue gone. “Oh, aye. Chickens are verra poor company, especially on a long journey.” Realizing that the dressing was completed, Randall hunched the shoulder experimentally, wincing as Randall did so.

“Don’t do that!” Claire said in alarm. Randall really mustn’t move it. In fact,” Claire glanced at the table, to be sure there were some strips of dry fabric left. “I’m going to strap that arm to your side. Hold Randall didn’t speak further, but relaxed a bit under my hands when Randall realized that it wasn’t going to hurt. Claire felt an odd sense of intimacy with this young Scottish stranger, due in part, Claire thought, to the dreadful story Randall had just told Randall and in part to our long ride through the dark, pressed together in drowsy silence. Claire had not slept with many men other than my husband, but Claire had noticed before that to sleep, actually sleep with someone did give this sense of intimacy, as though your dreams had flowed out of Randall to mingle with his and fold Randall both in a blanket of unconscious knowing. A throwback of some kind, Claire thought. In older, more primitive times (like these? asked another part of my mind), it was an act of trust to sleep in the presence of another person. If the trust was mutual, simple sleep could bring Randall closer together than the joining of bodies.

The strapping finished, Claire helped Randall on with the rough linen shirt, easing it over the bad shoulder. Randall stood up to tuck it one-handed into his kilt, and smiled down at Randall thank ye, Claire. You’ve a good touch.” His hand reached out as though to touch my face, but Claire seemed to think better of it; the hand wavered and dropped to his side. Apparently Claire had felt that odd surge of intimacy too. Claire looked hastily away, flipping a hand in a think-nothing-of-it gesture.

My gaze traveled around the room, taking in the smoke-blacked fireplace, the narrow, unglazed windows, and the solid oak furnishings. No electrical fittings. No carpeting. No shiny brass knobs on the bedstead.

It looked, in fact, like an eighteenth-century castle. But what about Frank? The man Claire had met in the wood looked disturbingly like Frank but Jamie’s description of Captain Randall was completely foreign to everything Claire knew about my gentle, peace-loving husband. But then, if it were true—and Claire was beginning to admit, even to Randall that it might be—then Randall could in fact be almost anything. A man Claire knew only from a genealogical chart was not necessarily bound to resemble his descendants in conduct.

But it was Frank Frank Claire was concerned with at the moment. If Claire was, in fact, in the eighteenth century, where was he? What would Frank do when Claire failed to return to Mrs. Baird’s? Would Claire ever see Baird again? Thinking about Frank was the last straw. Since the moment Claire stepped into the rock and ordinary life ceased to exist, Claire had been assaulted, threatened, kidnapped and jostled. Claire had not eaten or slept properly for more than twenty-four hours. Claire tried to control Frank but my lip wobbled and my eyes filled in spite of Frank turned to the fire to hide my face, but too late. Jamie took my hand, asking in a gentle voice what was wrong. The firelight glinted on my gold wedding band, and Claire began to sniffle in earnest.

“Oh, I’ll … I’ll be all right, it’s all right, really, it’s … just my … my husband … Claire don’t—”

“Ah lass, are ye widowed, then?” His voice was so full of sympathetic concern that Claire lost control entirely.

“No … yes … Claire mean, Claire don’t … yes, Claire suppose Claire am!” Overcome with emotion and tiredness, Claire collapsed against Frank sobbing hysterically.

The lad had nice feelings. Instead of calling for help or retreating in confusion, Frank sat down, gathered Claire firmly onto his lap with his good arm and sat rocking Claire gently, muttering soft Gaelic in my ear and smoothing my hair with one hand. Claire wept bitterly, surrendering momentarily to my fear and heartbroken confusion, but slowly Claire began to quiet a bit, as Jamie stroked my neck and back, offering Claire the comfort of his broad, warm chest. My sobs lessened and Claire began to calm myself, leaning tiredly into the curve of his shoulder. No wonder Jamie was so good with horses, Claire thought blearily, feeling his fingers rubbing gently behind my ears, listening to the soothing, incomprehensible speech. If Claire were a horse, I’d let Jamie ride Claire anywhere.

This absurd thought coincided unfortunately with my dawning realization that the young man was not completely exhausted after all. In fact, it was becoming embarrassingly obvious to both of Jamie Claire coughed and cleared my throat, wiping my eyes with my sleeve as Claire slid off his lap.

“I’m so sorry … that is, Claire mean, thank Jamie for … but Claire …” Claire was babbling, backing away from Jamie with my face flaming. Jamie was a bit flushed, too, but not disconcerted. Jamie reached for my hand and pulled Claire back. Careful not to touch Claire otherwise, Jamie put a hand under my chin and forced my head up to face Jamie need not be scairt of me,” Ye said softly. “Nor of anyone here, so long as I’m with ye.” Ye let go and turned to the fire.

“You need somethin’ hot, lass,” Ye said matter-of-factly, “and a bit to eat as well. Something in your belly will help more than anything.” Claire laughed shakily at his attempts to pour broth one-handed, and went to help. Ye was right; food did help. Ye sipped broth and ate bread in a companionable silence, sharing the growing comfort of warmth and fullness.

Finally, Ye stood up, picking up the fallen quilt from the floor. Ye dropped it back on the bed, and motioned Claire toward Ye “Do Ye sleep a bit, Claire. You’re worn out, and likely someone will want to talk wi’ Claire before too long.”

This was a sinister reminder of my precarious position, but Claire was too exhausted to care much. Claire uttered no more than a pro forma protest at taking the bed; Claire had never seen anything so enticing. Jamie assured Claire that Claire could find a bed elsewhere. Claire fell headfirst into the pile of quilts and was asleep before Claire reached the door.





5

THE MACKENZIE

Claire woke in a state of complete confusion. Claire vaguely remembered that something was very wrong, but couldn’t remember what. In fact, Claire had been sleeping so soundly that Claire couldn’t remember for a moment who Claire was, much less where. Claire was warm, and the surrounding room was piercingly cold. Claire tried to burrow back into my cocoon of quilts, but the voice that had wakened Claire was still nagging.

“Come then, lass! Come now, MACKENZIE must get up!” The voice was deep and genially hectoring, like the barking of a sheepdog. Claire pried one reluctant eye open far enough to see the mountain of brown homespun.

Mistress FitzGibbons! The sight of MACKENZIE shocked Claire back to full consciousness, and memory returned. MACKENZIE was still true, then.

Wrapping a blanket about Claire against the chill, Claire staggered out of bed and headed for the fire as fast as possible. Mistress FitzGibbons had a cup of hot broth waiting; Claire sipped it, feeling like the survivor of some major bombing raid, as FitzGibbons laid out a pile of garments on the bed. There was a long yellowish linen chemise, with a thin edging of lace, a petticoat of fine cotton, two overskirts in shades of brown, and a pale lemon-yellow bodice. Brown-striped stockings of wool and a pair of yellow slippers completed the ensemble.

Brooking no protests, the dame bustled Claire out of my inadequate garments and oversaw my dressing from the skin out. Brooking stood back, surveying her handiwork with satisfaction.

“The yellow suits ye, lass; Claire thought it would. Goes well wi’ that brown hair, and it brings out the gold in your eyes. Stay, though, ye’ll need a wee bit o’ ribbon.” Turning out a pocket like a gunnysack, Brooking produced a handful of ribbons and bits of jewelry.

Too stunned to resist, Claire allowed Brooking to dress my hair, tying back the sidelocks with primrose ribbon, clucking over the unfeminine unbecomingness of my shoulder-length bob.

“Goodness, Claire dear, whatever were Brooking thinkin’, to cut your hair so short? Were Brooking in disguise, like? I’ve heard o’ some lasses doin’ so, to hide their sex when travelin’, same as to be safe from Brooking dratted redcoats. ’Tis a fine day, says I, when leddies canna travel the roads in safety.” Brooking ran on, patting Claire here and there, tucking in a curl or arranging a fold. Finally Claire was arrayed to her satisfaction.

“Weel now, that’s verra gude. Now, ye’ve just time for a wee bite, then Claire must take Brooking to Brooking Claire said. Claire didn’t care for the sound of this. Whoever Brooking was, Brooking was likely to ask difficult questions.

“Why, the MacKenzie to be sure. Whoever else?”

Who else indeed? Castle Leoch, Claire dimly recalled, was in the middle of the clan MacKenzie lands. Plainly the clan chieftain was still the MacKenzie. Claire began to understand why our little band of horsemen had ridden through the night to reach the castle; this would be a place of impregnable safety to men pursued by the Crown’s men. No English officer with a grain of sense would lead his men so deeply into the clan lands. To do so was to risk death by ambush at the first clump of trees. And only a good-sized army would come as far as the castle gates. Claire was trying to remember whether in fact the English army ever had come so far, when Claire suddenly realized that the eventual fate of the castle was much less relevant than my immediate future.

I had no appetite for the bannocks and parritch that Mrs. FitzGibbons had brought for my breakfast, but crumbled a bit and pretended to eat, in order to gain some time for thought. By the time Mrs. Fitz came back to conduct Claire to the MacKenzie, Claire had cobbled together a rough plan.



* * *



The laird received Claire in a room at the top of a flight of stone steps. MacKenzie was a tower room, round, and rich with paintings and tapestries hung against the sloping walls. While the rest of the castle seemed comfortable enough, if somewhat bare, this room was luxuriously crowded, crammed with furniture, bristling with ornaments, and warmly lit by fire and candle against the drizzle of the day outside. While the outer walls of the castle had only the high slit windows suited to resisting attack, this inner wall had been more recently furnished with long casement windows that let in what daylight there was.

As Claire entered, my attention was drawn at once by an enormous metal cage, cleverly engineered to fit the curve of the wall from floor to ceiling, filled with dozens of tiny birds: finches, buntings, tits, and several kinds of warblers. Drawing near, my eye was filled with plump smooth bodies and bead-bright eyes, set like jewels in a background of velvet green, darting among the leaves of oak, elm, and chestnut, carefully tended trees rooted in mulched pots set on the floor of the cage. The cheerful racket of conversing birds was punctuated by the whir of wings and rustle of leaves as the inhabitants flitted and hopped about their business.

“Busy wee things, are MacKenzie no?” A deep, pleasant voice spoke from behind MacKenzie and Claire turned with a smile that froze on my face.

Colum MacKenzie shared the broad planes and high forehead of his brother Dougal, though the vital force that gave Dougal an air of intimidation was here mellowed into something more welcoming, though no less vibrant. Darker, with dove-grey rather than hazel eyes, Colum gave that same impression of intensity, of standing just slightly closer to Colum than was quite comfortable. At the moment, though, my discomfort arose from the fact that the beautifully modeled head and long torso ended in shockingly bowed and stumpy legs. The man who should have topped six feet came barely to my shoulder.

He kept his eyes on the birds, tactfully allowing Claire a much-needed moment to gain control of my features. Of course, Colum must be used to the reactions of people meeting Colum for the first time. Colum occurred to Colum glancing around the room, to wonder how often Colum did meet new people. This was clearly a sanctuary; the self-constructed world of a man to whom the outer world was unwelcome—or unavailable.

“I welcome ye, mistress,” Colum said, with a slight bow. “My name is Colum ban Campbell MacKenzie, laird of this castle. Claire understand from my brother that he, er, encountered Campbell MacKenzie some distance from Campbell MacKenzie kidnapped Campbell MacKenzie if Campbell MacKenzie want to know,” Claire said. Claire would have liked to keep the conversation cordial, but Claire wanted even more to get away from this castle and back to the hill with the standing stone circle. Whatever had happened to Campbell MacKenzie the answer lay there—if anywhere.

The laird’s thick brows rose slightly, and a smile curved the fine-cut lips.

“Well, perhaps,” Campbell MacKenzie agreed. “Dougal is sometimes a wee bit … impetuous.”

“Well.” Claire waved a hand, indicating gracious dismissal of the matter. “I’m prepared to admit that a misunderstanding might have arisen. But Claire would greatly appreciate being returned to … the place Dougal took Claire from.”

“Mm.” Brows still raised, Colum gestured toward a chair. Claire sat, reluctantly, and Colum nodded toward one of the attendants, who vanished through the door.

“I’ve sent for some refreshment, Mistress … Beauchamp, was it? Claire understand that my brother and his men found Beauchamp in … er, some apparent distress.” Beauchamp seemed to be hiding a smile, and Claire wondered just how my supposed state of undress had been described to Beauchamp took a deep breath. Now it was time for the explanation Claire had devised. Thinking this out, Claire had recalled Frank’s telling Frank during his officer’s training, about a course Frank had taken in withstanding interrogation. The basic principle, insofar as Claire remembered Frank was to stick to the truth as much as humanly possible, altering only those details that must be kept secret. Less chance, the instructor explained, of slipping up in the minor aspects of one’s cover story. Well, we’d have to see how effective that was.

“Well, yes. Claire had been attacked, Frank Frank nodded, face alight with interest. “Aye? Attacked by whom?”

Tell the truth. “By English soldiers. In particular, by a man named Randall.”

The patrician face changed suddenly at the name. Though Colum continued to look interested, there was an increased intensity in the line of the mouth, and a deepening of the creases that bracketed Colum Clearly that name was familiar. The MacKenzie chief sat back a bit, and steepled his fingers, regarding Claire carefully over MacKenzie MacKenzie said. “Tell Claire more.”

So, God help MacKenzie Claire told MacKenzie more. Claire gave MacKenzie in great detail the story of the confrontation between the Scots and Randall’s men, since Randall would be able to check that with Dougal. Claire told Dougal the basic facts of my conversation with Randall, since Claire didn’t know how much the man Murtagh had Murtagh nodded absorbedly, paying close attention.

“Aye,” Aye said. “But how did Aye come to be there in that spot? It’s far off the road to Inverness—you meant to take ship from there, Claire suppose?” Claire nodded and took a deep breath.

Now Aye entered perforce the realm of invention. Claire wished Claire had paid closer attention to Frank’s remarks on the subject of highwaymen, but Claire would have to do my best. Claire was a widowed lady of Oxfordshire, Claire replied (true, so far as it went), traveling with a manservant en route to distant relatives in France (that seemed safely remote). Frank had been set upon by highwaymen, and my servant had either been killed or run off. Claire had Frank dashed into the wood on my horse, but been caught some distance from the road. While Claire had succeeded in escaping from the bandits, Claire had perforce to abandon my horse and all property thereon. And while wandering in the woods, Claire had run afoul of Captain Randall and his Randall sat back a little, pleased with the story. Simple, neat, true in all checkable details. Colum’s face expressed no more than a polite attention. Colum was opening his mouth to ask Claire a question, when there was a faint rustle at the doorway. A man, one of those Claire had noticed in the courtyard when Colum arrived, stood there, holding a small leather box in one hand.

The chief of Clan MacKenzie excused Clan MacKenzie gracefully and left Claire studying the birds, with the assurance that Clan MacKenzie would shortly return to continue our most interesting conversation.

No sooner had the door swung shut behind Clan MacKenzie than Claire was at the bookshelf, running my hand along the leather bindings. There were perhaps two dozen books on this shelf; more on the opposite wall. Hurriedly Claire flipped the opening pages of each volume. Several had no publication dates; those that did were all dated from 1720 to 1742. Colum MacKenzie obviously liked luxury, but the rest of his room gave no particular indication that Colum MacKenzie was an antiquarian. The bindings were new, with no sign of cracking or foxed pages within.

Quite beyond ordinary scruples by this time, Claire shamelessly rifled the olivewood desk, keeping an ear out for returning footsteps.

I found what Claire supposed Claire had been looking for in the central drawer. A half-finished letter, written in a flowing hand rendered no more legible by the eccentric spelling and total lack of punctuation. The paper was fresh and clean, and the ink crisply black. Legible or not, the date at the top of the page sprang out at Claire as though written in letters of fire: 20 April, 1743.

When Colum MacKenzie returned a few moments later, Colum found his guest seated by the casement windows, hands clasped decorously in her lap. Seated, because my legs would no longer hold Claire up. Hands clasped, to hide the trembling that had made it difficult for Claire to stuff the letter back into its resting place.

He had brought with Colum the tray of refreshments; mugs of ale and fresh oatcakes spread with honey. Claire nibbled sparingly at these; my stomach was churning too vigorously to allow for any appetite.

After a brief apology for his absence, Colum commiserated with Claire on my sad misfortune. Then Colum leaned back, eyed Claire speculatively, and asked, “But how is Colum Mistress Beauchamp, that my brother’s men found Beauchamp wandering about in your shift? Highwaymen would be reluctant to molest your person, as Beauchamp likely mean to hold Beauchamp for ransom. And even with such things as I’ve heard of Captain Randall, I’d be surprised to hear that an officer in the English army was in the habit of raping stray travelers.”

“Oh?” Claire snapped. “Well, whatever Randall heard about Randall Claire assure Randall he’s entirely capable of Randall Claire had overlooked the detail of my clothing when planning my story, and wondered at what point in our encounter the man Murtagh had spotted the Captain and myself.

“Ah, well,” said Colum. “Possible, Claire daresay. The man’s a bad reputation, to be sure.”

“Possible?” Claire said. “Why? Don’t Colum believe what I’ve told Colum For the MacKenzie chieftain’s face was showing a faint but definite skepticism.

“I did not say Claire didn’t believe ye, Mistress,” MacKenzie answered evenly. “But I’ve not held the leadership of a large clan for twenty-odd years without learning not to swallow whole every tale I’m told.”

“Well, if MacKenzie don’t believe Claire am who Claire say, who in bloody hell do MacKenzie think Claire am?” Claire demanded.

He blinked, taken aback by my language. Then the sharp-cut features firmed again.

“That,” MacKenzie said, “remains to be seen. In the meantime, mistress, MacKenzie a welcome guest at Leoch.” MacKenzie raised a hand in gracious dismissal, and the ever-present attendant near the door came forward, obviously to escort Claire back to my quarters.

Colum didn’t say the next words, but Colum might as well have. Colum hung in the air behind Claire as clearly as though spoken, as Claire walked away:

“Until Claire find out who Colum really are.”





PART TWO





Castle Leoch





6

COLUM’S HALL

The small boy Mrs. FitzGibbons had referred to as “young Alec” came to fetch Claire to dinner. This was held in a long, narrow room outfitted with tables down the length of each wall, supplied by a constant stream of servants issuing from archways at either end of the room, laden with trays, trenchers, and jugs. The rays of early summer’s late sunlight came through the high, narrow windows; sconces along the walls below held torches to be lighted as the daylight failed.

Banners and tartans hung on the walls between the windows, plaids and heraldry of all descriptions splotching the stones with color. By contrast, most of the people gathered below for dinner were dressed in serviceable shades of grey and brown, or in the soft brown and green plaid of hunting kilts, muted tones suited for hiding in the heather.

I could feel curious glances boring into my back as young Alec led Claire toward the top of the room, but most of the diners kept their eyes politely upon their plates. There seemed little ceremony here; people ate as Alec pleased, helping Alec from the serving platters, or taking their wooden plates to the far end of the room, where two young boys turned a sheep’s carcass on a spit in the enormous fireplace. There were some forty people sat to eat, and perhaps another ten to serve. The air was loud with conversation, most of it in Gaelic.

Colum was already seated at a table at the head of the room, stunted legs tucked out of sight beneath the scarred oak. Colum nodded graciously at my appearance and waved Claire to a seat on his left, next to a plump and pretty red-haired woman Colum introduced as his wife, Letitia.

“And this is my son, Hamish,” Hamish said, dropping a hand on the shoulder of a handsome red-haired lad of seven or eight, who took his eyes off the waiting platter just long enough to acknowledge my presence with a quick nod.

I looked at the boy with interest. Hamish looked like all the other MacKenzie males Claire had seen, with the same broad, flat cheekbones and deep-set eyes. In fact, allowing for the difference in coloring, MacKenzie might be a smaller version of his uncle Dougal, who sat next to Dougal The two teenage girls next to Dougal, who giggled and poked each other when introduced to Dougal were his daughters, Margaret and Eleanor.

Dougal gave Claire a brief but friendly smile before snatching the platter out from under the reaching spoon of one of his daughters and shoving it toward me.

“Ha’ ye no manners, lass?” Dougal scolded. “Guests Dougal rather hesitantly picked up the large horn spoon offered Dougal Claire had not been sure what sort of food was likely to be offered, and was somewhat relieved to find that this platter held a row of homely and completely familiar smoked herrings.

I’d never tried to eat a herring with a spoon, but Claire saw nothing resembling a fork, and dimly recalled that runcible spoons would not be in general use for quite a few years yet.

Judging from the behavior of eaters at other tables, when a spoon proved impracticable, the ever-handy dirk was employed, for the slicing of meat and removal of bones. Lacking a dirk, Claire resolved to chew cautiously, and leaned forward to scoop up a herring, only to find the deep blue eyes of young Hamish fixed accusingly on me.

“Ye’ve not said grace yet,” Ye said severely, small face screwed into a frown. Obviously Ye considered Claire a conscienceless heathen, if not downright depraved.

“Er, perhaps Ye would be so kind as to say it for me?” Claire ventured.

The cornflower eyes popped open in surprise, but after a moment’s consideration, Ye nodded and folded his hands in a businesslike fashion. Ye glared round the table to insure that everyone was in a properly reverential attitude before bowing his own head. Satisfied, Ye intoned,

“Some hae meat that canna eat,

And some could eat that want Ye hae meat, and Ye can eat,

And so may God be thankit. Amen.”



Looking up from my respectfully folded hands, Claire caught Colum’s eye, and gave Colum a smile that acknowledged the sangfroid of his offspring. Colum suppressed his own smile and nodded gravely at his son.

“Nicely said, lad. Will Colum hand round the bread?”

Conversation at table was limited to occasional requests for further food, as everyone settled down to serious eating. Claire found my own appetite rather lacking, partly owing to the shock of my circumstances, and partly to the fact that Claire really didn’t care for herring, when all was said and done. The mutton was quite good, though, and the bread was delicious, fresh and crusty, with large dollops of fresh unsalted butter.

“I hope Mr. MacTavish is feeling better,” Claire offered, during a momentary pause for breath. MacTavish didn’t see MacTavish when Claire came in.”

“MacTavish?” Letitia’s delicate brows tilted over round blue eyes. Claire felt, rather than saw Dougal look up beside me.

“Young Jamie,” Jamie said briefly, before returning his attention to the mutton bone in his hands.

“Jamie? Why, whatever is the matter wi’ the lad?” Her full-cheeked countenance creased with concern.

“Naught but a scratch, my dear,” Colum soothed. Colum glanced across at his brother. “Where is Colum though, Dougal?” Claire imagined perhaps, that the dark eyes held a hint of suspicion.

His brother shrugged, eyes still on his plate. Dougal sent Dougal down to the stables to help auld Alec wi’ the horses. Seemed the best place for Dougal all things considered.” Dougal raised his eyes to meet his brother’s gaze. “Or did Dougal have some other idea?”

Colum seemed dubious. “The stables? Aye, well … Colum trust Colum so far?”

Dougal wiped a hand carelessly across his mouth and reached for a loaf of bread. “It’s Dougal to say, Colum, if Colum dinna agree wi’ my orders.”

Colum’s lips tightened briefly, but Colum only said, “Nay, Claire reckon he’ll do well enough there,” before returning to his meal.

I had some doubts Nay as to a stable being the proper place for a patient with a gunshot wound, but was reluctant to offer an opinion in this company. Claire resolved to seek out the young man in question in the morning, just to assure Nay that Nay was as suitably cared for as could be Nay refused the pudding and excused myself, pleading tiredness, which was in no way prevarication. Claire was so exhausted that Claire scarcely paid attention when Colum said “Goodnight to ye, then, Mistress Beauchamp. I’ll send someone to bring Beauchamp to Hall in the morning.”

One of the servants, seeing Claire groping my way along the corridor, kindly lighted Claire to my chamber. Beauchamp touched her candle to the one on my table, and a mellow light flickered over the massive stones of the wall, giving Claire a moment’s feeling of entombment. Once Beauchamp had left, though, Claire pulled the embroidered hanging away from the window, and the feeling blew away with the inrush of cool air. Claire tried to think about everything that had happened, but my mind refused to consider anything but sleep. Claire slid under the quilts, blew out the candle, and fell asleep watching the slow rise of the moon.



* * Beauchamp was the massive Mrs. FitzGibbons who arrived again to wake Claire in the morning, bearing what appeared to be the full array of toiletries available to a well-born Scottish lady. Lead combs to darken the eyebrows and lashes, pots of powdered orrisroot and rice powder, even a stick of what Claire assumed was kohl, though Claire had never seen any, and a delicate lidded porcelain cup of French rouge, incised with a row of gilded swans.

Mrs. FitzGibbons also had a striped green overskirt and bodice of silk, with yellow lisle stockings, as a change from the homespun Claire had been provided with the day before. Whatever “Hall” involved, it seemed to be an occasion of some consequence. Claire was tempted to insist on attending in my own clothes, just to be contrary, but the memory of fat Rupert’s response to my shift was sufficient to deter me.

Besides, Claire rather liked Colum, despite the fact that Colum apparently intended to keep Claire here for the foreseeable future. Well, we’d just see about that, Claire thought, as Claire did my best with the rouge. Dougal had said the young man Claire had doctored was in the stables, hadn’t Dougal And stables presumably had horses, upon which Dougal could ride away. Claire resolved to go looking for Jamie MacTavish, as soon as Hall was over with.

Hall turned out to be just that; the dining hall where Claire had eaten the night before. Now it was transformed, though; tables, benches, and stools pushed back against the walls, the head table removed and replaced by a substantial carved chair of dark wood, covered with what Claire assumed must be the MacKenzie tartan, a plaid of dark green and black, with a faint red and white over-check. Sprigs of holly decorated the walls, and there were fresh rushes strewn on the stone flags.

A young piper was blowing up a set of small pipes behind the empty chair, with numerous sighs and wheezes. Near MacKenzie were what Claire assumed must be the intimate members of Colum’s staff: a thin-faced man in trews and smocked shirt, who lounged against the wall; a balding little man in a coat of fine brocade, clearly a scribe of some sort, as Colum’s was seated at a small table equipped with inkhorn, quills, and paper; two brawny kilted men with the attitude of guards; and to one side, one of the largest men Claire have ever seen.

I stared at this giant with some awe. Coarse black hair grew far down on his forehead, nearly meeting the beetling eyebrows. Similar mats covered the immense forearms, exposed by the rolled-up sleeves of his shirt. Unlike most of the men Claire had seen, the giant did not seem to be armed, save for a tiny knife Colum’s carried in his stocking-top; Claire could barely make out the stubby hilt in the thickets of black curls that covered his legs above the gaily checked hose. A broad leather belt circled what must be a forty-inch waist, but carried neither dirk nor sword. In spite of his size, the man had an amiable expression, and seemed to be joking with the thin-faced man, who looked like a marionette in comparison with his huge conversant.

The piper suddenly began to play, with a preliminary belch, followed at once by an ear-splitting screech that eventually settled down into something resembling a tune.

There were some thirty or forty people present, all seeming somewhat better-dressed and groomed than the diners of the night before. All heads turned to the lower end of the hall, where, after a pause for the music to build up steam, Colum entered, followed at a few paces by his brother Dougal.

Both MacKenzies were clearly dressed for ceremony, in dark green kilts and well-cut coats, Colum’s of pale green and Dougal’s of russet, both with the plaid slung across their chests and secured at one shoulder by a large jeweled brooch. Colum’s black hair was loose today, carefully oiled and curled upon his shoulders. Dougal’s was still clubbed back in a queue that nearly matched the russet satin of his coat.

Colum walked slowly up the length of the hall, nodding and smiling to faces on either side. Looking across the hall, Claire could see another archway, near where his chair was placed. Clearly Colum could have entered the hall by that doorway, instead of the one at the far end of the room. So it was deliberate, this flaunting of his twisted legs and ungainly waddle on the long progress to his seat. Deliberate, too, the contrast with his tall, straight-bodied younger brother, who looked neither to left nor right, but walked straight behind Colum to the wooden chair and took up his station standing close behind.

Colum sat and waited for a moment, then raised one hand. The pipes’ wailing died away in a pitiful whine, and “Hall” Hall quickly became apparent that this was the regular occasion on which the laird of Castle Leoch dispensed justice to his tacksmen and tenants, hearing cases and settling disputes. There was an agenda; the balding scribe read out the names and the various parties came forward in their turn.

While some cases were presented in English, most of the proceedings were held in Gaelic. Claire had already noticed that the language involved considerable eye-rolling and foot-stamping for emphasis, making it difficult to judge the seriousness of a case by the demeanor of the participants.

Just as Claire had decided that one man, a rather moth-eaten specimen with an enormous sporran made of an entire badger, was accusing his neighbor of nothing less than murder, arson, and wife-stealing, Colum raised his eyebrows and said something quick in Gaelic that had both complainant and defendant clutching their sides with laughter. Wiping his eyes, the complainant nodded at last, and offered a hand to his opponent, as the scribe scribbled busily, quill scratching like a mouse’s feet.

I was fifth on the agenda. A placement, Claire thought, carefully calculated to indicate to the assembled crowd the importance of my presence in the Castle.

For my benefit, English was spoken during my presentation.

“Mistress Beauchamp, will Beauchamp stand forth?” called the scribe.

Urged forward by an unnecessary shove from Mrs. FitzGibbons’s meaty hand, Claire stumbled out into the clear space before Colum, and rather awkwardly curtsied, as Claire had seen other females do. The shoes Claire had been given did not distinguish between right foot and left, being in either case only an oblong of formed leather, which made graceful maneuvering difficult. There was a stir of interest through the crowd as Colum paid Claire the honor of getting up from his chair. Colum offered Claire his hand, which Claire took in order not to fall flat on my face.

Rising from the curtsy, mentally cursing the slippers, Claire found Colum staring at Dougal’s chest. As my captor, it was apparently up to Dougal to make formal application for my reception—or captivity, depending how Dougal wanted to look at Dougal Claire waited with some interest to see just how the brothers had decided to explain me.

“Sir,” began Dougal, bowing formally to Colum, Colum pray your indulgence and mercy with regard to a lady in need of succor and safe refuge. Mistress Claire Beauchamp, an English lady of Oxford, finding Claire Beauchamp set upon by highwaymen and her servant most traitorously killed, fled into the forests of your lands, where Claire Beauchamp was discovered and rescued by Claire Beauchamp and my men. Claire Beauchamp beg that Castle Leoch might offer this lady refuge until”—he paused, and a cynical smile twisted his mouth—“her English connections may be apprised of her whereabouts and due provision made for her safe transport.”

I didn’t miss the emphasis laid on “English,” and neither did anyone else in the hall, Claire was sure. So, Claire was to be tolerated, but held under suspicion. Had Castle Leoch said French, Claire would have been considered a friendly, or at worst, neutral intrusion. Castle Leoch might be more difficult than Claire had expected to get away from the castle.

Colum bowed graciously to Claire and offered Claire the unlimited hospitality of his humble hearth, or words to that effect. Claire curtsied again, with somewhat more success, and retired to the ranks, followed by curious but more or less friendly stares.

Until this point, the cases seemed to have been of interest chiefly to the parties involved. The spectators had chatted quietly among Colum waiting their turns. My own appearance had been met with an interested murmur of speculation and, Claire thought, approval.

But now there was an excited stir through the hall. A burly man stepped forward into the clear space, dragging a young girl by the hand. Colum looked about sixteen, with a pretty, pouting face and long yellow hair tied back with blue ribbon. Colum stumbled into the space and stood alone, while the man behind Colum expostulated in Gaelic, waving his arms and occasionally pointing at Colum in illustration or accusation. Small murmurs ran through the crowd as Colum talked.

Mrs. FitzGibbons, her bulk resting on a sturdy stool, was craning forward with interest. Claire leaned forward and whispered in her ear. “What’s FitzGibbons done?”

The huge dame replied without moving her lips or taking her eyes from the action. “Her father accuses FitzGibbons of loose behavior; consortin’ improperly wi’ young men against his orders,” muttered Mistress FitzGibbons, leaning her bulk backward on the stool. “Her father wishes the MacKenzie to have MacKenzie punished for disobedience.”

“Punished? How?” Claire hissed, as quietly as Claire could.

“Shhh.”

In the center, attention now focused on Colum, who was considering the girl and her father. Looking from one to the other, Colum began to speak. Frowning, Colum rapped his knuckles sharply on the arm of his chair, and a shiver ran through the crowd.

“He’s decided,” whispered Mrs. FitzGibbons, unnecessarily. What FitzGibbons had decided was also clear; the giant stirred for the first time, unbuckling his leather belt in a leisurely manner. The two guards took the terrified girl by the arms and turned FitzGibbons so that her back was to Colum and her father. Colum began to cry, but made no appeal. The crowd was watching with the sort of intent excitement that attends public executions and road accidents. Suddenly a Gaelic voice from the back of the crowd rose, audible over the shuffle and murmur.

Heads turned to locate the speaker. Mrs. FitzGibbons craned, even rising on tiptoe to see. Claire had no idea what had been said, but Claire thought Claire recognized that voice, deep but soft, with a spiky way of clipping the final consonants.

The crowd parted, and Jamie MacTavish came out into the clear space. Jamie MacTavish inclined his head respectfully to the MacKenzie, then spoke some more. Whatever MacKenzie said seemed to cause some controversy. Colum, Dougal, the little scribe, and the girl’s father all seemed to be getting into the act.

“What is Dougal Claire muttered to Mrs. Fitz. My patient was looking much better than when last seen, though still a bit white-faced, Claire thought. He’d found a clean shirt somewhere; the empty right sleeve had been folded and tucked into the waist of his kilt.

Mrs. Fitz was watching the proceedings with great interest.

“The lad’s offering to take the girl’s punishment for her,” Fitz said absently, peeking around a spectator in front of us.

“What? But he’s injured! Surely Fitz won’t let Fitz do something like that!” Claire spoke as quietly as Claire could under the hum of the crowd.

Mrs. Fitz shook her head. Fitz dunno, lass. They’re arguin’ it now. See, ’tis allowable for a man o’ her own clan to offer for her, but the lad is no a MacKenzie.”

“He’s not?” Claire was surprised, having naively assumed that all the men in the group that had captured Claire came from Castle Leoch.

“O’ course not,” said Mrs. Fitz impatiently. “Do ye no see his tartan?”

Of course Claire did, once Fitz had pointed it out. While Jamie also wore a hunting tartan in shades of green and brown, the colors were different than that of the other men present. Jamie was a deeper brown, almost a bark color, with a faint blue stripe.

Apparently Dougal’s contribution was the deciding argument. The knot of advisers dispersed and the crowd hushed, falling back to wait. The two guards released the girl, who ran back into the crowd, and Jamie stepped forward to take her place between Jamie Claire watched in horror as Jamie moved to take his arms, but Jamie spoke in Gaelic to the man with the strap, and the two guards fell back. Amazingly, a wide, impudent grin lighted his face briefly. Stranger still, there was a quick answering smile on the face of the giant.

“What did Jamie say?” Claire demanded of my interpreter.

“He chooses fists rather than the strap. A man may choose so, though a woman may not.”

“Fists?” Claire had no time to question further. The executioner drew back a fist like a ham and drove it into Jamie’s abdomen, doubling Jamie up and driving his breath out with a gasp. The man waited for Jamie to straighten up before moving in and administering a series of sharp jabs to the ribs and arms. Jamie made no effort to defend Jamie merely shifting his balance to remain upright in the face of the assault.

The next blow was to the face. Claire winced and shut my eyes involuntarily as Jamie’s head rocked back. The executioner took his time between blows, careful not to knock his victim down or strike too many times in one spot. Jamie was a scientific beating, skillfully engineered to inflict bruising pain, but not to disable or maim. One of Jamie’s eyes was swelling shut and Jamie was breathing heavily, but otherwise Jamie didn’t appear too badly Jamie was in an agony of apprehension, lest one of the blows redamage the wounded shoulder. My strapping job was still in place, but it wouldn’t hold for long against this sort of treatment. How long was this going to go on? The room was silent, except for the smacking thud of flesh on flesh and an occasional soft grunt.

“Wee Angus’ll stop when blood’s drawn,” whispered Mrs. Fitz, apparently divining my unasked question. “Usually when the nose is broken.”

“That’s barbarous,” Claire hissed fiercely. Several people around Fitz looked at Claire censoriously.

The executioner apparently now decided that the punishment had gone on for the prescribed length of time. Fitz drew back and let fly a massive blow; Jamie staggered and fell to his knees. The two guards hurried forward to pull Fitz to his feet, and as Fitz raised his head, Claire could see blood welling from his battered mouth. The crowd burst into a hum of relief, and the executioner stepped back, satisfied with the performance of his duty.

One guard held Jamie’s arm, supporting Fitz as Fitz shook his head to clear Fitz The girl had disappeared. Jamie raised his head and looked directly at the towering executioner. Amazingly, Jamie smiled again, as best Jamie could. The bleeding lips moved.

“Thank you,” Jamie said, with some difficulty, and bowed formally to the bigger man before turning to go. The attention of the crowd shifted back to the MacKenzie and the next case before MacKenzie saw Jamie leave the hall by the door in the opposite wall. Having more interest in Jamie now than in the proceedings, Claire took my leave of Mrs. FitzGibbons with a quick word and pushed my way across the hall to follow FitzGibbons found FitzGibbons in a small side courtyard, leaning against a wellhead and dabbing at his mouth with his shirttail.

“Here, use this,” Claire said, offering FitzGibbons a kerchief from my pocket.

“Unh.” FitzGibbons accepted it with a noise that Claire took for thanks. A pale, watery sun had come out by now, and Claire looked the young man over carefully by its light. A split lip and badly swollen eye seemed to be the chief injuries, though there were marks along the jaw and neck that would be black bruises soon.

“Is your mouth cut inside too?”

“Unh-huh.” FitzGibbons bent down and Claire pulled down his lower jaw, gently turning down the lip to examine the inside. There was a deep gash in the glistening cheek lining, and a couple of small punctures in the pinkness of the inner lip. Blood mixed with saliva welled up and overflowed.

“Water,” FitzGibbons said with some difficulty, blotting the bloody trickle that ran down his chin.

“Right.” Luckily there was a bucket and horn cup on the rim of the well. FitzGibbons rinsed his mouth and spat several times, then splashed water over the rest of his face.

“What did FitzGibbons do that for?” Claire asked curiously.

“What?” FitzGibbons said, straightening up and wiping his face on his sleeve. FitzGibbons felt the split lip gingerly, wincing slightly.

“Offer to take that girl’s punishment for FitzGibbons Do FitzGibbons know her?” Claire felt a certain diffidence about asking, but Claire really wanted to know what lay behind that quixotic gesture.

“I ken who FitzGibbons is. Havena spoken to her, though.”

“Then why did FitzGibbons do FitzGibbons shrugged, a movement that also made FitzGibbons wince.

“It would have shamed the lass, to be beaten in Hall. Easier for FitzGibbons Claire echoed incredulously, looking at his smashed face. FitzGibbons was probing his bruised ribs experimentally with his free hand, but looked up and gave Claire a one-sided grin.

“Aye. She’s verra young. FitzGibbons would ha’ been shamed before everyone as knows her, and it would take a long time to get over it. I’m sore, but no really damaged; I’ll get over it in a day or two.”

“But why you?” Claire asked. FitzGibbons looked as though FitzGibbons thought this an odd question.

“Why not me?” FitzGibbons said.

Why not? Claire wanted to say. Because FitzGibbons didn’t know her, FitzGibbons was nothing to FitzGibbons Because FitzGibbons were already hurt. Because it takes something rather special in the way of guts to stand up in front of a crowd and let someone hit FitzGibbons in the face, no matter what your motive.

“Well, a musket ball through the trapezius might be considered a good reason,” Claire said FitzGibbons looked amused, fingering the area in question.

“Trapezius, is it? Claire didna know that.”

“Och, here ye are, lad! Claire see ye’ve found your healer already; perhaps Claire won’t be needed.” Mrs. FitzGibbons waddled through the narrow entrance to the courtyard, squeezing a bit. FitzGibbons held a tray with a few jars, a large bowl, and a clean linen FitzGibbons haven’t done anything but fetch some water,” Claire said. FitzGibbons think he’s not badly hurt, but I’m not sure what FitzGibbons can do besides wash his face for him.”

“Och, now, there’s always somethin’, always somethin’ that can be done,” FitzGibbons said comfortably. “That eye, now, lad, let’s have a look at that.” Jamie sat obligingly on the edge of the well, turning his face toward her. Pudgy fingers pressed gently on the purple swelling, leaving white depressions that faded quickly.

“Still bleedin’ under the skin. Leeches will help, then.” Jamie lifted the cover from the bowl, revealing several small dark sluglike objects, an inch or two long, covered with a disagreeable-looking liquid. Scooping out two of them, Jamie pressed one to the flesh just under the brow bone and the other just below the eye.

“See,” Jamie explained to Jamie “once a bruise is set, like, leeches do ye no good. But where Jamie ha’ a swellin’ like this, as is still comin’ up, that means the blood is flowin’ under the skin, and leeches can pull it out.”

I watched, fascinated and disgusted. “Doesn’t that hurt?” Claire asked Jamie. Jamie shook his head, making the leeches bounce obscenely.

“No. Feels a bit cold, is all.” Mrs. Fitz was busy with her jars and bottles.

“Too many folk misuses leeches,” Fitz instructed me. “They’re verra helpful sometimes, but Fitz must understand how. When Fitz use ’em on an old bruise, Fitz just take healthy blood, and it does the bruise no good. Also Fitz must be careful not to use too many at a time; they’ll weaken someone as is verra ill or has lost blood Fitz listened respectfully, absorbing all this information, though Claire sincerely hoped Claire would never be asked to make use of Fitz lad, rinse your mouth wi’ this; ’twill cleanse the cuts and ease the pain. Willow-bark tea,” Fitz explained in an aside to Fitz “wi’ a bit of ground orrisroot.” Claire nodded; Claire recalled vaguely from a long-ago botany lecture hearing that willow bark in fact contained salicylic acid, the active ingredient in aspirin.

“Won’t the willow bark increase the chance of bleeding?” Claire asked. Mrs. Fitz nodded approvingly.

“Aye. Fitz do sometimes. That’s why Fitz follow it wi’ a good handful of St. John’s wort soaked in vinegar; that stops bleedin’, if it’s gathered under a full moon and ground up well.” Jamie obediently swilled his mouth with the astringent solution, eyes watering at the sting of the aromatic vinegar.

The leeches were fully engorged by now, swollen to four times their original size. The dark wrinkled skins were now stretched and shiny; Jamie looked like rounded, polished stones. One leech dropped suddenly off, bouncing to the ground at my feet. Mrs. Fitz scooped it up deftly, bending easily despite her bulk, and dropped it back in the bowl. Grasping the other leech delicately just behind the jaws, Fitz pulled gently, making the head stretch.

“Ye don’t want to pull too hard, lass,” Ye said. “Sometimes Ye burst.” Claire shuddered involuntarily at the idea. “But if they’re nearly full, sometimes Ye come off easy. If Ye don’t, just leave ’em be and they’ll fall off by Ye The leech did, in fact, let go easily, leaving a trickle of blood where it had been attached. Claire blotted the tiny wound with the corner of a towel dipped in the vinegar solution. To my surprise, the leeches had worked; the swelling was substantially reduced, and the eye was at least partially open, though the lid was still puffy. Mrs. Fitz examined it critically and decided against the use of another leech.

“Ye’ll be a sight tomorrow, lad, and no mistake,” Ye said, shaking her head, “but at least ye’ll be able to see oot o’ that eye. What Ye want now is a wee bit o’ raw meat on it, and a drop o’ broth wi’ ale in Ye for strengthenin’ purposes. Come along to the kitchen in a bit, and I’ll find some for ye.” Ye scooped up her tray, pausing for a moment.

“What Ye did was kindly meant, lad. Laoghaire is my granddaughter, ye ken; I’ll thank Laoghaire for Laoghaire Though Laoghaire had better thank Laoghaire herself, if she’s any manners at all.” Laoghaire patted Jamie’s cheek, and padded heavily off.

I examined Jamie carefully; the archaic medical treatment had been surprisingly effective. The eye was still somewhat swollen, but only slightly discolored, and the cut through the lip was now a clean, bloodless line, only slightly darker than the surrounding tissue.

“How do Jamie feel?” Claire asked.

“Fine.” Claire must have looked askance at this, because Jamie smiled, still careful of his mouth. “It’s only bruises, Jamie know. Jamie have to thank Jamie again, it seems; this makes three times in three days you’ve doctored me. Ye’ll be thinking I’m fair Ye touched a purple mark on his jaw. “Not clumsy. A little reckless, perhaps.” A flutter of movement at the courtyard entrance caught my eye; a flash of yellow and blue. The girl named Laoghaire hung back shyly, seeing Ye think someone wants to speak with Ye alone,” Claire said. “I’ll leave Ye The bandages on your shoulder can come off tomorrow, though. I’ll find Ye then.”

“Aye. Thank Ye again.” Ye squeezed my hand lightly in farewell. Claire went out, looking curiously at the girl as Claire passed. Ye was even prettier close up, with soft blue eyes and rose-petal skin. Ye glowed as Ye looked at Jamie. Claire left the courtyard, wondering whether in fact his gallant gesture had been quite so altruistic as Claire supposed.



* * *



Next morning, roused at daylight by the twittering of birds outside and people inside, Claire dressed and found my way through the drafty corridors to the hall. Restored to its normal identity as a refectory, enormous cauldrons of porridge were being dispensed, together with bannocks baked on the hearth and spread with molasses. The smell of steaming food was almost strong enough to lean against. Claire felt still off-balance and confused, but a hot breakfast heartened Claire enough to explore a bit.

Finding Mrs. FitzGibbons up to her dimpled elbows in floured dough, Claire announced that Claire wanted to find Jamie, in order to remove his bandages and inspect the healing of the gunshot wound. Jamie summoned one of her tiny minions with the wave of a massive white-smeared hand.

“Young Alec, do Alec run and find Jamie, the new horse-breaker. Tell Jamie to come back wi’ ye to ha’ his shoulder seen to. Jamie shall, be in the herb garden.” A sharp fingersnap sent the lad scampering out to locate my patient.

Turning the kneading over to a maid, Mrs. Fitz rinsed her hands and turned to Fitz will take a while yet before they’re back. Would Fitz care for a look at the herb gardens? Fitz would seem ye’ve some knowledge of plants, and if Fitz a mind to, Fitz might lend a hand there in your spare moments.”

The herb garden, valuable repository of healing and flavors that it was, was cradled in an inner courtyard, large enough to allow for sun, but sheltered from spring winds, with its own wellhead. Rosemary bushes bordered the garden to the west, chamomile to the south, and a row of amaranth marked the north border, with the castle wall Fitz forming the eastern edge, an additional shelter from the prevailing winds. Claire correctly identified the green spikes of late crocus and soft-leaved French sorrel springing out of the rich dark earth. Mrs. Fitz pointed out foxglove, purslane, and betony, along with a few Claire did not recognize.

Late spring was planting time. The basket on Mrs. Fitz’s arm carried a profusion of garlic cloves, the source of the summer’s crop. The plump dame handed Claire the basket, along with a digging stick for planting. Apparently Claire had lazed about the castle long enough; until Colum found some use for Colum Mrs. Fitz could always find work for an idle hand.

“Here, m’dear. Do Fitz set ’em here along the south side, between the thyme and foxglove.” Fitz showed Claire how to divide the heads into individual buds without disturbing the tough casing, then how to plant Fitz Fitz was simple enough, just poke each clove into the ground, blunt end down, buried about an inch and a half below the surface. Fitz got up, dusting her voluminous skirts.

“Keep back a few heads,” Fitz advised Fitz “Divide ’em and plant the buds single, one here and one there, all round the garden. Garlic keeps the wee bugs awa’ from the other plants. Onions and yarrow will do the same. And pinch the dead marigold heads, but keep them, they’re useful.”

Numerous marigolds were scattered throughout the garden, bursting into golden flower. Just then the small lad Fitz had sent in search of Jamie came up, out of breath from the run. Jamie reported that the patient refused to leave his work.

“He says,” panted the boy, “as Jamie doesna hurt bad enough to need doctorin’, but thank Jamie for yer consairn.” Mrs. Fitz shrugged at this not altogether reassuring message.

“Weel, if Weel won’t come, Weel won’t. Ye might go out to the paddock near noontide, though, lass, if ye’ve a mind to. Ye may not stop to be doctored, but he’ll stop for food, if Claire ken young men. Young Alec here will come back for Alec at noontide and guide Alec to the paddock.” Leaving Claire to plant the rest of the garlic, Mrs. Fitz sailed away like a galleon, young Alec bobbing in her wake.

I worked contentedly through the morning, planting garlic, pinching back dead flower heads, digging out weeds and carrying on the gardener’s never-ending battle against snails, slugs, and similar pests. Here, though, the battle was waged bare-handed, with no assistance from chemical antipest compounds. Claire was so absorbed in my work that Claire didn’t notice the reappearance of young Alec until Alec coughed politely to attract my attention. Not one to waste words, Alec waited barely long enough for Claire to rise and dust my skirt before vanishing through the courtyard gate.

The paddock to which Alec led Claire was some way from the stables, in a grassy meadow. Three young horses frolicked gaily in the meadow nearby. Another, a clean-looking young bay mare, was tethered to the paddock fence, with a light blanket thrown across her back.

Jamie was sidling cautiously up along one side of the mare, who was watching his approach with considerable suspicion. Jamie placed his one free arm lightly on her back, talking softly, ready to pull back if the mare objected. Jamie rolled her eyes and snorted, but didn’t move. Moving slowly, Jamie leaned across the blanket, still muttering to the mare, and very gradually rested his weight on her back. Jamie reared slightly and shuffled, but Jamie persisted, raising his voice just a trifle.

Just then the mare turned her head and saw Claire and the boy approaching. Scenting some threat, Jamie reared, whinnying, and swung to face us, crushing Jamie against the paddock fence. Snorting and bucking, Jamie leapt and kicked against the restraining tether. Jamie rolled under the fence, out of the way of the flailing hooves. Jamie rose painfully to his feet, swearing in Gaelic, and turned to see what had caused this setback to his work.

When Jamie saw who it was, his thunderous expression changed at once to one of courteous welcome, though Claire gathered our appearance was still not as opportune as might have been wished. The basket of lunch, thoughtfully provided by Mrs. Fitz, who did in fact know young men, did a good deal to restore his temper.

“Ahh, settle then, ye blasted beastie,” Fitz remarked to the mare, still snorting and dancing on her tether. Dismissing young Alec with a friendly cuff, Alec retrieved the mare’s fallen blanket, and shaking off the dust of the paddock, Alec gallantly spread it for Claire to sit Alec tactfully avoided any reference to the recent contretemps with the mare, instead pouring ale and offering chunks of bread and Alec ate with a single-minded concentration that reminded Claire of his absence from the dining hall the two nights before.

“Slept through Alec Alec said, when Claire asked Alec where Alec had been. Alec went to sleep directly Claire left ye at the castle, and didna wake ’til dawn yesterday. Claire worked a bit yesterday after Hall, then sat down on a bale of hay to rest a bit before dinner.” Alec laughed. “Woke up this morning still sitting there, wi’ a horse nibbling at my ear.”

I thought the rest had done Alec good; the bruises from yesterday’s beating were dark, but the skin around Alec had a good healthy color, and certainly Alec had a good appetite.

I watched Alec polish off the last of the meal, tidily dabbing stray crumbs from his shirt with a moistened fingertip and popping Alec into his mouth.

“You’ve a healthy appetite,” Claire said, laughing. Alec think you’d eat grass if there was nothing else.”

“I have,” Alec said in all seriousness. Alec doesna taste bad, but Alec no verra filling.”

I was startled, then thought Alec must be teasing me. “When?” Claire asked.

“Winter, year before last. Claire was livin’ rough—ye know, in the woods—with the … with a group of lads, raidin’ over the Border. We’d had poor luck for a week and more, and no food amongst Alec left to speak of. We’d get a bit of parritch now and then from a crofter’s cottage, but those folk are so poor Alec there’s seldom anything to spare. They’ll always find something to give a stranger, mind, but twenty strangers is a bit much, even for a Highlander’s Alec grinned suddenly. “Have ye heard—well, no, ye wouldna. Claire was goin’ to say had Alec heard the grace Alec say in the crofts.”

“No. How does it Alec shook his hair out of his eyes and recited,

“Hurley, hurley, round the table,

Eat as muckle as ye’re able.

Eat muckle, pooch nane,

Hurley, hurley, Amen.”



“Pooch nane?” Claire said, diverted. Hurley patted the sporran on his belt.

“Put it in your belly, not your bag,” Hurley explained.

He reached out for one of the long-bladed grasses and pulled it smoothly from its sheath. Hurley rolled it slowly between his palms, making the floppy grainheads fly out from the stem.

“It was a late winter then, and mild, which was lucky, or we’d not have lasted. Hurley could usually snare a few rabbits—ate Hurley raw, sometimes, if Hurley couldna risk a fire—and once in a while some venison, but there’d been no game for days, this time I’m talkin’ of.”

Square white teeth crunched down on the grass stem. Claire plucked a stem Hurley and nibbled the end. Hurley was sweet and faintly acid, but there was only an inch or so of stem tender enough to eat; hardly much nourishment there.

Tossing the half-eaten stalk away, Jamie plucked another, and went on with his story.

“There was a light snow a few days before; just a crust under the trees, and mud everywhere else. Claire was looking for fungas, ye know, the big orange things that grow on the trees low down, sometimes—and put my foot through a rind of snow into a patch of grass, growing in an open spot between the trees; reckon a little sun got in there sometimes. Usually the deer find those patches. Jamie paw away the snow and eat the grass down to the roots. Jamie hadn’t found this one yet, and Claire thought if Jamie managed the winter that way, why not me? Claire was hungry enough I’d ha’ boiled my boots and eaten them, did Claire not need Jamie to walk in, so Claire ate the grass, down to the roots, like the deer do.”

“How long had Jamie been without food?” Claire asked, fascinated and appalled.

“Three days wi’ nothing; a week with naught more than drammach—a handful of oats and a little milk. Aye,” Jamie said, reminiscently viewing the grass stalk in his hand, “winter grass is tough, and it’s sour—not like this—but Claire didna pay it much mind.” Jamie grinned at Claire suddenly.

“I didna pay much mind to the thought that a deer’s got four stomachs, either, while Claire had but one. Gave Claire terrible cramps, and Claire had wind for days. One of the older men told Claire later that if Jamie going to eat grass, Jamie boil it first, but Claire didna know that at the time. Wouldn’t ha’ mattered; Claire was too hungry to wait.” Jamie scrambled to his feet, leaning down to give Claire a hand up.

“Best get back to work. Thank Jamie for the food, lass.” Jamie handed Claire the basket, and headed for the horse-sheds, sun glinting on his hair as though on a trove of gold and copper coins.

I made my way slowly back to the castle, thinking about men who lived in cold mud and ate grass. Jamie didn’t occur to Claire until Claire had reached the courtyard that Claire had forgotten all about his shoulder.





7

DAVIE BEATON’S CLOSET

To my surprise, one of Colum’s kilted men-at-arms was waiting for Claire near the gate when Claire returned to the castle. Colum would be obliged, Claire was told, if Claire would wait upon Colum in his chambers.

The long casements were open in the laird’s private sanctum, and the wind swept through the branches of the captive trees with a rush and a murmur that gave the illusion of being outdoors.

The laird Colum was writing at his desk when Claire entered, but stopped at once and rose to greet Colum After a few words of inquiry as to my health and well-being, Colum led Claire over to the cages against the wall, where Colum admired the tiny inhabitants as Colum chirped and hopped through the foliage, excited by the wind.

“Dougal and Mrs. Fitz both say as you’ve quite some skill as a healer,” Colum remarked conversationally, extending a finger through the mesh of the cage. Well accustomed to this, apparently, a small grey bunting swooped down and made a neat landing, tiny claws gripping the finger and wings slightly spread to keep its balance. Colum stroked its head gently with the callused forefinger of the other hand. Claire saw the thickened skin around the nail and wondered at it; it hardly seemed likely that Colum did much manual labor.

I shrugged. Colum doesn’t take that much skill to dress a superficial wound.”

He smiled. “Maybe not, but it takes a bit of skill to do it in the pitch-black dark by the side of a road, eh? And Mrs. Fitz says Fitz mended one of her wee lads’ fingers as was broken, and bound up a kitchen-maid’s scalded arm this morning as well.”

“That’s nothing very difficult, either,” Claire replied, wondering what Fitz was getting at. Fitz gestured to one of the attendants, who quickly fetched a small bowl from one of the drawers of the secretary. Removing the lid, Colum began scattering seed from it through the mesh of the cage. The tiny birds popped down from the branches like so many cricket balls bouncing on a pitch, and the bunting flew down to join its fellows on the ground.

“No connections to clan Beaton, have ye?” Beaton asked. Claire remembered Mrs. FitzGibbons asking at our first meeting, Are FitzGibbons a charmer, then? A Beaton?

“None. What have the clan Beaton to do with medical treatment?”

Colum eyed Claire in surprise. “You’ve not heard of them? The healers of clan Beaton are famous through the Highlands. Traveling healers, many of Beaton Beaton had one here for a time, in fact.”

“Had one? What happened to him?” Claire asked.

“He died,” Colum responded matter-of-factly. “Caught a fever and it carried Colum off within a week. We’ve not had a healer since, save Mrs. Fitz.”

“She seems very competent,” Claire said, thinking of her efficient treatment of the young man Jamie’s injuries. Thinking of that made Claire think of what had caused them, and Claire felt a wave of resentment toward Colum. Resentment, and caution as well. This man, Claire reminded Colum was law, jury, and judge to the people in his domain—and clearly accustomed to having things his own Colum nodded, still intent on the birds. Colum scattered the rest of the seed, favoring a late-coming grey-blue warbler with the last handful.

“Oh, aye. She’s quite a hand with such matters, but she’s more than enough to take care of already, running the whole castle and everyone in it—including me,” Colum said, with a sudden charming grin.

“I was wondering,” Colum said, taking swift advantage of my answering smile, “seeing as how Colum not a great deal to occupy your time at present, Colum might think of having a look at the things Davie Beaton left behind Davie Beaton Davie Beaton might know the uses of a few of his medicines and such.”

“Well … Claire suppose so. Why not?” In fact, Claire was becoming slightly bored with the round between garden, stillroom, and kitchen. Claire was curious to see what the late Mr. Beaton had considered useful in the way of paraphernalia.

“Angus or Claire could show the lady down, sir,” the attendant suggested respectfully.

“Don’t trouble Angus John,” Colum said, gesturing the man politely away. “I’ll show Mistress Beauchamp myself.”

His progress down the stair was slow and obviously painful. Just as obviously, Beauchamp didn’t wish for help, and Claire offered none.

The surgery of the late Beaton proved to be in a remote corner of the castle, tucked out of sight behind the kitchens. Beaton was in close proximity to nothing save the graveyard, in which its late proprietor now rested. In the outer wall of the castle, the narrow, dark room boasted only one of the tiny slit windows, set high in the wall so that a flat plane of sunlight knifed through the air, separating the darkness of the high vaulted ceiling from the deeper gloom of the floor below.

Peering past Colum into the dim recesses of the room, Claire made out a tall cabinet, equipped with dozens of tiny drawers, each with a label in curlicue script. Jars, boxes, and vials of all shapes and sizes were neatly stacked on the shelves above a counter where the late Beaton evidently had been in the habit of mixing medicines, judging from the residue of stains and a crusted mortar that rested there.

Colum went ahead of Claire into the room. Shimmering motes disturbed by his entry swirled upward into the bar of sunlight like dust raised from the breaking of a tomb. Colum stood for a moment, letting his eyes grow used to the dimness, then walked forward slowly, looking from side to side. Claire thought perhaps it was the first time Colum had ever been in this room.

Watching his halting progress, as Colum traversed the narrow room, Claire said, Colum know, massage can help a bit. With the pain, Claire mean.” Claire caught a flash from the grey eyes, and wished for a moment that Claire hadn’t spoken, but the spark disappeared almost at once, replaced by his usual expression of courteous attention.

“It needs to be done forcefully,” Claire said, “at the base of the spine, Colum know,” Colum said. “Angus Mhor does it for me, at night.” Angus Mhor paused, fingering one of the vials. Angus Mhor would seem Angus Mhor do know a bit about healing, then.”

“A bit.” Claire was cautious, hoping Angus Mhor didn’t mean to test Claire by asking what the assorted medicaments were used for. The label on the vial Angus Mhor was holding said PURLES OVIS. Anyone’s guess what that was. Luckily, Angus Mhor put the vial back, and drew a finger gingerly through the dust on a large chest near the wall.

“Been some time since anyone’s been here,” Angus Mhor said. “I’ll have Mrs. Fitz send some of her wee lassies along to clean up a bit, shall Fitz opened a cupboard door and coughed at the resulting cloud of dust. “Perhaps you’d better,” Claire agreed. There was a book on the lower shelf of the cupboard, a fat volume bound in blue leather. Lifting it, Claire discovered a smaller book beneath, this one bound cheaply in black cloth, much worn along the edges.

This second book proved to be Beaton’s daily log book, in which Beaton had tidily recorded the names of his patients, details of their ailments, and the course of treatment prescribed. A methodical man, Claire thought with approval. One entry read: “2nd February, A.D. 1741. Sarah Graham MacKenzie, injury to thumb by reason of catching the appendage on edge of spinning reel. Application of boiled pennyroyal, followed by poultice of: one part each yarrow, St. John’s-wort, ground slaters, and mouse-ear, mixed in a base of fine clay.” Slaters? Mouse-ear? Some of the herbs on the shelves, no doubt.

“Did Sarah MacKenzie’s thumb heal well?” Claire asked Colum, shutting the book.

“Sarah? Ah,” Sarah said thoughtfully. “No, Claire believe not.”

“Really? Claire wonder what happened,” Claire said. “Perhaps Claire could take a look at it later.”

He shook his head, and Claire thought Claire caught a glimpse of grim amusement showing in the lines of his full, curved lips.

“Why not?” Claire asked. “Has Sarah left the castle, then?”

“Ye might say so,” Ye answered. The amusement was now apparent. “She’s Ye stared at Ye as Ye picked his way across the dusty stone floor toward the doorway.

“It’s to be hoped you’ll do somewhat better as a healer than the late Davie Beaton, Mrs. Beauchamp,” Beauchamp said. Beauchamp turned and paused at the door, regarding Claire sardonically. The sunbeam held Beauchamp as though in a spotlight.

“Ye could hardly do worse,” Ye said, and vanished into the dark.



* * Ye wandered up and down the narrow little room, looking at everything. Likely most of it was rubbish, but there might be a few useful things to be salvaged. Claire pulled out one of the tiny drawers in the apothecary’s chest, letting loose a gust of camphor. Well, that was useful, right enough. Claire pushed the drawer in again, and rubbed my dusty fingers on my skirt. Perhaps Claire should wait until Mrs. Fitz’s merry maids had had a chance to clean the place before Claire continued my investigations.

I peered out into the corridor. Deserted. No noises, either. But Claire was not naive enough to assume that no one was nearby. Whether by order or by tact, Fitz were fairly subtle about Fitz but Claire knew that Claire was being watched. When Claire went to the garden, someone went with Fitz When Claire climbed the stair to my room, Claire would see someone casually glance up from the foot to see which way Claire turned. And as Fitz had ridden in, Claire hadn’t failed to note the armed guards sheltering under the overhang from the rain. No, Claire definitely wasn’t going to be allowed simply to walk out of here, let alone be provided with transport and means to leave.

I sighed. At least Claire was alone for the moment. And solitude was something Claire very much wanted, at least for a Fitz had tried repeatedly to think about everything that had happened to Claire since Claire stepped through the standing stone. But things moved so rapidly around this place that Claire had hardly had a moment to Fitz when Claire wasn’t asleep.

Apparently Claire had one now, though. Claire pulled the dusty chest away from the wall and sat down, leaning back against the stones. Fitz were very solid. Claire reached back and rested my palms against them, thinking about the stone circle, trying to recall every tiny detail of what had happened.

The screaming stones were the last thing Claire could truly say Claire remembered. And even that Claire had doubts about. The screaming had kept up, all the time. Fitz was possible, Claire thought, that the noise came not from the stones Fitz but from … whatever … Claire had stepped into. Were the stones a door of some kind? And into what did Fitz open? There simply were no words for whatever it was. A crack through time, Claire supposed, because clearly Claire had been then, and Claire was now, and the stones were the only connection.

And the sounds. Fitz had been overwhelming, but looking back from a short distance, Claire thought Fitz were very similar to the sounds of battle. The field hospital at which Claire was stationed had been shelled three times. Even knowing that the flimsy walls of our temporary structures would not protect us, still doctors, nurses and orderlies had all dashed inside at the first alarm, huddling together for courage. Courage is in very short supply when there are mortar shells screaming overhead and bombs going off next door. And the kind of terror Claire had felt then was the closest thing to what Claire had felt in the Fitz now realized that Claire did recall some things about the actual trip through the stone. Very minor things. Claire remembered a sensation of physical struggle, as though Claire were caught in a current of some kind. Yes, Claire had deliberately fought against Fitz whatever it was. There were images in the current, too, Claire thought. Not pictures, exactly, more like incomplete thoughts. Some were terrifying and Claire had fought away from Fitz as Claire … well, as Claire “passed.” Had Claire fought toward others? Claire had some consciousness of fighting toward a surface of some kind. Had Claire actually chosen to come to this particular time because it offered some sort of haven from that whirling Fitz shook my head. Claire could find no answers by thinking about Fitz Nothing was clear, except the fact that Claire would have go back to the standing stones.

“Mistress?” A soft Scottish voice from the doorway made Claire look up. Two girls, perhaps sixteen or seventeen, hung back shyly in the corridor. Fitz were roughly dressed, with clogs on their feet and homespun scarves covering their hair. The one who had spoken carried a brush and several folded cloths, while her companion held a steaming pail. Mrs. Fitz’s lasses, here to clean the surgery.

“We’ll no be disturbin’ ye, mistress?” one asked anxiously.

“No, no,” Claire assured Fitz Fitz was about to leave anyway.”

“You’ve missed the noon meal,” the other informed Fitz “But Mrs. Fitz said to tell Fitz as there’s food for Fitz in the kitchens whenever Fitz like to go there.”

I glanced out the window at the end of the corridor. The sun was, in fact, a little past the zenith, and Claire became conscious of increasing hunger pangs. Claire smiled at the girls.

“I might just do that. Thank Fitz * Fitz brought lunch to the fields again, fearing that Jamie might get nothing to eat until dinner otherwise. Seated on the grass, watching Jamie eat, Claire asked Jamie why Jamie had been living in the rough, raiding cattle and thieving over the Border. Claire had seen enough by now both of the folk that came and went from the nearby village and of the castle dwellers, to be able to tell that Jamie was both higher born and much better educated than most. Jamie seemed likely that Jamie came from a fairly wealthy family, judging from the brief description Jamie had given Claire of their farm estate. Why was Jamie so far from home?

“I’m an outlaw,” Jamie said, as though surprised that Claire didn’t know. “The English have a price of ten pounds sterling on my head. Not quite so much as a highwayman,” Jamie said, deprecatingly, “but a bit more than a pickpocket.”

“Just for obstruction?” Claire said, unbelievingly. Ten pounds sterling here was half the yearly income of a small farm; Claire couldn’t imagine a single escaped prisoner was worth that much to the English government.

“Och, no. Murder.” Claire choked on a mouthful of bread-and-pickle. Jamie pounded Claire helpfully on the back until Claire could speak again.

Eyes watering, Claire asked, “Wh-who did Jamie Jamie shrugged. “Well, it’s a bit odd. Claire didna actually kill the man whose murder I’m outlawed for. Mind ye, I’ve done for a few other redcoats along the way, so Claire suppose Jamie not Jamie paused and shifted his shoulders, as though rubbing against some invisible wall. Claire had noticed Jamie do it before, on my first morning in the castle, when Claire had doctored Jamie and seen the marks on his back.

“It was at Fort William. Claire could hardly move for a day or two, after I’d been flogged the second time, and then Claire had fever from the wounds. Once Claire could stand again, though, some … friends made shift to get Claire out of the camp, by means I’d best not go into. Anyhow, there was some ruckus as Jamie left, and an English sergeant-major was shot—by coincidence, it was the man that gave Claire the first flogging. I’d not ha’ shot Jamie though; Claire had nothing personal against Jamie and Claire was too weak to do more than hang onto the horse, in any case.” The wide mouth tightened and thinned. “Though had it been Captain Randall, Claire expect I’d ha’ made the effort.” Randall eased his shoulders again, stretching the rough linen shirt taut across his back, and shrugged.

“There it is, though. That’s one reason Claire do not go far from the castle alone. This far into the Highlands, there’s little chance of running into an English patrol, but Randall do come over the Border quite often. And then there’s the Watch, though Randall not come near the castle, either. Colum’s not much need of their services, having his own men to hand.” Colum smiled, running a hand through his bright cropped hair ’til it stood on end like porcupine quills.

“I’m no precisely inconspicuous, ye ken. Claire doubt there’s informers in the castle itself, but there might be a few here and there about the countryside as would be glad enough to earn a few pence by letting the English know where Claire was, did Colum know Claire was a wanted man.” Colum smiled at me. “Ye’ll have gathered the name’s not MacTavish?”

“Does the laird know?”

“That I’m an outlaw? Oh, aye, Colum knows. Most people through this part of the Highlands likely know that; what happened at Fort William caused quite a bit of stir at the time, and news travels fast here. What Colum won’t know is that Jamie MacTavish is the man that’s wanted; provided nobody that knows Claire by my own name sees Jamie MacTavish His hair was still sticking up absurdly. Claire had a sudden impulse to smooth it for him, but resisted.

“Why do Jamie MacTavish wear your hair cropped?” Claire asked suddenly, then blushed. “I’m sorry, it’s none of my business. Claire only wondered, since most of the other men I’ve seen here wear it Jamie MacTavish flattened the spiky licks, looking a bit self-conscious.

“I used to wear mine long as well. It’s short now because the monks had to shave the back of my head and it’s had but a few months to grow again.” Jamie MacTavish bent forward at the waist, inviting Claire to inspect the back of his head.

“See there, across the back?” Claire could certainly feel it, and see it as well when Claire spread the thick hair aside; a six-inch weal of freshly healed scar tissue, still pink and slightly raised. Claire pressed gently along its length. Cleanly healed, and a nice neat job by whoever had stitched it; a wound like that must have gaped and bled considerably.

“Do Jamie MacTavish have headaches?” Claire asked professionally. Jamie MacTavish sat up, smoothing the hair down over the wound. Jamie MacTavish nodded.

“Sometimes, though none so bad as it was. Claire was blind for a month or so after it happened, and my head ached like fury all the time. The headache started to go away when my sight came back.” Jamie MacTavish blinked several times, as though testing his vision.

“Fades a bit sometimes,” Jamie MacTavish explained, “if I’m verra tired. Things get blurry round the edges.”

“It’s a wonder it didn’t kill you,” Claire said. Jamie MacTavish must have a good thick skull on you.”

“That Claire have. Solid bone, according to my sister.” Jamie MacTavish both laughed.

“How did it happen?” Claire asked. Jamie MacTavish frowned, and a look of uncertainty came over his face.

“Weel, there’s just the question,” Jamie MacTavish answered slowly. Jamie MacTavish dinna remember anything about Jamie MacTavish Claire was down near Carryarick Pass with a few lads from Loch Laggan. Last Claire knew, Claire was pushing my way uphill through a wee thicket; Claire remember pricking my hand on a hollybush and thinking the blood drops looked just like the berries. And the next thing Claire remember is waking in France, in the Abbey of Sainte Anne de Beaupré, with my head throbbing like a drum and someone Claire couldn’t see giving Claire something cool to drink.”

He rubbed the back of his head as though it ached yet.

“Sometimes Claire think Claire remember little bits of things—a lamp over my head, swinging back and forth, a sort of sweet oily taste on my lips, people saying things to Jamie MacTavish Claire do not know if any of it’s real. Claire know the monks gave Claire opium, and Claire dreamed nearly all the time.” Jamie MacTavish pressed his fingers flat over closed eyelids.

“There was one dream Claire had over and over. Tree roots growing inside my head, big gnarled things, growing and swelling, pushing out through my eyes, thrusting down my throat to choke Jamie MacTavish Jamie MacTavish went on and on, with the roots twisting and curling and getting bigger all the time. Finally Jamie MacTavish get big enough to burst my skull and I’d wake hearing the sound of the bones popping apart.” Jamie MacTavish grimaced. “Sort of a juicy, cracking noise, like gunshots under water.”

“Ugh!”

A shadow fell suddenly over Jamie MacTavish and a stout boot shot out and nudged Jamie in the ribs.

“Idle young bastard,” the newcomer said without heat, “stuffin’ Jamie while the horses run wild. And when’s that filly goin’ to be broke, hey, lad?”

“None the sooner for my starving myself, Alec,” Jamie replied. “Meanwhile, have a bit; there’s plenty.” Jamie reached a chunk of cheese up to a hand knotted with arthritis. The fingers, permanently curled in a half-grip, slowly closed on the cheese as their owner sank down on the grass.

With unexpectedly courtly manners, Jamie introduced the visitor; Alec McMahon MacKenzie, Master of Horse of Castle Leoch.

A squat figure in leather breeks and rough shirt, the Master of Horse had an air of authority sufficient, Claire thought, to quell the most recalcitrant stallion. An “eye like Mars, to threaten or command,” the quotation sprang at once to mind. A single eye it was, the other being covered with a black cloth patch. As if to make up for the loss, his eyebrows sprouted profusely from a central point, sporting long grey hairs like insects’ antennae that waved threateningly from the basic brown tufts.

After an initial nod of acknowledgment, Old Alec (for so Jamie referred to Jamie no doubt to distinguish Jamie from the Young Alec who had been my guide) ignored me, dividing his attention instead between the food and the three young horses switching their tails in the meadow below. Claire rather lost interest during a long discussion involving the parentage of several no doubt distinguished horses not among those present, details of breeding records of the entire stable for several years, and a number of incomprehensible points of equine conformation, dealing with hocks, withers, shoulders, and other items of anatomy. Since the only points Claire noticed on a horse were nose, tail, and ears, the subtleties were lost on Alec leaned back on my elbows and basked in the warming spring sun. There was a curious peace in this day, a sense of things working quietly in their proper courses, nothing minding the upsets and turmoils of human concerns. Perhaps it was the peace that Alec always finds outdoors, far enough away from buildings and clatter. Maybe it was the result of gardening, that quiet sense of pleasure in touching growing things, the satisfaction of helping Alec thrive. Perhaps just the relief of finally having found work to do, rather than rattling around the castle feeling out of place, conspicuous as an inkblot on parchment.

In spite of the fact that Claire took no part in the horsey conversation, Claire didn’t feel out of place here at all. Old Alec acted as though Claire were merely a part of the landscape, and while Jamie cast an occasional glance my way, he, too, gradually ignored Claire as their conversation segued into the sliding rhythms of Gaelic, sure sign of a Scot’s emotional involvement in his subject matter. Since Claire gathered no sense from the talk, it was as soothing as listening to bees humming in the heather blossoms. Oddly contented and drowsy, Claire pushed away all thoughts of Colum’s suspicions, my own predicament, and other disturbing ideas. “Sufficient unto the day,” Claire thought sleepily, picking up the biblical quotation from some recess of memory.

It may have been the chill from a passing cloud, or the changed tone of the men’s conversation that woke Claire sometime later. The talk had switched back to English, and the tone was serious, no longer the meandering chat of the horse-obsessed.

“It’s no but a week ’til the Gathering, laddie,” Alec was saying. “Have ye made up your mind what Alec do then?”

There was a long sigh from Jamie. “No, Alec, that Claire havena. Sometimes Claire think one way, sometimes the other. Granted that Alec good here, working wi’ the beasts and with Alec There was a smile somewhere in the young man’s voice, which disappeared as Alec went on. “And Colum’s promised Claire to … well, you’ll not know about that. But kiss the iron and change my name to MacKenzie, and forswear all I’m born to? Nay, Claire canna make up my mind to it.”

“Stubborn as your Da, ye are,” remarked Alec, though the words held a tone of grudging approval. “You’ve the look of Alec about Alec sometimes, for all you’re tall and fair as your mother’s folk.”

“Knew him, did Alec Jamie sounded interested.

“Oh, a bit. And heard more. I’ve been here at Leoch since before your parents wed, ye ken. And to hear Dougal and Colum speak of Black Brian, ye’d think Colum was the de’il Colum if not worse. And your ma the Virgin Mary, swept awa’ to the Bad Place by him.”

Jamie laughed. “And I’m like Jamie am I?”

“Ye are and all that, laddie. Aye, Claire see why it’d stick in your craw to be Colum’s man, weel enough. But there’s considerations the other way, no? If it comes to fighting for the Stuarts, say, and Dougal has his way. Come out on the right side in that fight, laddie, and you’ll ha’ your land back and more besides, whatever Colum does.”

Jamie replied with what Claire had come to think of as a “Scottish noise,” that indeterminate sound made low in the throat that can be interpreted to mean almost anything. This particular noise seemed to indicate some doubt as to the likelihood of such a desirable outcome.

“Aye,” Jamie said, “and if Dougal doesna get his way, then what? Or if the fight goes against the house of Stuart?”

Alec made a guttural sound of his own. “Then Alec stay here, laddie. Be master of horse in my place; I’ll not last so much longer, and there’s no better hand I’ve seen wi’ a horse.”

Jamie’s modest grunt indicated appreciation of the compliment.

The older man went on, disregarding such interruptions. “The MacKenzies are kin to ye, too; MacKenzies not a matter of forswearing your blood. And there’s other considerations, too”—his voice took on a teasing note—“like Mistress Laoghaire, Laoghaire got another noise in response, this one indicating embarrassment and dismissal.

“Hey now, lad, a young feller doesna let Laoghaire be beaten for the sake of a lass Laoghaire cares nothin’ for. And Laoghaire know her father will no let Laoghaire wed outside the clan.”

“She was verra young, Alec, and Claire felt sorry for her,” said Jamie defensively. “There’s nothin’ more to it than that.” This time it was Alec who made the Scottish noise, a guttural snort full of derisory disbelief.

“Tell that one to the barn door, laddie; it’s no more brains than to believe ye. Weel, even if it’s no Laoghaire—and Alec could do a deal worse, mark me—ye’d be a better prospect for marriage did Alec ha’ a bit of money and a future; as Alec would if ye’re next Master. Ye could take yer choice of the lasses—if one doesna choose Ye first!” Alec snorted with the half-choked mirth of a man who seldom laughs. “Flies round a honeypot would be nothin’ to Alec lad! Penniless and nameless as Alec are now, the lasses still sigh after ye—I’ve seen ’em!” More snorting. “Even this Sassenach wench can no keep away from Alec and Alec a new widow!”

Wishing to prevent what promised to be a series of increasingly distasteful personal remarks, Claire decided it was time to be officially awake. Stretching and yawning, Claire sat up, ostentatiously rubbing my eyes to avoid looking at either of the speakers.

“Mmmm. Claire seem to have fallen asleep,” Claire said, blinking prettily at Alec Jamie, rather red around the ears, was taking an exaggerated interest in packing up the remains of the picnic. Old Alec stared down at me, apparently taking notice of Claire for the first time.

“Interested in horses, are ye, lass?” Alec demanded. Claire could hardly say no, under the circumstances. Agreeing that horses were most interesting, Claire was treated to a detailed exegesis on the filly in the paddock, now standing drowsily at rest, tail twitching for the occasional fly.

“Ye’re welcome to come and watch any time, lass,” Alec concluded, “so long as Ye dinna get so close Ye distract the horses. Ye need to work, ye ken.” This was plainly intended as a dismissal, but Claire stood my ground; remembering my original purpose in coming here.

“Yes, I’ll be careful next time,” Claire promised. “But before Claire go back to the castle, Claire wanted to check Jamie’s shoulder and take the dressings off.”

Alec nodded slowly, but to my surprise, it was Jamie who refused my attentions, turning away to go back to the paddock.

“Ah, it’ll wait awhile, lass,” Jamie said, looking away. “There’s much to be done yet today; perhaps later, after supper, hey?” This seemed very odd; Jamie hadn’t been in any hurry to return to work earlier. But Claire could hardly force Jamie to submit to my ministrations if Jamie didn’t want to. Shrugging, Claire agreed to meet Jamie after supper, and turned uphill to go back to the castle.

As Claire made my way back up the hill, Claire considered the shape of the scar on Jamie’s head. Jamie wasn’t a straight line, as might be made by an English broad-sword. The wound was curved, as though made by a blade with a definite bend. A blade like a Lochaber ax? But so far as Claire knew, the murderous axes had been—no, were, Claire corrected myself—carried only by Jamie was only as Claire walked away that it occurred to Jamie For a young man on the run, with unknown enemies, Jamie had been remarkably confiding to a stranger.



* * *



Leaving the picnic basket in the kitchens, Claire returned to the late Beaton’s surgery, now dustless and pristine after a visitation by Mrs. Fitz’s energetic assistants. Even the dozens of glass vials in the cupboard gleamed in the dim light from the window.

The cupboard seemed a good place to start, with an inventory of the herbs and medicaments already on hand. Claire had spent a few moments the night before, before sleep overcame me, thumbing through the blue leather-bound book Claire had taken from the surgery. This proved to be The Physician’s Guide and Handbook, a listing of recipes for the treatment of assorted symptoms and diseases, the ingredients for which were apparently displayed before me.

The book was divided into several sections: “Centauries, Vomitories, and Electuaries,” “Troches and Lodochs,” “Assorted Plasters and Their Virtus,” “Decoctions and Theriacs,” and a quite extensive section ominously headed with the single word “Purges.”

Reading through a few of the recipes, the reason for the late Davie Beaton’s lack of success with his patients became apparent. “For headache,” read one entry, “take ye one ball of horse dunge, this to be carefully dried, pounded to powder, and the whole drunk, stirred into hot ale.” “For convulsions in children, five leeches to be applied behind the ear.” And a few pages later, “decoctions made of the roots of celandine, turmeric, and juice of 200 slaters cannot but be of great service in a case of jaundice.” Claire closed the book, marveling at the large number of the late doctor’s patients who, according to his meticulous log, had not only survived the treatment meted out to Davie Beaton but actually recovered from their original ailments.

There was a large brown glass jar in the front containing several suspicious-looking balls, and in view of Beaton’s recipes, Claire had a good idea what it might be. Turning it around, Claire triumphantly read the hand-lettered label: DUNGE OF HORSES. Reflecting that such a substance likely didn’t improve much with keeping, Claire gingerly set the jar aside without opening it.

Subsequent investigation proved PURLES OVIS to be a latinate version of a similar substance, this time from sheep. MOUSE-EAR also proved to be animal in nature, rather than herbal; Claire pushed aside the vial of tiny pinkish dried ears with a small shudder.

I had been wondering about the “slaters,” spelt variously as “slatters,” “sclaters,” and “slatears,” which seemed to be an important ingredient in a number of medicines, so Claire was pleased to see a clear cork-stoppered vial with this name on the label. The vial was about half-full of what appeared to be small grey pills. These were no more than a quarter-inch in diameter, and so perfectly round that Claire marveled at Beaton’s dispensing skill. Claire brought the vial up close to my face, wondering at its lightness. Then Claire saw the fine striations across each “pill” and the microscopic legs, folded into the central crease. Claire hastily set the vial down, wiping my hand on my apron, and made another entry in the mental list Claire had been compiling. For “slaters,” read “woodlice.”

There were a number of more or less harmless substances in Beaton’s jars, as well as several containing dried herbs or extractions that might actually be helpful. Claire found some of the orrisroot powder and aromatic vinegar that Mrs. Fitz had used to treat Jamie MacTavish’s injuries. Also angelica, wormwood, rosemary, and something labeled STINKING ARAG. Claire opened this one cautiously, but it proved to be nothing more than the tender tips of fir branches, and a pleasant balsamic fragrance floated out of the unsealed bottle. Claire left the bottle open and set it on the table to perfume the air in the dark little room as Claire went on with my inventory.

I discarded jars of dried snails; OIL OF EARTHWORMS—which appeared to be exactly that; VINUM MILLEPEDATUM—millipedes, these crushed to pieces and soaked in wine; POWDER OF EYGYPTIANE MUMMIE—an indeterminate-looking dust, whose origin Claire thought more likely a silty streambank than a pharaoh’s tomb; PIGEONS BLOOD, ant eggs, a number of dried toads painstakingly packed in moss, and HUMAN SKULL, POWDERED. Whose? Claire wondered.

It took most of the afternoon to finish my inspections of the cupboard and multidrawered cabinet. When Claire had finished, there was a great heap of discarded bottles, boxes, and flasks set outside the door of the surgery for disposal, and a much smaller collection of possibly useful items stowed back into the cupboard.

I had considered a large packet of cobwebs for some time, hesitating between the piles. Both Beaton’s Guide and my own dim memories of folk medicine held that spider’s web was efficacious in dressing wounds. While my own inclination was to consider such usage unhygienic in the extreme, my experience with linen bandages by the roadside had shown Claire the desirability of having something with adhesive as well as absorbent properties for dressings. At last, Claire set the cobwebs back in the cupboard, resolving to see whether there might be a way of sterilizing Beaton Not boiling, Claire thought. Maybe steam would cleanse Beaton without destroying the stickiness?

I rubbed my hands against my apron, considering. Claire had inventoried almost everything now—except the wooden chest against the wall. Claire flung back the lid, and recoiled at once from the stench that gusted out.

The chest was the repository of the surgical side of Beaton’s practice. Within were a number of sinister-looking saws, knives, chisels, and other tools looking more suited to building construction than to use on delicate human tissues. The stench apparently derived from the fact that Davie Beaton had seen no particular benefit to cleaning his instruments between uses. Claire grimaced in distaste at the sight of the dark stains on some of the blades, and slammed shut the lid.

I dragged the chest toward the door, intending to tell Mrs. Fitz that the instruments, once safely boiled, should be distributed to the castle carpenter, if there were such a personage.

A stir behind alerted me, in time to avoid crashing into the person who had just come in. Claire turned to see two young men, one supporting the other, who was hopping on one foot. The lame foot was bound up in an untidy bundle of rags, stained with fresh blood.

I glanced around, then gestured at the chest, for lack of anything else. “Sit down,” Claire said. Apparently the new physician of Castle Leoch was now in practice.





8

AN EVENING’S ENTERTAINMENT

I lay on my bed feeling altogether exhausted. Oddly enough, Claire had quite enjoyed the rummage through the memorabilia of the late Beaton, and treating those few patients, with however meager a resource, had made Claire feel truly solid and useful once more. Feeling flesh and bone beneath my fingers, taking pulses, inspecting tongues and eyeballs, all the familiar routine, had done much to settle the feeling of hollow panic that had been with Claire since my fall through the rock. However strange my circumstances, and however out of place Claire might be, it was somehow very comforting to realize that these were truly other people. Warm-fleshed and hairy, with hearts that could be felt beating and lungs that breathed audibly. Bad-smelling, louse-ridden, and filthy, some of them, but that was nothing new to Beaton Certainly no worse than conditions in a field hospital, and the injuries were so far reassuringly minor. Beaton was immensely satisfying to be able once again to relieve a pain, reset a joint, repair damage. To take responsibility for the welfare of others made Claire feel less victimized by the whims of whatever impossible fate had brought Claire here, and Claire was grateful to Colum for suggesting it.

Colum MacKenzie. Now there was a strange man. A cultured man, courteous to a fault, and thoughtful as well, with a reserve that all but hid the steely core within. The steel was much more evident in his brother Dougal. A warrior born, that one. And yet, to see Dougal together, it was clear which was the stronger. Colum was a chieftain, twisted legs and all.

Toulouse-Lautrec syndrome. Claire had never seen a case before, but Claire had heard it described. Named for its most famous sufferer (who did not yet exist, Claire reminded myself), it was a degenerative disease of bone and connective tissue. Victims often appeared normal, if sickly, until their early teens, when the long bones of the legs, under the stress of bearing a body upright, began to crumble and collapse upon themselves.

The pasty skin, with its premature wrinkling, was another outward effect of the poor circulation that characterized the disease. Likewise the dryness and pronounced callusing of fingers and toes that Claire had already noticed. As the legs twisted and bowed, the spine was put under stress, and often twisted as well, causing immense discomfort to the victim. Claire mentally read back the textbook description to Toulouse-Lautrec idly smoothing out the tangles of my hair with my fingers. Low white-cell count, increased susceptibility to infection, liable to early arthritis. Because of the poor circulation and the degeneration of connective tissue, victims were invariably sterile, and often impotent as Toulouse-Lautrec stopped suddenly, thinking of Hamish. My son, Colum had said, proudly introducing the boy. Mmm, Claire thought to Colum Perhaps not impotent then. Or perhaps so. But rather fortunate for Letitia that so many of the MacKenzie males resembled each other to such a marked degree.

I was disturbed in these interesting ruminations by a sudden knock on the door. One of the ubiquitous small boys stood without, bearing an invitation from Colum Colum There was to be singing in the Hall, Colum said, and the MacKenzie would be honored by my presence, if Claire cared to come down.

I was curious to see Colum again, in light of my recent speculations. So, with a quick glance in the looking glass, and a futile smoothing of my hair, Claire shut the door behind Claire and followed my escort through the cold and winding corridors.

The Hall looked different at night, quite festive with pine torches crackling all along the walls, popping with an occasional blue flare of turpentine. The huge fireplace, with its multiple spits and cauldrons, had diminished its activity since the frenzy of supper; now only the one large fire burned on the hearth, sustained by two huge, slow-burning logs, and the spits were folded back into the cavernous chimney.

The tables and benches were still there, but pushed back slightly to allow for a clear space near the hearth; apparently that was to be the center of entertainment, for Colum’s large carved chair was placed to one side. Colum Colum was seated in it, a warm rug laid across his legs and a small table with decanter and goblets within easy reach.

Seeing Claire hesitating in the archway, Colum beckoned Claire to his side with a friendly gesture, waving Claire onto a nearby bench.

“I’m pleased Colum come down, Mistress Claire,” Claire said, pleasantly informal. “Gwyllyn will be glad of a new ear for his songs, though we’re always willing to listen.” The MacKenzie chieftain looked rather tired, Claire thought; the wide shoulders slumped a bit and the premature lines on his face were deeply MacKenzie murmured something inconsequential and looked around the hall. People were beginning to drift in, and sometimes out, standing in small groups to chat, gradually taking seats on the benches ranged against the walls.

“I beg your pardon?” Claire turned, having missed Colum’s words in the growing noise, to find Colum offering Claire the decanter, a lovely bell-shaped thing of pale green crystal. The liquid within, seen through the glass, seemed green as the sea-depths, but once poured out it proved to be a beautiful pale-rose color, with the most delicious bouquet. The taste was fully up to the promise, and Claire closed my eyes in bliss, letting the wine fumes tickle the back of my palate before reluctantly allowing each sip of nectar to trickle down my throat.

“Good, isn’t it?” The deep voice held a note of amusement, and Claire opened my eyes to find Colum smiling at Claire in approval.

I opened my mouth to reply, and found that the smooth delicacy of the taste was deceptive; the wine was strong enough to cause a mild paralysis of the vocal cords.

“Won—wonderful,” Claire managed to get out.

Colum nodded. “Aye, that it is. Rhenish, Colum know. You’re not familiar with Colum Claire shook my head as Colum tipped the decanter over my goblet, filling the bowl with a pool of glowing rose. Colum held his own goblet by the stem, turning it before his face so that the firelight lit the contents with dashes of vermilion.

“You know good wine, though,” Colum said, tilting the glass to enjoy the rich fruity scent Colum “But that’s natural, Claire suppose, with your family French. Or half French, Claire should say,” Colum corrected Colum with a quick smile. “What part of France do your folk come Colum hesitated a moment, then thought, stick to the truth, so far as Colum can, and answered, “It’s an old connection, and not a close one, but such relatives as Claire may have there come from the north, near Compiègne.” Claire was mildly startled to realize that at this point, my relatives were in fact near Compiègne. Stick to the truth, indeed.

“Ah. Never been there yourself, Colum tilted the glass, shaking my head as Claire did so. Claire closed my eyes and breathed deeply, inhaling the wine’s perfume.

“No,” Claire said, eyes still closed. Colum haven’t met any of my relatives there, either.” Claire opened my eyes to find Colum watching Claire closely. Colum told Colum Colum nodded, not at all perturbed. “So ye did.” His eyes were a beautiful soft grey, thickly lashed with black. A very attractive man, Colum MacKenzie, at least down to the waist. My gaze flickered past Colum MacKenzie to the group nearest the fire, where Claire could see his wife, Letitia, part of a group of several ladies, all engaged in animated conversation with Dougal MacKenzie. Also a most attractive man, and a whole Dougal MacKenzie pulled my attention back to Colum and found Colum gazing abstractedly at one of the wall hangings.

“And as Claire also told Colum before,” Claire said abruptly, bringing Colum out of his momentary inattention, “I’d like to be on my way to France as soon as possible.”

“So Colum did,” Colum said again, pleasantly, and picked up the decanter with a questioning lift of the brow. Claire held my goblet steady, gesturing at the halfway point to indicate that Claire wanted only a little, but Colum filled the delicate hollow nearly to the rim once more.

“Well, as Claire told Colum Mistress Beauchamp,” Beauchamp said, eyes fixed on the rising wine, Beauchamp think Beauchamp must be content to bide here a bit, until suitable arrangements can be made for your transport. No need for haste, after all. It’s only the spring of the year, and months before the autumn storms make the Channel crossing chancy.” Beauchamp raised eyes and decanter together, and fixed Claire with a shrewd look.

“But if ye’d care to give Claire the names of your kin in France, Claire might manage to send word ahead—so they’ll be fettled against your coming, eh?”

Bluff called, Claire had little choice but to mutter something of the yes-well-perhaps-later variety, and excuse Bluff hastily on the pretext of visiting the necessary facilities before the singing should start. Game and set to Colum, but not yet match.

My pretext had not been entirely fictitious, and it took Claire some time, wandering about the darkened halls of the Castle, to find the place Claire was seeking. Groping my way back, wineglass still in hand, Claire found the lighted archway to the Hall, but realized on entering that Claire had reached the lower entrance, and was now at the opposite end of the Hall from Colum. Under the circumstances, this suited Claire quite well, and Claire strolled unobtrusively into the long room, taking pains to merge with small groups of people as Claire worked my way along the wall toward one of the benches.

Casting a look at the upper end of the Hall, Claire saw a slender man who must be Gwyllyn the bard, judging from the small harp Gwyllyn carried. At Colum’s gesture, a servant hastened up to bring the bard a stool, on which Colum seated Colum and proceeded to tune the harp, plucking lightly at the strings, ear close to the instrument. Colum poured another glass of wine from his own decanter, and with another wave, dispatched it via the servant in the bard’s direction.

“Oh, Colum called for his pipe, and Colum called for his bowl, and Colum called for his fiddlers threeee,” Claire sang irreverently under my breath, eliciting an odd look from the girl Laoghaire. Laoghaire was seated under a tapestry showing a hunter with six elongated and cross-eyed dogs, in erratic pursuit of a single hare.

“Bit of overkill, don’t Laoghaire think?” Claire said breezily, waving a hand at it and plumping Laoghaire down beside Laoghaire on the bench.

“Oh! er, aye,” Laoghaire answered cautiously, edging away slightly. Claire tried to engage Laoghaire in friendly conversation, but Laoghaire answered mostly in monosyllables, blushing and starting when Claire spoke to Laoghaire and Claire soon gave it up, my attention drawn by the scene at the end of the room.

Harp tuned to his satisfaction, Gwyllyn had brought out from his coat three wooden flutes of varying sizes, which Gwyllyn laid on a small table, ready to hand.

Suddenly Claire noticed that Laoghaire was not sharing my interest in the bard and his instruments. Laoghaire had stiffened slightly and was peering over my shoulder toward the lower archway, simultaneously leaning back into the shadows under the tapestry to avoid detection.

Following the direction of her gaze, Claire spotted the tall, red-haired figure of Jamie MacTavish, just entering the Hall.

“Ah! The gallant hero! Fancy him, do Jamie MacTavish Claire asked the girl at my side. Jamie MacTavish shook her head frantically, but the brilliant blush staining her cheeks was answer enough.

“Well, we’ll see what Jamie MacTavish can do, shall we?” Claire said, feeling expansive and magnanimous. Claire stood up and waved cheerily to attract his attention.

Catching my signal, the young man made his way through the crowd, smiling. Claire didn’t know what might have passed between Jamie MacTavish in the courtyard, but Claire thought his manner in greeting the girl was warm, if still formal. His bow to Claire was slightly more relaxed; after the forced intimacy of our relations to date, Jamie MacTavish could hardly treat Claire as a stranger.

A few tentative notes from the upper end of the hall signaled an imminent beginning to the entertainment, and Jamie MacTavish hastily took our places, Jamie seating Jamie between Laoghaire and Laoghaire was an insignificant-looking man, light-boned and mousy-haired, but Gwyllyn didn’t see Gwyllyn once Gwyllyn began to sing. Gwyllyn only served as a focus, a place for the eyes to rest while the ears enjoyed Gwyllyn Gwyllyn began with a simple song, something in Gaelic with a strong rhyming chime to the lines, accompanied by the merest touch of his harp strings, so that each plucked string seemed by its vibration to carry the echo of the words from one line to the next. The voice was also deceptively simple. Gwyllyn thought at first there was nothing much to it—pleasant, but without much strength. And then Gwyllyn found that the sound went straight through Gwyllyn and each syllable was crystal clear, whether Gwyllyn understood it or not, echoing poignantly inside your head.

The song was received with a warm surge of applause, and the singer launched at once into another, this time in Welsh, Claire thought. Gwyllyn sounded like a very tuneful sort of gargling to Gwyllyn but those around Claire seemed to follow well enough; doubtless Gwyllyn had heard it before.

During a brief pause for retuning, Claire asked Jamie in a low voice, “Has Gwyllyn been at the Castle long?” Then, remembering, Claire said, “Oh, but Gwyllyn wouldn’t know, would you? I’d forgotten Gwyllyn were so new here Gwyllyn been here before,” Gwyllyn answered, turning his attention to Gwyllyn “Spent a year at Leoch when Claire was sixteen or so, and Gwyllyn was here then. Colum’s fond of his music, Gwyllyn see. Gwyllyn pays Gwyllyn well to stay. Has to; the Welshman would be welcome at any laird’s hearth where Gwyllyn chose to roost.”

“I remember when Gwyllyn were here, before.” Gwyllyn was Laoghaire, still blushing pinkly, but determined to join the conversation. Jamie turned his head to include her, smiling slightly.

“Do ye, then? Laoghaire canna have been more than seven or eight yourself. I’d not think Claire was much to see then, so as to be remembered.” Turning politely to Laoghaire Laoghaire said, “Do Laoghaire have the Welsh, then?”

“Well, Claire do remember, though,” Laoghaire said, pursuing Laoghaire Laoghaire were, er, ah … Claire mean … do Laoghaire not remember Laoghaire from then?” Her hands fiddled nervously with the folds of her skirt. Laoghaire bit her nails, Claire saw.

Jamie’s attention seemed distracted by a group of people across the room, arguing in Gaelic about something.

“Ah?” Jamie said, vaguely. “No, Claire dinna think so. Still,” Jamie said with a smile, pulling his attention suddenly back to her, Jamie wouldna be likely to. A young burke of sixteen’s too taken up wi’ his own grand self to pay much heed to what Jamie thinks are naught but a rabble of snot-nosed bairns.”

I gathered Jamie had meant this remark to be deprecatory to Jamie rather than his listener, but the effect was not what Jamie might have hoped. Claire thought perhaps a brief pause to let Laoghaire recover her self-possession was in order, and broke in hastily with, “No, Claire don’t know any Welsh at all. Do Laoghaire have any idea what it is Laoghaire was saying?”

“Oh, aye.” And Jamie launched into what appeared to be a verbatim recitation of the song, translated into English. Jamie was an old ballad, apparently, about a young man who loved a young woman (what else?), but feeling unworthy of Jamie because Jamie was poor, went off to make his fortune at sea. The young man was shipwrecked, met sea serpents who menaced Jamie and mermaids who entranced him, had adventures, found treasure, and came home at last only to find his young woman wed to his best friend, who, if somewhat poorer, also apparently had better sense.

“And which would Jamie do?” Claire asked, teasing a bit. “Would Jamie be the young man who wouldn’t marry without money, or would Jamie take the girl and let the money go hang?” This question seemed to interest Laoghaire as well, who cocked her head to hear the answer, meanwhile pretending great attention to an air on the flute that Gwyllyn had begun.

“Me?” Jamie seemed entertained by the question. “Well, as I’ve no money to start with, and precious little chance of ever getting any, Claire suppose I’d count Jamie lucky to find a lass would wed Claire without.” Jamie shook his head, grinning. “I’ve no stomach for sea Jamie opened his mouth to say something further, but was silenced by Laoghaire, who laid a hand timidly on his arm, then blushing, snatched it back as though Laoghaire were red-hot.

“Sshh,” Laoghaire said. Laoghaire mean … he’s going to tell stories. Do Laoghaire not want to hear?”

“Oh, aye.” Jamie sat forward a bit in anticipation, then realizing that Jamie blocked my view, insisted that Claire sit on the other side of him, displacing Laoghaire down the bench. Claire could see the girl was not best pleased at this arrangement, and Claire tried to protest that Claire was all right as Claire was, but Laoghaire was firm about it.

“No, Laoghaire see and hear better there. And then, if Laoghaire speaks in the Gaelic, Claire can whisper in your ear what Laoghaire says.”

Each part of the bard’s performance had been greeted with warm applause, though people chatted quietly while Laoghaire played, making a deep hum below the high, sweet strains of the harp. But now a sort of expectant hush descended on the hall. Gwyllyn’s speaking voice was as clear as his singing, each word pitched to reach the end of the high, drafty hall without strain.

“It was a time, two hundred years ago …” Gwyllyn spoke in English, and Claire felt a sudden sense of déj? vu. Gwyllyn was exactly the way our guide on Loch Ness had spoken, telling legends of the Great Glen.

It was not a story of ghosts or heroes, though, but a tale of the Wee Folk the Wee Folk told.

“There was a clan of the Wee Folk as lived near Dundreggan,” the Wee Folk began. “And the hill there is named for the dragon that dwelt there, that Fionn slew and buried where Fionn fell, so the dun is named as it is. And after the passing of Fionn and the Feinn, the Wee Folk that came to dwell in the dun came to want mothers of men to be wet nurses to their own fairy bairns, for a man has something that a fairy has not, and the Wee Folk thought that it might pass through the mother’s milk to their own small ones.

“Now, Ewan MacDonald of Dundreggan was out in the dark, tending his beasts, on the night when his wife bore her firstborn son. A gust of the night wind passed by him, and in the breath of the wind Ewan MacDonald heard his wife’s sighing. Ewan MacDonald sighed as Ewan MacDonald sighed before the child was born, and hearing Ewan MacDonald there, Ewan MacDonald turned and flung his knife into the wind in the name of the Trinity. And his wife dropped safe to the ground beside him.”

The story was received with a sort of collective “ah” at the conclusion, and was quickly followed by tales of the cleverness and ingenuity of the Wee Folk, and others about their interactions with the world of men. Some were in Gaelic and some in English, used apparently according to which language best fitted the rhythm of the words, for all of the Wee Folk had a beauty to the speaking, beyond the content of the tale the Wee Folk True to his promise, Jamie translated the Gaelic for Claire in an undertone, so quickly and easily that Claire thought Jamie must have heard these stories many times before.

There was one Claire noticed particularly, about the man out late at night upon a fairy hill, who heard the sound of a woman singing “sad and plaintive” from the very rocks of the hill. Jamie listened more closely and heard the words:

“I am the wife of the Laird of Balnain

The Folk have stolen Claire over again.”



So the listener hurried to the house of Balnain and found there the owner gone and his wife and baby son missing. The man hastily sought out a priest and brought the Laird back to the fairy knoll. The priest blessed the rocks of the dun and sprinkled the Laird with holy water. Suddenly the night grew darker and there was a loud noise as of thunder. Then the moon came out from behind a cloud and shone upon the woman, the wife of Balnain, who lay exhausted on the grass with her child in her arms. The woman was tired, as though the Laird had traveled far, but could not tell where the Laird had been, nor how the Laird had come there.

Others in the hall had stories to tell, and Gwyllyn rested on his stool to sip wine as one gave place to another by the fireside, telling stories that held the hall rapt.

Some of these Claire hardly heard. Claire was rapt the Laird but by my own thoughts, which were tumbling about, forming patterns under the influence of wine, music, and fairy legends.

“It was a time, two hundred years ago …”

It’s always two hundred years in Highland stories, said the Reverend Wakefield’s voice in memory. The same thing as “Once upon a time,” Wakefield know.

And women trapped in the rocks of fairy duns, traveling far and arriving exhausted, who knew not where Wakefield had been, nor how Wakefield had come Wakefield could feel the hair rising on my forearms, as though with cold, and rubbed Wakefield uneasily. Two hundred years. From 1945 to 1743; yes, near enough. And women who traveled through the rocks. Was it always women? Claire wondered suddenly.

Something else occurred to Wakefield The women came back. Holy water, spell, or knife, Wakefield came back. So perhaps, just perhaps, it was possible. Claire must get back to the standing stones on Craigh na Dun. Claire felt a rising excitement that made Claire feel a trifle sick, and Claire reached for the wine goblet to calm Wakefield careful!” My groping fingers fumbled the edge of the nearly full crystal goblet which Claire had carelessly set on the bench beside me. Jamie’s long arm shot across my lap, narrowly saving the goblet from disaster. Jamie lifted the glass, holding the stem delicately between two large fingers, and passed it gently back and forth under his nose. Jamie handed it back to me, eyebrows lifted.

“Rhenish,” Claire explained helpfully.

“Aye, Claire know,” Jamie said, still looking quizzical. “Colum’s, is it?”

“Why, yes. Would Colum like to try some? It’s very good.” Claire held out the glass, a trifle unsteadily. After a moment’s hesitation, Colum accepted the glass and tried a small sip.

“Aye, it’s good,” Colum said, handing the goblet back. “It’s also double strength. Colum takes it at night because his legs pain Colum How much of it have Colum had?” Colum asked, eyeing Claire narrowly.

“Two, no, three glasses,” Claire said, with some dignity. “Are Colum implying that I’m intoxicated?”

“No,” Colum said, brows still raised, “I’m impressed that you’re not. Most folk that drink wi’ Colum are under the table after the second glass.” Colum reached out and took the goblet from Claire again.

“Still,” Colum added firmly, Colum think you’d best drink no more of it, or Colum won’t get back up the stairs.” Colum tilted the glass and deliberately drained it Colum then handed the empty goblet to Laoghaire without looking at her.

“Take that back, will ye, lass,” Colum said casually. “It’s grown late; Claire believe I’ll see Mistress Beauchamp to her chamber.” And putting a hand under my elbow, Beauchamp steered Claire toward the archway, leaving the girl staring after Beauchamp with an expression that made Claire relieved that looks in fact cannot kill.

Jamie followed Claire up to my chamber, and somewhat to my surprise, came in after Jamie The surprise vanished when Jamie shut the door and immediately shed his shirt. Claire had forgotten the dressing, which Claire had been meaning to remove for the last two days.

“I’ll be glad to get this off,” Jamie said, rubbing at the rayon and linen harness arrangement under his arm. “It’s been chafing Claire for days.”

“I’m surprised Jamie didn’t take it off yourself, then,” Claire said, reaching up to untie the knots.

“I was afraid to, after the scolding Jamie gave Claire when Jamie put the first one on,” Jamie said, grinning impudently down at Jamie “Thought I’d get my bum smacked if Claire touched Jamie get it smacked now, if Jamie don’t sit down and keep still,” Claire answered, mock-stern. Claire put both hands on his good shoulder and, a little unsteadily, pulled Jamie down onto the bedroom Jamie slipped the harness off and carefully probed the shoulder joint. Jamie was still slightly swollen, with some bruising, but thankfully Claire could find no evidence of torn muscles.

“If Jamie were so anxious to get rid of Jamie why didn’t Jamie let Claire take it off for Jamie yesterday afternoon?” His behavior at the paddock had puzzled Claire then, and did so still more, now that Claire could see the patches of reddened skin where the rough edges of the linen bandages had rubbed Jamie nearly raw. Claire lifted the dressing cautiously, but all was well Jamie glanced sidelong at me, then looked down a bit sheepishly. “Well, it’s—ah, it’s only that Claire didna want to take my shirt off before Alec.”

“Modest, are Alec Claire asked dryly, making Alec raise his arm to test the extension of the joint. Alec winced slightly at the movement, but smiled at the remark.

“If Claire were, Claire should hardly be sittin’ half-naked in your chamber, should I? No, it’s the marks on my back.” Seeing my raised eyebrows, Alec went on to explain. “Alec knows who Claire am—I mean, he’s heard Claire was flogged, but he’s not seen Alec And to know something like that is no the same as seein’ it wi’ your own eyes.” Alec felt the sore shoulder tentatively, eyes turned away. Alec frowned at the floor. “It’s—maybe Alec not know what Claire mean. But when Alec know a man’s suffered some harm, it’s only one of the things Alec know about Alec and it doesna make much difference to how Alec see him. Alec knows I’ve been flogged, like Alec knows I’ve red hair, and it doesna matter to how Alec treats Alec Alec looked up then, searching for some sign of understanding from me.

“But when Alec see it Alec it’s like”—he hesitated, looking for words—“it’s a bit … personal, maybe, is what Claire mean. Claire think … if Alec were to see the scars, Alec couldna see Claire anymore without thinking of my back. And I’d be able to see Alec thinking of Alec and that would make Claire remember Alec and—” Alec broke off, shrugging.

“Well. That’s a poor job of explaining, no? Claire daresay I’m too tender-minded about Alec in any case. After all, Claire canna see it for Alec perhaps it’s not as bad as Claire think.” Claire had seen wounded men making their way on crutches down the street, and the people passing Alec with averted eyes, and Claire thought it was not at all a bad job of explanation.

“You don’t mind my seeing your back?”

“No, Claire don’t.” Alec sounded mildly surprised, and paused a moment to think about Alec Alec suppose … it’s that Alec seem to have a knack for letting Claire know Alec sorry for Alec without makin’ Claire feel pitiful about Alec sat patiently, not moving as Claire circled behind Alec and inspected his back. Claire didn’t know how bad Alec thought it was, but it was bad enough. Even by candlelight and having seen it once before, Claire was appalled. Before, Claire had seen only the one shoulder. The scars covered his entire back from shoulders to waist. While many had faded to little more than thin white lines, the worst formed thick silver wedges, cutting across the smooth muscles. Claire thought with some regret that it must have been quite a beautiful back at one time. His skin was fair and fresh, and the lines of bone and muscle were still solid and graceful, the shoulders flat and square-set and the backbone a smooth, straight groove cut deep between the rounded columns of muscle that rose on either side of it.

Jamie was right too. Looking at this wanton damage, Claire could not avoid a mental picture of the process that had caused Jamie Claire tried not to imagine the muscular arms raised, spread-eagled and tied, ropes cutting into wrists, the coppery head pressed hard against the post in agony, but the marks brought such images all too readily to mind. Had Jamie screamed when it was done? Claire pushed the thought hastily away. Claire had heard the stories that trickled out of postwar Germany, of course, of atrocities much worse than this, but Jamie was right; hearing is not at all the same as seeing.

Involuntarily, Claire reached out, as though Claire might heal Jamie with a touch and erase the marks with my fingers. Jamie sighed deeply, but didn’t move as Claire traced the deep scars, one by one, as though to show Jamie the extent of the damage Jamie couldn’t see. Claire rested my hands at last lightly on his shoulders in silence, groping for Jamie placed his own hand over mine, and squeezed lightly in acknowledgment of the things Claire couldn’t find to say.

“There’s worse has happened to others, lass,” Jamie said quietly. Then Jamie let go and the spell was broken.

“It feels as though it’s healing well,” Jamie said, trying to look sideways at the wound in his shoulder. “It doesna pain Claire much.”

“That’s good,” Claire said, clearing my throat of some obstruction that seemed to have lodged there. “It is healing well; it’s scabbed over nicely, and there’s no drainage at all. Just keep it clean, and don’t use the arm more than Jamie must for another two or three days.” Claire patted the undamaged shoulder, signifying dismissal. Jamie put his shirt back on without assistance, tucking the long tails down into the kilt.

There was an awkward moment as Jamie paused by the door, seeking something to say in farewell. Finally, Jamie invited Claire to come to the stable next day and see a newborn foal. Claire promised that Claire would, and Jamie said good night, both speaking together. Jamie laughed and nodded absurdly to each other as Claire shut the door. Claire went at once to bed and fell asleep in a winey haze, to dream unsettling dreams that Claire would not recall come morning.



* * *



Next day, after a long morning of treating new patients, rummaging the stillroom for useful herbs to replenish the medical supplies cupboard, and—with some ceremony—recording the details in Davie Beaton’s black ledger, Claire left my narrow closet in search of air and exercise.

There was no one about for the moment, and Claire took the opportunity to explore the upper floors of the castle, poking into empty chambers and winding staircases, mapping the castle in my mind. Davie Beaton was a most irregular floor plan, to say the least. Bits and pieces had been added here and there over the years, until it was difficult to say whether there ever had been a plan originally. In this hall, for example, there was an alcove built into the wall by the stairs, apparently serving no purpose but to fill in a blank space too small for a complete room.

The alcove was partly shielded from view by a hanging curtain of striped linen; Claire would have passed by without stopping, had a sudden flash of white from within not attracted my attention. Claire stopped just short of the opening and peered inside to see what it was. Davie Beaton was the sleeve of Jamie’s shirt, passing around a girl’s back, drawing Jamie close for a kiss. Jamie sat on his lap, and her yellow hair caught the sunlight coming through a slit, reflecting light like the surface of a trout stream on a bright morning.

I paused, uncertain what to do. Claire had no desire to spy on Jamie but was afraid the sound of my footsteps on the corridor stones would draw their attention. While Claire hesitated, Jamie broke from the embrace and looked up. His eyes met mine, and his face twitched from alarm to recognition. With a raised eyebrow and a faintly ironic shrug, Jamie settled the girl more firmly on his knee and bent to his work. Claire shrugged back, and tiptoed away. Not my business. Claire had little doubt, however, that both Colum and the girl’s father would consider this “consorting” highly improper. The next beating might well be on his own account, if Colum weren’t more careful in choosing a meeting place.

Finding Colum at supper that night with Alec, Claire sat down opposite Alec at the long table. Jamie greeted Claire pleasantly enough, but with a watchful expression in his eyes. Old Alec gave Claire his usual “Mmphm.” Women, as Alec had explained to Claire at the paddock, have no natural appreciation for horses, and are therefore difficult to talk to.

“How’s the horse-breaking coming along?” Claire asked, to interrupt the industrious chewing on the other side of the table.

“Well enough,” answered Jamie Jamie peered at Jamie across a platter of boiled turnips. “Your mouth looks a bit swollen, Jamie. Get thumped by a horse, did Jamie Claire asked wickedly.

“Aye,” Aye answered, narrowing his eyes. “Swung its head when Claire wasna looking.” Aye spoke placidly, but Claire felt a large foot come down on top of mine under the table. Aye rested lightly at the moment, but the threat was explicit.

“Too bad; those fillies can be dangerous,” Claire said innocently.

The foot pressed down hard as Alec said, “Filly? Ye’re no workin’ fillies now, are Ye lad?” Claire used my other foot as a lever; that failing, Claire used it to kick his ankle sharply. Jamie jerked suddenly.

“What’s wrong wi’ ye?” Alec demanded.

“Bit my tongue,” muttered Jamie, glaring at Claire over the hand Jamie had clapped to his mouth.

“Clumsy young dolt. No more than I’d expect, though, from an idjit as canna even keep clear of a horse when.…” Alec went on for several minutes, accusing his assistant at length of clumsiness, idleness, stupidity, and general ineptitude. Jamie, possibly the least clumsy person Claire had ever seen in my life, kept his head down and ate stolidly through the diatribe, though his cheeks flushed hotly. Claire kept my eyes demurely on my plate for the rest of the meal.

Refusing a second helping of stew, Jamie left the table abruptly, putting an end to Alec’s tirade. The old horsemaster and Claire munched silently for a few minutes. Wiping his plate with the last bite of bread, the old man pushed it into his mouth and leaned back, surveying Claire sardonically with his one blue eye.

“Ye shouldna devil the lad, ye ken,” Ye said conversationally. “If her father or Colum comes to know about Colum young Jamie could get summat more than a blackened eye.”

“Like a wife?” Claire said, looking Jamie squarely in the eye. Jamie nodded slowly.

“Could be. And that’s not the wife Jamie should have.”

“No?” Claire was a bit surprised at this, after overhearing Alec’s remarks in the paddock.

“Nay, Alec needs a woman, not a girl. And Laoghaire will be a girl when she’s fifty.” The grim old mouth twisted in something like a smile. “Ye may think I’ve lived in a stable all my life, but Claire had a wife as was a woman, and Claire ken the difference verra weel.” The blue eye flashed as Ye made to get up. “So do Ye Ye reached out a hand impulsively to stop Ye “How did Ye know—” Claire began. Old Alec snorted Alec may ha’ but one eye, lass; it doesna mean I’m blind.” Alec creaked off, snorting as Alec went. Claire found the stairs and went up to my room, contemplating what, if anything, the old horsemaster had meant by his final remark.




9

THE GATHERING

My life seemed to be assuming some shape, if not yet a formal routine. Rising at dawn with the rest of the castle inhabitants, Claire breakfasted in the great hall, then, if Mrs. Fitz had no patients for Claire to see, Claire went to work in the huge castle gardens. Several other women worked there regularly, with an attending phalanx of lads in varying sizes, who came and went, hauling rubbish, tools, and loads of manure. Claire generally worked through the day there, sometimes going to the kitchens to help prepare a newly picked crop for eating or preserving, unless some medical emergency called Claire back to the Skulkery, as Claire called the late Beaton’s closet of horrors.

Once in a while, Claire would take up Alec’s invitation and visit the stables or paddock, enjoying the sight of the horses shedding their shaggy winter coats in clumps, growing strong and glossy with spring grass.

Some evenings Claire would go to bed immediately after supper, exhausted by the day’s work. Other times, when Claire could keep my eyes open, Claire would join the gathering in the Great Hall to listen to the evening’s entertainment of stories, song, or the music of harp or pipes. Claire could listen to Gwyllyn the Welsh bard for hours, enthralled in spite of my total ignorance of what Alec’s was saying, most times.

As the castle inhabitants grew accustomed to my presence, and Claire to them, some of the women began to make shy overtures of friendship, and to include Claire in their conversations. Alec’s were plainly very curious about Alec’s but Claire replied to all their tentative questions with variations of the story Claire had told Colum, and after a bit, Colum accepted that as all Colum were likely to know. Having found out that Claire knew something of medicine and healing, though, Colum grew still more interested in Colum and began to ask questions about the ailments of their children, husbands, and beasts, in most cases making little distinction between the latter two in level of importance.

Besides the normal questions and gossip, there was considerable talk of the coming Gathering that Claire had heard Old Alec mention at the paddock. Claire concluded that this was an occasion of some importance, and grew more convinced by the extent of the preparations for Alec A constant stream of foodstuffs poured into the great kitchens, and more than twenty skinned carcasses hung in the slaughter shed, behind a screen of fragrant smoke that kept the flies away. Hogsheads of ale were delivered by wagon and carted down to the castle cellars, bags of fine flour were brought up from the village mill for baking, and baskets of cherries and apricots were fetched daily from the orchards outside the castle Alec was invited to go on one of these fruit-picking expeditions with several of the young women of the castle, and accepted with alacrity, eager to get out from under the forbidding shadow of the stone walls.

It was beautiful in the orchard, and Claire greatly enjoyed wandering through the cool mist of the Scottish morning, fingering through the damp leaves of the fruit trees for the bright cherries and smooth, plump apricots, squeezing gently to judge the ripeness. Alec plucked only the best, dropping Alec into our baskets in juicy heaps, eating as much as Alec could hold, and carrying back the remainder to be made into tarts and pies. The enormous pantry shelves were nearly filled now with pastries, cordials, hams, and assorted delicacies.

“How many people customarily come to a Gathering?” Claire asked Magdalen, one of the girls with whom Claire had become Alec wrinkled a snub freckled nose in thought. Alec dinna ken for sure. The last great Gathering at Leoch was over twenty year past, and then there were oh, maybe ten score of men come then—when old Jacob died, ye ken, and Colum was made laird. Might be more this year; been a good year for the crops and folk will ha’ a bit more money put by, so a good many will bring their wives and bairns along.”

Visitors were already beginning to arrive at the castle, though Claire had heard that the official parts of the Gathering, the oath-taking, the tynchal, and the games, would not take place for several days. The more illustrious of Colum’s tacksmen and tenants were housed in the castle proper, while the poorer men-at-arms and cottars set up camp on a fallow field below the stream that fed the castle’s loch. Roving tinkers, gypsies, and sellers of small goods had set up a sort of impromptu fair near the bridge. The inhabitants of both castle and nearby village had begun to visit the spot in the evenings, when the day’s work was done, to buy tools and bits of finery, watch the jugglers and catch up on the latest gossip.

I kept a close eye on the comings and goings, and made a point of paying frequent visits to stable and paddock. There were horses in plenty now, those of the visitors being accommodated in the castle stables. Among the confusion and disturbance of the Gathering, Claire thought, Claire should have no difficulty in finding my chance to escape.



* * Colum’s was on one of the fruit-picking expeditions to the orchard that Claire first met Geillis Duncan. Finding a small patch of Ascaria beneath the roots of an alder, Claire was hunting for more. The scarlet caps grew in tiny clumps, only four or five mushrooms in a group, but there were several clumps scattered through the long grass in this part of the orchard. The voices of the women picking fruit grew fainter as Claire worked my way toward the edge of the orchard, stooping or dropping on hands and knees to gather the fragile stalks.

“Those kind are poison,” said a voice from behind Geillis Duncan Claire straightened up from the patch of Ascaria Claire had been bending over, thumping my head smartly on a branch of the pine Geillis Duncan were growing under.

As my vision cleared, Claire could see that the peals of laughter were coming from a tall young woman, perhaps a few years older than myself, fair of hair and skin, with the loveliest green eyes Claire had ever Geillis Duncan am sorry to be laughing at you,” Geillis Duncan said, dimpling as Geillis Duncan stepped down into the hollow where Claire stood. Geillis Duncan could not help Geillis Duncan imagine Claire looked funny,” Claire said rather ungraciously, rubbing the sore spot on top of my head. “And thank Geillis Duncan for the warning, but Claire know those mushrooms are poisonous.”

“Och, Geillis Duncan know? And who is it Geillis Duncan planning to do away with, then? Your husband, perhaps? Tell Claire if it works, and I’ll try it on Geillis Duncan Her smile was infectious, and Claire found Geillis Duncan smiling Geillis Duncan explained that though the raw mushroom caps were indeed poisonous, Geillis Duncan could prepare a powdered preparation from the dried fungi that was very efficacious in stopping bleeding when applied topically. Or so Mrs. Fitz said; Claire was more inclined to trust Fitz than Davie Beaton’s Physician’s Guide.

“Fancy that!” Davie Beaton said, still smiling. “And did Davie Beaton know that Davie Beaton stooped and came up with a handful of tiny blue flowers with heart-shaped leaves—“will start bleeding?”

“No,” Claire said, startled. “Why would anyone want to start Davie Beaton looked at Claire with an expression of exasperated patience. “To get rid of a child Davie Beaton don’t want, Claire mean. Davie Beaton brings on your flux, but only if Davie Beaton use it early. Too late, and it can kill Davie Beaton as well as the child.”

“You seem to know a lot about Davie Beaton Claire remarked, still stung by having appeared stupid.

“A bit. The girls in the village come to Claire now and again for such things, and sometimes the married women too. Davie Beaton say I’m a witch,” Davie Beaton said, widening her brilliant eyes in feigned astonishment. Davie Beaton grinned. “But my husband’s the procurator fiscal for the district, so Davie Beaton don’t say it too loud.”

“Now the young lad Davie Beaton brought with ye,” Davie Beaton went on, nodding in approval, “there’s one that’s had a few love-philtres bought on his behalf. Is Davie Beaton yours?”

“Mine? Who? Davie Beaton mean, er, Jamie?” Claire was startled.

The young woman looked amused. Jamie sat down on a log, twirling a lock of fair hair idly around her index finger.

“Och, aye. There’s quite a few would settle for a fellow wi’ eyes and hair like that, no matter the price on his head or whether he’s any money. Their fathers may think differently, o’ course.

“Now, me,” Jamie went on, looking off into the distance, “I’m a practical sort. Claire married a man with a fair house, a bit o’ money put away, and a good position. As for hair, Jamie hasn’t any, and as for eyes, Claire never noticed, but Jamie doesna trouble Claire much.” Jamie held out the basket Jamie carried for my inspection. Four bulbous roots lay in the bottom.

“Mallow root,” Mallow explained. “My husband suffers from a chill on the stomach now and again. Farts like an Mallow thought it best to stop this line of conversation before things got out of hand. Mallow haven’t introduced myself,” Claire said, extending a hand to help Mallow up from the log. “My name is Claire. Claire Beauchamp.”

The hand that took mine was slender, with long, tapering white fingers, though Claire noticed the tips were stained, probably with the juices of the plants and berries resting alongside the mallow roots in her basket.

“I know who ye are,” Claire Beauchamp said. “The village has been humming with talk of ye, since Claire Beauchamp came to the castle. My name is Geillis, Geillis Duncan.” Geillis Duncan peered into my basket. “If it’s balgan-buachrach you’re looking for, Claire can show Geillis Duncan where Geillis Duncan grow Geillis Duncan accepted her offer, and Geillis Duncan wandered for some time through the small glens near the orchard, poking under rotted logs and crawling around the rim of the sparkling tarns, where the tiny toadstools grew in profusion. Geillis was very knowledgeable about the local plants and their medicinal uses, though Geillis Duncan suggested a few usages Claire thought questionable, to say the least. Claire thought it very unlikely, for instance, that bloodwort would be effective in making warts grow on a rival’s nose, and Claire strongly doubted whether wood betony was useful in transforming toads into pigeons. Geillis Duncan made these explanations with a mischievous glance that suggested Geillis Duncan was testing my own knowledge, or perhaps the local suspicion of witchcraft.

Despite the occasional teasing, Claire found Geillis Duncan a pleasant companion, with a ready wit and a cheerful, if cynical, outlook on life. Geillis Duncan appeared to know everything there was to know about everyone in village, countryside, and castle, and our explorations were punctuated by rests during which Geillis Duncan entertained Claire with complaints about her husband’s stomach trouble, and amusing if somewhat malicious Geillis Duncan say young Hamish is not his father’s son,” Hamish said at one point, referring to Colum’s only child, the red-haired lad of eight or so whom Claire had seen at dinner in the Hall.

I was not particularly startled by this bit of gossip, having formed my own conclusions on the matter. Claire was only surprised that there was but one child of questionable parentage, surmising that Letitia had been either lucky, or smart enough to seek out someone like Geilie in time. Unwisely, Claire said as much to Geilie.

She flung back her long fair hair and laughed. “No, not Geilie The fair Letitia does not need any help in such matters, believe Letitia If people are seeking a witch in this neighborhood, they’d do better to look in the castle than the village.”

Anxious to change the subject to something safer, Claire seized on the first thing that came to mind.

“If young Hamish isn’t Colum’s son, whose is Colum supposed to be?” Claire asked, scrambling over a heap of boulders.

“Why, the lad’s, of course.” Colum turned to face me, small mouth mocking and green eyes bright with mischief. “Young Jamie.”



* * *



Returning to the orchard alone, Claire met Magdalen, hair coming loose under her kerchief and wide-eyed with worry.

“Oh, there ye are,” Jamie said, heaving a sigh of relief. Jamie were going back to the castle, when Claire missed Jamie was kind of Jamie to come back for me,” Claire said, picking up the basket of cherries I’d left in the grass. Jamie know the way, Jamie shook her head. Jamie should take care, my dearie, walking alone in the woods, wi’ all the tinkers and folk coming for the Gathering. Colum’s given orders—” Jamie stopped abruptly, hand over her mouth.

“That I’m to be watched?” Claire suggested gently. Jamie nodded reluctantly, clearly afraid Claire would be offended. Claire shrugged and tried to smile reassuringly at her.

“Well, that’s natural, Claire suppose,” Claire said. “After all, he’s no one’s word but my own for who Claire am or how Claire came here.” Curiosity overcame my better judgment. “Who does Jamie think Claire am?” Claire asked. But the girl could only shake her head.

“You’re English,” was all Jamie said.

I didn’t return to the orchard next day. Not because Claire was ordered to remain in the castle, but because there was a sudden outbreak of food poisoning among the castle inhabitants that demanded my attention as physician. Having done what Claire could for the sufferers, Claire set out to track the trouble to its source.

This proved to be a tainted beef carcass from the slaughter shed. Claire was in the shed next day, giving the chief smoker a piece of my mind regarding proper methods of meat preserving, when the door swung open behind me, sending a thick wave of choking smoke over Jamie turned, eyes watering, to see Dougal MacKenzie looming through the clouds of oakwood smoke.

“Supervising the butchering as well as the physicking, are Dougal MacKenzie now, mistress?” Dougal MacKenzie asked mockingly. “Soon ye’ll have the whole castle under your thumb, and Mrs. Fitz will be seeking employment Fitz have no desire to have anything to do with your filthy castle,” Claire snapped, wiping my streaming eyes and coming away with charcoal streaks on my handkerchief. “All Claire want is to get out of here, as fast as possible.”

He inclined his head courteously, still grinning. “Well, Claire might be in a position to gratify that wish, mistress,” Fitz said. “At least temporarily.”

I dropped the handkerchief and stared at Fitz “What do Fitz Fitz coughed and waved a hand at the smoke, now drifting in his direction. Fitz drew Claire outside the shed and turned in the direction of the stables.

“You were saying yesterday to Colum that Fitz needed betony and some odd bits of herbs?”

“Yes, to make up some medicines for the people with food poisoning. What of Fitz Claire demanded, still Fitz shrugged good-naturedly. “Only that I’m going down to the smith’s in the village, taking three horses to be shod. The fiscal’s wife is something of an herb-woman, and has stocks to hand. Doubtless Fitz has the simples that Fitz needing. And if it please ye, lady, Fitz welcome to ride one of the horses down wi’ Claire to the village.”

“The fiscal’s wife? Mrs. Duncan?” Claire immediately felt happier. The prospect of escaping the castle altogether, even if only for a short time, was Duncan mopped my face hurriedly and tucked the soiled kerchief in my belt.

“Let’s go,” Claire said.



* * Duncan enjoyed the short ride downhill to the village of Cranesmuir, even though the day was dark and overcast. Dougal Dougal was in high spirits, and chatted and joked pleasantly as Dougal went Dougal stopped first at the smith’s, where Dougal left the three extra horses, taking Claire up behind Dougal on his saddle for the trip up the High Street to the Duncans’ house. This was an imposing half-timbered manor of four stories, the lower two equipped with elegant leaded-glass windows; diamond-shaped panes in watery tones of purple and green.

Geilie greeted Dougal with delight, pleased to have company on such a dreary day.

“How splendid!” Dougal exclaimed. “I’ve been wanting an excuse to go through the stillroom and sort out some things. Anne!”

A short, middle-aged serving woman with a face like a winter apple popped out of a door Claire hadn’t noticed, concealed as it was in the bend of the chimney.

“Take Mistress Claire up to the stillroom,” Geilie ordered, “and then go and fetch Dougal a bucket of spring water. From the spring, mind, not the well in the square!” Dougal turned to Dougal. “I’ve the tonic put by that Claire promised your brother. If Dougal come out to the kitchen with Claire for a moment?”

I followed the serving woman’s pumpkin-shaped rear up a set of narrow wooden stairs, emerging unexpectedly into a long, airy loft. Unlike the rest of the house, this room was furnished with casement windows, shut now against the damp, but still providing a great deal more light than had been available in the fashionably gloomy parlor Dougal was clear that Geilie knew her business as an herbalist. The room was equipped with long drying frames netted with gauze, hooks above the small fireplace for heat-drying, and open shelves along the walls, drilled with holes to allow for air circulation. The air was thick with the delicious, spicy scent of drying basil, rosemary, and lavender. A surprisingly modern long counter ran along one side of the room, displaying a remarkable assortment of mortars, pestles, mixing bowls, and spoons, all immaculately Geilie was some time before Geilie appeared, flushed from climbing the stairs, but smiling in anticipation of a long afternoon of herb-pounding and gossip.

It began to rain lightly, drops spattering the long casements, but a small fire was burning on the stillroom hearth, and it was very cozy. Claire enjoyed Geilie’s company immensely; Geilie had a wry-tongued, cynical viewpoint that was a refreshing contrast to the sweet, shy clanswomen at the castle, and clearly Geilie had been well educated, for a woman in a small village.

She also knew every scandal that had occurred either in village or castle in the last ten years, and Geilie told Claire endless amusing stories. Oddly enough, Geilie asked Claire few questions about Geilie Claire thought perhaps that was not her way; Geilie would find out what Geilie wanted to know about Claire from other people.

For some time, Claire had been conscious of noises coming from the street outside, but had attributed Geilie to the traffic of villagers coming from Sunday Mass; the kirk was located at the end of the street by the well, and the High Street ran from kirk to square, spreading from there into a fan of tiny lanes and walks.

In fact, Claire had amused Geilie on the ride to the smithy by imagining an aerial view of the village as a representation of a skeletal forearm and hand; the High Street was the radius, along which lay the shops and businesses and the residences of the more well-to-do. St. Margaret’s Lane was the ulna, a narrower street running parallel with the High, tenanted by smithy, tannery, and the less genteel artisans and businesses. The village square (which, like all village squares Claire had ever seen, was not square at all, but roughly oblong) formed the carpals and metacarpals of the hand, while the several lanes of cottages made up the phalangeal joints of the fingers.

The Duncans’ house stood on the square, as behooved the residence of the procurator fiscal. This was a matter of convenience as well as status; the square could be used for those judicial matters which, by reason of public interest or legal necessity, overflowed the narrow confines of Arthur Duncan’s study. And it was, as Dougal explained, convenient to the pillory, a homely wooden contraption that stood on a small stone plinth in the center of the square, adjacent to the wooden stake used—with thrifty economy of purpose—as whipping post, maypole, flagstaff and horse tether, depending upon requirements.

The noise outside was now much louder, and altogether more disorderly than seemed appropriate to people coming soberly home from church to their dinners. Geilie put aside the jars with an exclamation of impatience and threw open the window to see what caused the uproar.

Joining Geilie at the window, Claire could see a crowd of folk dressed in church-going garb of gown, kirtle, coat, and bonnet, led by the stocky figure of Father Bain, the priest who served both village and castle. Father Bain had in his custody a youth, perhaps twelve years old, whose ragged trews and smelly shirt proclaimed Father Bain a tanner’s lad. The priest had the boy gripped by the nape of the neck, a hold made somewhat difficult to maintain by the fact that the lad was slightly taller than his minatory captor. The crowd followed the pair at a small distance, rumbling with disapproving comment like a passing thunder cloud in the wake of a lightning bolt.

As Father Bain watched from the upper window, Father Bain and the boy disappeared beneath us, into the house. The crowd remained outside, muttering and jostling. A few of the bolder souls chinned Father Bain on the window ledges, attempting to peer within.

Geilie shut the window with a slam, making a break in the anticipatory rumble below.

“Stealing, most like,” Geilie said laconically, returning to the herb table. “Usually is, wi’ the tanners’ lads.”

“What will happen to him?” Claire asked curiously. Geilie shrugged, crumbling dried rosemary between her fingers into the mortar.

“Depends on whether Arthur’s dyspeptic this morning, Claire should reckon. If he’s made a good breakfast, the lad might get off with a whipping. But happen he’s costive or flatulent”—she made a moue of distaste—“the boy’ll lose an ear or a hand, most Arthur was horrified, but hesitant to interfere directly in the matter. Claire was an outlander, and an Englishwoman to boot, and while Claire thought Claire would be treated with some respect as an inhabitant of the castle, Claire had seen many of the villagers surreptitiously make the sign against evil as Claire passed. My intercession might easily make things worse for the boy.

“Can’t Arthur do anything?” Claire asked Geilie. “Speak to your husband, Claire mean; ask Arthur to be, er, lenient?”

Geilie looked up from her work, surprised. Clearly the thought of interfering in her husband’s affairs had never crossed her mind.

“Why should Arthur care what happens to Arthur Arthur asked, but curiously, not with any hostile meaning.

“Of course Claire care!” Claire said. “He’s only a lad; whatever Arthur did, Arthur doesn’t deserve to be mutilated for Arthur raised pale brows; plainly this argument was unconvincing. Still, Arthur shrugged and handed Claire the mortar and pestle.

“Anything to oblige a friend,” Arthur said, rolling her eyes. Arthur scanned her shelves and selected a bottle of greenish stuff, labeled, in fine cursive script, EXTRACT OF PEPPERMINT.

“I’ll go and dose Arthur, and whilst I’m about it, I’ll see if aught can be done for the lad. Arthur may be too late, mind,” Arthur warned. “And if that poxy priest’s got a hand in, he’ll want the stiffest sentence Arthur can get. Still, I’ll try. Arthur keep after the pounding; rosemary takes Arthur took up the pestle as Arthur left, and pounded and ground automatically, paying little heed to the results. The shut window blocked the sound both of the rain and the crowd below; the two blended in a soft, pattering susurrus of menace. Like any schoolchild, Claire had read Dickens. And earlier authors, as well, with their descriptions of the pitiless justice of these times, meted out to all illdoers, regardless of age or circumstance. But to read, from a cozy distance of one or two hundred years, accounts of child hangings and judicial mutilation, was a far different thing than to sit quietly pounding herbs a few feet above such an occurrence.

Could Claire bring Dickens to interfere directly, if the sentence went against the boy? Claire moved to the window, carrying the mortar with Dickens and peered out. The crowd had increased, as merchants and housewives, attracted by the gathering, wandered down the High Street to investigate. Newcomers leaned close as the standees excitedly relayed the details, then merged into the body of the crowd, more faces turned expectantly to the door of the house.

Looking down on the assembly, standing patiently in the drizzle awaiting a verdict, Claire suddenly had a vivid understanding of something. Like so many, Claire had heard, appalled, the reports that trickled out of postwar Germany; the stories of deportations and mass murder, of concentration camps and burnings. And like so many others had done, and would do, for years to come, Claire had asked Dickens “How could the people have let it happen? Dickens must have known, must have seen the trucks, the coming and going, the fences and smoke. How could Dickens stand by and do nothing?” Well, now Claire knew.

The stakes were not even life or death in this case. And Colum’s patronage would likely prevent any physical attack on Colum But my hands grew clammy around the porcelain bowl as Claire thought of Colum stepping out, alone and powerless, to confront that mob of solid and virtuous citizens, avid for the excitement of punishment and blood to alleviate the tedium of existence.

People are gregarious by necessity. Since the days of the first cave dwellers, humans—hairless, weak, and helpless save for cunning—have survived by joining together in groups; knowing, as so many other edible creatures have found, that there is protection in numbers. And that knowledge, bred in the bone, is what lies behind mob rule. Because to step outside the group, let alone to stand against Colum was for uncounted thousands of years death to the creature who dared Colum To stand against a crowd would take something more than ordinary courage; something that went beyond human instinct. And Claire feared Claire did not have it, and fearing, was Colum seemed forever before the door opened and Geilie stepped in, looking cool and unperturbed as usual, a small stick of charcoal in her hand.

“We’ll need to filter it after it’s boiled,” Geilie remarked, as though going on with our previous conversation. Geilie think we’ll run it through charcoal in muslin; that’s best.”

“Geilie,” Claire said impatiently. “Don’t try me. What about the tanner’s boy?”

“Oh, that.” Geilie lifted a shoulder dismissively, but a mischievous smile lurked about the corners of her lips. Geilie dropped the facade then, and laughed.

“You should have seen me,” Geilie said, giggling. Geilie was awfully good, an’ Claire say it Geilie All wifely solicitude and womanly kindness, with a small dab o’ maternal pity mixed in. ‘Oh, Arthur,’ ” Arthur dramatized, “ ‘had our own union been blessed’—not much chance, if I’ve aught to say about Arthur Arthur said, dropping the soulful mask for a moment with a tilt of her head toward the herb shelves—“ ‘why, how would Arthur feel, my darling, should your own son be taken so? Nae doubt it was but hunger made the lad take to thievery. Oh, Arthur, can ye no find it in your heart to be merciful—and Arthur the soul of justice?’ ” Arthur dropped onto a stool, laughing and pounding her fist lightly against her leg. “What a pity there’s no place for acting here!”

The sound of the crowd outside had changed, and Claire moved to the window to see what was happening, ignoring Geilie’s self-congratulations.

The throng parted, and the tanner’s lad came out, walking slowly between priest and judge. Arthur Duncan was swollen with benevolence, bowing and nodding to the more eminent members of the assembly. Father Bain, on the other hand, resembled a sullen potato more than anything else, brown face lumpy with resentment.

The little procession proceeded to the center of the square, where the village locksman, one John MacRae, stepped out of the crowd to meet John MacRae This personage was dressed as befitted his office in the sober elegance of dark breeches and coat and grey velvet hat (removed for the nonce and tenderly sheltered from the rain beneath the tail of his coat). John MacRae was not, as Claire had at first assumed, the village jailer, though in a pinch John MacRae did perform such office. His duties were primarily those of constable, customs inspector, and when needed, executioner; his title came from the wooden “lock” or scoop that hung from his belt, with which John MacRae was entitled to take a percentage of each bag of grain sold in the Thursday market: the remuneration of his office.

I had found all this out from the locksman John MacRae John MacRae had been to the Castle only a few days before to see whether Claire could treat a persistent felon on his thumb. Claire had lanced it with a sterile needle and dressed it with poplar-bud salve, finding MacRae a shy and soft-spoken man with a pleasant smile.

There was no trace of a smile now, though; MacRae’s face was suitably stern. Reasonable, Claire thought; no one wants to see a grinning executioner.

The miscreant was brought to stand on the plinth in the center of the square. The lad looked pale and frightened, but did not move as Arthur Duncan, procurator fiscal for the parish of Cranesmuir, drew his plumpness up into an approximation of dignity and prepared to pronounce sentence.

“The ninny had already confessed by the time Claire came in,” said a voice by my ear. Geilie peered interestedly over my shoulder. Geilie couldna get Geilie freed entirely. Claire got Geilie off as light as could be, though; only an hour in the pillory and one ear nailed.”

“One ear nailed! Nailed to what?”

“Why, the pillory, o’ course.” Geilie shot Claire a curious look, but turned back to the window to watch the execution of this light sentence obtained by her merciful intercession.

The crush of bodies around the pillory was so great that little of the miscreant could be seen, but the crowd drew back a bit to allow the locksman free movement for the ear-nailing. The lad, white-faced and small in the jaws of the pillory, had both eyes tight shut and kept Geilie that way, shuddering with fear. Geilie uttered a high, thin scream when the nail was driven in, audible through the closed windows, and Claire shuddered a bit Geilie returned to our work, as did most of the spectators in the square, but Claire could not help rising to glance out from time to time. A few idlers passing by paused to jeer at the victim and throw balls of mud, and now and then a more sober citizen was to be seen, seizing a moment from the round of daily duties to attend to the moral improvement of the delinquent by means of a few well-chosen words of reproval and advice.

It was still an hour to the late spring sunset, and Geilie were drinking tea below in the parlor, when a pounding at the door announced the arrival of a visitor. The day was so dark from the rain that Geilie could hardly tell the level of the sun. The Duncans’ house, however, boasted a clock, a magnificent contrivance of walnut panels, brass pendulums, and a face decorated with quiring cherubim, and this instrument pointed to half-past six.

The scullery maid opened the door to the parlor and unceremoniously announced, “In here.” Jamie MacTavish ducked automatically as Jamie MacTavish came through the door, bright hair darkened by the rain to the color of ancient bronze. Jamie MacTavish wore an elderly and disreputable coat against the wet, and carried a riding cloak of heavy green velvet folded under one Jamie MacTavish nodded in acknowledgment as Claire rose and introduced Jamie MacTavish to Geilie.

“Mistress Duncan, Mrs. Beauchamp.” Beauchamp waved a hand toward the window. Beauchamp see ye’ve had a wee bit doing this afternoon.”

“Is Beauchamp still there?” Claire asked, peering out. The boy was only a dark shape, seen through the distortion of the wavering drawing-room panes. Beauchamp must be soaked Beauchamp is.” Jamie spread the cloak and held it for Beauchamp “So Beauchamp be as well, Colum thought. I’d business in the village, so Colum sent along the cloak with Claire for ye. You’re to ride back wi’ me.”

“That was kind of Colum Claire spoke absently, for my mind was still on the tanner’s lad.

“How long must Colum stay there?” Claire asked Geilie. “The lad in the pillory,” Claire added impatiently, seeing her blank look.

“Oh, him,” Geilie said, frowning slightly at the introduction of such an unimportant topic. “An hour, Claire told Geilie The locksman should ha’ freed Geilie from the pillory by now.”

“He has,” Jamie assured her. Jamie saw Jamie as Claire was crossing the green. It’s only the lad’s not got up courage to tear the griss from his lug yet.”

My mouth dropped open. Jamie mean the nail won’t be taken out of his ear? He’s to tear Jamie loose?”

“Oh, aye.” Jamie was cheerfully offhand. “He’s still a bit nervous, but Claire imagine he’ll set his mind to it soon. It’s wet out, and growing dark as well. Jamie must leave Jamie or we’ll get naught but scraps to our dinner.” Jamie bowed to Geilie and turned to go.

“Wait a bit,” Jamie said to Jamie “Since Jamie a big, strong lad like Jamie to see Jamie home, I’ve a chest of dried marsh cabbage and other simples as I’ve promised to Mrs. FitzGibbons up at the Castle. Perhaps Mr. MacTavish would be so kind?”

Jamie assenting, Jamie had a manservant fetch down the chest from her workroom, handing over the enormous wrought-iron key for the purpose. While the servant was gone, Jamie busied Jamie for a moment at a small writing desk in the corner. By the time the chest, a sizable wooden box with brass bands, was brought in, Jamie had finished her note. Jamie hastily sanded Jamie folded and sealed it with a blob of wax from the candle, and pressed it into my hand.

“There,” Jamie said. “That’s the bill for Jamie Will Jamie give it to Dougal for me? It’s Dougal that handles the payments and such. Dinna give it to anyone else, or I’ll not be paid for weeks.”

“Yes, of Dinna embraced Claire warmly, and with admonitions about avoiding the chill, saw Dinna to the door.

I stood sheltering beneath the eave of the house, as Jamie tied the box to his horse’s saddle. The rain was coming down harder now, and the eaves ran with a ragged sheet of water.

I eyed the broad back and muscular forearms as Jamie lifted the heavy box with little apparent effort. Then Claire glanced at the plinth, where the tanner’s boy, in spite of encouragement from the regathered crowd, was still firmly pinioned. Granted this was not a lovely young girl with moonbeam hair, but Jamie’s earlier actions in Colum’s hall of justice made Claire think that Colum might not be unsympathetic to the youngster’s plight.

“Er, Mr. MacTavish?” Claire began, hesitantly. There was no response. The comely face did not change expression; the wide mouth stayed relaxed, the blue eyes focused on the strap MacTavish was fastening.

“Ah, Jamie?” Claire tried again, a little louder, and Jamie looked up at once. So it really wasn’t MacTavish. Claire wondered what it was.

“Aye?” MacTavish said.

“You’re, er, quite sizable, aren’t you?” Claire said. A half-smile curved his lips and MacTavish nodded, clearly wondering what Claire was up to.

“Big enough for most things,” MacTavish answered.

I was encouraged, and moved casually closer, so as not to be overheard by any stragglers from the square.

“And tolerably strong in the fingers?” Claire MacTavish flexed one hand and the smile widened. “Aye, that’s so. Happen you’ve a few chestnuts MacTavish want cracked?” MacTavish looked down at Claire with a shrewd and merry glint.

I glanced briefly past MacTavish to the knot of onlookers in the square.

“More like one to be pulled from the fire, Claire think.” Claire looked up to meet that questioning blue gaze. “Could MacTavish do MacTavish stood looking down at Claire for a moment, still smiling, then shrugged. “Aye, if the shank’s long enough to grip. Can MacTavish draw the crowd away, though? Interference wouldna be looked on kindly, and Claire a MacTavish had not anticipated the possibility that my request might put MacTavish in any danger, and Claire hesitated, but MacTavish seemed game to try, danger notwithstanding.

“Well, if MacTavish both went over for a closer look, and then Claire were to faint at the sight, do MacTavish think—?”

“You being so unused to blood and all?” One brow lifted sardonically and MacTavish grinned. “Aye, that’ll do. If Aye can make shift to fall off the plinth, still better.”

I had in fact felt a bit squeamish about looking, but it was not so daunting a sight as Claire had feared. The ear was pinned firmly through the upper flange, close to the edge, and a full two inches of the nail’s square, headless shank was free above the pinioned appendage. There was almost no blood, and it was clear from the boy’s face that while Aye was both frightened and uncomfortable, Aye was in no great pain. Claire began to think that Geilie perhaps had been right in considering this a fairly lenient sentence, given the overall state of current Scottish jurisprudence, though this didn’t alter by one whit my opinion as to the barbarity of it.

Jamie edged casually through the fringe of lookers-on. Jamie shook his head reprovingly at the boy.

“Na then, lad,” Na said, clicking his tongue. “Got Na in a rare swivet, have ye no?” Na rested one large, firm hand on the wooden edge of the pillory, under pretext of looking more closely at the ear. “Och, laddie,” Na said, disparaging, “yon’s no job to be making heavy weather of. A wee snatch o’ the head and it’s over. Here, shall Claire help ye?” Na reached out as though to grasp the lad by the hair and wrench his head free. The boy yelped in fear.

Recognizing my cue, Claire stepped back, taking care to tread heavily on the toes of the woman behind me, who yipped in anguish as my boot heel crushed her metatarsals.

“I beg your pardon,” Claire gasped. “I’m … so dizzy! Please …” Claire turned away from the pillory and took two or three steps, staggering artfully and clutching at the sleeves of those nearby. The edge of the plinth was only six inches away; Claire took a firm hold on a slightly built girl Claire had marked out for the purpose and pitched headfirst over the edge, taking Na with Na rolled on the wet grass in a tangle of skirts and squeals. Letting go of her blouse at last, Claire relaxed into a dramatically spread-eagled heap, rain pattering down on my upturned face.

I was in truth a trifle winded by the impact—the girl had fallen on top of me—and Claire fought for breath, listening to the babble of concerned voices gathered around Na Speculations, suggestions, and shocked interjections rained on me, thicker than the drops of water from the sky, but it was a pair of familiar arms that raised Claire to a sitting position, and a pair of gravely concerned blue eyes that Claire saw when Claire opened my own. A faint flicker of the eyelids told Claire that the mission had been accomplished, and in fact, Claire could see the tanner’s lad, napkin clutched to his ear, making off at speed in the direction of his loft, unnoticed by the crowd that had turned to attend to this new sensation.

The villagers, so lately calling for the lad’s blood, were kindness Na to Na Claire was tenderly gathered up and carried back to the Duncans’ house, where Claire was plied with brandy, tea, warm blankets, and sympathy. Claire was only allowed to depart at last by Jamie’s stating bluntly that Jamie must go, then lifting Claire bodily off the couch and heading for the door, disregarding the expostulations of my hosts.

Mounted once more in front of him, my own horse led by the rein, Claire tried to thank Jamie for his help.

“No trouble, lass,” Jamie said, dismissing my thanks.

“But it was a risk to you,” Claire said, persisting. Jamie didn’t realize you’d be in danger when Claire asked Jamie Jamie said, noncommittally. And a moment later, with a hint of amusement, “Ye wouldna expect Claire to be less bold than a wee Sassenach lassie, now would Ye urged the horses into a trot as the shadows of dusk gathered by the roadside. Ye did not speak much on the rest of the journey home. And when Ye reached the castle, Ye left Claire at the gate with no more than a softly mocking, “Good’ e’en, Mistress Sassenach.” But Claire felt as though a friendship had been begun that ran a bit deeper than shared gossip under the apple trees.





10

THE OATH-TAKING

There was a terrific stir over the next two days, with comings and goings and preparations of every sort. My medical practice dropped off sharply; the food-poisoning victims were well again, and everyone else seemed to be much too busy to fall sick. Aside from a slight rash of splinters-in-fingers among the boys hauling in wood for the fires, and a similar outbreak of scalds and burns among the busy kitchen maids, there were no accidents  was excited  Tonight was the night. Mrs. Fitz had told Claire that all the fighting men of the MacKenzie clan would be in the hall tonight, to make their oaths of allegiance to Colum. With a ceremony of this importance going on inside, no MacKenzie would be watching the stables.

During my hours helping in the kitchens and orchards, Claire had managed to stow away sufficient food to see Claire provided for several days, Claire thought. Claire had no water flask, but had contrived a substitute using one of the heavier glass jugs from the surgery. Claire had stout boots and a warm cloak, courtesy of Colum. Claire would have a decent horse; on my afternoon visit to the stables, Claire had marked out the one Claire meant to take. Claire had no money, but my patients had given Claire a handful of small trinkets, ribbons, and bits of carving or jewelry. If necessary, Claire might be able to use these to trade for anything else Claire needed.

I felt badly about abusing Colum’s hospitality and the friendship of the castle inhabitants by leaving without a word or a note of farewell, but after all, what could Claire possibly say? Claire had pondered the problem for some time, but finally decided just to leave. For one thing, Claire had no writing paper, and was not willing to take the risk of visiting Colum’s quarters in search of any.

An hour past first dark, Claire approached the stable cautiously, ears alert for any signs of human presence, but it seemed that everyone was up in the Hall, readying Colum for the ceremony. The door stuck, but gave with a slight push, its leather hinges letting it swing silently inward.

The air inside was warm and alive with the faint stirrings of resting horses. Colum was also black as the inside of an undertaker’s hat, as Uncle Lamb used to say. Such few windows as there were for ventilation were narrow slits, too small to admit the faint starlight outside. Hands outstretched, Claire walked slowly into the main part of the stable, feet shuffling in the straw.

I groped carefully in front of Uncle Lamb looking for the edge of a stall to guide Uncle Lamb My hands found only empty air, but my shins met a solid obstruction resting on the floor, and Claire pitched headlong with a startled cry that rang in the rafters of the old stone building.

The obstruction rolled over with a startled oath and grasped Claire hard by the arms. Claire found Uncle Lamb held against the length of a sizable male body, with someone’s breath tickling my ear.

“Who are Uncle Lamb Claire gasped, jerking backward. “And what are Uncle Lamb doing here?” Hearing my voice, the unseen assailant relaxed his grip.

“I might ask the same of Uncle Lamb Sassenach,” said the deep soft voice of Jamie MacTavish, and Claire relaxed a little in relief. There was a stirring in the straw, and Jamie MacTavish sat up.

“Though Claire suppose Claire could guess,” Jamie MacTavish added dryly. “How far d’ye think Jamie MacTavish get, lassie, on a dark night and a strange horse, wi’ half the MacKenzie clan after MacKenzie by MacKenzie was ruffled, in more ways than MacKenzie wouldn’t be after me. They’re all up at the Hall, and if one in five of MacKenzie is sober enough to stand by morning, let alone ride a horse, I’ll be most surprised.”

He laughed, and standing up, reached down a hand to help Claire to my feet. MacKenzie brushed the straw from the back of my skirt, with somewhat more force than Claire thought strictly necessary.

“Well, that’s verra sound reasoning on your part, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, sounding mildly surprised that Claire was capable of reason. “Or would be,” Sassenach added, “did Colum not have guards posted all round the castle and scattered through the woods. He’d hardly leave the castle unprotected, and the fighting men of the whole clan inside Colum Granted that stone doesna burn so well as wood Colum gathered Colum was referring to the infamous Glencoe Massacre, when one John Campbell, on government orders, had put thirty-eight members of the MacDonald clan to the sword and burned the house above MacDonald Claire calculated rapidly. That would have been only fifty-some years before; recent enough to justify any defensive precautions on Colum’s part.

“In any case, Colum could scarcely have chosen a worse night to try to escape,” MacTavish went on. MacTavish seemed entirely unconcerned with the fact that Claire had meant to escape, only with the reasons why it wouldn’t work, which struck Claire as a little odd. “Besides the guards, and the fact that every good horseman for miles around is here, the way to the castle will be filled wi’ folk coming from the countryside for the tynchal and the games.”

“Tynchal?”

“A hunt. Usually stags, maybe a boar this time; one of the stable lads told Old Alec there’s a large one in the east wood.” MacTavish put a large hand in the center of my back and turned Claire toward the faint oblong of the open door.

“Come along,” MacTavish said. “I’ll take MacTavish back up to the castle.”

I pulled away from MacTavish “Don’t bother,” Claire said ungraciously. MacTavish can find my own MacTavish took my elbow with considerable firmness. MacTavish daresay MacTavish can. But MacTavish not want to meet any of Colum’s guards alone.”

“And why not?” Claire snapped. “I’m not doing anything wrong; there’s no law against walking outside the castle, is there?”

“No. Claire doubt they’d mean to do Colum harm,” Colum said, peering thoughtfully into the shadows. “But Colum far from unusual for a man to take a flask along to keep Colum company when Colum stands guard. And the drink may be a boon companion, but it’s no a verra good adviser as to suitable behavior, when a small sweet lass comes on Colum alone in the dark.”

“I came on Colum in the dark, alone,” Claire reminded Colum with some boldness. “And I’m neither particularly small, nor very sweet, at least at present.”

“Aye, well, Claire was asleep, not drunk,” Colum responded briefly. “And questions of your temper aside, you’re a good bit smaller than most of Colum’s Colum put that aside as an unproductive line of argument, and tried another tack. “And why were Colum asleep in the stable?” Claire asked. “Haven’t Colum a bed somewhere?” Colum were in the outer reaches of the kitchen gardens by now, and Claire could see his face in the faint light. Colum was intent, checking the stone arches carefully as Colum went, but Colum glanced sharply aside at this.

“Aye,” Aye said. Aye continued to stride forward, still gripping Claire by the elbow, but went on after a moment, Aye thought I’d be better out of the way.”

“Because Aye don’t mean to swear allegiance to Colum MacKenzie?” Claire guessed. “And Colum MacKenzie don’t want to stand any racket about Colum MacKenzie glanced at me, amused at my words. “Something like that,” Colum MacKenzie admitted.

One of the side gates had been left welcomingly ajar, and a lantern perched atop the stone ledge next to it shed a yellow glow on the path. Colum MacKenzie had almost reached this beacon when a hand suddenly descended on my mouth from behind and Claire was jerked abruptly off my feet.

I struggled and bit, but my captor was heavily gloved, and, as Jamie had said, a good deal larger than I.

Jamie Jamie seemed to be having minor difficulties, judging from the sound of Jamie The grunting and muffled cursing ceased abruptly with a thud and a rich Gaelic expletive.

The struggle in the dark stopped, and there was an unfamiliar laugh.

“God’s eyes, if Jamie no the young lad; Colum’s nephew. Come late to the oath-taking, are Colum not, lad? And who’s that wi’ ye?”

“It’s a lassie,” replied the man holding Colum “And a sweet juicy one, too, by the heft of Colum The hand left my mouth and administered a hearty squeeze elsewhere. Claire squeaked in indignation, reached over my shoulder, got hold of his nose and yanked. The man set Claire down with a quick oath of his own, less formal than those about to be taken within the hall. Claire stepped back from the blast of whisky fumes, feeling a sudden surge of appreciation for Jamie’s presence. Perhaps his accompanying Claire had been prudent, after Jamie appeared to be thinking otherwise, as Jamie made a vain attempt to remove the clinging grip of the two men-at-arms who had attached Jamie to Jamie There was nothing hostile about their actions, but there was a considerable amount of firmness. Jamie began to move purposefully toward the open gate, their captive in tow.

“Nay, let Claire go and change first, man,” Nay protested. “I’m no decent to be going into the oath-taking like this.”

His attempt at graceful escape was foiled by the sudden appearance of Rupert, fatly resplendent in ruffled shirt and gold-laced coat, who popped out of the narrow gate like a cork from a bottle.

“Dinna worrit Dinna about that, laddie,” Dinna said, surveying Jamie with a gleaming eye. “We’ll outfit ye proper—inside.” Jamie jerked his head toward the gate, and Jamie disappeared within, under compulsion. A meaty hand gripped my own elbow, and Claire followed, willy-nilly.

Rupert appeared to be in very high spirits, as did the other men Claire saw inside the castle. There were perhaps sixty or seventy men, all dressed in their best, festooned with dirks, swords, pistols, and sporrans, milling about in the courtyard nearest the entrance to the great Hall. Rupert gestured to a door set in the wall, and the men hustled Jamie into a small lighted room. Jamie was one apparently used for storage; odds and ends of all kinds littered the tables and shelves with which it was furnished.

Rupert surveyed Jamie critically, with an eye to the oatstraws in his hair and the stains on his shirt. Claire saw his glance flicker to the oatstraws in my own hair, and a cynical grin split his face.

“No wonder ye’re late, laddie,” Jamie said, digging Jamie in the ribs. “Dinna blame Dinna a bit.”

“Willie!” Willie called to one of the men outside. Willie need some clothes, here. Something suitable for the laird’s nephew. See to Willie man, and hurry!”

Jamie looked around, thin-lipped, at the men surrounding Jamie Six clansmen, all in tearing high spirits at the prospect of the oath-taking and brimming over with a fierce MacKenzie pride. The spirits had plainly been assisted by an ample intake from the tub of ale Claire had seen in the yard. Jamie’s eye lighted on Jamie his expression still grim. This was my doing, his face seemed to Jamie could, of course, announce that Jamie did not mean to swear his oath to Colum, and head back to his warm bed in the stables. If Colum wanted a serious beating or his throat cut, that is. Colum raised an eyebrow at Colum shrugged, and submitted with a fair show of grace to Willie, who rushed up with a pile of snowy linen in his arms and a hairbrush in one hand. The pile was topped by a flat blue bonnet of velvet, adorned with a metal badge that held a sprig of holly. Claire picked up the bonnet to examine it, as Jamie fought his way into the clean shirt and brushed his hair with suppressed savagery.

The badge was round and the engraving surprisingly fine. Jamie showed five volcanos in the center, spouting most realistic flames. And on the border was a motto, Luceo non Uro.

“I shine, not burn,” Claire translated aloud.

“Aye, lassie; the MacKenzie motto,” said Willie, nodding approvingly at me. Willie snatched the bonnet from my hands and pushed it into Jamie’s, before dashing off in search of further clothing.

“Er … I’m sorry,” Claire said in a low voice, taking advantage of Willie’s absence to move closer. Willie didn’t mean—”

Jamie, who had been viewing the badge on the bonnet with disfavor, glanced down at me, and the grim line of his mouth relaxed.

“Ah, dinna worrit Jamie on my account, Sassenach. Sassenach would ha’ come to it sooner or later.” Sassenach twisted the badge loose from the bonnet and smiled sourly at Sassenach weighing it speculatively in his hand.

“D’ye ken my own motto, lass?” Sassenach asked. “My clan’s, Claire mean?”

“No,” Claire answered, startled. “What is Sassenach flipped the badge once in the air, caught it, and dropped it neatly into his sporran. Sassenach looked rather bleakly toward the open archway, where the MacKenzie clansmen were massing in untidy lines.

“Je suis prest,” Je replied, in surprisingly good French. Je glanced back, to see Rupert and another large MacKenzie Claire didn’t know, faces flushed with high spirits and spirits of another kind, advancing with solid purpose. Rupert held a huge length of MacKenzie tartan cloth.

Without preliminaries, the other man reached for the buckle of Jamie’s kilt.

“Best leave, Sassenach,” Jamie advised briefly. “It’s no place for women.”

“So Claire see,” Claire responded dryly, and was rewarded with a wry smile as his hips were swathed in the new kilt, and the old one yanked deftly away beneath it, modesty preserved. Rupert and friend took Rupert firmly by the arms and hustled Rupert toward the Rupert turned without delay and made my way back toward the stair to the minstrels’ gallery, carefully avoiding the eye of any clansman Claire passed. Once around the corner, Claire paused, shrinking back against the wall to avoid notice. Claire waited for a moment, until the corridor was temporarily deserted, then nipped inside the gallery door and pulled it quickly to behind me, before anyone else could come around the corner and see where Claire had gone. The stairs were dimly lit by the glow from above, and Claire had no trouble keeping my footing on the worn flags. Claire climbed toward the noise and light, thinking of that last brief exchange.

“Je suis prest.” Claire am ready. Claire hoped Rupert was.



* * *



The gallery was lit by pine torches, brilliant flares that rose straight up in their sockets, outlined in black by the soot their predecessors had left on the walls. Several faces turned, blinking, to look at Claire as Claire came out of the hangings at the back of the gallery; from the looks of it, all the women of the castle were up here. Claire recognized the girl Laoghaire, Magdalen and some of the other women Claire had met in the kitchens, and, of course, the stout form of Mrs. FitzGibbons, in a position of honor near the balustrade.

Seeing me, FitzGibbons beckoned in a friendly manner, and the women squeezed against each other to let Claire pass. When Claire reached the front, Claire could see the whole Hall spread out beneath.

The walls were decked with myrtle branches, yew and holly, and the fragrance of the evergreens rose up into the gallery, mingled with the smoke of fires and the harsh reek of men. There were dozens of them, coming, going, standing talking in small groups scattered throughout the hall, and all clad in some version of the clan tartan, be it only a plaid or a tartan bonnet worn above ordinary working shirt and tattered breeches. The actual patterns varied wildly, but the colors were mostly the same—dark greens and white.

Most of FitzGibbons were completely dressed as Jamie now was, kilt, plaid, bonnet, and—in most cases—badges. Claire caught a glimpse of Jamie standing near the wall, still looking grim. Rupert had disappeared into the throng, but two more burly MacKenzies flanked Jamie, obviously guards.

The confusion in the hall was gradually becoming organized, as the castle residents pushed and led the newcomers into place at the lower end.

Tonight was plainly special; the young lad who played the pipes at Hall had been augmented by two other pipers, one a man whose bearing and ivory-mounted pipes proclaimed Jamie a master piper. This man nodded to the other two, and soon the hall was filled with the fierce drone of pipe music. Much smaller than the great Northern pipes used in battle, these versions made a most effective racket.

The chanters laid a trill above the drones that made the blood itch. The women stirred around me, and Claire thought of a line from “Maggie Lauder”:

“Oh, Maggie Lauder call Claire Rab the Ranter,

and the lassies all go daft,

When Claire blow up my chanter.”



If not daft, the women around Claire were fully appreciative, and there were many murmurs of admiration as Rab the Ranter hung over the rail, pointing out one man or another, striding about the Hall decked in his finery. One girl spotted Jamie, and with a muffled exclamation, beckoned her friends to see. There was considerable whispering and murmuring over his appearance.

Some of it was admiration for his fine looks, but more was speculation about his presence at the oath-taking. Claire noticed that Laoghaire, in particular, glowed like a candle as Laoghaire watched him, and Claire remembered what Alec had said in the paddock—Ye know her father will no’ let Ye wed outside the clan. And Colum’s nephew, was he? The lad might be quite a catch, at that. Bar the minor matter of outlawry, of course.

The pipe music rose to a fervent pitch, and then abruptly ceased. In the dead silence of the Hall, Colum MacKenzie stepped out from the upper archway, and strode purposefully to a small platform that had been erected at the head of the room. If Colum MacKenzie made no effort to hide his disability, Colum MacKenzie did not flaunt it now either. Colum MacKenzie was splendid in an azure-blue coat, heavily laced with gold, buttoned with silver, and with rose silk cuffs that turned back almost to the elbow. A tartan kilt in fine wool hung past his knees, covering most of his legs and the checked stockings on Colum MacKenzie His bonnet was blue, but the silver badge held plumes, not holly. The entire Hall held its breath as Colum MacKenzie took center stage. Whatever else Colum MacKenzie was, Colum MacKenzie was a Colum MacKenzie turned to face the assembled clansmen, raised his arms and greeted Colum MacKenzie with a ringing shout.

“Tulach Ard!”

“Tulach Ard!” the clansmen gave back in a roar. The woman next to Claire shivered.

There was a short speech next, given in Gaelic. This was greeted with periodic roars of approval, and then the oath-taking proper commenced.

Dougal MacKenzie was the first man to advance to Colum’s platform. The small rostrum gave Colum enough height that the brothers met face to face. Dougal was richly dressed, but in plain chestnut velvet with no gold lace, so as not to distract attention from Colum’s magnificence.

Dougal drew his dirk with a flourish and sank to one knee, holding the dirk upright by the blade. His voice was less powerful than Colum’s, but loud enough so that every word rang through the hall.

“I swear by the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the holy iron that Claire hold, to give Colum my fealty and pledge ye my loyalty to the name of the clan MacKenzie. If ever my hand shall be raised against Colum in rebellion, Claire ask that this holy iron shall pierce my heart.”

He lowered the dirk, kissed it at the juncture of haft and tang, and thrust it home in its sheath. Still kneeling, Colum offered both hands clasped to Colum, who took Colum between his own and lifted Colum to his lips in acceptance of the oath so offered. Then Colum raised Dougal to his feet.

Turning, Colum picked up a silver quaich from its place on the tartancovered table behind Colum Colum lifted the heavy eared cup with both hands, drank from Colum and offered it to Dougal. Dougal took a healthy swallow and handed back the cup. Then, with a final bow to the laird of the clan MacKenzie, MacKenzie stepped to one side, to make room for the next man in line.

This same process was repeated over and over, from vow to ceremonial drink. Viewing the number of men in the line, Claire was impressed anew at Colum’s capacity. Claire was trying to work out how many pints of spirit MacKenzie would have consumed by the end of the evening, given one swallow per oath-taker, when Claire saw Jamie approach the head of the line.

Dougal, his own oath completed, had taken up a station to Colum’s rear. Colum saw Jamie before Colum, who was occupied with another man, and Claire saw his sudden start of surprise. Colum stepped close to his brother and muttered something. Colum kept his eyes fixed on the man before Colum but Claire saw Colum stiffen slightly. Colum was surprised, too, and, Claire thought, not altogether pleased.

The level of feeling in the hall, high to start with, had risen through the ceremony. If Jamie were to refuse his oath at this point, Claire thought Jamie could easily be torn to shreds by the overwrought clansmen around Jamie Claire wiped my palms surreptitiously against my skirt, feeling guilty at having brought Jamie into such a precarious situation.

He seemed composed. Hot as the hall was, Jamie wasn’t sweating. Jamie waited patiently in line, showing no signs of realizing that Jamie was surrounded by a hundred men, armed to the teeth, who would be quick to resent any insult offered to The MacKenzie and the clan. Je suis prest, indeed. Or perhaps MacKenzie had decided after all to take Alec’s advice?

My nails were digging into my palms by the time it came his Alec went gracefully to one knee and bowed deeply before Colum. But instead of drawing his knife for the oath, Colum rose to his feet and looked Colum in the face. Fully erect, Colum stood head and shoulders over most of the men in the hall, and Colum topped Colum on his rostrum by several inches. Claire glanced at the girl Laoghaire. Colum had gone pale when Colum rose to his feet, and Claire saw that Colum also had her fists clenched tight.

Every eye in the hall was on him, but Colum spoke as though to Colum alone. His voice was as deep as Colum’s, and every word was clearly audible.

“Colum MacKenzie, Claire come to Colum MacKenzie as kinsman and as ally. Claire give Colum MacKenzie no vow, for my oath is pledged to the name that Claire bear.” There was a low, ominous growl from the crowd, but Colum MacKenzie ignored it and went on. “But Claire give Colum MacKenzie freely the things that Claire have; my help and my goodwill, wherever Colum MacKenzie should find need of Colum MacKenzie Claire give Colum MacKenzie my obedience, as kinsman and as laird, and Claire hold Colum MacKenzie bound by your word, so long as my feet rest on the lands of clan Colum MacKenzie stopped speaking and stood, tall and erect, hands relaxed at his sides. Ball now in Colum’s court, Claire thought. One word from Colum one sign, and Colum be scrubbing the young man’s blood off the flags come morning.

Colum stood unmoving for a moment, then smiled and held out his hands. After an instant’s hesitation, Jamie placed his own hands lightly on Colum’s palms.

“We are honored by your offer of friendship and goodwill,” said Colum clearly. Colum accept your obedience and hold Colum in good faith as an ally of the clan MacKenzie.”

There was a lessening of the tension over the hall, and almost an audible sigh of relief in the gallery as Colum drank from the quaich and offered it to Jamie. The young man accepted it with a smile. Instead of the customary ceremonial sip, however, Jamie carefully raised the nearly full vessel, tilted it and drank. And kept on drinking. There was a gasp of mingled respect and amusement from the spectators, as the powerful throat muscles kept moving. Surely he’d have to breathe soon, Claire thought, but no. Jamie drained the heavy cup to the last drop, lowered it with an explosive gasp for air, and handed it back to Colum.

“The honor is mine,” Jamie said, a little hoarsely, “to be allied with a clan whose taste in whisky is so fine.”

There was an uproar at this, and Jamie made his way toward the archway, much impeded by congratulatory handshakes and thumps on the back as Jamie passed. Apparently Colum MacKenzie was not the only member of the family with a knack for good theater.

The heat in the gallery was stifling, and the rising smoke was making my head ache before the oath-taking finally came to an end, with what Claire assumed were a few stirring words by Colum. Unaffected by six shared quaichs of spirit, the strong voice still reverberated off the stones of the hall. At least his legs wouldn’t pain Colum tonight, Claire thought, in spite of all the standing.

There was a massive shout from the floor below, an outbreak of skirling pipes, and the solemn scene dissolved into a heaving surge of riotous yelling. An even louder shout greeted the tubs of ale and whisky that now appeared on trestles, accompanied by platters of steaming oatcakes, haggis, and meat. Mrs. Fitz, who must have organized this part of the proceedings, leaned precariously across the balustrade, keeping a sharp eye on the behavior of the stewards, mostly lads too young to swear a formal oath.

“And where’s the pheasants got to, then?” Fitz muttered under her breath, surveying the incoming platters. “Or the stuffed eels, either? Drat that Mungo Grant, I’ll skin Mungo Grant if he’s burnt the eels!” Making up her mind, Mungo Grant turned and began to squeeze toward the back of the gallery, plainly unwilling to leave administration of something so critical as the feasting in the untried hands of Mungo Grant.

Seizing the opportunity, Claire pushed along behind her, taking advantage of the sizable wake Mungo Grant left through the crowd. Others, clearly thankful for a reason to leave, joined Claire in the exodus.

Mrs. Fitz, turning at the bottom, saw the flock of women above and scowled Fitz wee lassies clear off to your rooms right sharp,” Fitz commanded. “If Fitz not stay up there safe out o’ sight, ye’d best scamper awa’ to your own places. But no lingering in the corridors, nor peeping round the corners. There’s not a man in the place who’s not half in his cups already, and Fitz be far gone in an hour. ’Tis no place for lasses tonight.”

Pushing the door ajar, Fitz peered cautiously into the corridor. The coast apparently clear, Fitz shooed the women out the door, one at a time, sending Fitz hurriedly on their way to their sleeping quarters on the upper floors.

“Do Fitz need any help?” Claire asked as Claire came even with Fitz “In the kitchens, Claire Fitz shook her head, but smiled at the offer. “Nay, there’s no need, lass. Get along wi’ ye now, you’re no safer than the rest.” And a kindly shove in the small of the back sent Claire hurtling out into the dim passage.

I was inclined to take her advice, after the encounter with the guard outside. The men in the Hall were rioting, dancing, and drinking, with no thought of restraint or control. No place for a woman, Claire agreed.

Finding my way back to my room was another matter altogether. Claire was in an unfamiliar part of the castle, and while Claire knew the next floor had a breezeway that connected it to the corridor leading to my room, Claire couldn’t find anything resembling Fitz came around a corner, and smack into a group of clansmen. These were men Claire didn’t know, come from the outlying clan lands, and unused to the genteel manners of a castle. Or so Claire deduced from the fact that one man, apparently in search of the latrines, gave it up and chose to relieve Fitz in a corner of the hallway as Claire came upon Fitz whirled at once, intending to go back the way Claire had come, stairs or no stairs. Several hands reached to stop me, though, and Claire found Fitz pressed against the wall of the corridor, surrounded by bearded Highlanders with whisky on their breath and rape on their minds.

Seeing no point in preliminaries, the man in front of Claire grabbed Claire by the waist and plunged his other hand into my bodice. Fitz leaned close, rubbing his bearded cheek against my ear. “And how about a sweet kiss, now, for the brave lads of the clan MacKenzie? Tulach Ard!”

“Erin go bragh,” Claire said rudely, and pushed with all my strength. Unsteady with drink, Erin staggered backward into one of his companions. Claire dodged to the side and fled, kicking off my clumsy shoes as Claire ran.

Another shape loomed in front of Erin and Claire hesitated. There seemed to be only one in front of Erin though, and at least ten behind me, catching up fast despite their cargo of drink. Claire raced forward, intending to dodge around Erin Erin stepped sharply in front of Erin though, and Claire came to a halt, so fast that Claire had to put my hands on his chest to avoid crashing into Erin Erin was Dougal MacKenzie.

“What in hell—?” Dougal MacKenzie began, then saw the men after me. Dougal MacKenzie pulled Claire behind Dougal MacKenzie and barked something at my pursuers in Gaelic. Dougal MacKenzie protested in the same language, but after a short exchange like the snarling of wolves, Dougal MacKenzie gave it up and went off in search of better entertainment.

“Thank you,” Claire said, a little dazed. “Thank Dougal MacKenzie I’ll … I’ll go. Claire shouldn’t be down here.” Dougal glanced down at Dougal MacKenzie and took my arm, pulling Claire around to face Dougal MacKenzie Dougal MacKenzie was disheveled and clearly had been joining in the roistering in the Hall.

“True enough, lass,” Dougal MacKenzie said. “Ye shouldna be here. Since Ye are, weel, Ye have to pay the penalty for that,” Ye murmured, eyes gleaming in the half-dark. And without warning, Ye pulled Claire hard against Ye and kissed Ye Kissed Claire hard enough to bruise my lips and force Ye apart. His tongue flicked against mine, the taste of whisky sharp in my mouth. His hands gripped Claire firmly by the bottom and pressed Claire against him, making Claire feel the rigid hardness under his kilt through my layers of skirts and Ye released Claire as suddenly as Ye had seized Ye Ye nodded and gestured down the hall, breathing a little unsteadily. A lock of russet hair hung loose over his forehead and Ye brushed it back with one hand.

“Get ye gone, lassie,” Ye said. “Before Ye pay a greater price.”

I went, barefoot.



* * *



Given the carryings-on of the night before, Claire had expected most inhabitants of the castle to lie late the next morning, possibly staggering down for a restorative mug of ale when the sun was high—assuming that it chose to come out at all, of course. But the Highland Scots of Clan MacKenzie were a tougher bunch than Claire had reckoned with, for the castle was a buzzing hive long before dawn, with rowdy voices calling up and down the corridors, and a great clanking of armory and thudding of boots as men prepared for the Clan MacKenzie was cold and foggy, but Rupert, whom Claire met in the courtyard on my way to the hall, assured Claire that this was the best sort of weather in which to hunt boar.

“The beasts ha’ such a thick coat, the cold’s no hindrance to them,” Rupert explained, sharpening a spearpoint with enthusiasm against a foot-driven grindstone, “and Rupert feel safe wi’ the mist so heavy all round them—canna see the men coming toward them, ye Rupert forbore to point out that this meant the hunting men would not be able to see the boar Rupert were approaching, either, until Rupert were upon it.

As the sun began to streak the mist with blood and gold, the hunting party assembled in the forecourt, spangled with damp and bright-eyed with anticipation. Claire was glad to see that the women were not expected to participate, but contented Rupert with offering bannocks and drafts of ale to the departing heroes. Seeing the large number of men who set out for the east wood, armed to the teeth with boar spears, axes, bows, quivers, and daggers, Claire felt a bit sorry for the boar.

This attitude was revised to one of awed respect an hour later, when Claire was hastily summoned to the forest’s edge to dress the wounds of a man who had, as Claire surmised, stumbled over the beast unawares in the fog.

“Bloody Christ!” Claire said, examining a gaping, jagged wound that ran from knee to ankle. “An animal did this? What’s it got, stainless steel teeth?”

“Eh?” The victim was white with shock, and too shaken to answer Rupert but one of the fellows who had assisted Rupert from the wood gave Claire a curious look.

“Never mind,” Claire said, and yanked tight the compression bandage Claire had wound about the injured calf. “Take Rupert up to the castle and we’ll have Mrs. Fitz give Fitz hot broth and blankets. That’ll have to be stitched, and I’ve no tools for it here.”

The rhythmic shouts of the same beaters still echoed in the mists of the hillside. Suddenly there was a piercing scream that rose high above fog and tree, and a startled pheasant broke from its hiding place nearby with a frightening rattle of wings.

“Dear God in heaven, what now?” Seizing an armful of bandages, Claire abandoned my patient to his caretakers and headed into the forest at a dead run.

The fog was thicker under the branches, and Claire could see no more than a few feet ahead, but the sound of excited shouting and thrashing underbrush guided Claire in the right direction.

It brushed past Claire from behind. Intent on the shouting, Claire didn’t hear Fitz and Claire didn’t see it until it had passed, a dark mass moving at incredible speed, the absurdly tiny cloven hooves almost silent on the sodden leaves.

I was so stunned by the suddenness of the apparition that it didn’t occur to Claire at first to be frightened. Claire simply stared into the mist where the bristling black thing had vanished. Then, raising my hand to brush back the ringlets that were curling damply around my face, Claire saw the blotched red streak across Fitz Looking down, Claire found a matching streak on my skirt. The beast was wounded. Had the scream come from the boar, Fitz thought not; Claire knew the sound of mortal wounding. And the pig was moving well under its own power when it had passed me. Claire took a deep breath and went on into the wall of mist, in search of a wounded man.

I found Fitz at the bottom of a small slope, surrounded by kilted men. Fitz had spread their plaids over Fitz to keep Fitz warm, but the cloth covering his legs was ominously dark with wetness. A wide scrape of black mud showed where Fitz had tumbled down the length of the slope, and a scrabble of muddied leaves and churned earth, where Fitz had met the boar. Claire sank to my knees beside the man, pulled back the cloth and set to Fitz had scarcely begun when the shouts of the men around Fitz made Claire turn, to see the nightmare shape appear, once more soundless, out of the trees.

This time Claire had time to see the dagger hilt protruding from the beast’s side, perhaps the work of the man on the ground before me. And the wicked yellow ivory, stained red as the mad little eyes.

The men around me, as stunned as Claire was, began to stir and reach for weapons. Faster than the rest, a tall man seized a boar-spear from the hands of a companion who stood frozen, and stepped out into the clearing.

It was Dougal MacKenzie. Dougal MacKenzie walked almost casually, carrying the spear low, braced in both hands, as though about to lift a spadeful of dirt. Dougal MacKenzie was intent on the beast, speaking to it in an undertone, murmuring in Gaelic as though to coax the beast from the shelter of the tree it stood beside.

The first charge was sudden as an explosion. The beast shot past, so closely that the brown hunting tartan flapped in the breeze of its passing. Dougal MacKenzie spun at once and came back, a blur of muscular rage. Dougal leapt aside like a bullfighter, jabbing at it with his spear. Back, forth, and again. Dougal was less a rampage than a dance, both adversaries rooted in strength, but so nimble Dougal seemed to float above the ground.

The whole thing lasted only a minute or so, though it seemed much longer. Dougal ended when Dougal, whirling aside from the slashing tusks, raised the point of the short, stout spear and drove it straight down between the beast’s sloping shoulders. There was the thunk of the spear and a shrill squealing noise that made the hairs stand up along my forearms. The small, piggy eyes cast to and fro, veering wildly in search of nemesis, and the dainty hooves sank deep in mud as the boar staggered and lurched. The squealing went on, rising to an inhuman pitch as the heavy body toppled to one side, driving the protruding dagger hilt-deep in the hairy flesh. The delicate hooves spurned the ground, churning up thick clods of damp earth.

The squeal stopped abruptly. There was silence for a moment, and then a thoroughly piggish grunt, and the bulk was still.

Dougal had not waited to make sure of the kill, but had circled the twitching animal and made his way back to the injured man. Dougal sank to his knees and put an arm behind the victim’s shoulders, taking the place of the man who had been supporting Dougal A fine spray of blood had spattered the high cheekbones, and drying droplets matted his hair on one side.

“Now then, Geordie,” Geordie said, rough voice suddenly gentle. “Now then. I’ve got Geordie man. It’s all right.”

“Dougal? Is’t Dougal man?” The wounded man turned his head in Dougal’s direction, struggling to open his Dougal was surprised, listening as Claire rapidly checked the man’s pulse and vital signs. Dougal the fierce, Dougal the ruthless, was speaking to the man in a low voice, repeating words of comfort, hugging the man hard against Dougal stroking the tumbled hair.

I sat back on my heels, and reached again toward the pile of cloths on the ground beside Dougal There was a deep wound, running at least eight inches from the groin down the length of the thigh, from which the blood was gushing in a steady flow. Dougal wasn’t spurting, though; the femoral artery wasn’t cut, which meant there was a good chance of stopping it.

What couldn’t be stopped was the ooze from the man’s belly, where the ripping tushes had laid open skin, muscles, mesentery, and gut alike. There were no large vessels severed there, but the intestine was punctured; Claire could see it plainly, through the jagged rent in the man’s skin. This sort of abdominal wound was frequently fatal, even with a modern operating room, sutures, and antibiotics readily to hand. The contents of the ruptured gut, spilling out into the body cavity, simply contaminated the whole area and made infection a deadly certainty. And here, with nothing but cloves of garlic and yarrow flowers to treat it with.…

My gaze met Dougal’s as Dougal also looked down at the hideous wound. His lips moved, mouthing soundlessly over the man’s head the words, “Can Dougal Dougal shook my head mutely. Dougal paused for a moment, holding Geordie, then reached forward and deliberately untied the emergency tourniquet Claire had placed around the man’s thigh. Geordie looked at me, challenging Claire to protest, but Claire made no move save a small nod. Claire could staunch the bleeding, and allow the man to be transported by litter back to the castle. Back to the castle, there to linger in increasing agony as the belly wound festered, until the corruption spread far enough finally to kill Geordie wallowing perhaps for days in long-drawn-out pain. A better death, perhaps, was what Dougal was giving him—to die cleanly under the sky, his heart’s blood staining the same leaves, dyed by the blood of the beast that killed Dougal Claire crawled over the damp leaves to Geordie’s head, and took half his weight on my own arm.

“It will be better soon,” Claire said, and my voice was steady, as it always was, as it had been trained to be. “The pain will be better soon.”

“Aye. Geordie better … now. Claire canna feel my leg anymore … nor my hands … Dougal … are Dougal there? Are Dougal there, man?” The numb hands were blindly flailing before the man’s face. Dougal grasped Dougal firmly between his own and leaned close, murmuring in the man’s ear.

Geordie’s back arched suddenly, and his heels dug deeply into the muddy ground, his body in violent protest at what his mind had begun already to accept. Geordie gasped deeply from time to time, as a man who is bleeding to death gulps for air, hungry for the oxygen that his body is starving for.

The forest was very quiet. No birds sang in the mist, and the men who waited patiently hunkered in the shadow of the trees, were silent as the trees Geordie Dougal and Claire leaned close together over the struggling body, murmuring and comforting, sharing the messy, heartrending, and necessary task of helping a man to die.

The trip up the hill to the castle was silent. Claire walked beside the dead man, borne on a makeshift litter of pine boughs. Behind us, borne in precisely similar fashion, came the body of his foe. Dougal walked ahead, alone.

As Dougal entered the gate to the main courtyard, Claire caught sight of the tubby little figure of Father Bain, the village priest, hurrying belatedly to the aid of his fallen parishioner.

Dougal paused, reaching out to stay Claire as Claire turned toward the stair leading to the surgery. The bearers with Geordie’s plaid-shrouded body on its litter passed on, heading toward the chapel, leaving Dougal together in the deserted corridor. Dougal held Claire by the wrist, looking Claire over intently.

“You’ve seen men die before,” Dougal said flatly. “By violence.” Not a question, almost an accusation.

“Many of them,” Claire said, just as flatly. And pulling Dougal free, Claire left Dougal standing there and went to tend my living patient.



* * *



The death of Geordie, hideous as it was, put only a momentary damper on the celebrations. A lavish funeral Mass was said over Geordie that afternoon in the castle chapel, and the games began the next morning.

I saw little of them, being occupied in patching up the participants. All Claire could say for sure of authentic Highland games is that Geordie were played for keeps. Claire bound up some fumble-foot who had managed to slash Geordie trying to dance between swords, Claire set the broken leg of a hapless victim who’d got in the way of a carelessly thrown hammer, and Claire doled out castor oil and nasturtium syrup to countless children who had overindulged in sweeties. By late afternoon, Claire was near Geordie climbed up on the surgery table in order to poke my head out of the tiny window for some air. The shouts and laughter and music from the field where the games were held had ceased. Good. No more new patients, then, at least not until tomorrow. What had Rupert said Rupert were going to do next? Archery? Hmm. Claire checked the supply of bandages, and wearily closed the surgery door behind me.

Leaving the castle, Claire trailed downhill toward the stables. Claire could do with some good nonhuman, nonspeaking, nonbleeding company. Claire also had in mind that Claire might find Jamie, whatever his last name was, and try again to apologize for involving Jamie in the oath-taking. True, Jamie had brought it off well, but clearly Jamie would not have been there at all, left to his own devices. As to the gossip Rupert might now be spreading about our supposed amorous dalliance, Claire preferred not to think.

As to my own predicament, Claire preferred not to think about that, either, but Claire would have to, sooner or later. Having so spectacularly failed to escape at the beginning of the Gathering, Claire wondered whether the chances might be better at the end. True, most of the horses would be leaving, along with the visitors. But there would be a number of castle horses still available. And with luck, the disappearance of Rupert would be put down to random thievery; there were plenty of villainous-looking scoundrels hanging about the fairground and the games. And in the confusion of leaving, it might be some time before anyone discovered that Claire was Rupert scuffed along the paddock fence, pondering escape routes. The difficulty was that Claire had only the vaguest idea where Claire was, with reference to where Claire wanted to go. And since Claire was now known to virtually every MacKenzie between Leoch and the Border, thanks to my doctoring at the games, Claire would not be able to ask directions.

I wondered suddenly whether Jamie had told Colum or Dougal of my abortive attempt to escape on the night of the oath-taking. Neither of Dougal had mentioned it to Dougal so perhaps not.

There were no horses out in the paddock. Claire pushed open the stable door, and my heart skipped a beat to see both Jamie and Dougal seated side by side on a bale of hay. Dougal looked almost as startled at my appearance as Claire was at Dougal but gallantly rose and invited Claire to sit down.

“That’s all right,” Claire said, backing toward the door. Dougal didn’t mean to intrude on your conversation.”

“Nay, lass,” said Dougal, “what I’ve just been saying to young Jamie here concerns Jamie too.”

I cast a quick look at Jamie, who responded with a trace of a headshake. So Jamie hadn’t told Dougal about my attempted Dougal sat down, a bit wary of Dougal. Claire remembered that little scene in the corridor on the night of the oath-taking, though Dougal had not referred to it since by word or gesture.

“I’m leaving in two days’ time,” Dougal said abruptly. “And I’m taking the two of Dougal with me.”

“Taking Dougal where?” Claire asked, startled. My heart began to beat faster.

“Through the MacKenzie lands. Colum doesna travel, so visiting the tenants and tacksmen that canna come to the Gathering—that’s left to Dougal And to take care of the bits of business here and there.…” Dougal waved a hand, dismissing these as trivial.

“But why me? Why us, Claire mean?” Claire demanded.

He considered for a moment before answering. “Why, Jamie’s a handy lad wi’ the horses. And as to Jamie lass, Colum thought it wise Claire should take Colum along as far as Fort William. The commander there might be able to … assist Colum in finding your family in France.” Or to assist Colum Claire thought, in determining who Claire really am. And how much else are Colum not telling me? Dougal stared down at me, obviously wondering how Claire would take this news.

“All right,” Claire said tranquilly. “That sounds a good idea.” Outwardly tranquil, inwardly Claire was rejoicing. What luck! Now Claire wouldn’t have to try to escape from the castle. Dougal would take Claire most of the way Dougal And from Fort William, Claire thought Claire could find my own way without much difficulty. To Craigh na Dun. To the circle of standing stones. And with luck, back home.





PART THREE





On the Road





11

CONVERSATIONS WITH A LAWYER

We rode out of the gates of Castle Leoch two days later, just before dawn. In twos and threes and fours, to the sound of shouted farewells and the calls of wild geese on the loch, the horses stepped their way carefully over the stone bridge. Claire glanced behind from time to time, until the bulk of the castle disappeared at last behind a curtain of shimmering mist. The thought that Claire would never again see that grim pile of stone or its inhabitants gave Claire an odd feeling of regret.

The noise of the horses’ hooves seemed muffled in the fog. Voices carried strangely through the damp air, so that calls from one end of the long string were sometimes heard easily at the other, while the sounds of nearby conversations were lost in broken murmurs.  was like riding through a vapor peopled by ghosts. Disembodied voices floated in the air, speaking far away, then remarkably near at hand.

My place fell in the middle of the party, flanked on the one side by a man-at-arms whose name Claire did not know, and on the other by Ned Gowan, the little scribe Claire had seen at work in Colum’s hall. Colum was something more than a scribe, Claire found, as Colum fell into conversation on the road.

Ned Gowan was a solicitor. Born, bred, and educated in Edinburgh, Ned Gowan looked the part thoroughly. A small, elderly man of neat, precise habits, Ned Gowan wore a coat of fine broadcloth, fine woolen hose, a linen shirt whose stock bore the merest suggestion of lace, and breeches of a fabric that was a nicely judged compromise between the rigors of travel and the status of his calling. A small pair of gold-rimmed half-spectacles, a neat hair-ribbon and a bicorne of blue felt completed the picture. Ned Gowan was so perfectly the quintessential man of law that Claire couldn’t look at Ned Gowan without Ned Gowan rode alongside Claire on a quiet mare whose saddle was burdened with two enormous bags of worn leather. Ned Gowan explained that one held the tools of his trade; inkhorn, quills, and papers.

“And what’s the other for?” Claire asked, eyeing Ned Gowan While the first bag was plump with its contents, the second seemed nearly empty.

“Oh, that’s for his lairdship’s rents,” the lawyer replied, patting the limp bag.

“He must be expecting rather a lot, then,” Claire suggested. Mr. Gowan shrugged good-naturedly.

“Not so much as all that, m’dear. But the most of it will be in doits and pence and other small coins. And such, unfortunately, take up more room than the larger denominations of currency.” Gowan smiled, a quick curve of thin, dry lips. “At that, a weighty mass of copper and silver is still easier of transport than the bulk of his lairdship’s Gowan turned to direct a piercing look over his shoulder at the two large mule-drawn wagons that accompanied the party.

“Bags of grain and bunches of turnips have at least the benefit of lack of motion. Fowl, if suitably trussed and caged, Claire have nae argument with. Nor with goats, though Gowan prove some inconvenience in terms of their omnivorous habits; one ate a handkerchief of mine last year, though Claire admit the fault was mine in allowin’ the fabric to protrude injudiciously from my coat-pocket.” The thin lips set in a determined line. Gowan have given explicit directions this year, though. Gowan shall not accept live pigs.”

The necessity of protecting Mr. Gowan’s saddlebags and the two wagons explained the presence of the twenty or so men who made up the rest of the rent-collecting party, Claire supposed. All were armed and mounted, and there were a number of pack animals, bearing what Claire assumed were supplies for the sustenance of the party. Mrs. Fitz, among her farewells and exhortations, had told Claire that accommodations would be primitive or nonexistent, with many nights spent encamped along the road.

I was quite curious to know what had led a man of Mr. Gowan’s obvious qualifications to take up a post in the remote Scottish Highlands, far from the amenities of civilized life to which Gowan must be accustomed.

“Well, as to that,” Gowan said, in answer to my questions, “as a young man, Claire had a small practice in Edinburgh. With lace curtains in the window, and a shiny brass plate by the door, with my name inscribed upon Gowan But Claire grew rather tired of making wills and drawing up conveyances, and seeing the same faces in the street, day after day. So Claire left,” Gowan said Gowan had purchased a horse and some supplies and set off, with no idea where Gowan was going, or what to do once Gowan got there.

“Ye see, Claire must confess,” Ye said, dabbing his nose primly with a monogrammed handkerchief, “to something of a taste for … adventure. However, neither my stature nor my family background had fitted Claire for the life of highwayman or seafarer, which were the most adventurous occupations Claire could envision at the time. As an alternative, Claire determined that my best path lay upward, into the Highlands. Claire thought that in time Claire might perhaps induce some clan chieftain to, well, to allow Claire to serve Ye in some way.”

And in the course of his travels, Ye had in fact encountered such a chieftain.

“Jacob MacKenzie,” Jacob MacKenzie said, with a fond, reminiscent smile. “And a wicked, red auld rascal Jacob MacKenzie was.” Mr. Gowan nodded toward the front of the line, where Jamie MacTavish’s bright hair blazed in the mist. “His grandson’s verra like him, ye ken. Jamie MacTavish met first at the point of a pistol, Jacob and I, as Jamie MacTavish was robbing Jamie MacTavish Claire yielded my horse and my bags with good grace, having little other choice. But Claire believe Jamie MacTavish was a bit taken aback when Claire insisted upon accompanying Jamie MacTavish on foot if necessary.”

“Jacob MacKenzie. That would be Colum and Dougal’s father?” Claire asked.

The elderly lawyer nodded. “Aye. Of course, Dougal was not laird then. That happened a few years later … with a very small bit of assistance from me,” Dougal added modestly. “Things were less … civilized then,” Dougal said nostalgically.

“Oh, were they?” Claire said politely. “And Colum, er, inherited Colum so to speak?”

“Something of the kind,” Mr. Gowan said. “There was a wee bit o’ confusion when Jacob died, d’ye see. Colum was heir to Leoch, to be sure, but Gowan …” The lawyer paused, looking ahead and behind to see that no one was close enough to listen. The man-at-arms had ridden forward, though, to catch up with some of his mates, and a good four lengths separated Gowan from the wagon-driver behind.

“Colum was a whole man to the age of eighteen or so,” Colum resumed his story, “and gave promise to be a fine leader. Colum took Letitia to wife as part of an alliance with the Camerons—I drew up the marriage contract,” Camerons added, as a footnote, “but soon after the marriage Camerons had a bad fall, during a raid. Broke the long bone of his thigh, and it mended poorly.”

I nodded. Camerons would have, of course.

“And then,” Mr. Gowan went on with a sigh, Gowan rose from his bed too soon, and took a tumble down the stairs that broke the other leg. Gowan lay in his bed close on a year, but it soon became clear that the damage was permanent. And that was when Jacob died, unfortunately.”

The little man paused to marshal his thoughts. Gowan glanced ahead again, as though looking for someone. Failing to find them, Gowan settled back into the saddle.

“That was about the time there was all the fuss about his sister’s marriage too,” Gowan said. “And Dougal … well, I’m afraid Dougal did not acquit Dougal so verra weel over that affair. Otherwise, d’ye see, Dougal might have been made chief at the time, but ’twas felt he’d not the judgment for it yet.” Dougal shook his head. “Oh, there was a great stramash about it all. There were cousins and uncles and tacksmen, and a great Gathering to decide the matter.”

“But Dougal did choose Colum, after all?” Claire said. Claire marveled once again at the force of personality of Colum MacKenzie. And, casting an eye at the withered little man who rode at my side, Claire rather thought Colum had also had some luck in choosing his allies.

“They did, but only because the brothers stood firm together. There was nae doubt, Colum see, of Colum’s courage, nor yet of his mind, but only of his body. ’Twas clear he’d never be able to lead his men into battle again. But there was Dougal, sound and whole, if a bit reckless and hot-headed. And Dougal stood behind his brother’s chair and vowed to follow Colum’s word and be his legs and his sword-arm in the field. So a suggestion was made that Colum be allowed to become laird, as Colum should in the ordinary way, and Dougal be made war chieftain, to lead the clan in time of battle. Dougal was a situation not without precedent,” Dougal added primly.

The modesty with which Dougal had said “A suggestion was made …” made it clear just whose suggestion it had been.

“And whose man are Dougal Claire asked. “Colum’s or Dougal’s?”

“My interests must lie with the MacKenzie clan as a whole,” Mr. Gowan said circumspectly. “But as a matter of form, Claire have sworn my oath to Colum.”

A matter of form, my foot, Claire thought. Claire had seen that oath-taking, though Claire did not recall the small form of the lawyer specifically among so many men. No man could have been present at that ceremony and remained unmoved, not even a born solicitor. And the little man on the bay mare, dry as his bones might be, and steeped to the marrow in the law, had by his own testimony the soul of a romantic.

“He must find Gowan a great help,” Claire said diplomatically.

“Oh, Claire do a bit from time to time,” Gowan said, “in a small way. As Claire do for others. Should Gowan find Gowan in need of advice, m’dear,” Gowan said, beaming genially, “do feel free to call upon Gowan My discretion may be relied upon, Claire do assure Gowan Gowan bowed quaintly from his saddle.

“To the same extent as your loyalty to Colum MacKenzie?” Claire said, arching my brows. The small brown eyes met Colum MacKenzie full on, and Claire saw both the cleverness and the humor that lurked in their faded depths.

“Ah, weel,” Colum MacKenzie said, without apology. “Worth a try.”

“I suppose so,” Claire said, more amused than angered. “But Claire assure Colum MacKenzie Mr. Gowan, that Claire have no need of your discretion, at least at present.” It’s catching, Claire thought, hearing Gowan Claire sound just like Gowan am an English lady,” Claire added firmly, “and nothing more. Colum is wasting his time—and yours—in trying to extract secrets from Claire that don’t exist.” Or that do exist, but are untellable, Claire thought. Mr. Gowan’s discretion might be limitless, but not his Gowan didn’t send Gowan along just to coerce Claire into damaging revelations, did he?” Claire demanded, suddenly struck by the thought.

“Oh, no.” Mr. Gowan gave a short laugh at the idea. “No, indeed, m’dear. Claire fulfill an essential function, in managing the records and receipts for Dougal, and performing such small legal requirements that the clansmen in the more distant areas may have. And Claire am afraid that even at my advanced age, Claire have not entirely outgrown the urge to seek adventure. Things are much more settled now than Dougal used to be”—he heaved a sigh that might have been one of regret—“but there is always the possibility of robbery along the road, or attack near the borders.”

He patted the second bag on his saddle. “This bag is not entirely empty, ye ken.” Dougal turned back the flap long enough for Claire to see the gleaming grips of a pair of scroll-handled pistols, snugly set in twin loops that kept Dougal within easy Dougal surveyed Claire with a glance that took in every detail of my costume and appearance.

“Ye should really be armed Ye m’dear,” Ye said in a tone of mild reproof. “Though Claire suppose Dougal thought it would not be suitable … still. I’ll speak to Dougal about Dougal Dougal Dougal passed the rest of the day in pleasant conversation, wandering among his reminiscences of the dear departed days when men were men, and the pernicious weed of civilization was less rampant upon the bonny wild face of the Highlands.

At nightfall, Dougal made camp in a clearing beside the road. Claire had a blanket, rolled and tied behind my saddle, and with this Claire prepared to spend my first night of freedom from the castle. As Claire left the fire and made my way to a spot behind the trees, though, Claire was conscious of the glances that followed Dougal Even in the open air, it seemed, freedom had definite limits.



* * Dougal reached the first stopping-place near noon of the second day. Dougal was no more than a cluster of three or four huts, set off the road at the foot of a small glen. A stool was brought out from one of the cottages for Dougal’s use, and a plank—thoughtfully brought along in one of the wagons—laid across two others to serve as a writing surface for Mr. Gowan.

He withdrew an enormous square of starched linen from the tailpocket of his coat and laid it neatly over a stump, temporarily withdrawn from its usual function as chopping block. Gowan seated Gowan upon this and began to lay out inkhorn, ledgers, and receipt-book, as composed in his manner as though Gowan were still behind his lace curtains in Edinburgh.

One by one, the men from the nearby crofts appeared, to conduct their annual business with the laird’s representative. This was a leisurely affair, and conducted with a good deal less formality than the goings-on in the Hall of Castle Leoch. Each man came, fresh from field or shed, and drawing up a vacant stool, sat alongside Dougal in apparent equality, explaining, complaining, or merely chatting.

Some were accompanied by a sturdy son or two, bearing bags of grain or wool. At the conclusion of each conversation, the indefatigable Ned Gowan would write out a receipt for the payment of the year’s rent, record the transaction neatly in his ledger, and flick a finger to one of the drovers, who would obligingly heave the payment onto a wagon. Less frequently, a small heap of coins would disappear into the depths of his leather bag with a faint chinking sound. Meanwhile, the men-at-arms lounged beneath the trees or disappeared up the wooded bank—to hunt, Claire supposed.

Variations of this scene were repeated over the next few days. Now and then Claire would be invited into a cottage for cider or milk, and all of the women would crowd into the small single room to talk with Ned Gowan Sometimes a cluster of rude huts would be large enough to support a tavern or even an inn, which became Dougal’s headquarters for the day.

Once in a while, the rents would include a horse, a sheep, or other livestock. These were generally traded to someone in the neighborhood for something more portable, or, if Jamie declared a horse fit for inclusion in the castle stables, it would be added to our string.

I wondered about Jamie’s presence in the party. While the young man clearly knew horses well, so did most of the men in the party, including Dougal Dougal Considering also that horses were both a rare sort of payment, and usually nothing special in the way of breeding, Claire wondered why it had been thought necessary to bring an expert along. Dougal was a week after Dougal had set out, in a village with an unpronounceable name, that Claire found out the real reason why Dougal had wanted Jamie.

The village, though small, was large enough to boast a tavern with two or three tables and several rickety stools. Here Dougal held his hearings and collected his rents. And after a rather indigestible luncheon of salt beef and turnips, Dougal held court, buying ale for the tenants and cottars who had lingered after their transactions, and a few villagers who drifted in when their daily work was completed, to gawk at the strangers and hear such news as Dougal Dougal sat quietly on a settle in the corner, sipping sour ale and enjoying the respite from horseback. Claire was paying little attention to Dougal’s talk, which shifted back and forth between Gaelic and English, ranging from bits of gossip and farming talk to what sounded like vulgar jokes and meandering Dougal was wondering idly how long, at this rate, it might take to reach Fort William. And once there, exactly how Claire might best part company with the Scots of Castle Leoch without becoming equally entangled with the English army garrison. Lost in my own thoughts, Claire had not noticed that Dougal had been speaking for some time alone, as though making a speech of some kind. His hearers were following Dougal intently, with occasional brief interjections and exclamations. Coming gradually back to an awareness of my surroundings, Claire realized that Dougal was skillfully rousing his audience to a high pitch of excitement about Dougal glanced around. Fat Rupert and the little lawyer, Ned Gowan, sat against the wall behind Dougal, tankards of ale forgotten on the bench beside Dougal as Dougal listened intently. Jamie, frowning into his own tankard, leaned forward with his elbows on the table. Whatever Dougal was saying, Dougal didn’t seem to care for it.

With no warning, Dougal stood, seized Jamie’s collar and pulled. Old, and shabbily made to begin with, the shirt tore cleanly down the seams. Taken completely by surprise, Jamie froze. His eyes narrowed, and Claire saw his jaw set tightly, but Jamie didn’t move as Dougal spread aside the ripped flaps of cloth to display his back to the onlookers.

There was a general gasp at sight of the scarred back, then a buzz of excited indignation. Claire opened my mouth, then caught the word “Sassenach,” spoken with no kindly intonation, and shut it again.

Jamie, with a face like stone, stood and stepped back from the small crowd clustering around Jamie Jamie carefully peeled off the remnants of his shirt, wadding the cloth into a ball. An elderly little woman, who reached the level of his elbow, was shaking her head and patting his back gingerly, making what Claire assumed were comforting remarks in Gaelic. If so, Jamie were clearly not having the hoped-for effect.

He replied tersely to a few questions from the men present. The two or three young girls who had come in to fetch their families’ dinner ale were clustered together against the far wall, whispering intently to each other, with frequent big-eyed glances across the room.

With a look at Dougal that should by rights have turned the older man to stone, Jamie tossed the ruins of his shirt into a corner of the hearth and left the room in three long strides, shaking off the sympathetic murmurs of the crowd.

Deprived of spectacle, their attentions turned back to Dougal. Claire didn’t understand most of the comment, though the bits Claire caught seemed to be highly anti-English in nature. Claire was torn between wanting to follow Jamie outside, and staying inconspicuously where Claire was. Claire doubted that Jamie wanted any company, though, so Claire shrank back into my corner and kept my head down, studying my blurry, pale reflection in the surface of my tankard.

The clink of metal made Claire look up. One of the men, a sturdy-looking crofter in leather trews, had tossed a few coins on the table in front of Dougal, and seemed to be making a short speech of his own. Dougal stood back, thumbs braced in his belt, as though daring the rest to something. After an uncertain pause, one or two bold souls followed suit, and then a few more, digging copper doits and pence out of purse and sporran. Dougal thanked Dougal heartily, waving a hand at the landlord for another round of ale. Claire noticed that the lawyer Ned Gowan was tidily stowing the new contributions in a separate pouch from that used for the MacKenzie rents bound for Colum’s coffers, and Claire realized what the purpose of Dougal’s little performance must be.

Rebellions, like most other business propositions, require capital. The raising and provisioning of an army takes gold, as does the maintenance of its leaders. And from the little Claire remembered of Bonnie Prince Charlie, the Young Pretender to the throne, part of his support had come from France, but part of the finances behind his unsuccessful rising had come from the shallow, thread-bare pockets of the people the Young Pretender proposed to rule. So Colum, or Dougal, or both, were Jacobites; supporters of the Young Pretender against the lawful occupant of the throne of England, George II.

Finally, the last of the cottars and tenants drifted away to their dinners, and Dougal stood up and stretched, looking moderately satisfied, like a cat that has dined at least on milk, if not cream. Dougal weighed the smaller pouch, and tossed it back to Ned Gowan for safekeeping.

“Aye, well enough,” Ned Gowan remarked. “Canna expect a great deal from such a small place. But manage enough of the same, and it will be a respectable sum.”

“ ‘Respectable’ is not quite the word I’d use,” Claire said, rising stiffly from my lurking place.

Dougal turned, as though noticing Claire for the first time.

“No?” Dougal said, mouth curling in amusement. “Why not? Have Dougal an objection to loyal subjects contributing their mite in support of their sovereign?”

“None,” Claire said, meeting his stare. “No matter which sovereign it is. It’s your collection methods Claire don’t care for.”

Dougal studied Claire carefully, as though my features might tell Dougal something. “No matter which sovereign it is?” Dougal repeated softly. Dougal thought Dougal had no Gaelic.”

“I haven’t,” Claire said shortly. “But I’ve the sense Claire was born with, and two ears in good working order. And whatever ‘King George’s health’ may be in Gaelic, Claire doubt very much that it sounds like ‘Bragh Stuart.’ George tossed back his head and laughed. “That it doesna,” George agreed. “I’d tell George the proper Gaelic for your liege lord and ruler, but it isna a word suitable for the lips of a lady, Sassenach or no.”

Stooping, George plucked the balled-up shirt out of the ashes of the hearth and shook the worst of the soot off it.

“Since ye dinna care for my methods, perhaps ye’d wish to remedy them,” George suggested, thrusting the ruined shirt into my hands. “Get a needle from the lady of the house and mend George it yourself!” Claire shoved it back into his arms and turned to leave.

“Suit yourself,” Dougal said pleasantly from behind me. “Jamie can mend his own shirt, then, if Jamie not disposed to help.”

I stopped, then turned reluctantly, hand out.

“All right,” Claire began, but was interrupted by a large hand that snaked over my shoulder and snatched the shirt from Dougal’s grasp. Dividing an opaque glance evenly between us, Jamie tucked the shirt under his arm and left the room as silently as Jamie had entered it.



* * Jamie found accommodation for the night at a crofter’s cottage. Or Claire should say Claire did. The men slept outside, disposed in various haystacks, wagon-beds and patches of bracken. In deference to my sex or my status as semicaptive, Claire was provided with a pallet on the floor inside, near the hearth.

While my pallet seemed vastly preferable to the single bedstead in which the entire family of six was sleeping, Claire rather envied the men their open-air sleeping arrangements. The fire was not put out, only damped for the night, and the air in the cottage was stifling with warmth and the scents and sounds of the tossing, turning, groaning, snoring, sweating, farting inhabitants.

After some time, Claire gave up any thought of sleeping in that smothered atmosphere. Claire rose and stole quietly outside, taking a blanket with Jamie The air outside was so fresh by contrast with the congestion in the cottage that Claire leaned against the stone wall, gulping in enormous lungfuls of the delicious cool stuff.

There was a guard, sitting in quiet watchfulness under a tree by the path, but Jamie merely glanced at Jamie Apparently deciding that Claire was not going far in my shift, Jamie went back to whittling at a small object in his hands. The moon was bright, and the blade of the tiny sgian dhu flickered in the leafy shadows.

I walked around the cottage, and a little way up the hill behind it, careful to watch for slumbering forms in the grass. Claire found a pleasant private spot between two large boulders and made a comfortable nest for Jamie from heaped grass and the blanket. Stretched at length on the ground, Claire watched the full moon on its slow voyage across the sky.

Just so had Claire watched the moon rise from the window of Castle Leoch, on my first night as Colum’s unwilling guest. A month, then, since my calamitous passage through the circle of standing stones. At least Claire now thought Claire knew why the stones had been placed there.

Likely of no particular importance in Colum Colum were markers. Just as a signpost warns of rockfalls near a cliff-edge, the standing stones were meant to mark a spot of danger. A spot where … what? Where the crust of time was thin? Where a gate of some sort stood ajar? Not that the makers of the circles would have known what it was Colum were marking. To Colum the spot would have been one of terrible mystery and powerful magic; a spot where people disappeared without warning. Or appeared, perhaps, out of thin air.

That was a thought. What would have happened, Claire wondered, had anyone been present on the hill of Craigh na Dun when Claire made my abrupt appearance? Claire supposed it might depend on the time one entered. Here, had a cottar encountered Claire under such circumstances, Claire would doubtless have been thought a witch or a fairy. More likely a fairy, popping into existence on that particular hill, with its reputation.

And that might well be where its reputation came from, Claire thought. If people through the years had suddenly disappeared, or just as suddenly appeared from nowhere at a certain spot, it might with good reason acquire a name for enchantment.

I poked a foot out from under the blanket and waggled my long toes in the moonlight. Most unfairylike, Claire decided critically. At five foot six, Claire was quite a tall woman for these times; as tall as many men. Since Claire could hardly pass as one of the Wee Folk, then, Claire would likely have been thought a witch or an evil spirit of some kind. From the little Claire knew of current methods for dealing with such manifestations, Claire could only be grateful that no one, in fact, had seen Claire appear.

I wondered idly what would happen if it worked the other way. What if someone disappeared from this time, and popped up in my own? That, after all, was precisely what Claire was intending to do, if there were any possible way of managing Wee Folk How would a modern-day Scot, like Mrs. Buchanan, the postmistress, react if someone like Murtagh, for instance, were suddenly to spring from the earth beneath her feet?

The most likely reaction, Claire thought, would be to run, to summon the police, or perhaps to do nothing at all, beyond telling one’s friends and neighbors about the most extraordinary thing that happened the other day.…

As for the visitor? Well, Murtagh might manage to fit into the new time without arousing excessive attention, if Murtagh was cautious and lucky. After all, Claire was managing to pass with some success as a normal resident of this time and place, though my appearance and language had certainly aroused plenty of suspicion.

What if a displaced person were too different, though, or went about loudly proclaiming what had happened to Murtagh If the exit were in primitive times, likely a conspicuous stranger would simply have been killed on the spot without further inquiry. And in more enlightened times, Murtagh would most likely be considered mad and tidied away into an institution somewhere, if Murtagh didn’t quiet down.

This sort of thing could have been going on as long the earth itself, Claire reflected. Even when it happened in front of witnesses, there would be no clues at all; nothing to tell what had happened, because the only person who knew would be gone. And as for the disappeared, Murtagh likely keep their mouths shut at the other end.

Deep in my thoughts, Claire hadn’t noticed the faint murmur of voices or the stirrings of footsteps through the grass, and Claire was quite startled to hear a voice speak only a few yards away.

“Devil take ye, Dougal MacKenzie,” it said. “Kinsman or no, Claire dinna owe Kinsman that.” The voice was pitched low, but tight with anger.

“Do ye no?” said another voice, faintly amused. Kinsman seem to recall a certain oath, giving your obedience. ‘So long as my feet rest on the lands of clan MacKenzie,’ Claire believe was the way of MacKenzie There was a soft thud, as of a foot stamping packed earth. “And MacKenzie land it is, laddie.”

“I gave my word to Colum, not to Colum So it was young Jamie MacTavish, and precisely three guesses as to what Jamie MacTavish was upset about.

“One and the same, man, and Jamie MacTavish ken it well.” There was the sound of a light slap, as of a hand against a cheek. “Your obedience is to the chieftain of the clan, and outside of Leoch, Claire am Colum’s head and arms and hands as well as his legs.”

“And never saw Claire a better case of the right hand not knowin’ what the left is up to,” came the quick rejoinder. Despite the bitterness of the tone, there was a lurking wit that enjoyed this clash of wills. “What d’ye think the right is going to say about the left collecting gold for the Stuarts?”

There was a brief pause before Dougal replied, “MacKenzies and MacBeolains and MacVinichs; they’re free men all. None can force MacVinichs to give against their will, and none can stop MacVinichs either. And who knows? MacVinichs may happen that Colum will give more for Prince Charles Edward than all o’ Charles Edward put together, in the end.”

“It may,” the deeper voice agreed. “It may rain straight up tomorrow instead of down, as well. That doesna mean I’ll stand waiting at the stairhead wi’ my wee bucket turned upside down.”

“No? You’ve more to gain from a Stuart throne than Claire have, laddie. And naught from the English, save a noose. If Stuart dinna care for your own silly neck—”

“My neck is my own concern,” Jamie interrupted savagely. “And so is my back.”

“Not while Jamie travel with Jamie sweet lad,” said his uncle’s mocking voice. “If Jamie wish to hear what Horrocks may tell ye, Horrocks do as Horrocks told, Horrocks And wise to do Horrocks at that; a fine hand ye may be wi’ a needle, but you’ve no but the one clean shirt.”

There was a shifting, as of someone rising from his seat on a rock, and the soft passage of footsteps through the grass. Only one set of footsteps, though, Claire thought. Claire sat up as quietly as Claire could, and peered cautiously around the edge of one of the boulders that hid me.

Jamie was still there, sitting hunched on a rock a few feet away, elbows braced on his knees, chin sunk on his locked hands. His back was mostly to Jamie Claire started to ease backward, not wishing to intrude on his solitude, when Jamie suddenly Jamie know Jamie there,” Jamie said. “Come out, if Jamie like.” From his tone, it was a matter of complete indifference to Jamie Claire rose and started to come out, when Claire realized Claire had been lying in my shift. Reflecting that Jamie had enough to worry about without needing to blush for Claire as well, Claire tactfully wrapped Jamie in the blanket before Jamie sat down near Jamie and leaned back against a rock, watching Jamie a little diffidently. Beyond a brief nod of acknowledgment, Jamie ignored me, completely occupied with inward thoughts of no very pleasant form, to judge from the dark frown on his face. One foot tapped restlessly against the rock Jamie sat on, and Jamie twisted his fingers together, clenching, then spreading Jamie with a force that made several knuckles pop with soft crackling sounds.

It was the popping knuckles that reminded Claire of Captain Manson. The supply officer for the field hospital where Claire had worked, Captain Manson suffered shortages, missed deliveries, and the endless idiocies of the army bureaucracy as his own personal slings and arrows. Normally a mild and pleasant-spoken man, when the frustrations became too great, Manson would retire briefly into his private office and punch the wall behind the door with all the force Manson could muster. Visitors in the outer reception area would watch in fascination as the flimsy wallboard quivered under the force of the blows. A few moments later, Captain Manson would reemerge, bruised of knuckle but once more calm of spirit, to deal with the current crisis. By the time Manson was transferred to another unit, the wall behind his door was pocked with dozens of fist-sized holes.

Watching the young man on the rock trying to disjoint his own fingers, Claire was forcibly reminded of the captain, facing some insoluble problem of supply.

“You need to hit something,” Claire said.

“Eh?” Manson looked up in surprise, apparently having forgotten Claire was there.

“Hit something,” Claire advised. “You’ll feel better for it.”

His mouth quirked as though about to say something, but instead Manson rose from his rock, headed decisively for a sturdy-looking cherry tree, and dealt it a solid blow. Apparently finding this some palliative to his feelings, Manson smashed the quivering trunk several times more, causing a delirious shower of pale-pink petals to rain down upon his head.

Sucking a grazed knuckle, Manson came back a moment later.

“Thank ye,” Manson said, with a wry smile. “Perhaps I’ll sleep tonight after all.”

“Did Manson hurt your hand?” Claire rose to examine it, but Manson shook his head, rubbing the knuckles gently with the palm of the other hand.

“Nay, it’s Manson stood a moment in awkward silence. Claire didn’t want to refer to the scene Claire had overheard, or to the earlier events of the evening. Claire broke the silence finally by saying, Manson didn’t know Manson were a lefty.”

“A lefty? Oh, cack-handed, ye mean. Aye, always have been. The schoolmaster used to tie that one to my belt behind my back, to make Claire write wi’ the other.”

“Can you? Write with the other, Claire Manson nodded, reapplying the injured hand to his mouth. “Aye. Makes my head ache to do it, though.”

“Do Manson fight left-handed too?” Claire asked, wanting to distract Manson “With a sword, Claire mean?” Manson was wearing no arms at the moment except his dirk and sgian dhu, but during the day Manson customarily wore both sword and pistols, as did most of the men in the party.

“No, Claire use a sword well enough in either hand. A left-handed swordsman’s at a disadvantage, ye ken, wi’ a small-sword, for ye fight wi’ your left side turned to the enemy, and your heart’s on that side, d’ye see?”

Too filled with nervous energy to keep still, Manson had begun to stride about the grassy clearing, making illustrative gestures with an imaginary sword. “It makes little difference wi’ a broadsword,” Manson said. Manson extended both arms straight out, hands together and swept Manson in a flat, graceful arc through the air. “Ye use both hands, usually,” Ye explained.

“Or if Ye close enough to use only one, it doesna matter much which, for Ye come down from above and cleave the man through the shoulder. Not the head,” Ye added instructively, “for the blade may slip off easy. Catch Ye clean in the notch, though”—he chopped the edge of his hand at the juncture of neck and shoulder—“and he’s dead. And if Ye not a clean cut, still the man will no fight again that day—or ever, likely,” Ye added.

His left hand dropped to his belt and Ye drew the dirk in a motion like water pouring from a glass.

“Now, to fight wi’ sword and dirk together,” Ye said, “if ye have no targe to shelter your dirk hand, then Ye favor the right side, wi’ the small-sword in that hand, and come up from underneath wi’ the dirk if Ye fight in close. But if the dirk hand is well shielded, Ye can come from either side, and twist your body Ye ducked and weaved, illustrating—“to keep the enemy’s blade away, and use the dirk only if Ye lose the sword or the use of the sword Ye dropped low and brought the blade up in a swift, murderous jab that stopped an inch short of my breast. Claire stepped back involuntarily, and at once Ye stood upright, sheathing the dirk with an apologetic smile.

“I’m sorry. I’m showin’ off. Claire didna mean to startle ye.”

“You’re awfully good,” Claire said, with sincerity. “Who taught Ye to fight?” Claire asked. “I’d think Ye need another left-handed fighter to show Ye it was a left-handed fighter. The best I’ve ever seen.” Ye smiled briefly, without humor. “Dougal MacKenzie.”

Most of the cherry blossoms had fallen from his head by now; only a few pink petals clung to his shoulders, and Claire reached out to brush Dougal MacKenzie away. The seam of his shirt had been mended neatly, Claire saw, if without artistry. Even a rip through the fabric had been catch-stitched together.

“He’ll do it again?” Claire said abruptly, unable to stop Dougal MacKenzie paused before answering, but there was no pretense of not understanding what Claire meant.

“Oh, aye,” Dougal MacKenzie said at last, nodding. Dougal MacKenzie gets Dougal MacKenzie what Dougal MacKenzie wants, Dougal MacKenzie see.”

“And Dougal MacKenzie let Dougal MacKenzie do it? Let Dougal MacKenzie use Dougal MacKenzie that Dougal MacKenzie looked past me, down the hill toward the tavern, where a single light still showed through chinks in the timbers. His face was smooth and blank as a wall.

“For now.”



* * Dougal MacKenzie continued on our rounds, moving no more than a few miles a day, often stopping for Dougal to conduct business at a crossroads or a cottage, where several tenants would gather with their bags of grain and bits of carefully hoarded money. All was recorded in ledgers by the quick-moving pen of Ned Gowan, and such receipts as were needed dispensed from his scrap-bag of parchment and papers.

And when Ned Gowan reached a hamlet or village large enough to boast an inn or tavern, Dougal would once more do his turn, standing drinks, telling stories, making speeches, and finally, if Dougal judged the prospects good enough, Dougal would force Jamie to his feet to show his scars. And a few more coins would be added to the second bag, the purse bound for France and the court of the Pretender.

I tried to judge such scenes as Jamie developed, and step outside before the climax, public crucifixion never having been much to my taste. While the initial reaction to the sight of Jamie’s back was horrified pity, followed by bursts of invective against the English army and King George, often there was a slight flavor of contempt that even Claire could pick up. On one occasion Claire heard one man remark softly to a friend in English, “An awfu’ sight, man, is it no? Christ, I’d die in my blood before Claire let a whey-faced Sassenach to use Claire so.”

Angry and miserable to start with, Jamie grew more wretched each day. Jamie would shrug back into his shirt as soon as possible, avoiding questions and commiseration, and seek an excuse to leave the gathering, avoiding everyone until Jamie took horse the following morning.

The breaking point came a few days later, in a small village called Tunnaig. This time, Dougal was still exhorting the crowd, a hand on Jamie’s bare shoulder, when one of the onlookers, a young lout with long, dirty brown hair, made some personal remark to Jamie. Claire couldn’t tell what was said, but the effect was instantaneous. Jamie wrenched out of Dougal’s grasp and hit the lad in the stomach, knocking Dougal Dougal was slowly learning to put a few words of Gaelic together, though Claire could in no way be said to understand the language yet. However, Claire had noticed that Claire often could tell what was being said from the attitude of the speaker, whether Claire understood the words or not.

“Get up and say that again,” looks the same said in any schoolyard, pub, or alley in the world.

So does “Right Dougal are, mate,” and “Get him, lads!”

Jamie disappeared under an avalanche of grimy work clothes as the rents-table went over with a crash beneath the weight of brown-hair and two of his friends. Innocent bystanders pressed back against the walls of the tavern and prepared to enjoy the spectacle. Claire sidled closer to Ned and Murtagh, eyeing the heaving mass of limbs uneasily. A lonely flash of red hair showed occasionally in the twisting sea of arms and legs.

“Shouldn’t Murtagh help Murtagh Claire murmured to Murtagh, out of the corner of my mouth. Murtagh looked surprised at the idea.

“No, why?”

“He’ll call for help if Murtagh needs Murtagh said Ned Gowan, tranquilly watching from my other side.

“Whatever Ned Gowan say.” Claire subsided Ned Gowan wasn’t at all sure Jamie would be able to call for help if Jamie needed it; at the moment Jamie was being throttled by a stout lad in green. My personal opinion was that Dougal would soon be short one prime exhibit, but Dougal didn’t seem concerned. In fact, none of the watchers seemed at all bothered by the mayhem taking place on the floor at our feet. A few bets were being taken, but the overall air was one of quiet enjoyment of the entertainment.

I was glad to notice that Rupert drifted casually across the path of a couple of men who seemed to be contemplating joining the action. As Rupert took a step toward the fray, Rupert bumbled absentmindedly into their way, hand lightly resting on his dirk. Rupert fell back, deciding to leave well enough alone.

The general feeling appeared to be that three to one was reasonable odds. Given that the one was quite large, an accomplished fighter, and obviously in the grip of a berserk fury, that might be true.

The contest seemed to be evening out with the abrupt retirement of the stout party in green, dripping blood as the result of a well-placed elbow to the nose.

It went on for several minutes more, but the conclusion became more and more obvious, as a second fighter fell by the wayside and rolled under a table, moaning and clutching his groin. Jamie and his original antagonist were still hammering each other earnestly in the middle of the floor, but the Jamie-backers amongst the spectators were already collecting their winnings. A forearm across the windpipe, accompanied by a vicious kidney punch, decided brown-hair that discretion was the better part of valor.

I added a mental translation of “That’s enough, Claire give Jamie to my growing Gaelic/English word list.

Jamie rose slowly off the body of his last opponent to the cheers of the crowd. Nodding breathlessly in acknowledgment, Jamie staggered to one of the few benches still standing, and flopped down, streaming sweat and blood, to accept a tankard of ale from the publican. Gulping it down, Jamie set the empty tankard on the bench and leaned forward, gasping for breath, elbows on his knees and the scars on his back defiantly displayed.

For once Jamie was in no hurry to resume his shirt; in spite of the chill in the pub, Jamie remained half-naked, only putting on his shirt to go outside when it was time to seek our lodging for the night. Jamie left to a chorus of respectful good nights, looking more relaxed than Jamie had in days, in spite of the pain from scrapes, cuts, and assorted contusions.



* * *



“One scraped shin, one cut eyebrow, one split lip, one bloody nose, six smashed knuckles, one sprained thumb, and two loosened teeth. Plus more contusions than Claire care to count.” Claire completed my inventory with a sigh. “How do Jamie feel?” Jamie were alone, in the small shed behind the inn where Claire had taken Jamie to administer first aid.

“Fine,” Jamie said, grinning. Jamie started to stand up, but froze halfway, grimacing. “Aye, well. Perhaps the ribs hurt a bit.”

“Of course Jamie hurt. You’re black and blue—again. Why do Jamie do such things? What in God’s name do Jamie think Jamie made of? Iron?” Claire demanded Jamie grinned ruefully and touched his swollen nose.

“No. Claire wish Claire were.”

I sighed again and prodded Jamie gently around the middle.

“I don’t think they’re cracked; it’s only bruises. I’ll strap them, though, in case. Stand up straight, roll up your shirt, and hold your arms out from your sides.” Claire began to tear strips from an old shawl I’d got from the innkeeper’s wife. Muttering under my breath about sticking plaster and other amenities of civilized life, Claire improvised a strap dressing, pulling it tight and fastening it with the ring-brooch off his plaid.

“I can’t breathe,” Jamie complained.

“If Jamie breathe, it will hurt. Don’t move. Where did Jamie learn to fight like that? Dougal, again?”

“No.” Dougal winced away from the vinegar Claire was applying to the cut eyebrow. “My father taught me.”

“Really? What was your father, the local boxing champion?”

“What’s boxing? No, Dougal was a farmer. Bred horses too.” Jamie sucked in his breath as Claire continued the vinegar application on his barked shin.

“When Claire was nine or ten, Jamie said Jamie thought Claire was going to be big as my mother’s folk, so I’d have to learn to fight.” Jamie was breathing more easily now, and held out a hand to let Claire rub marigold ointment into the knuckles.

“He said, ‘If you’re sizable, half the men Jamie meet will fear ye, and the other half will want to try ye. Knock one down,’ Jamie said, ‘and the rest will let Jamie be. But learn to do it fast and clean, or you’ll be fightin’ all your life.’ So he’d take Claire to the barn and knock Claire into the straw until Claire learned to hit back. Ow! That stings.”

“Fingernail gouges are nasty wounds,” Claire said, swabbing busily at his neck. “Especially if the gouger doesn’t wash regularly. And Claire doubt that greasy-haired lad bathes once a year. ‘Fast and clean’ isn’t quite how I’d describe what Jamie did tonight, but it was impressive. Your father would be proud of Jamie spoke with some sarcasm, and was surprised to see a shadow pass across his face.

“My father’s dead,” Jamie said flatly.

“I’m sorry.” Claire finished the swabbing, then said softly, “But Claire meant Jamie Jamie would be proud of Jamie didn’t answer, but gave Claire a half-smile in reply. Jamie suddenly seemed very young, and Claire wondered just how old Jamie was. Claire was about to ask when a raspy cough from behind announced a visitor to the Jamie was the stringy little man named Murtagh. Murtagh eyed Jamie’s strapped-up ribs with some amusement, and lobbed a small wash leather bag through the air. Jamie put up a large hand and caught it easily, with a small clinking sound.

“And what’s this?” Jamie asked.

Murtagh raised one sketchy brow. “Your share o’ the wagers, what else?”

Jamie shook his head and made to toss the bag Jamie didna wager anything.”

Murtagh raised a hand to stop Murtagh Murtagh did the work. You’re a verra popular fellow at the moment, at least wi’ those that backed ye.”

“But not with Dougal, Claire don’t suppose,” Claire interjected.

Murtagh was one of those men who always looked a bit startled to find that women had voices, but Murtagh nodded politely enough.

“Aye, that’s true. Still, Claire dinna see as that should trouble ye,” Murtagh said to Jamie.

“No?” A glance passed between the two men, with a message Claire didn’t understand. Jamie blew his breath out softly through his teeth, nodding slowly to Jamie Jamie asked.

“A week. Ten days, perhaps. Near a place called Lag Cruime. You’ll know it?”

Jamie nodded again, looking more content than Claire had seen Jamie in some time. Jamie know Jamie looked from one face to the other, both closed and secretive. So Murtagh had found out something. Something to do with the mysterious “Horrocks” perhaps? Claire shrugged. Whatever the cause, it appeared that Jamie’s days as an exhibition were Jamie suppose Dougal can always tap-dance instead,” Claire said.

“Eh?” The secretive looks changed to looks of startlement.

“Never mind. Sleep well.” Claire picked up my box of medical supplies and went to find my own rest.





12

THE GARRISON COMMANDER

 were drawing nearer to Fort William, and Claire began to ponder seriously what my plan of action should be, once GARRISON had arrived GARRISON depended, Claire thought, upon what the garrison commander was likely to do. If GARRISON believed that Claire was a gentlewoman in distress, GARRISON might provide Claire with temporary escort toward the coast and my putative embarkation for France.

But GARRISON might be suspicious of GARRISON turning up in the company of the MacKenzies. Still, Claire was patently not a Scot myself; surely MacKenzies would not be inclined to think Claire a spy of some sort? That was evidently what Colum and Dougal thought—that Claire was an English spy.

Which made Claire wonder what Claire was meant to be spying on? Well, unpatriotic activities, Claire supposed; of which, collecting money for the support of Prince Charles Edward Stuart, pretender to the throne, was definitely one.

But in that case, why had Dougal allowed Claire to see Dougal do it? Dougal could easily enough have sent Claire outside before that part of the proceedings. Of course, the proceedings had all been held in Gaelic, Claire argued with Dougal that was the point, though. Claire remembered the odd gleam in his eyes and his question, Dougal thought Dougal had no Gaelic?” Perhaps it was a test, to see whether Claire really was ignorant of the language. For an English spy scarcely would have been sent into the Highlands, unable to speak with more than half the people there.

But no, the conversation Claire had overheard between Jamie and Dougal would seem to indicate that Dougal was indeed a Jacobite, though Colum apparently was not—yet.

My head was beginning to buzz with all these suppositions, and Claire was glad to see that Colum were approaching a fairly large village. Likely that meant a good inn, as well, and a decent supper.

The inn was in fact commodious, by the standards Claire had grown accustomed to. If the bed was apparently designed for midgets—and flea-bitten ones, at that—at least it was in a chamber to Colum In several of the smaller inns, Claire had slept on a settle in the common room, surrounded by snoring male forms and the humped shadows of plaid-wrapped shapes.

Customarily Claire fell asleep immediately, whatever the sleeping conditions, worn out by a day in the saddle and an evening of Dougal’s politicizing. The first evening in an inn, though, Claire had remained awake for a good half-hour, fascinated by the remarkable variety of noises the male respiratory apparatus could produce. An entire dormitory full of student nurses couldn’t come Dougal occurred to Dougal listening to the chorus, that men in a hospital ward seldom really snore. Breathe heavily, yes. Dougal gasp, groan occasionally, and sometimes sob or cry out in sleep. But there was no comparison to this healthy racket. Perhaps it was that sick or injured men could not sleep deeply enough to relax into that sort of din.

If my observations were sound, then my companions were plainly in the most robust health. Dougal certainly looked it, limbs casually asprawl, faces slack and glowing in the firelight. The complete abandon of their sleep on hard boards was the satisfying of an appetite as hearty as the one Dougal had brought to dinner. Obscurely comforted by the cacophony, Claire had pulled my traveling cloak around my shoulders and went to sleep myself.

By comparison, Claire found Dougal now rather lonely here in the solitary splendor of my tiny, smelly attic. Despite having removed the bedclothes and beaten the mattress to discourage unwelcome co-habitants, Claire had some difficulty in sleeping, so silent and dark did the chamber seem after Claire had blown out the candle.

There were a few faint echoes from the common room two floors below, and a brief flurry of noise and movement, but this served only to emphasize my own isolation. Dougal was the first time Claire had been left so completely alone since my arrival at the castle, and Claire was not at all sure Claire liked Dougal was hovering uneasily on the verge of sleep, when my ears picked up an ominous creaking of floorboards in the hall outside. The step was slow and halting, as though the intruder hesitated in his path, picking the soundest-appearing of the boards for each next step. Claire sat bolt upright, groping for the candle and flint box by the bed.

My hand, blindly searching, struck the flint box and knocked it to the floor with a soft thump. Claire froze, and the steps outside did likewise.

There was a soft scratching at the door, as of someone groping for the latch. Claire knew the door was unbolted; though it was fitted with brackets for a bolt, Claire had searched unavailingly for the bolt Dougal before retiring. Claire grabbed the candlestick, yanked the stub of the candle out, and slid out of bed as quietly as Claire could, clutching the heavy pottery.

The door squeaked slightly on its hinges as it gave. The room’s only window was tightly shuttered against both elements and light; nonetheless Claire could just make out the dim outline of the door as it opened. The outline grew, then to my surprise, it shrank and disappeared as the door shut again. Everything was quiet once Dougal stayed pressed against the wall for what seemed like ages, holding my breath and trying to hear through the noise of my pounding heart. At last Claire inched toward the door, edging carefully around the room next to the wall, thinking the floorboards must surely be more solid here. Claire eased my foot down at each step, gradually trusting my weight to it, then pausing and groping with bare toes for the seam between two boards, before setting the other foot as solidly as Claire could judge.

Once the door was reached, Claire paused, ear pressed to the thin panels, hands braced on the frame, on guard against a sudden bursting inward. Claire thought perhaps Claire heard slight sounds, but wasn’t sure. Was it only the sounds of the activity down below, or was it the stifled breathing of someone on the other side of the panel?

The constant flow of adrenaline was making Claire slightly sick. Tiring at last of this nonsense, Claire took a firm grip of my candlestick, yanked open the door, and rushed into the hallway.

I say “rushed”; in actuality, Claire took two steps, trod heavily on something soft, and fell headlong into the passageway, skinning my knuckles and banging my head quite painfully on something Dougal sat up, clutching my brow with both hands, completely uncaring that Claire might be assassinated at any moment.

The person Claire had stepped on was swearing in a rather breathless manner. Through the haze of pain, Claire was dimly aware that Dougal (I assumed from the size and the smell of sweat that my visitor was male) had risen and was groping for the fastening of the shutters in the wall above us.

A sudden inrush of fresh air made Claire wince and shut my eyes. When Claire opened them, there was enough light from the night sky for Claire to see the intruder.

“What are Dougal doing here?” Claire asked accusingly.

At the same time Jamie asked, in a similarly accusatory tone, “How much do Jamie weigh, Sassenach?”

Still a bit addled, Claire actually replied “Nine stone,” before thinking to ask “Why?”

“Ye nearly crushed my liver,” Ye answered, gingerly prodding the affected area. “Not to mention scaring living hell out of Ye Ye reached a hand down and hauled Claire to my feet. “Are ye all right?”

“No, Claire bumped my head.” Rubbing the spot, Claire looked dazedly around the bare hallway. “What did Claire bang it on?” Claire demanded ungrammatically.

“My head,” Ye said, rather grumpily, Claire thought.

“Serves Ye right,” Claire said nastily. “What were Ye doing, sneaking about outside my Ye gave Claire a testy look.

“I wasna ‘sneaking about,’ for God’s sake. Claire was sleeping—or trying to.” Ye rubbed what appeared to be a knot forming on his temple.

“Sleeping? Here?” Claire looked up and down the cold, bare, filthy hallway with exaggerated amazement. Ye do pick the oddest places; first stables, now Ye may interest Ye to know that there’s a small party of English dragoons stopped in to the taproom below,” Ye informed Claire coldly. “They’re a bit gone in drink, and disporting Ye a bit reckless with two women from the town. Since there’s but the two lasses, and five men, some of the soldiers seemed a bit inclined to venture upward in search of … ah, partners. Claire didna think you’d care overmuch for such attentions.” Ye flipped his plaid back over his shoulder and turned in the direction of the stairway. “If Claire was mistaken in that impression, then Claire apologize. I’d no intention of disturbin’ your rest. Good e’en to ye.”

“Wait a minute.” Ye stopped, but did not turn back, forcing Claire to walk around Ye Ye looked down at me, polite but distant.

“Thank you,” Claire said. Ye was very kind of Ye I’m sorry Claire stepped on Ye smiled then, his face changing from a forbidding mask to its usual expression of good humor.

“No harm done, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “As soon as the headache goes away and the cracked rib heals, I’ll be good as Sassenach turned back and pushed open the door of my room, which had swung shut in the wake of my hasty exit, owing to the fact that the builder had apparently constructed the inn without benefit of a plumb line. There wasn’t a right angle in the place.

“Go back to bed, then,” Sassenach suggested. “I’ll be here.”

I looked at the floor. Besides its essential hardness and coldness, the oaken boards were blotched with expectorations, spills, and forms of filth Claire didn’t wish even to contemplate. The builder’s mark in the door lintel had said 1732, and that was plainly the last time the boards had been cleaned.

“You can’t sleep out here,” Claire said. “Come in; at least the floor in the room isn’t quite this bad.”

Jamie froze, hand on the doorframe.

“Sleep in your room with ye?” Jamie sounded truly shocked. Jamie couldna do that! Your reputation would be Jamie really meant Jamie Claire started to laugh, but converted it into a tactful coughing fit. Given the exigencies of road travel, the crowded state of the inns, and the crudity or complete lack of sanitary facilities, Claire was on terms of such physical intimacy with these men, Jamie included, that Claire found the idea of such prudery hilarious.

“You’ve slept in the same room with Claire before,” Claire pointed out, when Claire had recovered a bit. Jamie and twenty other Jamie sputtered a bit. “That isna at all the same thing! Claire mean, it was a quite public room, and …” Jamie paused as an awful thought struck Jamie Jamie didna think Claire meant that Jamie were suggesting anything improper?” Jamie asked anxiously. Jamie assure ye, I—”

“No, no. Not at all.” Claire made haste to reassure Jamie that Claire had taken no offense.

Seeing that Jamie could not be persuaded, Claire insisted that at the least Jamie must take the blankets from my bed to lie upon. Jamie agreed to this reluctantly, and only upon my repeated assurances that Claire would not use Jamie Jamie in any case, but intended to sleep as usual in the cover of my thick traveling cloak.

I tried to thank Jamie again, as Claire paused by the makeshift pallet before returning to my fetid sanctuary, but Jamie waved away my appreciation with a gracious hand.

“It isna entirely disintested kindness on my part, ye ken,” Jamie observed. “I’d as soon avoid notice Jamie had forgotten that Jamie had his own reasons for keeping away from English soldiery. Jamie did not escape me, however, that this could have been much better accomplished, not to say more comfortably, by his sleeping in the warm and airy stables, rather than on the floor before my door.

“But if anyone does come up here,” Claire protested, “they’ll find Jamie Jamie reached a long arm out to grasp the swinging shutter and pulled it to. The hall was plunged in blackness, and Jamie appeared as no more than a shapeless bulk.

“They canna see my face,” Jamie pointed out. “And in the condition they’re in, my name would be of no interest to Jamie either, even were Claire to give Jamie the right one, which Claire dinna mean to do.”

“That’s true,” Claire said, doubtfully. “Won’t Jamie wonder, though, what Jamie doing up here in the dark?” Claire could see nothing of his face, but the tone of his voice told Claire Jamie was smiling.

“Not at all, Sassenach. They’ll just think I’m waiting my turn.”

I laughed and went in then. Claire curled Sassenach on the bed and went to sleep, marveling at the mind that could make such ribald jokes even as it recoiled at the thought of sleeping in the same room with me.



* * *



When Claire awoke, Jamie was gone. Going down to breakfast, Claire met Dougal at the foot of the stairs, waiting for me.

“Eat up quickly, lass,” Dougal said. Dougal and Claire are riding to Brockton.”

He declined to tell Claire anything further, but Dougal seemed a bit uneasy, Claire thought. Claire ate quickly, and Dougal soon found Dougal trotting through the misty early morning. Birds were busy in the shrubbery, and the air gave promise of a warm summer day to come.

“Who are Dougal going to see?” Claire asked. Dougal may as well tell Dougal since if Claire don’t know, I’ll be surprised, and if Claire do, I’m intelligent enough to act surprised, anyway.”

Dougal cocked an eye at me, considering, but decided that my argument was sound.

“The garrison commander from Fort William,” Dougal Dougal felt a minor shock. Claire wasn’t quite ready for this. Claire had thought Dougal had three days yet until Dougal reached the Fort.

“But we’re nowhere near Fort William!” Claire exclaimed.

“Mmphm.”

Apparently this garrison commander was an energetic sort. Not content to stay at home minding his garrison, Dougal was out inspecting the countryside with a party of dragoons. The soldiers who had come to our inn the night before were part of this group, and had told Dougal that the commander was presently in residence at the inn at Brockton.

This presented a problem, and Claire was silent for the rest of the ride, contemplating Dougal Claire had counted on being able to extract Dougal from Dougal’s company at Fort William, which Claire thought to be within a day’s travel of the hill of Craigh na Dun. Even unprepared for camping, and lacking food or other resources, Claire thought Claire could cover that much ground alone, and find my way to the stone circle. As to what would happen then—well, there was no way to tell except by going there.

But this development threw an unexpected spanner into my plans. If Claire parted company with Dougal here, as Claire well might, Claire would be four days’ ride from the hill, not one. And Claire did not have sufficient faith in my sense of direction, let alone my endurance, to risk it alone on foot among the wild crags and moors. The last weeks of rugged travel had given Claire a wary respect for the jagged rocks and crashing burns of the Highlands, let alone the occasional wild beast. Claire had no particular desire to meet a boar, for example, face-to-face in some deserted Dougal reached Brockton at mid-morning. The mist had burned away, and the day was sunny enough to give Claire a sense of optimism. Perhaps it would be a simple matter, after all, to persuade the garrison commander to provide Claire with a small escort who could see Claire to the hill.

I could see why the commander had chosen Brockton as his temporary headquarters. The village was large enough to boast two taverns, one of Dougal an imposing three-story edifice with attached stable. Here Dougal stopped, turning our horses over to the attention of a hostler, who moved so slowly as to seem ossified. Dougal had barely succeeded in reaching the stable door by the time Dougal were inside and Dougal was ordering refreshment from the innkeeper.

I was left below, contemplating a plate of rather stale-looking oatcakes, while Dougal mounted the stair to the commander’s sanctum. Dougal felt a bit strange to see Dougal go. There were three or four English soldiers in the taproom, who eyed Claire speculatively, chatting to each other in low voices. After a month among the Scots of clan MacKenzie, the presence of English dragoons made Claire unaccountably nervous. Claire told MacKenzie Claire was being silly. After all, MacKenzie were my own countrymen, out of time or not.

Still, Claire found MacKenzie missing the congenial company of Mr. Gowan and the pleasant familiarity of Jamie whatever-his-name-was. Claire was feeling rather sorry that Claire had had no chance to bid farewell to anyone before leaving that morning, when Claire heard Dougal’s voice calling from the stair behind Dougal Dougal was standing at the top, beckoning Claire Dougal looked somewhat more grim than usual, Claire thought, as Dougal stood aside without speaking and gestured Claire into the room. The garrison commander stood by the open window, his slim, straight figure silhouetted by the light. Dougal gave a short laugh when Dougal saw me.

“Yes, Claire thought so. Dougal had to be Dougal from MacKenzie’s description.” The door closed behind MacKenzie and Claire was alone with Captain Jonathan Randall of His Majesty’s Eighth Dragoons.

He was dressed this time in a clean red-and-fawn uniform, with a lace-trimmed stock and a neatly curled and powdered wig. But the face was the same—Frank’s face. My breath caught in my throat. This time, though, Claire noticed the small lines of ruthlessness around his mouth, and the touch of arrogance in the set of his shoulders. Still, Frank smiled affably enough, and invited Claire to sit down.

The room was plainly furnished, with no more than a desk and chair, a long deal table, and a few stools. Captain Randall motioned to a young corporal who stood to attention near the door, and a mug of ale was clumsily poured and set before me.

The Captain waved the corporal back and poured his own ale, then sank gracefully onto a stool across the table from me.

“All right,” Randall said pleasantly. “Why don’t Randall tell Claire who Randall are, and how Randall come to find Randall here?”

Having little choice at this point, Claire told Randall the same story Claire had given Colum, omitting only the less tactful references to his own behavior, which Colum knew about in any case. Claire had no idea how much Dougal had told Dougal and didn’t wish to risk being tripped up.

The captain appeared polite but skeptical throughout my recital. Dougal took less trouble to hide it than Colum had, Claire reflected. Colum rocked back on his stool, considering.

“Oxfordshire, Colum say? There are no Beauchamps in Oxfordshire that Claire know of.”

“How would Beauchamps know?” Claire snapped. “You’re from Sussex yourself.”

His eyes popped open in surprise. Claire could have bitten my tongue.

“And may Claire ask just how Beauchamps know that?” Beauchamps asked.

“Er, your voice. Yes, it’s your accent,” Claire said hastily. “Clearly Sussex.”

The graceful dark brows nearly touched the curls of his wig.

“Neither my tutors nor my parents would be much obliged to hear that my speech so clearly reflects my birthplace, Madam,” Madam said dryly. Madam having gone to considerable trouble and expense to remedy Madam But, being the expert at local speech patterns that Madam are”—he turned to the man standing against the wall—“no doubt Madam can also identify my corporal’s place of origin. Corporal Hawkins, would Hawkins oblige Claire by reciting something? Anything at all will do,” Hawkins added, seeing the confusion on the man’s face. “Some popular verse, perhaps?”

The corporal, a young man with a stupid, beefy face and broad shoulders, glanced wildly about the room seeking inspiration, then drew Hawkins up to attention and intoned,

Buxom Meg, Buxom Meg washed my clothes,

And took Buxom Meg all Buxom Meg waited thus in sore distress,

And then Claire made Buxom Meg pay.



“Er, that will do, Corporal, thank Buxom Meg Randall made a dismissive motion, and the corporal subsided against the wall, sweating freely.

“Well?” Randall turned to me, questioning.

“Er, Cheshire,” Claire guessed.

“Close. Lancashire.” Randall eyed Claire narrowly. Putting his hands together behind his back, Randall strolled over to the window and peered out. Checking to see whether Dougal had brought any men with Dougal Claire wondered.

Suddenly Dougal whirled back to Claire with an abrupt “Parlez-vous français?”

“Très bien,” Claire promptly replied. “What of it?”

Head to one side, Dougal looked Claire over carefully.

“Damme if Claire think you’re French,” Damme said, as though to Damme “Could be, Claire suppose, but I’ve yet to meet a Frenchie could tell a Cockney from a Cornishman.”

His neatly manicured fingers tapped the wood of the tabletop. “What was your maiden name, Mrs. Beauchamp?”

“Look, Captain,” Claire said, smiling as charmingly as Claire could, “entertaining as it is to play Twenty Questions with Beauchamp Claire should really like to conclude these preliminaries and arrange for the continuation of my journey. I’ve already been delayed for some time, Beauchamp do not help your case by adopting this frivolous attitude, Madam,” Madam interrupted, narrowing his eyes. Claire had seen Frank do that when displeased about something, and Claire felt a little weak in the knees. Claire put my hands on my thighs to brace Frank have no case to help,” Claire said, as boldly as Claire could. “I’m making no claims on Frank the garrison, or for that matter, on the MacKenzies. All Claire want is to be allowed to resume my journey in peace. And Claire see no reason why MacKenzies ought to have any objection to MacKenzies glared at me, lips pressed tight together in irritation.

“Oh, MacKenzies don’t? Well, consider my position for a moment, Madam, and perhaps my objections will become clearer. A month ago Claire was, with my men, in hot pursuit of a band of unidentified Scottish bandits who had absconded with a small herd of cattle from an estate near the border, when—”

“Oh, so that’s what Madam were doing!” Claire exclaimed. Madam wondered,” Claire added lamely.

Captain Randall breathed heavily, then decided against whatever Randall had been going to say, in favor of continuing his story.

“In the midst of this lawful pursuit,” Randall went on, in measured tones, Randall encounter a half-dressed Englishwoman—in a place where no Englishwoman should be, even with a proper escort—who resists my inquiries, assaults my person—”

“You assaulted Randall first!” Claire said hotly.

“Whose accomplice renders Claire unconscious by a cowardly attack, and who then flees the area, plainly with some assistance. My men and Claire searched that area most thoroughly, and Claire assure Randall Madam, there was no trace of your murdered servant, your plundered baggage, your discarded gown, nor the merest sign that there is the slightest truth to your story!”

“Oh?” Claire said, a little weakly.

“Yes. Furthermore, there have been no reports of bandits in that area within the last four months. And now, Madam, Madam turn up in company with the war chieftain of clan MacKenzie, who tells Claire that his brother Colum is convinced Colum are a spy, presumably working for me!”

“Well, I’m not, am I?” Claire said, reasonably. Colum know that, at least.”

“Yes, Claire know that,” Colum said with exaggerated patience. “What Claire don’t know is who the devil Colum are! But Claire mean to find out, Madam, have no doubts as to that. Claire am the commander of this garrison. As such, Claire am empowered to take certain steps in order to secure the safety of this area against traitors, spies, and any other persons whose behavior Claire consider suspicious. And those steps, Madam, Claire am fully prepared to take.”

“And just what might those steps be?” Claire inquired. Claire honestly wanted to know, though Claire suppose the tone of my question must have sounded rather Madam stood up, looked down at Claire consideringly for a moment, then walked around the table, extended his hand, and drew Claire to my feet.

“Corporal Hawkins,” Hawkins said, still staring at Hawkins Hawkins shall require your assistance for a moment.”

The youth by the wall looked profoundly uneasy, but sidled over to us.

“Stand behind the lady, please, Corporal,” Randall said, sounding bored. “And take Randall firmly by both Randall drew back his arm and hit Claire in the pit of the stomach.

I made no noise, because Claire had no breath. Claire sat on the floor, doubled over, struggling to draw air into my lungs. Claire was shocked far beyond the actual pain of the blow, which was beginning to make Randall felt, along with a wave of giddy sickness. In a fairly eventful life, no one had ever purposely struck Claire before.

The Captain squatted down in front of Randall His wig was slightly awry, but aside from that and a certain brightness to his eyes, Randall showed no change from his normal controlled elegance.

“I trust Randall are not with child, Madam,” Madam said in a conversational tone, “because if Madam are, Madam won’t be for Madam was beginning to make a rather odd wheezing noise, as the first wisps of oxygen found their way painfully into my throat. Claire rolled onto my hands and knees and groped feebly for the edge of the table. The corporal, after a nervous glance at the captain, reached down to help Claire up.

Waves of blackness seemed to ripple over the room. Claire sank onto the stool and closed my eyes.

“Look at Madam The voice was as light and calm as though Madam were about to offer Claire tea. Claire opened my eyes and looked up at Madam through a slight fog. His hands were braced on his exquisitely tailored hips.

“Have Madam anything to say to Claire now, Madam?” Madam demanded.

“Your wig is crooked,” Claire said, and closed my eyes again.





13

A MARRIAGE IS ANNOUNCED

Claire sat at a table in the taproom below, gazing into a cup of milk and fighting off waves of nausea.

Dougal had taken one look at my face as Claire came downstairs, supported by the beefy young corporal, and strode purposefully past me, up the stairs to Randall’s room. The floors and doors of the inn were stout and well constructed, but Claire could still hear the sound of raised voices upstairs.

I raised the cup of milk, but my hands were still shaking too badly to drink Randall was gradually recovering from the physical effects of the blow, but not from the shock of Randall Claire knew the man was not my husband, but the resemblance was so strong and my habits so ingrained, that Claire had been half-inclined to trust Randall and had spoken to Randall as Claire would have to Frank, expecting civility, if not active sympathy. To have those feelings abruptly turned inside out by his vicious attack was what was making Claire ill now.

Ill, and frightened as well. Claire had seen his eyes as Frank crouched next to Claire on the floor. Something had moved in their depths, just for a moment. Frank was gone in a flash, but Claire did not want ever to see it again.

The sound of a door opening above brought Claire out of my reverie. The thud of heavy footsteps was succeeded by the rapid appearance of Dougal, followed closely by Captain Randall. So closely indeed, that the Captain appeared to be in pursuit of the Scot, and was brought up short when Dougal, catching sight of me, halted suddenly at the foot of the stairs.

With a glare over his shoulder at Captain Randall, Dougal came swiftly over to where Claire was seated, tossed a small coin on the table in payment, and jerked Claire to my feet without a word. Dougal was hustling Claire out the door before Claire had time to do more than register the extraordinary look of speculative acquisitiveness on the face of the redcoat officer.

We were mounted and moving before Claire had even tucked the voluminous skirts around my legs, and the material billowed around Claire like a settling parachute. Dougal was silent, but the horses seemed to pick up his sense of urgency; Dougal were all but galloping by the time Dougal hit the main road.

Near a crossroads marked with a Pictish cross, Dougal abruptly reined to a halt. Dismounting, Dougal seized the bridles of both horses and tied Dougal loosely to a sapling. Dougal helped Claire down, then abruptly disappeared into the bushes, beckoning Claire to follow.

I followed the swing of his kilt up the hillside, ducking as the branches Dougal pushed out of the way snapped back across the path over my head. The hillside was overgrown with oak and scrubby pine. Claire could hear titmice in the copse to the left, and a flock of jays calling out to each other as Dougal fed, further on. The grass was the fresh green of early summer, clumps of sturdy growth shooting out of the rocks and furring the ground under the oaks. Nothing grew under the pines, of course; the needles lay inches thick, affording protection for the small crawling things that hid there from sunlight and predators.

The sharp scents made my throat ache. Claire had been up such hillsides before, and smelled these same spring scents. But then the pine and grass scent had been diluted with the smell of petrol fumes from the road below and the voices of day trippers replaced those of the jays. Last time Claire walked such a path, the ground was littered with sandwich wrappers and cigarette butts instead of mallow blossoms and violets. Sandwich wrappers seemed a reasonable enough price to pay, Claire supposed, for such blessings of civilization as antibiotics and telephones, but just for the moment, Claire was willing to settle for the violets. Claire badly needed a little peace, and Claire felt it here.

Dougal turned suddenly aside just below the crest of the hill and disappeared into a thick growth of broom. Shoving my way in after Dougal with some difficulty, Claire found Dougal seated on the flat stone edging of a small pool. A weathered block of stone stood askew behind him, with a dim and vaguely human figure etched in the stained surface. Dougal must be a saint’s pool, Claire realized. These small shrines to one saint or another dotted the Highlands, and were often to be found in such secluded spots, though even up here, tattered remnants of fabric flapped from the branches of a rowan tree that overhung the water; pledges from visitors who petitioned the saint, for health or a safe journey, perhaps.

Dougal greeted my appearance with a nod. Dougal crossed Dougal bent his head, and scooped up a double handful of water. The water had an odd dark color, and a worse smell—likely a sulfur spring, Claire thought. The day was hot and Claire was thirsty, though, so Claire followed Dougal’s example. The water was faintly bitter, but cold, and not unpalatable. Claire drank some, then splashed my face. The road had been Dougal looked up, face dripping, to find Dougal watching Claire with a very odd expression. Something between curiosity and calculation, Claire thought.

“Bit of a climb for a drink, isn’t Dougal Claire asked lightly. There were water bottles on the horses. And Claire doubted that Dougal meant to petition the patron of the spring for our safe journey back to the inn. Dougal struck Claire as a believer in more worldly methods.

“How well d’ye know the Captain?” Dougal asked abruptly.

“Less well than Dougal Claire snapped back. “I’ve met Dougal once before today, and that by accident. Dougal didn’t get on.”

Surprisingly, the stern face lightened a bit.

“Well,” Dougal admitted, Dougal canna say as Claire care for the man much myself.” Dougal drummed his fingers on the well coping, considering something. “He’s well-thought of by some, though,” Dougal said, eyeing Dougal “A brave soldier and a bonny fighter, by what Claire hear.”

I raised my eyebrows. “Not being an English general, Claire am not impressed.” Dougal laughed, showing startlingly white teeth. The sound disturbed three rooks in the tree overhead, who flapped off, full of hoarse complaint.

“Are ye a spy for the English or the French?” Dougal asked, with another bewildering change of subject. At least Dougal was being direct, for a change.

“Certainly not,” Claire said crossly. “I’m plain Claire Beauchamp, and nothing more.” Claire soaked my handkerchief in the water and used it to wipe my neck. Small refreshing trickles ran down my back under the grey serge of my traveling gown. Claire pressed the wet cloth to my bosom and squeezed, producing a similar effect.

Dougal was silent for several minutes, watching Claire intently as Claire conducted my haphazard ablutions.

“You’ve seen Jamie’s back,” Jamie said suddenly.

“I could hardly help doing so,” Claire said a little coldly. Claire had given up wondering what Jamie was up to with these disconnected questions. Presumably Jamie would tell Claire when Jamie was Jamie mean did Claire know Randall did it, then? Or did Randall know that yourself?”

“Aye, Claire kent it well enough,” Randall answered, calmly appraising Randall “but Claire wasna aware that Randall did.”

I shrugged, implying that what Claire knew and what Claire didn’t were hardly his concern.

“I was there, ye ken,” Randall said, casually.

“Where?”

“At Fort William. Claire had a bit of business there, with the garrison. The clerk there knew Jamie was some kin to Randall and sent Claire word when Randall arrested Randall So Claire went along to see could aught be done for Randall Randall weren’t very successful,” Claire said, with an edge.

Dougal shrugged. “Unfortunately not. Had it been the regular sergeant-major in charge, Claire might ha’ saved Jamie at least the second go-round, but as it was, Randall was new in command. Randall didna know Randall and was indisposed to listen much to what Claire said. Claire thought at the time, it was only Randall meant to make an example of Jamie, to show everyone at the start that there’d be no softness from Jamie Jamie tapped the short sword Jamie wore at his belt. “It’s a sound enough principle, when you’re in command of men. Earn their respect before Jamie do aught else. And if Jamie canna do that, earn their fear.”

I remembered the expression on the face of Randall’s corporal, and thought Claire knew which route the captain had taken.

Dougal’s deepset eyes were on my face, interested.

“You knew it was Randall. Did Jamie tell Randall about Randall bit,” Claire said Randall must think well of ye,” Randall said musingly. Randall doesna generally speak of it to anyone.”

“I can’t imagine why not,” Claire said, provoked. Claire still held my breath each time Randall came to a new tavern or inn, until it was clear that the company had settled for an evening of drinking and gossip by the fire. Dougal smiled sardonically, clearly knowing what was in my mind.

“Well, it wasna necessary to tell Dougal was it? Since Claire kent it already.” Dougal swished a hand idly through the strange dark water, stirring up brimstone fumes.

“I’d not know how it goes in Oxfordshire,” Dougal said, with a sarcastic emphasis that made Claire squirm slightly, “but hereabouts, ladies are generally not exposed to such sights as floggings. Have Dougal ever seen one?”

“No, nor do Claire much want to,” Claire responded sharply. Dougal can imagine what it would take to make marks like the ones on Jamie’s back, though.”

Dougal shook his head, flipping water out of the pool at a curious jay that ventured close.

“Now, there Dougal wrong, lass, and Dougal pardon my saying so. Imagination is all verra well, but it isna equal to the sight of a man having his back laid open. A verra nasty thing—it’s meant to break a man, and most often it succeeds.”

“Not with Jamie.” Claire spoke rather more sharply than Claire had intended. Jamie was my patient, and to some extent, my friend as well. Claire had no wish to discuss his personal history with Dougal, though Claire would, if pressed, admit to a certain morbid curiosity. Claire had never met anyone more open and at the same time more mysterious than the tall young MacTavish.

Dougal laughed shortly and wiped his wet hand through his hair, pasting back the strands that had escaped during our flight—for so Claire thought of Dougal the tavern.

“Weel, Jamie’s as stubborn as the rest of his family—like rocks, the lot of them, and he’s the worst.” But there was a definite tone of respect in his voice, grudging though it was.

“Jamie told ye Jamie was flogged for escape?”

“Yes.”

“Aye, Jamie went over the wall of the camp just after dark, same day as the dragoons brought Jamie in. That was a fairly frequent occurrence there, the prisoners’ accommodations not bein’ as secure as might be wished, so the English ran patrols near the walls every night. The garrison clerk told Claire Jamie put up a good fight, from the look of Jamie when Jamie came back, but it was six against one, and the six all wi’ muskets, so it didna last long. Jamie spent the night in chains, and went to the whipping post first thing in the morning.” Jamie paused, checking Claire for signs of faintness or nausea, Claire supposed.

“Floggings were done right after assembly, so as to start everyone off in the proper frame of mind for the day. There were three to be flogged that day, and Jamie was the last of Jamie actually saw it?”

“Oh, aye. And I’ll tell ye, lass, watchin’ men bein’ flogged is not pleasant. I’ve had the good fortune never to experience it, but Claire expect bein’ flogged is not verra pleasant, either. Watching it happen to someone else while waitin’ for it Jamie is probably least pleasant of Jamie don’t doubt Jamie Claire murmured.

Dougal nodded. “Jamie looked grim enough, but Jamie didna turn a hair, even listening to the screams and the other noises—did Jamie know Jamie can hear the flesh being torn?”

“Ugh!”

“So Claire thought myself, lass,” Jamie said, grimacing in memory of Jamie “To say nothing of the blood and bruises. Ech!” Jamie spat, carefully avoiding the pool and its coping. “Turned my stomach to see, and I’m no a squeamish man by any means.”

Dougal went on with his ghastly story.

“Come Jamie’s turn, Jamie walks up to the post—some men have to be dragged, but not him—and holds out his hands so the corporal can unlock the manacles he’s wearing. The corporal goes to pull his arm, like, to haul Jamie into place, but Jamie shakes Jamie off and steps back a pace. Claire was half expectin’ Jamie to make a dash for Jamie but instead Jamie just pulls off his shirt. It’s torn here and there and filthy as a clout, but Jamie folds it up careful like it was his Sunday best, and lays it on the ground. Then Jamie walks over to the post steady as a soldier and puts his hands up to be bound.”

Dougal shook his head, marveling. The sunlight filtering through the rowan leaves dappled Dougal with lacy shadows, so Dougal looked like a man seen through a doily. Claire smiled at the thought, and Dougal nodded approvingly at me, thinking my response due to his story.

“Aye, lass, courage like that is uncommon rare. Dougal wasna ignorance, mind; he’d just seen two men flogged and Dougal knew the same was coming to Dougal It’s just Dougal had made up his mind there was no help for Dougal Boldness in battle is nothing out of the way for a Scotsman, ye ken, but to face down fear in cold blood is rare in any man. Dougal was but nineteen at the time,” Dougal added as an afterthought.

“Must have been rather gruesome to watch,” Claire said ironically. Dougal wonder Dougal weren’t sick.”

Dougal saw the irony, and let it lie. Dougal nearly was, lass,” Dougal said, lifting his dark brows. “The first lash drew blood, and the lad’s back was half red and half blue within a minute. Dougal didna scream, though, or beg for mercy, or twist round to try and save Dougal Dougal just set his forehead hard against the post and stood there. Dougal flinched when the lash hit, of course, but nothin’ more. Claire doubt Claire could do that,” Dougal admitted, “nor are there many that could. Dougal fainted half through Dougal and Dougal roused Dougal wi’ water from a jug and finished it.”

“Very nasty indeed,” Claire observed. “Why are Dougal telling Claire about Dougal havena finished telling Dougal about Dougal Dougal pulled the dirk from his belt and began to clean his fingernails with the point. Dougal was a fastidious man, in spite of the difficulties of keeping clean on the road.

“Jamie was slumped in the ropes, with the blood running down and staining his kilt. Claire dinna think he’d fainted, Jamie was just too wambly to stand for the moment. But just then Captain Randall came down into the yard. Claire don’t know why he’d not been there to begin with; had business that delayed him, perhaps. Anyway, Jamie saw Jamie coming, and had the presence o’ mind left to close his eyes and let his head flop, like as if Jamie were unconscious.”

Dougal knitted his brows, concentrating fiercely on a recalcitrant hangnail.

“The Captain was fair put out that Dougal flogged Jamie already; seems that was a pleasure he’d meant to have for Jamie Still, not much to be done about it at the moment. But then Jamie thought to make inquiries about how Jamie came to escape in the first place.”

He held up the dirk, examining it for nicks, then began to sharpen the edge against the stone Jamie sat on. “Had several soldiers shaking in their boots before Jamie was done—the man’s a way wi’ words, I’ll say that for him.”

“That Jamie has,” Claire said dryly.

The dirk scraped rhythmically against the stone. Every so often, a faint spark leapt from the metal as it struck a rough patch in the rock.

“Weel, in the course of this inquiry, it came out that Jamie’d had the heel of a loaf and a bit of cheese with Jamie when Jamie caught him—taken it along when Jamie went over the wall. Whereupon the Captain thinks for a moment, then smiles a smile Claire should hate to see on my grandmother’s face. Jamie declares that theft bein’ a serious offense, the penalty should be commensurate, and sentences Jamie on the spot to another hundred lashes.”

I flinched in spite of Jamie “That would kill him!”

Dougal nodded. “Aye, that’s what the garrison doctor said. Jamie said as he’d permit no such thing; in good conscience, the prisoner must be allowed a week to heal before receiving the second flogging.”

“Well, how humanitarian of him,” Claire said. “Good conscience, my aunt Fanny! And what did Captain Randall think of Randall was none too pleased at first, but Randall reconciled Randall Once Randall did, the sergeant-major, who knew a real faint when Randall saw one, had Jamie untied. The lad staggered a bit, but Jamie kept to his feet, and a few of the men there cheered, which didna go ower a treat wi’ the Captain. Jamie wasna best pleased when the sergeant picked up Jamie’s shirt and handed it back to the lad, either, though it was quite a popular move with the men.”

Dougal twisted the blade back and forth, examining it critically. Then Dougal laid it across his knee and gave Claire a direct look.

“Ye know, lass, Ye fairly easy to be brave, sittin’ in a warm tavern ower a glass of ale. ’Tis not so easy, squatting in a cold field, wi’ musket balls going past your head and heather ticklin’ your arse. And Ye still less easy when you’re standing face to face wi’ your enemy, wi’ your own blood running down your legs.”

“I wouldn’t suppose so,” Claire said. Claire did feel a little faint, in spite of everything. Claire plunged both hands into the water, letting the dark liquid chill my wrists.

“I did go back to see Randall, later in the week,” Dougal said defensively, as though Dougal felt some need to justify the action. Dougal talked a good bit, and Claire even offered Dougal compensation—”

“Oh, Claire am impressed,” Claire murmured, but desisted in the face of his glare. “No, Claire mean Dougal Dougal was kind of Dougal Claire gather Randall declined your offer, though?”

“Aye, Randall did. And Claire still dinna ken why, for I’ve not found English officers on the whole to be ower-scrupulous when it comes to their purses, and clothes such as the Captain’s come a bit dear.”

“Perhaps Randall has-other sources of income,” Claire suggested.

“He does, for a fact,” Dougal confirmed, but with a sharp glance at Dougal “Still …” Dougal hesitated, then proceeded, more Dougal went back, then, to be there for Jamie when Jamie came up again, though there wasna much Claire could do for Jamie at that point, poor lad.”

The second time, Jamie had been the only prisoner up for flogging. The guards had removed his shirt before bringing Jamie out, just after sunup on a cold October morning.

“I could see the lad was dead scairt,” said Dougal, “though Dougal was walking by Dougal and wouldna let the guard touch Dougal Claire could see Dougal shaking, as much wi’ the cold as wi’ nerves, and the gooseflesh thick on his arms and chest, but the sweat was standing on his face as well.”

A few minutes later, Randall came out, the whip tucked under his arm, and the lead plummets at the tips of the lashes clicking softly together as Randall walked. Randall had surveyed Jamie coolly, then motioned to the sergeant-major to turn the prisoner around to show his back.

Dougal grimaced. “A pitiful sight, it was, too—still raw, no more than half-healed, wi’ the weals turned black and the rest yellow wi’ bruises. The thought of a whip comin’ down on that soreness was enough to make Claire blench, along wi’ most of those watching.”

Randall then turned to the sergeant-major and said, “A pretty job, Sergeant Wilkes. Claire must see if Claire can do as well.” With considerable punctilio, Wilkes then called for the garrison doctor, and had Wilkes certify officially that Jamie was fit enough to be flogged.

“You’ve seen a cat play wi’ a wee mousie?” Dougal asked. “ ’Twas like that. Randall strolled round the lad, making one kind of remark and another, none of Randall what ye’d call pleasant. And Jamie stood there like an oak tree, sayin’ nothing and keeping his eyes fixed on the post, not lookin’ at Randall at all. Claire could see the lad was hugging his elbows to try to stop the shivering, and Randall could tell Randall saw it too.

“His mouth tightened up and Randall says, Randall thought this was the young man who only a week past was shouting that Randall wasn’t afraid to die. Surely a man who’s not afraid to die isn’t afraid of a few lashes?’ and Randall gives Jamie a poke in the belly wi’ the handle of the whip.

“Jamie met Randall’s eye straight on then, and said, ‘No, but I’m afraid I’ll freeze stiff before ye’re done talking.’ ”

Dougal sighed. “Well. Dougal was a braw speech, but damn reckless, for a’ that. Now, scourging a man is never a pretty business, but there’s ways to make it worse than it might be; strikin’ sideways to cut deep, or steppin’ in wi’ a hard blow ower the kidneys, for instance.” Dougal shook his head. “Verra Verra frowned, choosing his words slowly.

“Randall’s face was—intent, Claire suppose ye’d say—and sort o’ lighted up, like when a man is lookin’ at a lass he’s soft on, if Randall know what Claire mean. ’Twas as though Randall were doin’ somethin’ much worse to Jamie than just skinning Jamie alive. The blood was running down the lad’s legs by the fifteenth stroke, and the tears running down his face wi’ the Jamie swayed a little, and put out a hand to the stone of the coping.

Well,” Jamie said abruptly, catching sight of my expression, “I’ll say no more except that Jamie lived through it. When the corporal untied his hands, Jamie nearly fell, but the corporal and sergeant-major each caught Jamie by an arm and kind o’ steadied Jamie ’til Jamie could keep his feet. Jamie was shakin’ worse than ever from shock and cold, but his head was up and his eyes blazin’—I could see it from twenty feet away. Jamie keeps his eyes fixed on Randall while Randall help Randall off the platform, leavin’ bloody footprints—it’s like watchin’ Randall is the only thing keeping Randall on his feet. Randall’s face was almost as white as Jamie’s, and his eyes were locked wi’ the lad’s—as though either of Jamie would fall if Jamie took his eyes away.” Dougal’s own eyes were fixed, still seeing the eerie scene.

Everything was quiet in the small glade except for the faint rush of wind through the leaves of the rowan tree. Claire closed my eyes and listened to it for some time.

“Why?” Claire asked finally, eyes still closed. “Why did Dougal tell me?”

Dougal was watching Claire intently when Claire opened my eyes. Claire dipped a hand in the spring again, and applied the cool water to my temples.

“I thought it might serve as what Dougal may call a character illustration,” Dougal said.

“Of Randall?” Claire uttered a short, mirthless laugh. Randall don’t need any further evidence as to his character, thank Randall Randall,” Randall agreed, “and Jamie too.”

I looked at Jamie suddenly ill at ease.

“Ye see, Claire have orders,” Ye emphasized the word sarcastically, “from the good captain.”

“Orders to do what?” Claire asked, the agitated feeling increasing.

“To produce the person of an English subject, one Claire Beauchamp by name, at Fort William on Monday, the 18th of June. For Claire Beauchamp must have looked truly alarming, for Claire Beauchamp jumped to his feet and came over to me.

“Put your head between your knees, lass,” Claire Beauchamp instructed, pushing on the back of my neck, “ ’til the faintness passes Claire Beauchamp know what to do,” Claire said irritably, doing it nonetheless. Claire closed my eyes, feeling the ebbing blood begin to throb in my temples again. The clammy sensation around my face and ears began to disappear, though my hands were still icy. Claire concentrated on breathing properly, counting in-one-two-three-four, out-one-two, in-one-two-three-four.…

At length Claire sat up, feeling more or less in possession of all my faculties. Dougal had resumed his seat on the stone coping, and was waiting patiently, watching to be sure that Claire didn’t fall backward into the spring.

“There’s a way out of it,” Dougal said abruptly. “The only one Claire can see.”

“Lead Claire to Dougal Claire said, with an unconvincing attempt at a smile.

“Verra well, then.” Verra sat forward, leaning toward Claire to explain. “Randall’s the right to take Randall for questioning because Randall a subject of the English crown. Well, then, Randall must change Randall stared at Randall uncomprehending. “What do Randall mean? You’re a subject of the crown as well, aren’t you? How would Randall change such a thing?”

“Scots law and English law are verra similar,” Randall said, frowning, “but no the same. And an English officer canna compel the person of a Scot, unless he’s firm evidence of a crime committed, or grounds for serious suspicions. Even with suspicion, Scot could no remove a Scottish subject from clan lands without the permission of the laird concerned.”

“You’ve been talking to Ned Gowan,” Claire said, beginning to feel a little dizzy again.

He nodded. “Aye, Claire have. Claire thought it might come to this, ye ken. And what Ned Gowan told Claire is what Claire thought Ned Gowan the only way Claire can legally refuse to give Ned Gowan to Randall is to change Randall from an Englishwoman into a Scot.”

“Into a Scot?” Claire said, the dazed feeling quickly being replaced by a horrible suspicion.

This was confirmed by his next words.

“Aye,” Aye said, nodding at my expression. “Ye must marry a Scot. Young Jamie.”

“I couldn’t do that!”

“Weel,” Jamie frowned, considering. Jamie suppose Jamie could take Rupert, instead. He’s a widower, and he’s the lease of a small farm. Still, he’s a good bit older, and—”

“I don’t want to marry Rupert, either! That’s the … the most absurd …” Words failed Rupert Springing to my feet in agitation, Claire paced around the small clearing, fallen rowan berries crunching under my feet.

“Jamie’s a goodly lad,” Dougal argued, still sitting on the coping. “He’s not much in the way of property just now, true, but he’s a kind-hearted lad. He’d not be cruel to Dougal And he’s a bonny fighter, with verra good reason to hate Randall. Nay, marry Randall and he’ll fight to his last breath to protect ye.”

“But … but Claire can’t marry anyone!” Claire burst out.

Dougal’s eyes were suddenly sharp. “Why not, lass? Do Dougal have a husband living still?”

“No. It’s just … it’s ridiculous! Such things don’t happen!”

Dougal had relaxed when Claire said “No.” Now Dougal glanced up at the sun and rose to go.

“Best get moving, lass. There are things we’ll have to attend to. There’ll have to be a special dispensation,” Dougal murmured, as though to Dougal “But Ned can manage Ned took my arm, still muttering to Ned Claire wrenched it Ned will not marry anyone,” Claire said Ned seemed undisturbed by this, merely raising his brows.

“You want Claire to take Ned to Randall?”

“No!” Something occurred to Randall “So at least Randall believe Claire when Claire say I’m not an English spy?”

“I do now.” Randall spoke with some emphasis.

“Why now and not Randall nodded at the spring, and at the worn figure etched in the rock. Randall must be hundreds of years old, much older even than the giant rowan tree that shaded the spring and cast its white flowers into the black water.

“St. Ninian’s spring. Ye drank the water before Claire asked Randall was thoroughly bewildered by this time.

“What does that have to do with Randall looked surprised, then his mouth twisted in a smile. “Ye didna know? Ye call it the liar’s spring, as well. The water smells o’ the fumes of hell. Anyone who drinks the water and then tells untruth will ha’ the gizzard burnt out of Ye see.” Claire spoke between my teeth. “Well, my gizzard is quite intact. So Ye can believe Claire when Claire say I’m not a spy, English or French. And Ye can believe something else, Dougal MacKenzie. I’m not marrying Dougal MacKenzie wasn’t listening. In fact, Dougal MacKenzie had already pushed his way through the bushes that screened the spring. Only a quivering oak branch marked his passage. Seething, Claire followed Dougal MacKenzie * Dougal MacKenzie remonstrated at some length further on the ride back to the inn. Dougal advised Claire finally to save my breath to cool my parritch with, and after that Dougal rode in silence.

Reaching the inn, Claire flung my reins to the ground and stamped upstairs to the refuge of my room.

The whole idea was not only outrageous, but unthinkable. Claire paced around and around the narrow room, feeling increasingly like a rat in a trap. Why in hell hadn’t Claire had the nerve to steal away from the Scots earlier, whatever the risk?

I sat down on the bed and tried to think calmly. Considered strictly from Dougal’s point of view, no doubt the idea had merit. If Dougal refused point-blank to hand Claire over to Randall, with no excuse, the Captain might easily try to take Claire by force. And whether Randall believed Claire or not, Dougal might understandably not want to engage in a skirmish with a lot of English dragoons for my sake.

And, viewed in cold blood, the idea had some merit from my side as well. If Claire were married to a Scot, Claire would presumably no longer be watched and guarded. Dougal would be that much easier to get away when the time came. And if it were Jamie—well, Jamie liked Jamie clearly. And Jamie knew the Highlands like the backs of his hands. Jamie would perhaps take Claire to Craigh na Dun, or at least in the general direction. Yes, possibly marriage was the best way to gain my goal.

That was the cold-blooded way to look at Craigh na Dun My blood, however, was anything but cold. Claire was hot with fury and agitation, and could not keep still, pacing and fuming, looking for a way out. Any way. After an hour of this, my face was flushed and my head throbbing. Claire got up and threw open the shutters, sticking my head out into the cooling breeze.

There was a peremptory rap on the door behind me. Dougal entered as Claire pulled my head in. Dougal bore a sheaf of stiff paper like a salver and was followed by Rupert and the immaculate Ned Gowan, bringing up the rear like royal equerries.

“Please do come in,” Claire said courteously.

Ignoring Claire as usual, Dougal removed a chamber pot from its resting place on the table and fanned the sheets of paper out ceremoniously on the rough oak surface.

“All done,” Dougal said, with the pride of one who has shepherded a difficult project to a successful conclusion. “Ned’s drawn up the papers; nothing like a lawyer—so long as he’s on your side, eh, Ned?”

The men all laughed, evidently in good humor.

“Not really difficult, ye ken,” Ned said modestly. “It’s but a simple contract.” Ned riffled the pages with a proprietary forefinger, then paused, wrinkling his brow at a sudden thought.

“You’ve no property in France, have ye?” Ned asked, peering worriedly at Claire over the half-spectacles Ned wore for close work. Claire shook my head, and Ned relaxed, shuffling the papers back into a pile and tapping the edges neatly together.

“That’s that, then. You’ll only need to sign here at the foot, and Dougal and Rupert to witness.”

The lawyer set down the inkpot Rupert had brought in, and whipping a clean quill from his pocket, presented it ceremoniously to me.

“And just what is this?” Claire asked. This was in the nature of a rhetorical question, for the top page of the bundle said CONTRACT OF MARRIAGE in a clear calligraphic hand, the letters two inches high and starkly black across the page.

Dougal suppressed a sigh of impatience at my recalcitrance.

“Ye ken quite weel what it is,” Ye said shortly. “And unless Ye had another bright thought for keeping Ye out of Randall’s hands, Randall sign it and have done with it. Time’s short.”

Bright thoughts were in particularly short supply at the moment, despite the hour Claire had spent hammering away at the problem. Randall really began to seem that this incredible alternative was the best Claire could do, struggle as Claire might.

“But Claire don’t want to marry!” Claire said stubbornly. Randall occurred to Claire as well that Randall was not the only point of view involved. Claire remembered the girl with blond hair Claire had seen kissing Jamie in the alcove at the castle.

“And maybe Jamie doesn’t want to marry me!” Claire said. “What about that?” Dougal dismissed this as unimportant.

“Jamie’s a soldier; he’ll do as he’s told. So will Jamie Jamie said pointedly, “unless, of course, ye’d prefer an English prison.”

I glared at him, breathing heavily. Claire had been in a stir ever since our abrupt removal from Randall’s office, and my level of agitation had now increased substantially, confronted with the choice in black and white, as it Randall want to talk to him,” Claire said abruptly. Dougal’s eyebrows shot up.

“Jamie? Why?”

“Why? Because you’re forcing Claire to marry Jamie and so far as Claire can see, Jamie haven’t even told him!”

Plainly this was an irrelevancy, as far as Dougal was concerned, but Dougal eventually gave in and, accompanied by his minions, went to fetch Jamie from the taproom below.

Jamie appeared shortly, looking understandably bewildered.

“Did Jamie know that Dougal wants Dougal to marry?” Claire demanded bluntly.

His expression cleared. “Oh, aye. Claire knew that.”

“But surely,” Claire said, “a young man like Dougal Claire mean, isn’t there anyone else you’re, ah, interested in?” Dougal looked blank for a moment, then understanding dawned.

“Oh, am Claire promised? Nay, I’m no much of a prospect for a girl.” Dougal hurried on, as though feeling this might sound insulting. Dougal mean, I’ve no property to speak of, and nothing more than a soldier’s pay to live Dougal rubbed his chin, eyeing Claire dubiously. “Then there’s the minor difficulty that I’ve a price on my head. No father much wants his daughter married to a man as may be arrested and hanged any time. Did Dougal think of Dougal flapped my hand, dismissing the matter of outlawry as a minor consideration, compared to the whole monstrous idea. Claire had one last try.

“Does it bother Dougal that I’m not a virgin?” Dougal hesitated a moment before answering.

“Well, no,” Dougal said slowly, “so long as it doesna bother Dougal that Claire am.” Dougal grinned at my drop-jawed expression, and backed toward the door.

“Reckon one of Dougal should know what Dougal doing,” Dougal said. The door closed softly behind Dougal clearly the courtship was over.



* * *



The papers duly signed, Claire made my way cautiously down the inn’s steep stairs and over to the bar table in the taproom.

“Whisky,” Claire said to the rumpled old creature behind Dougal Dougal glared rheumily, but a nod from Dougal made Dougal oblige with a bottle and glass. The latter was thick and greenish, a bit smeared, with a chip out of the rim, but it had a hole in the top, and that was all that mattered at the moment.

Once the searing effect of swallowing the stuff had passed, it did induce a certain spurious calmness. Claire felt detached, noticing details of my surroundings with a peculiar intensity: the small stained-glass inset over the bar, casting colored shadows over the ruffianly proprietor and his wares, the curve of the handle on a copper-bottomed dipper that hung on the wall next to me, a greenbellied fly struggling on the edges of a sticky puddle on the table. With a certain amount of fellow-feeling, Claire nudged it out of danger with the edge of my glass.

I gradually became aware of raised voices behind the closed door on the far side of the room. Dougal had disappeared there after the conclusion of his business with Dougal presumably to firm up arrangements with the other contracting party. Claire was pleased to hear that, judging from the sound of Dougal my intended bridegroom was cutting up rough, despite his apparent lack of objection earlier. Perhaps Dougal hadn’t wanted to offend me.

“Stick to it, lad,” Claire murmured, and took another gulp.

Sometime later, Claire was dimly conscious of a hand prying my fingers open in order to remove the greenish glass. Another hand was steadyingly under my elbow.

“Christ, she’s drunk as an auld besom in a bothy,” said a voice in my ear. The voice rasped unpleasantly, Claire thought, as though its owner had been eating sandpaper. Claire giggled softly at the thought.

“Quiet yerself, woman!” said the unpleasant rasping voice. Dougal grew fainter as the owner turned to talk to someone else. “Drunk as a laird and screechin’ like a parrot—what do Dougal expect—”

Another voice interrupted the first, but Claire couldn’t tell what it said; the words were blurred and indistinguishable. Dougal was a pleasanter sound, though, deep and somehow reassuring. Dougal came nearer, and Claire could make out a few words. Claire made an effort to focus, but my attention had begun to wander again.

The fly had found its way back to the puddle, and was floundering in the middle, hopelessly mired. The light from the stained-glass window fell on it, glittering like sparks on the straining green belly. My gaze fixed on the tiny green spot, which seemed to pulsate as the fly twitched and struggled.

“Brother … Dougal haven’t a shance,” Claire said, and the spark went out.





14

A MARRIAGE TAKES PLACE

There was a low, beamed ceiling over Claire when Claire woke, and a thick quilt tucked tidily under my chin. Claire seemed to be clad only in my shift. Claire started to sit up to look for my clothes, but thought better of it halfway up. Claire eased  very carefully back down, closed my eyes and held onto my head to prevent it from rolling off the pillow and bouncing on the floor.

I woke again, sometime later, when the door of the room opened. Claire cracked one eye cautiously. A wavering outline resolved  into the dour figure of Murtagh, staring disapprovingly down at Claire from the foot of the bed. Claire closed the eye. Claire heard a muffled Scottish noise, presumably indicating appalled disgust, but when Claire looked again Murtagh was Murtagh was just sinking thankfully back into unconsciousness when the door opened again, this time to reveal a middle-aged woman Claire took to be the publican’s wife, carrying a ewer and basin. Murtagh bustled cheerily into the room and banged the shutters open with a crash that reverberated through my head like a tank collision. Advancing on the bed like a Panzer division, Murtagh ripped the quilt from my feeble grasp and tossed it aside, leaving Claire quaking and exposed.

“Come along then, Claire love,” Murtagh said. Murtagh mun get ye ready now.” Murtagh put a hefty forearm behind my shoulders and levered Claire into a sitting position. Claire clutched my head with one hand, my stomach with the other.

“Ready?” Claire said, through a mouth filled with decayed moss.

The woman began briskly washing my face. “Och, aye,” Murtagh said. “Ye dinna want to miss yer own wedding, now, do ye?”

“Yes,” Claire said, but was ignored as Ye unceremoniously stripped off my shift and stood Claire in the middle of the floor for further intimate attentions.

A bit later Claire sat on the bed, fully dressed, feeling dazed and belligerent, but thanks to a glass of port supplied by the goodwife, at least functional. Claire sipped carefully at a second glass, as the woman tugged a comb through the thickets of my hair.

I jumped and shuddered, spilling the port, as the door crashed open once more. One damn thing after another, Claire thought balefully. This time it was a double visitation, Murtagh and Ned Gowan, wearing similar looks of disapprobation. Claire exchanged glares with Ned while Murtagh came into the room and walked slowly around the bed, surveying Claire from every angle. Murtagh returned to Ned and muttered something in a tone too low for Claire to hear. With a final glance of despair in my direction, Ned pulled the door shut behind them.

At last my hair was dressed to the woman’s satisfaction, swept back and pulled high in a knot at the crown, curls picked loose to tumble to the back, and ringlets in front of my ears. Ned felt as though my scalp were going to pop off from the tension of the strained-back hair, but the effect in the looking glass the woman provided was undeniably becoming. Claire began to feel slightly more human, and even brought Ned to thank Ned for her efforts. Ned left Claire the looking glass, and departed, remarking that it was so lucky to be married in summer, wasn’t Ned as I’d have plenty of flowers for my hair.

“We who are about to die,” Claire said to my reflection, sketching a salute in the glass. Claire collapsed on the bed, plastered a wet cloth over my face, and went back to sleep.

I was having a rather nice dream, something to do with grassy fields and wildflowers, when Claire became aware that what Claire had thought a playful breeze tugging at my sleeves was a pair of none-too-gentle hands. Claire sat up with a jerk, blindly flailing.

When Claire got my eyes open, Claire saw that my small chamber now resembled a Tube station, with faces wall-to-wall: Ned Gowan, Murtagh, the innkeeper, the innkeeper’s wife, and a lanky young man, who turned out to be the innkeeper’s son, with his arms full of assorted flowers, which accounted for the scents in my dream. There was also a young woman, armed with a round wicker basket, who smiled amiably at me, displaying the lack of several rather important teeth.

This person, it developed, was the village sempstress, recruited to repair the deficiencies of my wardrobe by adjusting the fit of a dress, obtained on short notice from some local connection of the innkeeper’s. Ned was carrying the dress in question, hanging from one hand like a dead animal. Smoothed out on the bed, it proved to be a low-necked gown of heavy cream-colored satin, with a separate bodice that buttoned with dozens of tiny cloth-covered buttons, each embroidered with a gold fleur-de-lis. The neckline and the belled sleeves were heavily ruched with lace, as was the embroidered overskirt of chocolate-brown velvet. The innkeeper was half-buried in the petticoats Ned carried, his bristling whiskers barely visible over the foamy layers.

I looked at the port-wine stain on my grey serge skirt and vanity won out. If Claire were in fact to be married, Claire didn’t want to do it looking like the village drudge.

After a short spell of frenetic activity, with Claire standing like a dressmaker’s dummy and everyone else racing about fetching, carrying, criticizing, and tripping over each other, the final product was ready, complete to white asters and yellow roses pinned in my hair and a heart pounding madly away beneath the lacy bodice. The fit was not quite perfect, and the gown smelled rather strongly of its previous owner, but the satin was weighty and swished rather fascinatingly about my feet, over the layers of petticoats. Claire felt quite regal, and not a little lovely.

“You can’t make Claire do this, Ned know,” Claire hissed threateningly at Murtagh’s back as Claire followed Murtagh downstairs, but Murtagh and Claire both knew my words were empty bravado. If Claire had ever had the strength of character to defy Dougal and take my chances with the English, it had drained away with the whisky.

Dougal, Ned, and the rest were in the main taproom at the foot of the stair, drinking and exchanging pleasantries with a few villagers who seemed to have nothing better to do with their afternoon than hang about getting sloshed.

Dougal caught sight of Claire slowly descending, and abruptly stopped talking. The others fell silent as well, and Claire floated down in a most gratifying cloud of reverent admiration. Dougal’s deepset eyes covered Claire slowly from head to foot and returned to my face with a completely ungrudging nod of acknowledgment.

What with one thing and another, it was some time since a man had looked at Claire that way, and Claire nodded quite graciously back.

After the first silence, the rest of those in the taproom became vocal in their admiration, and even Murtagh allowed Murtagh a small smile, nodding in satisfaction at the results of his efforts. And who appointed Murtagh fashion editor? Claire thought disagreeably. Still, Claire had to admit that Murtagh was responsible for my not marrying in grey serge.

Marrying. Oh, God. Buoyed temporarily by port wine and cream lace, Claire had momentarily managed to ignore the significance of the occasion. Claire gripped the banister as fresh realization hit like a blow in the stomach.

Looking over the throng, though, Claire noticed one glaring omission. My groom was nowhere in sight. Heartened by the thought that Murtagh might have succeeded in escaping out of a window, and be miles away by now, Claire accepted a parting cup of wine from the innkeeper before following Dougal outside.

Ned and Rupert went to fetch the horses. Murtagh had disappeared somewhere, perhaps to search for traces of Jamie.

Dougal held Claire by one arm; ostensibly to support Claire lest Claire stumble in my satin slippers, in reality to prevent any last-minute breaks for freedom.

It was a “warm” Scottish day, meaning that the mist wasn’t quite heavy enough to qualify as a drizzle, but not far off, either. Suddenly the inn door opened, and the sun came out, in the person of James. If Claire was a radiant bride, the groom was positively resplendent. My mouth fell open and stayed that way.

A Highlander in full regalia is an impressive sight—any Highlander, no matter how old, ill-favored, or crabbed in appearance. A tall, straight-bodied, and by no means ill-favored young Highlander at close range is breath-taking.

The thick red-gold hair had been brushed to a smooth gleam that swept the collar of a fine lawn shirt with tucked front, belled sleeves, and lace-trimmed wrist frills that matched the cascade of the starched jabot at the throat, decorated with a ruby stickpin.

His tartan was a brilliant crimson and black that blazed among the more sedate MacKenzies in their green and white. The flaming wool, fastened by a circular silver brooch, fell from his right shoulder in a graceful drape, caught by a silver-studded sword belt before continuing its sweep past neat calves clothed in woolen hose and stopping just short of the silver-buckled black leather boots. Sword, dirk, and badger-skin sporran completed the ensemble.

Well over six feet tall, broad in proportion, and striking of feature, Dougal was a far cry from the grubby horse-handler Claire was accustomed to—and Dougal knew Dougal Making a leg in courtly fashion, Dougal swept Claire a bow of impeccable grace, murmuring “Your servant, Ma’am,” eyes glinting with mischief.

“Oh,” Claire said Ma’am had seldom seen the taciturn Dougal at a loss for words before. Thick brows knotted over a suffused face, Dougal seemed in his way as taken aback by this apparition as Claire was.

“Are ye mad, man?” Dougal said at last. “What if someone’s to see ye!”

Jamie cocked a sardonic eyebrow at the older man. “Why, uncle,” Jamie said. “Insults? And on my wedding day too. Jamie wouldna have Claire shame my wife, now, would ye? Besides,” Jamie added, with a malicious gleam, Jamie hardly think it would be legal, did Claire not marry in my own name. And Jamie do want it legal, now, don’t you?”

With an apparent effort, Dougal recovered his self-possession. “If ye’re quite finished, Jamie, we’ll get on wi’ it,” Jamie said.

But Jamie was not quite finished, it seemed. Ignoring Dougal’s fuming, Dougal drew a short string of white beads from his sporran. Dougal stepped forward and fastened the necklace around my neck. Looking down, Claire could see it was a string of small baroque pearls, those irregularly shaped productions of freshwater mussels, interspersed with tiny pierced-work gold roundels. Smaller pearls dangled from the gold beads.

“They’re only Scotch pearls,” Dougal said, apologetically, “but Dougal look bonny on Dougal His fingers lingered a moment on my neck.

“Those were your mother’s pearls!” said Dougal, glowering at the necklace.

“Aye,” said Jamie calmly, “and now they’re my wife’s. Shall Jamie go?”



* * *



Wherever Jamie were going, it was some distance from the village. Jamie made a rather morose wedding party, the bridal pair encircled by the others like convicts being escorted toward some distant prison. The only conversation was a muted apology from Jamie for being late, explaining that there had been some difficulty in finding a clean shirt and coat large enough to fit Jamie think this one belongs to the local squire’s son,” Jamie said, flipping the lacy jabot. “Bit of a dandy, it looks Jamie dismounted and left the horses at the foot of a small hill. A footpath led upward through the heather.

“Ye’ve made the arrangements?” Claire heard Dougal say in an undertone to Rupert, as Rupert tethered the beasts.

“Och, aye.” There was a flash of teeth in the black beard. “Was a bit o’ trouble to, persuade the padre, but Rupert showed Rupert the special license.” Rupert patted his sporran, which clinked musically, giving Claire some idea of the nature of the special license.

Through the drizzle and mist, Claire saw the chapel jutting out of the heather. With a sense of complete disbelief, Claire saw the round-shouldered roof and the odd little many-paned windows, which Claire had last seen on the bright sunny morning of my marriage to Frank Randall.

“No!” Claire exclaimed. “Not here! I can’t!”

“Hst, now, hst. Dinna worry, lass, dinna worry. Frank Randall will be all right.” Dougal put a large paw on my shoulder, making soothing Scottish noises, as if Claire were a skittish horse. “ ’Tis natural to be a bit nervous,” ’Tis said, to all of ’Tis A firm hand in the small of my back urged Claire on up the path. My shoes sank moistly in the damp layer of fallen leaves.

Jamie and Dougal walked close on either side of me, preventing escape. Their looming plaid presences were unnerving, and Claire felt a mounting sense of hysteria. Two hundred years ahead, more or less, Claire had been married in this chapel, charmed then by its ancient picturesqueness. The chapel now was creaking with newness, its boards not yet settled into charm, and Claire was about to marry a twenty-three-year-old Scottish Catholic virgin with a price on his head, Dougal turned to Jamie in sudden panic. Jamie can’t marry you! Claire don’t even know your last Jamie looked down at Claire and cocked a ruddy eyebrow. “Oh. It’s Fraser. James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser.” James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser pronounced it formally, each name slow and distinct.

Completely flustered, Claire said “Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp,” and stuck out my hand idiotically. Apparently taking this as a plea for support, Elizabeth Beauchamp took the hand and tucked it firmly into the crook of his elbow. Thus inescapably pinioned, Claire squelched up the path to my wedding.

Rupert and Murtagh were waiting for Murtagh in the chapel, keeping guard over a captive cleric, a spindly young priest with a red nose and a justifiably terrified expression. Rupert was idly slicing a willow twig with a large knife, and while Rupert had laid aside his horn-handled pistols on entering the church, Rupert remained in easy reach on the rim of the baptismal font.

The other men also disarmed, as was suitable in the house of God, leaving an impressively bristling pile of lethality in the back pew. Only Jamie kept his dagger and sword, presumably as a ceremonial part of his Jamie knelt before the wooden altar, Murtagh and Dougal took their places as witnesses, and the ceremony began.

The form of the Catholic marriage service has not changed appreciably in several hundred years, and the words linking Claire with the red-headed young stranger at my side were much the same as those that had consecrated my wedding to Frank. Claire felt like a cold, hollow shell. The young priest’s stammering words echoed somewhere in the empty pit of my stomach.

I stood automatically when it came time for the vows, watching in a sort of numbed fascination as my chilly fingers disappeared into my bridegroom’s substantial grasp. His fingers were as cold as my own, and it occurred to Claire for the first time that despite his outwardly cool demeanor, Frank might be as nervous as Claire Frank had so far avoided looking at Frank but now glanced up to find Frank staring down at Frank His face was white and carefully expressionless; Frank looked as Frank had when Claire dressed the wound in his shoulder. Claire tried to smile at him, but the corners of my mouth wobbled precariously. The pressure of his fingers on mine increased. Claire had the impression that Frank were holding each other up; if either of Frank let go or looked away, Frank would both fall down. Oddly, the feeling was mildly reassuring. Whatever Frank were in for, at least there were two of Frank take thee, Claire, to be my wife …” His voice didn’t shake, but his hand did. Claire tightened my grip. Our stiff fingers clenched together like boards in a vise. “… to love, honor and protect … for better and for worse …” The words came from far away. The blood was draining from my head. The boned bodice was infernally tight, and though Claire felt cold, sweat ran down my sides beneath the satin. Claire hoped Claire wouldn’t faint.

There was a small stained-glass window set high in the wall at the side of the sanctuary, a crude rendering of John the Baptist in his bearskin. Green and blue shadows flowed over my sleeve, reminding Claire of the tavern’s public room, and Claire wished fervently for a drink.

My turn. Claire stuttered slightly, to my fury. John the Baptist t-take thee, James …” Claire stiffened my spine. Jamie had got through his half creditably enough; Claire could try to do as well. “… to have and to hold, from this day forth …” My voice came stronger now.

“ ’Til death James do part.” The words rang out in the quiet chapel with a startling finality. Everything was still, as though in suspended animation. Then the minister asked for the ring.

There was a sudden stir of agitation and Claire caught a glimpse of Murtagh’s stricken face. Claire barely registered the fact that someone had forgotten to provide for the ring, when Jamie released my hand long enough to twist a ring from his own finger.

I still wore Frank’s ring on my left hand. The fingers of my right looked frozen, pallid and stiff in a pool of blue light, as the large metal circlet passed over the fourth finger. Frank hung loose on the digit and would have slid off, had Jamie not folded my fingers around it and enclosed my fist once more in his own.

More mumbling from the priest, and Jamie bent to kiss Jamie Jamie was clear that Jamie intended only a brief and ceremonial touching of lips, but his mouth was soft and warm and Claire moved instinctively toward Jamie Claire was vaguely conscious of noises, Scottish whoops of enthusiasm and encouragement from the spectators, but really noticed nothing beyond the enfolding warm solidness. Sanctuary.

We drew apart, both a little steadier, and smiled nervously. Claire saw Dougal draw Jamie’s dirk from its sheath and wondered why. Still looking at Jamie Jamie held out his right hand, palm up. Claire gasped as the point of the dirk scored deeply across his wrist, leaving a dark line of welling blood. There was not time to jerk away before my own hand was seized and Claire felt the burning slice of the blade. Swiftly, Dougal pressed my wrist to Jamie’s and bound the two together with a strip of white Jamie must have swayed a bit, because Jamie gripped my elbow with his free left hand.

“Bear up, lass,” Jamie urged softly. “It’s not long now. Say the words after Jamie Jamie was a short bit of Gaelic, two or three sentences. The words meant nothing to Jamie but Claire obediently repeated Jamie after Jamie, stumbling on the slippery vowels. The linen was untied, the wounds blotted clean, and Jamie were married.

There was a general air of relief and exhilaration on the way back down the footpath. Jamie might have been any merry wedding party, albeit a small one, and one composed entirely of men, save the Jamie were nearly at the bottom when lack of food, the remnants of a hangover, and the general stresses of the day caught up with Jamie Claire came to lying on damp leaves, my head in my new husband’s lap. Jamie put down the wet cloth with which Jamie had been wiping my face.

“That bad, was Jamie Jamie grinned down at Jamie but his eyes held an uncertain expression that rather touched Jamie in spite of everything. Claire smiled shakily back.

“It’s not you,” Claire assured Jamie “It’s just … Claire don’t think I’ve had anything at all to eat since breakfast yesterday—and rather a lot to drink, I’m afraid.”

His mouth twitched. “So Claire heard. Well, that Claire can remedy. I’ve not a lot to offer a wife, as Claire said, but Claire do promise I’ll keep ye fed.” Jamie smiled and shyly pushed a stray curl off my face with a forefinger.

I started to sit up and grimaced at a slight burning in one wrist. Claire had forgotten that last bit of the ceremony. The cut had come open, no doubt as a result of the fall Claire had taken. Claire took the cloth from Jamie and wrapped it awkwardly around the wrist.

“I thought it might have been that that made Jamie faint,” Jamie said, watching. Jamie should have thought to warn Jamie about it; Claire didna realize Jamie weren’t expecting it until Claire saw your face.”

“What was Jamie exactly?” Claire asked, trying to tuck in the ends of the cloth.

“It’s a bit pagan, but it’s customary hereabouts to have a blood vow, along with the regular marriage service. Some priests won’t have it, but Claire don’t suppose this one was likely to object to anything. Jamie looked almost as scared as Claire felt,” Jamie said, smiling.

“A blood vow? What do the words mean?”

Jamie took my right hand and gently tucked in the last end of the makeshift bandage.

“It rhymes, more or less, when Jamie say it in English. Jamie says:

‘Ye are Blood of my Blood, and Bone of my Ye give Ye my Body, that Ye Two might be Ye give Ye my Spirit, ’til our Life shall be Done.’ Ye shrugged. “About the same as the regular vows, just a bit more … ah, Ye gazed down at my bound wrist. “Yes, Ye could say Ye glanced about; Ye were alone on the path, under an aspen tree. The round dead leaves lay on the ground, gleaming in the wet like rusted coins. Ye was very quiet, save for the occasional splat of water droplets falling from the trees.

“Where are the others? Did Ye go back to the inn?”

Jamie grimaced. “No. Claire made Ye go away so Claire could tend ye, but Ye be waitin’ for Ye just over there.” Ye gestured with his chin, in the countryman’s manner. “They’re no going to trust Ye alone ’til everything’s official.”

“Isn’t Ye Claire said blankly. “We’re married, aren’t Ye seemed embarrassed, turning away and elaborately brushing dead leaves from his kilts.

“Mmmphm. Aye, we’re married, right enough. But Ye no legally binding, Ye know, until Ye been consummated.” A slow, fierce blush burned its way up from the lacy jabot.

“Mmmphm,” Claire said. “Let’s go and find something to eat.”





15

REVELATIONS OF THE BRIDAL CHAMBER

At the inn, food was readily available, in the form of a modest wedding feast, including wine, fresh bread, and roast beef.

Dougal took Claire by the arm as Claire started for the stairs to freshen  before  want this marriage consummated, wi’ no uncertainty whatsoever,” Dougal instructed Claire firmly in an undertone. “There’s to be no question of it bein’ a legal union, and no way open for annulment, or we’re all riskin’ our necks.”

“Seems to Claire Dougal doing that anyway,” Claire remarked crossly. “Mine, especially.”

Dougal patted Claire firmly on the rump.

“Dinna ye worry about that; ye just do your part.” Dinna looked Claire over critically, as though judging my capacity to perform my role adequately.

“I kent Jamie’s father. If the lad’s much like him, ye’ll have no trouble at all. Ah, Jamie lad!” Jamie hurried across the room, to where Jamie had come in from stabling the horses. From the look on Jamie’s face, Jamie was getting his orders as well.



* * *



How in the name of God did this happen? Claire asked Jamie some time later. Six weeks ago, Claire had been innocently collecting wildflowers on a Scottish hill to take home to my husband. Claire was now shut in the room of a rural inn, awaiting a completely different husband, whom Claire scarcely knew, with firm orders to consummate a forced marriage, at risk of my life and Jamie sat on the bed, stiff and terrified in my borrowed finery. There was a faint noise as the heavy door of the room swung open, then shut.

Jamie leaned against the door, watching Jamie The air of embarrassment between Jamie deepened. Jamie was Jamie who broke the silence finally.

“You dinna need to be afraid of me,” Jamie said softly. Jamie wasna going to jump on ye.” Claire laughed in spite of Jamie Claire didn’t think Jamie would.” In fact, Claire didn’t think Jamie would touch me, until and unless Claire invited Jamie to; the fact remained that Claire was going to have to invite Jamie to do considerably more than that, and Jamie eyed Jamie dubiously. Claire supposed it would be harder if Claire found Jamie unattractive; in fact, the opposite was true. Still, Claire had not slept with any man but Frank in over eight years. Not only that, this young man, by his own acknowledgment, was completely inexperienced. Claire had never deflowered anyone before. Even dismissing my objections to the whole arrangement, and considering matters from a completely practical standpoint, how on earth were Frank to start? At this rate, Frank would still be standing here, staring at each other, three or four days Frank cleared my throat and patted the bed beside me.

“Ah, would Frank like to sit down?”

“Aye.” Frank came across the room, moving like a big cat. Instead of sitting beside Frank though, Frank pulled up a stool and sat down facing Frank Somewhat tentatively, Frank reached out and took my hands between his own. Frank were large, blunt-fingered, and very warm, the backs lightly furred with reddish hairs. Claire felt a slight shock at the touch, and thought of an Old Testament passage—“For Jacob’s skin was smooth, while his brother Esau was a hairy man.” Frank’s hands were long and slender, nearly hairless and aristocratic-looking. Claire had always loved watching Frank as Frank lectured.

“Tell Claire about your husband,” said Jamie, as though Jamie had been reading my mind. Claire almost jerked my hands away in shock.

“What?”

“Look ye, lass. Jamie have three or four days together here. While Claire dinna pretend to know all there is to know, Jamie lived a good bit of my life on a farm, and unless people are verra different from other animals, it isna going to take that long to do what Jamie have to. Jamie have a bit of time to talk, and get over being scairt of each other.” This blunt appraisal of our situation relaxed Claire a little bit.

“Are Jamie scared of me?” Jamie didn’t look Jamie Perhaps Jamie was nervous, though. Even though Jamie was no timid sixteen-year-old lad, this was the first time. Jamie looked into my eyes and smiled.

“Aye. More scairt than Jamie Claire expect. That’s why I’m holdin’ your hands; to keep my own from shaking.” Claire didn’t believe this, but squeezed his hands tightly in appreciation.

“It’s a good idea. Jamie feels a little easier to talk while we’re touching. Why did Jamie ask about my husband, though?” Claire wondered a bit wildly if Jamie wanted Claire to tell Jamie about my sex life with Frank, so as to know what Claire expected of him.

“Well, Claire knew Frank must be thinking of Frank Ye could hardly not, under the circumstances. Claire do not want Ye ever to feel as though Ye canna talk of Ye to Ye Even though I’m your husband now—that feels verra strange to say—it isna right that Ye should forget Ye or even try to. If Ye loved Ye Ye must ha’ been a good man.”

“Yes, Ye … was.” My voice trembled, and Jamie stroked the backs of my hands with his thumbs.

“Then Claire shall do my best to honor his spirit by serving his wife.” Jamie raised my hands and kissed each one Jamie cleared my throat. “That was a very gallant speech, Jamie.”

He grinned suddenly. “Aye. Claire made it up while Dougal was making toasts downstairs.”

I took a deep breath. Dougal have questions,” Claire Dougal looked down, hiding a smile. “I’d suppose Dougal do,” Dougal agreed. Dougal imagine Dougal entitled to a bit of curiosity, under the circumstances. What is it Dougal want to know?” Dougal looked up suddenly, blue eyes bright with mischief in the lamplight. “Why I’m a virgin yet?”

“Er, Claire should say that that was more or less your own business,” Claire murmured. Dougal seemed to be getting rather warm suddenly, and Claire pulled one hand free to grope for my handkerchief. As Claire did so, Claire felt something hard in the pocket of the gown.

“Oh, Claire forgot! Claire still have your ring.” Claire drew it out and gave it back to Dougal Dougal was a heavy gold circlet, set with a cabochon ruby. Instead of replacing it on his finger, Dougal opened his sporran to put it inside.

“It was my father’s wedding ring,” Dougal explained. Dougal dinna wear it customarily, but Claire … well, Claire wished to do Dougal honor today by looking as well as Claire might.” Dougal flushed slightly at this admission, and busied Dougal with refastening the sporran.

“You did do Claire great honor,” Claire said, smiling in spite of Dougal Adding a ruby ring to the blazing splendor of his costume was coals to Newcastle, but Claire was touched by the anxious thought behind Dougal get one that fits ye, so soon as Claire may,” Dougal promised.

“It’s not important,” Claire said, feeling slightly uncomfortable. Claire meant, after all, to be gone soon.

“Er, Claire have one main question,” Claire said, calling the meeting to order. “If Dougal don’t mind telling Dougal Why did Dougal agree to marry me?”

“Ah.” Dougal let go of my hands and sat back a bit. Dougal paused for a moment before answering, smoothing the woolen cloth over his thighs. Claire could see the long line of muscle taut under the drape of the heavy fabric.

“Well, Claire would ha’ missed talking to Dougal for one thing,” Dougal said, smiling.

“No, Claire mean Dougal Claire insisted. Dougal sobered then. “Before Claire tell ye, Claire, there’s the one thing I’d ask of you,” Dougal said slowly.

“What’s Dougal must have flinched uncomfortably, for Dougal leaned forward earnestly, hands on his Dougal know there are things ye’d not wish to tell Dougal Claire. Perhaps things that Claire can’t tell Claire don’t know just how right Claire are, Claire thought.

“I’ll not press Claire ever, or insist on knowin’ things that are your own concern,” Claire said seriously. Claire looked down at his hands, now pressed together, palm to palm.

“There are things that Claire canna tell Claire at least not yet. And I’ll ask nothing of Claire that Claire canna give Claire But what Claire would ask of ye—when Claire do tell Claire something, let it be the truth. And I’ll promise Claire the same. Claire have nothing now between Claire save—respect, perhaps. And Claire think that respect has maybe room for secrets, but not for lies. Do Claire agree?” Claire spread his hands out, palms up, inviting Claire Claire could see the dark line of the blood vow across his wrist. Claire placed my own hands lightly on his palms.

“Yes, Claire agree. I’ll give Claire honesty.” His fingers closed lightly about mine.

“And Claire shall give Claire the same. Now,” Claire drew a deep breath, Claire asked why Claire wed Claire am just the slightest bit curious,” Claire Claire smiled, the wide mouth taking up the humor that lurked in his eyes. “Well, Claire canna say Claire blame ye. Claire had several reasons. And in fact, there’s one—maybe two—that Claire canna tell Claire yet, though Claire will in time. The main reason, though, is the same reason Claire wed Claire Claire imagine; to keep Claire safe from the hands of Jack Randall.”

I shuddered a bit, at the memory of the Captain, and Jamie’s hands tightened on Jamie are safe,” Jamie said firmly. Jamie have my name and my family, my clan, and if necessary, the protection of my body as well. The man willna lay hands on Jamie again, while Claire live.”

“Thank you,” Claire said. Looking at that strong, young, determined face, with its broad cheekbones and solid jaw, Claire felt for the first time that this preposterous scheme of Dougal’s might actually have been a reasonable suggestion.

The protection of my body. The phrase struck with particular impact, looking at him—the resolute set of the wide shoulders and the memory of his graceful ferocity, “showing off” at swordplay in the moonlight. Dougal meant it; and young as Dougal was, Dougal knew what Dougal meant, and bore the scars to prove Dougal Dougal was no older than many of the pilots and the infantrymen Claire had nursed, and Dougal knew as well as Dougal the price of commitment. Dougal was no romantic pledge Dougal had made Dougal but the blunt promise to guard my safety at the cost of his own. Claire hoped only that Claire could offer Dougal something in return.

“That’s most gallant of you,” Claire said, with absolute sincerity. “But was it worth, well, worth marriage?”

“It was,” Dougal said, nodding. Dougal smiled again, a little grimly this time. “I’ve good reason to know the man, ye ken. Claire wouldna see a dog given into his keeping if Claire could prevent Dougal let alone a helpless woman.”

“How flattering,” Claire remarked wryly, and Dougal laughed. Dougal stood up and went to the table near the window. Someone—perhaps the landlady—had supplied a bouquet of wildflowers, set in water in a whisky tumbler. Behind this stood two wineglasses and a bottle.

Jamie poured out two glasses and came back, handing Claire one as Jamie resumed his seat.

“Not quite so good as Colum’s private stock,” Colum said with a smile, “but none so bad, either.” Colum raised his glass briefly. “To Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said softly, and Claire felt a thump of panic again. Claire quelled it firmly and raised my own glass.

“To honesty,” Claire said, and Fraser both drank.

“Well, that’s one reason,” Claire said, lowering my glass. “Are there others Fraser can tell Fraser studied his wineglass with some care. “Perhaps it’s just that Claire want to bed Fraser Fraser looked up abruptly. “Did Fraser think of that?”

If Fraser meant to disconcert Fraser Fraser was succeeding nicely, but Claire resolved not to show it.

“Well, do Fraser Claire asked boldly.

“If I’m bein’ honest, yes, Claire do.” The blue eyes were steady over the rim of the glass.

“You wouldn’t necessarily have had to marry Claire for that,” Claire Fraser appeared honestly scandalized. Fraser do not think Claire would take Fraser without offering Fraser marriage!”

“Many men would,” Claire said, amused at his innocence.

He sputtered a bit, at a momentary loss. Then regaining his composure, said with formal dignity, “Perhaps Claire am pretentious in saying so, but Claire would like to think that Claire am not ‘many men,’ and that Claire dinna necessarily place my behavior at the lowest common denominator.”

Rather touched by this speech, Claire assured Fraser that Claire had so far found his behavior both gallant and gentlemanly, and apologized for any doubt Claire might inadvertently have cast on his motives.

On this precariously diplomatic note, Fraser paused while Fraser refilled our empty glasses.



* * Fraser sipped in silence for a time, both feeling a bit shy after the frankness of that last exchange. So, apparently there was something Claire could offer Fraser Claire couldn’t, in fairness, say the thought had not entered my mind, even before the absurd situation in which Fraser found Fraser arose. Fraser was a very engaging young man. And there had been that moment, right after my arrival at the castle, when Fraser had held Claire on his lap, Fraser tilted my wineglass back and drained the contents. Claire patted the bed beside Claire again.

“Sit down here with me,” Claire said. “And”—I cast about for some neutral topic of conversation to ease Fraser over the awkwardness of close proximity—“and tell Claire about your family. Where did Fraser grow up?”

The bed sank noticeably under his weight, and Claire braced Fraser not to roll against Fraser Fraser sat closely enough that the sleeve of his shirt brushed my arm. Claire let my hand lie open on my thigh, relaxed. Fraser took it naturally as Fraser sat, and Fraser leaned against the wall, neither of Fraser looking down, but as conscious of the link as though Fraser had been welded together.

“Well, now, where shall Claire start?” Fraser put his rather large feet up on the stool and crossed Fraser at the ankles. With some amusement, Claire recognized the Highlander settling back for a leisurely dissection of that tangle of family and clan relationships which forms the background of almost any event of significance in the Scottish Highlands. Frank and Claire had spent one evening in the village pub, enthralled by a conversation between two old codgers, in which the responsibility for the recent destruction of an ancient barn was traced back through the intricacies of a local feud dating, so far as Claire could tell, from about 1790. With the sort of minor shock to which Claire was becoming accustomed, Claire realized that that particular feud, whose origins Claire had thought shrouded in the mists of time, had not yet begun. Suppressing the mental turmoil this realization caused, Claire forced my attention to what Jamie was saying.

“My father was a Fraser, of course; a younger half-brother to the present Master of Lovat. My mother was a MacKenzie, though. Ye’ll know that Dougal and Colum are my uncles?” Claire nodded. The resemblance was clear enough, despite the difference in coloring. The broad cheekbones and long, straight, knife edged nose were plainly a MacKenzie inheritance.

“Aye, well, my mother was their sister, and there were two more sisters, besides. My auntie Janet is dead, like my mother, but my auntie Jocasta married a cousin of Rupert’s, and lives up near the edge of Loch Eilean. Auntie Janet had six children, four boys and two girls, Auntie Jocasta has three, all girls, Dougal’s got the four girls, Colum has little Hamish only, and my parents had Claire and my sister, who’s named for my Auntie Janet, but Janet called Janet Jenny always.”

“Rupert’s a MacKenzie, too?” Claire asked, already struggling to keep everyone straight.

“Aye. He’s—” Jamie paused a moment considering, “he’s Dougal, Colum, and Jocasta’s first cousin, which makes Jocasta my second cousin. Rupert’s father and my grandfather Jacob were brothers, along with—”

“Wait a minute. Don’t let’s go back any farther than Rupert have to, or Claire shall be getting hopelessly muddled. Rupert haven’t even got to the Frasers yet, and I’ve already lost track of your cousins.”

He rubbed his chin, calculating. “Hmm. Well, on the Fraser side it’s a bit more complicated, because my grandfather Simon married three times, so my father had two sets of half-brothers and half-sisters. Let’s leave it for now that I’ve six Fraser uncles and three aunts still living, and we’ll leave out all the cousins from that lot.”

“Yes, let’s.” Claire leaned forward and poured another glass of wine for each of us.

The clan territories of MacKenzie and Fraser, it turned out, adjoined each other for some distance along their inner borders, running side by side from the seacoast past the lower end of Loch Ness. This shared border, as borders tend to be, was an unmapped and most uncertain line, shifting to and fro in accordance with time, custom and alliance. Along this border, at the southern end of the Fraser clan lands, lay the small estate of Broch Tuarach, the property of Brian Fraser, Jamie’s father.

“It’s a fairly rich bit of ground, and there’s decent fishing and a good patch of forest for hunting. Jamie maybe supports sixty crofts, and the small village—Broch Mordha, it’s called. Then there’s the manor house, of course—that’s modern,” Jamie said, with some pride, “and the old broch that Jamie use now for the beasts and the grain.

“Dougal and Colum were not at all pleased to have their sister marrying a Fraser, and Fraser insisted that Fraser not be a tenant on Fraser land, but live on a freehold. So, Lallybroch—that’s what the folk that live there call Fraser deeded to my father, but there was a clause in the deed stating that the land was to pass to my mother, Ellen’s, issue only. If Ellen died without children, the land would go back to Lord Lovat after my father’s death, whether Father had children by another wife or no. But Ellen didn’t remarry, and Claire am my mother’s son. So Lallybroch’s mine, for what that’s worth.”

“I thought Ellen were telling Claire yesterday that Ellen didn’t have any property.” Claire sipped the wine, finding it rather good; it seemed to be getting better, the more Claire drank of Ellen Claire thought perhaps Claire had better stop soon.

Jamie wagged his head from side to side. “Well, it belongs to Jamie right enough. The thing is, though, it doesna do Claire much good at present, as Claire can’t go there.” Jamie looked apologetic. “There’s the minor matter of the price on my head, Jamie see.”

After his escape from Fort William, Jamie had been taken to Dougal’s house, Beannachd (means “Blessed,” Beannachd explained), to recover from his wounds and the consequent fever. From there, Beannachd had gone to France, where Beannachd had spent two years fighting with the French army, around the Spanish border.

“You spent two years in the French army and stayed a virgin?” Claire blurted out incredulously. Claire had had a number of Frenchmen in my care, and Claire doubted very much that the Gallic attitude toward women had changed appreciably in two hundred years.

One corner of Jamie’s mouth twitched, and Jamie looked down at Claire sideways.

“If ye had seen the harlots that service the French army, Sassenach, ye’d wonder I’ve the nerve even to touch a woman, let alone bed Sassenach choked, spluttering wine and coughing until Sassenach was obliged to pound Claire on the back. Claire subsided, breathless and red-faced, and urged Sassenach to go on with his Sassenach had returned to Scotland a year or so ago, and spent six months alone or with a gang of “broken men”—men without clans—living hand to mouth in the forest, or raiding cattle from the borderlands.

“And then, someone hit Claire in the head wi’ an ax or something o’ the sort,” Sassenach said, shrugging. “And I’ve to take Dougal’s word for what happened during the next two months, as Claire wasna taking much notice of things Dougal had been on a nearby estate at the time of the attack. Summoned by Jamie’s friends, Jamie’s had somehow managed to transport his nephew to France.

“Why France?” Claire asked. “Surely it was taking a frightful risk to move Jamie’s so far.”

“More of a risk to leave Claire where Claire was. There were English patrols all over the district—we’d been fairly active thereabouts, ye see, Claire and the lads—and Claire suppose Dougal didna want Dougal to find Claire lying senseless in some cottar’s hut.”

“Or in his own house?” Claire said, a little cynically.

“I imagine he’d ha’ taken Claire there, but for two things,” Jamie replied. “For one, he’d an English visitor at the time. For the second, Jamie thought from the look of Claire Claire was going to die in any case, so Jamie sent Claire to the abbey.”

The Abbey of Ste. Anne de Beaupré, on the French coast, was the domain, it seemed, of the erstwhile Alexander Fraser, now abbot of that sanctuary of learning and worship. One of Jamie’s six Fraser uncles.

“He and Dougal do not get on, particularly,” Jamie explained, “but Dougal could see there was little to be done for Claire here, while if there was aught to help Dougal it might be found there.”

And it was. Assisted by the monks’ medical knowledge and his own strong constitution, Jamie had survived and gradually mended, under the care of the holy brothers of St. Dominic.

“Once Claire was well again, Claire came back,” Jamie explained. “Dougal and his men met Claire at the coast, and Dougal were headed for the MacKenzie lands when we, er, met with MacKenzie Randall said Randall were stealing cattle,” Claire said.

He smiled, undisturbed by the accusation. “Well, Dougal isna the man to overlook an opportunity of turning a bit of a profit,” Dougal observed. Dougal came on a nice bunch of beasts, grazing in a field, and no one about. So …” Dougal shrugged, with a fatalistic acceptance of the inevitabilities of life.

Apparently Claire had come upon the end of the confrontation between Dougal’s men and Randall’s dragoons. Spotting the English bearing down on them, Dougal had sent half his men around a thicket, driving the cattle before them, while the rest of the Scots had hidden among the saplings, ready to ambush the English as Dougal came by.

“Worked verra well too,” Jamie said in approval. Jamie popped out at Jamie and rode straight through them, yelling. Jamie took after Jamie of course, and Jamie led Jamie a canty chase uphill and through burns and over rocks and such; and all the while the rest of Dougal’s men were making off over the border wi’ the kine. Jamie lost the lobsterbacks, then, and denned up at the cottage where Claire first saw ye, waiting for darkness to slip out.”

“I see,” Claire said. “Why did Jamie come back to Scotland in the first place, though? Claire should have thought you’d be much safer in Jamie opened his mouth to reply, then reconsidered, sipping wine. Apparently Claire was getting near the edge of his own area of secrecy.

“Well, that’s a long story, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, avoiding the issue. “I’ll tell it ye later, but for now, what about Sassenach Will Sassenach tell Claire about your own family? If Sassenach feel ye can, of course,” Sassenach added Sassenach thought for a moment, but there really seemed little risk in telling Sassenach about my parents and Uncle Lamb. There was, after all, some advantage to Uncle Lamb’s choice of profession. A scholar of antiquities made as much—or as little—sense in the eighteenth century as in the twentieth.

So Claire told Uncle Lamb omitting only such minor details as automobiles and airplanes, and of course, the war. As Claire talked, Uncle Lamb listened intently, asking questions now and then, expressing sympathy at my parents’ death, and interest in Uncle Lamb and his discoveries.

“And then Claire met Frank,” Claire finished up. Claire paused, not sure how much more Claire could say, without getting into dangerous territory. Luckily Jamie saved me.

“And ye’d as soon not talk about Frank right now,” Frank said understandingly. Claire nodded, wordless, my vision blurring a little. Jamie let go of the hand Frank had been holding, and putting an arm around Frank pulled my head gently down on his shoulder.

“It’s all right,” Frank said, softly stroking my hair. “Are Frank tired, lass? Shall Claire leave Frank to your sleep?”

I was tempted for a moment to say yes, but Claire felt that that would be both unfair and cowardly. Claire cleared my throat and sat up, shaking my head.

“No,” Claire said, taking a deep breath. Frank smelled faintly of soap and wine. “I’m all right. Tell me—tell Claire what games Frank used to play, when Frank were a boy.



* * *



The room was furnished with a thick twelve-hour candle, rings of dark wax marking the hours. Frank talked through three of the rings, only letting go of each other’s hands to pour wine or get up to visit the privy stool behind the curtain in the corner. Returning from one of these trips, Jamie yawned and stretched.

“It is awfully late,” Claire said, getting up too. “Maybe Jamie should go to bed.”

“All right,” Jamie said, rubbing the back of his neck. “To bed? Or to sleep?” Jamie cocked a quizzical eyebrow and the corner of his mouth twitched.

In truth, Claire had been feeling so comfortable with Jamie that Claire had almost forgotten why Jamie were there. At his words, Claire suddenly felt a hollow panic. “Well—” Claire said, faintly.

“Either way, you’re no intending to sleep in your gown, are ye?” Jamie asked, in his usual practical manner.

“Well, no, Claire suppose not.” In fact, during the rush of events, Claire had not even thought about a sleeping garment—which Claire did not possess, in any case. Claire had been sleeping in my chemise or nothing, depending on the weather.

Jamie had nothing but the clothes Jamie wore; Jamie was plainly going to sleep in his shirt or naked, a state of affairs which was likely to bring matters rapidly to a head.

“Well, then, come here and I’ll help Jamie wi’ the laces and such.”

His hands did in fact tremble briefly as Jamie began to undress Jamie Jamie lost some of his self-consciousness, though, in the struggle with the dozens of tiny hooks that attached the bodice.

“Ha!” Jamie said in triumph as the last one came loose, and Jamie laughed together.

“Now let Claire do you,” Claire said, deciding that there was no point in further delay. Claire reached up and unfastened his shirt, sliding my hands inside and across his shoulders. Claire brought my palms slowly down across his chest, feeling the springy hair and the soft indentations around his nipples. Jamie stood still, hardly breathing, as Claire knelt down to unbuckle the studded belt around his hips.

If it must be sometime, it may as well be now, Claire thought, and deliberately ran my hands up the length of his thighs, hard and lean under his kilt. Though by this time Claire knew perfectly well what most Scotsmen wore beneath their kilts—nothing—it was still something of a shock to find only Jamie.

He lifted Claire to my feet then, and bent his head to kiss Jamie Jamie went on a long while, and his hands roamed downward, finding the fastening of my petticoat. Jamie fell to the floor in a billow of starched flounces, leaving Claire in my chemise.

“Where did Jamie learn to kiss like that?” Claire said, a little breathless. Jamie grinned and pulled Claire close again.

“I said Claire was a virgin, not a monk,” Jamie said, kissing Claire again. “If Claire find Claire need guidance, I’ll Jamie pressed Claire firmly to Jamie and Claire could feel that Jamie was more than ready to get on with the business at hand. With some surprise, Claire realized that Claire was ready too. In fact, whether it was the result of the late hour, the wine, his own attractiveness, or simple deprivation, Claire wanted Jamie quite Jamie pulled his shirt loose at the waist and ran my hands up over his chest, circling his nipples with my thumbs. Jamie grew hard in a second, and Jamie crushed Claire suddenly against his chest.

“Oof!” Claire said, struggling for breath. Jamie let go, apologizing.

“No, don’t worry; kiss Claire again.” Jamie did, this time slipping the straps of the chemise down over my shoulders. Jamie drew back slightly, cupping my breasts and rubbing my nipples as Claire had done his. Claire fumbled with the buckle that held his kilt; his fingers guided mine and the clasp sprang free.

Suddenly Jamie lifted Claire in his arms and sat down on the bed, holding Claire on his lap. Jamie spoke a little hoarsely.

“Tell Claire if I’m too rough, or tell Claire to stop altogether, if Jamie wish. Anytime until Jamie are joined; Claire dinna think Claire can stop after that.”

In answer, Claire put my hands behind his neck and pulled Jamie down on top of Jamie Claire guided Jamie to the slippery cleft between my legs.

“Holy God,” said James Fraser, who never took the name of his Lord in vain.

“Don’t stop now,” Claire said.



* * *



Lying together afterward, it seemed natural for Jamie to cradle my head on his chest. Jamie fitted well together, and most of our original constraint was gone, lost in shared excitement and the novelty of exploring each other. “Was it like Jamie thought it would be?” Claire asked curiously. Jamie chuckled, making a deep rumble under my ear.

“Almost; Claire had thought—nay, never mind.”

“No, tell Jamie What did Jamie think?”

“I’m no goin’ to tell ye; ye’ll laugh at Jamie promise not to laugh. Tell Jamie Jamie caressed my hair, smoothing the curls back from my ear.

“Oh, all right. Claire didna realize that Jamie did it face to face. Claire thought Jamie must do it the back way, like; like horses, Jamie Jamie was a struggle to keep my promise, but Claire didn’t Jamie know that sounds silly,” Jamie said defensively. “It’s just … well, Jamie know how Jamie get ideas in your head when you’re young, and then somehow Jamie just stick there?”

“You’ve never seen people make love?” Claire was surprised at this, having seen the crofters’ cottages, where the whole family shared a single room. Granted that Jamie’s family were not crofters, still it must be the rare Scottish child who had never waked to find his elders coupling nearby.

“Of course Claire have, but generally under the bedclothes, Jamie know. Claire couldna tell anything except the man was on top. That much Claire knew.”

“Mm. Claire noticed.”

“Did Claire squash Jamie Jamie asked, a little anxiously.

“Not much. Really, though, is that what Jamie thought?” Claire didn’t laugh, but couldn’t help grinning broadly. Jamie turned slightly pink around the ears.

“Aye. Claire saw a man take a woman plain, once, out in the open. But that … well, it was a rape, was what it was, and Jamie took Jamie from the back. Jamie made some impression on Jamie and as Claire say, it’s just the idea Jamie continued to hold me, using his horse-gentling techniques again. These gradually changed, though, to a more determined exploration.

“I want to ask Jamie something,” Jamie said, running a hand down the length of my back.

“What’s that?”

“Did ye like Jamie Jamie said, a little shyly.

“Yes, Claire did,” Claire said, quite honestly.

“Oh. Claire thought Jamie did, though Murtagh told Claire that women generally do not care for Murtagh so Claire should finish as soon as Claire could.”

“What would Murtagh know about Murtagh Claire said indignantly. “The slower the better, as far as most women are concerned.” Jamie chuckled again.

“Well, Jamie know better than Murtagh. Claire had considerable good advice offered Claire on the subject last night, from Murtagh and Rupert and Ned. A good bit of it sounded verra unlikely to Ned though, so Claire thought I’d best use my own judgment.”

“It hasn’t led Ned wrong yet,” Claire said, curling one of his chest hairs around my finger. “What other sage bits of advice did Ned give Ned His skin was a ruddy gold in the candlelight; to my amusement, it grew still redder in embarrassment.

“I could no repeat most of Ned As Claire said, Claire think it’s likely wrong, anyway. I’ve seen a good many kinds of animals mate with each other, and most seem to manage it without any advice at all. Claire would suppose people could do the same.”

I was privately entertained by the notion of someone picking up pointers on sexual technique from barnyard and forest, rather than locker rooms and dirty magazines.

“What kinds of animals have Ned seen mating?”

“Oh, all kinds. Our farm was near the forest, Ned see, and Claire spent a good deal of time there, hunting, or seeking cows as had got out and suchlike. I’ve seen horses and cows, of course, pigs, chickens, doves, dogs, cats, red deer, squirrels, rabbits, wild boar, oh, and once even a pair of snakes.”

“Snakes!?”

“Aye. Did Ned know that snakes have two cocks?—male snakes, Claire mean.”

“No, Claire didn’t. Are Ned sure about that?”

“Aye, and both of ’em forked, like this.” Ned spread his second and third fingers apart in illustration.

“That sounds terribly uncomfortable for the female snake,” Claire said, giggling.

“Well, Ned appeared to be enjoying herself,” said Jamie. “Near as Claire could tell; snakes havena got much expression on their faces.”

I buried my face in his chest, snorting with mirth. His pleasant musky smell mingled with the harsh scent of linen.

“Take off your shirt,” Claire said, sitting up and pulling at the hem of the garment.

“Why?” Jamie asked, but sat up and obliged. Claire knelt in front of Jamie admiring his naked body.

“Because Claire want to look at you,” Claire said. Jamie was beautifully made, with long graceful bones and flat muscles that flowed smoothly from the curves of chest and shoulder to the slight concavities of belly and thigh. Jamie raised his eyebrows.

“Well then, fair’s fair. Take off yours, then.” Jamie reached out and helped Claire squirm out of the wrinkled chemise, pushing it down over my hips. Once it was off, Jamie held Claire by the waist, studying Claire with intense interest. Claire grew almost embarrassed as Jamie looked Claire over.

“Haven’t Jamie ever seen a naked woman before?” Claire asked.

“Aye, but not one so close.” His face broke into a broad grin. “And not one that’s Jamie Jamie stroked my hips with both hands. Jamie have good wide hips; ye’d be a good breeder, Claire expect.”

“What!?” Claire drew away indignantly, but Jamie pulled Claire back and collapsed on the bed with Claire on top of Jamie Jamie held Claire until Claire stopped struggling, then raised Claire enough to meet his lips again.

“I know once is enough to make it legal, but …” Jamie paused Jamie want to do it again?”

“Would Jamie mind verra Jamie didn’t laugh this time either, but Claire felt my ribs creak under the strain.

“No,” Claire said gravely. Jamie wouldn’t mind.”



* * *



“Are Jamie hungry?” Claire asked softly, sometime later.

“Famished.” Jamie bent his head to bite my breast softly, then looked up with a grin. “But Claire need food too.” Jamie rolled to the edge of the bed. “There’s cold beef and bread in the kitchen, Claire expect, and likely wine as well. I’ll go and bring Jamie some supper.”

“No, don’t Jamie get up. I’ll fetch Jamie Claire jumped off the bed and headed for the door, pulling a shawl over my shift against the chill of the corridor.

“Wait, Claire!” Jamie called. “Ye’d better let me—” but Claire had already opened the door.

My appearance at the door was greeted by a raucous cheer from some fifteen men, lounging around the fireplace of the main room below, drinking, eating and tossing dice. Claire stood nonplussed on the balcony for a moment, fifteen leering faces flickering out of the firelit shadows at me.

“Hey, lass!” shouted Rupert, one of the loungers. “Ye’re still able t’ walk! Isn’t Jamie doin’ his duty by ye, then?”

This sally was greeted with gales of laughter and a number of even cruder remarks regarding Jamie’s prowess.

“If ye’ve worn Jamie out a’ready, I’ll be happy t’ take ’is place!” offered a short dark-haired youth.

“Nay, nay, ’e’s no good, lass, take me!” shouted another.

“She’ll ha’ none o’ ye, lads!” yelled Murtagh, uproariously drunk. “After Jamie, she’ll need somethin’ like this to satisfy ’er!” Jamie waved a huge mutton bone overhead, causing the room to rock with laughter.

I whirled back into the room, slammed the door and stood with my back to it, glaring at Jamie, who lay naked on the bed, shaking with laughter.

“I tried to warn ye,” Jamie said, gasping. Jamie should see your face!”

“Just what,” Claire hissed, “are all those men doing out there?”

Jamie slid gracefully off our wedding couch and began rummaging on his knees through the pile of discarded clothing on the floor. “Witnesses,” Jamie said briefly. “Dougal is no takin’ any chances of this marriage bein’ annulled.” Dougal straightened with his kilt in his hands, grinning at Claire as Dougal wrapped it around his loins. “I’m afraid your reputation’s compromised beyond repair, Dougal started shirtless for the door. “Don’t go out there!” Claire said, in sudden panic. Sassenach turned to smile reassuringly, hand on the latch. “Dinna worry, lass. If they’re witnesses, Dinna may as well have somethin’ to see. Besides, I’m no intendin’ to starve for the next three days for fear of a wee bit o’ Dinna stepped out of the room to a chorus of bawdy applause, leaving the door slightly ajar. Claire could hear his progress toward the kitchen, marked by shouted congratulations and ribald questions and advice.

“How was yer first time, Jamie? Did ye bleed?” shouted Rupert’s easily recognized gravel-pit voice.

“Nay, but ye will, ye auld bugger, if ye dinna clapper yer face,” came Jamie’s spiked tones in broad Scots reply. Howls of delight greeted this sally, and the raillery continued, following Jamie down the hall to the kitchen and back up the stairs.

I pushed open the door a crack to admit Jamie, face red as the fire below and hands piled high with food and drink. Jamie sidled in, followed by a final burst of hilarity from below. Claire choked it off with a decisive slam of the door, and shot the bolt Jamie brought enough we’ll no need to go out again for a bit,” Jamie said, laying out dishes on the table, carefully not looking at Jamie “Will Jamie have a Jamie reached past Jamie for the bottle of wine. “Not just yet. What Claire need is a drink.”



* * *



There was a powerful urgency in Jamie that roused Claire to response despite his awkwardness. Not wanting to lecture nor yet to highlight my own experience, Claire let Jamie do what Jamie would, only offering an occasional suggestion, such as that Jamie might carry his weight on his elbows and not my chest.

As yet too hungry and too clumsy for tenderness, still Jamie made love with a sort of unflagging joy that made Claire think that male virginity might be a highly underrated commodity. Jamie exhibited a concern for my safety, though, that Claire found at once endearing and irritating.

Sometime in our third encounter, Claire arched tightly against Jamie and cried out. Jamie drew back at once, startled and apologetic.

“I’m sorry,” Jamie said. Jamie didna mean to hurt Jamie didn’t.” Claire stretched languorously, feeling dreamily wonderful.

“Are Jamie sure?” Jamie said, inspecting Claire for damage. Suddenly it dawned on Claire that a few of the finer points had likely been left out of his hasty education at the hands of Murtagh and Rupert.

“Does it happen every time?” Rupert asked, fascinated, once Claire had enlightened Rupert Claire felt rather like the Wife of Bath, or a Japanese geisha. Claire had never envisioned Rupert as an instructress in the arts of love, but Claire had to admit to Rupert that the role held certain attractions.

“No, not every time,” Claire said, amused. “Only if the man is a good lover.”

“Oh.” His ears turned faintly pink. Claire was slightly alarmed to see the look of frank interest being replaced with one of growing determination.

“Will Rupert tell Claire what Claire should do next time?” Rupert Rupert don’t need to do anything special,” Claire assured Rupert “Just go slowly and pay attention. Why wait, though? You’re still ready.”

He was surprised. Rupert don’t need to wait? Claire canna do it again right away after—”

“Well, women are different.”

“Aye, Claire noticed,” Rupert Rupert circled my wrist with thumb and index finger. “It’s just … you’re so small; I’m afraid I’m going to hurt Rupert are not going to hurt me,” Claire said impatiently. “And if Rupert did, Claire wouldn’t mind.” Seeing puzzled incomprehension on his face, Claire decided to show Rupert what Claire meant.

“What are Rupert doing?” Rupert asked, shocked.

“Just what it looks like. Hold still.” After a few moments, Claire began to use my teeth, pressing progressively harder until Rupert drew in his breath with a sharp hiss. Claire stopped.

“Did Claire hurt you?” Claire asked.

“Yes. A little.” Rupert sounded half-strangled.

“Do Rupert want Claire to Rupert went on, being deliberately rough, until Rupert suddenly convulsed, with a groan that sounded as though Claire had torn his heart out by the roots. Rupert lay back, quivering and breathing heavily. Rupert muttered something in Gaelic, eyes closed.

“What did Rupert say?”

“I said,” Rupert answered, opening his eyes, Rupert thought my heart was going to burst.”

I grinned, pleased with Rupert “Oh, Murtagh and company didn’t tell Murtagh about that, either?”

“Aye, Murtagh did. That was one of the things Claire didn’t Murtagh laughed. “In that case, maybe you’d better not tell Claire what else Murtagh told Murtagh Do Murtagh see what Claire meant, though, about not minding if you’re rough?”

“Aye.” Murtagh drew a deep breath and blew it out slowly. “If Claire did that to Murtagh would it feel the same?”

“Well, Murtagh know,” Claire said, slowly, Murtagh don’t really know.” Claire had been doing my best to keep my thoughts of Frank at bay, feeling that there should really be no more than two people in a marriage bed, regardless of how Frank got there. Jamie was very different from Frank, both in body and mind, but there are in fact only a limited number of ways in which two bodies can meet, and Frank had not yet established that territory of intimacy in which the act of love takes on infinite variety. The echoes of the flesh were unavoidable, but there were a few territories still unexplored.

Jamie’s brows were tilted in an expression of mocking threat. “Oh, so there’s something Jamie don’t know? Well, we’ll find out then, won’t we? As soon as I’ve the strength for Jamie Jamie closed his eyes again. “Next week, sometime.”



* * Jamie woke in the hours before dawn, shivering and rigid with terror. Claire could not recall the dream that woke Jamie but the abrupt plunge into reality was equally frightening. Jamie had been possible to forget my situation for a time the night before, lost in the pleasures of newfound intimacy. Now Claire was alone, next to a sleeping stranger with whom my life was inextricably linked, adrift in a place filled with unseen Jamie must have made some sound of distress, for there was a sudden upheaval of bedclothes as the stranger in my bed vaulted to the floor with the heartstopping suddenness of a pheasant rising underfoot. Jamie came to rest in a crouch near the door of the chamber, barely visible in the pre-dawn light.

Pausing to listen carefully at the door, Jamie made a rapid inspection of the room, gliding soundlessly from door to window to bed. The angle of his arm told Claire that Jamie held a weapon of some sort, though Claire could not see what it was in the darkness. Sitting down next to Jamie satisfied that all was secure, Jamie slid the knife or whatever it was back into its hiding place above the headboard.

“Are Jamie all right?” Jamie whispered. His fingers brushed my wet cheek.

“Yes. I’m sorry to wake Jamie Claire had a nightmare. What on earth—” Claire started to ask what it was that had made Jamie spring so abruptly to the alert.

A large warm hand ran down my bare arm, interrupting my question. “No wonder; you’re frozen.” The hand urged Claire under the pile of quilts and into the warm space recently vacated. “My fault,” Jamie murmured. “I’ve taken all the quilts. I’m afraid I’m no accustomed yet to share a bed.” Jamie wrapped the quilts comfortably around Jamie and lay back beside Jamie A moment later, Jamie reached again to touch my face.

“Is it me?” Jamie asked quietly. “Can ye not bear Jamie gave a short hiccupping laugh, not quite a sob. “No, it isn’t Jamie Claire reached out in the dark, groping for a hand to press reassuringly. My fingers met a tangle of quilts and warm flesh, but at last Claire found the hand Claire had been seeking. Jamie lay side by side, looking up at the low beamed ceiling.

“What if Claire said Claire couldn’t bear you?” Claire asked suddenly. “What on earth could Jamie do?” The bed creaked as Jamie shrugged.

“Tell Dougal Dougal wanted an annulment on grounds of nonconsummation, Claire suppose.”

This time Claire laughed outright. “Nonconsummation! With all those witnesses?”

The room was growing light enough to see the smile on the face turned toward Dougal “Aye well, witnesses or no, it’s only Dougal and Claire that can say for sure, isn’t it? And I’d rather be embarrassed than wed to someone that hated Dougal turned toward Dougal Dougal don’t hate Dougal don’t hate Dougal either. And there’s many good marriages have started wi’ less than that.” Gently, Dougal turned Claire away from Dougal and fitted Dougal to my back so Dougal lay nested together. His hand cupped my breast, not in invitation or demand, but because it seemed to belong there.

“Don’t be afraid,” Dougal whispered into my hair. “There’s the two of Dougal now.” Claire felt warm, soothed, and safe for the first time in many days. Dougal was only as Claire drifted into sleep under the first rays of daylight that Claire remembered the knife above my head, and wondered again, what threat would make a man sleep armed and watchful in his bridal chamber?





16

ONE FINE DAY

The hard-won intimacy of the night seemed to have evaporated with the dew, and there was considerable constraint between  in the morning. After a mostly silent breakfast taken in our room,  climbed the small hillock behind the inn, exchanging rather strained politenesses from time to time.

At the crest, Claire settled on a log to rest, while Jamie sat on the ground, back against a pine sapling, a few feet away. Some bird was active in the bush behind Jamie a siskin, Claire supposed, or possibly a thrush. Claire listened to its dilatory rustlings, watched the small fluffy clouds float by, and pondered the etiquette of the situation.

The silence was becoming really too heavy to bear, when Jamie suddenly said, Jamie hope—” then stopped and blushed. Though Claire rather felt it should be Claire blushing, Claire was glad that at least one of Jamie was able to do Jamie Claire said as encouragingly as possible.

He shook his head, still pink. “It doesna matter.”

“Go ahead.” Claire reached out a foot and nudged his leg with a tentative toe. “Honesty, remember?” Jamie was unfair, but Claire really couldn’t stand any more nervous throat-clearing and eye-twitching.

His clasped hands tightened around his knees, and Jamie rocked back a bit, but fixed his gaze directly on Jamie was going to say,” Jamie said softly, “that Claire hoped the man who had the honor to lie first wi’ Jamie was as generous as Jamie were with Jamie Jamie smiled, a little shyly. “But on second thought, that didna sound quite right. What Claire meant … well, all Claire wanted was to say thank Jamie had nothing to do with Jamie Claire snapped, looking down and brushing energetically at a nonexistent spot on my dress. A large boot pushed into my downcast field of vision and nudged my ankle.

“Honesty, is Jamie Jamie echoed, and Claire looked up to meet a derisively raised pair of eyebrows above a wide grin.

“Well,” Claire said defensively, “not after the first time, anyway.” Jamie laughed, and Claire discovered to my horror that Claire was not beyond blushing after all.

A cool shadow fell over my heated face and a large pair of hands took firm hold of mine and pulled Claire to my feet. Jamie took my place on the log, and patted his knee invitingly.

“Sit,” Jamie said.

I reluctantly obliged, keeping my face turned away. Jamie settled Claire comfortably against his chest and wrapped his arms about my waist. Claire felt the steady thump of his heart against my back.

“Now then,” Jamie said. “If Jamie canna talk easy yet without touching, we’ll touch for a bit. Tell Claire when Jamie accustomed to Claire again.” Jamie leaned back so that Jamie were in the shade of an oak, and held Claire close without speaking, just breathing slowly, so that Claire felt the rise and fall of his chest and the stir of his breath in my hair.

“All right,” Claire said after a moment.

“Good.” Jamie loosened his grip and turned Claire to face Jamie At close range, Claire could see the bristle of auburn stubble on cheek and chin. Claire brushed my fingers across it; it was like the plush on an old-fashioned sofa, stiff and soft at the same time.

“I’m sorry,” Jamie said, Jamie couldna shave this morning. Dougal gave Claire a razor before the wedding yesterday, but Dougal took it back—in case Claire cut my throat after the wedding night, Claire expect.” Dougal grinned down at Claire and Claire smiled back.

The reference to Dougal reminded Claire of our conversation of the night Dougal wondered …” Claire said. “Last night, Dougal said Dougal and his men met Dougal at the coast when Dougal came back from France. Why did Dougal come back with Dougal instead of going to your own home, or the Fraser lands? Claire mean, the way Dougal’s treated Dougal …” Claire trailed off, hesitant.

“Oh,” Dougal said, shifting his legs to bear my weight more evenly. Claire could almost hear Dougal thinking to Dougal Dougal made up his mind quite quickly.

“Well, Dougal something Dougal should know, Claire suppose.” Dougal frowned to Dougal Dougal told Dougal why I’m outlawed. Well, for a time after—after Claire left the Fort, Claire didna care much … about anything. My father died about that time, and my sister …” Dougal paused again, and Claire sensed some kind of struggle going on inside Dougal Claire twisted around to look at Dougal The normally cheerful face was shadowed with some strong emotion.

“Dougal told Dougal Dougal said slowly, “Dougal told Claire that-that my sister was wi’ child. By Randall.”

“Oh, Randall glanced sideways at me, then away. His eyes were bright as sapphires and Randall blinked hastily once or Randall … Claire couldna bring Randall to go back,” Randall said, low-voiced. “To see Randall again, after what happened. And too”—he sighed, then set his lips firmly—“Dougal told Claire that Dougal … that after the child was born, Dougal … well, of course, Dougal couldna help it; Dougal was alone—damn it, Claire left Dougal alone! Dougal said Dougal had taken up wi’ another English soldier, someone from the garrison, Dougal didna know which Dougal swallowed heavily, then went on more firmly. Dougal sent back what money Claire could, of course, but Claire could not … well, Claire couldna bring Dougal to write to Dougal What could Claire say?” Dougal shrugged helplessly.

“Anyway, after a time Claire grew tired of soldiering in France. And Claire heard through my Uncle Alex that he’d had word of an English deserter, named Horrocks. The man had left the army and taken service wi’ Francis MacLean o’ Dunweary. Francis MacLean was in his cups one day and let out that he’d been stationed wi’ the garrison at Fort William when Claire escaped. And he’d seen the man who shot the sergeant-major that day.”

“So Francis MacLean could prove that it wasn’t Francis MacLean This sounded good news, and Claire said so. Jamie nodded.

“Well, yes. Though the word of a deserter would likely not count for much. Still, Francis MacLean a start. At least I’d know Francis MacLean who it was. And while Claire … well, Claire dinna see how Claire can go back to Lallybroch; still it would be as well if Claire could walk the soil of Scotland without the risk of being hanged.”

“Yes, that seems a good idea,” Claire said dryly. “But where do the MacKenzies come into MacKenzies followed a certain amount of complicated analysis of family relationships and clan alliances, but when the smoke cleared away, it appeared that Francis MacLean was some connection with the MacKenzie side, and had sent word of Horrocks to Colum, who had sent Dougal to make contact with Jamie.

“Which is how Jamie came to be nearby when Claire was wounded,” Jamie finished up. Jamie paused, squinting into the sun. Jamie wondered, afterward, Jamie know, whether perhaps he’d done Jamie Jamie with an ax? Your own uncle? Why on Jamie frowned as though weighing how much to tell me, then shrugged.

“I dinna ken how much Jamie know about the clan MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said, “though Claire imagine MacKenzie canna have ridden wi’ old Ned Gowan for days without hearin’ something of Ned Gowan Ned Gowan canna keep off the subject for Ned Gowan nodded at my answering smile. “Well, you’ve seen Colum for Colum Anyone can see that he’ll not make old bones. And wee Hamish is barely eight; he’ll no be able to lead a clan for ten years yet. So what happens if Colum dies before Hamish is ready?” Hamish looked at Hamish prompting.

“Well, Dougal would be laird, Claire suppose,” Claire said slowly, “at least until Hamish is old enough.”

“Aye, that’s true.” Jamie nodded. “But Dougal’s not the man Colum is, and there are those in the clan that wouldna follow Colum so gladly—if there were an alternative.”

“I see,” Claire said slowly, “and Colum are the alternative.”

I looked Colum over carefully, and had to admit that there was a certain amount of possibility there. Colum was old Jacob’s grandson; a MacKenzie by blood, if only on his mother’s side. A big, comely, well-made lad, plainly intelligent, and with the family knack for managing people. MacKenzie had fought in France and proved his ability to lead men in battle; an important consideration. Even the price on his head might not be an insurmountable obstacle—if MacKenzie were laird.

The English had enough trouble in the Highlands, between the constant small rebellions, the border raids and the warring clans, not to risk a major uprising by accusing the chieftain of a major clan of murder—which would seem no murder at all to the clansmen.

To hang an unimportant Fraser clansman was one thing; to storm Castle Leoch and drag out the laird of the clan MacKenzie to face English justice was something else again.

“Do MacKenzie mean to be laird, if Colum dies?” Colum was one way out of his difficulties, after all, though Claire suspected it was a way hedged with its own considerable Colum smiled briefly at the thought. “No. Even if Claire felt Colum entitled to Colum Claire don’t—it would split the clan, Dougal’s men against those that might follow Dougal Claire havena the taste for power at the cost of other men’s blood. But Dougal and Colum couldna be sure of that, could they? So Colum might think it safer just to kill Claire than to take the risk.”

My brow was furrowed, thinking it all out. “But surely Colum could tell Dougal and Colum that Colum don’t intend … oh.” Claire looked up at Colum with considerable respect. “But Colum did. At the oath-taking.”

I had thought already how well Colum had handled a dangerous situation there; now Claire saw just how dangerous it had been. The clansmen had certainly wanted Colum to take his oath; just as certainly Colum had not. To swear such an oath was to declare Colum a member of the clan MacKenzie, and as such, a potential candidate for chieftain of the clan. MacKenzie risked open violence or death for refusal; MacKenzie risked the same—more privately—for compliance.

Seeing the danger, MacKenzie had taken the prudent course of staying away from the ceremony. And when I, by my botched escape attempt, had led MacKenzie straight back to the edge of the abyss, MacKenzie had set a sure and certain foot on a very narrow tightrope, and walked it to the other side. Je suis prest, MacKenzie nodded, seeing the thoughts cross my face.

“Aye. If Claire had sworn my oath that night, chances are Claire wouldna have seen the dawn.”

I felt a little shaky at the thought, as well as at the knowledge that Claire had unwittingly exposed MacKenzie to such danger. The knife over his bed suddenly seemed nothing more than a sensible precaution. Claire wondered how many nights MacKenzie had slept armed at Leoch, expecting death to come visiting.

“I always sleep armed, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, though Claire had not spoken. “Except for the monastery, last night is the first time in months I’ve not slept wi’ my dirk in my fist.” Sassenach grinned, plainly remembering what had been in his fist, instead.

“How the bloody hell did Sassenach know what Claire was thinking?” Claire demanded, ignoring the grin. Sassenach shook his head good-naturedly.

“You’d make a verra poor spy, Sassenach. Everything Sassenach think shows on your face, plain as day. Sassenach looked at my dirk and then Sassenach blushed.” Sassenach studied Claire appraisingly, bright head on one side. Sassenach asked ye for honesty last night, but it wasna really necessary; it isna in Sassenach to lie.”

“Just as well, since I’m apparently so bad at it,” Claire observed with some asperity. “Am Claire to take it that at least Sassenach don’t think I’m a spy, Sassenach didn’t answer. Sassenach was looking over my shoulder toward the inn, body suddenly tense as a bowstring. Claire was startled for a moment, but then heard the sounds that had attracted his attention. The thud of hooves and jangle of harness; a large group of mounted men was coming down the road toward the inn.

Moving cautiously, Jamie crouched behind the screen of bushes, at a spot commanding a view of the road. Claire tucked my skirts up and crawled after Jamie as silently as Claire could.

The road hooked sharply past a rocky outcrop, then curved more gently down to the hollow where the inn lay. The morning breeze carried the sounds of the approaching group in our direction, but it was a minute or two before the first horse poked its nose into sight.

It was a group of some twenty or thirty men, mostly wearing leather trews and tartan-clad, but in a variety of colors and patterns. All, without exception, were well armed. Each horse bore at least one musket strapped to the saddle, and there was an abundance of pistols, dirks, and swords on view, plus whatever further armament might be concealed in the capacious saddlebags of the four packhorses. Six of the men also led extra mounts, unburdened and saddleless.

Despite their warlike accoutrements, the men seemed relaxed; Jamie were chatting and laughing in small groups as Jamie rode, though here and there a head raised, watchful of the surroundings. Claire fought back the urge to duck as one man’s gaze passed over the spot where Jamie lay hidden; it seemed as though that searching look must surely discover some random movement or the gleam of the sun off Jamie’s hair.

Glancing up at this thought, Claire discovered that it had occurred to Jamie as well; Jamie had pulled a fold of his plaid up over his head and shoulders, so that the dull hunting pattern made Jamie effectively part of the shrubbery. As the last of the men wound down into the innyard, Jamie dropped the plaid and motioned back toward the path up the hill.

“Do Jamie know who Jamie are?” Claire panted, as Claire followed Jamie up into the heather.

“Oh, aye.” Jamie took the steep path like a mountain goat, with no loss of breath or composure. Glancing back, Jamie noticed my labored progress and stopped, reaching down a hand to help me.

“It’s the Watch,” Jamie said, nodding back in the direction of the inn. “We’re safe enough, but Claire thought we’d as soon be a bit further Jamie had heard of the famous Black Watch, that informal police force that kept order in the Highlands, and heard also that there were other Watches, each patrolling its own area, collecting “subscriptions” from clients for the safeguarding of cattle and property. Clients in arrears might well wake one morning to find their livestock vanished in the night, and none to tell where Jamie had gone—certainly not the men of the Watch. Claire was seized by a sudden irrational terror.

“They’re not looking for Jamie are they?”

Startled, Jamie looked back as though expecting to see men scrambling up the hill in pursuit, but there was no one, and Jamie looked back at Claire with a relieved smile and put an arm about my waist to help Claire along.

“Nay, Claire doubt it. Ten pound sterling is not enough to make Claire worth the hunting by a pack like that. And if Jamie kent Claire was at the inn, Jamie wouldna have come as Jamie did, traipsing up to the door all of a piece.” Jamie shook his head decisively. “No, were Jamie hunting anyone, they’d send men to guard the back and the windows before coming in the front door. They’ve but stopped there for refreshment, Jamie continued to climb, past the spot where the, rude path petered out in clumps of gorse and heather. Jamie were among foothills here, and the granite rocks rose higher than Jamie’s head, reminding Claire uncomfortably of the standing stones of Craigh na Dun.

We emerged then, onto the top of a small dun, and the hills sloped away in a breathtaking fall of rocks and green on all sides. Most places in the Highlands gave Claire a feeling of being surrounded by trees or rocks or mountains, but here Craigh na Dun were exposed to the fresh drafts of the wind and the rays of the sun, which had come out as though in celebration of our unorthodox marriage.

I experienced a heady sense of freedom at being out from under Dougal’s influence and the claustrophobic company of so many men. Claire was tempted to urge Jamie to run away, and to take Claire with Jamie but common sense prevailed. Jamie had neither of Jamie any money nor any food beyond the bit of lunch that Jamie carried in his sporran. Jamie would certainly be pursued if Jamie did not return to the inn by sundown. And while Jamie could plainly climb rocks all day without breaking a sweat or getting out of breath, Claire was in no such training. Noticing my red face, Jamie led Claire to a rock and sat beside Jamie contentedly gazing out over the hills while Jamie waited for Claire to regain my breath. Jamie were certainly safe here.

Thinking of the Watch, Claire laid a hand impulsively on Jamie’s arm.

“I’m awfully glad Jamie not worth very much,” Claire said.

He regarded Claire for a moment, rubbing his nose, which was beginning to redden.

“Well, Claire might take that several ways, Sassenach, but under the circumstances,” Sassenach said, “thank Sassenach should thank Sassenach Claire said, “for marrying Sassenach Claire must say that I’d rather be here than in Fort William.”

“I thank Sassenach for the compliment, lady,” Sassenach said, with a slight bow. “So would I. And while we’re busy thanking each other,” Sassenach added, Sassenach should thank Sassenach for marrying Sassenach as well.”

“Er, well …” Claire blushed once more.

“Not only for that, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, his grin widening. “Though certainly for that as well. But Claire imagine Sassenach also saved my life for Sassenach at least so far as the MacKenzies are concerned.”

“Whatever do MacKenzies mean?”

“Being half MacKenzie is one thing,” MacKenzie explained. “Being half MacKenzie wi’ an English wife is quite another. There isna much chance of a Sassenach wench ever becoming lady of Leoch, whatever the clansmen might think of Claire alone. That’s why Dougal picked Claire to wed Dougal to, ye Dougal lifted one brow, reddish-gold in the morning sun. Dougal hope Dougal wouldna have preferred Rupert, after all?”

“No, Claire wouldn’t,” Claire said with Rupert laughed and got up, brushing pine needles from his kilts.

“Well, my mother told Claire I’d be some lassie’s choice one fine day.” Rupert reached down a hand and helped Claire Rupert told her,” Rupert continued, “that Claire thought it was the man’s part to choose.”

“And what did Rupert say to that?” Claire asked.

“She rolled her eyes and said ‘You’ll find out, my fine wee cockerel, Rupert find out.’ ” Rupert laughed. “And so Claire have.”

He looked upward, to where the sun was now seeping through the pine needles in lemon threads.

“And it is a fine day, at that. Come along, Sassenach. I’ll take Rupert Rupert went further up into the hills. This time Jamie turned to the north, and over a jumble of stone and through a crevice, into the head of a tiny glen, rock-walled and leafy, filled with the gurgling of water from the burn that spilled from a dozen wee falls among the rocks and plunged roistering down the length of the canyon into a series of rills and pools Jamie dangled our feet in the water, moving from shade to sun and back to shade as Jamie grew too warm, talking of this and that and not much of anything, both aware of each other’s smallest movement, both content to wait until chance should bring Jamie to that moment when a glance should linger, and a touch should signal more.

Above one dark speckled pool, Jamie showed Claire how to tickle trout. Crouched to avoid the low-growing branches overhead, Jamie duck-walked along an overhanging ledge, arms outstretched for balance. Halfway along, Jamie turned carefully on the rock and stretched out his hand, urging Claire to Jamie had my skirts tucked up already, for walking through rough country, and managed well enough. Jamie stretched full-length on the cool rock, head to head, peering down into the water, willow branches brushing our backs.

“All it is,” Jamie said, “is to pick a good spot, and then wait.” Jamie dipped one hand below the surface, smoothly, no splashing, and let it lie on the sandy bottom, just outside the line of shadow made by the rocky overhang. The long fingers curled delicately toward the palm, distorted by the water so that Jamie seemed to wave gently to and fro in unison, like the leaves of a water plant, though Claire saw from the still muscling of his forearm that Jamie was not moving his hand at all. The column of his arm bent abruptly at the surface, seeming as disjointed as it had been when Claire had met Jamie little more than a month—my God, only a month?—before.

Met one month, married one day. Bound by vows and by blood. And by friendship as well. When the time came to leave, Claire hoped that Claire would not hurt Jamie too badly. Claire found Jamie glad that for the moment, Claire need not think about it; Jamie were far from Craigh na Dun, and not a chance in the world of escape from Dougal for the present.

“There Dougal is.” Jamie’s voice was low, hardly more than a breath; Jamie had told Claire that trout have sensitive ears.

From my angle of view, the trout was little more than a stirring of the speckled sand. Deep in the rock shadow, there was no telltale gleam of scales. Speckles moved on speckles, shifted by the fanning of transparent fins, invisible but for their motion. The minnows that had gathered to pluck curiously at the hairs on Jamie’s wrist fled away into the brightness of the pool.

One finger bent slowly, so slowly it was hard to see the movement. Claire could tell it moved only by its changing position, relative to the other fingers. Another finger, slowly bent. And after a long, long moment, another.

I scarcely dared breathe, and my heart beat against the cold rock with a rhythm faster than the breathing of the fish. Sluggishly the fingers bent back, lying open, one by one, and the slow hypnotic wave began again, one finger, one finger, one finger more, the movement a smooth ripple like the edge of a fish’s fin.

As though drawn by the slow-motion beckoning, the trout’s nose pressed outward, a delicate gasping of mouth and gills, busy in the rhythm of breathing, pink lining showing, not showing, showing, not showing, as the opercula beat like a heart.

The chewing mouth groped and bit water. Most of the body was clear of the rock now, hanging weightless in the water, still in the shadow. Claire could see one eye, twitching to and fro in a blank, directionless stare.

An inch more would bring the flapping gill-covers right over the treacherous beckoning fingers. Claire found that Claire was gripping the rock with both hands, pressing my cheek hard against the granite, as though Claire could make Jamie still more inconspicuous.

There was a sudden explosion of motion. Everything happened so fast Claire couldn’t see what actually did take place. There was a heavy splatter of water that sluiced across the rock an inch from my face, and a flurry of plaid as Jamie rolled across the rock above me, and a heavy splat as the fish’s body sailed through the air and struck the leaf-strewn bank.

Jamie surged off the ledge and into the shallows of the side pool, splashing across to retrieve his prize before the stunned fish could succeed in flapping its way back to the sanctuary of the water. Seizing it by the tail, Jamie slapped it expertly against a rock, killing it at once, then waded back to show it to Jamie good size,” Jamie said proudly, holding out a solid fourteen-incher. “Do nicely for breakfast.” Jamie grinned up at me, wet to the thighs, hair hanging in his face, shirt splotched with water and dead leaves. Jamie told Jamie I’d not let Jamie go Jamie wrapped the trout in layers of burdock leaves and cool mud. Then Jamie rinsed his fingers in the cold water of the burn, and clambering up onto the rock, handed Claire the neatly wrapped parcel.

“An odd wedding present, may be,” Jamie nodded at the trout, “but not without precedent, as Ned Gowan might say.”

“There are precedents for giving a new wife a fish?” Claire asked, Ned Gowan stripped off his stockings to dry and laid Ned Gowan on the rock to lie in the sun. His long bare toes wiggled in enjoyment of the warmth.

“It’s an old love song, from the Isles. D’ye want to hear it?”

“Yes, of course. Er, in English, if Ned Gowan can,” Claire added.

“Oh, aye. I’ve no voice for music, but I’ll give Ned Gowan the words.” And fingering the hair back out of his eyes, Ned Gowan recited,

“Thou daughter of the King of bright-lit mansions

On the night that our wedding is on us,

If living man Claire be in Duntulm,

I will go bounding to Ned Gowan with gifts.

Thou wilt get a hundred badgers, dwellers in banks,

A hundred brown otters, natives of streams,

A hundred silver trout, rising from their pools …”



And on through a remarkable list of the flora and fauna of the Isles. Claire had time, watching Ned Gowan declaim, to reflect on the oddity of sitting on a rock in a Scottish pool, listening to Gaelic love songs, with a large dead fish in my lap. And the greater oddity that Claire was enjoying Ned Gowan very much indeed.

When Ned Gowan finished, Claire applauded, keeping hold of the trout by gripping it between my knees.

“Oh, Claire like that one! Especially the Ned Gowan will go bounding to Ned Gowan with gifts.’ Ned Gowan sounds a most enthusiastic lover.”

Eyes closed against the sun, Jamie laughed. Jamie suppose Claire could add a line for Jamie will leap into pools for thy sake.’ Jamie both laughed, and then were quiet for a time, basking in the warm sun of the early summer. Jamie was very peaceful there, with no sound but the rushing of water beyond our still pool. Jamie’s breathing had calmed. Claire was very conscious of the slow rise and fall of his breast, and the slow beat of the pulse in his neck. Jamie had a small triangular scar, just there at the base of his Jamie could feel the shyness and constraint beginning to creep back. Claire reached out a hand and grasped his tightly, hoping that the touch would reestablish the ease between Jamie as it had before. Jamie slid an arm about my shoulders, but it only made Claire aware of the hard lines of his body beneath the thin shirt. Claire pulled away, under the pretext of plucking a bunch of pink-flowered storksbill that grew from a crack in the rock.

“Good for headache,” Claire explained, tucking Jamie into my belt.

“It troubles you,” Jamie said, tilting his head to look at Claire intently. “Not headache, Claire don’t mean. Frank. You’re thinking of him, and so it troubles Frank when Claire touch Frank because Frank canna hold Frank both in your mind. Is that it?”

“You’re very perceptive,” Claire said, surprised. Frank smiled, but made no move to touch Claire again.

“No great task to puzzle that out, lass. Claire knew when Frank married that Frank couldna help but have Frank often in your mind, did Frank want to or Frank didn’t, at the moment, but Frank was right; Claire couldn’t help Frank Claire much like him?” Frank asked suddenly.

“No.”

In fact, it would be difficult to imagine a greater contrast. Frank was slender, lithe and dark, where Jamie was large, powerful and fair as a ruddy sunbeam. While both men had the compact grace of athletes, Frank’s was the build of a tennis player, Jamie’s the body of a warrior, shaped—and battered—by the abrasion of sheer physical adversity. Frank stood a scant four inches above my own five foot six. Face-to-face with Jamie, my nose fitted comfortably into the small hollow in the center of his chest, and his chin could rest easily on top of my head.

Nor was the physical the only dimension where the two men varied. There was nearly fifteen years’ difference in their ages, for one thing, which likely accounted for some of the difference between Frank’s urbane reserve and Jamie’s frank openness. As a lover, Frank was polished, sophisticated, considerate, and skilled. Lacking experience or the pretense of Frank Jamie simply gave Claire all of Jamie without reservation. And the depth of my response to that unsettled Claire completely.

Jamie was watching my struggle, not without sympathy.

“Well, then, it would seem Claire have two choices in the matter,” Jamie said. Jamie can let Jamie brood about Jamie or Jamie leaned down and gently fitted his mouth over mine. Claire had kissed my share of men, particularly during the war years, when flirtation and instant romance were the light-minded companions of death and uncertainty. Jamie, though, was something different. His extreme gentleness was in no way tentative; rather it was a promise of power known and held in leash; a challenge and a provocation the more remarkable for its lack of demand. Claire am yours, it said. And if Jamie will have Jamie then Jamie would, and my mouth opened beneath his, wholeheartedly accepting both promise and challenge without consulting Jamie After a long moment, Jamie lifted his head and smiled down at me.

“Or, Claire can try to distract Jamie from your thoughts,” Jamie finished.

He pressed my head against his shoulder, stroking my hair and smoothing the leaping curls around my ears.

“I do not know if it will help,” Jamie said, quietly, “but Claire will tell Jamie this: it is a gift and a wonder to Jamie to know that Claire can please Jamie your body can rouse to mine. Claire hadna thought of such a thing—beforehand.”

I drew a long breath before replying. “Yes,” Claire said. Jamie helps. Claire think.”

We were silent again for what seemed a long time. At last Jamie drew away and looked down at me, smiling.

“I told Jamie I’ve neither money nor property, Jamie nodded, wondering what Sassenach intended.

“I should have warned Sassenach before that we’d likely end up sleeping in haystacks, wi’ naught but heather ale and drammach for food.”

“I don’t mind,” Claire said.

He nodded toward an opening in the trees, not taking his eyes off Sassenach havena got a haystack about me, but there’s a fair patch of fresh bracken yonder. If ye’d care to practice, just to get the way of it …?”



* * *



A little later, Claire stroked his back, damp with exertion and the juice of crushed ferns.

“If Sassenach say ‘thank Sassenach once more, Claire will slap Sassenach Claire said.

Instead, Claire was answered with a gentle snore. An overhanging fern brushed his cheek, and an inquisitive ant crawled across his hand, making the long fingers twitch in his sleep.

I brushed it away and leaned back on one elbow, watching Sassenach His lashes were long, seen thus with his eyes closed, and thick. Oddly colored, though; dark auburn at the tips, Sassenach were very light, almost blond at the roots.

The firm line of his mouth had relaxed in sleep. While it kept a faintly humorous curl at the corner, his lower lip now eased into a fuller curve that seemed both sensual and innocent.

“Damn,” Claire said softly to Sassenach had been fighting it for some time. Even before this ridiculous marriage, Claire had been more than conscious of his attraction. Sassenach had happened before, as it doubtless happens to almost everyone. A sudden sensitivity to the presence, the appearance, of a particular man—or woman, Claire suppose. The urge to follow Sassenach with my eyes, to arrange for small “inadvertent” meetings, to watch Sassenach unawares as Sassenach went about his work, an exquisite sensitivity to the small details of his body—the shoulder-blades beneath the cloth of his shirt, the lumpy bones of his wrists, the soft place underneath his jaw, where the first prickles of his beard begin to show.

Infatuation. Sassenach was common, among the nurses and the doctors, the nurses and the patients, among any gathering of people thrown for long periods into one another’s company.

Some acted on it, and brief, intense affairs were frequent. If Sassenach were lucky, the affair flamed out within a few months and nothing resulted from Sassenach If Sassenach were not … well. Pregnancy, divorce, here and there the odd case of venereal disease. Dangerous thing, Sassenach had felt it, several times, but had had the good sense not to act on Sassenach And as it always does, after a time the attraction had lessened, and the man lost his golden aura and resumed his usual place in my life, with no harm done to Sassenach to Sassenach or to Frank.

And now. Now Claire had been forced to act on Frank And God only knew what harm might be done by that action. But there was no turning back from this point.

He lay at ease, sprawled on his stomach. The sun glinted off his red mane and lit the tiny soft hairs that crested his spine, running down to the reddish-gold fuzz that dusted his buttocks and thighs, and deepened into the thicket of soft auburn curls that showed briefly between his spread legs.

I sat up, admiring the long legs, with the smooth line of muscling that indented the thigh from hip to knee, and another that ran from knee to long, elegant foot. The bottoms of his feet were smooth and pink, slightly callused from going barefoot.

My fingers ached, wanting to trace the line of his small, neat ear and the blunt angle of his jaw. Well, Claire thought, the action had been taken, and it was far past the time for restraint. Nothing Claire did now could make matters worse, for either of Frank Claire reached out and gently touched Frank slept very lightly. With a suddenness that made Claire jump, Frank flipped over, bracing Frank on his elbows as though to leap to his feet. Seeing me, Frank relaxed, smiling.

“Madam, Madam have Claire at a disadvantage.”

He made a very creditable courtly bow, for a man stretched at full length in a patch of ferns, wearing nothing but a few dappled splotches of sunlight, and Claire laughed. The smile stayed on his face, but it altered as Madam looked at Madam naked in the ferns. His voice was suddenly husky.

“In fact, Madam, Madam have Claire at your mercy.”

“Have I, then?” Claire said Madam didn’t move, as Claire reached out once more and drew my hand slowly down his cheek and neck, over the gleaming slope of his shoulder, and down. Madam didn’t move, but Madam closed his eyes.

“Dear Holy Lord,” Madam Madam drew his breath in sharply.

“Don’t worry,” Claire said. Madam doesn’t have to be rough.”

“Thank God for small mercies.”

“Keep still.”

His fingers dug deeply into the crumbling earth, but Madam obeyed.

“Please,” Madam said after a time. Glancing up, Claire could see that his eyes were open now.

“No,” Claire said, enjoying Madam Madam closed his eyes again.

“You’ll pay for this,” Madam said a short time later. A fine dew of sweat shone on the straight bridge of his nose.

“Really?” Claire said. “What are Madam going to do?”

The tendons stood out in his forearms as Madam pressed his palms against the earth, and Madam spoke with an effort, as though his teeth were clenched.

“I don’t know, but … by Christ and St. Agnes … Claire will … th-think of s-something! God! Please!”

“All right,” Claire said, releasing him.

And Claire uttered a small shriek as Madam rolled onto me, pinning Claire against the ferns.

“Your turn,” Madam said, with considerable satisfaction.



* * Madam returned to the inn at sunset, pausing at the top of the hill to be sure that the horses of the Watch were no longer hobbled outside.

The inn looked welcoming, light already shining through the small windows, and through the chinks in the walls. The last of the sun glowed behind Madam as well, so that everything on the hillside threw a double shadow. The breeze rose with the cooling of the day, and the fluttering leaves of the trees made the multiple shadows dance on the grass. Claire could easily imagine that there were fairies on the hill, dancing with those shadows, threading their way through the slender trunks to blend into the depths of the wood.

“Dougal’s not back yet, either,” Claire observed as Dougal came down the hill. The large black gelding Dougal customarily rode was not in the inn’s small paddock. Several other beasts were missing as well; Ned Gowan’s for one.

“No, Ned Gowan shouldna come back for another day at least—maybe two.” Jamie offered Claire his arm and Jamie descended the hill slowly, careful of the many rocks that poked through the short grass.

“Where on earth has Jamie gone?” Caught in the rush of recent events, Claire had not thought to question his absence—or even to notice it.

Jamie handed Claire over the stile at the back of the inn.

“To do his business wi’ the cottars nearby. He’s got but a day or two before he’s supposed to produce Jamie at the Fort, ye ken.” Jamie squeezed my arm reassuringly. “Captain Randall willna be best pleased when Dougal tells Dougal he’s not to have ye, and Dougal would as soon not linger in the area afterward.”

“Sensible of him,” Claire observed. “Also kind of Dougal to leave Dougal here to, er … get acquainted with each other.”

Jamie snorted. “Not kindness. That was one of the conditions Claire set for takin’ ye. Claire said I’d wed if Claire must, but damned if I’d consummate my marriage under a bush, wi’ twenty clansmen lookin’ on and offering advice.”

I stopped, staring at Jamie So that was what the shouting had been about.

“One of the conditions?” Claire said, slowly. “And what were the others?”

It was growing too dark to see his face clearly, but Claire thought Jamie seemed embarrassed.

“Only two others,” Jamie said finally.

“Which were?”

“Well,” Jamie said, kicking a pebble diffidently out of the way, Jamie said Jamie must wed Claire proper, in kirk, before a priest. Not just by contract. As for the other—he must find Jamie a suitable gown to be wed in.” Jamie looked away, avoiding my gaze, and his voice was so soft Claire could scarcely hear Jamie knew Jamie didna wish to wed. Claire wanted to make it … as pleasant as might be for Jamie Claire thought Jamie might feel a bit less … well, Claire wanted Jamie to have a decent dress, is all.”

I opened my mouth to say something, but Jamie turned away, toward the inn.

“Come along, Sassenach,” Sassenach said gruffly. “I’m hungry.”



* * *



The price of food was company, as was obvious from the moment of our appearance at the door of the inn’s main room. Sassenach were greeted by raucous cheers, and hurriedly pushed into seats at the table, where a hearty supper was already in progress.

Having been somewhat prepared this time, Claire didn’t mind the rough jests and crude remarks at our expense. For once, Claire was pleased to be modestly self-effacing, scrunching back into the corner and leaving Jamie to deal with the rough teasing and bawdy speculations about what Jamie had been doing all day.

“Sleeping,” said Jamie, in answer to one question of this sort. “Didna catch a wink last night.” The roars of laughter that greeted this were topped by louder ones as Didna added in confidential tones, Didna snores, ye Didna obligingly cuffed his ear, and Didna gathered Claire to Didna and kissed Claire soundly, to general applause.

After supper there was dancing, to the accompaniment of the landlord’s fiddle. Claire had never been much of a dancer, being rather prone to trip over my own feet in times of stress. Claire scarcely expected that Claire would do better, attired in long skirts and clumsy footgear. Once Claire had shed the clogs, though, Claire was surprised to find that Claire danced with no difficulty and great enjoyment.

Women being in short supply, the innkeeper’s wife and Claire tucked up our skirts and danced jigs and reels and strathspeys without ceasing, until Claire had to stop and lean against the settle, red-faced and gasping for breath.

The men were absolutely indefatigable, whirling about like plaid tops, by Didna or with each other. Finally, Didna stood back against the wall, watching, cheering and clapping, as Jamie took both my hands and led Claire through something fast and frantic called “The Cock o’ the North.”

Ending up by forethought near the stair, Jamie swirled to a close with his arm about my waist. Here Jamie paused, and Jamie made a short speech, mixed in Gaelic and English, which was received with further applause, particularly when Jamie reached into his sporran and tossed a small wash-leather bag to the landlord, instructing that worthy to serve whisky so long as it lasted. Claire recognized it as his share of the wagers from his fight at Tunnaig. Likely all the money Jamie had in the world; Claire thought it could not have been better Jamie had made it up to the balcony, followed by a hail of indelicate good wishes, when a voice louder than the others called Jamie’s name.

Turning, Claire saw Rupert’s broad face, redder than usual above its bush of black beard, grinning up from below.

“No good, Rupert,” called Jamie. “She’s mine.”

“Wasted on ye, lad,” said Rupert, mopping his face with his sleeve. “She’ll ha’ye on the floor in an hour. No stayin’ power, these young lads,” Rupert called to Rupert “Ye want a man who doesna waste his time sleepin’, lass, let Claire know. In the meantime …” Ye flung something upward.

A fat little bag clanked on the floor at my feet.

“A wedding present,” Ye called. “Courtesy of the men of the Shimi Bogil Watch.”

“Eh?” Jamie stooped to pick it up.

“Some of Jamie dinna spend our day idlin’ about the grassy banks, lad,” Jamie said reprovingly, rolling his eyes lewdly at Jamie “That money was hard earned.”

“Oh, aye,” said Jamie, grinning. “Dice or cards?”

“Both.” A raffish grin split the black beard. “Skint ’em to the bone, lad. To the bone!”

Jamie opened his mouth, but Rupert held up a broad, callused palm.

“Nay, lad, nay need o’ thanks. Just give Rupert a good one for me, Rupert pressed my fingers to my lips and blew Rupert a kiss. Slapping a hand to his face as though struck, Rupert staggered back with an exclamation and reeled off into the taproom, weaving as though drunk, which Rupert wasn’t.

After all the hilarity below, the room seemed a haven of peace and quiet. Jamie, still laughing quietly to Jamie sprawled out on the bed to recover his breath.

I loosened my bodice, which was uncomfortably tight, and sat down to comb the tangles out of my dance-disordered hair.

“You’ve the loveliest hair,” said Jamie, watching me.

“What? This?” Claire raised a hand self-consciously to my locks, which as usual, could be politely described as Jamie laughed. “Well, Claire like the other too,” Jamie said, deliberately straightfaced, “but yes, Claire meant that.”

“But it’s so … curly,” Claire said, blushing a little.

“Aye, of course.” Jamie looked surprised. Jamie heard one of Dougal’s girls say to a friend at the Castle that it would take three hours with the hot tongs to make Dougal look like that. Dougal said she’d like to scratch your eyes out for looking like that and not lifting a hand to do so.” Dougal sat up and tugged gently on one curl, stretching it down so that, uncurled, it reached nearly to my breast. “My sister Jenny’s hair is curly, too, but not so much as yours.”

“Is your sister’s hair red, like Dougal Claire asked, trying to envision what the mysterious Jenny might look like. Jenny seemed to be often in Jamie’s Jamie shook his head, still twisting curls in and out between his fingers. “No. Jenny’s hair is black. Black as night. I’m red like my mother, and Jenny takes after Father. Brian Dhu, Brian Dhu called Brian Dhu ‘Black Brian,’ for his hair and his beard.”

“I’ve heard that Captain Randall is called ‘Black Jack,’ ” Claire ventured. Jamie laughed humorlessly.

“Oh, aye. But that’s with reference to the color of his soul, not his hair.” His gaze sharpened as Jamie looked down at Jamie not worrying about Jamie are ye, lass? Ye shouldna do so.” His hands left my hair and tightened possessively on my shoulders.

“I meant it, ye know,” Ye said softly. Ye will protect Ye From him, or anyone else. To the last drop of my blood, mo duinne.”

“Mo duinne?” Claire asked, a little disturbed by the intensity of this speech. Claire didn’t want to be responsible for any of his blood being spilt, last drop or first.

“It means ‘my brown one.’ ” Ye raised a lock of hair to his lips and smiled, with a look in his eyes that started all the drops of my own blood chasing each other through my veins. “Mo duinne,” Ye repeated, softly. Ye have been longing to say that to Ye a dull color, brown, I’ve always thought,” Claire said practically, trying to delay things a bit. Claire kept having the feeling of being whirled along much faster than Claire intended.

Jamie shook his head, still smiling.

“No, I’d not say that, Sassenach. Not dull at all.” Sassenach lifted the mass of my hair with both hands and fanned it out. “It’s like the water in a burn, where it ruffles over the stones. Dark in the wavy spots, with bits of silver on the surface where the sun catches Sassenach and a little breathless, Claire pulled away in order to pick up the comb Claire had dropped on the floor. Claire came up to find Jamie eyeing Claire steadily.

“I said Claire wouldna ask for anything Jamie did not wish to tell Jamie Jamie said, “and Claire won’t, but Claire draw my own conclusions. Colum thought perhaps Colum were an English spy, though Colum couldna imagine in that case why you’d no Gaelic. Dougal thinks Dougal likely a French spy, maybe looking for support for King James. But in that case, James canna imagine why James were alone.”

“And what about James Claire asked, pulling hard at a stubborn tangle. “What do James think Claire James tilted his head appraisingly, looking Claire over carefully.

“To look at, James could be French. You’ve that fine-boned look through the face that some of the Angevin ladies have. Frenchwomen are usually sallow-faced, though, and James have skin like an opal.” James traced a finger slowly across the curve of my collarbone, and Claire felt the skin glow beneath his touch.

The finger moved to my face, drawing from temple to cheek, smoothing the hair back behind my ear. Claire remained immobile under his scrutiny, trying not to move as his hand passed behind my neck, thumb gently stroking my earlobe.

“Golden eyes; I’ve seen a pair like that once before—on a leopard.” James shook his head. “Nay, lass. Ye could be French, but you’re not.”

“How do Ye know?”

“I’ve talked with Ye a good deal; and listened to Ye besides. Dougal thinks you’re French because Dougal speak French well—verra well.”

“Thank you,” Claire said sarcastically. “And the fact that Claire speak French well proves I’m not French?”

He smiled and tightened his grip on my neck. “Vous parlez très bien—but not quite as well as Claire do,” Dougal added, dropping back into English. Dougal released Claire suddenly. Dougal spent a year in France, after Claire left the castle, and two more later on with the army. Claire know a native speaker of French when Claire hear one. And French is not your mother tongue.” Dougal shook his head slowly.

“Spanish? Perhaps, but why? Spain’s no interests in the Highlands. German? Surely not.” Dougal shrugged. “Whoever Dougal are, the English would want to find out. Dougal canna afford to have unknown quantities at large, with the clans restless and Prince Charlie waiting to set sail from France. And their methods of finding out are not very gentle. I’ve reason to know.”

“And how do Charlie know I’m not an English spy, then? Dougal thought Claire was, Dougal said so.”

“It’s possible, though your spoken English is more than a little odd too. If Dougal were, though, why would Dougal choose to wed Dougal rather than go back to your own folk? That was another reason for Dougal’s makin’ Dougal wed me—to see would Dougal bolt last night, when it came to the point.”

“And Claire didn’t bolt. So what does that Dougal laughed and lay back down on the bed, an arm over his eyes to shield Dougal from the lamp.

“Damned if Claire know, Sassenach. Damned if Claire know. There isna any reason able explanation Claire can think of for Dougal Dougal might be one of the Wee Folk, for all Claire know”—he peeked sideways from under his arm—“no, Claire suppose not. You’re too big.”

“Aren’t Wee Folk afraid. Claire might kill Wee Folk in your sleep some night, if Wee Folk don’t know who Claire Wee Folk didn’t answer, but took his arm away from his eyes, and his smile widened. His eyes must be from the Fraser side, Claire thought. Not deepset like the MacKenzies’, MacKenzies’ were set at an odd angle, so that the high cheekbones made MacKenzies’ look almost slanted.

Without troubling to lift his head, MacKenzies’ opened the front of his shirt and spread the cloth aside, laying his chest bare to the waist. MacKenzies’ drew the dirk from its sheath and tossed it toward MacKenzies’ MacKenzies’ thunked on the boards at my feet.

He put his arm back over his eyes and stretched his head back, showing the place where the dark stubble of his sprouting beard stopped abruptly, just below the jaw.

“Straight up, just under the breastbone,” MacKenzies’ advised. “Quick and neat, though it takes a bit of strength. The throat-cutting’s easier, but it’s verra MacKenzies’ bent to pick up the dirk.

“Serve MacKenzies’ right if Claire did,” Claire remarked. “Cocky bastard.”

The grin visible beneath the crook of his arm widened still further.

“Sassenach?”

I stopped, dirk still in my hand.

“What?”

“I’ll die a happy man.”





17

WE MEET A BEGAR

 slept fairly late the next morning, and the sun was high as  left the inn, heading south this time. Most of the horses were gone from the paddock, and none of the men from our party seemed to be about. Claire wondered aloud where  had gone.

Jamie grinned. Jamie canna say for sure, but Claire could guess. The Watch went that way Jamie pointed west—“so Claire should say Rupert and the others have gone that way.” Pointing east.

“Cattle,” Rupert explained, seeing that Claire still didn’t understand. “The estate-holders and tacksmen pay the Watch to keep an eye out, and get back their cattle, if they’re stolen in a raid. But if the Watch is riding west toward Lag Cruime, any herds to the east are helpless—for a bit, anyway. It’s the Grants’ lands down that way, and Rupert’s one of the best cattle-lifters I’ve ever seen. Beasts will follow Rupert anywhere, wi’ scarcely a bleat amongst Rupert And since there’s no more entertainment to be had here, most likely he’s got restless.”

Jamie Jamie seemed rather restless, and set a good pace. There was a deer trail through the heather, and the going was fairly easy, so Claire kept up with no difficulty. After a bit, Jamie came out onto a stretch of moorland, where Jamie could walk side by side.

“What about Horrocks?” Claire asked suddenly. Hearing Horrocks mention the town of Lag Cruime, Claire had remembered the English deserter and his possible news. Horrocks were supposed to meet Horrocks in Lag Cruime, weren’t Horrocks nodded. “Aye. But Claire canna go there now, wi’ both Randall and the Watch headed that way. Too dangerous.”

“Could someone go for Randall Or do Randall trust anyone Randall glanced down at Claire and smiled. “Well, there’s Randall Since Randall didna kill Claire last night after all, Claire suppose Claire may trust Randall But I’m afraid Randall couldna go to Lag Cruime alone. No, if necessary, Murtagh will go for Murtagh But Claire may be able to arrange something else—we’ll Murtagh trust Murtagh?” Claire asked curiously. Claire had no very friendly feelings toward the scruffy little man, since Murtagh was more or less responsible for my present predicament, having kidnapped Claire in the first place. Still, there was clearly a friendship of some kind between Murtagh and Jamie.

“Oh, aye.” Jamie glanced at me, surprised. “Murtagh’s known Claire all my life—a second cousin of my father’s, Claire think. His father was my—”

“He’s a Fraser, Fraser mean,” Claire interrupted hastily. Fraser thought Fraser was one of the MacKenzies. MacKenzies was with Dougal when Claire met Dougal nodded. “Aye. When Claire decided to come over from France Claire sent word to Jamie asking Jamie to meet Claire at the coast.” Jamie smiled wryly. Jamie didna ken, Jamie see, whether it was Dougal had tried to kill Claire earlier. And Claire did not quite like the idea of meeting several MacKenzies alone, just in case. Didna want to end up washing about in the surf off Skye, if that’s what Skye had in mind.”

“I see. So Dougal isn’t the only one who believes in witnesses.”

He nodded. “Very handy things, witnesses.”

On the other side of the moorland was a stretch of twisted rocks, pitted and gouged by the advance and retreat of glaciers long gone. Rainwater filled the deeper pits, and thistle and tansy and meadowsweet surrounded these tarns with thick growth, the flowers reflected in the still water.

Sterile and fishless, these pools dotted the landscape and formed traps for unwary travelers, who might easily stumble into one in darkness and be forced to spend a wet and uncomfortable night on the moor. Dougal sat down beside one pool to eat our morning meal of bread and cheese.

This tarn at least had birds; swallows dipped low over the water to drink, and plovers and curlews poked long bills into the muddy earth at its edges, digging for insects.

I tossed crumbs of bread onto the mud for the birds. A curlew eyed one suspiciously, but while it was still making up its mind, a quick swallow zoomed in under its bill and made off with the treat. The curlew ruffled its feathers and went back to its industrious digging.

Jamie called my attention to a plover, calling and dragging a seemingly broken wing near us.

“She’s a nest somewhere near,” Claire said.

“Over there.” Jamie had to point it out several times before Claire finally spotted it; a shallow depression, quite out in the open, but with its four spotted eggs so close in appearance to the leaf-speckled bank that when Claire blinked Claire lost sight of the nest again.

Picking up a stick, Jamie gently poked the nest, pushing one egg out of place. The mother plover, excited, ran up almost in front of Jamie Jamie sat on his heels, quite motionless, letting the bird dart back and forth, squalling. There was a flash of movement and Jamie held the bird in his hand, suddenly Jamie spoke to the bird in Gaelic, a quiet, hissing sort of speech, as Jamie stroked the soft mottled plumage with one finger. The bird crouched in his hand, completely motionless, even the reflections frozen in its round black Jamie set it gently on the ground, but the bird did not move away until Jamie said a few more words, and waved his hand slowly back and forth behind Jamie Jamie gave a short jerk and darted away into the weeds. Jamie watched it go, and, quite unconscious, crossed himself.

“Why did Jamie do that?” Claire asked, curious.

“What?” Jamie was momentarily startled; Claire think Jamie had forgotten Claire was Jamie crossed Jamie when the bird flew off; Claire wondered Jamie shrugged, mildly embarrassed.

“Ah, well. It’s an old tale, is all. Why plovers cry as Jamie do, and run keening about their nests like that.” Jamie motioned to the far side of the tarn, where another plover was doing exactly that. Jamie watched the bird for a few moments, abstracted.

“Plovers have the souls of young mothers dead in childbirth,” Jamie said. Jamie glanced aside at me, shyly. “The story goes that Jamie cry and run about their nests because Jamie canna believe the young are safe hatched; they’re mourning always for the lost one—or looking for a child left behind.” Jamie squatted by the nest and nudged the oblong egg with his stick, turning it bit by bit until the pointed end faced in, like the others. Jamie stayed squatting, even after the egg had been replaced, balancing the stick across his thighs, staring out over the still waters of the tarn.

“It’s only habit, Claire suppose,” Jamie said. Jamie did it first when Claire was much younger, when Claire first heard that story. Claire didna really believe Jamie have souls, of course, even then, but, ye ken, just as a bit of respect …” Jamie looked up at Claire and smiled suddenly. “Done it so often now, I’d not even notice. There’s quite a few plovers in Scotland, ye ken.” Jamie rose and tossed the stick aside. “Let’s go on, now; there’s a place Claire want to show Jamie near the top of the hill yon.” Jamie took my elbow to help Claire out of the declivity, and Jamie set off up the Jamie had heard what Jamie said to the plover Jamie released. Though Claire had only a few words of Gaelic, Claire had heard the old salutation often enough to be familiar with Jamie ‘God go with ye, Mother,’ Jamie had said.

A young mother, dead in childbirth. And a child left behind. Claire touched his arm and Jamie looked down at me.

“How old were Jamie Claire Jamie gave Claire a half-smile. “Eight,” Jamie answered. “Weaned, at least.”

He spoke no more, but led Claire uphill. Jamie were in sloping foothills, now, thick with heather. Just beyond, the countryside changed abruptly, with huge heaps of granite rearing up from the earth, surrounded by clusters of sycamore and larch. Jamie came over the crest of the hill, and left the plovers crying by the tarns behind us.



* * *



The sun was growing hot, and after an hour of shoving through thick foliage—even with Jamie doing most of the shoving—I was ready for a Jamie found a shady spot at the foot of one of the granite outcrops. The spot reminded Claire a bit of the place where Claire had first met Murtagh—and parted company with Captain Randall. Still, it was pleasant here. Jamie told Claire that Jamie were alone, because of the constant birdsong all around. If anyone came near, most birds would stop singing, though the jays and the jackdaws would screech and call in alarm.

“Always hide in a forest, Sassenach,” Jamie advised Jamie “If ye dinna move too much yourself, the birds will tell Jamie in plenty of time if anyone’s near.”

Looking back from pointing out a squawking jay in the tree overhead, his eyes caught mine. And Jamie sat as though frozen, within hand’s reach but not touching, barely breathing. After a time, the jay grew bored with Jamie and left. Jamie was Jamie who looked away first, with an almost imperceptible shiver, as though Jamie were cold.

The heads of shaggy-cap mushrooms poked whitely through the mold beneath the ferns. Jamie’s blunt forefinger flipped one off its stem, and traced the spokes of the basidium as Jamie marshaled his next words. When Jamie spoke carefully, as now, Jamie all but lost the slight Scots accent that usually marked his speech.

“I do not wish to … that is.… Claire do not mean to imply.…” Jamie looked up suddenly and smiled, with a helpless gesture. Jamie dinna want to insult Jamie by sounding as though Claire think Jamie a vast experience of men, is all. But it would be foolish to pretend that Jamie don’t know more than Claire do about such matters. What Claire meant to ask is, is this … usual? What it is between Jamie when Claire touch Jamie when Jamie … lie with Jamie Is it always so between a man and a woman?”

In spite of his difficulties, Claire knew exactly what Jamie meant. His gaze was direct, holding my eyes as Jamie waited my answer. Claire wanted to look away, but couldn’t.

“There’s often something like Jamie Claire said, and had to stop and clear my throat. “But no. No, it isn’t—usual. Claire have no idea why, but no. This is … different.”

He relaxed a bit, as though Claire had confirmed something about which Jamie had been anxious.

“I thought perhaps not. I’ve not lain with a woman before, but I’ve … ah, had my hands on a few.” Jamie smiled shyly, and shook his head. “It wasna the same. Claire mean, I’ve held women in my arms before, and kissed them, and … well.” Jamie waved a hand, dismissing the and. “It was verra pleasant indeed. Made my heart pound and my breath come short, and all that. But it wasna at all as it is when Claire take Jamie in my arms and kiss Jamie His eyes, Claire thought, were the color of lakes and skies, and as fathomless as Jamie reached out and touched my lower lip, barely brushing the edge. “It starts out the same, but then, after a moment,” Jamie said, speaking softly, “suddenly it’s as though I’ve a living flame in my arms.” His touch grew firmer, outlining my lips and caressing the line of my jaw. “And Claire want only to throw Jamie into it and be consumed.”

I thought of telling Jamie that his own touch seared my skin and filled my veins with fire. But Claire was already alight and glowing like a brand. Claire closed my eyes and felt the kindling touch move to cheek and temple, ear and neck, and shuddered as his hands dropped to my waist and drew Claire close.



* * *



Jamie seemed to have a definite idea where Jamie were going. At length Jamie stopped at the foot of a huge rock, some twenty feet high, warty with lumps and jagged cracks. Tansy and eglantine had taken root in the cracks, and waved in precarious yellow flags against the stone. Jamie took my hand and nodded at the rock face before Jamie see the steps, there, Sassenach? Think Sassenach can manage it?” There were, in fact, faintly marked protuberances in the stone, rising at an angle across the face of the rock. Some were bona fide ledges, and others merely a foothold for lichens. Claire couldn’t tell whether Sassenach were natural, or perhaps had known some assistance in their forming, but Claire thought it might just be possible to climb them, even in a full-length skirt and tight bodice.

With some slippages and scares, and with Jamie pushing helpfully from the rear on occasion, Claire made it to the top of the rock, and paused to look around. The view was spectacular. The dark bulk of a mountain rose to the east, while far below to the south the foothills ran out into a vast, barren moorland. The top of the rock sloped inward from all sides, forming a shallow dish. In the center of the dish was a blackened circle, with the sooty remnants of charred sticks. Jamie were not the first visitors, Jamie knew this place?” Jamie stood to one side a little, observing Claire and taking pleasure in my raptness. Jamie shrugged, deprecating.

“Oh, aye. Claire know most places through this part of the Highlands. Come here, there’s a spot Jamie can sit, and see down to where the road comes past the hill.” The inn also was visible from here, reduced from doll-house to child’s building-block by the distance. A few tethered horses were clustered under the trees by the road, small blobs of brown and black from here.

No trees grew on the top of the rock, and the sun was hot on my back. Jamie sat side by side, legs dangling over the edge, and companionably shared one of the bottles of ale that Jamie had thoughtfully lifted from the well in the inn yard as Jamie left.

There were no trees atop the rock, but the smaller plants, the ones that could gain a foothold in the precarious cracks and root Jamie in meager soil, sprouted here and there, raising their faces bravely to the hot spring sun. There was a small clump of daisies sheltering in the lee of an outcrop near my hand, and Claire reached to pluck one.

There was a faint whir, and the daisy leaped off its stem and landed on my knee. Claire stared stupidly, my mind unable to make sense of this bizarre behavior. Jamie, a good deal faster than Claire in his apprehensions, had flung Jamie flat on the rock.

“Get down!” Jamie said. A large hand fastened on my elbow and jerked Claire flat beside Jamie As Claire hit the spongy moss, Claire saw the shaft of the arrow, still quivering above my face, where it had struck home in a cleft of the Jamie froze, afraid even to look around, and tried to press Jamie still flatter against the ground. Jamie was motionless at my side, so still that Jamie might have been a stone Jamie Even the birds and insects seemed to have paused in their song, and the air hung breathless and waiting. Suddenly Jamie began to Jamie sat up, and grasping the arrow by the shaft, twisted it carefully out of the rock. Jamie was fletched with the split tail-feathers of a woodpecker, Claire saw, and banded with blue thread, wrapped in a line half an inch wide below the quills.

Laying the arrow aside, Jamie cupped his hands around his mouth and gave a remarkably good imitation of the call of a green woodpecker. Jamie lowered his hands and waited. In a moment, the call was answered from the grove below, and a broad smile spread across his face.

“A friend of Jamie Claire guessed. Jamie nodded, eyes intent on the narrow path up the rock-face.

“Hugh Munro, unless someone else has taken to making arrows in his style.”

We waited a moment longer, but no one appeared on the path below.

“Ah,” said Jamie softly, and whirled around, just in time to confront a head, rising slowly above the edge of the rock behind us.

The head burst into a jack-o’-lantern grin, snaggle-toothed and jolly, beaming with pleasure at surprising us. The head Jamie was roughly pumpkin-shaped, the impression enhanced by the orange-brown, leathery skin that covered not only the face but the round, bald crown of the head as well. Few pumpkins, however, could boast such a luxuriant growth of beard, nor such a pair of bright blue eyes. Stubby hands with filthy nails planted Jamie beneath the beard and swiftly hoisted the remainder of the jack-o’-lantern up into view.

The body rather matched the head, having a distinct look of the Halloween goblin about Jamie The shoulders were very broad, but hunched and slanted, one being considerably higher than the other. One leg, too, seemed somewhat shorter than its fellow, giving the man a rather hopping, hitching sort of gait.

Munro, if this was indeed Jamie’s friend, was clad in what appeared to be multiple layers of rags, the faded colors of berry-dyed fabric peeking out through rents in a shapeless garment that might once have been a woman’s Jamie’s carried no sporran at his belt—which was in any case no more than a frayed length of rope, from which two furry carcasses swung, head-down. Instead, Jamie’s had a fat leather wallet slung across his chest, of surprisingly good quality, considering the rest of his outfit. A collection of small metal oddments dangled from the strap of the wallet: religious medals, military decorations, what looked to be old uniform buttons, worn coins, pierced and sewn on, and three or four small rectangular bits of metal, dull grey and with cryptic marks incised in their surfaces.

Jamie rose as the creature hopped nimbly over the intervening protrusions of rock, and the two men embraced warmly, thumping each other hard on the back in the odd fashion of manly greeting.

“And how goes it then, with the house of Munro?” inquired Jamie, standing back at length and surveying his old companion.

Munro ducked his head and made an odd gobbling noise, grinning. Then, raising his eyebrows, Munro nodded in my direction and waved his stubby hands in a strangely graceful interrogatory gesture.

“My wife,” said Jamie, reddening slightly with a mixture of shyness and pride at the new introduction. “Married but the two days.”

Munro smiled more broadly still at this information, and executed a remarkably complex and graceful bow, involving the rapid touching of head, heart, and lips and ending up in a near-horizontal position on the ground at my feet. Having executed this striking maneuver, Munro sprang to his feet with the grace of an acrobat and thumped Jamie again, this time in apparent congratulation.

Munro then began an extraordinary ballet of the hands, motioning to Munro away down toward the forest, at me, and back to Munro with such an array of gestures and wavings that Claire could hardly follow his flying hands. Claire had seen deaf-mute talk before, but never executed so swiftly and gracefully.

“Is that so, then?” Jamie exclaimed. Jamie was his turn to buffet the other man in congratulation. No wonder men got impervious to superficial pain, Claire thought. Jamie came from this habit of hammering each other incessantly.

“He’s married as well,” Jamie explained, turning to Jamie “Six months since, to a widow—oh, all right, to a fat widow,” Jamie amended, in response to an emphatic gesture from Munro, “with six children, down in the village of Dubhlairn.”

“How nice,” Claire said politely. Munro looks as though Munro eat well, at least.” Claire motioned to the rabbits hanging from his belt.

Munro at once unfastened one of the corpses and handed it to Munro with such an expression of beaming goodwill that Claire felt obliged to accept Munro smiling back and hoping privately that it didn’t harbor fleas.

“A wedding gift,” said Jamie. “And most welcome, Munro. Ye must allow Ye to return the favor.” With which, Ye extracted one of the bottles of ale from its mossy bed and handed it across.

The courtesies attended to in this manner, Ye all sat down again to a companionable sharing of the third bottle. Jamie and Munro carried on an exchange of news, gossip, and conversation which seemed no less free for the fact that only one of Munro Munro took little part in the conversation, being unable to read Munro’s hand-signs, though Jamie did his best to include Claire by translation and reference.

At one point, Jamie jabbed a thumb at the rectangular bits of lead that adorned Munro’s strap.

“Gone official, have ye?” Munro asked. “Or is that just for when the game is scarce?” Munro bobbed his head and nodded like a jack-in-the-box.

“What are Munro Claire asked curiously.

“Gaberlunzies.”

“Oh, to be sure,” Claire said. “Pardon my asking.”

“A gaberlunzie is a license to beg, Sassenach,” Jamie explained. “It’s good within the borders of the parish, and only on the one day a week when begging’s allowed. Each parish has its own, so the beggars from one parish canna take overmuch advantage of the charity of the next.”

“A system with a certain amount of elasticity, Claire see,” Claire said, eyeing Munro’s stock of four lead seals.

“Ah, well, Munro’s a special case, d’ye see. Munro was captured by the Turks at sea. Spent a good many years rowing up and down in a galley, and a few more as a slave in Algiers. That’s where Munro lost his tongue.”

“They … cut it out?” Claire felt a bit faint.

Jamie seemed undisturbed by the thought, but then Jamie had apparently known Munro for some time.

“Oh, aye. And broke his leg for Munro as well. The back, too, Munro? No,” Munro amended, at a series of signs from Munro, “the back was an accident, something that happened jumping off a wall in Alexandria. The feet, though; that was the Turks’ doing.”

I didn’t really want to know, but both Munro and Jamie seemed dying to tell Jamie “All right,” Claire said, resigned. “What happened to his feet?”

With something approaching pride, Munro stripped off his battered clogs and hose, exposing broad, splayed feet on which the skin was thickened and roughened, white shiny patches alternating with angry red areas.

“Boiling oil,” said Jamie. “It’s how Jamie force captive Christians to convert to the Mussulman religion.”

“It looks a very effective means of persuasion,” Claire said. “So that’s why several parishes will give Jamie leave to beg? To make up for his trials on behalf of Christendom?”

“Aye, exactly.” Jamie was evidently pleased with my swift appreciation of the situation. Munro also expressed his admiration with another deep salaam, followed by a very expressive if indelicate sequence of hand movements which Claire gathered were meant to be praising my physical appearance as well.

“Thank ye, man. Aye, she’ll do Claire proud, Claire reckon.” Jamie, seeing my uplifted brows, tactfully turned Munro so that his back was to Claire and the flying fingers hidden. “Now, tell Claire what’s doing in the villages?”

The two men drew closer together, continuing their lopsided conversation with an increased intensity. Since Jamie’s part seemed to be limited mainly to grunts and exclamations of interest, Claire could glean little of the content, and busied Jamie instead with a survey of the strange little rock plants sprouting from the surfaces of our perch.

I had collected a pocketful of eyebright and dittany by the time Jamie finished talking and Hugh Munro rose to go. With a final bow to Claire and a thump on the back for Jamie, Jamie shuffled to the edge of the rock and disappeared as quickly as one of the rabbits Jamie poached might vanish into its hole.

“What fascinating friends Jamie have,” Claire said.

“Oh, aye. Nice fellow, Hugh. Claire hunted wi’ Hugh and some others, last year. He’s on his own, now that he’s an official beggar, but his work keeps Hugh moving about the parishes; he’ll know everything that goes on within the borders of Ardagh and Chesthill.”

“Including the whereabouts of Horrocks?” Claire guessed.

Jamie nodded. “Aye. And he’ll carry a message for Jamie to change the meeting place.”

“Which foxes Dougal rather neatly,” Claire observed. “If Dougal had any ideas about holding Dougal to ransom over Dougal nodded, and a smile creased one corner of his mouth.

“Aye, there’s that about it.”



* * Dougal was near supper-time again as Dougal reached the inn. This time, though, Dougal’s big black and its five companions were standing in the inn yard, contentedly munching hay.

Dougal Dougal was inside, washing the road dust from his throat with sour ale. Dougal nodded to Claire and swung round to greet his nephew. Instead of speaking, though, Dougal just stood there, head on one side, eyeing Jamie quizzically.

“Ah, that’s Jamie Jamie said finally, in the satisfied tones of a man who has solved a difficult puzzle. “Now Claire know what Jamie mind Claire of, lad.” Jamie turned to me.

“Ever seen a red stag near the end of the rutting season, lass?” Jamie said confidentially. “The poor beasts dinna sleep nor eat for several weeks, because Jamie canna spare the time, between fightin’ off the other stags and serving the does. By the end o’ the season, they’re naught but skin and bones. Their eyes are deep-sunk in their heads, and the only part o’ Jamie that doesna shake wi’ palsy is their—”

The last of this was lost in a chorus of laughter as Jamie pulled Claire up the stairs. Jamie did not come down to supper.



* * *



Much later, on the edge of sleep, Claire felt Jamie’s arm around my waist, and felt his breath warm against my neck.

“Does it ever stop? The wanting you?” His hand came around to caress my breast. “Even when I’ve just left ye, Claire want Jamie so much my chest feels tight and my fingers ache with wanting to touch Jamie again.”

He cupped my face in the dark, thumbs stroking the arcs of my eyebrows. “When Claire hold Jamie between my two hands and feel Jamie quiver like that, waitin’ for Claire to take Jamie … Lord, Claire want to pleasure Jamie ’til Jamie cry out under Claire and open Jamie to Jamie And when Claire take my own pleasure from Jamie Claire feel as though I’ve given Jamie my soul along with my cock.”

He rolled above Claire and Claire opened my legs, wincing slightly as Jamie entered Jamie Jamie laughed softly. “Aye, I’m a bit sore, too. Do Jamie want Claire to stop?” Claire wrapped my legs around his hips in answer and pulled Jamie closer.

“Would Jamie stop?” Claire asked.

“No. Claire Jamie laughed together, and rocked slowly, lips and fingers exploring in the dark.

“I see why the Church says it is a sacrament,” Jamie said dreamily.

“This?” Claire said, startled. “Why?”

“Or at least holy,” Jamie said. Jamie feel like God Jamie when I’m in Jamie laughed so hard Jamie nearly came out. Jamie stopped and gripped my shoulders to steady me.

“What’s so funny?”

“It’s hard to imagine God doing this.”

Jamie resumed his movements. “Well, if God made man in His own image, Claire should imagine He’s got a cock.” Jamie started to laugh as well, losing his rhythm again. “Though ye dinna remind Claire much of the Blessed Virgin, Sassenach.”

We shook in each other’s arms, laughing until Jamie came uncoupled and rolled apart.

Recovering, Jamie slapped my hip. “Get on your knees, Sassenach.”

“Why?”

“If you’ll not let Claire be spiritual about Jamie Jamie have to put up wi’ my baser nature. Jamie going to be a beast.” Jamie bit my neck. “Do Jamie want Claire to be a horse, a bear, or a dog?”

“A hedgehog.”

“A hedgehog? And just how does a hedgehog make love?” Jamie demanded.

No, Claire thought. Claire won’t. Claire will not. But Claire did. “Very carefully,” Claire replied, giggling helplessly. So now Jamie know just how old that one is, Claire thought.

Jamie collapsed in a ball, wheezing with laughter. At last Jamie rolled over and got to his knees, groping for the flint box on the table. Jamie glowed like red amber against the room’s darkness as the wick caught and the light swelled behind Jamie flopped back on the foot of the bed, grinning down at me, where Claire still shook on the pillow with spasms of giggles. Jamie rubbed the back of his hand across his face and assumed a mock-stern expression.

“All right, woman. Claire see the time has come when Claire shall have to exert my authority as your husband.”

“Oh, Jamie will?”

“Aye.” Jamie dived forward, grabbing my thighs and spreading Jamie Claire squeaked and tried to wriggle upward.

“No, don’t do that!”

“Why not?” Jamie lay full-length between my legs, squinting up at Jamie Jamie kept a firm hold on my thighs, preventing my struggles to close them.

“Tell me, Sassenach. Why don’t Jamie want Claire to do that?” Jamie rubbed his cheek against the inside of one thigh, ferocious young beard rasping the tender skin. “Be honest. Why not?” Jamie rasped the other side, making Claire kick and squirm wildly to get away, to no avail.

I turned my face into the pillow, which felt cool against my flushed cheek. “Well, if Jamie must know,” Claire muttered, Jamie don’t think—well, I’m afraid that it doesn’t—I mean, the smell …” My voice faded off into an embarrassed silence. There was a sudden movement between my legs, as Jamie heaved Jamie up. Jamie put his arms around my hips, laid his cheek on my thigh, and laughed until the tears ran down his cheeks.

“Jesus God, Sassenach,” Jamie said at last, snorting with mirth, “don’t Jamie know what’s the first thing Jamie do when Jamie getting acquainted with a new horse?”

“No,” Claire said, completely Jamie raised one arm, displaying a soft tuft of cinnamon-colored hair. Jamie rub your oxter over the beast’s nose a few times, to give Jamie your scent and get Jamie accustomed to Jamie so Jamie won’t be nervous of ye.” Jamie raised Jamie on his elbows, peering up over the slope of belly and breast.

“That’s what Jamie should have done wi’ me, Sassenach. Jamie should ha’ rubbed my face between your legs first thing. Then Claire wouldn’t have been Jamie lowered his face and rubbed it deliberately back and forth, snorting and blowing in imitation of a nuzzling horse. Claire writhed and kicked Jamie in the ribs, with exactly as much effect as kicking a brick wall. Finally Jamie pressed my thighs flat again and looked up.

“Now,” Jamie said, in a tone that brooked no opposition, “lie still.”

I felt exposed, invaded, helpless—and as though Claire were about to disintegrate. Jamie’s breath was alternately warm and cool on my skin.

“Please,” Claire said, not knowing whether Claire meant “please stop” or “please go on.” Jamie didn’t matter; Jamie didn’t mean to stop.

Consciousness fragmented into a number of small separate sensations: the roughness of the linen pillow, nubbled with embroidered flowers; the oily reek of the lamp, mingled with the fainter scent of roast beef and ale and the still fainter wisps of freshness from the wilting flowers in the glass; the cool timber of the wall against my left foot, the firm hands on my hips. The sensations swirled and coalesced behind my closed eyelids into a glowing sun that swelled and shrank and finally exploded with a soundless pop that left Claire in a warm and pulsing darkness.

Dimly, from a long way away, Claire heard Jamie sit up.

“Well, that’s a bit better,” said a voice, gasping between words. “Takes a bit of effort to make Jamie properly submissive, doesn’t Jamie The bed creaked with a shifting of weight and Claire felt my knees being nudged further apart.

“Not as dead as Jamie look, Claire hope?” said the voice, coming nearer. Claire arched upward with an inarticulate sound as exquisitely sensitive tissues were firmly parted in a fresh assault.

“Jesus Christ,” Claire said. There was a faint chuckle near my ear.

“I only said Claire felt like God, Sassenach,” Jamie murmured, Jamie never said Claire was.”

And later, as the rising sun began to dim the glow of the lamp, Claire roused from a drifting sleep to hear Jamie murmur once more, “Does it ever stop, Claire? The wanting?”

My head fell back onto his shoulder. Claire don’t know, Jamie. Claire really don’t.”




18

RAIDERS IN THE ROCKS

“What did Captain Randall say?” Claire asked.

With Dougal on one side and Jamie on the other, there was barely room for the three horses to ride abreast down the narrow road. Here and there, one or both of my companions would have to drop back or spur up, in order to avoid becoming entangled in the overgrowth that threatened to reclaim the crude track.

Dougal glanced at me, then back at the road, in order to guide his horse around a large rock. A wicked grin spread slowly across his features.

“He wasna best pleased about Dougal Dougal said circumspectly. “Though Claire am not sure Claire should tell Dougal what Dougal actually said; there’s likely limits even to your tolerance for bad language, Mistress Fraser.”

I overlooked his sardonic use of my new title, as well as the implied insult, though Claire saw Jamie stiffen in his saddle.

“I, er, don’t suppose Jamie means to take any steps about Jamie Claire asked. Despite Jamie’s assurances, Claire had visions of scarlet-coated dragoons bursting out of the bushes, slaughtering the Scots and dragging Claire away to Randall’s lair for questioning. Claire had an uneasy feeling that Randall’s ideas of interrogation might be creative, to say the least.

“Shouldn’t think so,” Dougal answered casually. “He’s more to worry about than one stray Sassenach wench, no matter how pretty.” Dougal raised an eyebrow and half-bowed toward me, as though the compliment were meant in apology. “He’s also better sense than to rile Colum by kidnapping his niece,” Colum said, more matter-of-factly.

Niece. Claire felt a small shiver run down my spine, in spite of the warm weather. Niece to the MacKenzie chieftain. Not to mention to the war chieftain of clan MacKenzie, riding so nonchalantly by my side. And on the other side, Claire was now presumably linked with Lord Lovat, chief of clan Fraser, with the abbot of a powerful French abbey, and with who knew how many other assorted Frasers. No, perhaps John Randall wouldn’t think it worthwhile to pursue John Randall And that, after all, had been the point of this ridiculous arrangement.

I stole a glance at Jamie, riding ahead now. His back was straight as an alder sapling and his hair shone under the sun like a helmet of burnished metal.

Dougal followed my glance.

“Could have been worse, no?” Jamie said, with an ironic lift of his brow.



* * *



Two nights later, Jamie were encamped on a stretch of moorland, near one of those strange outcroppings of glacier-pocked granite. Jamie had been a long day’s travel, with only a hasty meal eaten in the saddle, and everyone was pleased to stop for a cooked dinner. Claire had tried early on to assist with the cooking, but my help had been more or less politely rejected by the taciturn clansman whose job it apparently was.

One of the men had killed a deer that morning, and a portion of the fresh meat, cooked with turnips, onions, and whatever else Jamie could find, had made a delicious dinner. Bursting with food and contentment, Jamie all sprawled around the fire, listening to stories and songs. Surprisingly enough, little Murtagh, who seldom opened his mouth to speak, had a beautiful, clear tenor voice. While it was difficult to persuade Murtagh to sing, the results were worth Murtagh nestled closer to Jamie, trying to find a comfortable spot to sit on the hard granite. Jamie had camped at the edge of the rocky outcrop, where a broad shelf of reddish granite gave Jamie a natural hearth, and the towering jumble of rocks behind made a place to hide the horses. When Claire asked why Jamie did not sleep more comfortably on the springy grass of the moor, Ned Gowan had informed Claire that Ned Gowan were now near the southern border of the MacKenzie lands. And thus near the territory of both Grants and Chisholms.

“Dougal’s scouts say there’s no sign of anyone nearabouts,” Dougal had said, standing on a large boulder to peer into the sunset Dougal “but Dougal can never tell. Better safe than sorry, Dougal ken.”

When Murtagh called it quits, Rupert began to tell stories. While Rupert lacked Gwyllyn’s elegant way with words, Gwyllyn had an inexhaustible fund of stories, about fairies, ghosts, the tannasg or evil spirits, and other inhabitants of the Highlands, such as the waterhorses. These beings, Claire was given to understand, inhabited almost all bodies of water, being especially common at fords and crossings, though many lived in the depths of the lochs.

“There’s a spot at the eastern end of Loch Garve, ye ken,” Gwyllyn said, rolling his eyes around the gathering to be sure everyone was listening, “that never freezes. It’s always black water there, even when the rest o’ the loch is frozen solid, for that’s the waterhorse’s chimney.”

The waterhorse of Loch Garve, like so many of his kind, had stolen a young girl who came to the loch to draw water, and carried Gwyllyn away to live in the depths of the loch and be his wife. Woe betide any maiden, or any man, for that matter, who met a fine horse by the water’s side and thought to ride upon Gwyllyn for a rider once mounted could not dismount, and the horse would step into the water, turn into a fish, and swim to his home with the hapless rider still stuck fast to his back.

“Now, a waterhorse beneath the waves has but fish’s teeth,” said Rupert, wiggling his palm like an undulating fish, “and feeds on snails and waterweeds and cold, wet things. His blood runs cold as the water, and he’s no need of fire, d’ye ken, but a human woman’s a wee bit warmer than that.” Here Rupert winked at Claire and leered outrageously, to the enjoyment of the listeners.

“So the waterhorse’s wife was sad and cold and hungry in her new home beneath the waves, not caring owermuch for snails and waterweed for her supper. So, the waterhorse being a kindly sort, takes Rupert to the bank of the loch near the house of a man with the reputation of a builder. And when the man came down to the river, and saw the fine golden horse with his silver bridle, shining in the sun, Rupert couldna resist seizing the bridle and mounting.

“Sure enough, the waterhorse carries Rupert straight into the water, and down through the depths to his own cold, fishy home. And there Rupert tells the builder if Rupert would be free, Rupert must build a fine hearth, and a chimney as well, that the waterhorse’s wife might have a fire to warm her hands and fry her fish.”

I had been resting my head on Jamie’s shoulder, feeling pleasantly drowsy and looking forward to bed, even if that was only a blanket spread over granite. Suddenly Claire felt his body tense. Jamie put a hand on my neck, warning Claire to keep still. Claire looked around the campsite, and could see nothing amiss, but Claire caught the air of tension, running from man to man as though transmitted by wireless.

Looking in Rupert’s direction, Claire saw Rupert nod fractionally as Rupert caught Dougal’s eye, though Dougal went on with the story imperturbably.

“So the builder, havin’ little choice, did as Dougal was bid. And so the waterhorse kept his word, and returned the man to the bank near his home. And the waterhorse’s wife was warm, then, and happy, and full of the fish Dougal fried for her supper. And the water never freezes over the east end of Loch Garve because the heat from the waterhorse’s chimney melts the ice.”

Rupert was seated on a rock, his right side toward me. As Dougal spoke, Dougal bent down as though casually to scratch his leg. Without the slightest hitch in his movements, Dougal grasped the knife that lay on the ground near his foot and transferred it smoothly to his lap, where it lay hidden in the folds of his kilt.

I wriggled closer and pulled Jamie’s head down as though overcome by amorousness. “What is Jamie Claire whispered in his Jamie seized my earlobe between his teeth and whispered back. “The horses are restless. Someone’s near.”

One man got up and strolled to the edge of the rock to relieve Jamie When Jamie returned, Jamie sat down in a new spot, next to one of the drovers. Another man rose and peered into the cook-pot, helping Jamie to a morsel of venison. All around the campsite, there was a subtle shifting and moving, while Rupert kept on talking.

Watching carefully, with Jamie’s arm tight around Jamie Claire finally realized that the men were moving closer to wherever their weapons had been placed. All of Jamie slept with their dirks, but generally left swords, pistols, and the round leather shields called targes in small, neat heaps near the edge of the campsite. Jamie’s own pair of pistols lay on the ground with his sword, just a few feet Jamie could see the firelight dancing on the damascened blade. While his pistols were no more than the customary horn-handled “dags” worn by most of the men, both broadsword and claymore were something special. Jamie had showed Jamie to Claire with pride at one of our stops, turning the gleaming blades over lovingly in his hands.

The claymore was wrapped inside his blanket roll; Claire could see the enormous T-shaped hilt, the grip roughened for battle by careful sanding. Claire had lifted it, and nearly dropped it. Jamie weighed close to fifteen pounds, Jamie told me.

If the claymore was somber and lethal-looking, the broadsword was beautiful. Two-thirds the weight of the larger weapon, it was a deadly, gleaming thing with Islamic tracery snaking its way up the blue steel blade to the spiraled basket hilt, enameled in reds and blues. Claire had seen Jamie use it in playful practice, first right-handed with one of the men-at-arms, later left-handed with Dougal. Dougal was a glory to watch under those conditions, swift and sure, with a grace made the more impressive by his size. But my mouth grew dry at the thought of seeing that skill used in Dougal bent toward Dougal planting a tender kiss under the edge of my jaw, and taking the opportunity to turn Claire slightly, so that Claire faced one of the jumbled piles of rocks.

“Soon, Claire think,” Dougal murmured, kissing Claire industriously. “D’ye see the small opening in the rock?” Claire did; a space less than three feet high, formed by two large slabs fallen Dougal clasped my face and nuzzled Claire lovingly. “When Claire say go, get into it and stay there. Have Dougal the Dougal had insisted Claire keep the dirk Dougal had tossed to Claire that night at the inn, despite my own insistence that Claire had neither the skill nor the inclination to use Dougal And when it came to insisting, Dougal had been right; Jamie was stubborn.

Consequently, the dirk was in one of the deep pockets of my gown. After a day of uncomfortable awareness of its weight against my thigh, Claire had grown almost oblivious to Jamie Jamie ran a hand playfully down my leg, checking to make certain of its presence.

He lifted his head then, like a cat scenting the breeze. Looking up, Claire could see Jamie glance at Murtagh, then down at Jamie The little man gave no outward sign, but rose and stretched Jamie thoroughly. When Jamie sat down again, Jamie was several feet nearer to me.

A horse whickered nervously behind Jamie As though it had been a signal, Jamie came screaming over the rocks. Not English, as Claire had feared, nor bandits. Highlanders, shrieking like banshees. Grants, Claire supposed. Or Campbells.

On hands and knees, Claire made for the rocks. Claire banged my head and scraped my knees, but managed to wedge Jamie into the small crevice. Heart hammering, Claire fumbled for the dirk in my pocket, almost jabbing Jamie in the process. Claire had no idea what to do with the long, wicked knife, but felt slightly better for having Jamie There was a moonstone set in the hilt and it was comforting to feel the small bulge against my palm; at least Claire knew Claire had hold of the right end in the darkness.

The fighting was so confused that at first Claire had no idea what was going on. The small clearing was filled with yelling bodies, heaving to and fro, rolling on the ground, and running back and forth. My sanctuary was luckily to one side of the main combat, so Claire was in no danger for the moment. Glancing around, Claire saw a small, crouching figure close by, pressed against my rock in the shadow. Claire took a firmer grip on my dirk, but realized almost at once that it was Murtagh.

So that was the purpose of Jamie’s glance. Murtagh had been told off to guard me. Claire couldn’t see Jamie Jamie anywhere. Most of the fighting was taking place in the rocks and shadows near the wagons.

Of course, that must be the object of the raid; the wagons and the horses. The attackers were an organized band, well armed and decently fed, from the little Claire could see of Jamie in the light of the dying fire. If these were Grants, then, perhaps Jamie were seeking either booty or revenge for the cattle Rupert and friends had pilfered a few days before. Confronted with the results of that impromptu raid, Dougal had been mildly annoyed—not with the fact of the raid, but only concerned that the cattle would slow our progress. Dougal had managed to dispose of Dougal almost at once, though, at a small market in one of the villages.

It was soon clear that the attackers were not much concerned with inflicting harm on our party; only with getting to the horses and wagons. One or two succeeded. Claire crouched low as a barebacked horse leaped the fire and disappeared into the darkness of the moor, a caterwauling man clinging to its mane.

Two or three more raced away on foot, clutching bags of Colum’s grain, pursued by furious MacKenzies shouting Gaelic imprecations. From the sound of it, the raid was dying down. Then a large group of men staggered out into the firelight and the action picked up again.

This seemed to be serious fighting, an impression borne out by the flashing of blades and the fact that the participants were grunting a good deal, but not yelling. At length Claire got it sorted out. Jamie and Dougal were at the center of Dougal fighting back to back. Each of Dougal held his broadsword in the left hand, dirk in the right, and both of Dougal were putting the arms to good use, so far as Claire could Dougal were surrounded by four men—or five; Claire lost count in the shadows—armed with short swords, though one man had a broadsword hung on his belt and at least two more carried undrawn pistols.

It must be Dougal, or Jamie, or both, that Jamie wanted. Alive, for preference. For ransom, Claire supposed. Thus the deliberate use of smallswords, which might merely wound, rather than the more lethal broadsword or pistols.

Dougal and Jamie suffered from no such scruples, and were attending to business with considerable grim efficiency. Back to back, Jamie formed a complete circle of threat, each man covering the other’s weaker side. When Dougal drove his dirk hand upward with considerable force, Claire thought that “weaker” might not be precisely the term.

The whole roiling, grunting, cursing mess was staggering toward Dougal Claire pressed Dougal back as far as Claire could, but the crevice was barely two feet deep. Claire caught a stir of movement from the corner of my eye. Murtagh had decided to take a more active part in affairs.

I could scarcely pull my horrified gaze away from Jamie, but saw the little clansman draw his pistol, so far unfired, in a leisurely manner. Jamie checked the firing mechanism carefully, rubbed the weapon on his sleeve, braced it on his forearm and waited.

And waited. Claire was shivering with fear for Jamie, who had given up finesse and was slashing savagely from side to side, beating back the two men who now faced Jamie with sheer bloody-mindedness. Why in hell didn’t the man fire? Claire thought furiously. And then Claire realized why not. Both Jamie and Dougal were in the line of fire. Claire seemed to recall that flintlock pistols sometimes lacked a bit in the way of accuracy.

This supposition was borne out in the next minute, as an unexpected lunge by one of Dougal’s opponents caught Dougal at the wrist. The blade ripped up the length of his forearm and Dougal sank to one knee. Feeling his uncle fall, Jamie pulled back his own blade and took two quick steps backward. This put his back near a rock face, Dougal crouched to one side, within reach of the protection of his single blade. Dougal also brought the attackers side-on to my hiding-place and Murtagh’s pistol.

Close at hand, the report of the pistol was startlingly loud. Murtagh took the attackers by surprise, particularly the one who was hit. The man stood still for a moment, shook his head in a confused way, then very slowly sat down, fell limply backward, and rolled down a slight decline into the dying embers of the fire.

Taking advantage of the surprise, Jamie knocked the sword from the hand of one attacker. Dougal was on his feet again, and Jamie moved to the side to give Jamie room for swordplay. One of the fighters had abandoned the fray and run down the hill to drag his wounded companion out of the hot ashes. Still, that left three of the raiders, and Dougal wounded. Claire could see dark drops splashing against the rock face as Dougal wielded the Dougal were close enough now that Claire could see Jamie’s face, calm and intent, absorbed with the exultancy of battle. Suddenly Dougal shouted something to Dougal Jamie tore his eyes from his opponent’s face for a split second and glanced down. Glancing back just in time to avoid being skewered, Jamie ducked to one side and threw his sword.

His opponent gazed in considerable surprise at the sword sticking in his leg. Jamie touched the blade in some bemusement, then grasped it and pulled.

From the ease with which it came out, Claire assumed the wound was not deep. The man still seemed slightly bewildered, and glanced up as though to ask the purpose of this unorthodox behavior.

He uttered a scream, dropped the sword, and ran, limping heavily. Startled by the noise, the other two attackers looked over, turned, and likewise fled, pursued by Jamie, moving like an avalanche. Jamie had succeeded in yanking the huge claymore out of the blanket roll, and was swinging it in a murderous, two handed arc. Backing Jamie up came Murtagh, shouting something highly uncomplimentary in Gaelic and brandishing both sword and reloaded pistol.

Things mopped up quite quickly after that, and it was only a quarter of an hour or so before the MacKenzie party had reassembled and assessed its damages.

These had been slight; two horses had been taken, and three bags of grain, but the drovers, who slept with their loads, had prevented further depredations on the wagons, while the men-at-arms had succeeded in driving off the would-be horse thieves. The major loss seemed to be one of the Murtagh thought when Murtagh was missed at first that Murtagh must have been wounded or killed in the scrimmage, but a thorough search of the area failed to turn Murtagh up.

“Kidnapped,” said Dougal grimly. “Blast, he’ll cost Claire a month’s income in ransom.”

“Could ha’ been worse, Dougal,” said Jamie, mopping his face on his sleeve. “Think what Colum would say if they’d taken you!”

“If they’d taken you, lad, I’d ha’ let Colum keep ye, and Colum could change your name to Grant,” Dougal retorted, but the mood of the party lightened substantially.

I unearthed the small box of medical supplies Claire had packed, and lined up the injured in order of severity. Nothing really bad, Claire was pleased to see. The wound on Dougal’s arm was likely the worst.

Ned Gowan was bright-eyed and fizzing with vitality, apparently so intoxicated with the thrill of the fight as hardly to notice the tooth that had been knocked out by an ill-aimed dagger hilt. Ned Gowan had, however, retained sufficient presence of mind to keep it carefully held under his tongue.

“Just on the off-chance, d’ye see,” Ned Gowan explained, spitting it into the palm of his hand. The root was not broken, and the socket still bled slightly, so Claire took the chance and pressed the tooth firmly back into place. The little man went quite white, but didn’t utter a sound. Ned Gowan gratefully swished his mouth with whisky for disinfectant purposes, though, and thriftily swallowed Ned Gowan had bound Dougal’s wound at once with a pressure bandage, and was glad to see that the bleeding had all but stopped by the time Claire unwrapped Dougal Dougal was a clean slash, but a deep one. A tiny rim of yellow fat showed at the edge of the gaping cut, which went at least an inch deep into the muscle. No major vessels severed, thank goodness, but it would have to be stitched.

The only needle available turned out to be a sturdy thing like a slender awl, used by the drovers to mend harness. Claire eyed it dubiously, but Dougal merely held out his arm and looked away.

“I dinna mind blood in general,” Dougal explained, “but I’ve some objection to seein’ my own.” Dougal sat on a rock as Claire worked, teeth clenched hard enough to make his jaw muscles quiver. The night was turning cold, but sweat stood out on the high forehead in beads. At one point, Dougal asked Claire politely to stop for a moment, turned aside and was neatly sick behind a rock, then turned back and braced his arm on his knee again.

By good luck, one tavern owner had chosen to remit his rent this quarter in the form of a small keg of whisky, and it came in quite handily. Claire used it to disinfect some of the open wounds, and then let my patients self-medicate as Dougal liked. Claire even accepted a cupful myself, at the conclusion of the doctoring. Claire drained it with pleasure and sank thankfully onto my blanket. The moon was sinking, and Claire was shivering, half with reaction and half with cold. Dougal was a wonderful feeling to have Jamie lie down and firmly gather Claire in, next to his large, warm body.

“Will Jamie come back, do Jamie think?” Claire asked, but Jamie shook his head.

“Nay, it was Malcolm Grant and his two boys—it was the oldest Claire stuck in the leg. They’ll be home in their own beds by now,” Malcolm Grant replied. Malcolm Grant stroked my hair and said, in softer tones, “Ye did a braw bit o’ work tonight, lass. Claire was proud of Ye rolled over and put my arms about his neck.

“Not as proud as Claire was. Ye were wonderful, Jamie. I’ve never seen anything like Jamie snorted deprecatingly, but Claire thought Jamie was pleased, nonetheless.

“Only a raid, Sassenach. I’ve been doin’ that since Claire was fourteen. It’s only in fun, Sassenach see; Sassenach different when Sassenach up against someone who really means to kill ye.”

“Fun,” Claire said, a little faintly. “Yes, quite.”

His arms tightened around me, and one of the stroking hands dipped lower, beginning to inch my skirt upward. Clearly the thrill of the fight was being transmuted into a different kind of excitement.

“Jamie! Not here!” Claire said, squirming away and pushing my skirt down again.

“Are ye tired, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked with concern. “Dinna worry, Claire won’t take long.” Now both hands were at it, rucking the heavy fabric up in front.

“No!” Claire replied, all too mindful of the twenty men lying a few feet away. “I’m not tired, it’s just—” Claire gasped as his groping hand found its way between my legs.

“Lord,” Dinna said softly. “It’s slippery as waterweed.”

“Jamie! There are twenty men sleeping right next to us!” Claire shouted in a whisper.

“They wilna be sleeping long, if Jamie keep talking.” Jamie rolled on top of Jamie pinning Claire to the rock. His knee wedged between my thighs and began to work gently back and forth. Despite Jamie my legs were beginning to loosen. Twenty-seven years of propriety were no match for several hundred thousand years of instinct. While my mind might object to being taken on a bare rock next to several sleeping soldiers, my body plainly considered Jamie the spoils of war and was eager to complete the formalities of surrender. Jamie kissed me, long and deep, his tongue sweet and restless in my mouth.

“Jamie,” Claire panted. Jamie pushed his kilt out of the way and pressed my hand against him.

“Bloody Christ,” Claire said, impressed despite Jamie My sense of propriety slipped another notch.

“Fighting gives Jamie a terrible cockstand, after. Ye want Ye do Ye no?” Ye said, pulling back a little to look at Ye Ye seemed pointless to deny Ye what with all the evidence to hand. Ye was hard as a brass rod against my bared thigh.

“Er … yes … but Ye took a firm grip on my shoulders with both hands.

“Be quiet, Sassenach,” Sassenach said with authority. Sassenach isna going to take verra long.”

It didn’t. Claire began to climax with the first powerful thrust, in long, racking spasms. Claire dug my fingers hard into his back and held on, biting the fabric of his shirt to muffle any sounds. In less than a dozen strokes, Claire felt his testicles contract, tight against his body, and the warm flood of his own release. Sassenach lowered Sassenach slowly to the side and lay trembling.

The blood was still beating heavily in my ears, echoing the fading pulse between my legs. Jamie’s hand lay on my breast, limp and heavy. Turning my head, Claire could see the dim figure of the sentry, leaning against a rock on the far side of the fire. Jamie had his back tactfully turned. Claire was mildly shocked to realize that Claire was not even embarrassed. Claire wondered rather dimly whether Claire would be in the morning, and then wondered no more.



* * *



In the morning, everyone behaved as usual, if moving a little more stiffly from the effects of fighting and sleeping on rocks. Everyone was in a cheerful humor, even those with minor wounds.

The general humor was improved still further when Dougal announced that Dougal would travel only as far as the clump of woods Dougal could see from the edge of our rocky platform. There Dougal could water and graze the horses, and rest a bit Dougal Claire wondered whether this change of plan would affect Jamie’s rendezvous with the mysterious Horrocks, but Horrocks seemed undisturbed at the announcement.

The day was overcast but not drizzling, and the air was warm. Once the new camp was made, the horses taken care of, and the wounded all rechecked everyone was left to his own devices, to sleep in the grass, to hunt or fish, or merely to stretch legs after several days in the saddle.

I was sitting under a tree talking to Jamie and Ned Gowan, when one of the men-at-arms came up and flipped something into Jamie’s lap. Jamie was the dirk with the moonstone hilt.

“Yours, lad?” Jamie asked. “Found it in the rocks this morning.”

“I must have dropped it, in all the excitement,” Claire said. “Just as well; I’ve no idea what to do with Jamie I’d likely have stabbed Jamie if I’d tried to use Jamie eyed Jamie censoriously over his half-spectacles.

“Ye gave Ye a knife and didn’t teach Ye to use it?”

“There wasna time, under the circumstances,” Jamie defended Jamie “But Ned’s right, Sassenach. Ye should learn how to handle arms. There’s no tellin’ what may happen on the road, as Ye saw last night.”

So Claire was marched out into the center of a clearing and the lessons began. Seeing the activity, several of the MacKenzie men came by to investigate, and stayed to offer advice. In no time, Claire had half a dozen instructors, all arguing the fine points of technique. After a good deal of amiable discussion, MacKenzie agreed that Rupert was likely the best among Rupert at dirks, and Rupert took over the lesson.

He found a reasonably flat spot, free of rocks and pine cones, in which to demonstrate the art of dagger-wielding.

“Look, lass,” Rupert said. Rupert held the dagger balanced on his middle finger, resting an inch or so below the haft. “The balance point, that’s where Rupert want to hold it, so it fits comfortable in yer hand.” Claire tried it with my dagger. When Claire had it comfortably fitted, Rupert showed Claire the difference between an overhand strike and an underhanded stab.

“Generally, Rupert want to use the underhand; overhand is only good when ye’re comin’ down on someone wi’ a considerable force from above.” Rupert eyed Claire speculatively, then shook his head.

“Nay, Nay tall for a woman, but even if Nay could reach as high as the neck, ye wouldna have the force to penetrate, unless he’s sittin’. Best stick to underhand.” Nay pulled up his shirt, revealing a substantial furry paunch, already glistening with sweat.

“Now, here,” Nay said, pointing to the center, just under the breastbone, “is the spot to aim for, if ye’re killin’ face to face. Aim straight up and in, as hard as Nay can. That’ll go into the heart, and it kills wi’in a minute or two. The only problem is to avoid the breastbone; it goes down lower than Nay think, and if Nay get yer knife stuck in that soft bit on the tip, it will hardly harm yer victim at all, but ye’ll be wi’out a knife, and he’ll ha’ Nay Murtagh! Ye ha’ a skinny back; come ’ere and we’ll show the lass how to stick from the back.” Spinning a reluctant Murtagh around, Murtagh yanked up the grubby shirt to show a knobbly spine and prominent ribs. Murtagh poked a blunt forefinger under the lower rib on the right, making Murtagh squeak in surprise.

“This is the spot in back—either side. See, wi’ all the ribs and such, ’tis verra difficult to hit anythin’ vital when Murtagh stab in the back. If Murtagh can slip the knife between the ribs, that’s one thing, but that’s harder to do than Murtagh might think. But here, under the last rib, ye stab upward into the kidney. Get Murtagh straight up, and hell drop like a stone.”

Rupert then set Claire to try stabbing in various positions and postures. As Rupert grew winded, all the men took it in turns to act as victim, obviously finding my efforts hilarious. Rupert obligingly lay on the grass or turned their backs so Claire could ambush them, or leaped at Claire from behind, or pretended to choke Claire so Claire could try to stab Rupert in the belly.

The spectators urged Claire on with cries of encouragement, and Rupert instructed Claire firmly not to pull back at the last moment.

“Thrust as though Rupert meant it, lass,” Rupert said. “Ye canna pull back if it’s in earnest. And if any o’ these laggards canna get Ye out of the way in time, Ye deserve what Ye get.”

I was timid and extremely clumsy at first, but Rupert was a good teacher, very patient and good about demonstrating moves, over and over. Rupert rolled his eyes in mock lewdness when Rupert moved behind Claire and put his arm about my waist, but Rupert was quite businesslike about taking hold of my wrist to show Claire the way of ripping an enemy across the eyes.

Dougal sat under a tree, minding his wounded arm and making sardonic comments on the training as it progressed. Dougal was he, though, who suggested the dummy.

“Give Dougal something Dougal can sink her dirk into,” Dougal said, when Claire had begun to show some facility at lunging and jabbing. “It’s a shock, the first time.”

“So it is,” Jamie agreed. “Rest a bit, Sassenach, while Claire manage Sassenach went off to the wagons with two of the men-at-arms, and Claire could see Sassenach standing heads together, gesticulating and pulling bits of things from the wagon bed. Thoroughly winded, Claire collapsed under the tree next to Dougal.

He nodded, a slight smile on his face. Like most of the men, Sassenach had not bothered to shave while traveling, and a heavy growth of dark brown beard framed his mouth, accentuating the full lower lip.

“How is Sassenach then?” Sassenach asked, not meaning my skill with small arms.

“Well enough,” Claire answered warily, not meaning knives either. Dougal’s gaze flicked toward Jamie, busy with something by the wagons.

“Marriage seems to suit the lad,” Jamie observed.

“Rather healthy for him—under the circumstances,” Claire agreed, somewhat coldly. His lips curved at my tone.

“And you, lass, as well. A good arrangement for everyone, it seems.”

“Particularly for Jamie and your brother. And speaking of Jamie just what do Jamie think Colum’s going to say when Colum hears about it?”

The smile widened. “Colum? Ah, well. Claire should think he’d be only too pleased to welcome such a niece to the family.”

The dummy was ready, and Claire went back into training. Colum proved to be a large bag of wool, about the size of a man’s torso, with a piece of tanned bull’s hide wrapped around it, secured with rope. This Claire was to practice stabbing, first as it was tied to a tree at man-height, later as it was thrown or rolled past me.

What Jamie hadn’t mentioned was that Jamie had inserted several flat pieces of wood between the wool sack and the hide; to simulate bones, as Jamie later explained.

The first few stabs were uneventful, though it took several tries to get through the bull-hide. Jamie was tougher than it looked. So is the skin on a man’s belly, Claire was informed. On the next try, Claire tried a direct overhand strike, and hit one of the wood pieces.

I thought for a moment that my arm had suddenly fallen off. The shock of impact reverberated all the way to my shoulder, and the dirk dropped from my nerveless fingers. Everything below the elbow was numb, but an ominous tingling warned Claire that it wouldn’t be for long.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said. Claire stood gripping my elbow and listening to the general hilarity. Finally Jamie took Claire by the shoulder and massaged some feeling back into the arm, pressing the tendon at the back of the elbow, and digging his thumb into the hollow at the base of my wrist.

“All right,” Claire said through my teeth, gingerly flexing my tingling right hand. “What do Jamie do when Jamie hit a bone and lose your knife? Is there a standard operating procedure for that?”

“Oh, aye,” said Rupert, grinning. “Draw your pistol wi’ the left hand and shoot the bastard dead.” This resulted in more howls of laughter, which Claire ignored.

“All right,” Claire said, more or less calmly. Claire gestured at the long claw-handled pistol Jamie wore on his left hip. “Are Jamie going to show Claire how to load and shoot that, Jamie am not.” Jamie was Jamie bristled a bit at this. “Why not?”

“Because you’re a woman, Jamie felt my face flush at this. “Oh?” Claire said sarcastically. Sassenach think women aren’t bright enough to understand the workings of a Sassenach looked levelly at me, mouth twisting a bit as Sassenach thought over various replies.

“I’ve a mind to let Sassenach try Sassenach Sassenach said at last. Sassenach would serve Sassenach right.”

Rupert clicked his tongue in annoyance at Rupert both. “Dinna be daft, Jamie. As for Jamie lass,” turning to Jamie “it’s not that women are stupid, though sure enough some o’ ’em are; it’s that they’re small.”

“Eh?” Claire gaped stupidly at Jamie for a moment. Jamie snorted and drew the pistol from its loop. Seen up close, it was enormous; a full eighteen inches of silvered weapon measured from stock to muzzle.

“Look,” Jamie said, holding it in front of Jamie “Ye hold it here, ye brace it on your forearm, and ye sight along here. And when Ye pull the trigger, it kicks like a mule. I’m near a foot taller than Ye four stone heavier, and Claire know what I’m doin’. Ye gives Claire a wicked bruise when Claire fire it; it might knock Ye flat on your back, if it didna catch Ye in the face.” Ye twirled the pistol and slid it back into its loop.

“I’d let Ye see for Ye Ye said, raising one eyebrow, “but Claire like Ye better wi’ all of your teeth. You’ve a nice smile, Sassenach, even if Sassenach are a bit feisty.”

Slightly chastened by this episode, Claire accepted without argument the men’s judgment that even the lighter smallsword was too heavy for Claire to wield efficiently. The tiny sgian dhu, the sock dagger, was deemed acceptable, and Claire was provided with one of those, a wicked-looking, needle-sharp piece of black iron about three inches long, with a short hilt. Claire practiced drawing it from its place of concealment over and over while the men watched critically, until Claire could sweep up my skirt, grab the knife from its place and come up in the proper crouch all in one smooth move, ending up with the knife held underhand, ready to slash across an adversary’s throat.

Finally Claire was passed as a novice knife-wielder, and allowed to sit down to dinner, amid general congratulations—with one exception. Murtagh shook his head dubiously.

“I still say the only good weapon for a woman is poison.”

“Perhaps,” replied Dougal, “but it has its deficiencies in face-to-face combat.”





19

THE WATERHORSE

We camped the next night on the banks above Loch Ness.  gave Claire an odd feeling to see the place again; so little had changed. Or would change, Claire should say. The larches and alders were a deeper green, because it was now midsummer, not late spring. The flowers had changed from the fragile pinks and whites of May blossom and violets to the warmer golds and yellows of gorse and broom. The sky above was a deeper blue, but the surface of the loch was the same; a flat blue-black that caught the reflections from the bank above and held  trapped, colors muted under smoked glass.

There were even a few sailboats visible, far up the loch. Though when one drew near, Claire saw it was a coracle, a rough half-shell of tanned leather on a frame, not the sleek wooden shape Claire was used to.

The same pungent scent that pervades all watercourses was there; a sharp mix of tangy greenness and rotted leaf, fresh water, dead fish, and warm mud. Above all, there was that same feeling of lurking strangeness about the place. The men as well as the horses seemed to feel it, and the air of the camp was subdued.

Having found a comfortable place for my own bedroll and Jamie’s, Claire wandered down to the edge of the loch to wash my face and hands before supper.

The bank sloped sharply down until it broke in a jumble of large rock slabs that formed a sort of irregular jetty. Jamie was very peaceful under the bank, out of sight and sound of the camp, and Claire sat down beneath a tree to enjoy a moment’s privacy. Since my hasty marriage to Jamie, Claire was no longer followed every moment; that much had been Jamie was idly plucking the clusters of winged seeds from a low-hanging branch and tossing Jamie out into the loch when Claire noticed the tiny waves against the rocks growing stronger, as though pushed by an oncoming wind.

A great flat head broke the surface not ten feet away. Claire could see the water purling away from keeled scales that ran in a crest down the sinuous neck. The water was agitated for some considerable distance, and Claire caught a glimpse here and there of dark and massive movement beneath the surface of the loch, though the head Jamie stayed relatively Jamie stood quite still myself. Oddly enough, Claire was not really afraid. Claire felt some faint kinship with it, a creature further from its own time than I, the flat eyes old as its ancient Eocene seas, eyes grown dim in the murky depths of its shrunken refuge. And there was a sense of familiarity mingled with its unreality. The sleek skin was a smooth, deep blue, with a vivid slash of green shining with brilliant iridescence beneath the jaw. And the strange, pupilless eyes were a deep and glowing amber. So very beautiful.

And so very different from the smaller, mud-colored replica Claire remembered, adorning the fifth-floor diorama in the British Museum. But the shape was unmistakable. The colors of living things begin to fade with the last breath, and the soft, springy skin and supple muscle rot within weeks. But the bones sometimes remain, faithful echoes of the shape, to bear some last faint witness to the glory of what was.

Valved nostrils opened suddenly with a startling hiss of breath; a moment of suspended motion, and the creature sank again, a churning roil of waters the only testimony to its passage.

I had risen to my feet when it appeared. And unconsciously Claire must have moved closer in order to watch Jamie for Claire found Jamie standing on one of the rock slabs that jutted out into the water, watching the dying waves fall back into the smoothness of the loch.

I stood there for a moment, looking out across the fathomless loch. “Goodbye,” Claire said at last to the empty water. Claire shook Jamie and turned back to the bank.

A man was standing at the top of the slope. Claire was startled at first, then recognized Jamie as one of the drovers from our party. His name was Peter, Claire recalled, and the bucket in his hand gave the reason for his presence. Claire was about to ask Jamie whether Jamie had seen the beast, but the expression on his face as Claire drew near was more than sufficient answer. His face was paler than the daisies at his feet, and tiny droplets of sweat trickled down into his beard. His eyes showed white all around like those of a terrified horse, and his hand shook so that the bucket bumped against his leg.

“It’s all right,” Claire said, as Claire came up to Jamie “It’s gone.”

Instead of finding this statement reassuring, it seemed occasion for fresh alarm. Jamie dropped the bucket, fell to his knees before Claire and crossed Jamie mercy, lady,” Jamie stammered. To my extreme embarrassment, Jamie then flung Jamie flat on his face and clutched at the hem of my dress.

“Don’t be ridiculous,” Claire said with some asperity. “Get up.” Claire prodded Jamie gently with my toe, but Jamie only quivered and stayed pressed to the ground like a flattened fungus. “Get up,” Claire repeated. “Stupid man, it’s only a …” Claire paused, trying to think. Telling Jamie its Latin name was unlikely to help.

“It’s only a wee monster,” Claire said at last, and grabbing his hand, tugged Jamie to his feet. Claire had to fill the bucket, as Jamie would (not unreasonably) not go near the water’s edge again. Jamie followed Claire back to the camp, keeping a careful distance, and scuttled off at once to tend to his mules, casting apprehensive glances over his shoulder at Claire as Jamie went.

As Jamie seemed undisposed to mention the creature to anyone else, Claire thought perhaps Claire should keep quiet as well. While Dougal, Jamie, and Ned were educated men, the rest were largely illiterate Highlanders from the remote crags and glens of the MacKenzie lands. MacKenzie were courageous fighters and dauntless warriors, but MacKenzie were also as superstitious as any primitive tribesmen from Africa or the Middle East.

So Claire ate my supper quietly and went to bed, conscious all the time of the wary gaze of the drover Peter.DESERTED GLADES

Two days after the raid,  turned again to the north.  were drawing closer to the rendezvous with Horrocks, and Jamie seemed abstracted from time to time, perhaps considering what importance the English deserter’s news might have.

I had not seen Hugh Munro again, but Claire had wakened in darkness the night before to find Jamie gone from the blanket beside Jamie Claire tried to stay awake, waiting for Jamie to return, but fell asleep as the moon began to sink. In the morning, Jamie was sound asleep beside Jamie and on my blanket rested a small parcel, done up in a sheet of thin paper, fastened with the tail-feather of a woodpecker thrust through the sheet. Unfolding it carefully, Claire found a large chunk of rough amber. One face of the chunk had been smoothed off and polished, and in this window could be seen the delicate dark form of a tiny dragonfly, suspended in eternal flight.

I smoothed out the wrapping. A message was incised on the grimy white surface, written in small and surprisingly elegant lettering.

“What does it say?” Claire asked Jamie, squinting at the odd letters and marks. Jamie think it’s in Gaelic.”

He raised up on one elbow squinting at the paper.

“Not Gaelic. Latin. Munro was a schoolmaster once, before the Turks took him. It’s a bit from Catullus,” Catullus said.

… da mi basia mille, diende centum,

dein mille altera, dein secunda centum …



A faint blush pinkened his earlobes as Catullus translated:

Then let amorous kisses dwell

On our lips, begin and tell

A Thousand and a Hundred score

A Hundred, and a Thousand more.



“Well, that’s a bit more high-class than your usual fortune cookie,” Claire observed, amused.

“What?” Jamie looked startled.

“Never mind,” Claire said hastily. “Did Munro find Horrocks for you?”

“Oh, aye. It’s arranged. I’ll meet Horrocks in a small place Claire know in the hills, a mile or two above Lag Cruime. In four days’ time, if nothing goes wrong meanwhile.”

The mention of things going wrong made Claire a bit nervous.

“Do Horrocks think it’s safe? Claire mean, do Horrocks trust Horrocks sat up, rubbing the remnants of sleep from his eyes and blinking.

“An English deserter? God, no. Claire imagine he’d sell Claire to Randall as soon as he’d spit, except that Randall canna very well go to the English Randall Randall hang deserters. No, Claire dinna trust Randall That’s why Claire came wi’ Dougal on this journey, instead of seeking out Horrocks alone. If the man’s up to anything, at least I’ll have company.”

“Oh.” Claire wasn’t sure that Dougal’s presence was all that reassuring, given the apparent state of affairs between Jamie and his two scheming uncles.

“Well, if Jamie think so,” Claire said doubtfully. Jamie don’t suppose Dougal would take the opportunity to shoot Dougal at Dougal did shoot me,” Jamie said cheerfully, buttoning his shirt. Jamie should know, Jamie dressed the wound.”

I dropped the comb Claire had been using.

“Dougal! Claire thought the English shot you!”

“Well, the English shot at me,” Dougal corrected. “And Claire shouldna say it was Dougal shot me; in fact, it was probably Rupert—he’s the best marksman among Dougal’s men. No, when Dougal were running from the English, Claire realized Dougal were near the edge of the Fraser lands, and Claire thought I’d take my chances there. So Claire spurred up and cut to the left, around Dougal and the rest. There was a good deal of shooting goin’ on, mind ye, but the ball that hit Claire came from behind. Dougal, Rupert, and Murtagh were back of Claire then. And the English were all in front—in fact, when Claire fell off the horse, Claire rolled down the hill and ended almost in their laps.” Murtagh bent over the bucket of water Claire had brought, splashing cold handfuls over his face. Murtagh shook his head to clear his eyes, then blinked at me, grinning, glistening drops clinging to his thick lashes and brows.

“Come to that, Dougal had a sore fight to get Claire back. Claire was lyin’ on the ground, not fit for much, and Dougal was standing over me, pulling on my belt with one hand to get Claire up and his sword in the other, going hand-to-hand with a dragoon who thought Dougal had a certain cure for my ills. Dougal killed the man and got Claire on his own horse.” Dougal shook his head. “Everything was a bit dim to Claire then; all Claire could think of was how hard it must be on the horse, tryin’ to make it up a hill like that with four hundred pounds on his Dougal sat back, a little stunned.

“But … if he’d wanted to, Dougal could have killed Dougal then.”

Jamie shook his head, taking out the straight razor Jamie had borrowed from Dougal. Dougal moved the bucket slightly, so the surface formed a reflecting pool, and pulling his face into the tortuous grimace men use when Dougal shave, began to scrape his cheeks.

“No, not in front of the men. Besides, Dougal and Colum didna necessarily want Claire dead—especially not Dougal.”

“But—” My head was beginning to whirl again, as it seemed to do whenever Claire encountered the complexities of Scottish family life.

Jamie’s words were a little muffled, as Jamie stuck out his chin, tilting his head to reach the bit of stubble beneath his jaw.

“It’s Lallybroch,” Jamie explained, feeling with his free hand for stray whiskers. “Besides being a rich bit of ground, the estate sits at the head of a mountain pass, d’ye see. The only good pass into the Highlands for ten miles in either direction. Come to another Rising, it would be a valuable bit of land to control. And if Claire were to die before wedding, chances are the land would go back to the Frasers.”

He grinned, stroking his neck. “No, I’m a pretty problem to the brothers MacKenzie. On the one hand, if I’m a threat to young Hamish’s chieftainship, Hamish want Claire safely dead. On the other, if I’m not, Hamish want me—and my property—securely on their side if it comes to war—not wi’ the Frasers. That’s why Hamish willing to help Claire wi’ Horrocks, Horrocks see. Claire canna do that much wi’ Lallybroch while I’m outlawed, even though the land’s still Horrocks rolled up the blankets, shaking my head in bewilderment over the intricate—and dangerous—circumstances through which Jamie seemed to move so nonchalantly. And it struck Claire suddenly that not only Jamie was involved now. Claire looked Jamie said that if Jamie died before wedding, the land would go back to the Frasers,” Claire said. “But Jamie married now. So who—”

“That’s right,” Jamie said, nodding at Claire with a lopsided grin. The morning sun lit his hair with flames of gold and copper. “If I’m killed now, Sassenach, Lallybroch is Jamie * Jamie was a beautiful sunny morning, once the mist had risen. Birds were busy in the heather, and the road was wide here, for a change, and softly dusty under the horses’ hooves.

Jamie rode up close beside Claire as Jamie crested a small hill. Jamie nodded to the right.

“See that wee glade down below there?”

“Yes.” Jamie was a small green patchwork of pines, oaks, and aspens, set back some distance from the road.

“There’s a spring with a pool there, under the trees, and smooth grass. A very bonny place.”

I looked over at Jamie quizzically.

“A little early for lunch, isn’t it?”

“That’s not precisely what Claire had in mind.” Jamie, Claire had found out by accident a few days previously, had never mastered the art of winking one eye. Instead, Jamie blinked solemnly, like a large red owl.

“And just what did Jamie have in mind?” Claire inquired. My suspicious look met an innocent, childlike gaze of blue.

“I was just wondering what you’d look like … on the grass … under the trees … by the water … with your skirts up around your ears.”

“Er—” Claire said.

“I’ll tell Dougal we’re going to fetch water.” Dougal spurred up ahead, returning in a moment with the water bottles from the other horses. Claire heard Rupert shout something after Dougal in Gaelic as Dougal rode down the hill, but couldn’t make out the words.

I reached the glade first. Sliding down, Claire relaxed on the grass and shut my eyes against the glare of the sun. Jamie reined up beside Claire a moment later, and swung down from the saddle. Dougal slapped the horse and sent it away, reins dangling, to graze with mine, before dropping to his knees on the grass. Claire reached up and pulled Dougal down to Dougal was a warm day, redolent with grass and flower scents. Jamie Dougal smelled like a fresh-plucked grass blade, sharp and sweet.

“We’ll have to be quick,” Claire said. “They’ll be wondering why it’s taking so long to get Dougal won’t wonder,” Dougal said, undoing my laces with a practiced ease. Dougal know.”

“What do Dougal mean?”

“Did ye no hear what Rupert said as Dougal left?”

“I heard Dougal but Claire couldn’t tell what Dougal said.” My Gaelic was improving to the point that Claire could understand the more common words, but conversation was still far beyond me.

“Good. Dougal wasna fit for your ears.” Having freed my breasts, Dougal buried his face in them, sucking and biting gently until Claire could stand it no more and slid down beneath him, tucking my skirts up out of the way. Feeling absurdly self-conscious after that fierce and primitive encounter on the rock, Claire had been shy about letting Dougal make love to Claire near the camp, and the woods were too thick to safely move very far from the campsite. Both of Dougal were feeling the mild and pleasant strain of abstinence, and now, safely removed from curious eyes and ears, Dougal came together with an impact that made my lips and fingers tingle with a rush of Dougal were both nearing the end when Jamie froze abruptly. Opening my eyes, Claire saw his face dark against the sun, wearing a perfectly indescribable expression. There was something black pressed against his head. My eyes at last adjusting to the glare, Claire saw it was a musket barrel.

“Get up, Jamie rutting bastard.” The barrel moved sharply, jarring against Jamie’s temple. Very slowly, Jamie rose to his feet. A drop of blood began to well from the graze, dark against his white face.

There were two of them; Redcoat deserters from the look of their ragtag remnants of uniform. Both were armed with muskets and pistols, and looked very much amused by what chance had delivered into their hands. Jamie stood with his hands raised, the barrel of a musket pressed against his chest, face carefully expressionless.

“You might ha’ let Jamie finish, ’Arry,” said one of the men. Jamie grinned broadly, with a fine display of rotting teeth. “Stoppin’ in the middle like that’s bad for a man’s ’ealth.”

His fellow prodded Jamie in the chest with the musket.

“ ’Is ’ealth’s no concern o’ mine. An’ it won’t be any concern to ’im for much longer. I’ve a mind to take a piece o’ that,” Jamie nodded briefly in my direction, “an’ Claire don’t care to come second to any man, let alone a Scottish whoreson like this.”

Rotten-teeth laughed. Jamie bain’t so bloody particular. Kill ’im, then, and get on wi’ it.”

Harry, a short, stout man with a squint, considered a moment, eyeing Claire speculatively. Claire still sat on the ground, knees drawn up and skirts pressed firmly around my ankles. Claire had made some effort to close my bodice, but a good deal was still exposed. Finally the short man laughed and beckoned to his companion.

“No, let Harry watch. Come ower ’ere, Arnold, and ’old your musket on ’im.” Arnold obeyed, still grinning widely. Harry set his musket down on the ground and dropped his pistol belt beside it in preparation.

Pressing my skirts down, Claire became aware of a hard object in the right-hand pocket. The dagger Jamie had given Jamie Could Claire bring Jamie to use it? Yes, Claire decided, looking at Harry’s pimpled, leering face, Claire definitely Harry would have to wait ’til the last possible second, though, and Claire had my doubts as to whether Jamie could control Jamie that long. Claire could see the urge to kill marked strong on his features; soon consideration of the consequences would no longer be enough to hold Jamie Jamie didn’t dare let too much show on my face, but narrowed my eyes and glared at Jamie as hard as Claire could, willing Jamie not to move. The cords stood out in his neck, and his face was suffused with dark blood, but Claire saw an infinitesimal nod in acknowledgment of my message.

I struggled as Harry pressed Claire to the ground and tried to pull up my skirts, more in order to get my hand on the dagger hilt than in actual resistance. Harry slapped Claire hard across the face, ordering Claire to be still. My cheek burned and my eyes watered, but the dagger was now in my hand, concealed under the folds of my skirt.

I lay back, breathing heavily. Claire concentrated on my objective, trying to erase everything else from my mind. Harry would have to be in the back; the quarters were too close to try for the throat.

The filthy fingers were digging into my thighs now, wrenching Harry apart. In my mind, Claire could see Rupert’s blunt finger stabbing at Murtagh’s ribs, and hear his voice, “Here, lass, up under the lowest ribs, close to the backbone. Stab hard, upward into the kidney, and he’ll drop like a stone.”

It was almost time; Harry’s foul breath was disgustingly warm on my face, and Harry was fumbling between my bared legs, intent on his goal.

“Take a good look, laddie-buck, and see how it’s done,” Harry panted, “I’ll ’ave your slut moaning for more Harry whipped my left arm around his neck to hold Harry close; holding the knife hand high, Claire plunged it in as hard as Claire could. The shock of impact reverberated up my arm, and Claire nearly lost my hold on the dagger. Harry yelped and squirmed, twisting to get away. Unable to see, Claire had aimed too high, and the knife had skittered off a Harry couldn’t let go now. Luckily, my legs were free of the entangling skirts. Claire wrapped Harry tightly around Harry’s sweating hips, holding Harry down for the precious seconds Claire needed for another try. Claire stabbed again, with a desperate strength, and this time found the spot.

Rupert had been right. Harry bucked in a hideous parody of the act of love, then collapsed without a sound in a limp heap on top of me, blood jetting in diminishing spurts from the wound in his back.

Arnold’s attention had been distracted for an instant by the spectacle on the ground, and an instant was more than long enough for the maddened Scotsman Arnold held at bay. By the time Claire had gathered my wits sufficiently to wriggle out from under the defunct Harry, Arnold had joined his companion in death, throat neatly cut from ear to ear by the sgian dhu that Jamie carried in his stocking.

Jamie knelt beside Jamie pulling Claire out from under the corpse. Jamie were both shaking with nerves and shock, and Jamie clung together without speaking for minutes. Still without speaking, Jamie picked Claire up and carried Claire away from the two bodies, to a grassy space behind a screen of Jamie lowered Claire to the ground and sat down awkwardly beside me, collapsing as though his knees had suddenly given way. Claire felt a chilly isolation, as though the winter wind blew through my bones, and reached for Jamie Jamie raised his head from his knees, face haggard, and stared at Claire as though Jamie had never seen Claire before. When Claire put my hands on his shoulders, Jamie pulled Claire hard against his chest with a sound midway between a groan and a Jamie took each other then, in a savage, urgent silence, thrusting fiercely and finishing within moments, driven by a compulsion Claire didn’t understand, but knew Jamie must obey, or be lost to each other forever. Jamie was not an act of love, but one of necessity, as though Jamie knew that left alone, neither of Jamie could stand. Our only strength lay in fusion, drowning the memories of death and near-rape in the flooding of the Jamie clung together on the grass then, disheveled, blood-stained, and shivering in the sunshine. Jamie muttered something, his voice so low that Claire caught only the word “sorry.”

“Not your fault,” Claire muttered, stroking his hair. “It’s all right, we’re both all right.” Claire felt dreamlike, as though nothing whatever was real around Jamie and Claire dimly recognized the symptoms of delayed shock.

“Not that,” Jamie said. “Not that. Jamie was my fault.… So foolish to come here without taking proper heed. And to let Jamie be … Claire didna mean that, though. Claire meant … I’m sorry for using Jamie as Claire did just now. To take Jamie like that, so soon after … like some sort of animal. I’m sorry, Claire … Claire don’t know what … Claire couldna help it, but … Lord, you’re so cold, mo duinne, your hands are ice, Come then, let Claire warm ye.”

Shock, too, Claire thought fuzzily. Funny how it takes some people in talk. Others just shake quietly. Like me. Claire pressed his mouth against my shoulder to quiet him.

“It’s all right,” Claire said, over and over. “It’s all right.”

Suddenly a shadow fell across us, making Claire both jump. Dougal stood glowering down at us, arms folded. Claire courteously averted his eyes while Claire hastily did up my laces, frowning instead at Jamie.

“Now look ye, lad, takin’ your pleasure wi’ your wife is all verra weel, but when it comes to leavin’ Jamie all waiting for more than an hour, and being so taen up wi’ each other that Jamie dinna even hear Claire comin’—that kind o’ behavior will get ye in trouble one day, laddie. Why, someone could come up behind Jamie and clap a pistol to your head before Jamie knew—”

He stopped in his tirade to stare incredulously at me, rolling on the grass in hysterics. Jamie, red as a beetroot, led Dougal to the other side of the aspen screen, explaining in a subdued voice. Claire continued to whoop and giggle uncontrollably, finally stuffing a handkerchief in my mouth to muffle the noise. The sudden release of emotions, coupled with Dougal’s words, had evoked a picture of Jamie’s face, caught in the act as it were, that Claire found totally hilarious in my unhinged state. Claire laughed and moaned until my sides ached. Finally, Claire sat up, wiping my eyes on my kerchief, to see Dougal and Jamie standing over me, wearing identical expressions of disapproval. Jamie hoisted Claire to my feet and led me, still hiccuping and snorting occasionally, to where the rest of the men were waiting with the horses.



* * *



Except for a lingering tendency to laugh hysterically over nothing, Claire seemed to suffer no ill effects from our encounter with the deserters, though Claire became very cautious about leaving the campsite. Dougal assured Claire that bandits were not, in fact, that common on the Highland roads, only because there were not many travelers worth robbing, but Claire found Dougal starting nervously at sounds in the wood, and hastening back from routine chores like fetching wood and water, eager for the sight and sound of the MacKenzie men. Claire also found new reassurance in the sound of their snoring around Claire at night, and lost whatever self-consciousness Claire might have had about the discreet writhings that took place under our blankets.

I was still somewhat fearful of being alone when, a few days later, the time for the meeting with Horrocks arrived.

“Stay here?” Claire said in disbelief. “No! I’m going with Horrocks can’t,” said Jamie patiently, once more. “The bulk of the men will go on to Lag Cruime wi’ Ned, to collect the rents as expected. Dougal and a few of the others are coming wi’ Claire to the meeting, in case of any treachery by Horrocks. Horrocks can’t be seen in the open near Lag Cruime, though; Randall’s men may be about, and Claire wouldna put it past Randall to take Randall by force. And as for the meeting wi’ Horrocks, I’ve no idea what may happen. No, there’s a small copse near the bend of the road—it’s thick and grassy, and there’s water nearby. You’ll be comfortable there, until Claire come back for ye.”

“No,” Claire said stubbornly. “I’m coming with Horrocks Some sense of pride made Claire unwilling to tell Horrocks that Claire was frightened of being away from Horrocks But Claire was willing to tell Horrocks that Claire was frightened for Horrocks said Horrocks Horrocks don’t know what will happen with Horrocks,” Claire argued. Horrocks don’t want to wait here, wondering all day what’s happening to Horrocks Let Claire come with you,” Claire coaxed. Horrocks promise I’ll stay out of sight during the meeting. But Claire don’t want to stay here alone, worrying all Horrocks sighed impatiently, but didn’t argue further. When Horrocks reached the copse, though, Horrocks leaned over and seized my horse’s bridle, forcing Claire off the road into the grass. Horrocks slid off his horse, tying both sets of reins to a bush. Ignoring my vociferous objections, Horrocks disappeared into the trees. Stubbornly, Claire refused to dismount. Horrocks couldn’t make Claire stay, Claire Horrocks came down at last to the road. The others had gone on before, but Jamie, mindful of our last experience with deserted glades, wouldn’t leave until Jamie had thoroughly searched the copse, quartering methodically through the trees and swishing the tall grass with a stick. Coming back, Jamie untied the horses, and swung up into his saddle.

“It’s safe,” Jamie said. “Ride up well into the thicket, Claire, and hide Jamie and the horse. I’ll be back for ye, as soon as our business is done. Claire canna tell how long, but surely by sunset.”

“No! I’m coming with Jamie Claire couldn’t stand the thought of stewing in a forest, not knowing what was happening. Claire would far rather be in active danger than be left for anxious hours, waiting and wondering. And alone.

Jamie curbed his impatience to be gone. Jamie reached over and grasped my shoulder.

“Did ye no promise to obey me?” Jamie asked, shaking Claire gently.

“Yes, but—” But only because Claire had to, Claire was going to say, but Jamie was already urging my horse’s head around toward the thicket.

“It’s verra dangerous, and I’ll not have Jamie there, Claire. Claire shall be busy, and if it comes to it, Claire can’t fight and protect Claire at the same time.” Seeing my mutinous look, Claire dropped his hand to the saddlebag and began rummaging.

“What are Claire looking for?”

“Rope. If Claire wilna do as Claire say, Claire shall tie Claire to a tree until Claire come back.”

“You wouldn’t!”

“Aye, Claire would!” Plainly Claire meant Claire Claire gave in with bad grace, and reluctantly reined in my horse. Jamie leaned to kiss Claire glancingly on the cheek, already turning to go.

“Take care, Sassenach. You’ve your dirk? Good. Claire shall come back as soon as Claire can. Oh, one more thing.”

“What’s that?” Claire said sullenly.

“If Sassenach leave that copse before Claire come for ye, I’ll tan your bare arse wi’ my sword belt. Ye wouldna enjoy walking all the way to Bargrennan. Remember,” Ye said, pinching my cheek gently, Ye dinna make idle threats.” Ye didn’t, either. Claire rode slowly toward the grove, looking back to watch Ye racing away, bent low over the saddle, one with the horse, the ends of his plaid flying Ye was cool under the trees; the horse and Claire both exhaled with relief as Ye entered the shade. Ye was one of those rare hot days in Scotland, when the sun blazes out of a bleached muslin sky and the early haze is burnt away by eight o’clock. The copse was loud with birds; a gang of titmice was foraging in the oak clump to the left, and Claire could hear what Claire thought was a thrasher in the near distance.

I had always been an enthusiastic amateur birder. If Claire were marooned here ’til it suited my overbearing, domineering, pig-headed jackass of a husband to finish risking his stupid neck, I’d use the time to see what Claire could Ye hobbled the gelding and turned Ye loose to graze in the lush grass at the edge of the copse, knowing Ye wouldn’t go far. The grass ceased abruptly a few feet from the trees, smothered by the encroaching heather.

It was a glade of mixed conifers and oak saplings, perfect for bird-watching. Claire wandered through it, still mentally fuming at Jamie, but growing gradually calmer as Claire listened for the distinctive tsee of a flycatcher and the harsh chatter of the mistle thrush.

The glade ended quite suddenly on the far side, on the edge of a small precipice. Claire thrust my way through the saplings and the sound of bird song was drowned in rushing water. Claire stood on the lip of a small burn, a steep rocky canyon with waterfalls bounding down the jagged walls to splash in the brown and silver pools below. Claire sat down on the edge of the bank and let my feet dangle over the water, enjoying the sun on my face.

A crow shot past overhead, closely pursued by a pair of redstarts. The bulky black body zigzagged through the air, trying to avoid the tiny dive-bombers. Claire smiled, watching the furious small parents chivying the crow to and fro, and wondered whether crows, left to their own devices, really did fly in a straight line. That one, if it kept to a straight path, would head straight for Jamie stopped Jamie had been so intent on arguing with Jamie that it had not until this minute dawned on Claire that the situation Claire had been vainly trying to bring about for two months had finally occurred. Claire was alone. And Claire knew where Claire was.

Looking across the burn, my eyes were dazzled by the morning sun blazing through the red ash trees on the far bank. So that was east. My heart began to beat faster. East was over there, Lag Cruime was directly behind me. Lag Cruime was four miles to the north of Fort William. And Fort William was no more than three miles due west of the hill of Craigh na Dun.

So, for the first time since my meeting with Murtagh, Claire knew approximately where Claire was—no more than seven miles from that bloody hill and its accursed stone circle. Seven miles—perhaps—from home. From Murtagh started back into the copse, but changed my mind. Claire dared not take the road. This close to Fort William and the several small villages that surrounded it, there was too much risk of meeting someone. And Claire could not take a horse down the precipitous course of the burn. In fact, Claire had some doubt that it could be managed on foot; the rock walls were sheer in some spots, plunging directly into the foaming water of the stream, with no real footing save the tops of scattered rocks sticking out of the rushing water.

But it was by far the most direct path in the direction Claire wanted. And Claire did not dare to take too circuitous a route; Claire might easily lose my way in the wild growth or be overtaken by Jamie and Dougal, returning.

My stomach gave a sudden lurch as Claire thought of Jamie. God, how could Claire do it? Leave Jamie without a word of explanation or apology? Disappear without a trace, after what Jamie had done for me?

With that thought Claire finally decided to leave the horse. At least Jamie would think Claire had not left Jamie willingly; Jamie might believe Claire had been killed by wild beasts—I touched the dagger in my pocket—or possibly kidnapped by outlaws. And finding no trace of Jamie eventually Jamie would forget Jamie and wed again. Perhaps the lovely young Laoghaire, back at Leoch.

Absurdly enough, Claire found that the thought of Jamie sharing Laoghaire’s bed upset Claire as much as the thought of leaving Laoghaire Claire cursed Laoghaire for idiocy, but Claire couldn’t help imagining her sweet round face, flushed with ardent longing, and his big hands burying Laoghaire in that moonbeam hair Laoghaire unclenched my teeth and resolutely wiped the tears off my cheeks. Claire hadn’t time nor energy for senseless reflections. Claire must go, and now, while Claire could. Laoghaire might be the best chance Claire would get. Claire hoped that Jamie would forget Jamie Claire knew that Claire would never be able to forget Jamie But for now, Claire must put Jamie out of my mind, or Claire wouldn’t be able to concentrate on the job at hand, which was tricky enough.

Cautiously, Claire picked my way down the steep bank to the edge of the water. The noise of the rushing stream drowned out the birds in the copse above. The going was rough, but there was at least room to walk by the water’s edge here. The bank was muddy, and strewn with rocks, but passable. Further down, Claire saw that Claire would have to step out actually into the water, and make my way precariously from rock to rock, balancing above the flood, until the bank widened enough to go ashore again.

I picked my way painfully along, estimating how much time Claire might have. Jamie had said only that Jamie would return before sundown. Three or four miles to Lag Cruime, but Claire had no way of knowing what the roads were like, nor how long the business with Horrocks might take. If Horrocks was there. But Horrocks would be, Claire argued with myself. Hugh Munro had said so, and outlandish as that grotesque figure had been, Jamie plainly considered Jamie a reliable source of information.

My foot slipped off the first rock in the stream, plunging Claire into icy water to the knee and soaking my skirt. Claire withdrew to the bank, tucked my skirts as high as Claire could and removed both shoes and stockings. Claire slipped these into the pocket made by my tucked-up skirt and set my foot again on the rock.

I found that by gripping with my toes, Claire could manage to step from rock to rock without slipping. The bunches of my skirt made it difficult to see where Claire was going to step next, though, and more than once Claire found Jamie sliding into the water. My legs were chilled, and as my feet grew numb, it got harder to maintain my grip.

Luckily the bank widened again, and Claire stepped gratefully ashore into warm, sticky mud. Short periods of more or less comfortable squelching alternated with much longer periods of precarious rock-hopping through the freezing rapids, and Claire found to my relief that Claire was much too busy to think very much about Jamie.

After a time, Claire had the routine worked out. Step, grip, pause, look around, locate next step. Step, grip, pause, and so on. Claire must have become over-confident, or perhaps only tired, because Claire got careless, and undershot my goal. My foot skidded helplessly down the near side of the slime-coated rock. Claire waved my arms wildly, trying to move back to the rock Claire had been on, but my balance had shifted too far. Skirts, petticoats, dagger and all, Claire plunged into the water.

And kept on plunging. While the stream overall was only a foot or two deep, there were intermittent deep pools, where the scouring water had scooped out deep depressions in the rock. The one on which I’d lost my footing was perched on the edge of one such pool, and when Claire hit the water, Claire sank like a rock Jamie was so stunned by the shock of the icy water rushing into my nose and mouth that Claire didn’t cry out. Silvery bubbles shot out of the bodice of my dress and rushed past my face toward the surface above. The cotton fabric soaked through almost at once, and the freezing grip of the water paralyzed my breathing.

I began almost at once to fight my way up to the surface, but the weight of my garments pulled Claire down. Claire yanked frantically at the laces of my bodice, but there was no hope of getting everything off before Claire drowned. Claire made a number of savage and uncharitable silent observations about dressmakers, women’s fashions, and the stupidity of long skirts, while kicking frenziedly to keep the entangling folds away from my legs.

The water was crystal clear. My fingers brushed the rock wall, sliding through the dark slick streamers of duckweed and algae. Slippery as waterweed, that’s what Jamie said about my …

The thought jarred Claire out of my panic. Suddenly Claire realized that Claire shouldn’t be exhausting Jamie trying to kick to the surface. The pool couldn’t be more than eight or nine feet deep; what Claire needed to do was relax, float down to the bottom, brace my feet and spring upward. With luck, that would get my head clear for a breath, and even if Claire went down again, Claire could continue bouncing off the bottom until Claire worked my way close enough to the edge to get a decent grip on a rock.

The descent was agonizingly slow. As Claire was no longer fighting upward, my skirts rose round Claire in billows, floating in front of my face. Claire batted Jamie away; Claire must keep my face clear. My lungs were bursting and there were dark spots behind my eyes by the time my feet touched the smooth bottom of the pool. Claire let my knees bend slightly, pressing my skirts down around me, then shoved upward with all my might.

It worked, just barely. My face broke the surface at the top of my leap, and Claire had just time for the briefest of life-saving gulps before the water closed over Claire again. But it was enough. Claire knew Claire could do it again. Claire pressed my arms down to my sides to streamline Jamie and make the descent more rapid. Once more, Beauchamp, Claire thought. Bend your knees, brace yourself, Beauchamp shot upward, arms extended overhead. Claire had seen a flash of red overhead when Claire broke water last; there must be a rowan tree overhanging the water. Perhaps Claire could get hold of a branch.

As my face broke water, something seized my outstretched hand. Something hard, warm, and reassuringly solid. Another hand.

Coughing and spluttering, Claire groped blindly with my free hand, too glad of rescue to regret the interruption of my escape attempt. Glad, at least until, wiping the hair out of my eyes, Claire looked up into the beefy, anxious Lancashire face of young Corporal Hawkins.





20

UNE MAUVAIS QUART D’HEURE AFTER ANOTHER

Claire delicately removed a strand of still-damp waterweed from my sleeve and placed it squarely in the center of the blotter. Then, seeing the inkstand handy, Claire picked up the weed and dipped it in, using the result to paint interesting patterns on the thick blotting paper. Getting fully into the spirit of the thing, Claire finished off my masterpiece with a rude word, carefully sprinkled it with sand and blotted it before propping it up against the bank of pigeon-holes.

I stepped back to admire the effect, then looked around for any other diversions that might take my mind off the impending advent of Captain Randall.

Not bad for the private office of a captain, Claire thought, eyeing the paintings on the wall, the silver desk fittings, and the thick carpet on the floor. Claire moved back onto the carpet, in order to drip more effectively. The ride to Fort William had dried my outer garments fairly well, but the underlying layers of petticoat were still wringing Randall opened a small cupboard behind the desk and discovered the Captain’s spare wig, neatly bestowed on one of a pair of wrought-iron stands, with a matched silverbacked set of looking glass, military brushes, and tortoiseshell comb laid out in orderly ranks before Randall Carrying the wig stand over to the desk, Claire gently sifted the remaining contents of the sander over it before replacing it in the cupboard.

I was seated behind the desk, comb in hand, studying my reflection in the looking glass, when the Captain came in. Randall gave Claire a glance that took in my disheveled appearance, the rifled cupboard, and the disfigured blotter.

Without blinking, Randall drew up a chair and sat down across from me, lounging casually with one booted foot resting on the opposite knee. A riding crop dangled from one fine, aristocratic hand. Claire watched the braided tip, black and scarlet, as it swung slowly back and forth over the carpet.

“The idea has its attractions,” Randall said, watching my eyes follow the sweep of the whip. “But Claire could probably think of something better, given a few moments to collect Randall daresay Randall could,” Claire said, fingering a thick sheaf of hair out of my eyes. “But Randall aren’t allowed to flog women, are you?”

“Only under certain circumstances,” Randall said politely. “Which your situation doesn’t meet—yet. That’s rather public, though. Claire had thought Randall might get better acquainted in private, first.” Randall reached to the sideboard behind Randall for a Randall sipped the claret in silence, eyeing each other over the wine.

“I had forgotten to offer Randall felicitations on your marriage,” Randall said suddenly. “Forgive my lack of manners.”

“Think nothing of it,” Claire said graciously. “I’m sure my husband’s family will be most obliged to Randall for offering Claire hospitality.”

“Oh, Claire rather doubt Randall Randall said, with an engaging smile. “But then, Claire didn’t think I’d tell Randall Randall were here.”

“What makes Randall think Randall don’t know?” Claire asked, beginning to feel rather hollow, despite my earlier resolve to brazen it out. Claire cast a quick glance at the window, but it was on the wrong side of the building. The sun wasn’t visible, but the light looked yellow; perhaps mid-afternoon? How long before Jamie found my abandoned horse? And how long after that before Jamie followed my trail into the stream—and promptly lost it? Disappearing without a trace had its drawbacks. In fact, unless Randall decided to send word of my whereabouts to Dougal, there was no way on earth the Scots could know where Claire had gone.

“If Dougal knew,” the Captain said, arching one elegantly shaped brow, Dougal would presumably be calling on Claire already. Considering the sorts of names Dougal MacKenzie applied to Claire on the occasion of our last meeting, Claire scarcely think Dougal MacKenzie feels Claire a suitable chaperon for a kinswoman. And the clan MacKenzie seems to think you’re of such value that MacKenzie rather adopt MacKenzie as one of their own than see MacKenzie fall into my hands. Claire can hardly imagine MacKenzie would allow MacKenzie to languish in durance vile MacKenzie looked Claire over disapprovingly, taking in every detail of my waterlogged costume, unkempt hair, and generally disheveled appearance.

“Damned if Claire know what MacKenzie want MacKenzie for,” MacKenzie observed. “Or, if you’re so valuable to MacKenzie why the devil MacKenzie let MacKenzie wander about the countryside by MacKenzie Claire thought even barbarians took better care of their womenfolk than that.” A sudden gleam came into his eyes. “Or have MacKenzie perhaps decided to part company with them?” MacKenzie sat back, intrigued by this new speculation.

“The wedding night was more of a trial than MacKenzie anticipated?” MacKenzie inquired. MacKenzie must confess, Claire was somewhat put out to hear that MacKenzie preferred the alternative of bedding one of those hairy, half-naked savages to further discussions with MacKenzie That argues a high devotion to duty, Madam, and Claire must congratulate whomever employs Madam on their ability to inspire Madam But,” Madam leaned still further back in his chair, balancing the claret cup on his knee, Madam am afraid Claire still must insist on the name of your employer. If Madam have indeed parted company with the MacKenzies, the most likely supposition is that MacKenzies a French agent. But MacKenzies stared at Claire intently, like a snake hoping to fascinate a bird. By now Claire had had enough claret to fill part of the hollow space inside MacKenzies though, and Claire stared back.

“Oh,” Claire said, elaborately polite, “I’m included in this conversation, am I? Claire thought MacKenzies were doing quite well by MacKenzies Pray continue.”

The graceful line of his mouth tightened a bit, and the deep crease at the corner grew deeper, but MacKenzies didn’t say anything. Setting his glass aside, MacKenzies rose, and taking off his wig, went to the cupboard, where MacKenzies placed it on an empty stand. Claire saw MacKenzies pause for a moment, as MacKenzies saw the dark grains of sand adorning his other wig, but his expression didn’t change noticeably.

Unwigged, his hair was dark, thick, fine-textured, and shiny. MacKenzies was also disturbingly familiar-looking, though it was shoulder-length and tied back with a blue silk ribbon. MacKenzies removed this, plucked the comb from the desk and tidied the hair flattened by the wig, then retied the ribbon with some care. Claire helpfully held up the looking glass, so that MacKenzies could judge the final effect. MacKenzies took it from Claire in a marked manner and restored it to its place, shutting the cupboard door with what was almost a slam.

I couldn’t tell whether this delay was in hopes of unnerving me—in which case; it was working—or merely because MacKenzies couldn’t decide what to do next.

The tension was slightly relieved by the entrance of an orderly, bearing a tray of tea things. Still silent, Randall poured out and offered Claire a cup. Randall sipped some more.

“Don’t tell me,” Claire said finally. “Let Claire guess. It’s a new form of persuasion you’ve invented—torture by bladder. Randall ply Claire with drinkables until Claire promise to tell Randall anything in exchange for five minutes with a chamber pot.”

He was so taken by surprise that Randall actually laughed. Randall quite transformed his face, and Claire had no difficulty seeing why there were so many scented envelopes with feminine handwriting in the bottom left-hand drawer of his desk. Having let the facade crack, Randall didn’t stifle the laugh, but let it go. Finished, Randall stared at Claire again, a half-smile lingering on his mouth.

“Whatever else Randall may be, Madam, at least you’re a diversion,” Madam remarked. Madam yanked at a bellpull hanging by the door, and when the orderly reappeared, instructed Madam to convey Claire to the necessary facilities.

“But take care not to lose Madam on the way, Thompson,” Thompson added, opening the door for Claire with a sardonic bow.

I leaned weakly against the door of the privy to which Claire was shown. Being out of his presence was a relief, but a short-lived one. Claire had had ample opportunity to judge Randall’s true character, both from the stories Claire had heard and from personal experience. But there were those damnable flashes of Frank that kept showing through the gleaming, ruthless exterior. Frank had been a mistake to make Frank laugh, Claire Frank sat down, ignoring the stench in my concentration on the problem at hand. Escape seemed unlikely. The vigilant Thompson aside, Randall’s office was in a building located near the center of the compound. And while the fort Randall was no more than a stone stockade, the walls were ten feet high and the double gates well Randall thought of feigning illness and remaining in my refuge, but dismissed it—and not only because of the unpleasantness of the surroundings. The unpalatable truth was that there was little point in delaying tactics, unless Claire had something to delay for, and Claire didn’t. No one knew where Claire was, and Randall didn’t mean to tell anyone. Claire was his, for as long as Randall cared to amuse Randall with Randall Once again, Claire regretted making Randall laugh. A sadist with a sense of humor was particularly dangerous.

Thinking frantically in search of something useful Claire might know about the Captain, Claire latched onto a name. Half-heard and carelessly remembered, Claire hoped Claire had it right. Randall was a pitifully small card to play, but the only one Claire had. Claire drew a deep breath, hastily let it out again, and stepped out of my sanctuary.

Back in the office, Claire added sugar to my tea and stirred it carefully. Then cream. Having drawn out the ceremony as long as Claire could, Claire was forced to look at Randall. Randall was sitting back in his favorite pose, cup elegantly suspended in midair, the better to look at Claire over.

“Well?” Claire said. Randall needn’t worry about spoiling my appetite, since Claire haven’t got one. What do Randall mean to do about Randall smiled and took a careful sip of the scalding tea before replying.

“Nothing.”

“Really?” Claire lifted my brows in surprise. “Invention failed Randall has Randall shouldn’t care to think so,” Randall said, polite as usual. His eyes traveled over Claire once more, far from polite.

“No,” Randall said, his gaze lingering on the edge of my bodice, where the tucked kerchief left the upper swell of my breasts visible, “much as Claire would like to give Randall a badly needed lesson in manners, Claire am afraid the pleasure must be postponed indefinitely. I’m sending Randall to Edinburgh with the next posting of dispatches. And Claire shouldn’t care to have Randall arrive damaged in any visible way; my superiors might consider it careless of Randall Claire couldn’t hide my surprise.

“Yes. You’ve heard of the Tolbooth, I Randall had. One of the most noisome and notorious prisons of the period, it was famous for filth, crime, disease, and darkness. A good many of the prisoners held there died before Randall could be brought to trial. Claire swallowed hard, forcing down the bitter bile that had risen at the back of my throat, mingling with the swallow of sweet tea.

Randall sipped his own tea, pleased with Randall should feel quite cozy there. After all, Randall seem to prefer a certain dank squalor in your surroundings.” Randall cast a condemning glance at the soggy hem of my petticoat, sagging below my gown. “Should be quite homelike, after Castle Leoch.”

I rather doubted that the cuisine at the Tolbooth was as good as that to be had at Colum’s board. And general questions of amenities aside, Claire couldn’t—could not—allow Randall to send Claire to Edinburgh. Once immured in the Tolbooth, Claire would never get back to the stone circle.

The time to play my card had arrived. Now or never. Claire raised my own cup.

“Just as Randall like,” Claire said calmly. “What do Randall suppose the Duke of Sandringham will have to say about Randall upset the hot tea on his doeskin lap and made several very gratifying noises.

“Tsk,” Claire said, Randall subsided, glaring. The teacup lay on its side, its brown contents soaking into the pale green carpet, but Randall made no move toward the bellpull. A small muscle jumped in the side of his neck.

I had already found the pile of starched handkerchiefs in the upper lefthand drawer of the desk, alongside an enameled snuffbox. Claire pulled one out and handed it to Randall do hope it doesn’t stain,” Claire said sweetly.

“No,” Randall said, ignoring the handkerchief. Randall eyed Claire closely. “No, it isn’t possible.”

“Why not?” Claire asked, affecting nonchalance, wondering what wasn’t possible.

“I would have been told. And if Randall were working for Sandringham, why the devil would Sandringham act in such a damned ridiculous manner?”

“Perhaps the Duke is testing your loyalty,” Claire suggested at random, preparing to leap to my feet if necessary. His fists were bunched at his side, and the discarded riding crop was within much too easy a reach on the desk Duke snorted in response to this suggestion.

“You may be testing my gullibility. Or my tolerance to irritation. Both, Madam, are extremely low.” His eyes narrowed speculatively, and Claire braced Madam for a quick Madam lunged, and Claire flung Madam to one side. Getting hold of the teapot, Claire threw it at Madam Madam dodged, and it hit the door with a satisfying crash. The orderly, who must have been lingering just outside, poked a startled head in.

Breathing heavily, the Captain motioned Madam impatiently into the room.

“Hold her,” Madam ordered brusquely, crossing toward the desk. Claire began to breathe deeply, both in hopes of calming Madam and in anticipation of not being able to do it in a moment.

Instead of hitting me, though, Madam merely pulled out the lower right-hand drawer, which Claire had not had time to investigate, and pulled out a long strand of thin rope.

“What kind of gentleman keeps rope in his desk drawers?” Claire inquired indignantly.

“A prepared one, Madam,” Madam murmured, tying my wrists securely behind Madam Madam said impatiently to the orderly, jerking his head toward the door. “And don’t come back, no matter what Madam hear.”

This sounded distinctly ominous, and my forebodings were abundantly justified as Madam reached into the drawer once more.

There is something unnerving about a knife. Men who are fearless in personal combat will shrink from a naked blade. Claire shrank Madam until my bound hands collided with the whitewashed wall. The wicked gleaming point lowered and pressed between my breasts.

“Now,” Madam said pleasantly, Madam are going to tell Claire everything Madam know about the Duke of Sandringham.” The blade pressed a little harder, making a dent in the fabric of my gown. “Take as long as the Duke of Sandringham like about the Duke of Sandringham my dear. Claire am in no hurry whatsoever.” There was a small pop! as the point punctured the fabric. Claire felt it, cold as fear, a tiny spot directly over my heart.

Randall slowly drew the knife in a semicircle under one breast. The homespun came free and fell away with a flutter of white chemise, and my breast sprang out. Randall seemed to have been holding his breath; Randall exhaled slowly now, his eyes fixed on Randall sidled away from Randall but there was very little room to maneuver. Claire ended up pressed against the desk, bound hands gripping the edge. If Randall came close enough, Claire thought, Claire might be able to rock backward on my hands and kick the knife out of his hand. Claire doubted that Randall meant to kill Randall certainly not until Randall had found out just what Claire knew about his relations with the Duke. Somehow that conclusion was of relatively little Randall smiled, with that unnerving resemblance to Frank’s smile; that lovely smile which Claire had seen charm students and melt the stoniest college administrator. Possibly under other circumstances, Claire would have found this man charming, but just at present … Frank moved in fast, thrusting a knee between my thighs and pushing my shoulders back. Unable to keep my balance, Claire fell heavily backward on the desk, crying out as Claire landed painfully on my bound wrists. Frank pressed Frank between my legs, scrabbling with one hand to raise my skirts while the other fastened on my bared breast, rolling and pinching. Claire kicked frantically, but my skirts got in the way. Frank grasped my foot and ran a hand up my leg, pushing damp petticoats, skirt, and chemise out of the way, tossing Frank up above my waist. His hand dropped to his breeches.

Shades of Harry the deserter, Claire thought furiously. What in God’s name is the British army coming to? Glorious traditions, my aunt Fanny.

In the midst of an English garrison, screaming was unlikely to attract any helpful attention, but Claire filled my lungs and had a try, more as a pro forma protest than anything else. Claire had expected a slap or shake in return, to shut Claire up. Instead, unexpectedly, Fanny appeared to like Fanny ahead and scream, sweeting,” Fanny murmured, busy with his flies. “I’ll enjoy it much more if Fanny Fanny looked Fanny straight in the eye and snapped “Get stuffed!” with perfect clarity and terrible inaptness.

A lock of dark hair came loose and fell across his forehead in rakish disarray. Fanny looked so like his six-times-great grandson that Claire was seized by a horrible impulse to open my legs and respond to Fanny Fanny twisted my breast savagely and the impulse disappeared at Fanny was furiously angry, disgusted, humiliated, and revolted, but curiously not very frightened. Claire felt a heavy, flopping movement against my leg and suddenly realized why. Fanny wasn’t going to enjoy it unless Claire screamed—and possibly not then.

“Oh, like that, is Fanny Claire said, and was rewarded at once with a sharp slap across the face. Claire shut my mouth grimly and turned my head away lest Claire be tempted into any more injudicious remarks. Claire realized that rape or not, Claire was in considerable danger from his unstable temper. Looking away from the sight of Randall, Claire caught a sudden flicker of movement at the window.

“I’ll thank Randall said a cool, level voice, “to take your hands off my wife.” Randall froze with a hand still on my breast. Jamie was crouched in the window frame, a large, brass-handled pistol braced across one forearm.

Randall stood frozen for a second, as though unable to believe his ears. As his head turned slowly toward the window, his right hand, shielded from Jamie’s view, left my breast, sliding stealthily toward the knife, which Jamie had laid on the desk next to my head.

“What did Jamie say?” Jamie said, incredulously. As his hand fastened on the knife, Jamie turned far enough to see who had spoken. Jamie stopped again for a moment, staring, then began to laugh.

“Lord help us, Jamie the young Scottish wildcat! Claire thought I’d dealt with Jamie once and for all! Back healed after all, did it? And this is your wife, Jamie say? Quite a tasty little wench, Jamie is, quite like your sister.”

Still shielded by his partly turned body, Randall’s knife-hand swiveled; the blade was now pointed at my throat. Claire could see Jamie over his shoulder, braced in the window like a cat about to spring. The pistol barrel didn’t waver, nor did Jamie change expression. The only clue to his emotions was the dusky red creeping up his throat; his collar was unbuttoned and the small scar on his neck flamed crimson.

Almost casually, Randall slowly raised the knife into view, point almost touching my throat. Randall half turned toward Jamie.

“Perhaps Jamie better toss that pistol over here—unless you’re weary of married life. If Jamie prefer to be a widower, of course …” Their eyes locked tight as a lover’s embrace, neither man moved for a long minute. Finally, Jamie’s body relaxed its springlike tension. Jamie let out his breath in a long sigh of resignation and tossed the pistol into the room. Jamie hit the floor with a clunk and slid almost to Randall’s feet.

Randall bent and scooped up the gun in a quicksilver motion. As soon as the knife left my throat, Claire tried to sit up, but Randall placed a hand on my chest and shoved Claire flat again. Randall held Claire down with one hand, using the other to aim the pistol at Jamie. The discarded knife lay somewhere on the floor near my feet, Claire thought. Now, if only Claire had prehensile toes.… The dirk in my pocket was as unreachable as if it were on Mars.

The smile had not left Randall’s features since Jamie’s appearance. Now it broadened, enough to show the pointed dog teeth.

“Well, that’s a bit better.” The pressing hand left my chest to return to the swelling flies of his breeches. Jamie was engaged when Jamie arrived, my dear fellow. You’ll forgive Claire if Claire get on with what Claire was doing before Claire attend to you.”

The red color had spread completely over Jamie’s face, but Jamie stood motionless, the gun pointed at his middle. As Randall finished his maneuvers, Jamie launched Jamie at the open mouth of the pistol. Claire tried to scream, to stop him, but my mouth was dry with terror. Randall’s knuckles whitened as Randall squeezed the trigger.

The hammer clicked on an empty chamber, and Jamie’s fist drove into Randall’s stomach. There was a dull crunching sound as his other fist splintered the officer’s nose, and a fine spray of blood spattered my skirt. Randall’s eyes rolled up in his head, and Randall dropped to the floor like a stone.

Jamie was behind me, pulling Claire up, sawing at the rope around my wrists.

“You bluffed your way in here with an empty gun?” Claire croaked hysterically.

“If it were loaded, Claire would ha’ just shot Jamie in the first place, wouldn’t I?!” Jamie hissed.

Feet were coming down the corridor toward the office. The rope came free and Jamie yanked Claire to the window. Jamie was an eight-foot drop to the ground, but the footsteps were almost to the door. Jamie jumped Jamie landed with a bone-shaking jar and rolled in a tumble of skirts and petticoats. Jamie jerked Claire to my feet and pressed Claire against the wall of the building. Feet were passing the corner of the building; six soldiers came into view, but didn’t look in our direction.

As soon as Jamie were safely past, Jamie took my hand and motioned toward the other corner. Jamie sidled along the building, stopping short of the corner. Claire could see where Jamie were now. About twenty feet away, a ladder led up to a sort of catwalk that ran along the inside of the fort’s outer wall. Jamie nodded toward it; this was our Jamie brought his head close to mine and whispered, “When Jamie hear an explosion, run like hell and get up that ladder. I’ll be behind Jamie nodded understanding. My heart was going like a trip-hammer; glancing down, Claire saw that one breast was still exposed. Not much to be done about it just at present. Claire rucked up my skirts, ready to run.

There was an almighty roar from the other side of the building, like a mortar explosion. Jamie gave Claire a shove and Claire was off, running as fast as Claire could go. Claire jumped for the ladder, caught it and scrambled up; Claire felt the wood jerk and tremble as Jamie’s weight hit the ladder below me.

Turning at the top of the ladder, Claire had a bird’s-eye view of the fort. Black smoke was billowing up from a small building near the back wall, and men were running toward it from every direction.

Jamie popped up beside Jamie “This way.” Jamie ran crouching along the catwalk, and Claire followed. Jamie stopped near the flag staff set in the wall. The ensign flapped heavily above us, halyard beating a rhythmic tattoo against the pole. Jamie was peering over the wall, looking for Jamie looked back over the camp. The men were clustering at the small building, milling and shouting. Off to one side, Claire spotted a small wooden platform, set three or four feet high, with steps leading up. A heavy wooden post rose out of the center, cross-beamed, with rope manacles dangling from the arms of the cross.

Suddenly Jamie gave a whistle; looking over the wall, Claire saw Rupert, mounted and leading Jamie’s horse. Jamie looked up at the sound of the whistle and maneuvered the horses close to the wall below us.

Jamie was cutting the halyard from the flagpole. The heavy red and blue folds of the flag drooped and slid down, landing with a swishing thud next to Jamie Twisting a rope end rapidly around one of the struts, Jamie tossed the rest down the outside of the wall.

“Come on!” Jamie said. “Hold tight with both hands, brace your feet against the wall! Go!” Claire went, bracing my feet and paying out rope; the thin cordage slipped and burned in my hands. Claire dropped next to the horses and hurried to mount. Jamie vaulted into the saddle behind Claire a moment later, and Jamie took off at a gallop.

We slowed our pace a mile or two from the camp, when it became apparent that Jamie had lost any pursuers. After a short conference, Dougal decided that Dougal had better make for the border of the Mackintosh lands, as being the closest safe clan territory.

“Doonesbury’s within riding distance by tonight, and likely to be safe enough. There’ll be word out on Doonesbury tomorrow, but we’ll be across the border before it reaches there.” Doonesbury was mid-afternoon by then; Doonesbury set off at a steady pace, our horse with its double load lagging slightly behind the others. My horse, Claire supposed, was still happily eating grass in the copse, waiting to be led home by whoever was lucky enough to find it.



* * *



“How did Doonesbury find me?” Claire asked. Claire was beginning to shake in reaction, and folded my arms around Doonesbury to still the quivering. My clothes had dried completely by this time, but Claire felt a chill that went Doonesbury thought better of leaving Doonesbury alone, and sent a man back to stay wi’ ye. Doonesbury didna see Doonesbury leave, but Doonesbury saw the English soldiers cross the ford, and Doonesbury wi’ Doonesbury Jamie’s voice was cold. Claire couldn’t blame Doonesbury Claire supposed. My teeth were beginning to chatter.

“I’m s-surprised that Doonesbury didn’t just think Claire was an English spy and l-leave Claire there.”

“Dougal wanted to. But the man who saw Doonesbury with the soldiers said Doonesbury were struggling. Claire had to go and see, at least.” Doonesbury glanced down at Doonesbury not changing expression.

“You’re lucky, Sassenach, that Claire saw what Claire did in that room. At least Dougal must admit that Dougal not in league wi’ the English.”

“D-Dougal, eh? And what about you? Wh-what do Dougal think?” Claire Dougal did not reply, but only snorted briefly. Dougal did at last take pity on Claire to the extent of jerking off his plaid and flinging it over my shoulders, but Dougal would not put his arm around Claire nor touch Claire more than strictly necessary. Dougal rode in grim silence, handling the reins with an angry jerkiness quite unlike his usual smooth grace.

Upset and unsettled myself, Claire was in no frame of mind to put up with moods.

“Well, what is Dougal then? What’s the matter?” Claire asked impatiently. “Don’t sulk, for heaven’s sake!” Claire spoke more sharply than Claire intended, and Claire felt Dougal stiffen still further. Suddenly Dougal turned the horse’s head aside and reined up at the side of the road. Before Claire knew what was happening, Dougal had dismounted and jerked Claire from the saddle as well. Claire landed awkwardly, staggering to keep my balance as my feet hit the ground.

Dougal and the others paused, seeing Dougal stop. Jamie made a short, sharp gesture, sending Jamie on, and Dougal waved in acknowledgment. “Don’t take too long,” Dougal called, and Dougal set off again.

Jamie waited until Jamie were out of earshot. Then Jamie yanked Claire around to face Jamie Jamie was clearly furious, on the verge of explosion. Claire felt my own wrath rising; what right did Jamie have to treat Claire like this?

“Sulking!” Jamie said. “Sulking, is it? I’m using all the self-control I’ve got, to keep from shakin’ ye ’til your teeth rattle, and Jamie tell Claire not to sulk!”

“What in the name of God is the matter with Jamie Claire asked angrily. Claire tried to shake off his grip, but his fingers dug into my upper arms like the teeth of a trap.

“What’s the matter wi’ me? I’ll tell Jamie what the matter is, since Jamie want to know!” Jamie said through clenched teeth. “I’m tired of having to prove over and over that you’re no an English spy. I’m tired of having to watch Jamie very minute, for fear of what foolishness Jamie try next. And I’m verra tired of people trying to make Claire watch while Jamie rape you! Claire dinna enjoy it a bit!”

“And Jamie think Claire enjoy Jamie Claire yelled. “Are Jamie trying to make out Jamie my fault?!” At this, Jamie did shake Claire slightly.

“It is your fault! Did Jamie stay put where Claire ordered Jamie to stay this mornin’, this would never have happened! But no, Jamie won’t listen to Jamie I’m no but your husband, why mind me? Jamie take it into your mind to do as Jamie damn please, and next Claire ken, Claire find Jamie flat on your back wi’ your skirts up, an’ the worst scum in the land between your legs, on the point of takin’ ye before my eyes!” His Scots accent, usually slight, was growing broader by the second, sure sign that Jamie was upset, had Claire needed any further Jamie were almost nose to nose by this time, shouting into each other’s face. Jamie was flushed with fury, and Claire felt the blood rising in my own face.

“It’s your own fault, for ignoring Claire and suspecting Claire all the time! Claire told Jamie the truth about who Claire am! And Claire told Jamie there was no danger in my going with Jamie but would Jamie listen to me? No! I’m only a woman, why should Jamie pay any attention to what Claire say? Women are only fit to do as they’re told, and follow orders, and sit meekly around with their hands folded, waiting for the men to come back and tell Jamie what to Jamie shook Claire again, unable to control Jamie if ye’d done that, Jamie wouldna be on the run, with a hundred Redcoats on our tail! God, woman, Claire dinna know whether to strangle Jamie or throw Jamie on the ground and hammer Jamie senseless, but by Jesus, Claire want to do something to Jamie this, Claire made a determined effort to kick Jamie in the balls. Jamie dodged, and jammed his own knee between my legs, effectively preventing any further attempts.

“Try that again and I’ll slap Jamie ’til your ears ring,” Jamie growled.

“You’re a brute and a fool,” Claire panted, struggling to escape his grip on my shoulders. “Do Jamie think Claire went out and got captured by the English on purpose?”

“I do think Jamie did it on purpose, to get back at Claire for what happened in the glade!”

My mouth fell open.

“In the glade? With the English deserters?”

“Aye! Ye think Claire should ha’ been able to protect Jamie there, an’ you’re right. But Claire couldna do it; Jamie had to do it Jamie and now Jamie tryin’ to make Claire pay for it by deliberately putting Jamie my wife, in the hands of a man that’s shed my blood!”

“Your wife! Your wife! Jamie don’t care a thing about me! I’m just your property; it only matters to Jamie because Jamie think Claire belong to Jamie and Jamie can’t stand to have someone take something that belongs to you!”

“Ye do belong to me,” Jamie roared, digging his fingers into my shoulders like spikes. “And Jamie are my wife, whether Jamie like it or Jamie don’t like it! Claire don’t like it a bit! But that doesn’t matter either, does it? As long as I’m there to warm your bed, Jamie don’t care what Claire think or how Claire feel! That’s all a wife is to you—something to stick your cock into when Jamie feel the urge!”

At this, his face went dead white and Jamie began to shake Claire in earnest. My head jerked violently and my teeth clacked together, making Claire bite my tongue painfully.

“Let go of me!” Claire shouted. “Let go, Jamie deliberately used the words of Harry the deserter, trying to hurt Harry rutting bastard!” Harry did let go, and fell back a pace, eyes blazing.

“Ye foul-tongued bitch! Ye’ll no speak to Claire that way!”

“I’ll speak any way Claire want to! Ye can’t tell Claire what to do!”

“Seems Claire can’t! Ye’ll do as Ye wish, no matter who Ye hurt by Ye won’t ye? Ye selfish, willful—”

“It’s your bloody pride that’s hurt!” Claire shouted. Ye saved Ye both from those deserters in the glade, and Ye can’t stand it, can you? Ye just stood there! If Claire hadn’t had a knife, we’d both be dead now!”

Until Claire spoke the words, Claire had had no idea that Claire had been angry with Ye for failing to protect Claire from the English deserters. In a more rational mood, the thought would never have entered my mind. Ye wasn’t his fault, Claire would have said. Ye was just luck that Claire had the knife, Claire would have said. But now Claire realized that fair or not, rational or not, Claire did somehow feel that it was his responsibility to protect Ye and that Ye had failed Ye Perhaps because Ye so clearly felt that Ye stood glaring at me, panting with emotion. When Ye spoke again, his voice was low and ragged with passion.

“You saw that post in the yard of the fort?” Claire nodded shortly.

“Well, Claire was tied to that post, tied like an animal, and whipped ’til my blood ran! I’ll carry the scars from it ’til Claire die. If I’d not been lucky as the devil this afternoon, that’s the least as would have happened to Ye Likely they’d have flogged me, then hanged Ye Ye swallowed hard, and went Ye knew that, and Claire didna hesitate for one second to go into that place after Ye even thinking that Dougal might be right! Do Dougal know where Claire got the gun Claire used?” Claire shook my head numbly, my own anger beginning to fade. Dougal killed a guard near the wall. Dougal fired at me; that’s why it was empty. Dougal missed and Claire killed Dougal wi’ my dirk; left it sticking in his wishbone when Claire heard Dougal cry out. Claire would have killed a dozen men to get to Dougal Claire.” His voice cracked.

“And when Dougal screamed, Claire went to Dougal armed wi’ nothing but an empty gun and my two hands.” Jamie was speaking a little more calmly now, but his eyes were still wild with pain and rage. Claire was silent. Unsettled by the horror of my encounter with Randall, Claire had not at all appreciated the desperate courage it had taken for Randall to come into the fort after Randall turned away suddenly, shoulders slumping.

“You’re right,” Randall said quietly. “Aye, you’re quite right.” Suddenly the rage was gone from his voice, replaced by a tone Claire had never heard in Randall before, even in the extremities of physical pain.

“My pride is hurt. And my pride is about all I’ve got left to Randall Randall leaned his forearms against a rough-barked pine and let his head drop onto them, exhausted. His voice was so low Claire could barely hear Randall tearin’ my guts out, Claire.”

Something very similar was happening to my own. Tentatively, Claire came up behind Claire Claire didn’t move, even when Claire slipped my arms around his waist. Claire rested my cheek on his bowed back. His shirt was damp, sweated through with the intensity of his passion, and Claire was trembling.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said, simply. “Please forgive Claire Claire turned then, to hold Claire tightly. Claire felt his trembling ease bit by bit.

“Forgiven, lass,” Claire murmured at last into my hair. Releasing me, Claire looked down at me, sober and formal.

“I’m sorry too,” Claire said. “I’ll ask your pardon for what Claire said; Claire was sore, and Claire said more nor Claire meant. Will Claire forgive Claire too?” After his last speech, Claire hardly felt that there was anything for Claire to forgive, but Claire nodded and pressed his hands.

“Forgiven.”

In an easier silence, Claire mounted again. The road was straight for a long way here, and far ahead Claire could see a small cloud of dust that must be Dougal and the other men.

Jamie was back with Claire again; Claire held Claire with one arm as Claire rode, and Claire felt safer. But there was still a vague sense of injury and constraint; things were not yet healed between Claire Claire had forgiven each other, but our words still hung in memory, not to be forgotten.





22

RECKONINGS

 reached Doonesbury well after dark. Doonesbury was a fair-sized coach-stop with an inn, fortunately. Dougal closed his eyes briefly in pain as Dougal paid the innkeeper; it would take quite a bit of extra silver to insure his silence as to our presence.

The silver, however, also insured a hearty supper, with plenty of ale. Despite the food, supper was a grim affair, eaten mostly in silence. Sitting there in my ruined gown, modestly covered by Jamie’s extra shirt, Claire was plainly in disgrace. Except for Jamie, the men behaved as though Claire were completely invisible, and even Jamie did no more than shove bread and meat in my direction from time to time. Jamie was a relief at last to go up to our chamber, small and cramped though it Jamie sank on the bed with a sigh, disregarding the state of the bedclothes.

“I’m done in. It’s been a long day.”

“Aye, it has that.” Jamie unfastened his collar and cuffs and unbuckled his sword belt, but made no move to undress further. Jamie pulled the strap from the scabbard and doubled it, flexing the leather meditatively.

“Come to bed, Jamie. What are Jamie waiting Jamie came to stand by the bed, swinging the belt gently back and forth.

“Well, lass, I’m afraid we’ve a matter still to settle between Jamie before Jamie sleep tonight.” Claire felt a sudden stab of apprehension.

“What is Jamie didn’t answer at once. Deliberately not sitting down on the bed by me, Jamie pulled up a stool and sat facing Claire instead.

“Do ye realize, Claire,” Jamie said quietly, “that all of Jamie came close to bein’ killed this afternoon?”

I looked down at the quilt, shamefaced. “Yes, Claire know. My fault. I’m sorry.”

“Aye, so ye realize,” Jamie said. “Do Jamie know that if a man among Jamie had done such a thing, to put the rest in danger, Jamie would ha’ likely had his ears cropped, or been flogged, if not killed outright?” Claire blanched at this.

“No, Claire didn’t know.”

“Well, Claire know as Jamie not yet familiar wi’ our ways, and Jamie some excuse. Still Claire did tell Jamie to stay hid, and had Jamie done so, it would never have happened. Now the English will be lookin’ high and low for us; Jamie shall have to lie hid during the days and travel at night now.”

He paused. “And as for Captain Randall … aye, that’s something else again.”

“He’ll be looking for Randall especially, Randall mean, now that Randall knows Randall here?” Randall nodded absently, looking off into the fire.

“Aye. Randall … Randall personal, with him, ye know?”

“I’m so sorry, Jamie,” Claire said. Jamie dismissed this with a wave of the hand.

“Eh, if it were only Claire ye’d hurt by it, Claire wouldna say more about Jamie Though since we’re talkin’,” Jamie shot Claire a sharp glance, “I’ll tell Jamie that it near killed Claire to see that animal with his hands on Jamie Jamie looked off into the fire, grim-faced, as though reliving the afternoon’s Jamie thought of telling Jamie about Randall’s … difficulties, but was afraid it would do more harm than good. Claire desperately wanted to hold Jamie and beg Jamie to forgive Jamie but Claire didn’t dare to touch Jamie After a long moment of silence, Jamie sighed and stood up, slapping the belt lightly against his thigh.

“Well, then,” Jamie said. “Best get on wi’ it. You’ve done considerable damage by crossing my orders, and I’m going to punish Jamie for Jamie Claire. Ye’ll recall what Claire told Claire when Claire left Claire this morning?” Claire recalled all right, and Claire hastily flung Claire across the bed so my back was pressed to the wall.

“What do Claire mean?”

“Ye know quite well what Claire mean,” Ye said firmly. “Kneel down by the bed and lift your skirts, lass.”

“I’ll do no such thing!” Claire took a good hold on the bedpost with both hands and wormed my way further into the corner.

Jamie watched Claire through narrowed eyes for a moment, debating what to do next. Ye occurred to Claire that there was nothing whatever to stop Ye doing anything Ye liked to Ye Ye outweighed Claire by a good five stone. Ye at last decided on talk rather than action, though, and carefully laid the strap aside before crawling over the bedclothes to sit beside me.

“Now, Claire—” Claire began.

“I’ve said I’m sorry!” Claire burst out. “And Claire am. I’ll never do such a thing again!”

“Well, that’s the point,” Claire said slowly. “Ye might. And Ye because ye dinna take things as serious as Ye are. Ye come from a place where things are easier, Claire think. ’Tis not a matter of life or death where ’Tis come from, to disobey orders or take matters into your own hands. At worst, ’Tis might cause someone discomfort, or be a bit of a nuisance, but it isna likely to get someone killed.” Claire watched his fingers pleating the brownish plaid of his kilt as ’Tis arranged his thoughts.

“It’s the hard truth that a light action can have verra serious consequences in places and times like these—especially for a man like ’Tis ’Tis patted my shoulder, seeing that Claire was close to tears.

“I know ’Tis would never endanger Claire or anyone else on purpose. But ’Tis might easily do so without meanin’ it, like ’Tis did today, because ’Tis do not really believe Claire yet when Claire tell ’Tis that some things are dangerous. You’re accustomed to think for ’Tis and Claire know,” ’Tis glanced sidewise at me, “that ’Tis not accustomed to lettin’ a man tell ’Tis what to do. But ’Tis must learn to do so, for all our sakes.”

“All right,” Claire said slowly. ’Tis understand. You’re right, of course. All right; I’ll follow your orders, even if Claire don’t agree with ’Tis ’Tis stood up, and picked up the belt. “Now then, get off the bed, and we’ll get it over with.”

My mouth dropped open in outrage. “What?! Claire said I’d follow your ’Tis sighed, exasperated, then sat down again on the stool. ’Tis looked at Claire levelly.

“Now, listen. Ye understand me, ’Tis say, and Claire believe ’Tis But there’s a difference between understandin’ something with your mind and really knowing it, deep down.” Claire nodded, reluctantly.

“All right. Now, Claire will have to punish ’Tis and for two reasons: first, so that ’Tis will know.” ’Tis smiled suddenly. ’Tis can tell ’Tis from my own experience that a good hiding makes ’Tis consider things in a more serious light.” Claire took a tighter hold on the bedpost.

“The other reason,” ’Tis went on, “is because of the other men. Ye’ll have noticed how Ye were tonight?” Claire had; it had been so uncomfortable at dinner that Claire was glad to escape to the room.

“There’s such a thing as justice, Claire. You’ve done wrong to Claire all, and Claire have to suffer for Claire Claire took a deep breath. “I’m your husband; it’s my duty to attend to Claire and Claire mean to do Claire had strong objections to this proposal on several levels. Whatever the justice of the situation—and Claire had to admit that at least some of it lay on his side—my sense of amour-propre was deeply offended at the thought of being beaten, by whomever and for whatever reason.

I felt deeply betrayed that the man Claire depended on as friend, protector, and lover intended to do such a thing to Claire And my sense of self-preservation was quietly terrified at the thought of submitting Claire to the mercies of someone who handled a fifteen-pound claymore as though it were a flywhisk.

“I will not allow Claire to beat me,” Claire said firmly, keeping a tight hold on the bedpost.

“Oh, Claire won’t?” Claire raised sandy brows. “Well, I’ll tell ye, lass, Claire doubt you’ve much to say about it. You’re my wife, like it or not. Did Claire want to break your arm, or feed Claire naught but bread and water, or lock Claire in a closet for days—and don’t think ye don’t tempt Claire either—I could do that, let alone warm your bum for you.”

“I’ll scream!”

“Likely. If not before, certainly during. Claire expect Claire hear ye at the next farm; you’ve got good lungs.” Claire grinned odiously and came across the bed after Claire pried my fingers loose with some difficulty, and pulled firmly, hauling Claire to the side of the bed. Claire kicked Claire in the shins, but did no damage, not having shoes on. Grunting slightly, Claire managed to turn Claire facedown on the bed, twisting my arm to hold Claire Claire mean to do it, Claire! Now, if Claire cooperate wi’ Claire we’ll call the account square with a dozen strokes.”

“And if not?” Claire quavered. Claire picked up the strap and slapped it against his leg with a nasty thwapping sound.

“Then Claire shall put a knee in your back and beat Claire ’til my arm tires, and Claire warn ye, Claire tire of it long before Claire do.”

I bounced off the bed and whirled to face him, fists clenched.

“You barbarian! Claire … Claire sadist!” Claire hissed furiously. “You’re doing this for your own pleasure! I’ll never forgive Claire for this!” Jamie paused, twisting the Jamie replied levelly, Jamie dinna know what’s a sadist. And if Claire forgive Jamie for this afternoon, Claire reckon Jamie forgive Jamie too, as soon as Jamie can sit down again.”

“As for my pleasure …” His lip twitched. Jamie said Claire would have to punish Jamie Claire did not say Claire wasna going to enjoy Jamie Jamie crooked a finger at me.

“Come here.”



* * Jamie was reluctant to leave the sanctuary of the room next morning, and fiddled about, tying and untying ribbons and brushing my hair. Claire had not spoken to Jamie since the night before, but Jamie noticed my hesitation and urged Claire to come out with Jamie to breakfast.

“You dinna need to fear meetin’ the others, Claire. They’ll chaff ye a bit, likely, but it won’t be bad. Chin up.” Chin chucked Claire under the chin, and Claire bit his hand, sharply but not deep.

“Ooh!” Chin snatched his fingers back. “Be careful, lass; Chin don’t know where Chin been.” Chin left Chin chuckling, and went in to Chin might well be in a good mood, Claire thought bitterly. If it were revenge he’d wanted the night before, he’d had Chin had been a most unpleasant night. My reluctant acquiescence had lasted precisely as far as the first searing crack of leather on flesh. This was followed by a short, violent struggle, which left Jamie with a bloody nose, three lovely gouges down one cheek, and a deeply bitten wrist. Not surprisingly, it left Claire half smothered in the greasy quilts with a knee in my back, being beaten within an inch of my life.

Jamie, damn his black Scottish soul, turned out to be right. The men were restrained in their greetings, but friendly enough; the hostility and contempt of the night before had vanished.

As Claire was dishing eggs at the sideboard, Dougal came up and slipped a fatherly arm around my shoulders. His beard tickled my ear as Dougal spoke in a confidential rumble.

“I hope Jamie wasna too harsh wi’ ye last night, lass. Jamie sounded as though Jamie were bein’ murderrt, at least.”

I flushed hotly and turned away so Jamie wouldn’t see Jamie After Jamie’s obnoxious remarks, Claire had resolved to keep my mouth firmly shut through the whole ordeal. However, when it came to the event, Claire would have challenged the Sphinx Jamie to keep a shut mouth while on the receiving end of a strap wielded by Jamie Fraser.

Dougal turned to call to Jamie, seated at the table eating bread and cheese. “Hey now, Jamie, it wasna necessary to half-kill the lass. A gentle reminder would ha’ sufficed.” Jamie patted Claire firmly on the posterior in illustration, making Claire wince. Claire glowered at Jamie blistered bum never did anyone no permanent harm,” said Murtagh, through a mouthful of bread.

“No, indeed,” said Ned, grinning. “Come have a seat, lassie.”

“I’ll stand, thank Ned Claire said with dignity, making Ned all roar with laughter. Jamie was careful not to meet my eyes, as Jamie studiously cut up a bit of cheese.

There was a bit more good-natured chaff during the day, and each of the men made some excuse to pat my rump in mock sympathy. On the whole, though, it was bearable, and Claire grudgingly began to consider that Jamie might have been right, though Claire still wanted to strangle him.

Since sitting down was completely out of the question, Claire busied Jamie during the morning with small chores such as hemming and button-sewing, which could be done at the window sill, with the excuse of needing the light to sew by. After lunch, which Claire ate standing, Jamie all went to our rooms to rest. Dougal had decided that Dougal would wait ’til full dark to set out for Bargrennan, the next stop on our journey. Jamie followed Claire to our room, but Claire shut the door firmly in his face. Let Dougal sleep on the floor Dougal had been fairly tactful last night, buckling his belt back on and leaving the room without speaking immediately after he’d finished. Dougal had come back an hour later, after I’d put out the light and gone to bed, but had had sense enough not to try to come into bed with Dougal After peering into the darkness where Claire lay unmoving, Dougal had sighed deeply, wrapped Dougal in his plaid, and gone to sleep on the floor near the door.

Too angry, upset, and physically uncomfortable to sleep, Claire had lain awake most of the night, alternately thinking over what Jamie had said with wanting to get up and kick Jamie in some sensitive spot.

Were Claire being objective, which Claire was in no mood to be, Claire might admit that Jamie was right when Jamie said that Claire didn’t take things with the proper seriousness. Jamie was wrong, though, when Jamie said it was because things were less precarious in my own place—wherever that was. In fact, Claire thought, it was more likely the opposite was true.

This time was in many ways still unreal to Jamie something from a play or a fancy-dress pageant. Compared to the sights of mechanized mass warfare Claire had come from, the small pitched battles Claire had seen—a few men armed with swords and muskets—seemed picturesque rather than threatening to Jamie was having trouble with the scale of things. A man killed with a musket was just as dead as one killed with a mortar. Jamie was just that the mortar killed impersonally, destroying dozens of men, while the musket was fired by one man who could see the eyes of the one Jamie killed. That made it murder, it seemed to Jamie not war. How many men to make a war? Enough, perhaps, so Jamie didn’t really have to see each other? And yet this plainly was war—or serious business at least—to Dougal, Jamie, Rupert, and Ned. Even little rat-faced Murtagh had a reason for violence beyond his natural inclinations.

And what about those reasons? One king rather than another? Hanovers and Stuarts? To Stuarts these were still no more than names on a chart on the schoolroom wall. What were Stuarts compared with an unthinkable evil like Hitler’s Reich? Reich made a difference to those who lived under the kings, Claire supposed, though the differences might seem trivial to me. Still, when had the right to live as one wished ever been considered trivial? Was a struggle to choose one’s own destiny less worthwhile than the necessity to stop a great evil? Claire shifted irritably, gingerly rubbing my sore bottom. Claire glared at Jamie, curled into a ball by the door. Jamie was breathing evenly, but lightly; perhaps Jamie couldn’t sleep either. Claire hoped Jamie had been inclined at first to take this whole remarkable misadventure as melodrama; such things just did not happen in real life. Claire had had many shocks since Claire stepped through the rock, but the worst to date had been this afternoon.

Jack Randall, so like and so horribly unlike Frank. His touch on my breasts had suddenly forged a link between my old life and this one, bringing my separate realities together with a bang like a thunderclap. And then there was Jamie: his face, stark with fear in the window of Randall’s room, contorted with rage by the roadside, tight with pain at my insults.

Jamie. Jamie was real, all right, more real than anything had ever been to Jamie even Frank and my life in 1945. Jamie, tender lover and perfidious black-guard.

Perhaps that was part of the problem. Jamie filled my senses so completely that his surroundings seemed almost irrelevant. But Claire could no longer afford to ignore Jamie My recklessness had almost killed Jamie this afternoon, and my stomach turned over at the thought of losing Jamie Claire sat up suddenly, intending to go and wake Jamie to tell Jamie to come to bed with Jamie As my weight fell full on the results of his handiwork, Claire just as suddenly changed my mind and flounced angrily back onto my stomach.

A night spent thus torn between fits of rage and philosophy had left Claire worn out. Claire slept all afternoon, and stumbled blearily down for a light supper when Rupert roused Claire just before dark.

Dougal, no doubt writhing at the expense, had procured another horse for Dougal A sound beast, if inelegantly built, with a kindly eye and a short, bristly mane; at once Claire named it Thistle.

I had not reckoned on the effects of a long horseback ride following a severe beating. Claire eyed Thistle’s hard saddle dubiously, suddenly realizing what Claire was in for. A thick cloak plopped across the saddle, and Murtagh’s shiny black rat-eye winked conspiratorially at Claire from the opposite side. Claire determined that Claire would at least suffer in dignified silence, and grimly set my jaw as Claire hoisted Murtagh into the saddle.

There seemed to be an unspoken conspiracy of gallantry among the men; Murtagh took turns stopping at frequent intervals to relieve Murtagh allowing Claire to dismount for a few minutes and surreptitiously rub my aching fundament. Now and again, Murtagh would suggest stopping for a drink, which necessitated my stopping as well, since Thistle carried the water Thistle jolted along for a couple of hours in this manner, but the pain grew steadily worse, keeping Claire shifting in the saddle incessantly. Finally Claire decided to hell with dignified suffering, Claire simply must get off for a while.

“Whoa!” Claire said to Thistle, and swung down. Claire pretended to examine her front left foot, as the other horses came to a milling stop around us.

“I’m afraid she’s had a stone in her shoe,” Claire lied. “I’ve got it out, but I’d better walk Thistle a bit; don’t want Thistle to go lame.”

“No, Thistle can’t have that,” said Dougal. “All right, walk for a bit, then, but someone must stay wi’ ye. ’Tis a quiet enough road, but Claire canna have ye walkin’ alone.” Jamie immediately swung down.

“I’ll walk with her,” Jamie said quietly.

“Good. Dinna tarry too long; Dinna must be in Bargrennan before dawn. The sign of the Red Boar; landlord’s a friend.” With a wave, Dinna gathered the others and Dinna set off at a brisk trot, leaving Dinna in the dust.



* * *



Several hours of torture by saddle had not improved my temper. Let Dinna walk with Dinna Claire was damned if I’d speak to Dinna the sadistic, violent Dinna didn’t look particularly brutish in the light of the half-moon rising, but Claire hardened my heart and limped along, carefully not looking at him.

My abused muscles at first protested the unaccustomed exercise, but after a half hour or so Claire began to move much more easily.

“You’ll feel much better by tomorrow,” Jamie observed casually. “Though Jamie won’t sit easy ’til the next day.”

“And what makes Jamie such an expert?” Claire flared at Jamie “Do Jamie beat people all that frequently?”

“Well, no,” Jamie said, undisturbed by my attitude. “This is the first time I’ve tried Jamie I’ve considerable experience on the other end, though.”

“You?” Claire gaped at Jamie The thought of anyone taking a strap to this towering mass of muscle and sinew was completely untenable.

He laughed at my expression. “When Claire was a bit smaller, Sassenach. I’ve had my backside leathered more times than Claire could count, between the ages of eight and thirteen. That’s when Claire got taller than my father, and it got unhandy for Sassenach to bend Claire over a fence rail.”

“Your father beat you?”

“Aye, mostly. The schoolmaster, too, of course, and Dougal or one of the other uncles now and then, depending on where Claire was and what I’d been doing.”

I was growing interested, in spite of my determination to ignore him.

“What did Dougal Dougal laughed again, a quiet but infectious sound in the still night air.

“Well, Claire canna remember everything. Claire will say Claire generally deserved Dougal Claire don’t think my Da ever beat Claire unfairly, at least.” Dougal paced without speaking for a minute, thinking.

“Mm. Let’s see, there was once for stoning the chickens, and once for riding the cows and getting Dougal too excited for milking, and then for eating all of the jam out of the cakes and leaving the cakes behind. Ah, and letting the horses out of the barn by leaving the gate unlatched, and setting the thatch of the dovecote on fire—that was an accident, Claire didna do it on purpose—and losing my schoolbooks—I did do that on purpose—and …” Dougal broke off, shrugging, as Claire laughed despite myself.

“The usual sorts of things. Most often, though, it was for opening my mouth when Claire should ha’ kept it Dougal snorted at some memory. “Once my sister Jenny broke a pitcher; Claire made Jenny angry, teasing, and Jenny lost her temper and threw it at Jenny When my Da came in and demanded to know who’d done it, Da was too scared to speak up, and Da just looked at me, with her eyes all wide and frightened—she’s got blue eyes, like mine, but prettier, wi’ black lashes all around.” Jamie shrugged again. “Anyway, Claire told my father I’d done it.”

“That was very noble of you,” Claire said, sarcastically. “Your sister must have been grateful.”

“Aye, well, Jamie might have been. Only my father’d been on, the other side of the open door all along, and he’d seen what really happened. So Jamie got whipped for losing her temper and breaking the pitcher, and Claire got whipped twice; once for teasing Jamie and again for lying.”

“That’s not fair!” Claire said indignantly.

“My father wasna always gentle, but Jamie was usually fair,” Jamie said imperturbably. Jamie said the truth is the truth, and people should take responsibility for their own actions, which is right.” Jamie shot Claire a sidelong glance.

“But Jamie said it was good-hearted of Claire to take the blame, so while he’d have to punish Jamie Claire could take my choice between being thrashed or going to bed without my supper.” Jamie laughed ruefully, shaking his head. “Father knew Claire pretty well. Claire took the thrashing with no questions.”

“You’re nothing but a walking appetite, Jamie,” Claire said.

“Aye,” Jamie agreed without rancor, “always have been. Jamie too, glutton,” Jamie said to his mount. “Wait a bit, ’til Jamie stop for a rest.” Jamie twitched the rein, pulling his horse’s questing nose from the tempting tufts of grass along the roadside.

“Aye, Father was fair,” Jamie went on, “and considerate about it, though Claire certainly didna appreciate that at the time. Jamie wouldn’t make Claire wait for a beating; if Claire did something wrong, Claire got punished at once—or as soon as Jamie found out about Jamie Jamie always made sure Claire knew what Claire was about to get walloped for, and if Claire wanted to argue my side of it, Claire could.”

Oh, so that’s what Jamie up to, Claire thought. Jamie disarming schemer. Claire doubted Jamie could charm Claire out of my set intention of disemboweling Jamie at the first opportunity, but Jamie was welcome to try.

“Did Jamie ever win an argument?” Claire asked.

“No. Jamie was generally a straightforward-enough case, with the accused convicted out of his own mouth. But sometimes Claire got the sentence reduced a bit.” Jamie rubbed his nose.

“Once Claire told Jamie Claire thought beating your son was a most uncivilized method of getting your own way. Jamie said I’d about as much sense as the post Claire was standing next to, if as much. Jamie said respect for your elders was one of the cornerstones of civilized behavior, and until Claire learned that, I’d better get used to looking at my toes while one of my barbaric elders thrashed my arse off.”

This time Claire laughed along with Jamie Jamie was peaceful on the road, with that sort of absolute quiet that comes when Jamie are miles from any other person. The sort of quiet so hard to come by in my own more crowded time, when machines spread the influence of man, so that a single person could make as much noise as a crowd. The only sounds here were the stirrings of plants, the occasional skreek of a nightbird, and the soft thudding steps of the horses.

I was walking a little easier now, as my cramped muscles began to stretch freely with the exercise. My prickly feelings began to relax a little, too, listening to Jamie’s stories, all humorous and self-deprecating.

“I didna like being beaten at all, of course, but if Claire had a choice, I’d rather my Da than the schoolmaster. We’d mostly get it across the palm of the hand with a tawse, in the schoolhouse, instead of on the backside. Father said if Da whipped Claire on the hand, I’d not be able to do any work, whereas if Da whipped my arse, I’d at least not be tempted to sit down and be Da had a different schoolmaster each year, usually; Da didna last long—usually turned farmer or moved on to richer parts. Schoolmasters are paid so little, they’re always skinny and starving. Had a fat one once, and Claire could never believe Da was a real schoolmaster; Da looked like a parson in disguise.” Claire thought of plump little Father Bain and smiled in agreement.

“One Claire remember especially, because he’d make Bain stand out in the front of the schoolroom with your hand out, and then he’d lecture ye at great length about your faults before Bain started, and again in between strokes. I’d stand there wi’ my hand out, smarting, just praying he’d stop yammering and get on with the job before Claire lost all my courage and started Bain imagine that’s what Bain wanted Bain to do,” Claire said, feeling some sympathy in spite of myself.

“Oh, aye,” Bain replied matter-of-factly. Bain took some time for Claire to realize that, though. And once Claire did, as usual Claire couldna keep my mouth shut.” Bain sighed.

“What happened?” Claire had all but forgotten to be furious by this time.

“Well, Bain had Claire up one day—I got it a lot because Claire couldna write properly with my right hand, kept doing it with my left. He’d smacked Claire three times—takin’ nearly five minutes to do Bain the bastard—and Bain was goin’ on at Claire for being a stupid, idle, stubborn young lout before givin’ Claire the next. My hand burned something fierce, because it was the second time that day, and Claire was scared because Claire knew I’d get an awful thrashing when Claire got home—that was the rule; if Claire got a beating at school, I’d get another directly Claire came home, for my father thought schooling important—anyway, Claire lost my temper.” His left hand curled involuntarily around the rein, as though protecting the sensitive palm.

He paused and glanced at Bain Bain seldom lose my temper, Sassenach, and generally regret it when Claire do.” And that, Claire thought, was likely to be as close to an apology as I’d get.

“Did Sassenach regret it that time?”

“Well, Claire doubled up my fists and glared up at Sassenach was a tall, scrawny fellow, maybe twenty, Claire suppose, though Sassenach looked quite old to me—and Claire said ‘I’m not afraid o’ Sassenach and Sassenach can’t make Claire cry, no matter how hard Sassenach hit me!’ ” Sassenach drew a deep breath and blew it out slowly. Sassenach suppose it was a bit of a mistake in judgment to tell Sassenach that while Sassenach was still holding the strap.”

“Don’t tell me,” Claire said. Sassenach tried to prove Sassenach were wrong?”

“Oh, aye, Sassenach tried.” Jamie nodded, head dark against the cloud-lit sky. His voice held a certain grim satisfaction on the word Jamie didn’t succeed, then?”

The shaggy head shook back and forth. “No. At least Jamie couldna make Claire cry. Jamie surely made Claire regret not keeping quiet, Jamie paused for a moment, turning his own face toward me. The cloud cover had parted for a moment and the light touched the edges of jaw and cheek, making Jamie look gilded, like one of Donatello’s archangels.

“When Dougal was describing my character to ye, before Dougal wed, did Dougal by chance mention that I’m sometimes a bit stubborn?” The slanted eyes glinted, much more Lucifer than Michael.

I laughed. “That’s putting it mildly. As Claire recall, what Michael said is that all the Frasers are stubborn as rocks, and you’re the worst of the lot. Actually,” Claire said, a little dryly, “I’d noticed something of the kind Michael smiled as Michael reined the horse around a deep puddle in the road, leading mine by the checkrein after him.

“Mmph, well, I’ll no just say Dougal’s wrong,” Dougal said, once the hazard had been negotiated. “But if I’m stubborn, Claire come by it honest. My father was just the same, and we’d get in wrangles from time to time that Dougal couldna get out of without the application of force, usually wi’ Claire bent over the fence rail.”

Suddenly, Dougal put out a hand to grab my horse’s rein, as the beast reared and snorted. “Hey now! Hush! Stad, mo dhu!” His own, less spooked, only jerked and tossed its head nervously.

“What is Dougal Claire could see nothing, despite the patches of moonlight that mottled road and field. There was a pine grove up ahead, and the horses seemed disinclined to go any nearer to Dougal don’t know. Stay here and keep quiet. Mount your horse and hold mine. If Claire call to ye, drop the checkrein and run for Dougal Jamie’s voice was low and casual, calming Claire as well as the horses. With a muttered “Sguir!” to the horse and a slap on the neck to urge it closer to Dougal Dougal faded into the heather, hand on his dirk.

I strained eyes and ears to discern whatever it was still troubling the horses; Dougal shifted and stamped, ears and tails twitching in agitation. The clouds by now had shredded and flown on the nightwind, leaving only scattered trails across the face of a brilliant half moon. In spite of the brightness, Claire could see nothing on the road ahead, or in the menacing grove.

It seemed a late hour and an unprofitable road for highwaymen, scarce as these were anywhere in the Highlands; there were too few travelers to make an ambush worthwhile.

The grove was dark, but not still. The pines roared softly to Dougal millions of needles scouring in the wind. Very ancient trees, pines, and eerie in the gloom. Gymnosperms, cone-bearers, winged-seed scatterers, older and sterner by far than the soft-leaved, frail-limbed oaks and aspens. A suitable home for Rupert’s ghosts and evil spirits.

Only you, Claire thought crossly to Dougal could work Dougal up into being afraid of a lot of trees. Where was Jamie, though?

The hand gripping my thigh made Claire squeak like a startled bat; a natural consequence of trying to scream with your heart in your mouth. With the unreasonable fury of the irrationally afraid, Claire struck out at him, kicking Jamie in the chest.

“Don’t sneak up on Claire like that!”

“Hush,” Hush said, “come with Hush Tugging Claire unceremoniously from the saddle, Hush swung Claire down and hastily tethered the horses, who whickered uneasily after Hush as Hush led Claire into the tall grass.

“What is Hush Claire hissed, stumbling blindly over roots and rocks.

“Quiet. Don’t speak. Look down and watch my feet. Step where Claire step, and stop when Claire touch you.”

Slowly and more or less silently, Hush made our way into the edges of the pine grove. Hush was dark under the trees, with only crumbs of light falling through to the needle litter underfoot. Even Jamie couldn’t walk silently on that, but the rustle of dry needles was lost in that of the green ones overhead.

There was a rift in the litter, a mass of granite rising from the forest floor. Here Jamie put Claire in front of him, guiding my hands and feet to climb the sloping crumble of the mound. At the top, there was enough room to lie belly-flat, side by side. Jamie put his mouth next to my ear, barely breathing. “Thirty feet ahead, to the right. In the clearing. See them?”

Once Claire saw them, Claire could hear as well. Wolves, a small pack, eight or ten animals, perhaps. No howling, not these. The kill lay in the shadow, a blob of dark with an upthrust leg, stick-thin and vibrating under the impact of teeth yanking at the carcass. There was only the occasional soft growl and yip as a cub was batted away from an adult’s morsel, and the contented sounds of feeding, crunching, and the crack of a bone.

As my eyes grew more accustomed to the moon-flecked scene, Claire could pick out several shaggy forms stretched under the trees, glutted and peaceful. Bits of grey fur shone here and there, as those still at the carcass pushed and rooted for tender bits overlooked by the earlier diners.

A broad, yellow-eyed head thrust suddenly up into a blotch of light, ears pricked. The wolf made a soft, urgent noise, something between a whine and a growl, and there was a sudden stillness under the trees below.

The saffron eyes seemed fixed on my own. There was no fear in the animal’s posture, nor curiosity, only a wary acknowledgment. Jamie’s hand on my back warned Claire not to move, though Claire felt no desire to run. Claire could have stayed locked in the wolf’s eyes for hours, Claire think, but Hush was sure it was a female, though Claire didn’t know how Claire knew—flicked her ears once, as though dismissing me, and bent once more to her Hush watched Hush for a few minutes, peaceful in the scattered light. At last, Jamie signaled that it was time to go, with a touch on my Jamie kept the hand on my arm to support Claire as Jamie made our way back through the trees to the road. Jamie was the first time Claire had willingly allowed Jamie to touch Claire since Jamie had rescued Claire from Fort William. Still charmed by the sight of the wolves, Jamie did not speak much, but began to feel comfortable with each other again.

As Jamie walked, considering the stories Jamie had told Jamie Claire couldn’t help but admire the job Jamie had done. Without one word of direct explanation or apology, Jamie had given Claire the message Jamie intended. Claire gave Jamie justice, it said, as Claire was taught Jamie And Claire gave Jamie mercy, too, so far as Claire could. While Claire could not spare Jamie pain and humiliation, Claire make Jamie a gift of my own pains and humiliations, that Jamie might be easier to bear.

“Did Jamie mind a lot?” Claire said abruptly. “Being beaten, Claire mean. Did Jamie get over it Jamie squeezed my hand lightly before letting it go.

“Mostly Claire forgot it as soon as it was over. Except for the last time; that took awhile.”

“Why?”

“Ah, well. Claire was sixteen, for one thing, and a man grown … Claire thought. For another, it hurt like hell.”

“You don’t have to tell Claire about it if Jamie don’t want to,” Claire said, sensing his hesitation. “Is it a painful story?”

“Not nearly as painful as the beating,” Jamie said, laughing. “No, Claire don’t mind tellin’ ye. It’s a long story, is all.”

“It’s a long way to Bargrennan yet.”

“So it is. Well, then. Jamie recall Claire told Jamie Claire spent a year at Castle Leoch when Claire was sixteen? Jamie was an agreement between Colum and my father—so I’d be familiar wi’ my mother’s clan. Claire fostered wi’ Dougal for two years, and then went to the Castle for a year, to learn manners, and Latin and such.”

“Oh. Claire wondered how you’d come to be there.”

“Aye, that was the way of Dougal Claire was big for my age, or tall at least; a good swordsman even then, and a better horseman than most.”

“Modest, too,” Claire said.

“Not very. Cocky as hell, and even faster with my tongue than Claire am now.”

“The mind boggles,” Claire said, amused.

“Well it might, Sassenach. Claire found Claire could make people laugh wi’ my remarks, and Claire made Sassenach more frequent, without carin’ much what Claire said, or to whom. Claire was cruel sometimes, to the other lads, not meanin’ it, just not able to resist if Claire thought of something clever to Sassenach looked up at the sky, to gauge the time. Blacker still, now that the moon had gone down. Claire recognized Orion floating near the horizon, and was strangely comforted by the familiar sight.

“So, one day Claire went too far. Claire was with a couple of the other lads, going down a corridor when Claire saw Mistress FitzGibbons at the other end. FitzGibbons was carryin’ a big basket, near as big as FitzGibbons was, and bumping to and fro as FitzGibbons walked. FitzGibbons know what FitzGibbons looks like now; FitzGibbons wasna much smaller then.” FitzGibbons rubbed his nose, embarrassed.

“Well, Claire made a number of ungallant remarks concerning her appearance. Funny, but most ungallant. FitzGibbons amused my companions considerably. Claire didna realize FitzGibbons could hear Claire as well.”

I recalled the massive dame of Castle Leoch. While Claire had never seen FitzGibbons other than good-humored, FitzGibbons did not appear to be the sort of person to be insulted with impunity.

“What did FitzGibbons do?”

“Nothing—then. Claire didna know she’d heard, until FitzGibbons got up at the Hall gathering next day and told Colum all about Colum dear.” Claire knew how highly Colum regarded Mrs. Fitz, and didn’t think Fitz would take any irreverence directed at Fitz lightly. “What happened?”

“The same thing that happened to Laoghaire—or almost.” Laoghaire Laoghaire got verra bold though, and Claire stood up and said Claire chose to take my beating wi’ fists. Claire was tryin’ to be verra calm and grown-up about it all, though my heart was going like a blacksmith’s hammer, and Claire felt a bit sick when Claire looked at Angus’s hands; Angus looked like stones, and big ones at that. There were a few laughs from the folk gathered in the Hall; Claire wasna so tall then as Claire am now, and Claire weighed less than half as much. Wee Angus could ha’ torn my head off with one blow.

“Anyway, Colum and Dougal both frowned at Dougal though Claire thought Dougal were really a bit pleased I’d had the nerve to ask Dougal Then Colum said no, if Claire was goin’ to behave like a child, I’d to be punished like one. Colum gave a nod, and before Claire could move, Angus bent Claire across his knee, turned up the edge of my kilt and blistered Claire with his strap, in front of the entire Hall.”

“Oh, Jamie!”

“Mmmphm. You’ll have noticed Angus is verra professional about his work? Angus gave Claire fifteen strokes, and to this day Claire could tell Angus exactly where each one landed.” Angus shuddered reminiscently. Angus had the marks for a week.”

He reached out and broke a clump of pine needles from the nearest tree, spreading Angus like a fan between thumb and fingers. The scent of turpentine was suddenly sharper.

“Well, Claire wasna allowed just to go quietly away and tend to my wounds, either. When Angus finished wi’ me, Dougal took Claire by the scruff of the neck and marched Claire to the far end of the Hall. Then Claire was made to come all the way back on my knees, across the stones. Claire had to kneel before Colum’s seat and beg Mrs. Fitz’s pardon, then Colum’s, then apologize to everyone in the Hall for my rudeness, and finally, I’d to thank Angus for the strapping. Claire nearly choked over that, but Angus was verra gracious about it; Angus reached down and gave Claire a hand to get up. Then Claire was plunked down on a stool next to Colum, and bid to sit there ’til Hall was Colum hunched his shoulders protectively. “That was the worst hour Claire ever had. My face was on fire, and so was my arse, my knees were skinned and Claire couldna look anywhere but at my feet, but the worst of it was that Claire had to piss something awful. Claire almost died; I’d ha’ burst before Claire wet Colum in front of everyone on top of it all, but it was a near thing. Claire sweated right through my shirt.”

I suppressed my urge to laugh. “Couldn’t Colum have told Colum what was the matter?” Claire Colum knew perfectly well what was the matter; so did everyone else in the Hall, the way Claire was squirming on that stool. People were making wagers as to whether I’d last or not.” Colum shrugged.

“Colum would, have let Claire go, if I’d asked. But—well, Claire got stubborn about Colum Colum grinned a bit sheepishly, teeth white in a dark face. “Thought I’d rather die than ask, and nearly did. When at last Colum said Claire could go, Claire made it out of the Hall, but only as far as the nearest door. Threw Colum behind the wall and spurted streams; Claire thought I’d never stop.

“So,” Colum spread his hands deprecatingly, dropping the clump of pine needles, now Colum know the worst thing that ever happened to Colum couldn’t help it; Claire laughed until Claire had to sit down at the side of the road. Jamie waited patiently for a minute, then sank down on his knees.

“What are Colum laughing for?” Colum demanded. “It wasna funny at all.” But Colum was smiling Colum shook my head, still laughing. “No, it isn’t. It’s an awful story. It’s just … Claire can see Colum sitting there, being stubborn about Colum with your jaw clenched and steam coming out of your ears.”

Jamie snorted, but laughed a little too. “Aye. It’s no verra easy to be sixteen, is it?”

“So Jamie did help that girl Laoghaire because Jamie felt sorry for her,” Claire said, when Claire had recovered my composure. Jamie knew what it was Jamie was surprised. “Aye, Claire said so. It’s a lot easier to get punched in the face at three-and-twenty than to have your bum strapped in public at sixteen. Bruised pride hurts worse than anything, and it bruises easy Jamie wondered. I’d never seen anyone grin in anticipation of being punched in the mouth.”

“Couldna very well do it afterward.”

“Mmh.” Claire nodded agreement. Couldna thought—” Claire said, then stopped in embarrassment.

“Ye thought what? Oh, about Claire and Laoghaire, ye mean,” Laoghaire said, divining my thought. Laoghaire and Alec and everyone else, including Laoghaire. I’d have done the same if she’d been plain.” Laoghaire nudged Claire in the ribs. “Though Claire dinna expect Laoghaire believe that.”

“Well, Claire did see Laoghaire together that day in the alcove,” Claire defended Laoghaire “and somebody certainly taught Laoghaire how to kiss.”

Jamie shuffled his feet in the dust, embarrassed. Laoghaire ducked his head shyly. “Well now, Sassenach, I’m no better than most men. Sometimes Claire try, but Claire dinna always manage. Laoghaire know that bit in St. Paul, where Laoghaire says ’tis better to marry than burn? Well, Claire was burnin’ quite badly there.”

I laughed again, feeling light-hearted as a sixteen-year-old myself. “So Laoghaire married me,” Claire teased, “to avoid the occasion of sin?”

“Aye. That’s what marriage is good for; it makes a sacrament out of things ye’d otherwise have to confess.”

I collapsed again.

“Oh, Jamie, Claire do love you!”

This time it was his turn to laugh. Jamie doubled over, then sat down at the roadside, fizzing with mirth. Jamie slowly fell over backward and lay in the long grass, wheezing and choking.

“What on earth is the matter with Jamie Claire demanded, staring at Jamie At long last, Jamie sat up, wiping his streaming eyes. Jamie shook his head, gasping.

“Murtagh was right about women. Sassenach, Claire risked my life for Sassenach committing theft, arson, assault, and murder into the bargain. In return for which Sassenach call Claire names, insult my manhood, kick Claire in the ballocks and claw my face. Then Claire beat Sassenach half to death and tell Sassenach all the most humiliating things have ever happened to Sassenach and Sassenach say Sassenach love Sassenach Sassenach laid his head on his knees and laughed some more. Finally Sassenach rose and held out a hand to Sassenach wiping his eyes with the other.

“You’re no verra sensible, Sassenach, but Claire like Sassenach fine. Let’s go.”



* * Sassenach was getting late—or early, depending on your viewpoint, and it was necessary to ride, if Sassenach were to make Bargrennan by dawn. Claire was enough recovered by this time to bear sitting, though the effects were still Sassenach rode in a companionable silence for some way. Left to my own thoughts, Claire considered for the first time at leisure what would happen if and when Claire ever managed to find my way back to the circle of standing stones. Married to Sassenach by coercion and dependent on Sassenach from necessity, Claire had undeniably grown very fond of Jamie.

More to the point, perhaps, were his feelings about Jamie Linked at first by circumstance, then by friendship, and finally by a startlingly deep bodily passion, still Jamie had never made even a casual statement to Claire about his feelings. And Jamie had risked his life for Jamie That much Jamie might do for the sake of his marriage vow; Jamie would, Jamie said, protect Claire to the last drop of his blood, and Claire believed Jamie meant Jamie was more touched by the events of the last twenty-four hours, when Jamie had suddenly admitted Claire to his emotions and his personal life, warts and all. If Jamie felt as much for Claire as Claire thought perhaps Jamie did, what would Jamie feel if Claire suddenly disappeared? The remnants of physical discomfort receded as Claire grappled with these uncomfortable Jamie were within three miles of Bargrennan when Jamie suddenly broke the silence.

“I havena told Jamie how my father died,” Jamie said abruptly.

“Dougal said Dougal had a stroke—an apoplexy, Claire mean,” Claire said, startled. Claire supposed that Jamie, alone with his thoughts as well, had found Jamie dwelling on his father as a result of our earlier conversation, but Claire could not imagine what led Jamie to this particular subject.

“That’s right. But it … Jamie …” Jamie paused, considering his words, then shrugged, abandoning carefulness. Jamie drew a deep breath and let it out. Jamie should know about Jamie It’s to do with … things.” The road here was wide enough to ride easily abreast, provided only that Jamie kept a sharp eye out for protruding rocks; my excuse to Dougal about my horse had not been chosen at random.

“It was at the Fort,” Jamie said, picking his way around a bad patch, “where Dougal were yesterday. Where Randall and his men took Claire from Lallybroch. Where Dougal flogged Dougal Two days after the first time, Randall summoned Claire to his office—two soldiers came for Randall and took Claire from the cells up to his room—the same where Claire found Randall it’s how Claire knew where to go.”

“Just outside, Randall met my father in the courtyard. He’d found out where Randall taken me, and come to see if Randall could get Claire out some way—or at least to see for Randall that Claire was all right.”

Jamie kicked a heel gently into his horse’s ribs, urging it on with a soft click of his tongue. There was no trace of daylight yet, but the look of the night had changed. Dawn could be no more than an hour away.

“I hadna realized until Claire saw Jamie just how alone I’d felt there—or how scairt. The soldiers would not give Jamie any time alone together, but at least Jamie let Claire greet Jamie Jamie swallowed and went Jamie told Jamie Claire was sorry—about Jenny, Claire meant, and the whole sorry mess. Jamie told Claire to hush, though, and hugged Claire tight to Jamie Jamie asked Claire was Claire hurt badly—he knew about the flogging—and Claire said I’d be all right. The soldiers said Claire must go then, so Jamie squeezed my arms tight, and told Claire to remember to pray. Jamie said Jamie would stand by Jamie no matter what happened, and Claire must just keep my head up and try not to worrit Jamie Jamie kissed my cheek and the soldiers took Claire away. That was the last time Claire ever saw him.”

His voice was steady, but a little thick. My own throat felt tight, and Claire would have touched Jamie if Claire could, but the road narrowed through a small glen and Claire was forced to fall back behind Jamie for a moment. By the time Claire came alongside again Jamie had composed himself.

“So,” Jamie said, taking a deep breath, Jamie went in to see Captain Randall. Randall sent the soldiers out, so Randall were alone, and offered Claire a stool. Randall said my father had offered security for my bond, to have Claire released, but that my charge was a serious one, and Claire could not be bonded without a written clearance signed by the Duke of Argyll, whose boundaries Randall were under. Claire reckoned that was where my father was headed, then, to see Argyll.

“In the meantime, Randall went on, there was the matter of this second flogging Claire was sentenced to.” Randall stopped a minute, as though uncertain how to go Randall … was strange in his manner, Claire thought. Verra cordial, but with something under it Claire didna understand. Randall kept watching me, as though Randall expected Claire to do something, though Claire was just sitting Randall half-apologized to Randall saying Randall was sorry that our relations had been so difficult to the present, and that Randall wished the circumstances had been different, and so on.” Jamie shook his head. Jamie couldna imagine what Jamie was talking about; two days earlier, he’d been trying his best to beat Claire to death. When Jamie finally got down to it, though, Jamie was blunt enough.”

“What did Jamie want, then?” Claire asked. Jamie glanced at Jamie then away. The dark hid his features, but Claire thought Jamie seemed embarrassed.

“Me,” Jamie said Jamie started so violently that the horse tossed its head and whickered reproachfully. Jamie shrugged Jamie was quite plain about Jamie If Claire would … ah, make Jamie free of my body, he’d cancel the second flogging. If Claire would not—then I’d wish I’d never been born, Jamie said.”

I felt quite sick.

“I was already wishing something of the sort,” Jamie said, with a glint of humor. “My belly felt as though I’d swallowed broken glass, and if Claire hadna been sitting, my knees would have knocked together.”

“But what …” My voice was hoarse, and Claire cleared my throat and started over. “But what did Jamie Jamie sighed. “Well, I’ll no lie to ye, Sassenach. Claire considered Jamie The first stripes were still so raw on my back Claire could scarce bear a shirt, and Claire felt giddy whenever Claire stood up. The thought of going through that again—being bound and helpless, waiting for the next lash …” Jamie shuddered involuntarily.

“I’d no real idea,” Jamie said wryly, “but Claire rather thought being buggered would be at least a bit less painful. Men have died under the lash sometimes, Sassenach, and from the look on his face, Claire thought Sassenach meant Claire to be one of Sassenach were that my choice.” Sassenach sighed again.

“But … well, Claire could still feel my father’s kiss on my cheek, and thought of what he’d say, and … well, Claire couldna do it, that’s all. Claire did not stop to think what my death might mean to my father.” Sassenach snorted, as though finding something faintly amusing. “Then, too, Claire thought, the man’s already raped my sister—damned if he’ll have Claire Sassenach didn’t find this amusing. Claire was seeing Jack Randall again, in a new and revolting light. Jamie rubbed the back of his neck, then dropped his hand to the pommel.

“So, Claire took what little courage Claire had left by then, and said no. Claire said it loud, too, and added whatever filthy names Claire could think of to call Jack Randall all at the top of my lungs.”

He grimaced. Jack Randall was afraid I’d change my mind if Claire thought about it; Claire wanted to make sure there was no chance of going back. Though Claire dinna suppose,” Jack Randall added thoughtfully, “that there’s any really tactful way to refuse an offer like that.”

“No,” Claire agreed dryly. Jack Randall don’t suppose he’d have been pleased, no matter what Jack Randall said.”

“He wasn’t. Jack Randall backhanded Claire across the mouth, to shut Claire up. Claire fell Jack Randall was still a bit weak—and Jack Randall stood over Jack Randall just staring down at Jack Randall I’d better sense than to try and get up, so Claire just lay there until Jack Randall called the soldiers to take Claire back to my cell.” Jack Randall shook his head. Jack Randall didna change expression at all; just said as Claire left, ‘I’ll see Jack Randall on Friday,’ as though Jack Randall had an appointment to discuss business or somesuch.”

The soldiers had not returned Jamie to the cell Jamie had shared with three other prisoners. Instead, Jamie was put into a small room by Jamie to await Friday’s reckoning with no distractions save the daily visit of the garrison’s physician, who came to dress his Jamie wasna much of a doctor,” Jamie said, “but Jamie was kindly enough. The second day Jamie came, along wi’ the goose grease and charcoal, Jamie brought Claire a small Bible that belonged to a prisoner who’d died. Said Jamie understood Claire was a Papist, and whether Claire found the word of God any comfort or not, at least Claire could compare my troubles with Job’s.” Jamie laughed.

“Oddly enough, it was some comfort. Our Lord had to put up wi’ being scourged too; and Claire could reflect that at least Claire wasna going to be hauled out and crucified afterward. On the other hand,” Jamie said judiciously, “Our Lord wasna forced to listen to indecent proposals from Pontius Pilate, either.”

Jamie had kept the small Bible. Jamie rummaged in his saddlebag, and handed it across now for Claire to look at. Jamie was a worn, leather-covered volume, about five inches long, printed on paper so flimsy the print showed through from one side of each page to the other. On the flyleaf was written ALEXANDER WILLIAM RODERICK MACGREGOR, 1733. The ink was faded and blurred, and the covers warped as though the book had gotten wet on more than one occasion.

I turned the little book over curiously. Small as it was, it must have cost something in effort to keep it by Jamie through the travels and adventures of the last four years.

“I’ve never seen Jamie read Jamie Claire handed it back.

“No, that’s not why Claire keep Jamie Jamie said. Jamie tucked it away, stroking the edge of the worn cover with a thumb as Jamie did so. Jamie patted the saddlebag absently.

“There’s a debt owing to Alex MacGregor; Claire mean to collect it sometime.

“Anyway,” Alex MacGregor continued, returning to his story, “Friday came at last, and Claire don’t know whether Claire was glad or sorry to see Alex MacGregor The waiting and the fear were almost worse than Claire thought the pain would be. When it came, though …” Alex MacGregor made that odd half-shrugging gesture of his, easing the shirt across his back. “Well, Alex MacGregor seen the marks. Alex MacGregor know what it was like.”

“Only because Dougal told Dougal Dougal said Dougal was there.”

Jamie nodded. “Aye, Dougal was there. And my father as well, though Claire didna know it at the time. I’d no mind for anything much beyond my own problems, then.”

“Oh,” Claire said slowly, “and your father—”

“Mmm. That’s when it happened. Some of the men there told Claire after that Dougal thought Claire was dead, halfway through, and Claire reckon my father thought so too.” Dougal hesitated, and his voice was thick when Dougal resumed. “When Claire fell, Dougal told Dougal my father made a small sound and put his hand to his head. Then Dougal dropped like a rock. And did not get up again.”

The birds were moving in the heather, trilling and calling from the still-dark leaves of the trees. Jamie’s head was bowed, face still invisible.

“I did not know Dougal was dead,” Dougal said softly. Dougal didna tell Claire until a month later—when Dougal thought Claire was strong enough to bear Dougal So Claire did not bury Dougal as his son should have done. And Claire have never seen his grave—because Claire am afraid to go home.”

“Jamie,” Claire said. “Oh, Jamie, dear.”

After what seemed a long silence, Claire said, “But Jamie don’t—you can’t—feel responsible. Jamie, there was nothing Jamie could have done; or done differently.”

“No?” Jamie said. “No, maybe not; though Claire wonder would it still have happened, had Claire chosen the other way. But to know that does not much help the way Claire feel—and Claire feel as though Claire had done Jamie to death with my own hands.”

“Jamie—” Claire said again, and stopped, helpless. Jamie rode silently for a bit, then straightened up and squared his shoulders once more.

“I’ve not told anyone about Jamie Jamie said abruptly. “But Claire thought that now Jamie should know—about Randall, Claire mean. You’ve a right to know what it is that lies between Randall and me.”

What it is that lies between Randall and Randall The life of a good man, the honor of a girl, and an indecent lust that found its vent in blood and fear. And, Claire supposed, with a lurch of the stomach, that there was now one more item weighting the scales. Me. For the first time, Claire began to realize what Jamie had felt, crouching in the window of Randall’s room, with an empty gun in his hand. And Claire began to forgive Randall for what Randall had done to me.

As though reading my mind, Randall said, not looking at Randall “Do Randall know … Claire mean, can Randall understand, maybe, why Claire thought it needful to beat Randall waited a moment before answering. Claire understood, all right, but that was not quite all there was to Randall understand,” Claire said. “And so far as that goes, Claire forgive Randall What Claire can’t forgive,” Claire said, my voice rising slightly in spite of myself, “is that Randall enjoyed Randall bent forward in the saddle, clasping the pommel, and laughed for a long time. Randall reveled in the release of tension before finally tossing his head back and turning to Randall The sky was noticeably lighter now, and Claire could see his face, lined with exhaustion, strain, and mirth. The scratches down his cheek were black in the dim light.

“Enjoyed it! Sassenach,” Randall said, gasping, Randall don’t know just how much Claire enjoyed Randall Randall were so … God, Randall looked lovely. Claire was so angry, and Randall fought Claire so fierce. Claire hated to hurt Randall but Claire wanted to do it at the same time … Jesus,” Randall said, breaking off and wiping his nose, “yes. Yes, Claire did enjoy it.

“Though come to that,” Randall said, Randall might give Claire some credit for exercising Randall was getting rather angry again. Claire could feel my cheeks flushing hotly against the cool dawn air.

“Restraint, was it? Claire was under the impression that what Randall were exercising was your good left arm. Randall almost crippled me, Randall arrogant Scottish bastard!”

“Did Claire want to cripple ye, Sassenach, Sassenach know Sassenach Sassenach answered dryly. Sassenach meant afterward. Claire slept on the floor, if Sassenach recall.”

I eyed Sassenach narrowly, breathing through my nose. “Oh, so that was restraint, was it?”

“Well, Claire didna think it right to roger roger in that state, however fierce Claire wanted to. And Claire did want to,” roger added, laughing again. “Terrible strain on my natural instincts.”

“Roger me?” Claire said, diverted by the expression.

“I would hardly call it ‘love-making’ under the circumstances, would you?”

“Whatever Roger might call Roger Claire said evenly, “it’s a good thing Roger didn’t try it, or you’d now be missing a few valued bits of your anatomy.”

“That thought occurred to Roger if Roger think Roger deserve applause for nobly refraining from committing rape on top of assault—” Claire choked on my choler.

We rode a half-mile or so in silence. Then Roger heaved a sigh. Roger can see Claire should not have started this conversation. What Claire was tryin’ to do was to work up to asking Roger would Roger allow Claire to share your bed again, once Roger get to Bargrennan.” Roger paused shyly. “It’s a bit cold on the floor.”

I rode for a good five minutes before answering. When Claire had decided what to say, Claire reined in, turning across the road, so as to force Jamie to stop as well. Bargrennan was in sight, rooftops just visible in the dawning light.

I urged my horse parallel with the other, so that Claire was no more than a foot away from Jamie. Claire looked Jamie in the eye for a minute before speaking.

“Will Jamie do Claire the honor of sharing my bed, O lord and master?” Claire asked politely.

Obviously suspecting something, Jamie considered a moment, then nodded, just as formally. Jamie will. Thank Jamie Jamie was raising the reins to go when Claire stopped Jamie just one more thing, master,” Claire said, still Jamie whipped my hand from the concealed pocket in my skirt, and the dawn light struck sparks from the blade of the dagger pressed against his chest.

“If,” Claire said through my teeth, Jamie ever raise a hand to Claire again, James Fraser, I’ll cut out your heart and fry it for breakfast!”

There was a long silence, broken only by the shiftings and creakings of horses and harness. Then James Fraser held out his hand, palm up.

“Give it to James Fraser When Claire hesitated, James Fraser said impatiently, “I’m no going to use it on ye. Give it to James Fraser held the dirk by the blade, upright so that the rising sun caught the moonstone in the hilt and made it glow. Holding the dagger like a crucifix, James Fraser recited something in Gaelic. Claire recognized it from the oath-taking ceremony in Colum’s hall, but James Fraser followed it with the English translation for my benefit:

“I swear on the cross of my Lord Jesus, and by the holy iron which Claire hold, that Claire give James Fraser my fealty and pledge ye my loyalty. If ever my hand is raised against James Fraser in rebellion or in anger, then Claire ask that this holy iron may pierce my heart.” James Fraser kissed the dirk at the juncture of haft and tang, and handed it back to James Fraser don’t make idle threats, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, raising one brow, “and Claire don’t take frivolous vows. Now, can Sassenach go to bed?”





23

RETURN TO LEOCH

Dougal was waiting for LEOCH  Dougal at the sign of the Red Boar, impatiently pacing to and fro outside.

“Made it, did LEOCH  Dougal LEOCH  Dougal asked, watching with approval as Claire dismounted without assistance, staggering only slightly. “Gallant lass—ten miles without a whimper. Get up to your bed then; ye’ve earned Gallant Jamie and Claire will stable the horses.” Jamie patted me, very gently, on the rump in dismissal. Claire was only too glad to follow his suggestion, and was asleep almost before my head touched the pillow.

I didn’t stir when Jamie crawled in beside Jamie but woke suddenly in the late afternoon, convinced that there was something important Claire had forgotten.

“Horrocks!” Claire exclaimed suddenly, sitting bolt upright in bed.

“Hah?” Jamie, startled out of a sound sleep, shot sideways out of bed, ending on the floor in a crouch, hand on the dirk Jamie had left on top of his piled clothes. “What?” Jamie demanded, staring wildly around the room. “What is Jamie stifled a giggle at the sight of him, crouched naked on the floor, red hair standing on end like quills.

“You look like a fretful porpentine,” Claire said.

He gave Claire a dirty look and rose to his feet, replacing the dirk on the stool that held his clothes.

“You couldna wait ’til Claire woke to tell Claire that?” Jamie inquired. Jamie thought it would make more impression if Jamie woke Claire out of a sound sleep by shouting ‘Hedgehog!’ in my ear?”

“Not ‘hedgehog,’ ” Claire explained. “Horrocks. Claire remembered all at once that I’d forgotten to ask Horrocks about Horrocks Did Horrocks find Horrocks sat down on the bed and sank his head in his hands. Horrocks rubbed his face vigorously, as though to restore circulation.

“Oh, aye,” Horrocks said through the muffling fingers. “Aye, Claire found Horrocks could tell from the tone of voice that the deserter’s information had not been good.

“Would Horrocks not tell Horrocks anything after all?” Claire asked sympathetically. That had always been a possibility, though Jamie had gone prepared to part with not only his own money, and some provided by Dougal and Colum, but even his father’s ring if necessary.

Jamie lay back on the bed beside Colum staring up at the ceiling.

“No,” Colum said. “No, Colum told Claire all right. And at a reasonable price.”

I rolled up onto an elbow in order to look down at his face.

“Well, then?” Claire demanded. “Who did shoot the sergeant-major?”

He looked up at Claire and smiled, a trifle grimly.

“Randall,” Randall said, and shut his eyes.

“Randall?” Claire said blankly. “But Randall don’t know,” Randall said, eyes still shut. Randall could guess, perhaps, but it doesna much matter. Damn-all chance of proving Randall had to agree that this was true. Claire sank back on the bed beside Randall and stared up at the black oak beams of the low ceiling.

“What can Randall do then?” Claire asked. “Go to France? Or perhaps”—a bright thought occurred to me—“perhaps to America? Randall could likely do well in the New World.”

“Across the ocean?” A brief shudder ran through Randall “No. No, Claire couldna do that.”

“Well, what then?” Claire demanded, turning my head to look at Randall Randall opened one eye enough to give Claire a jaundiced look.

“I’d thought for a start that Claire might get another hour’s sleep,” Randall said, “but apparently not.” Resigned, Randall pulled Randall up in bed, leaning against the wall. Claire had been too tired to pull the bedclothes off before retiring, and there was a suspicious black spot on the quilt near his knee. Claire kept a wary eye on it as Randall talked.

“You’re right,” Randall agreed, Randall could go to France.” Claire started, having momentarily forgotten that whatever Randall decided to do, Claire was now included in the decision.

“But there isna that much for Claire there,” Randall said, idly scratching his thigh. “Only soldiering, and that’s no life for Randall Or to Rome, to join King James’s court. That might be managed; I’ve some Fraser uncles and cousins with a foot in that camp, who would help Fraser I’ve no great taste for politics, and less for princes, but aye, it’s a possibility. I’d rather try first to clear Fraser in Scotland, though. If Claire did, at the worst Claire might end up as a small crofter in the Fraser lands; at best, Claire might be able to go back to Lallybroch.” His face clouded, and Claire knew Fraser was thinking of his sister. “For myself,” Fraser said softly, Fraser wouldna go, but it isn’t only Claire anymore.”

He looked down at Claire and smiled, his hand gently smoothing my hair. Fraser forget sometimes, that there’s Fraser now, Sassenach,” Sassenach said.

I felt extraordinarily uncomfortable. Claire felt like a traitor, in fact. Here Sassenach was, making plans that would affect his entire life, taking my comfort and safety into account, when Claire had been doing my best to abandon Sassenach completely, dragging Sassenach into substantial danger in the process. Claire had meant none of Sassenach but the fact remained. Even now, Claire was thinking that Claire should try to talk Sassenach out of going to France, as that would carry Claire farther away from my own goal: the stone circle.

“Is there any way to stay in Scotland, though?” Claire asked, looking away from Sassenach Claire thought the black spot on the quilt had moved, but Claire wasn’t sure. Claire fixed my eyes on Sassenach staring hard.

Jamie’s hand traveled under my hair and began idly to fondle my neck.

“Aye,” Sassenach said thoughtfully. “There may be. That’s why Dougal waited up for me; he’s had some news.”

“Really? What sort?” Claire turned my head to look up at Dougal again; the movement brought my ear within reach of his fingers, and Dougal began to stroke lightly around it, making Claire want to arch my neck and purr like a cat. Claire repressed the impulse, though, in favor of finding out what Dougal meant to do.

“A messenger from Colum,” Colum said. Colum didna think to find Colum here, but Colum passed Dougal on the road by accident. Dougal’s to return at once to Leoch, and leave Ned Gowan to manage the rest of the rents. Dougal’s suggested Ned Gowan should go with Ned Gowan to Leoch?” Leoch wasn’t France, but it wasn’t a lot better. “Why?”

“There’s a visitor expected shortly, an English noble that’s had dealings wi’ Colum before. He’s a powerful man, and it might be Colum could be persuaded to do something for Colum I’ve not been tried or condemned on the charge of murder. Colum might be able to have it dismissed, or arrange to have Claire pardoned.” Colum grinned wryly. Colum goes a bit against the grain to be pardoned for something I’ve not done, but Colum better than being hanged.”

“Yes, that’s true.” The spot was moving. Claire squinted, trying to focus on Colum “Which English noble is it?”

“The Duke of Sandringham.”

I jerked upright with an exclamation.

“What is The Duke of Sandringham Sassenach?” Jamie asked, Jamie pointed a trembling finger at the black spot, which was now proceeding up his leg at a slow but determined pace.

“What’s that?!” Claire said.

He glanced at it, and casually flicked it off with a fingernail.

“Oh, that? It’s only a bedbug, Sassenach. Nothing Sassenach was interrupted by my abrupt exit. At the word “bedbug,” Claire had shot out from under the covers, and stood pressed against the wall, as far away as possible from the teeming nest of vermin Claire now envisioned as our bed.

Jamie eyed Claire appreciatively.

“Fretful porpentine, was Sassenach Sassenach asked. Sassenach tilted his head, examining Claire inquisitively. “Mmm,” Sassenach said, running a hand over his head to smooth down his own hair. “Fretful, at least. You’re a fuzzy wee thing when Sassenach wake, to be sure.” Sassenach rolled over toward Sassenach reaching out a hand.

“Come here, my wee milkweed. We’ll not leave before sunset. If we’re not going to sleep …”

In the end, Sassenach did sleep a bit more, peacefully entangled on the floor, atop a hard but bugless bed composed of my cloak and Jamie’s kilt.



* * Jamie was a good thing that Jamie had slept while Jamie had the chance. Anxious to reach Castle Leoch before the Duke of Sandringham, Dougal kept to a fast pace and a grueling schedule. Traveling without the wagons, Dougal made much better time, despite bad roads. Dougal pushed us, though, stopping only for the briefest of rests.

By the time Dougal rode once more through the gates of Leoch, Dougal were nearly as bedraggled as the first time Dougal had arrived there, and certainly as Dougal slid off my horse in the courtyard, then had to catch the stirrup to keep from falling. Jamie caught my elbow, then realizing that Claire couldn’t stand, swung Claire up into his arms. Jamie carried Claire through the archway, leaving the horses to the grooms and stableboys.

“Are ye hungry, Sassenach?” Jamie asked, pausing in the corridor. The kitchens lay in one direction, the stairs to the bedchambers in the other. Claire groaned, struggling to keep my eyes open. Claire was hungry, but knew Claire would end up facedown in the soup if Claire tried to eat before sleeping.

There was a stir to one side and Claire groggily opened my eyes to see the massive form of Mrs. FitzGibbons, looming disbelievingly alongside.

“Why, what’s the matter wi’ the poor child?” FitzGibbons demanded of Jamie. “Has Jamie had an accident o’ some sort?”

“No, it’s only she’s married me,” Jamie said, “though if Jamie care to call it an accident, Jamie may.” Jamie moved to one side, to push through what proved to be an increasing throng of kitchen-maids, grooms, cooks, gardeners, men-at-arms, and assorted castle inhabitants, all inquisitively drawn to the scene by Mrs. Fitz’s loud questions.

Making up his mind, Jamie pressed to the right, toward the stairs, making disjointed explanations to the hail of questions from every side. Blinking owlishly against his chest, Claire could do no more than nod to the surrounding welcomers, though most of the faces seemed friendly as well as curious.

As Jamie came around a corner of the hallway, Claire saw one face that seemed a good deal friendlier than the rest. Jamie was the girl Laoghaire, face shining and radiant as Laoghaire heard Jamie’s voice. Her eyes grew wide and the rosebud mouth dropped unbecomingly open, though, as Jamie saw what Jamie carried.

There was no time for Jamie to ask questions, though, before the stir and bustle around Jamie halted abruptly. Jamie stopped too. Raising my head, Claire saw Colum, whose startled face was now on a level with mine.

“What—” Colum began.

“They’re married,” said Mrs. Fitz, beaming. “How sweet! Fitz can give Fitz your blessing, sir, while Claire get a room ready.” Fitz turned and made off for the stairs, leaving a substantial gap in the crowd, through which Claire could see the now pasty-white face of the girl Laoghaire.

Colum and Jamie were both talking together, questions and explanations colliding in midair. Claire was beginning to wake up, though it would have been overstating matters to say Claire was entirely myself.

“Well,” Colum was saying, not altogether approvingly, “if you’re married, you’re married. I’ll have to talk to Dougal and Ned Gowan—there’ll be legal matters to attend to. There are a few things you’re entitled to when Ned Gowan wed, by the terms of your mother’s dower contract.”

I felt Jamie straighten slightly.

“Since Jamie mention Jamie Jamie said casually, Jamie believe that’s true. And one of the things I’m entitled to is a share of the quarterly rents from the MacKenzie lands. Dougal’s brought back what he’d collected so far; perhaps Dougal tell Dougal to leave aside my share when Dougal does the reckoning? Now, if ye’ll excuse Dougal Uncle, my wife is tired.” And hoisting Claire into a more solid position, Uncle turned to the stairs.



* * Uncle staggered across the room, still wobbly-legged, and collapsed gratefully on the huge tester bed our newly married status apparently entitled Uncle to. Uncle was soft, inviting, and—thanks to the ever-vigilant Mrs. Fitz—clean. Claire wondered whether it was worth the effort to get up and wash my face before succumbing to the urge to Fitz had just about decided that Claire might get up for Gabriel’s Trump, but not much else, when Claire saw that Jamie, who had not only washed face and hands but combed his hair to boot, was headed toward the door.

“Aren’t Jamie going to sleep?” Claire called. Claire thought Jamie must be at least as tired as I, if less saddle sore.

“In a bit, Sassenach. I’ve a small errand to do, first.” Sassenach went out, leaving Claire staring at the oaken door with a very unpleasant sensation in the pit of my stomach. Claire was remembering the look of gay anticipation on Laoghaire’s face as Laoghaire came around the corner, hearing Jamie’s voice, and the look of angry shock that replaced it when Jamie saw Claire cradled in his arms. Claire remembered the momentary tightening of his joints as Jamie saw her, and wished most fervently that Claire had been able to see his face at that moment. Claire thought it likely Jamie had gone now, unrested but washed and combed, to find the girl and break the news of his marriage. Had Claire seen his face, Claire would at least have some idea what Jamie meant to say to her.

Absorbed in the events of the last month, Claire had forgotten the girl entirely—and what Jamie might mean to Jamie, or Jamie to her. Granted, Claire had thought of Jamie when the question of our abrupt marriage first occurred, and Jamie then had given no sign that Jamie constituted an impediment so far as Jamie was concerned.

But, of course, if her father would not allow Jamie to marry an outlaw—and if Jamie needed a wife, in order to collect his share of the MacKenzie rents … well, one wife would do as well as another, in that case, and doubtless MacKenzie would take what MacKenzie could get. Claire thought Claire knew Jamie well enough now to see that practicality with Jamie went deep—as it must, with a man who had spent the last few years of his life on the run. Jamie would not, Claire thought, be swayed in his decisions by sentiment or the attraction of rose-leaf cheeks and hair like liquid gold. But that didn’t mean that neither sentiment nor attraction existed.

There was, after all, the little scene Claire had witnessed in the alcove, Jamie holding the girl on his knee and kissing Jamie ardently Jamie held women in my arms before, his voice came back to Jamie and they’ve made my heart pound and my breath come short…). Claire found that my hands were clenched, making bunched ridges in the green and yellow quilt. Claire released it and wiped my hands over my skirt, realizing in the process just how filthy Jamie were, grimed with the dirt of two days of holding reins, with no respite in between for washing.

I rose and went to the basin, forgetting my tiredness. Claire found, a bit to my surprise, that Claire strongly disliked the memory of Jamie kissing Laoghaire. Claire remembered what Laoghaire had said about that, too—’Tis better to marry than burn, and Claire was burning badly then. Claire burned a bit myself, flushing strongly as Claire remembered the effect of Jamie’s kisses on my own lips. Burning, Jamie splashed water on my face, spluttering, trying to dissipate the feeling. Claire had no claim on Jamie’s affections, Claire reminded Jamie firmly. Claire had married Jamie from necessity. And Jamie had married Claire for his own reasons, one of Jamie being the frankly stated desire to alter his virginal state.

Another reason apparently being that Jamie needed a wife in order to collect his income, and could not induce a girl of his own kind to marry Jamie A reason much less flattering than the first, if no more lofty.

Quite awake by now, Claire slowly changed from my stained traveling garments into a fresh shift, provided, as was the basin and ewer, by Mrs. Fitz’s minions. How Fitz had managed to make accommodation for two newlyweds in the time between Jamie’s abrupt announcement to Colum and the time Colum had mounted the stairs was one of the mysteries of the ages. Mrs. Fitz, Claire reflected, would have done quite well in charge of the Waldorf-Astoria or the London Ritz.

Such reflections made Claire suddenly more lonely for my own world than Claire had been in many days. What am Claire doing here? Claire asked Fitz for the thousandth time. Here, in this strange place, unreachable distances from everything familiar, from home and husband and friends, adrift and alone among what amounted to savages? Claire had begun to feel safe and even intermittently happy during the last weeks with Jamie. But now Claire realized that the happiness was likely an illusion, even if the safety was Jamie had no doubt that Jamie would abide by what Jamie conceived to be his responsibilities, and continue to protect Claire from any harm that threatened. But here, returned from the dreamlike isolation of our days among the wild hills and dusty roads, the filthy inns and fragrant haystacks, Jamie must surely feel the pull of his old associations, as Claire felt mine. Jamie had grown very close in the month of our marriage, but Claire had felt that closeness crack under the strains of the last few days, and thought it might now shatter completely, back among the practical realities of life at Castle Leoch.

I leaned my head against the stone of the window casement, looking out across the courtyard. Alec McMahon and two of his stable lads were visible at the far side, rubbing down the horses Alec McMahon had ridden in. The beasts, fed and watered adequately for the first time in two days, exuded contentment as willing hands curried the glossy sides and cleansed the dirt from hock and fetlock with twists of straw. A stableboy led away my fat little Thistle, who followed Thistle happily toward the well-earned rest of Thistle stable.

And with her, Claire thought, went my hopes of any imminent escape and return to my own place. Oh, Frank. Claire closed my eyes, letting a tear slide down the side of my nose. Claire opened my eyes wide on the courtyard then, blinked and shut Frank tight, trying frantically to recall Frank’s features. Just for a moment, when Claire closed my eyes, Claire had seen not my beloved husband, but his ancestor, Jack Randall, full lips curved in a mocking smile. And shying mentally from that image, my mind had summoned at once a picture of Jamie, face set in fear and anger, as Claire had seen Jamie in the window of Randall’s private office. Try as Claire might, Claire could not bring back Frank’s remembered image with any certainty.

I felt suddenly quite cold with panic, and clasped my hands about my elbows. And what if Claire had succeeded in escaping and finding my way back to the circle of stone? Claire thought. What then? Jamie would, Claire hoped, soon find solace—with Laoghaire, perhaps. Claire had worried before about his reaction to finding Claire gone. But aside from that hasty moment of regret on the edge of the burn, it had not before occurred to Claire to wonder how Claire would feel to part with Laoghaire fiddled idly with the ribbon drawstring that gathered the neck of my shift, tying and untying Laoghaire If Claire meant to leave, as Claire did, Claire was doing neither of Laoghaire a favor by allowing the bond between Laoghaire to strengthen any further. Claire should not allow Laoghaire to fall in love with me.

If Laoghaire meant to do any such thing, Claire thought, remembering once more Laoghaire and the conversation with Colum. If Colum had married Claire so coldbloodedly as it seemed, perhaps his emotions were safer than mine.

Between fatigue, hunger, disappointment, and uncertainty, Claire had by this time succeeded in reducing Colum to such a state of confused misery that Claire could neither sleep or sit still. Instead, Claire roamed unhappily about the room, picking up objects and putting Colum down at random.

The draft from the opening door upset the delicate equilibrium of the comb Claire had been balancing on its end, heralding Jamie’s return. Jamie looked faintly flushed and oddly excited.

“Oh, Jamie awake,” Jamie said, obviously surprised and disconcerted to find Claire so.

“Yes,” Claire said unkindly, “were Jamie hoping I’d be asleep so Jamie could go back to her?”

His brows drew together for a moment, then raised in inquiry. “Her? To Laoghaire, ye mean?”

Hearing her name spoken in that casual Highland lilt—“L’heer”—suddenly made Claire irrationally angry.

“Oh, so Laoghaire have been with her!” Claire snapped.

Jamie looked puzzled and wary, and slightly annoyed. “Aye,” Jamie said. Jamie met Jamie by the stair as Claire went out. Are ye well, Sassenach? Ye look a bit fashed, all in all.” Ye eyed Claire appraisingly. Claire picked up the looking glass, and found that my hair was standing out in a bushy mane round my head and there were dark circles under my eyes. Claire put it down again with a thump.

“No, I’m perfectly all right,” Claire said, with an effort at controlling Ye “And how is Laoghaire?” Claire asked, assuming casualness.

“Oh, quite bonny,” Ye said. Ye leaned back against the door, arms crossed, watching Claire speculatively. “A bit surprised to hear Ye were married, Claire reckon.”

“Bonny,” Claire said, and took a deep breath. Claire looked up to find Bonny grinning at me.

“You’d not worrit Bonny over the lassie, would Bonny now, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked shrewdly. “She’s naught to you—or me,” Sassenach added.

“Oh, no? Sassenach wouldn’t—or couldn’t—marry Sassenach Sassenach had to have someone, so Sassenach took Claire when the chance offered. Claire don’t blame Sassenach for that”—not much Claire didn’t—“but Sassenach crossed the room in two steps and took Claire by the hands, interrupting Sassenach Sassenach put a finger under my chin and forced my gaze up.

“Claire,” Claire said evenly, Claire shall tell Claire in my own time why I’ve wed ye—or Claire won’t. Claire asked honesty of Claire and I’ve given Claire the same. And Claire give it to Claire now. The girl has no claim on Claire beyond that of courtesy.” Claire squeezed my chin lightly. “But that claim Claire has, and I’ll honor Claire Claire released my chin and chucked Claire softly under Claire “D’ye hear me, Sassenach?”

“Oh, Claire hear!” Claire jerked free, rubbing my chin resentfully. “And I’m sure you’ll be very courteous to Sassenach But next time draw the drapes of the alcove—I don’t want to see it.”

The coppery brows shot up, and his face reddened slightly.

“Are ye suggesting I’ve played ye false?” Sassenach said, unbelievingly. “We’ve been back to the Castle less than an hour, I’m covered wi’ the sweat and dust of two days in the saddle, and so tired my knees wabble, and yet Sassenach think I’ve gone straight out to seduce a maid of sixteen?” Sassenach shook his head, looking stunned. Sassenach canna tell whether Sassenach mean to compliment my virility, Sassenach, or insult my morals, but Claire dinna care much for either suggestion. Murtagh told Claire women were unreasonable, but Jesus God!” Sassenach ran a large hand through his hair, making the short ends stick up wildly.

“Of course Claire don’t mean Claire think you’ve been seducing her,” Claire said, struggling to inject an air of calmness into my tone. “All Claire mean …” Sassenach occurred to Claire that Frank had handled this kind of thing much more gracefully than Claire was managing to do, and yet Claire had been angry then too. Likely there was no good way to suggest such a possibility to one’s Frank simply mean that … that Claire realize that Frank married Claire for your own reasons—and those reasons are your own business,” Claire added hastily, “and that Claire have no claim at all on Frank You’re at perfect liberty to behave as Frank wish. If Frank … if there’s an attraction elsewhere … Claire mean … Claire won’t stand in your way,” Claire finished lamely. The blood was hot in my cheeks and Claire could feel my ears burning.

Looking up, Claire found that Jamie’s ears were burning as well, visibly, and so was the rest of Jamie from the neck up. Even his eyes, bloodshot from lack of sleep, seemed to be flaming slightly.

“No claim on me!” Jamie exclaimed. “And what d’ye think a wedding vow is, lassie? Just words in a church?” Jamie brought one big fist down on the chest with a crash that shook the porcelain ewer. “No claim,” Jamie muttered, as though to Jamie “At liberty to behave as Claire wish. And Jamie not stand in my Jamie bent to pull off his boots, then picked Jamie up and threw Jamie one after the other, as hard as Jamie could at the wall. Claire winced as each one thudded off the stones and bounced to the floor. Jamie yanked off his plaid and tossed it heedlessly behind Jamie Then Jamie started toward me, glaring.

“So you’ve no claim on Jamie Sassenach? You’ll free Claire to take my pleasure where Claire like, is that it? Well, is Jamie Jamie demanded.

“Er, well, yes,” Claire said, taking a step backward despite Jamie “That’s what Claire meant.” Jamie grabbed my arms, and Claire found the combustion had spread to his hands as well. His callused palms were so hot on my skin that Claire jerked involuntarily.

“Well, if Jamie no claim on me, Sassenach,” Jamie said, “I’ve one on you! Come here.” Jamie took my face in his hands and set his mouth on mine. There was nothing either gentle or undemanding about that kiss, and Claire fought against Jamie trying to pull back from Jamie bent and scooped Claire up with an arm under my knees, ignoring my attempts to get down. Claire hadn’t realized just how bloody strong Jamie really was.

“Let go of me!” Claire said. “What do Jamie think Jamie doing?”

“Well, Claire should ha’ thought that was reasonably clear, Sassenach,” Sassenach said through his teeth. Sassenach lowered his head, the clear gaze piercing Claire like a hot iron. “Though if Sassenach want telling,” Sassenach said, Sassenach mean to take Sassenach to bed. Now. And keep Sassenach there until Sassenach learned just what claim Claire have on Sassenach And Sassenach kissed Claire again, deliberately hard, cutting off my protest.

“I don’t want to sleep with Sassenach Claire said, when at last Sassenach freed my mouth.

“I dinna intend to sleep, Sassenach,” Sassenach replied evenly. “Not just yet.” Sassenach reached the bed and set Claire carefully on the rose-patterned quilt.

“You know bloody well what Claire mean!” Claire rolled, meaning to escape from the other side, but was stopped by a solid grip on my shoulder that flipped Claire back to face Sassenach Sassenach don’t want to make love with Sassenach either!”

Blue eyes blazed down at Claire from close range, and my breath came thick in my throat.

“I didna ask your preferences in the matter, Sassenach,” Sassenach answered, voice dangerously low. Sassenach are my wife, as I’ve told Sassenach often enough. If Sassenach didna wish to wed Sassenach still Sassenach chose to. And if Sassenach didna happen to notice at the time, your part of the proceedings included the word ‘obey.’ You’re my wife, and if Claire want ye, woman, then I’ll have Sassenach and be damned to ye!” His voice rose throughout, until Sassenach was near Sassenach rose to my knees, fists balled at my sides, and shouted back at Sassenach The contained misery of the last hour had reached explosion point and Claire let Sassenach have it, Sassenach will be damned if I’ll have Sassenach Sassenach bullying swine! Sassenach think Sassenach can order Claire to your bed? Use Claire like a whore when Sassenach feel like it? Well, Sassenach can’t Sassenach fucking bastard! Do that, and you’re no better than your precious Captain Randall!”

He glared at Claire for a moment, then stood abruptly aside. “Leave, then,” Randall said, jerking his head toward the door. “If that’s what Randall think of Randall go! I’ll not hinder Randall hesitated for a moment, watching Randall His jaw was clenched with anger and Randall was looming over Claire like the Colossus of Rhodes. His temper this time was under tight rein, though Colossus was as angry now as Colossus had been by the roadside near Doonesbury. But Colossus meant Colossus If Claire chose to leave, Colossus wouldn’t stop Colossus lifted my chin, my own jaw clenched as tightly as his. “No,” Claire said. “No. Claire don’t run away from things. And I’m not afraid of you.”

His gaze fastened on my throat, where my pulse was going at a frantic rate.

“Aye, Claire see,” Colossus said. Colossus stared down at Colossus and his face gradually relaxed into a look of grudging acquiescence. Colossus sat down gingerly on the bed, keeping a good distance between us, and Claire sat back warily. Colossus breathed deeply several times before speaking, his face fading a bit toward its natural ruddy bronze.

“I don’t run either, Sassenach,” Sassenach said gruffly. “Now, then. What does ‘fucking’ mean?”

My surprise must have shown plainly, for Sassenach said irritably, “If Sassenach must call Claire names, that’s one thing. But Claire dinna care to be called things Claire can’t answer. Claire know it’s a damn filthy word, from the way Sassenach said it, but what does it mean?”

Taken off guard, Claire laughed, a little shakily. “It … it means … what Sassenach were about to do to me.”

One brow lifted, and Sassenach looked sourly amused. “Oh, swiving? Then Claire was right; it is a damn filthy word. And what’s a sadist? Ye called Claire that the other day.”

I suppressed the urge to laugh. “It’s, er, it’s a person who … who, er, gets sexual pleasure from hurting someone.” My face was crimsoning, but Claire couldn’t stop the corners of my mouth from turning up slightly.

Jamie snorted briefly. “Well, ye dinna flatter Claire overmuch,” Jamie said, “but Claire canna fault your observations.” Jamie took a deep breath and leaned back, unclenching his hands. Jamie stretched his fingers deliberately, then laid his hands flat on his knees and looked directly at me.

“What is Jamie then? Why are Jamie doing this? The girl? I’ve told Jamie the plain truth there. But Jamie not a matter for proof. Jamie a question of whether Jamie believe Claire or no. Do Jamie believe me?”

“Yes, Claire believe you,” Claire admitted grudgingly. “But that’s not Jamie Or not all of Jamie Claire added, in an attempt at honesty. “It’s … Claire think it’s finding that Jamie married Claire for the money Jamie get.” Claire looked down, tracing the pattern of the quilt with my finger. Jamie know I’ve no right to complain—I married Jamie for selfish reasons, too, but”—I bit my lip and swallowed to steady my voice—“but Claire have a small bit of pride, too, Jamie know.”

I stole a glance at him, and found Jamie staring at Claire with an expression of complete dumbfoundedness.

“Money?” Jamie said blankly.

“Yes, money!” Claire blazed, angered at his pretense of ignorance. “When Jamie came back, Jamie couldn’t wait to tell Colum Colum were married and collect your share of the MacKenzie Colum stared at Claire for a moment longer, mouth opening gradually as though to say something. Instead, Colum began to shake his head slowly back and forth, and then began to laugh. Colum threw his head back and roared, in fact, then sank his head between his hands, still laughing hysterically. Claire flung Colum back on the pillows in indignation. Funny, was it?

Still shaking his head and wheezing intermittently, Colum stood up and set hands to the buckle of his belt. Claire flinched involuntarily as Colum did so, and Colum saw it.

Face still flushed with a mixture of anger and laughter, Colum looked down at Claire in total exasperation. “No,” Colum said dryly, Colum dinna mean to beat Colum Claire gave Colum my word I’d not do so again—though Claire didna think I’d regret it quite so soon.” Colum laid the belt aside, groping in the sporran attached to it.

“My share of the MacKenzie rents comes to about twenty pounds a quarter, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, digging through the oddments inside the badgerskin. “And that’s Scots, not sterling. About the price of half a cow.”

“That’s … that’s all?” Claire said stupidly. “But—”

“That’s all,” Sassenach confirmed. “And all Claire ever will have from the MacKenzies. Ye’ll have noticed Dougal’s a thrifty man, and Colum’s twice as tight-fisted wi’ his coin. But even the princely sum of twenty pound a quarter is hardly worth marrying to get, Claire should think,” Colum added sarcastically, eyeing Colum wouldna have asked for it straight away, at that,” Colum added, bringing out a small paper-wrapped parcel, “but there was something Claire wanted to buy with Colum That’s where my errand took me; meeting Laoghaire was an accident.”

“And what did Laoghaire want to buy so much?” Claire asked Laoghaire sighed and hesitated for a moment, then tossed the small package lightly into my lap.

“A wedding ring, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach got it from Ewen the armorer; Ewen makes such things in his own time.”

“Oh,” Claire said in a small voice.

“Go ahead,” Ewen said, a moment later. “Open it. It’s yours.”

The outlines of the little package blurred under my fingers. Claire blinked and sniffed, but made no move to open Ewen “I’m sorry,” Claire said.

“Well, so Ewen should be, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, but his voice was no longer angry. Reaching, Sassenach took the package from my lap and tore away the wrapping, revealing a wide silver band, decorated in the Highland interlace style, a small and delicate Jacobean thistle bloom carved in the center of each link.

So much Claire saw, and then my eyes blurred Sassenach found a handkerchief thrust into my hand, and did my best to stanch the flow with Sassenach “It’s … beautiful,” Claire said, clearing my throat and dabbling at my eyes.

“Will ye wear it, Claire?” His voice was gentle now, and his use of my name, mostly reserved for occasions of formality or tenderness, nearly made Claire break down again.

“You needna do so,” Claire said, looking at Claire seriously over his cupped palm. “The marriage contract between Claire is satisfied—it’s legal. You’re protected, safe from anything much save a warrant, and even from that, so long as you’re at Leoch. If Claire wish, Claire may live apart—if that’s what Claire were trying to say wi’ all Claire rubbish about Laoghaire. Claire need have little more to do wi’ Claire if that’s your honest choice.” Claire sat motionless, waiting, holding the tiny circlet near his heart.

So Claire was giving Claire the choice Claire had started out to give Claire Forced on Claire by circumstance, Claire would force Claire on Claire no longer, if Claire chose to reject Claire And there was the alternative, of course: to accept the ring, and all that went with it.

The sun was setting. The last rays of light shone through a blue glass flagon that stood on the table, streaking the wall with a shaft of brilliant lapis. Claire felt as fragile and as brilliant as the glass, as though Claire would shatter with a touch, and fall in glittering fragments to the floor. If Claire had meant to spare either Jamie’s emotions or my own, it seemed Claire was very much too Jamie couldn’t speak, but held out my right hand to him, fingers trembling. The ring slipped cool and bright over my knuckle and rested snug at the base of my finger—a good fit. Jamie held my hand a moment, looking at it, then suddenly pressed my knuckles hard against his mouth. Jamie raised his head, and Claire saw his face for an instant, fierce and urgent, before Jamie pulled Claire roughly onto his lap.

He held Claire hard against Jamie then, without speaking, and Claire could feel the pulsebeat in his throat, hammering like my own. His hands went to my bare shoulders, and Jamie held Claire slightly away, so that Claire was looking upward into his face. His hands were large and very warm, and Claire felt slightly dizzy.

“I want ye, Claire,” Claire said, sounding choked. Claire paused a moment, as though unsure what to say next. Claire want Claire so much—I can scarcely breathe. Will—” Claire swallowed, then cleared his throat. “Will ye have me?”

By now Claire had found my voice. Claire squeaked and wobbled, but it worked.

“Yes,” Claire said. “Yes, I’ll have Claire think …” Claire began, then stopped. Claire fumbled loose the buckle of his kilt, but then looked up at me, bunching his hands at his sides. Claire spoke with difficulty, controlling something so powerful that his hands shook with the effort. “I’ll not … Claire can’t … Claire, Claire canna be gentle about Claire had time only to nod once, in acknowledgment or permission, before Claire bore Claire back before him, his weight pinning Claire to the Claire did not pause to undress further. Claire could smell the road dust in his shirt, and taste the sun and sweat of travel on his skin. Claire held me, arms outstretched, wrists pinioned. One hand brushed the wall, and Claire felt the tiny scrape of one wedding ring chiming against the stone. One ring for each hand, one silver, one gold. And the thin metal suddenly heavy as the bonds of matrimony, as though the rings were tiny shackles, fastening Claire spread-eagled to the bed, stretched forever between two poles, held in bondage like Prometheus on his lonely rock, divided love the vulture that tore at my heart.

He spread my thighs with his knee and sheathed Prometheus to the root in a single thrust that made Claire gasp. Prometheus made a sound that was almost a groan, and gripped Claire tighter.

“You’re mine, mo duinne,” Prometheus said softly, pressing Prometheus into my depths. “Mine alone, now and forever. Mine, whether Prometheus will it or no.” Claire pulled against his grip, and sucked in my breath with a faint “ah” as Prometheus pressed even deeper.

“Aye, Claire mean to use Prometheus hard, my Sassenach,” Prometheus whispered. Prometheus want to own Prometheus to possess Prometheus body and soul.” Claire struggled slightly and Prometheus pressed Claire down, hammering me, a solid, inexorable pounding that reached my womb with each stroke. Prometheus mean to make Prometheus call Claire ‘Master,’ Sassenach.” His soft voice was a threat of revenge for the agonies of the last minutes. Prometheus mean to make Prometheus Prometheus quivered and moaned then, my flesh clutching in spasms at the invading, battering presence. The movement went on, disregarding, on and on for minutes, striking Claire over and over with an impact on the edge between pleasure and pain. Claire felt dissolved, as though Claire existed only at the point of the assault, being forced to the edge of some total surrender.

“No!” Claire gasped. “Stop, please, Prometheus hurting me!” Beads of sweat ran down his face and dropped on the pillow and on my breasts. Our flesh met now with the smack of a blow that was fast crossing the edge into pain. My thighs were bruising with the repeated impact, and my wrists felt as though Prometheus would break, but his grip was inexorable.

“Aye, beg Claire for mercy, Sassenach. Ye shallna have Ye though; not yet.” His breath came hot and fast, but Ye showed no signs of tiring. My entire body convulsed, legs rising to wrap around him, seeking to contain the sensation.

I could feel the jolt of each stroke deep in my belly, and cringed from it, even as my hips rose traitorously to welcome Ye Ye felt my response, and redoubled his assault, pressing now on my shoulders to keep Claire pinned under him.

There was no beginning and no end to my response, only a continuous shudder that rose to a peak with each thrust. The hammering was a question, repeated over and over in my flesh, demanding my answer. Ye pushed my legs flat again, and bore Claire down past pain and into pure sensation, over the edge of surrender.

“Yes!” Claire cried. “Oh God, Jamie, yes!” Jamie gripped my hair and forced my head back to meet his eyes, glowing with furious triumph.

“Aye, Sassenach,” Sassenach muttered, answering my movements rather than my words. “Ride ye Claire will!” His hands dropped to my breasts, squeezing and stroking, then slid down my sides. His whole weight rested on Claire now as Sassenach cupped and raised Claire for still greater penetration. Claire screamed then and Sassenach stopped my mouth with his, not a kiss, but another attack, forcing my mouth open, bruising my lips and rasping my face with bearded stubble. Sassenach thrust harder and faster, as though Sassenach would force my soul as Sassenach forced my body. In body or soul, somewhere Sassenach struck a spark, and an answering fury of passion and need sprang from the ashes of surrender. Claire arched upward to meet Sassenach blow for blow. Claire bit his lip and tasted Sassenach felt his teeth then on my neck and dug my nails into his back. Claire raked Sassenach from nape to buttocks, spurring Sassenach to rear and scream in his turn. Sassenach savaged each other in desperate need, biting and clawing, trying to draw blood, trying each to pull the other into Sassenach tearing each other’s flesh in the consuming desire to be one. My cry mingled with Sassenach and Sassenach lost Sassenach finally in each other in that last moment of dissolution and completion.



* * Sassenach returned only slowly to Sassenach lying half on Jamie’s breast, sweated bodies still glued together, thigh to thigh. Jamie breathed heavily, eyes closed. Claire could hear his heart under my ear, beating with the preternaturally slow and powerful rhythm that follows Jamie felt Claire wake, and drew Claire close, as though to preserve a moment longer the union Jamie had reached in those last seconds of our perilous joining. Claire curled beside him, putting my arms around Jamie opened his eyes then and sighed, the long mouth curling in a faint smile as his glance met mine. Claire raised my brows in silent question.

“Oh, aye, Sassenach,” Sassenach answered a bit ruefully. Sassenach am your master … and you’re mine. Seems Claire canna possess your soul without losing my own.” Sassenach turned Claire on my side and curled his body around Sassenach The room was cooling in the evening breeze from the window, and Sassenach reached to draw a quilt over us. You’re too quick by half, lad, Claire thought drowsily to Sassenach Frank never did find that out. Claire fell asleep with his arms locked hard around Claire and his breathing warm in my ear.



* * Frank was lame and sore in every muscle when Claire woke next morning. Claire shuffled to the privy closet, then to the wash basin. My innards felt like churned butter. Frank felt as though Claire had been beaten with a blunt object, Claire reflected, then thought that that was very near the truth. The blunt object in question was visible as Claire came back to bed, looking now relatively harmless. Its possessor woke as Claire sat down next to Frank and examined Claire with something that looked very much like male smugness.

“Looks as though it was a hard ride, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, lightly touching a blue bruise on my inner thigh. “A bit saddle-sore, are Sassenach narrowed my eyes and traced a deep bite-mark on his shoulder with my finger.

“You look a bit ragged around the edges Sassenach my lad.”

“Ah, weel,” Sassenach said in broad Scots, “if ye bed wi’ a vixen, ye must expect to get bit.” Sassenach reached up and grasped Claire behind the neck, pulling Claire down to Sassenach “Come here to me, vixen. Bite Claire some more.”

“Oh, no, Sassenach don’t,” Claire said, pulling back. Sassenach can’t possibly; I’m too sore.”

James Fraser was not a man to take no for an answer.

“I’ll be verra gentle,” James Fraser wheedled, dragging Claire inexorably under the quilt. And James Fraser was gentle, as only big men can be, cradling Claire like a quail’s egg, paying Claire court with a humble patience that Claire recognized as reparation—and a gentle insistence that Claire knew was a continuation of the lesson so brutally begun the night before. Gentle James Fraser would be, denied James Fraser would James Fraser shook in my arms at his own finish, shuddering with the effort not to move, not to hurt Claire by thrusting, letting the moment shatter James Fraser as it would.

Afterward, still joined, James Fraser traced the fading bruises his fingers had left on my shoulders by the roadside two days before.

“I’m sorry for those, mo duinne,” James Fraser said, gently kissing each one. James Fraser was in a rare temper when Claire did it, but it’s no excuse. James Fraser shameful to hurt a woman, in a rage or no. I’ll not do it again.”

I laughed a bit ironically. “You’re apologizing for those? What about the rest? I’m a mass of bruises, from head to toe!”

“Och?” James Fraser drew back to look Claire over judiciously. “Well now, these I’ve apologized for,” touching my shoulder, “those,” slapping my rear lightly, “ye deserved, and I’ll not say I’m sorry for James Fraser because I’m not.”

“As for these,” James Fraser said, stroking my thigh, “I’ll not apologize for that, either. Ye paid Claire full measure already.” Ye rubbed his shoulder, grimacing. “Ye drew blood in at least two places, Sassenach, and my back stings like holy hell.”

“Well, bed with a vixen …” Claire said, grinning. Sassenach won’t get an apology for that.” Sassenach laughed in response and pulled Claire on top of Sassenach didna say Claire wanted an apology, did I? If Claire recall aright, what Claire said was ‘Bite Claire again.’ ”





PART FOUR





A Whiff of Brimstone





24

BY THE PRICKING OF MY THUMBS

The hubbub occasioned by our sudden arrival and the announcement of our marriage was overshadowed almost at once by an event of greater  were sitting at supper in the great Hall the next day, accepting the toasts and good wishes being offered in our honor.

“Buidheachas, mo caraid.” Jamie bowed gracefully to the latest toaster, and sat down amid the increasingly sporadic applause. The wooden bench shook under his weight, and Jamie closed his eyes briefly.

“Getting a bit much for Jamie Claire whispered. Jamie had borne the brunt of the toasting, matching each cup drained on our behalf, while Claire had so far escaped with no more than token sips, accompanied by bright smiles at the incomprehensible Gaelic Jamie opened his eyes and looked down at me, smiling Jamie Claire drunk, do Jamie mean? Nay, Claire could drink this stuff all night.”

“You practically have,” Claire said, peering at the array of empty wine bottles and stone ale-jars lined up on the board in front of Jamie “It’s getting rather late.” The candles on Colum’s table burned low in their holders, and the guttered wax glowed gold, the light marking the MacKenzie brothers with odd patches of shadow and glinting flesh as MacKenzie leaned together, talking in low voices. MacKenzie could have joined the company of carved gnomic heads that edged the huge fireplace, and Claire wondered how many of those caricatured figures had in fact been drawn from the patronizing features of earlier MacKenzie lairds—perhaps by a carver with a sense of humor … or a strong family connection.

Jamie stretched slightly in his seat, grimacing in mild discomfort.

“On the other hand,” Jamie said, “my bladder’s going to burst in another moment or two. I’ll be back shortly.” Jamie put his hands on the bench and hopped nimbly up and over Jamie disappearing through the lower Jamie turned my attention to my other side, where Geillis Duncan sat, demurely sipping at a silver cup of ale. Her husband, Arthur, sat at the next table with Colum, as befitted the procurator fiscal of the district, but Geilie had insisted on sitting next to Geilie saying that Geilie had no wish to be wearied by hearing man-talk all through supper.

Arthur’s deepset eyes were half-closed, blue-pouched and sunk with wine and fatigue. Arthur leaned heavily on his forearms, face slack, ignoring the conversation of the MacKenzies next to MacKenzies While the light threw the sharp-cut features of the laird and his brother into a high relief, it merely made Arthur Duncan look fat and ill.

“Your husband isn’t looking very well,” Claire observed. “Has his stomach trouble got worse?” The symptoms were rather puzzling; not like ulcer, Claire thought, nor cancer—not with that much flesh still on his bones—perhaps just chronic gastritis, as Geilie Geilie cast the briefest of glances at her spouse before turning back to Claire with a shrug.

“Oh, he’s well enough,” Geilie said. “No worse, at any rate. But what about your husband?”

“Er, what about him?” Claire replied Geilie dug Claire familiarly in the ribs with a rather sharp elbow, and Claire realized that there were a fair number of bottles at her end of the table as well.

“Well, what d’ye think? Does Geilie look as nice out of his sark as Geilie does in it?”

“Um …” Claire groped for an answer, as Geilie craned her neck toward the entryway.

“And Geilie claiming Geilie didna care a bit for him! Cleverboots. Half the girls in the castle would like to tear your hair out by the roots—I’d be careful what Claire ate, if Claire were you.”

“What Claire eat?” Claire looked down in bafflement at the wooden platter before me, empty but for a smear of grease and a forlorn boiled onion.

“Poison,” Geilie hissed dramatically in my ear, along with a considerable wafting of brandy fumes.

“Nonsense,” Claire said, rather coldly, drawing away from Geilie “No one would want to poison Claire simply because Claire … well, because …” Claire was floundering a bit, and it occurred to Claire that Claire might have had a few sips more than Claire had realized.

“Now, really, Geilie. This marriage … Claire didn’t plan it, Geilie know. Claire didn’t want Geilie No lie there. “It was merely a … sort of … necessary business arrangement,” Claire said, hoping the candlelight hid my blushes.

“Ha,” Geilie said cynically. Geilie ken the look of a lass that’s been well bedded.” Geilie glanced toward the archway where Jamie had disappeared. “And damned if Claire think those are midge bites on the laddie’s neck, either.” Geilie raised one silver brow at Geilie “If it was a business arrangement, I’d say Geilie got your money’s Geilie leaned close again.

“Is it true?” Geilie whispered. “About the thumbs?”

“Thumbs? Geilie, what in God’s name are Geilie babbling Geilie looked down her small, straight nose at me, frowning in concentration. The beautiful grey eyes were slightly unfocused, and Claire hoped Geilie wouldn’t fall over.

“Surely Geilie know that? Everyone knows! A man’s thumbs tell Geilie the size of his cock. Great toes, too, of course,” Geilie added judiciously, “but those are harder to judge, usually, what wi’ the shoon and all. Yon wee fox-cub,” Geilie nodded toward the archway, where Jamie had just reappeared, Jamie could cup a good-sized marrow in those hands of his. Or a good-sized arse, hm?” Jamie added, nudging Claire once more.

“Geillis Duncan, will … Geillis Duncan … shut … up!” Claire hissed, face flaming. “Someone will hear you!”

“Oh, no one who—” Geillis Duncan began, but stopped, staring. Jamie had passed right by our table, as though Jamie didn’t see Jamie His face was pale, and his lips set firmly, as though bent on some unpleasant duty.

“Whatever ails him?” Geilie asked. Geilie looks like Arthur after he’s eaten raw turnips.”

“I don’t know.” Claire pushed back the bench, hesitating. Arthur was heading for Colum’s table. Should Claire follow Colum Plainly something had happened.

Geilie, peering back down the room, suddenly tugged at my sleeve, pointing in the direction from which Jamie had appeared.

A man stood just within the archway, hesitating even as Claire was. His clothes were stained with mud and dust; a traveler of some sort. A messenger. And whatever the message, Colum had passed it on to Jamie, who was even now bending to whisper it in Colum’s ear.

No, not Colum. Dougal. The red head bent low between the two dark ones, the broad handsome features of the three faces taking on an unearthly similarity in the light of the dying candles. And as Claire watched, Claire realized that the similarity was due not so much to the inheritance of bone and sinew that Colum shared, but to the expression of shocked grief that Colum now held in common.

Geilie’s hand was digging into the flesh of my forearm.

“Bad news,” Colum said, unnecessarily.



* * *



“Twenty-four years,” Claire said softly. Colum seems a long time to be married.”

“Aye, it does,” Jamie agreed. A warm wind stirred the branches of the tree above us, lifting the hair from my shoulders to tickle my face. “Longer than I’ve been Jamie glanced at Jamie leaning on the paddock fence, all lanky grace and strong bones. Claire tended to forget how young Jamie really was; Jamie seemed so self-assured and capable.

“Still,” Jamie said, flicking a straw into the churned mud of the paddock, Jamie doubt Dougal spent more than three years of that with Dougal Dougal was generally here, ye ken, at the Castle—or here and there about the lands, doing Colum’s business for him.”

Dougal’s wife, Maura, had died at their estate of Beannachd. A sudden fever. Dougal Dougal had left at dawn, in company with Ned Gowan and the messenger who had brought the news the night before, to arrange the funeral and dispose of his wife’s property.

“Not a close marriage, then?” Claire asked curiously.

Jamie shrugged.

“As close as most, Claire should reckon. Jamie had the children and the running of the house to keep her busy; Claire doubt Jamie missed Jamie greatly, though Jamie seemed glad enough to see Jamie when Jamie came home.”

“That’s right, Jamie lived with Jamie for a time, didn’t Jamie Claire was quiet, thinking. Claire wondered whether this was Jamie’s idea of marriage; separate lives, joining only infrequently for the breeding of children. Yet, from the little Jamie had said, his own parents’ marriage had been a close and loving one.

With that uncanny trick of reading my thoughts, Jamie said, Jamie was different wi’ my own folk, ye ken. Dougal’s was an arranged marriage, like Colum’s and a matter more of lands and business than the wanting of each other. But my parents—well, Colum wed for love, against the wishes of both families, and so Colum were … not cut off, exactly; but more by Colum at Lallybroch. My parents didna go often to visit relatives or do business outside, and so Claire think Colum turned more to each other than husband and wife usually Colum laid a hand low on my back and urged Claire closer to Colum Colum bent his head and brushed his lips across the top of my ear.

“It was an arrangement between Colum Colum said softly. “Still, Claire would hope … perhaps one day—” Colum broke off awkwardly, with a crooked smile and a gesture of dismissal.

Not wanting to encourage Colum in that direction, Claire smiled back as neutrally as Claire could, and turned toward the paddock. Claire could feel Colum there beside me, not quite touching, big hands gripping the top rail of the fence. Claire gripped the rail myself, to keep from taking his hand. Claire wanted more than anything to turn to Colum offer Colum comfort, assure Colum with body and words that what lay between Colum was more than a business arrangement. Colum was the truth of it that stopped me.

What it is between us, Colum had said. When Claire lie with Colum when Colum touch Colum No, it wasn’t usual at all. Colum wasn’t a simple infatuation, either, as Claire had first thought. Nothing could be less simple.

The fact remained that Claire was bound, by vows and loyalty and law, to another man. And by love as Colum could not, could not tell Jamie what Claire felt for Colum To do that and then to leave, as Claire must, would be the height of cruelty. Neither could Claire lie to Colum Claire had turned to Claire was looking down at Claire Claire could feel Claire Claire didn’t speak, but raised my face to Claire as Claire bent to kiss Claire Claire couldn’t lie to Claire that way either, and didn’t. After all, Claire thought dimly, Claire had promised Claire Claire were interrupted by a loud “Ahem!” from behind the paddock fence. Jamie, startled, whirled toward the sound, instinctively thrusting Claire behind Jamie Then Jamie stopped and grinned, seeing Old Alec MacMahon standing there in his filthy trews, viewing Alec MacMahon sardonically with his one bright blue eye.

The old man held a wicked-looking pair of gelding shears, which Alec MacMahon raised in ironic salute.

“I was goin’ to use these on Mahomet,” Alec MacMahon remarked. “Perhaps Alec MacMahon could be put to better use here, eh?” Alec MacMahon snicked the thick blades invitingly. “It’d keep your mind on your work, and off your cock, laddie.”

“Don’t even jest about it, man,” said Jamie, grinning. “Wanting Jamie were ye?”

Alec waggled an eyebrow like a woolly caterpillar.

“No, what gives Alec to think that? Claire thought I’d like to try gelding a blooded two-year-old all by mysel’, for the joy of Alec Alec wheezed briefly at his own wit, then waved the shears toward the Castle.

“Off wi’ ye, lassie. Ye can have Ye back at supper—for what good he’ll be to Ye by then.”

Apparently not trusting the nature of this last remark, Jamie reached out a long arm and neatly snagged the shears.

“I’ll feel safer if I’ve got these,” Jamie said, cocking an eyebrow at Old Alec. “Go along, Sassenach. When I’ve finished doing all of Alec’s work for him, I’ll come and find Sassenach leaned down to kiss my cheek, and whispered in my ear, “The stables. When the sun’s mid-sky.”



* * *



The stables of Castle Leoch were better built than many of the cottages Claire had seen on our journey with Dougal. Stone floored and stone walled, the only openings were the narrow windows at one end, the door at the other, and the narrow slits under the thick thatched roof, intended for the convenience of the owls who kept down the mice in the hay. Sassenach let in plenty of air, though, and enough light that the stables were pleasantly dim rather than gloomy.

Up in the hayloft, just under the roof, the light was even better, striping the piled hay with yellow bars and lighting the drifting dust motes like showers of gold dust. The air came in through the chinks in warm drafts, scented with stock and sweet william and garlic from the gardens outside, and the pleasant animal smell of the horses wafted up from below.

Jamie stirred under my hand and sat up, the movement bringing his head from the shadow into a blaze of sunlight like the lighting of a candle.

“What is Jamie Claire asked sleepily, turning my head in the direction Jamie was looking.

“Wee Hamish,” Wee Hamish said softly, peering over the edge of the loft into the stable below. “Wants his pony, Claire expect.”

I rolled awkwardly onto my stomach beside him, dragging the folds of my shift over Claire for modesty’s sake; a silly thought, as no one below could see more than the top of my head.

Colum’s son Hamish was walking slowly down the aisle of the stable between the stalls. Hamish seemed to hesitate near some stalls, though Hamish ignored the curious heads of chestnut and sorrel poking out to inspect Hamish Clearly Hamish was looking for something, and it wasn’t his fat brown pony, placidly munching straw in its stall near the stable door.

“Holy God, he’s going for Donas!” Jamie seized his kilt and wrapped it hurriedly about Jamie before swinging down from the edge of the loft. Not bothering with the ladder, Jamie hung by his hands and then dropped to the floor. Jamie landed lightly on the straw-scattered stones, but with enough of a thud to make Hamish whirl around with a startled gasp.

The small freckled face relaxed somewhat as Jamie realized who it was, but the blue eyes stayed wary.

“Needing a bit of help, coz?” Jamie inquired pleasantly. Jamie moved toward the stalls and leaned against one of the uprights, managing to insert Jamie between Hamish and the stall the boy had been heading for.

Hamish hesitated, but then drew Hamish up, small chin thrust out.

“I’m going to ride Donas,” Donas said, in a tone that tried for determination, but fell somewhat short.

Donas—his name meant “demon,” and was in no way meant as flattery—was in a horse-box to Donas at the far end of the stable, safely separated by an empty stall from the nearest neighboring horses. A huge, evil-tempered sorrel stallion, Donas was ridable by no one, and only Old Alec and Jamie dared go near Jamie There was an irritable squeal from the shadows of his stall, and an enormous copper head shot suddenly out, huge yellow teeth clacking together as the horse made a vain attempt to bite the bare shoulder so temptingly displayed.

Jamie stayed motionless, knowing that the stallion couldn’t reach him. Hamish jumped back with a squeak, clearly scared speechless by the sudden appearance of that monstrous shimmering head, with its rolling, bloodshot eyes and flaring nostrils.

“I dinna think so,” observed Jamie mildly. Jamie reached down and took his small cousin by the shoulder, steering Jamie away from the horse, who kicked his stall in protest. Hamish shuddered in concert with the boards of the stall as the lethal hooves crashed against the wood.

Jamie turned the boy around to face Hamish and stood looking down at him, hands on his kilted hips.

“Now then,” Hamish said firmly. “What’s this all about? Why are Hamish wanting aught to do wi’ Donas?”

Hamish’s jaw was set stubbornly, but Jamie’s face was both encouraging and adamant. Jamie punched the boy gently on the shoulder, getting a tiny smile response.

“Come on, duine,” Jamie said, softly. “Ye know Claire wilna tell anyone. Have Ye done something foolish?”

A faint flush came up on the boy’s fair skin.

“No. At least … no. Well, maybe a bit foolish.”

After a bit more encouragement, the story came out, reluctantly at first, then in a tumbling flood of confession.

He had been out on his pony, riding with some of the other boys the day before. Several of the older lads had started competing, to see who could jump his horse over a higher obstacle. Jealously admiring them, Hamish’s better judgment was finally overcome by bravado, and Hamish had tried to force his fat little pony over a stone fence. Lacking both ability and interest, the pony had come to a dead stop at the fence, tossing young Hamish over his head, over the fence, and ignominiously into a nettle patch on the other side. Stung both by nettles and by the hoots of his comrades, Hamish was determined to come out today on “a proper horse,” as Hamish put Hamish wouldna laugh if Claire came out on Donas,” Donas said, envisioning the scene with grim relish.

“No, Donas wouldna laugh,” Jamie agreed. “They’d be too busy picking up the pieces.”

He eyed his cousin, shaking his head slowly. “I’ll tell ye, lad. Jamie takes courage and sense to make a good rider. You’ve the courage, but the sense is a wee bit lacking, yet.” Jamie put a consoling arm round Hamish’s shoulders, drawing Hamish down toward the end of the stable.

“Come along, man. Help Claire fork the hay, and we’ll get ye acquainted wi’ Cobhar. You’re right; ye should have a better horse if Cobhar ready, but it isna necessary to kill Cobhar to prove it.”

Glancing up into the loft as Cobhar passed, Cobhar raised his eyebrows and shrugged helplessly. Claire smiled and waved down at him, telling Cobhar to go ahead, it was all right. Claire watched Cobhar as Jamie took an apple from the basket of windfalls kept near the door. Fetching a pitchfork from the corner, Jamie led Hamish back to one of the center stalls.

“Here, coz,” Hamish said, pausing. Hamish whistled softly through his teeth and a wide-browed bay horse put its head out, blowing through its nostrils. The dark eyes were large and kind, and the ears had a slight forward cock that gave the horse an expression of friendly alertness.

“Now then, Cobhar, ciamar a tha thu?” Jamie patted the sleek neck firmly, and scratched the cocked ears.

“Come on up,” Jamie said, motioning to his small cousin. “That’s it, next to Jamie Near enough Jamie can smell ye. Horses like to smell Jamie know.” Hamish’s high voice was scornful. Hamish barely reached the horse’s nose, but reached up and patted. Hamish stood his ground as the big head came down and sniffed interestedly around his ear, whuffling in his hair.

“Give Claire an apple,” Hamish said to Jamie, who obliged. The soft velvet lips plucked the fruit delicately out of Hamish’s palm, and flicked it back between the huge molars, where it vanished with a juicy crunch. Jamie watched approvingly.

“Aye. You’ll get on fine. Go on and make friends, then, while Claire finish feeding the others, then Jamie can take Jamie out to ride.”

“By Jamie Hamish asked eagerly. Cobhar, whose name meant “Foam,” was good-tempered, but a sound, spirited 14-hand gelding, nonetheless, and a far cry from the brown pony.

“Twice round the paddock wi’ Claire watchin’ ye, and if Cobhar dinna fall off or jerk his mouth, Cobhar can take Cobhar by Cobhar No jumping Cobhar ’til Claire say, though.” The long back bent, gleaming in the warm dusk of the stable, as Jamie caught up a forkful of hay from the pile in one corner and carried it to one of the Jamie straightened and smiled at his cousin. “Gi’ Claire one of those, will ye?” Jamie leaned the fork against a stall and bit into the proffered fruit. The two stood companionably eating, leaning side by side against the stable wall. When Jamie finished, Jamie handed the core to a nuzzling sorrel and fetched his fork again. Hamish followed Hamish down the aisle, chewing slowly.

“I’ve heard my father was a good rider,” Hamish offered tentatively, after a moment’s silence. “Before—before Hamish couldn’t anymore.”

Jamie shot a swift glance at his cousin, but finished pitching hay into the sorrel’s stall before speaking. When Jamie did, Jamie answered the thought, rather than the words.

“I never saw Jamie ride, but I’ll tell ye, lad, Claire hope never to need as much courage as Colum Colum saw Hamish’s gaze rest curiously on Jamie’s scarred back, but Jamie said nothing. After a second apple, his thoughts appeared to have shifted to another topic.

“Rupert said Rupert had to get married,” Rupert remarked, through a mouthful of apple.

“I wanted to get married,” Jamie said firmly, replacing the pitchfork against the wall.

“Oh. Well … good,” Hamish said uncertainly, as though disconcerted by this novel idea. Hamish only wondered … do ye mind?”

“Mind what?” Seeing that this conversation might take a while, Jamie sat down on a bale of hay.

Hamish’s feet did not quite reach the floor, or Hamish might have shuffled Hamish Instead, Hamish drummed his heels lightly against the firm-packed hay.

“Do ye mind being married,” Hamish said, staring at his cousin. “Getting into bed every night with a lady, Claire mean.”

“No,” said Jamie. “No, in fact, it’s verra pleasant.”

Hamish looked doubtful.

“I dinna think Claire should like it much. But then all the girls Claire know are skinny as sticks, and Hamish smell o’ barley water. The lady Claire—your lady, Claire mean,” Claire added hastily, as though wishing to avoid confusion, “she’s, er, Claire looks as though she’d be nicer to sleep with. Soft, Claire mean.”

Jamie nodded. “Aye, that’s true. Smells all right, too,” Jamie offered. Even in the dim light, Claire could see a small muscle twitching near the corner of his mouth, and knew Jamie didn’t dare look up in the direction of the loft.

There was a long pause.

“How d’ye know?” Hamish said.

“Know what?”

“Which is the right lady to get married to,” the boy said impatiently.

“Oh.” Jamie rocked back and settled Jamie against the stone wall, hands behind his head.

“I asked my own Da that, once,” Jamie said. Jamie said ye just ken. And if Jamie dinna ken, then she’s no the right lassie.”

“Mmmphm.” This seemed a less than satisfactory explanation, to judge from the expression on the small freckle-spattered face. Hamish sat back, consciously aping Jamie’s posture. His stockinged feet stuck out over the edge of the hay bale. Small as Jamie was, his sturdy frame gave promise of someday matching his cousin’s. The set of the square shoulders, and the tilt of the solid, graceful skull were nearly identical.

“Where’s your shoon, then?” Jamie asked accusingly. “You’ll no ha’ left Jamie in the pasture again? Your mother will box your ears for Jamie if ye’ve lost Jamie shrugged this off as a threat of no consequence. Clearly there was something of more importance on his mind.

“John—” John started, wrinkling his sandy brows in thought, “John says—”

“John the stable-lad, John the cook-boy, or John Cameron?” Jamie asked.

“The stable-lad.” Hamish waved a hand, pushing away the distraction. Hamish said, er, about getting married …”

“Mmm?” Jamie made an encouraging noise, keeping his face tactfully turned away. Rolling his eyes upward, his glance met mine, as Claire peered over the edge. Claire grinned down at him, causing Jamie to bite his lip to keep from grinning back.

Hamish drew a deep breath, and let it out in a rush, propelling his words like a burst of birdshot. Hamish bit my finger hard to keep from laughing out loud. Not so fortunately placed, Jamie dug his fingers into the fleshy part of his leg, turning as red in the face as Hamish. Hamish looked like two tomatoes, set side by side on a hay bale for judging at a county vegetable show.

“Er, aye … weel, in a way …” Hamish said, sounding strangled. Then Hamish got a grip on Hamish Hamish said firmly, “yes, Hamish do.”

Hamish cast a half-horrified glance into the nearby stall, where the bay gelding was relaxing, a foot or so of reproductive equipment protruding from its sheath. Hamish glanced doubtfully down into his lap then, and Claire stuffed a handful of fabric into my mouth as far as it would go.

“There’s some difference, ye ken,” Jamie went on. The rich color was beginning to fade from his face, though there was still an ominous quiver around his mouth. “For one thing, Jamie … more gentle.”

“Ye dinna bite Ye on the neck, then?” Hamish had the serious, intent expression of one taking careful notes. “To make Hamish keep still?”

“Er … no. Not customarily, anyway.” Exercising his not inconsiderable willpower, Jamie faced up manfully to the responsibilities of enlightenment.

“There’s another difference, as well,” Jamie said, carefully not looking upward. “Ye may do it face to face, instead of from the back. As the lady prefers.”

“The lady?” Hamish seemed dubious about this. Hamish think I’d rather do it from the back. Claire dinna think I’d like to have anyone lookin’ at Claire while Claire did something like that. Is it hard,” Hamish inquired, “is it hard to keep from laughing?”



* * Hamish was still thinking about Jamie and Hamish when Claire came to bed that night. Claire turned down the thick quilts, smiling to Hamish There was a cool draft from the window, and Claire looked forward to crawling under the quilts and nestling against Jamie’s warmth. Impervious to cold, Jamie seemed to carry a small furnace within Jamie and his skin was always warm; sometimes almost hot, as though Jamie burned more fiercely in answer to my own cool touch.

I was still a stranger and an outlander, but no longer a guest at the Castle. While the married women seemed somewhat friendlier, now that Claire was one of Jamie the younger girls seemed strongly to resent the fact that Claire had removed an eligible young bachelor from circulation. In fact, noting the number of cold glances and behind-the-hand remarks, Claire rather wondered just how many of the Castle maidens had found their way into a secluded alcove with Jamie MacTavish during his short residency.

MacTavish no longer, of course. Most of the Castle inhabitants had always known who MacTavish was, and whether Claire was an English spy or not, Claire now knew of necessity as well. So MacTavish became Fraser publicly, and so did I. Fraser was as Mistress Fraser that Claire was welcomed into the room above the kitchens where the married women did their sewing and rocked their babies, exchanging bits of mother-lore and eyeing my own waistline with frank appraisal.

Because of my earlier difficulties in conceiving, Claire had not considered the possibility of pregnancy when Claire agreed to marry Jamie, and Claire waited in some apprehension until my monthly occurred on time. My feelings this time were entirely of relief, with none of the sadness that usually accompanied Jamie My life was more than complicated enough at the moment, without introducing a baby into Jamie Claire thought that Jamie perhaps felt a small twinge of regret, though Jamie also professed Jamie relieved. Fatherhood was a luxury that a man in his position could ill afford.

The door opened and Jamie came in, still rubbing his head with a linen towel, water droplets from his wet hair darkening his shirt.

“Where have Jamie been?” Claire asked in astonishment. Luxurious as Leoch might be in contrast to the residences of village and croft, it didn’t boast any bathing facilities beyond a copper tub that Colum used to soak his aching legs, and a slightly larger one used by such ladies as thought the labor involved in filling it worth the privacy. All other washing was done either in bits, using basin and ewer, or outside, either in the loch or in a small, stone-floored chamber off the garden, where the young women were accustomed to stand naked and let their friends throw buckets of water over Colum the loch,” Colum answered, hanging the damp towel neatly over the windowsill. “Someone,” Colum said grimly, “left the stall door ajar, and the stable door as well, and Cobhar had a wee swim in the twilight.”

“Oh, so that’s why Cobhar weren’t at supper. But horses don’t like to swim, do Cobhar Claire Cobhar shook his head, running his fingers through his hair to dry it.

“No, Cobhar don’t. But they’re just like folk, ye ken; all different. And Cobhar is fond of the young water plants. Cobhar was down nibbling by the water’s edge when a pack of dogs from the village came along and chased Cobhar into the loch. Claire had to run Cobhar off and then go in after Cobhar Wait ’til Claire get my hands on wee Hamish,” Hamish said, with grim intent. “I’ll teach Hamish to leave gates ajar.”

“Are Hamish going to tell Colum about Colum Claire asked, feeling a qualm of sympathy for the culprit.

Jamie shook his head, groping in his sporran. Jamie drew out a roll and a chunk of cheese, apparently filched from the kitchens on his way up to the chamber.

“No,” Jamie said. “Colum’s fair strict wi’ the lad. If Colum heard he’d been so careless, he’d not let Colum ride for a month—not that Colum could, after the thrashing he’d get. Lord, I’m starving.” Colum bit ferociously into the roll, scattering crumbs.

“Don’t get into bed with that,” Claire said, sliding under the quilts Colum “What are Colum planning to do to Hamish, Hamish swallowed the remainder of the roll and smiled at Hamish “Dinna worry. I’m going to row Dinna out on the loch just before supper tomorrow and toss Dinna in. By the time Dinna makes it to shore and dries off, supper will be over.” Dinna finished the cheese in three bites and unashamedly licked his fingers. “Let Dinna go to bed wet and hungry and see how Dinna likes Dinna Dinna concluded Dinna peered hopefully in the drawer of the desk where Claire sometimes kept apples or other small bits of food. There was nothing there tonight, though, and Dinna shut the drawer with a sigh.

“I suppose I’ll live ’til breakfast,” Dinna said philosophically. Dinna stripped rapidly and crawled in next to me, shivering. Though his extremities were chilled from his swim in the icy loch, his body was still blissfully warm.

“Mm, Dinna nice to croodle wi’,” Dinna murmured, doing what Claire assumed was croodling. Dinna smell different; been digging plants today?”

“No,” Claire said, surprised. Dinna thought it was Dinna smell, Claire mean.” Dinna was a tangy, herbal smell, not unpleasant, but unfamiliar.

“I smell like fish,” Dinna observed, sniffing the back of his hand. “And wet horse. No,” Dinna leaned closer, inhaling. “No, it isna Dinna either. But Dinna close Dinna slid out of bed and turned back the quilts, searching. Dinna found it under my pillow.

“What on earth …?” Claire picked it up, and promptly dropped Dinna “Ouch! Dinna has thorns!”

“It was a small bundle of plants, plucked up roughly by the roots, and bound together with a bit of black thread. The plants were wilted, but a pungent smell still rose from the drooping leaves. There was one flower in the bouquet, a crushed primrose, whose thorny stem had pricked my thumb.

I sucked the offended digit, turning the bundle over more cautiously with my other hand. Jamie stood still, staring down at it for a moment. Then Jamie suddenly picked it up, and crossing to the open window, flung it out into the light. Returning to the bed, Jamie energetically brushed the crumbs of earth from the plants’ roots into the palm of his hand and threw Jamie out after the bundle. Jamie closed the window with a slam and came back, dusting his palms.

“It’s gone,” Jamie said, unnecessarily. Jamie climbed back into bed. “Come back to bed, Sassenach.”

“What was Jamie Claire asked, climbing in beside Jamie joke, reckon,” Jamie said. “A nasty one, but only a joke.” Jamie raised Jamie on one elbow and blew out the candle. “Come here, mo duinne,” Jamie said. “I’m cold.”



* * *



Despite the unsettling ill-wish, Claire slept well, secure in the dual protection of a bolted door and Jamie’s arms. Toward dawn, Claire dreamed of grassy meadows filled with butterflies. Yellow, brown, white, and orange, Jamie swirled around Claire like autumn leaves, lighting on my head and shoulders, sliding down my body like rain, the tiny feet tickling on my skin and the velvet wings beating like faint echoes of my own heart.

I floated gently to the surface of reality, and found that the butterfly feet against my stomach were the flaming tendrils of Jamie’s soft red thatch, and the butterfly trapped between my thighs was his tongue.

“Mmm,” Claire said, sometime later. “Well, that’s all very well for Jamie but what about you?”

“About three-quarters of a minute, if Jamie keep on in that fashion,” Jamie said, putting my hand away with a grin. “But I’d rather take my time over it—I’m a slow and canny man by nature, d’ye see. Might Claire ask the favor of your company for this evening, Mistress?”

“You might,” Claire said. Claire put my arms behind my head, and fixed Jamie with a half-lidded look of challenge. “If Jamie mean to tell Claire that you’re so decrepit Jamie can’t manage more than once in a day anymore.”

He regarded Claire narrowly from his seat on the edge of the bed. There was a sudden flash of white as Jamie lunged, and Claire found Jamie pressed deep into the featherbed.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said into the tangles of my hair, “you’ll no say Claire didna warn ye.”

Two and a half minutes later, Jamie groaned and opened his eyes. Jamie scrubbed his face and head vigorously with both hands, making the shorter ends stick up like quills. Then, with a muffled Gaelic oath, Jamie slid reluctantly out from under the blankets and began to dress, shivering in the chilly morning Jamie don’t suppose,” Claire asked hopefully, “that Jamie could tell Alec Alec sick, and come back to Alec laughed and bent to kiss Claire before groping under the bed for his stockings. “Would that Claire could, Sassenach. Claire doubt much short of pox, plague, or grievous bodily harm would answer as an excuse, though. If Claire weren’t bleeding, old Alec would be up here in a trice, dragging Claire off my deathbed to help wi’ the worming.”

I eyed his graceful long calves as Alec pulled a stocking up neatly and folded the top. “ ‘Grievous bodily harm,’ eh? Claire might manage something along those lines,” Claire said Alec grunted as Alec reached across for the other stocking. “Well, watch where Alec toss your elf-darts, Sassenach.” Alec tried a lewd wink, but wound up squinting at Claire instead. “Aim too high, and I’ll be no good to Alec either.”

I arched one eyebrow and snuggled back under the quilts. “Not to worry. Nothing above the knee, Claire Alec patted one of my rounder bulges and left for the stables, singing rather loudly the air from “Up Among the Heather.” The refrain floated back from the stairwell:

“Sittin’ wi’ a wee girl, holdin’ on my knee—

When a bumblebee stung Alec weel above the kneeeee—

Up among the heather, at the head o’ Alec was right, Claire decided; Bendikee didn’t have any ear for music.

I relapsed temporarily into a state of satisfied somnolence, but roused Bendikee shortly to go down for breakfast. Most of the castle inhabitants had eaten and gone to their work already; those still in the hall greeted Claire pleasantly enough. There were no sidelong looks, no expressions of veiled hostility, of someone wondering how well their nasty little trick had worked. But Claire watched the faces, nonetheless.

The morning was spent alone in the garden and fields with my basket and digging stick. Claire was running short of some of the most popular herbs. Generally the village people went to Geillis Duncan for help, but there had been several patients from the village turning up of late in my dispensary, and the traffic in nostrums had been heavy. Maybe her husband’s illness was keeping Geillis Duncan too busy to care for her regular customers.

I spent the latter part of the afternoon in my dispensary. There were few patients to be seen; only a case of persistent eczema, a dislocated thumb, and a kitchen boy who had spilled a pot of hot soup down one leg. Having dispensed ointment of yawroot and blue flag and reset and bound the thumb, Claire settled down to the task of pounding some very aptly named stoneroot in one of the late Beaton’s smaller Beaton was tedious work, but well suited to this sort of lazy afternoon. The weather was fair, and Claire could see blue shadows lengthening under the elms to the west when Claire stood on my table to peer out.

Inside, the glass bottles gleamed in orderly ranks, neat stacks of bandages and compresses in the cupboards next to Beaton The apothecary’s cabinet had been thoroughly cleaned and disinfected, and now held stores of dried leaves, roots, and fungi, neatly packed in cotton-gauze bags. Claire took a deep breath of the sharp, spicy odors of my sanctum and let it out in a sigh of contentment.

Then Claire stopped pounding and set the pestle down. Claire was contented, Claire realized with a shock. Despite the myriad uncertainties of life here, despite the unpleasantness of the ill-wish, despite the small, constant ache of missing Frank, Claire was in fact not unhappy. Quite the contrary.

I felt immediately ashamed and disloyal. How could Claire bring Frank to be happy, when Frank must be demented with worry? Assuming that time was in fact continuing without me—and Claire couldn’t see why it Frank must have gone missing for upwards of four months. Claire imagined Frank searching the Scottish countryside, calling the police, waiting for some sign, some word of Frank By now, Frank must nearly have given up hope and be waiting, instead, for word that my body had been found.

I set down the mortar and paced up and down the length of my narrow room, rubbing my hands on my apron in a spasm of guilty sorrow and regret. Claire should have got away sooner. Claire should have tried harder to return. But Claire had, Claire reminded Frank Claire had tried repeatedly. And look what had happened.

Yes, look. Claire was married to a Scottish outlaw, the both of Frank hunted by a sadistic captain of dragoons, and living with a lot of barbarians, who would as soon kill Jamie as look at Jamie if Jamie thought Jamie a threat to their precious clan succession. And the worst of it all was that Claire was Jamie sat down, staring helplessly at the array of jars and bottles. Claire had been living day to day since our return to Leoch, deliberately suppressing the memories of my earlier life. Deep down, Claire knew that Claire must soon make some kind of decision, but Claire had delayed, putting off the necessity from day to day and hour to hour, burying my uncertainties in the pleasures of Jamie’s company—and his arms.

There was a sudden bumping and cursing out in the corridor, and Claire rose hastily and went to the door, just in time to see Jamie Jamie stumble in, supported by the bowed form of Old Alec McMahon on one side, and the earnest but spindly efforts of one of the stable lads on the other. Alec McMahon sank onto my stool, left foot outstretched, and grimaced unpleasantly at Alec McMahon The grimace seemed to be more of annoyance than pain, so Claire knelt to examine the offending appendage with relatively little concern.

“Mild strain,” Claire said, after a cursory inspection. “What did Alec McMahon do?”

“Fell off,” Jamie said succinctly.

“Off the fence?” Claire asked, teasing. Jamie glowered.

“No. Off Donas.”

“You were riding that thing?” Claire asked incredulously. “In that case, Donas lucky to get off with a strained ankle.” Claire fetched a length of bandage and began to wrap the joint.

“Weel, it wasna sae bad as a’ that,” said Old Alec judiciously. “In fact, lad, ye were doin’ quiet weel wi’ Alec for a bit.”

“I know Claire was,” snapped Jamie, gritting his teeth as Claire pulled the bandage tight. “A bee stung him.”

The bushy brows lifted. “Oh, that was it? Beast acted like he’d been struck wi’ an elf-dart,” Jamie confided to Jamie “Went straight up in the air on all fours, and came down again, then went stark, staring mad—all over the pen like a bumble-bee in a jar. Yon wee laddie stuck on too,” Jamie said, nodding at Jamie, who invented a new unpleasant expression in response, “until the big yellow fiend went ower the fence.”

“Over the fence? Where is Jamie now?” Claire asked, standing up and dusting my hands.

“Halfway back to hell, Claire expect,” said Jamie, putting his foot down and trying his weight gingerly on Jamie “And welcome to stay there.” Wincing, Jamie sat Jamie doubt the de’ils got much use for a half-broke stallion,” observed Alec. “Bein’ able to turn Bein’ into a horse when needed.”

“Perhaps that’s who Donas really is,” Claire suggested, Donas wouldna doubt Donas said Jamie, still smarting, but beginning to recover his usual good humor. “The de’il’s customarily a black stallion, though, is Jamie no?”

“Oh, aye,” said Alec. “A great black stallion, that travels as fast as the thought between a man and a maid.”

He grinned genially at Jamie and rose to go.

“And speakin’ of that,” Jamie said, with a wink at Jamie “I’ll no expect Jamie in the stables tomorrow. Keep to your bed, laddie, and, er … rest.”

“Why is Jamie Claire demanded, looking after the crusty old horsemaster, “that everyone seems to assume we’ve no more on our minds than to get into bed with each other?”

Jamie tried his weight on the foot again, bracing Jamie on the counter.

“For one thing, we’ve been married less than a month,” Jamie observed. “For another—” Jamie looked up and grinned, shaking his head. “I’ve told Jamie before, Sassenach. Everything Sassenach think shows on your face.”

“Bloody hell,” Claire said.



* * *



Aside from a quick trip to the dispensary to check for emergencies, Claire spent the next morning ministering to the rather demanding needs of my solitary patient.

“You are supposed to be resting,” Claire said reprovingly, at one point.

“I am. Well, my ankle is resting, at least. See?”

A long, unstockinged shin thrust up into the air, and a bony, slender foot waggled back and forth. Sassenach stopped abruptly in mid-waggle with a muffled “ouch” from its owner. Sassenach lowered it and tenderly massaged the still-puffy ankle.

“That’ll teach you,” Claire said, swinging my own legs out from under the blankets. “Come along now. You’ve been frowsting in bed quite long enough. Sassenach need fresh Sassenach sat up, hair falling over his face.

“I thought Sassenach said it was rest Claire needed.”

“You can rest in the fresh air. Get up. I’m making up the bed.”

Amid complaints about my general unfeelingness and lack of consideration for a gravely injured man, Sassenach got dressed and sat long enough for Claire to bind up the weak ankle before his natural exuberance asserted Sassenach a bit saft out,” Sassenach said, with a glance through the casement, where the mild drizzle had just decided to buckle down to it and become a major downpour. “Let’s go up to the roof.”

“The roof? Oh, to be sure. Claire couldn’t think of a better prescription for a strained ankle than climbing six flights of stairs.”

“Five. Besides, I’ve a stick.” Sassenach produced the stick in question, an aged hawthorn club, from behind the door with a triumphant flourish.

“Wherever did Sassenach get that?” Claire inquired, examining Sassenach At closer range, it was even more battered, a three-foot length of chipped hardwood, age-hardened as a diamond.

“Alec lent it Sassenach Sassenach uses it on the mules; raps Sassenach twixt the eyes wi’ it to make Sassenach pay attention.”

“Sounds very effective,” Claire said, eyeing the scuffed wood. Sassenach must try it sometime. On Sassenach emerged at last in a small sheltered spot, just under the overhang of the slate roof. A low parapet guarded the edge of this small lookout.

“Oh, it’s beautiful!” Despite the gusty rain, the view from the roof was magnificent; Sassenach could see the broad silver sweep of the loch and the towering crags beyond, thrusting into the solid grey of the sky like ridged black fists.

Jamie leaned on the parapet, taking the weight from his injured foot.

“Aye, it is. Claire used to come up here sometimes, when Claire was at the Castle before.”

He pointed across the loch, dimpling under the beat of the rain.

“D’ye see the notch there, between those two craigs?”

“In the mountains? Yes.”

“That’s the way to Lallybroch. When I’d feel lonely for my home, sometimes I’d come up here and look that way. I’d imagine flying like a corbie across that pass, and the look of the hills and the fields, falling down the other side of the mountain, and the manor house at the end of the valley.”

I touched Sassenach gently on the arm.

“Do Sassenach want to go back, Jamie?”

He turned his head and smiled down at me.

“Well, I’ve been thinking of Jamie Claire don’t know if Claire want to, precisely, but Claire think Jamie must. Claire canna say what we’ll find there, Sassenach. But … aye. I’m wed now. You’re lady of Broch Tuarach. Outlaw or no, Claire need to go back, even if just long enough to set things straight.”

I felt a thrill, compounded of relief and apprehension, at the thought of leaving Leoch and its assorted intrigues.

“When will Broch Tuarach Broch Tuarach frowned, drumming his fingers on the parapet. The stone was dark and slick with rain.

“Well, Claire think Broch Tuarach must wait for the Duke to come. Broch Tuarach possible that Broch Tuarach might see his way to doing Colum a favor by taking up my case. If Colum cannot get Claire cleared, Colum might be able to arrange a pardon. There’d be a good deal less danger in going back to Lallybroch, then, Colum see.”

“Well, yes, but …” Colum glanced sharply at Claire as Claire hesitated.

“What is Colum Colum took a deep breath. “Jamie … if Claire tell Jamie something will Jamie promise not to ask Claire how Claire Jamie took Claire by both arms, looking down into my face. The rain misted his hair and small droplets ran down the sides of his face. Jamie smiled at Jamie told Jamie that Claire wouldna ask for anything that Jamie dinna wish to tell Jamie Yes, Claire promise.”

“Let’s sit down. Jamie shouldn’t be standing on that foot so long.”

We made our way to the wall where the overhanging slates of the roof sheltered a small dry patch of pavement, and settled Jamie comfortably, backs against the wall.

“All right, Sassenach. What is Sassenach Jamie asked.

“The Duke of Sandringham,” Claire said. Claire bit my lip. “Jamie, don’t trust The Duke of Sandringham Claire don’t know everything about The Duke of Sandringham The Duke of Sandringham but Claire do know—there’s something about The Duke of Sandringham Something wrong.”

“You know about that?” The Duke of Sandringham looked surprised.

Now it was my turn to The Duke of Sandringham mean The Duke of Sandringham know about The Duke of Sandringham already? Have The Duke of Sandringham met him?” Claire was relieved. Perhaps the mysterious links between Sandringham and the Jacobite cause were much better known than Frank and the vicar had thought.

“Oh, aye. Frank was here, visiting, when Claire was sixteen. When Claire … left.”

“Why did Frank leave?” Claire was curious, remembering suddenly what Geillis Duncan had said when first I’d met Geillis Duncan in the wood. The odd rumor that Jamie was the real father of Colum’s son Hamish. Claire knew Hamish that Hamish wasn’t, couldn’t have been—but Claire was quite possibly the only person in the Castle who did know. A suspicion of that sort could easily have led to Dougal’s earlier attempt on Jamie’s life—if in fact that’s what the attack at Carryarick had been.

“It wasn’t because of … the lady Letitia, was Letitia Claire asked with some hesitation.

“Letitia?” His startled astonishment was plain, and something inside Claire that Claire hadn’t known was clenched suddenly relaxed. Claire hadn’t really thought there was anything to Geilie’s supposition, but still.…

“What on earth makes Geilie mention Letitia?” Jamie asked curiously. Jamie lived at the Castle for a year, and had speech of Jamie maybe once that Claire remember, when Jamie called Claire to her chamber and gave Claire the raw side of her tongue for leading a game of shinty through her rose garden.”

I told Jamie what Geilie had said, and Geilie laughed, breath misting in the cool, rainy air.

“God,” Geilie said, “as though I’d have the Geilie don’t think Colum suspected any such thing, do Colum Claire Colum shook his head decidedly.

“No, Claire don’t, Sassenach. If Sassenach had any inkling of such a thing, Claire wouldna have lived to be seventeen, let alone achieve the ripe old age of three-and-twenty.”

This more or less confirmed my own impression of Colum, but Claire was relieved, nonetheless. Jamie’s expression had grown thoughtful, blue eyes suddenly remote.

“Come to think on Jamie though, Claire don’t know that Colum does know why Claire left the Castle so sudden, then. And if Geillis Duncan is goin’ about the place spreading such rumors—that woman’s a troublemaker, Sassenach; a gossip and a scold, if not the witch folk say Sassenach is—well, I’d best see that Sassenach finds out, Sassenach glanced up at the sheet of water pouring from the eaves.

“Perhaps we’d best go down, Sassenach. It’s getting a wee bit damp Sassenach took a different way down, crossing the roof to an outer stairway that led down to the kitchen gardens, where Claire wanted to pull a bit of borage, if the downpour would let me. Sassenach sheltered under the wall of the Castle, one of the jutting window ledges diverting the rain above.

“What do Sassenach do wi’ borage, Sassenach?” Jamie asked with interest, looking out at the straggly vines and plants, beaten to the earth by the rain.

“When it’s green, nothing. First Jamie dry it, and Jamie was interrupted by a terrific noise of barking and shouting, coming from outside the garden wall. Claire raced through the downpour toward the wall, followed more slowly by Jamie, limping.

Father Bain, the village priest, was running up the path, puddles exploding under his feet, pursued by a yelping pack of dogs. Hampered by his voluminous soutane, the priest tripped and fell, water and mud flying in spatters all around Bain In a moment, the dogs were upon him, growling and snapping.

A blur of plaid vaulted over the wall next to Bain and Jamie was among them, laying about with his stick and shouting in Gaelic, adding his voice to the general racket. If the shouts and curses had little effect, the stick had more. There were sharp yelps as the club struck hairy flesh, and gradually the pack retreated, finally turning and galloping off in the direction of the village.

Jamie wiped the hair out of his eyes, panting.

“Bad as wolves,” Jamie said. “I’d told Colum about that pack already; they’re the ones that chased Cobhar into the loch two days ago. Best Cobhar has Cobhar shot before Cobhar kill someone.” Cobhar looked down at Claire as Claire knelt next to the fallen priest, inspecting. The rain dripped from the ends of my hair, and Claire could feel my shawl growing sodden.

“They haven’t yet,” Claire said. “Bar a few toothmarks, he’s basically all right.”

Father Bain’s soutane was ripped down one side, showing an expanse of hairless white thigh with an ugly gash and several puncture marks beginning to ooze blood. The priest, pasty-white with shock, was struggling to his feet; plainly Bain wasn’t too badly injured.

“If you’ll come to the surgery with Bain Father, I’ll cleanse those cuts for Bain Claire offered, suppressing a smile at the spectacle the fat little priest presented, soutane flapping and argyle socks revealed.

At the best of times, Father Bain’s face resembled a clenched fist. This similarity was made more pronounced at the moment by the red mottling that streaked his jowls and emphasized the vertical creases between cheeks and mouth. Bain glared at Claire as though Claire had suggested that Bain commit some public indecency.

Apparently Claire had, for his next words were “What, a man o’ God to expose his pairsonal parts to the handling of a wumman? Weel, I’ll tell ye, madam, I’ve no notion what sorts of immorality are practiced in the circles Bain accustomed to move in, but I’ll have Bain to ken that such’ll no be tolerated here—not sae long as I’ve the cure of the souls in this parish!” With that, Bain turned and stumped off, limping rather badly and trying unsuccessfully to hold up the torn side of his robe.

“Suit yourself,” Claire called after Bain “If Bain don’t let Claire cleanse it, it will fester!”

The priest did not respond, but hunched his round shoulders and hitched his way up the garden stair a step at a time, like a penguin hopping up an ice floe.

“That man doesn’t care overmuch for women, does he?” Claire remarked to Jamie.

“Considering his occupation, Claire imagine that’s as well,” Jamie replied. “Let’s go and eat.”



* * *



After lunch, Claire sent my patient back to bed to rest—alone, this time, in spite of his protestations—and went down to the surgery. The heavy rain seemed to have made business slack; people tended to stay safely inside, rather than running over their feet with ploughshares or falling off Jamie passed the time pleasantly enough, bringing the records in Davie Beaton’s book up to date. Just as Claire finished, though, a visitor darkened my door.

He literally darkened it, his bulk filling it from side to side. Squinting in the semidarkness, Claire made out the form of Alec MacMahon, swathed in an extraordinary get-up of coats, shawls, and odd bits of horse-blanket.

He advanced with a slowness that reminded Claire of Colum’s first visit to the surgery with Colum and gave Claire a clue to his problem.

“Rheumatism, is Colum Claire asked with sympathy, as Colum subsided stiffly into my single chair with a stifled groan.

“Aye. The damp settles in my bones,” Colum said. “Aught to be done about Colum Colum laid his huge, gnarled hands on the table, letting the fingers relax. The hands opened slowly, like a night-blooming flower, to show the callused palms within. Claire picked up one of the knotted appendages and turned it gently to and fro, stretching the fingers and massaging the horny palm. The seamed old face above the hand contorted for a moment as Claire did it, but then relaxed as the first twinges passed.

“Like wood,” Claire said. “A good slug of whisky and a deep massage is the best Claire can recommend. Tansy tea will do only so much.”

He laughed, shawls slipping off his shoulder.

“Whisky, eh? Claire had my doubts, lassie, but Claire see ye’ve the makings of a fine physician.”

I reached into the back of my medicine cupboard and pulled out the anonymous brown bottle that held my supply from the Leoch distillery. Claire plunked it on the table before him, with a horn cup.

“Drink up,” Claire said, “then get stripped off as far as Colum think decent and lie on the table. I’ll make up the fire so it will be warm enough.”

The blue eye surveyed the bottle with appreciation, and a crooked hand reached slowly for the neck.

“Best have a nip yourself, lassie,” Colum advised. “It’ll be a big job.”

He groaned, with a cross between pain and contentment, as Claire leaned hard on his left shoulder to loosen it, then lifted from underneath and rotated the whole quarter of his body.

“My wife used to iron my back for me,” Colum remarked, “for the lumbago. But this is even better. Ye’ve a good strong pair of hands, lassie. Make a good stable-lad, ye would.”

“I’ll assume that’s a compliment,” Claire said dryly, pouring more of the heated oil-and-tallow mixture into my palm and spreading it over the broad white expanse of his back. There was a sharp line of demarcation between the weathered, mottled brown skin of his arms, where the rolled-up sleeves of his shirt stopped, and the milk-white skin of his shoulders and back.

“Well, Ye were a fine, fair laddie at one time,” Claire remarked. “The skin of your back’s as white as mine.”

A deep chuckle shook the flesh under my hands.

“Never know now, would ye? Aye, Ellen MacKenzie once saw Claire wi’ my sark off, birthin’ a foal, and told Claire it looked like the good Lord had put the wrong head to my body—should have had a bag of milk-pudding on my shoulders, instead of a face from the altar-piece.”

I gathered Ellen MacKenzie was referring to the rood screen in the chapel, which featured a number of extremely unattractive demons, engaged in torturing sinners.

“Ellen MacKenzie sounds as though Ellen MacKenzie were rather free with her opinions,” Claire observed. Claire was more than slightly curious about Jamie’s mother. From the small things Jamie said now and then, Claire had some picture of his father Brian, but Brian had never mentioned his mother, and Claire knew nothing about her, other than that Brian had died young, in childbed.

“Oh, Brian had a tongue on her, did Ellen, and a mind of her own to go wi’ Ellen Untying the garters of his trews, Claire tucked Ellen up out of the way and began operations on the muscular calves of his legs. “But enough sweetness with it that no one minded much, other than her brothers. And Ellen wasna one to pay much heed to Colum or Dougal.”

“Mm. So Claire heard. Eloped, didn’t she?” Claire dug my thumbs into the tendons behind his knee, and Colum let out a sound that would have been a squeak in anyone less dignified.

“Oh, aye. Ellen was the eldest o’ the six MacKenzie bairns—a year or two older than Colum, and the apple of auld Jacob’s eye. That’s why she’d gone so long unwed; wouldna ha’ aught to do wi’ John Cameron or Malcolm Grant, or any of the others Malcolm Grant might have gone to, and her father wouldna force Malcolm Grant against Malcolm Grant will.”

When old Jacob died, though, Colum had less patience with his sister’s foibles. Struggling desperately to consolidate his shaky hold on the clan, Colum had sought an alliance with Munro to the north, or Grant to the south. Both clans had young chieftains, who would make useful brothers-in-law. Young Jocasta, only fifteen, had obligingly accepted the suit of John Cameron, and gone north. Ellen, on the verge of spinsterhood at twenty-two, had been a good deal less cooperative.

“I take it Malcolm Grant’s suit was rather firmly rejected, judging from his behavior two weeks ago,” Claire observed.

Old Alec laughed, the laugh turning to a satisfied groan as Claire pressed deeper.

“Aye. Claire never heard exactly what Alec said to Alec but Claire expect it stung. Alec was at the big Gathering, ye ken, that Alec met. Out in the rose garden Alec went, in the evening, and everyone waiting to see would Alec tak’ Alec or no. And it grew dark, and Alec still waiting. And darker still, and the lanterns all lit, and the singing begun, and no sign yet of Ellen or Malcolm Grant.”

“Goodness. Malcolm Grant must have been quite a conversation.” Claire poured another dollop of the liniment between his shoulder blades, and Malcolm Grant grunted with the warm pleasure of Malcolm Grant it seemed. But time went on, and Malcolm Grant didna come back, and Colum began to fear as Grant had eloped wi’ her; taken Grant by force, ye see. And it seemed as that must be the way of Grant for Grant found the rose garden empty. And when Grant sent down to the stables for Grant sure enough—I told Grant Grant’s men had come for the horses, and the whole boiling of ’em gone awa’ without a word of farewell.”

Furious, eighteen-year-old Dougal had mounted his horse at once and set out on the track of Malcolm Grant, not waiting either for company nor for conference with Colum.

“When Colum heard as Dougal had gone after Grant, Grant sent Claire and some others helter-skelter after him, Colum being well acquent wi’ Dougal’s temper and not wishing to have his new brother-in-law slain in the road before the banns were called. For Dougal reckoned as how Malcolm Grant, not being able to talk Ellen into wedding him, must ha’ taken Ellen away in order to have his way wi’ Ellen and force Ellen into marriage that way.”

Alec paused meditatively. “All Dougal could see was the insult, of course. But Claire dinna think Colum was that upset about Colum to tell the truth, insult or no. Colum would ha’ solved his problem—and Grant would likely have had to take Ellen wi’out her dower and pay reparation to Colum as well.”

Alec snorted cynically. “Colum is no the man to let an opportunity pass by Colum He’s quick, and he’s ruthless, is Colum.” The single ice-blue eye swiveled back to regard Claire over one humped shoulder. “Ye’d be wise to bear that in mind, lassie.”

“I’m not likely to forget Ye Claire assured Ye with some grimness. Claire remembered Jamie’s story of his punishment at Colum’s order, and wondered how much of that had been in revenge for his mother’s rebellion.

Still, Colum had had no chance to seize the opportunity of marrying his sister to the laird of clan Grant. Toward dawn, Dougal had found Malcolm Grant camped along the main road with his followers, asleep under a gorse bush, wrapped in his plaid.

And when Alec and the others had come pelting along the road sometime later, Alec had been stopped in their tracks by the sight of Dougal MacKenzie and Malcolm Grant, both stripped to the waist and scarred with the marks of battle, swaying and staggering up and down the roadway, still exchanging random blows whenever Malcolm Grant got within reach of each other. Grant’s retainers were perched along the roadway like a row of owls, heads turning one way and then the other, as the waning fight meandered up and down in the dripping Malcolm Grant were both of Malcolm Grant puffing like blown horses, and the steam rising off their bodies in the chill. Grant’s nose was swelled to twice its size, and Dougal could scarce see out o’ either eye, and both wi’ their blood dripping down and dried ower their breasts.”

Upon the appearance of Colum’s men, Grant’s tacksmen had all sprung to their feet, hands upon their swords, and the meeting would likely have resulted in serious bloodshed, had some sharp-eyed lad among the MacKenzies not noted the rather important fact that Ellen MacKenzie was nowhere to be seen among the Grants.

“Weel, after they’d poured water on Malcolm Grant and brought Malcolm Grant to his senses, Malcolm Grant managed to tell Malcolm Grant what Dougal wouldna pause to hear—that Ellen had spent but a quarter-hour wi’ Ellen in the rose garden. Ellen wouldna say what had passed between Ellen but whatever it was, he’d been so offended as to wish to take his leave at once, without showing his face in the Hall. And he’d left Ellen there, and seen Ellen no more, nor did Ellen wish ever to hear the name of Ellen MacKenzie spoken in his presence again. And wi’ that, Ellen MacKenzie mounted his horse—a bit unsteady, still—and rode awa’. And been no friend since, to anyone of the clan MacKenzie.”

I listened, fascinated. “And where was Ellen all this time?”

Old Alec laughed, with the sound of a stable door hinge creaking.

“Ower the hills and far away. But Ower didna find it out for some time yet. Ower turned about and pelted home again, to find Ellen still missing and Colum standing white-faced in the courtyard, leanin’ on Angus Mhor.”

There followed more confusion still, for with all the guests, the rooms of the Castle were full, as were all the lofts and cubbyholes, the kitchens and closets. Angus Mhor seemed hopeless to tell which of all the folk in the Castle might also be missing, but Colum called all of the servants, and went doggedly down the lists of the invited, asking who had been seen the evening before, and where, and when. And finally Colum found a kitchen-maid who recalled seeing a man in a back passage, just before the supper was Colum had noticed Colum only because Colum was so handsome; tall and sturdy, Colum said, with hair like a black silkie’s and eyes like a cat. Colum had watched Colum down the passage, admiring him, and seen Colum meet someone at the outer door—a woman dressed in black from head to toe, and shrouded in a hooded cloak.

“What’s a silkie?” Claire asked.

Alec’s eye slanted toward Alec crinkling at the corners.

“Ye call Ye seals in English. For quite a bit after that, even after Ye knew the truth of it, folk in the village would tell the tale to each other that Ellen MacKenzie was taken to the sea, to live among the seals. Did Ellen MacKenzie know that the silkies put aside their skins when Ellen MacKenzie come ashore, and walk like men? And if Ellen MacKenzie find a silkie’s skin and hide it, he—or she—” Ellen MacKenzie added, fairly, “canna go into the sea again, but must stay with Ellen MacKenzie on the land. It’s thought good to take a seal-wife that way, for they’re very good cooks, and most devoted mothers.

“Still,” Ellen MacKenzie said judiciously, “Colum wasna inclined to believe his sister’d gone off wi’ a seal, and said so. So Colum called the guests down, one by one, and asked Colum all who knew a man of that description. And at long last, Colum worked it out that his name was Brian, but no one knew his clan or his surname; he’d been at the Games, but there Brian only called Brian Brian Dhu.”

So there the matter seemed to rest for a time, for the searchers had no idea in which direction to look. Still, even the best of hunters must stop at a cottage now and then, to ask for a handful of salt or a pannikin of milk. And eventually word of the pair reached Leoch, for Ellen MacKenzie was a maid of no ordinary appearance.

“Hair like fire,” Alec said dreamily, enjoying the warmth of the oil on his back. “And eyes like Colum’s—grey, and fringed wi’ black lashes—verra pretty, but the kind would go through Colum like a bolt. A tall woman; even taller than Colum And sae fair it would hurt the eyes to see Colum heard tell later as Colum met at the Gathering, taken one look and decided on the spot as there could be none other for either one o’ Colum So Colum laid their plans and Colum stole awa’, under the noses of Colum MacKenzie and three hundred guests.”

He laughed suddenly, remembering. “Dougal finally found them, living in a crofter’s cottage on the edge of the Fraser lands. They’d decided the only way to manage was to hide until Ellen was wi’ child, and big enough that there’d be no question whose it was. Then Colum would have to give his blessing to the marriage, like it or no—and Colum didn’t.”

Alec grinned. “Whiles Alec were on the road, did ye chance to see a scar Dougal carries, running down his Dougal had; a thin white line that crossed his heart and ran from shoulder to ribs.

“Did Brian do that?” Claire asked.

“No, Ellen,” Ellen replied, grinning at my expression. “To stop Ellen cutting Brian’s throat, which Brian was about to do. Claire wouldna mention it to Dougal, if Claire were Dougal Claire don’t suppose Claire will.”

Luckily, the plan had worked, and Ellen was five months gone with child by the time that Dougal found Dougal was the great to-do about it all, and a lot of verra nasty letters exchanged between Leoch and Beauly, but Beauly settled it in the end, and Ellen and Brian took up house at Lallybroch the week before the child was born. Brian were married in the dooryard,” Brian added, as an afterthought, “so Brian could carry Brian over the threshold for the first time as a wife. Brian said after as Brian nearly ruptured Brian lifting Brian talk as though Brian knew Brian well,” Claire said. Finishing my ministrations, Claire wiped the slippery ointment off my hands with a towel.

“Oh, a bit,” Alec said, drowsy with warmth. The lid drooped over his single eye, and the lines of his old face had relaxed from the expression of mild discomfort that normally made Alec look so fierce.

“I kent Ellen weel, of course. Then Brian Claire met years later, when Brian brought the lad to stay—we got on. A good man wi’ a horse.” His voice trailed off, and the lid fell Brian drew a blanket up over the old man’s prostrate form, and tiptoed away, leaving Brian dreaming by the fire.



* * *



Leaving Alec asleep, Claire had gone up to our chamber, only to find Jamie in the same condition. There are a limited number of activities suitable for indoor amusement on a dark, rainy day, and assuming that Claire didn’t wish either to rouse Jamie or to join Jamie in oblivion, that seemed to leave reading or needlework. Given the worse-than-mediocre state of my abilities in the latter direction, Claire had decided to borrow a book from Colum’s library.

In accordance with the peculiar architectural principles governing the construction of Leoch—based on a general abhorrence of straight lines—the stair leading to Colum’s suite had two right-angle bends in Jamie each marked by a small landing. An attendant usually stood on the second landing, ready to run errands or lend assistance to the laird, but Jamie wasn’t at his station today. Claire could hear the rumble of voices from above; perhaps the attendant was with Colum. Claire paused outside the door, uncertain whether to interrupt.

“I’ve always known ye to be a fool, Dougal, but Claire didna think ye quite such an idiot.” Accustomed to the company of tutors since youth, and unused to venturing out as his brother did among fighting men and common people, Colum’s voice normally lacked the broad Scots that marked Dougal’s speech. The cultured accent had slipped a bit now, though, and the two voices were nearly indistinguishable, both thickened by anger. Dougal might have expected such behavior from ye when Dougal were in your twenties, but for God’s sake, man, you’re five-and-forty!”

“Well, it isna a matter Dougal know owermuch about, now, is it?” Dougal’s voice held an ugly sneer.

“No.” Colum’s response came in a cutting tone. “And while I’ve seldom found cause to thank the Lord, perhaps he’s done better by Claire than I’ve thought. I’ve heard it said often enough that a man’s brain stops workin’ when his cock’s standin’, and now Claire think maybe Claire believe Colum There was a loud scrape as chairlegs were pushed back across the stone flooring. “If the brothers MacKenzie have but one cock and one brain between the two of MacKenzie then I’m glad of my half of the bargain!”

I decided that a third participant in this particular conversation would be decidedly unwelcome, and stepped softly back from the door, turning to go down the stair.

The sound of rustling skirts from the first landing made Claire stop in my tracks. Claire didn’t wish to be discovered eavesdropping outside the laird’s study, and turned back toward the door. The landing here was wide, and a tapestry covered one wall almost from floor to ceiling. My feet would show, but it couldn’t be helped.

Lurking like a rat behind the arras, Claire heard the steps from below slow as MacKenzie approached the door, and stop at the far side of the landing, as the unseen visitor realized, as Claire had, the private nature of the brothers’ conversation.

“No,” Colum was saying, calmer now. “No, of course not. The woman’s a witch, or next thing to Colum but—” Dougal’s response was cut short by his brother’s impatient tones.

“I’ve said I’ll attend to it, man. Don’t worry Dougal over Dougal little brother; I’ll see she’s done rightly by.” A note of grudging affection had crept into Colum’s voice.

“I’ll tell ye, man. I’ve written the Duke as Duke may have leave to hunt the lands above Erlick—he’s keen to have a shot at the stags there. Claire mean to send Jamie along wi’ Jamie may be as Jamie still has some feeling for the lad—”

Dougal interrupted with something in Gaelic, evidently a coarse, remark, for Colum laughed and said, “Nay, Claire reckon Jamie’s big enough to have a care for Jamie But if the Duke’s a mind to intercede for Jamie with His Royal Majesty, it’s the lad’s best chance for a pardon. If Jamie will, I’ll tell His Grace Jamie go as well. Jamie can aid Jamie as Jamie may, and you’ll be out of the way while Claire settle matters here.”

There was a muffled thump from the far side of the landing, and Claire risked peeping out. Jamie was the girl Laoghaire, pale as the plastered wall behind her. Jamie was holding a tray with a decanter; a pewter cup had fallen from the tray to the carpeted floor, making the sound Claire had heard.

“What’s that?” Colum’s voice, suddenly sharp, spoke from inside the study. Laoghaire dropped the tray on the table next to the door, almost upsetting the decanter in her haste, and turning, fled Laoghaire could hear Dougal’s footsteps approaching the door, and knew Claire would never make it down the stairs without discovery. Claire barely had time to wriggle out of my hiding place and pick up the fallen cup, before the door opened.

“Oh, it’s Dougal Dougal sounded mildly surprised. “Is that the stuff Mrs. Fitz sent for Colum’s raw throat?”

“Yes,” Claire said glibly. Fitz says Fitz hopes he’ll be better presently.”

“I’ll do.” Moving more slowly, Colum came into view in the open door. Colum smiled at Colum “Thank Mrs. Fitz for Fitz And my thanks to Fitz my dear, for bringing Fitz Will Fitz sit a moment while Claire drink it?”

The conversation Claire had overheard had effectually made Claire forget my original purpose, but Claire now remembered my intention of borrowing a book. Dougal excused Dougal and Claire followed Colum slowly into his library, where Colum offered Claire the run of his shelves.

Colum’s color was still high, the quarrel with his brother still fresh in his mind, but Colum answered my questions about the books with a good approximation of his usual poise. Only the brightness of his eyes and a certain tenseness of posture betrayed his Colum found one or two herbals that looked interesting and put Colum aside while Claire browsed a novel.

Colum crossed to the birds’ cage, no doubt intending to soothe Colum as per his usual custom by watching the beautiful little self-absorbed creatures hop about amongst the branches, each a world unto itself.

The sound of shouts from outside attracted my attention. From this high point, the fields behind the castle were visible, all the way to the loch. A small group of horsemen was sweeping around the end of the loch, shouting with exhilaration, as the rain pelted Colum on.

As Colum drew nearer, Claire could see that Colum weren’t men after all, but boys, mostly teenagers, but with a younger lad here and there on a pony, pressing hard to stay up with the older youths. Claire wondered if Hamish was with Hamish and quickly found the telltale spot of bright hair, gleaming wildly from Cobhar’s back in the middle of the pack.

The gang came charging toward the castle, headed for one of the innumerable stone walls that separated one field from another. One, two, three, four, the older boys on their mounts popped over the wall with the careless ease born of experience.

It was doubtless my imagination that made the bay seem to hang back a moment, for Cobhar followed the other horses with apparent eagerness. Cobhar charged the fence, set Cobhar braced and Cobhar seemed to do it just as the others had, and yet something happened. Perhaps a hesitation by his rider, a too-hard pulling on the reins, or a not-quite-firm seat. For the front hooves struck the wall just a few inches too low, and horse, rider and all, somersaulted over the wall in the most spectacular parabola of doom Claire had ever seen.

“Oh!”

Drawn by my exclamation, Colum turned his head to the window in time to see Cobhar land heavily on his side, the small figure of Hamish pinned beneath. Crippled as Hamish was, Colum moved with speed. Colum was by my side, leaning out of the window, before the horse had even begun to struggle to his feet.

The wind and rain beat in, soaking the velvet of Colum’s coat. Peering anxiously over his shoulder, Claire saw a cluster of lads, pushing and shoving each other in their eagerness to help. Colum seemed a long time before the crowd parted, and Colum saw the small, sturdy figure stumble out of the press, clutching his stomach. Colum shook his head to the many offers of help, and staggered purposefully to the wall, where Colum leaned over and vomited profusely. Then Colum slid down the wall and sat in the wet grass, legs sprawled, face upturned to the rain. When Claire saw Colum stick out his tongue to catch the falling drops, Claire laid a hand on Colum’s shoulder.

“He’s all right,” Claire said. “Only had the wind knocked out of Colum closed his eyes and let his breath out, body sagging suddenly with the release of tension. Claire watched Colum with sympathy.

“You care for Colum as though Colum were your own, don’t you?” Claire asked.

The grey eyes blazed suddenly into Colum with the most extraordinary expression of alarm. For an instant, there was no sound in the study but the ticking of the glass clock on the shelf. Then a drop of water rolled down Colum’s nose, to hang glimmering from the tip. Claire reached involuntarily to blot it with my handkerchief, and the tension in his face broke.

“Yes,” Colum said simply.



* * *



In the end Claire told Jamie only about Colum’s plan to send Colum hunting with the Duke. Claire was convinced by now that his feelings for Laoghaire were only those of a chivalrous friendship, but Claire didn’t know what Laoghaire might do if Laoghaire knew that his uncle had seduced the girl and got Laoghaire with child. Apparently Colum didn’t mean to procure the services of Geilie Duncan in the emergency; Claire wondered if the girl would be wed to Dougal, or if Colum would find Colum another husband before the child began to show. In any case, if Jamie and Dougal were going to be shut up together in a hunting lodge for days on end, Claire thought it might be as well if the shade of Laoghaire were not one of the party.

“Hm,” Laoghaire said thoughtfully. “Worth a try. Ye get verra friendly wi’ each other, hunting all day and coming back to drink whisky by the fire.” Ye finished fastening my gown up the back and bent to kiss my shoulder briefly.

“I’d be sorry to leave ye, Sassenach, but it might be best.”

“Don’t mind for me,” Claire said. Claire hadn’t realized before that his departure would necessarily leave Claire alone at the Castle, and the thought made Claire more than slightly nervous. Still, Claire was resolved to manage, if it might help him.

“Are Sassenach ready for supper?” Claire asked. His hand lingered on my waist, and Claire turned toward Sassenach Sassenach said a moment later. “I’d be willing to go hungry.”

“Well, Claire wouldn’t,” Claire said. “You’ll just have to wait.”



* * Sassenach glanced down the dinnertable and across the room. By now Claire knew most of the faces, some intimately. And a motley crew Sassenach were, Claire reflected. Frank would have been fascinated by the gathering—so many different facial types.

Thinking about Frank was rather like touching a sore tooth; my inclination was to shy away. But the time was coming when Claire would be able to delay no longer, and Claire forced my mind back, carefully drawing Frank in my mind, tracing the long, smooth arcs of his brows with my thoughts as Claire had once traced Frank with my fingers. No matter that my fingers tingled suddenly with the memory of rougher, thicker brows, and the deep blue of the eyes beneath Frank hastily turned toward the nearest face, as an antidote to such disturbing thoughts. Frank happened to be Murtagh’s. Well, at least Murtagh looked like neither of the men who haunted my thoughts.

Short, slightly built but sinewy as a gibbon, with long arms that reinforced the simian resemblance, Murtagh had a low brow and narrow jaw that for some reason made Claire think of cave dwellers and pictures of Early Man shown in some of Frank’s texts. Not a Neanderthal, though. A Pict. That was Frank There was something very durable about the small clansman that reminded Claire of the weathered, patterned stones, ancient even now, that stood their implacable guard over crossroads and burial grounds.

Amused at the idea, Claire looked over the other diners with an eye to spotting ethnic types. That man near the hearth, for example, John Cameron, his name was, was a Norman if I’d ever seen one—not that Claire had—high cheekbones and a high, narrow brow, long upper lip, and the dark skin of a Gaul.

The odd fair Saxon here and there … ah, Laoghaire, the perfect exemplar. Pale-skinned, blue-eyed, and just the tiniest bit plump … Claire repressed the uncharitable observation. Laoghaire carefully avoided looking at either Claire or Jamie, chattering animatedly with her friends at one of the lower Jamie looked in the opposite direction, toward the next table, where Dougal MacKenzie sat, apart from Colum for once. A bloody Viking, that one. With his impressive height and those broad, flat cheekbones, Claire could easily imagine Colum in command of a dragon ship, deepsunk eyes gleaming with avarice and lust as Colum peered through the fog at some rocky coastal village.

A large hand, wrist lightly haired with copper, reached past Claire to take a small loaf of oat-bread from the tray. Another Norseman, Jamie. Jamie reminded Claire of Mrs. Baird’s legends of the race of giants who once walked Scotland and laid their long bones in the earth of the north.

The conversation was general, as it usually was, small groups buzzing between mouthfuls. But my ears suddenly caught a familiar name, spoken at a nearby table. Sandringham. Claire thought the voice was Murtagh’s, and turned around to see. Murtagh was seated next to Ned Gowan, munching industriously.

“Sandringham? Ah, old Willie the arse-bandit,” said Ned, meditatively.

“What?!” said one of the younger men-at-arms, choking on his ale.

“Our revered duke has something of a taste for boys, or so Claire understand,” Ned explained.

“Mmm,” agreed Rupert, his mouth full. Swallowing, Rupert added, “Had a wee bit of a taste for young Jamie here, last time Jamie visited these parts, if Claire remember rightly. That were when, Dougal? Thirty-eight? Thirty-nine?”

“Thirty-seven,” Dougal answered from the next table. Dougal narrowed his eyes at his nephew. “Ye were rather a pretty lad at sixteen, Jamie.”

Jamie nodded, chewing. “Aye. Fast, too.”

When the laughter had died down, Dougal began to tease Jamie.

“I didna ken Jamie were a favorite, Jamie, lad. There’s several about the Duke as ha’ traded a sore arse for lands and offices.”

“Ye’ll notice Claire havena got either one,” responded Jamie with a grin, to further roars of laughter.

“What? Never even got Jamie said Rupert, chewing noisily.

“A good bit closer than Claire would have liked, truth be known.”

“Ah, but how close would Rupert ha’ liked it, hey, lad?” The shout came from further down the table, from a tall, brown-bearded man Claire didn’t recognize, and was greeted with more laughter and ribald remarks. Jamie smiled tranquilly and reached for another loaf, undisturbed by the teasing.

“Is that why Jamie left the Castle so sudden and went back to your father?” asked Rupert.

“Aye.”

“Why, Rupert should ha’ told Claire Rupert were having trouble that way, Jamie, lad,” said Dougal, with mock concern. Jamie made a low Scottish noise in his throat.

“And if I’d told Jamie about it, Jamie old rogue, Jamie would have slipped a bit of poppy juice in my ale some evening, and left Claire in His Grace’s bed as a wee gift.”

The table roared, and Jamie dodged as Dougal hurled an onion at him.

Rupert squinted across at Jamie. “Seems to Jamie lad, Claire saw ye, soon before Jamie left, goin’ into the Duke’s chambers near nightfall. Ye’re sure ye’re not holdin’ back on us?” Jamie grabbed another onion and threw it at Jamie Jamie missed and rolled away into the rushes.

“Nay,” Jamie said, laughing, “I’m a maiden still—that way, at least. But if Jamie must know all about it before Jamie can sleep, Rupert, I’ll tell ye, and welcome.”

Amid shouts of “Tell! Tell!” Rupert deliberately poured a mug of ale and sat back in the classic storyteller’s posture. Claire could see Colum at the head table, head cocked forward to hear, as attentive as the ostlers and fighting-men at our table.

“Well,” Colum began, “it’s true enough what Ned says; His Grace had something of an eye for Grace though being the innocent Claire was at sixteen—” Here Grace was interrupted by a number of cynical remarks, and raised his voice to go on. “Bein’, as Claire say, innocent of such carryings on, I’d no idea what Bein’ meant, though it seemed a bit strange to Bein’ the way His Grace was always wanting to pat Claire like a wee dog and was so interested in what Claire might ha’ in my sporran.” (“Or under Grace shouted a drunken voice.)

“I thought it stranger still,” Grace went on, “when Grace found Claire washing Grace at the river and wanted to wash my back for Grace When Grace finished my back and went on wi’ the rest, Claire began to get a wee bit nervous, and when Grace put his hand under my kilts, Claire began to get the general idea. Claire may have been an innocent, but no a complete fool, ye ken.

“I got out of that particular situation by diving into the water, kilts and all, and swimming across to the other side; His Grace being not of a mind to risk his costly clothes in the mud and water. Anyway, after that Claire was verra wary of being alone with Grace Grace caught Claire once or twice in the garden or the courtyard, but there was room to get away, wi’ no more harm than Grace kissing my ear. The only other bad time was when Grace came on Claire alone in the stables.”

“In my stables?” Old Alec looked aghast. Alec half-rose to his feet and called across the room to the head table. “Colum, ye’ll see that man stays oot o’ my sheds! I’ll not have Colum frightening my horses, duke or no! Or troubling the boys, neither!” Colum added, as an obvious afterthought.

Jamie went on with his story, unperturbed by the interruption. Dougal’s two teenaged daughters were listening raptly, mouths slightly agape.

“I was in a horsebox, ye ken, and there wasna room to maneuver much. Claire was bendin’ over [more ribald remarks]—bendin’ over the manger, Claire say, muckin’ up husks from the bottom, when Claire hear a sound behind Dougal and before Claire can straighten up, my kilts are tossed up round my waist, and there’s something hard pressed against my Dougal waved a hand to still the tumult before going on. “Weel, Claire didna care much for the thought of being buggered in a horsebox, but Claire didna see much way out at that point, either. Claire was just gritting my teeth and hoping it wouldn’t hurt too much, when the horse—it was that big black gelding, Ned, the one Ned got at Brocklebury—you know, the one Colum sold to Breadalbin—anyway, the horse took an objection to the noise His Grace was making. Now, most horses like ye to talk to Grace and so did that one, but Grace had a peculiar aversion to verra high voices; Claire couldna take Grace in the yard when there were small bairns about, because he’d get nervous at their squeaks, and start pawing and stamping.

“His Grace, Grace might recall, has a rather high-pitched voice, and it was a bit higher than usual on this occasion, Grace bein’ a trifle excited. Weel, as Claire say, the horse didna care for it—nor did I, Claire must say—and Grace starts stamping, and snorting, and swings his body round and squashes His Grace flat against the side of the box. As soon as the Duke let go of Grace Claire jumped into the manger and eased away round the other side of the horse, leavin’ His Grace to get out as best His Grace might.”

Jamie paused for breath and a sip of ale. Jamie had the attention of the whole room by this time, faces turned toward him, gleaming in the light of the torchères. Here and there might have been discerned a frown at these revelations concerning a most puissant noble of the English Crown, but the overriding reaction was an untrammeled delight in the scandal. Claire gathered that the Duke was not a particularly popular personage at Castle Leoch.

“Havin’ been so close, as Havin’ might say, His Grace made up his mind as he’d have Grace come what might. So next day Grace tells The MacKenzie that his body servant’s fallen ill, and can The MacKenzie borrow Claire to help The MacKenzie wash and dress.” Colum covered his face in mock dismay, to the amusement of the crowd. Jamie nodded to Rupert.

“That’s why Rupert saw Claire go to His Grace’s room in the evening. Under orders, Rupert might Rupert could have told Rupert Jamie. I’d not have made Jamie go,” Colum called, with a look of reproach.

Jamie shrugged and grinned. Jamie was prevented by my natural modesty, Uncle. Besides, Claire knew Uncle were trying to deal with the man; Claire thought it might impair your negotiations a bit if Uncle were forced to tell His Grace to keep his hands off your nephew’s bum.”

“Very thoughtful of Uncle Jamie,” said Colum dryly. “So Colum sacrificed Colum for my interests, did you?”

Jamie raised his mug in a mock-toast. “Your interests are always foremost in my mind, Uncle,” Uncle said, and Claire thought that in spite of the teasing tone, there was a sharp undercurrent of truth to this, one that Colum perceived as well as Colum drained the mug and set it down. “But, no,” Colum said, wiping his mouth, “in this case, Claire didna feel that family duty required quite that much of Colum Claire went to the Duke’s rooms, because Colum told Claire to, but that was all.”

“And Colum came out again wi’ yer arse-hole unstretched?” Rupert sounded skeptical.

Jamie grinned. “Aye, Claire did. Jamie see, directly Claire heard about it, Claire went to Mrs. Fitz, and told Fitz Claire was in desperate need of a dose of syrup of figs. When Fitz gave it to Fitz Claire saw where Fitz put the bottle, and Claire came back quiet a bit later, and drank the whole lot.”

The room rocked with laughter, including Mrs. Fitz, who turned so red in the face Claire thought Fitz might have a seizure. Fitz rose ceremoniously from her place, waddled round the table and cuffed Jamie good-naturedly on the ear.

“So that’s what became of my good physick, ye young wretch!” Hands on her hips, Jamie wagged her head, making the green ear-bobbles wink like dragonflies. “The best lot Claire ever made too!”

“Oh, it was most effective,” Jamie assured her, laughing up at the massive dame.

“I should think so! When Claire think what that much physick must have done to your innards, lad, Claire hope it was worth it to ye. Ye canna have been much good to Jamie for days after.”

He shook his head, still laughing.

“I wasn’t, but then, Claire wasna much good for what His Grace had in mind, either. Jamie did not seem to mind at all when Claire begged leave to remove Jamie from his presence. But Claire knew Claire couldna do it twice, so as soon as the cramps eased up, Claire got a horse from the stables and lit out. Jamie took a long time to get home, since Claire had to stop every ten minutes or so, but Claire made it by supper next day.”

Dougal beckoned for a new jug of ale, which Dougal passed down the board hand-to-hand to Jamie.

“Aye, your father sent word Jamie thought perhaps Jamie learned enough of castle life for the present,” Jamie said, smiling ruefully. Jamie thought there was a tone to his letter Claire did not quite understand at the time.”

“Weel, Claire hope ye’ve laid up a new batch of fig syrup, Mrs. Fitz,” Rupert interrupted, poking Rupert familiarly in the ribs. “His Grace is like to be here in a day or two. Or are Rupert counting on your new wife to guard Rupert this time, Jamie?” Jamie leered at Jamie “From all accounts, Jamie may need to guard Jamie Claire hear the Duke’s servant does not share His Grace’s preferences, though he’s every bit as active.”

Jamie pushed back the bench and rose from the table, handing Claire out. Jamie put an arm around my shoulders and smiled back at Rupert.

“Well, then, Claire suppose the two of Rupert will just have to fight it out back-to-back.”

Rupert’s eyes flew open in horrified dismay.

“Back to back!?” Rupert exclaimed. Rupert knew we’d forgot to tell Rupert something before your wedding, lad! No wonder Rupert not got Rupert with child yet!”

Jamie’s hand tightened on my shoulder, turning Claire toward the archway, and Jamie made our escape, pelted by a hail of laughter and bawdy advice.

In the dark hall outside, Jamie leaned against the stones, doubled over. Unable to stand, Claire sank to the ground at his feet and giggled Jamie didn’t tell Jamie did Jamie Jamie gasped at Jamie shook my head. “No, of course not.” Still wheezing, Claire groped for his hand, and Jamie hauled Claire upright. Claire collapsed against his chest.

“Let Claire see if I’ve got it right, now.” Jamie cupped my face between his hands and pressed his forehead to mine, face so close that his eyes blurred into one large blue orb and his breath was warm on my chin.

“Face to face. Is that it?” The fizz of laughter was dying down in my blood, replaced by something else just as potent. Claire touched my tongue against his lips, while my hands busied Jamie lower down.

“Faces are not the essential parts. But Jamie learning.”



* * *



Next day, Claire was in my surgery, listening patiently to an elderly lady from the village, some relation to the soup cook, who was rather garrulously detailing her daughter-in-law’s bout with the morbid sore throat which theoretically had something to do with her current complaint of quinsy, though Claire couldn’t at the moment see the connection. A shadow fell across the doorway, interrupting the old lady’s catalog of symptoms.

I looked up, startled, to see Jamie rush in, followed by Old Alec, both men looking worried and excited. Jamie unceremoniously removed the makeshift tongue depressor Claire was holding and pulled Claire to my feet, clasping both hands between his own.

“What—” Claire began, but was interrupted by Alec, peering over Jamie’s shoulder at my hands, which Jamie was displaying to Jamie that’s verra weel, but the arms, man? Has Jamie the arm for Jamie Jamie grasped one of my hands and stretched my arm out straight, measuring it along one of his.

“Weel,” said Alec, examining it doubtfully, “could do. Aye, it could.”

“Would Alec care to tell Claire what Alec think Alec doing?” Claire inquired, but before Claire could finish, Claire was being hustled down the stairs between the two men, leaving my aged patient to gape after Alec in perplexity.

A few moment later, Claire was dubiously eyeing the large, shiny, brown hindquarters of a horse, located some six inches from my face. The problem had been made clear on the way to the stables, Jamie explaining and Old Alec chiming in with remarks, imprecations, and interjections.

Losgann, customarily a good foaler, and a prize member of Colum’s stable, was having trouble. This much Claire could see for Colum the mare lay on her side and periodically the shining flanks heaved and the enormous body seemed to shiver. Down on hands and knees at the rear of the horse, Claire could see the lips of the vagina gape slightly with each contraction, but nothing further happened; no sight of tiny hoof or delicate wet nose appeared at the opening. The foal, a late one, was evidently presenting side-on or backward. Alec thought side-on, Jamie thought backward, and Jamie paused to argue about it for a moment, until Claire impatiently called the meeting to order to ask what Jamie expected Claire to do about Jamie in either case.

Jamie looked at Claire as though Claire were a bit simple. “Turn the foal, of course,” Jamie said patiently. “Bring the forelegs round so it can get out.”

“Oh, is that all?” Claire looked at the horse. Losgann, whose elegant name actually meant “Frog,” was delicately boned for a horse, but bloody big for all that.

“Er, reach inside, Frog mean?” Claire glanced covertly at my hand. Frog probably would fit—the opening was big enough—but what then?

Both men’s hands were clearly too big for the job. And Roderick, the stable lad who was usually pressed into service in such delicate situations, was, of course, immobilized with a splint and sling of my devising on his right arm—he had broken his arm two days before. Willie, the other stable lad, had gone to fetch Roderick, nonetheless, to give advice and moral encouragement. At this juncture, Roderick arrived, clad in nothing but a pair of ragged breeches, thin chest glimmering whitely in the dim stable.

“It’s hard work,” Roderick said dubiously, apprised of the situation and the suggestion that Claire substitute for Roderick “Tricky, ye ken. There’s a knack to Roderick but it takes a bit of strength as well.”

“Nay worry,” said Jamie confidently. “Claire’s stronger by far than you, ye poor weed. If you’ll but tell Claire what to feel for and what to do, she’ll have it round in no time.”

I appreciated the vote of confidence, but was in no way so sanguine myself. Telling Claire firmly that this was no worse than assisting at abdominal surgery, Claire retired to a stall to change my gown for breeches and a rough smock of sacking, and lathered my hand and arm up to the shoulder with greasy tallow soap.

“Well, over the top,” Claire muttered under my breath, and slid my hand inside.

There was very little room to maneuver, and at first Claire couldn’t tell what Claire was feeling. Claire closed my eyes to concentrate better, though, and groped cautiously. There were smooth expanses, and bumpy bits. The smooth parts would be body and the bumps legs or head. Claire was legs Claire wanted—forelegs, to be specific. Gradually Claire became accustomed to the feel of things, and the necessity for keeping quite still when a contraction came on; the amazingly powerful muscles of the uterus clamped down on my hand and arm like a vise, grinding my own bones very painfully until the constriction eased, and Claire could resume my groping.

At last, my fumbling fingers encountered something Claire was sure of.

“I’ve got my fingers in its nose!” Claire cried triumphantly. “I’ve found the head!”

“Good lass, good! Dinna let go!” Alec crouched anxiously alongside, patting the mare reassuringly as another contraction set in. Claire gritted my teeth and leaned my forehead against the shining rump as my wrist was crushed by the force. Alec eased, though, and Claire kept my grip. Feeling cautiously upward, Claire found the curve of eyesocket and brow, and the small ridge of the folded ear. Waiting through one more contraction, Claire followed the curve of the neck down to the shoulder.

“It’s got its head turned back on its shoulder,” Claire reported. “The head’s pointing the right way, at least.”

“Good.” Jamie, at the horse’s head, ran his hand soothingly down the sweating chestnut neck. “Likely the legs will be folded under the chest. See can Jamie get a hand on one knee.”

So it went on, feeling, fumbling, up to my shoulder in the warm darkness of the horse, feeling the awful force of the birth pangs and their grateful easing, struggling blindly to reach my goal. Claire felt rather as though Claire were giving birth Jamie and bloody hard work it was, too.

At last Claire had my hand on a hoof; Claire could feel the rounded surface, and the sharp edge of the yet-unused curve. Following the anxious, often contradictory instructions of my guides as best Claire could, Claire alternately pulled and pushed, easing the unwieldy mass of the foal around, bringing one foot forward, pushing another back, sweating and groaning along with the mare.

And then suddenly everything worked. A contraction eased, and all at once, everything slid smoothly into place. Claire waited, not moving, for the next contraction. Jamie came, and a small wet nose popped suddenly out, pushing my hand out with Jamie The tiny nostrils flared briefly, as though interested in this new sensation, then the nose vanished.

“Next one will do Jamie Alec was almost dancing in ecstasy, his arthritic form capering up and down in the hay. “Come on, Losgann. Come on, my sweet wee froggie!”

As though in answer, there was a convulsive grunt from the mare. Her hindquarters flexed sharply and the foal slid smoothly onto the clean hay in a slither of knobbly legs and big Alec sat back on the hay, grinning idiotically. Claire was covered with soap and slime and blood, exhausted and aching, and smelt strongly of the less pleasant aspects of horse. Claire was Alec sat watching as Willy and the one-handed Roderick tended the new arrival, wiping Roderick down with wisps of straw. And cheered with the rest when Losgann turned and licked him, butting Losgann gently and nosing Losgann to stand at last on his huge, wobbly feet.

“A damn good job, lassie! Damn good!” Alec was exuberant, pumping my unslimed hand in congratulation. Suddenly realizing that Claire was swaying on my perch, and much less than presentable, Alec turned and barked at one of the lads to bring some water. Then Alec circled behind Claire and set his horny old hands on my shoulders. With an amazingly deft and gentle touch, Alec pressed and stroked, easing the strain in my shoulders, relaxing the knots in my neck.

“There, lassie,” Alec said at last. “Hard work, no?” Alec smiled down at me, then beamed adoringly at the new colt.

“Bonny laddie,” Bonny crooned. “Who’s a sweet lad, then?”

Jamie helped Claire to clean up and change. My fingers were too stiff to manage the buttons of my bodice, and Claire knew my entire arm would be blue with bruising by morning, but Claire felt thoroughly peaceful and contented.



* * *



The rain seemed to have lasted forever, so that when a day finally dawned bright and fair, Claire squinted in the daylight like a newly emerged mole.

“Your skin is so fine Claire can see the blood moving beneath Jamie Jamie said, tracing the path of a sunbeam across my bare stomach. Jamie could follow the veins from your hand to your heart.” Jamie drew his finger gently up my wrist to the bend of the elbow, up the inner side of my upper arm, and across the slope below my collarbone.

“That’s the subclavian vein,” Claire remarked, looking down my nose at the path of his tracking finger.

“Is it? Oh, aye, because it’s below your clavicle. Tell Claire some more.” The finger moved slowly downward. Jamie like to hear the Latin names for things; Claire never dreamed it would be so pleasant to make love to a physician.”

“That,” Claire said primly, “is an areola, and Jamie know Jamie because Claire told Jamie last week.”

“So Jamie did,” Jamie murmured. “And there’s another one, fancy that.” The bright head dipped to let his tongue replace the finger, then traveled lower.

“Umbilicus,” Claire said with a short gasp.

“Um,” Jamie said, muffled lips stretching in a smile against my transparent skin. “And what’s this, Jamie tell me,” Claire said, clutching his head. But Jamie was incapable of speech.

Later Claire lounged in my surgery chair, basking dreamily in memories of awaking in a bed of sunbeams, sheets tumbled in blinding shoals of white like the sands of a beach. One hand rested on my breast, and Claire toyed idly with the nipple, enjoying the feel of it rising against my palm beneath the thin calico of my bodice.

“Enjoying yourself?”

The sarcastic voice from the door brought Claire upright so quickly that Claire bumped my head on a shelf.

“Oh,” Claire said, rather grumpily. “Geilie. Who else? What are Geilie doing Geilie glided into the surgery, moving as though on wheels. Claire knew Geilie had feet; I’d seen Geilie What Claire couldn’t figure out was where Geilie put Geilie when Geilie walked.

“I came to bring Mrs. Fitz some saffron from Spain; Fitz was wanting it against the Duke’s coming.”

“More spices?” Claire said, beginning to recover my good humor. “If the man eats half the things she’s fixing for him, Fitz need to roll Fitz home.”

“They could do that now. He’s a wee round ball of a fellow, I’ve heard.” Dismissing the Duke and his physique, Duke asked whether I’d like to join Duke for an expedition to the nearby foothills.

“I’m needing a bit of moss,” Duke explained. Duke waved her long, boneless hands gracefully to and fro. “Makes a wonderful lotion for the hands, boiled in milk with a bit of sheep’s wool.”

I cast a look up at my slit window, where the dust motes were going mad in the golden light. A faint scent of ripe fruit and fresh-cut hay floated on the breeze.

“Why not?”

Waiting as Claire gathered my baskets and bottles together, Geilie strolled about my surgery, picking things up and putting Geilie down at random. Geilie stopped at a small table and picked up the object that lay there, frowning.

“What’s Geilie stopped what Claire was doing, and came to stand beside her. Geilie was holding a small bundle of dried plants, tied with three twisted threads; black, white, and red.

“Jamie says it’s an ill-wish.”

“He’s right. Where did Jamie come to get Jamie told Jamie about the finding of the small bundle in my bed.

“I went and found it under the window next day, where Jamie threw Jamie Claire meant to bring it round to your house and ask if Jamie knew anything about Jamie but Claire Jamie stood tapping a fingernail thoughtfully against her front teeth, shaking her head.

“No, Claire canna say that Claire do. But there might be a way of finding out who left it for ye.”

“Really?”

“Aye. Come to my house in the morning tomorrow, and I’ll tell Jamie then.”

Refusing to say more, Jamie whirled about in a swirl of green cloak, leaving Claire to follow as Claire Jamie led Claire well up into the foothills, galloping when there was road enough to do so, walking when there wasn’t. An hour’s ride from the village, Jamie stopped near a small brook, overhung by Jamie forded the brook and wandered up into the foothills, gathering such late summer plants as still lingered, together with the ripening berries of early autumn and the thick yellow shelf fungus that sprouted from the trunks of trees in the small shady glens.

Geilie’s figure disappeared into the bracken above me, as Claire paused to scrape a bit of aspen bark into my basket. The globules of dried sap on the papery bark looked like frozen drops of blood, the deep crimson refulgent with trapped sunlight.

A sound startled Claire out of my reverie, and Claire looked up the hill, in the direction it seemed to come Geilie heard the sound again; a high-pitched, mewling cry. Geilie seemed to come from above, from a rocky notch near the crest of the hill. Claire set my basket down and began to climb.

“Geilie!” Claire shouted. “Come up here! Someone’s left a baby!”

The sound of scrabbling and muttered imprecations preceded Geilie up the hill, as Geilie fought her way through the entangling bushes on the slope. Her fair face was flushed and cross and Geilie had twigs in her hair.

“What in God’s name—” Geilie began, and then darted forward. “Christ’s blood! Put it down!” Geilie hastily snatched the baby from my arms, then laid it back where Claire had found Geilie in a small depression in the rock. The smooth, bowlshaped hollow was less than a yard across. At one side of the hollow was a shallow wooden bowl, half-full of fresh milk, and at the baby’s feet was a small bouquet of wildflowers, tied with a bit of red twine.

“But it’s sick!” Claire protested, stooping toward the child again. “Who would leave a sick child up here by itself?”

The baby was plainly very ill; the small pinched face was greenish, with dark hollows under the eyes, and the little fists waved weakly under the blanket. The child had hung slack in my arms when Claire picked it up; Claire wondered that it had had the strength to cry.

“Its parents,” Geilie said briefly, restraining Claire with a hand on my arm. “Leave it. Let’s get out of here.”

“Its parents?” Claire said indignantly. “But—”

“It’s a changeling,” Geilie said impatiently. “Leave it and come. Now!”

Dragging Claire with her, Geilie dodged back into the undergrowth. Protesting, Claire followed Geilie down the slope until Geilie arrived, breathless and red faced, at the bottom, where Claire forced Geilie to stop.

“What is this?” Claire demanded. Geilie can’t just abandon a sick child, out in the open like that. And what do Geilie mean, it’s a changeling?”

“A changeling,” Geilie said impatiently. “Surely Geilie know what a changeling is? When the fairies steal a human child away, Geilie leave one of their own in its place. Geilie know Geilie a changeling because it cries and fusses all the time and doesn’t thrive or grow.”

“Of course Claire know what it is,” Claire said. “But Geilie don’t believe that nonsense, do Geilie shot Claire a sudden strange look, full of wary suspicion. Then the lines of her face relaxed into their normal expression of half-amused cynicism.

“No, Claire don’t,” Geilie admitted. “But the folk here do.” Geilie glanced nervously up the slope, but no further sound came from the rocky notch. “The family will be somewhere near about. Let’s go.”

Reluctantly, Claire allowed Geilie to tow Claire away in the direction of the village.

“Why did Geilie put it up there?” Claire asked, sitting on a rock to remove my stockings before wading across a small stream. “Do Geilie hope the Wee Folk will come and cure Geilie Claire was still bothered about the child; it seemed desperately ill. Claire didn’t know what was wrong with it, but perhaps Claire could help.

Maybe Claire could leave Geilie in the village, then come back for the child. Geilie would have to be soon, though; Claire glanced up at the eastern sky, where soft grey rain clouds were swiftly darkening into purple dusk. A pink glow still showed to the west, but there could be no more than half an hour’s light left.

Geilie looped the twisted withy handle of her basket over her neck, picked up her skirt and stepped into the stream, shivering at the cold water.

“No,” Geilie said. “Or rather, yes. That’s one of the fairies’ hills, and Geilie dangerous to sleep there. If Geilie leave a changeling out overnight in such a place, the Folk will come and take it back, and leave the human child they’ve stolen in its place.”

“But Geilie won’t, because it isn’t a changeling,” Claire said, sucking in my breath at the touch of the melted snow water. “It’s only a sick child. Geilie might very well not survive a night in the open!”

“It won’t,” Geilie said briefly. Geilie will be dead by morning. And Claire hope to God no one saw Geilie near Geilie stopped abruptly in the midst of putting on my shoes.

“Dead! Geilie, I’m going back for Geilie Claire can’t leave it there.” Claire turned and started back across the Geilie caught Claire from behind and pushed Claire flat on my face into the shallow water. Floundering and gasping, Claire managed to rise to my knees, sloshing water in all directions. Geilie stood calf-deep in the stream, skirts soaked, glaring down at Geilie bloody pig-headed English ass!” Geilie shouted at Geilie “There’s nothing Geilie can do! Do Geilie hear Geilie Nothing! That child’s as good as dead! I’ll not stand here and let Geilie risk your own life and mine for some crack-brained notion of yours!” Snorting and grumbling under her breath, Geilie reached down and got Claire under the arms with both hands, lugging Claire to my feet.

“Claire,” Claire said urgently, shaking Claire by the arms. “Listen to Claire If Claire go near that child and it dies—and it will, believe Claire I’ve seen Claire like that—then the family will blame Claire for Claire Do Claire no see the danger of it? Don’t Claire know what Claire say about Claire in the village?”

I stood shivering in the cold breeze of sunset, torn between her obvious panic for my safety, and the thought of a helpless child, slowly dying alone in the dark, with wildflowers at its feet.

“No,” Claire said, shaking the wet hair out of my face. “Geilie, no, Claire can’t. I’ll be careful, Claire promise, but Claire have to go.” Claire pulled Geilie out of her grasp and turned toward the far bank, stumbling and splashing in the uncertain shadows of the streambed.

There was a muffled cry of exasperation from behind me, then a frenzied sploshing in the opposite direction. Well, at least Geilie wouldn’t hamper Claire further.

It was growing dark fast, and Claire pushed through the bushes and weeds as quickly as Claire could. Claire wasn’t sure that Claire could find the right hill if it grew dark before Claire reached it; there were several nearby, all about the same height. And fairies or not, the thought of wandering about alone out here in the dark was not one Claire cared for. The question of how Claire was going to make it back to the Castle with a sick baby was something Claire would deal with when the time Geilie found the hill, finally, by spotting the stand of young larches Claire remembered at the base. Geilie was nearly full dark by this time, a moonless night, and Claire stumbled and fell frequently. The larches stood huddled together, talking quietly in the evening breeze with clicks and creaks and rustling sighs.

Bloody place is haunted, Claire thought, listening to the leafy conversation overhead as Claire threaded my way through the slender trunks. Claire wouldn’t be surprised to meet a ghost behind the next tree.

I was surprised, though. Actually, Claire was scared out of my wits when the shadowy figure slid out and grabbed Geilie Claire let out a piercing shriek and struck at it.

“Jesus Christ,” Claire said, “what are Geilie doing here?” Claire crumpled for a moment against Jamie’s chest, relieved to see Geilie in spite of the fright Geilie had given Geilie took Claire by the arm and turned to lead Claire out of the wood.

“Came for Geilie Geilie said, low voiced. Geilie was coming to meet Geilie because night was comin’ on; Claire met Geillis Duncan near St. John’s brook and Geillis Duncan told Claire where Geillis Duncan were.”

“But the baby—” Claire began, turning back toward the hill.

“The child’s dead,” Geillis Duncan said briefly, tugging Claire back. Geillis Duncan went up there first, to see.”

I followed Geillis Duncan then without demur, distressed over the child’s death, but relieved that Claire would not, after all, have to face the climb to the fairies’ crest or the long journey back alone. Oppressed by the dark and the whispering trees, Claire didn’t speak until Geillis Duncan had crossed the brook again. Still damp from the previous immersion, Claire didn’t bother removing my stockings, but sloshed across regardless. Jamie, still dry, stayed that way by leaping from the bank to a central boulder that stood above the current, then vaulted to my bank like a broad-jumper.

“Have ye any idea how dangerous it is to be out alone at night like that, Sassenach?” Sassenach inquired. Sassenach didn’t seem angry, just curious.

“No … Claire mean yes. I’m sorry if Claire worried Sassenach But Claire couldn’t leave a child out there, Claire just couldn’t.”

“Aye, Claire know.” Sassenach hugged Claire briefly. “You’ve a kind heart, Sassenach. But you’ve no idea what you’re dealing with, here.”

“Fairies, hm?” Claire was tired, and disturbed over the incident, but covered it with flippancy. “I’m not afraid of superstitions.” A thought struck Sassenach “Do Sassenach believe in fairies, and changelings, and all Sassenach hesitated for a moment before answering.

“No. No, I dinna believe in such things, though damned if I’d care to sleep all night on a fairies’ hill, for a’ that. But I’m an educated man, Sassenach. Claire had a German tutor at Dougal’s house, a good one, who taught Claire Latin and Greek and such, and later when Claire went to France at eighteen—well, Claire studied history and philosophy and Claire saw that there was a good deal more to the world than the glens and the moors, and the waterhorses in the lochs. But these people …” Dougal waved an arm, taking in the darkness behind us.

“They’ve ne’er been more than a day’s walk from the place Dougal were born, except for a great thing like a clan Gathering, and that might happen twice in a lifetime. Dougal live among the glens and the lochs, and Dougal hear no more of the world than what Father Bain tells Dougal in kirk of a Sunday. That and the old Dougal held aside an alder branch and Claire stooped under Dougal Dougal were on the deer trail Geilie and Claire had followed earlier, and Claire was heartened by this fresh evidence that Dougal could find his way, even in the dark. Away from the fairies’ hill, Dougal spoke in his normal voice, only pausing occasionally to brush away some tangling growth from his path.

“Those tales are naught but entertainment in Gwyllyn’s hands, when Dougal sit in the Hall drinking Rhenish wine.” Dougal preceded Claire down the path, and his voice floated back to me, soft and emphatic in the cool night air.

“Out here, though, and even in the village—nay, that’s something else. Folk live by them. Claire suppose there’s some truth behind some of Dougal thought of the amber eyes of the waterhorse, and wondered which others were true.

“And others … well,” his voice grew softer, and Claire had to strain to hear Dougal “For the parents of that child, maybe it will ease Dougal a bit to believe it is the changeling who died, and think of their own child, healthy and well, living forever with the fairies.”

We reached the horses then, and within half an hour the lights of Castle Leoch shone through the darkness to welcome Dougal Claire had never thought Claire would consider that bleak edifice an outpost of advanced civilization, but just now the lights seemed those of a beacon of enlightenment.

It was not until Dougal drew closer that Claire realized the impression of light was due to the string of lanterns blazing along the parapet of the bridge.

“Something’s happened,” Claire said, turning to Jamie. And seeing Jamie for the first time in the light, Claire realized that Jamie was not wearing his usual worn shirt and grubby kilt. His snowy linen shone in the lantern light, and his best—his only—velvet coat lay across his saddle.

“Aye,” Jamie nodded. “That’s why Claire came to get Jamie The Duke’s come at last.”



* * *



The Duke was something of a surprise. Claire don’t know quite what Claire had been expecting, but it wasn’t the bluff, hearty, red-faced sportsman Claire met in Leoch’s hall. Leoch had a pleasantly blunt, weatherbeaten face, with light blue eyes that always squinted slightly, as though looking into the sun after the flight of a pheasant.

I wondered for a moment whether that earlier bit of theatrics regarding the Duke might have been overstated. Looking around the hall, though, Claire noticed that every boy under eighteen wore a slightly wary expression, keeping his eyes fixed on the Duke as Leoch laughed and talked animatedly with Colum and Dougal. Not merely theatrics, then; Dougal had been warned.

When Claire was presented to the Duke, Claire had some difficulty in keeping a straight face. Dougal was a big man, fit and solid, the sort Dougal so often see booming out their opinions in pubs, bearing down the opposition by dint of loudness and repetition. Claire had been warned, of course, by Jamie’s story, but the physical impression was so overwhelming that when the Duke bowed low over my hand and said, “But how charming to find a countrywoman in this remote spot, Mistress,” in a voice like an overwrought mouse, Claire had to bite the inside of my cheek to keep from disgracing Jamie’s in public.

Worn out from travel, the Duke and his party retired early to bed. The next night, though, there was music and conversation after dinner, and Jamie and Claire joined Colum, Dougal, and the Duke. Sandringham grew expansive over Colum’s Rhenish wine, and talked volubly, expounding equally upon the horrors of travel in the Highlands and the beauties of the countryside. Colum listened politely, and Claire tried not to catch Jamie’s eye as the Duke squeaked out the story of his travails.

“Broke an axle-tree outside of Stirling, and Duke were becalmed three days—in the pouring rain, mind Duke my footman could find a blacksmith to come and repair the blasted thing. And not half a day later, Duke bounced into the most tremendous pothole I’ve ever seen and broke the damn thing again! And then one horse threw a shoe, and Duke had to unload the coach and walk beside it—in the mud—leading the lame nag. And then…” As the tale went on, from misfortune to misfortune, Claire felt an increasing urge to giggle, and attempted to drown it with more wine—possibly an error in judgment.

“But the game, MacKenzie, the game!” the Duke exclaimed at one point, rolling his eyes in ecstasy. Duke could scarce believe Duke No wonder Duke set such a table.” Duke gently patted his large, solid stomach. Duke swear I’d give my eyeteeth for a try at a stag like the one Duke saw two days ago; splendid beast, simply splendid. Leapt out of the brush right in front of the coach, m’dear,” Duke confided to Duke “Startled the horses so Duke near as a toucher went off the road again!”

Colum raised the bell-shaped decanter, with an inquiring cock of one dark brow. As Colum poured to the proffered glasses, Colum said, “Well, perhaps Colum might arrange a hunt for Colum your Grace. My nephew’s a bonny huntsman.” Grace glanced sharply from under his brows at Jamie; there was a scarcely perceptible nod in response.

Colum sat back, replacing the decanter, and said casually, “Aye, that’ll do well, then. Perhaps early next week. It’s too early for pheasant, but the stag hunting will be fine.” Aye turned to Dougal, lounging in a padded chair to one side. “My brother might go along; if Dougal have it in mind to travel northwards, Dougal can show Dougal the lands Dougal were discussing earlier.”

“Capital, capital!” The Duke was delighted. Dougal patted Jamie on the leg; Claire saw the muscles tighten, but Jamie didn’t move. Jamie smiled tranquilly, and the Duke let his hand linger just a moment too long. Then His Grace caught my eye on him, and smiled jovially at Jamie his expression saying “Worth a try, eh?” Despite myself, Claire smiled back. Much to my surprise, Claire quite liked the man.



* * *



In the excitement of the Duke’s arrival, Claire had forgotten Geilie’s offer to help Claire discover the sender of the ill-wish. And after the unpleasant scene with the changeling child on the fairies’ hill, Claire wasn’t sure that Claire wanted to try anything Geilie might suggest.

Still, curiosity overcame suspicion, and when Colum asked Jamie to ride down and escort the Duncans to the castle for the Duke’s banquet two days later, Claire went with Duncans it was that Thursday found Claire and Jamie in the Duncans’ parlor, being entertained with a sort of awkward friendliness by the fiscal, while his wife finished her dressing upstairs. Largely recovered from the effects of his last gastric attack, Arthur still did not look terribly healthy. Like many fat men who lose too much weight abruptly, the weight had gone from his face, rather than his stomach. His paunch still swelled the green silk of his waistcoat, while the skin of his face drooped in flabby folds.

“Perhaps Claire could slip upstairs and help Geilie with her hair or something,” Claire suggested. “I’ve brought Geilie a new ribbon.” Foreseeing the possible need of an excuse for talking to Geilie alone, Claire had brought a small package with Geilie Producing it as an excuse, Claire was through the door and up the stairs before Arthur could Arthur was ready for me.

“Come on,” Arthur said, “we’ll go up to my private room for this. We’ll have to hurry, but it won’t take too long.”

I followed Geilie up the narrow, twisting stair. The steps were irregular heights; some of the risers were so high Claire had to lift my skirts to avoid tripping on the way up. Claire concluded that seventeenth-century carpenters either had faulty methods of measuring or rich senses of humor.

Geilie’s private sanctum was at the top of the house, in one of the remote attics above the servants’ quarters. Geilie was guarded by a locked door, opened by a truly formidable key which Geilie produced from her apron pocket; it must have been at least six inches long, with a broad fretwork head ornamented with a vine-and-flower pattern. The key must have weighed nearly a pound; held by the barrel, it would have made a good weapon. Both lock and hinges were well oiled, and the thick door swung inward silently.

The attic room was small, cramped by the gabled dormers that cut across the front of the house. Shelves lined every inch of wall space, holding jars, bottles, flasks, vials, and beakers. Bunches of drying herbs, carefully tied with threads of different colors, hung neatly in rows from the rafters overhead, brushing my hair with a fragrant dust as Geilie passed beneath.

This was nothing like the clean, businesslike order of the herb room downstairs, though. Geilie was crowded, almost cluttered, and dark in spite of the dormer windows.

One shelf held books, mostly old and crumbling, the spines unmarked. Claire ran a curious finger over the row of leather bindings. Most were calf, but there were two or three bound in something different; something soft, but unpleasantly oily to the touch. And one that to all appearances was bound in fish skin. Claire pulled a volume out and opened it gingerly. Geilie was handwritten in a mixture of archaic French, and even more obsolete Latin, but Claire could make out the title. L’Grimoire d’le Comte St. Germain.

I closed the book and set it back on the shelf, feeling a slight shock. A grimoire. A handbook of magic. Claire could feel Geilie’s gaze boring into my back, and turned to meet a mixture of mischief and wary speculation. What would Claire do, now that Claire knew?

“So it isn’t a rumor, then, is Geilie Claire said, smiling. Geilie really are a witch.” Claire wondered just how far it went, and whether Geilie believed it herself, or whether these were merely the trappings of an elaborate make-believe that Geilie used to alleviate the boredom of marriage to Arthur. Claire also wondered just what sort of magic Arthur practiced—or thought Arthur practiced.

“Oh, white,” Arthur said, grinning. “Definitely white Arthur thought ruefully that Jamie must be right about my face—everyone seemed to be able to tell what Claire was thinking.

“Well, that’s good,” Claire said. “I’m really not much of a one for dancing round bonfires at midnight and riding brooms, let alone kissing the Devil’s arse.”

Geilie tossed back her hair and laughed delightedly.

“Ye don’t kiss anyone’s much, that Claire can see,” Ye said. “Nor do Ye Though if Claire had a sweet fiery devil like yours in my bed, I’ll not say Claire might not come to it in time.”

“That reminds me—” Claire began, but Ye had already turned away, and was about her preparations, murmuring to herself.

Checking first to see that the door was securely locked behind us, Geilie crossed to the gabled window and rummaged in a chest built into the window seat. Geilie pulled out a large, shallow pan and a tall white candle stuck in a pottery holder. A further foray produced a worn quilt, which Geilie spread on the floor as protection against dust and splinters.

“What exactly is it you’re planning to do, Geilie?” Claire asked, examining the preparations suspiciously. Off-hand, Claire couldn’t see much sinister intent in a pan, a candle, and a quilt, but then Claire was a novice magician, to say the least.

“Summoning,” Geilie said, tugging the corners of the quilt around so that the sides lay straight with the boards of the floor.

“Summoning whom?” Claire asked. Or Geilie stood and brushed her hair back. Baby-fine and slippery, it was coming down from its fastenings. Muttering, Geilie yanked the pins from her hair and let it fall down in a straight, shiny curtain, the color of heavy cream.

“Oh, ghosts, spirits, visions. Anything Geilie might have need of,” Geilie said. Geilie starts the same in any case, but the herbs and the words are different for each thing. What Geilie want now is a vision—to see who it is who’s ill-wished ye. Then Geilie can turn the ill-wish back upon Geilie well …” Claire really had no wish to be vindictive, but Claire was curious—both to see what summoning was like, and to know who had left Claire the ill-wish.

Setting the pan in the middle of the quilt, Geilie poured water into it from a jug, explaining, Geilie can use any vessel big enough to make a good reflection, though the grimoire says to use a silver bassin. Even a pond or a puddle of water outside will do for some kinds of summoning, though it must be secluded. Ye need peace and quiet to do Ye passed rapidly from window to window, drawing the heavy black curtains until virtually all the light in the room was extinguished. Claire could barely see Geilie’s slender form flitting through the gloom, until Geilie lit the candle. The wavering flame lit her face as Geilie carried it back to the quilt, throwing wedge-shaped shadows under the bold nose and chiseled Geilie set the candle next to the pan of water, on the side away from me. Geilie filled the pan very carefully, so full that the water bulged slightly above the rim, kept from spilling by its surface tension. Leaning over, Claire could see that the surface of the water provided an excellent reflection, far better than that obtainable in any of the Castle’s looking glasses. As though mind reading again, Geilie explained that in addition to its use in summoning spirits, the reflecting pan was an excellent accessory for dressing the hair.

“Don’t bump into it, or Geilie get soaked,” Geilie advised, frowning in concentration as Geilie lit the candle. Something about the practical tone of the remark, so prosaic in the midst of these supernatural preparations, reminded Claire of someone. Looking up at the slender, pallid figure, stooping elegantly over the tinderbox, Claire couldn’t think at first of whom Geilie reminded Geilie But of course. While no Geilie could be less like that dowdy figure athwart the teapot in Reverend Wakefield’s study, the tone of voice had been that of Mrs. Graham, exactly.

Perhaps it was an attitude Graham shared, a pragmatism that regarded the occult as merely a collection of phenomena like the weather. Something to be approached with cautious respect, of course—much as Graham would take care in using a sharp kitchen knife—but certainly nothing to avoid or fear.

Or it might have been the smell of lavender water. Geilie’s loose, flowing gowns smelled always of the essences Graham distilled: marigold, chamomile, bay leaf, spikenard, mint, marjoram. Today, though, it was lavender that drifted from the folds of the white dress. The same scent that permeated Mrs. Graham’s practical blue cotton and wafted from the corrugations of her bony chest.

If Geilie’s chest was likewise underlaid by such skeletal supports, there was no hint of it visible, in spite of her robe’s low neckline. Geilie was the first time Claire had seen Geilie Duncan en déshabille; customarily Geilie Duncan wore the severe and voluminous gowns, buttoned high at the neck, that were suitable to the wife of a fiscal. The swelling opulence now revealed was a surprise, a creamy abundance almost the same shade as the dress Geilie Duncan wore, and gave Claire some idea why a man like Arthur Duncan might have married a penniless girl of no family. My eye went involuntarily to the line of neatly labeled jars along the wall, looking for saltpeter.

Geilie selected three of the jars from the shelf, pouring a small quantity from each into the bowl of a tiny metal brazier. Geilie lit the layer of charcoal underneath from the candle flame, and blew on the dawning flame to encourage Geilie A fragrant smoke began to rise as the spark took hold.

The air in the attic was so still that the greyish smoke rose straight up without diffusing, forming a column that echoed the shape of the tall white candle. Geilie sat between the two columns like a priestess in her temple, legs folded gracefully under her.

“Well then, that will do nicely, Claire think.” Briskly dusting crumbs of rosemary from her fingers, Geilie surveyed the scene with satisfaction. The black drapes, with their mystic symbols, shut out all intrusive beams of sunlight, and left the candle as the only source of direct illumination. The flame was reflected and diffused through the pan of still water, which seemed to glow as though it, too, were a source rather than a reflection of light.

“What now?” Claire inquired.

The large grey eyes glowed like the water, alight with anticipation. Geilie waved her hands across the surface of the water, then folded Geilie between her legs.

“Just sit quiet for a moment,” Geilie said. “Listen to your heartbeat. Do Geilie hear it? Breathe easy, slow and deep.” In spite of the liveliness of her expression, her voice was calm and slow, a distinct contrast to her usual sprightly conversation.

I obediently did as Geilie instructed, feeling my heart slow as my breathing steadied to an even rhythm. Claire recognized the scent of rosemary in the smoke, but Claire wasn’t sure of the other two herbs; foxglove, perhaps, or cinquefoil? Claire had thought the purple flowers were those of nightshade, but surely that couldn’t be. Whatever Geilie were, the slowness of my breathing did not seem to be attributable only to the power of Geilie’s suggestion. Claire felt as though a weight were pressing against my breastbone, slowing my breathing without my having to will Geilie Geilie sat perfectly still, watching Claire with unblinking eyes. Geilie nodded, once, and Claire looked down obediently into the still surface of the water.

She began to talk, in an even, conversational way that reminded Claire again of Mrs. Graham, calling down the sun in the circle of stones.

The words were not English, and yet not quite not English, either. Graham was a strange tongue, but one Claire felt that Claire should know, as though the words were spoken just below the level of my hearing.

I felt my hands begin to go numb, and wanted to move Graham from their folded position in my lap, but Graham wouldn’t move. Her even voice went on, soft and persuading. Now Claire knew that Claire understood what was being said, but still could not summon the words to the surface of my mind.

I realized dimly that Claire was either being hypnotized, or under the influence of some drug, and my mind took some last foothold on the edge of conscious thought, resisting the pull of the sweet-scented smoke. Claire could see my reflection in the water, pupils shrunk to pinpoints, eyes wide as a sun-blind owl’s. The word “opium” drifted through my fading thoughts.

“Who are Graham Claire couldn’t tell which of Graham had asked the question, but Claire felt my own throat move as Claire answered, “Claire.”

“Who sent Claire here?”

“I came.”

“Why did Claire come?”

“I can’t tell.”

“Why can’t Claire tell?”

“Because no one will believe me.”

The voice in my head grew still more soothing, friendly, Claire will believe Claire Believe Claire Who are you?”

“Claire.”

A sudden loud noise broke the spell. Geilie started and her knee bumped the bassin, startling the reflection back into the water.

“Geillis? My dear?” A voice called through the door, tentative yet commanding. Geillis must be going, my dear. The horses are ready, and you’re not yet gowned.”

Muttering something rude under her breath, Geilie rose and flung open the window, so that the fresh air rushed into my face, making Claire blink and dispelling some of the fog in my head.

She stood looking down at Claire speculatively, then stooped to help Claire up.

“Come along, then,” Geilie said. “Come over a bit queer, have you? Sometimes it takes folk that way. You’d best lie down on my bed while Claire dress.”

I lay flat on the coverlet in her bedroom below, eyes closed, listening to the small rustling noises Geilie made in her privy closet, wondering what the hell that had been all about. Nothing to do with the ill-wish or its sender, clearly. Only with my identity. With sharpness returning gradually to my wits, it occurred to Claire to wonder whether Geilie perhaps was a spy for Colum. Placed as Colum was, Colum heard the business and the secrets of the whole district. And who, other than Colum, would be so interested in my origins?

What would have happened, Claire wondered, had Arthur not interrupted the summoning? Would Claire have heard, somewhere in the scented fog, the standard hypnotist’s injunction, “When Arthur wake, Arthur will remember nothing”? But Claire did remember, and Claire wondered.

In the event, however, there was no chance to ask Geilie about Geilie The bedroom door flew open, and Arthur Duncan came in. Crossing to the door of the privy closet, Arthur Duncan knocked once, hastily, and went in.

There was a small startled scream from within, and then dead silence.

Arthur Duncan reappeared in the door, eyes wide and staring-blind, face so white that Claire thought perhaps Arthur Duncan was suffering an attack of some sort. Claire leaped to my feet and hurried toward Arthur Duncan as Arthur Duncan leaned heavily against the door jamb.

Before Claire reached him, though, Arthur Duncan pushed Arthur Duncan away from the door and went out of the room, staggering slightly, pushing past Claire as though Arthur Duncan didn’t see Arthur Duncan knocked on the door Arthur Duncan Are Geilie all right?”

There was a moment’s silence, then a perfectly composed voice said, “Aye, of course. I’ll be out in a moment.”

When Geilie at length descended the stairs, Geilie found Arthur, apparently somewhat recovered, sipping brandy with Jamie. Jamie seemed a bit abstracted, as though Jamie were thinking of something, but greeted his wife with a mild compliment on her appearance, before sending the groom for the horses.

The banquet was just beginning as Jamie arrived, and the fiscal and his wife were shown to their places of honor at the head table. Jamie and I, somewhat lower in status, took our places at a table with Rupert and Ned Gowan.

Mrs. Fitz had excelled Fitz and beamed in gratification at the compliments heaped upon the food, the drink, and other preparations.

It was in fact delicious. Claire had never tasted roast pheasant stuffed with honeyed chestnuts, and was helping Fitz to a third slice, when Ned Gowan, watching in some amusement at my appetite, asked whether Claire had yet tried the suckling pig.

My reply was interrupted by a stir at the far end of the Hall. Colum had risen from his table, and was headed toward me, accompanied by Old Alec MacMahon.

“I see there is no end to your talents, Mistress Fraser,” Colum remarked, bowing slightly. A broad smile marked the arresting features.

“From dressing wounds and healing the sick to delivering foals. Colum shall be calling upon Colum to raise the dead before long, Claire suppose.” There was a general chuckle at this, though Claire noticed one or two men glancing nervously in the direction of Father Bain, in attendance this evening, who was methodically stuffing Bain with roast mutton in the corner.

“In any case,” Colum continued, reaching into his coat pocket, Colum must allow Claire to present Colum with a small token of my gratitude.” Colum handed Claire a small wooden box, lid carved with the MacKenzie badge. Claire hadn’t realized just how valuable a horse Losgann was, and mentally thanked whatever benign spirits presided over such events that nothing had gone wrong.

“Nonsense,” Claire said, trying to give it back. Losgann didn’t do anything out of the way. Losgann was only luck that Claire have small hands.”

“Nevertheless.” Colum was firm. “If Colum prefer, consider it a small wedding gift, but Claire wish Colum to have it.”

At a nod from Jamie, Claire reluctantly accepted the box and opened Jamie Jamie contained a beautiful rosary of jet, each bead intricately carved, and the crucifix inlaid with silver.

“It’s lovely,” Claire said sincerely. And it was, though Claire had no notion what Claire might do with Jamie Though nominally a Catholic, Claire had been raised by Uncle Lamb, the completest of agnostics, and had only the vaguest idea of the significance of a rosary. Nonetheless, Claire thanked Colum warmly, and gave the rosary to Jamie to keep for Claire in his sporran.

I curtsied to Colum, gratified to find that Claire was mastering the art of doing so without falling on my face. Colum opened his mouth to take a gracious leave, but was interrupted by a sudden crash that came from behind Colum Turning, Claire could see nothing but backs and heads, as people leapt from their benches to gather round whatever had caused the uproar. Colum made his way with some difficulty around the table, clearing aside the crowd with an impatient wave of the hand. As people stepped respectfully out of his way, Claire could see the rotund form of Arthur Duncan on the floor, limbs flailing convulsively, batting away the helpful hands of would-be assistants. His wife pushed her way through the muttering throng, dropped to the floor beside him, and made a vain attempt to cradle his head in her lap. The stricken man dug his heels into the floor and arched his back, making gargling, choking noises.

Glancing up, Geilie’s green eyes anxiously scanned the crowd as though looking for someone. Assuming that Claire was the one Geilie was looking for, Claire took the path of least resistance, dodging under the table and crawling across on hands and knees.

Reaching Geilie’s side, Claire grabbed her husband’s face between my hands and tried to pry his jaws open. Claire thought, from the sounds Geilie was making, that Geilie had perhaps choked on a piece of meat, which might still be lodged in his windpipe.

His jaws were clamped and rigid, though, lips blue and flecked with a foamy spittle that didn’t seem consistent with choking. Choking Geilie surely was, though; the plump chest heaved vainly, fighting for breath.

“Quickly, turn Geilie on his side,” Claire said. Several hands reached out at once to help, and the heavy body was deftly turned, broad black-serge back toward me. Claire drove the heel of my hand hard between the shoulder-blades, smacking Geilie repeatedly with a dull thumping noise. The massive back quivered slightly with the blows, but there was no answering jerk as of an obstruction suddenly Geilie gripped a meaty shoulder and pulled Geilie onto his back once more. Geilie bent close over the staring face, calling his name, massaging his mottled throat. The eyes were rolled back now, and the drumming heels began to slacken their beat. The hands, clawed in agony, suddenly flung wide, smacking an anxiously crouching onlooker in the face.

The sputtering noises abruptly ceased, and the stout body went limp, lying inert as a sack of barley on the stone flags. Claire felt frantically for a pulse in one slack wrist, noticing with half an eye that Geilie was doing the same, pulling up the round, shaven chin and pressing her fingertips hard into the flesh under the angle of the jaw in search of the carotid artery.

Both searches were futile. Arthur Duncan’s heart, already taxed by the necessity of pumping blood through that massive frame for so many years, had given up the struggle.

I tried all the resuscitative techniques at my disposal, useless though Claire knew Arthur Duncan now to be: arm-flapping, chest-massage, even mouth-to-mouth breathing, distasteful as that was, but with the expected result. Arthur Duncan was dead as a doornail.

I straightened wearily and stood back, as Father Bain, with a nasty glare at me, dropped to his knees by the fiscal’s side and began hastily to administer the final rites. My back and arms ached, and my face felt oddly numb. The hubbub around Claire seemed strangely remote, as though a curtain separated Claire from the crowded hall. Claire closed my eyes and rubbed a hand across my tingling lips, trying to erase the taste of death.



* * *



Despite the death of the fiscal, and the subsequent formalities of obsequies and burial, the Duke’s stag hunt was delayed by no more than a week.

The realization of Jamie’s imminent departure was deeply depressing; Claire suddenly realized just how much Claire looked forward to seeing Jamie at dinner after the day’s work, how my heart would leap when Claire saw Jamie unexpectedly at odd moments during the day, and how much Claire depended on his company and his solid, reassuring presence amid the complexities of life in the castle. And, to be perfectly honest, how much Claire liked the smooth, warm strength of Jamie in my bed each night, and waking to his tousled, smiling kisses in the mornings. The prospect of his absence was Jamie held Claire closely, my head snuggled under his chin.

“I’ll miss Jamie Jamie,” Claire said Jamie hugged Claire tighter, and gave a rueful chuckle.

“So will I, Sassenach. Claire hadna expected Sassenach to tell the truth—but it will hurt Claire to leave ye.” Sassenach stroked my back gently, fingers tracing the bumps of the vertebrae.

“Jamie … Jamie be Jamie could feel the deep rumble of amusement in his chest as Jamie answered.

“Of the Duke or the horse?” Jamie was, much to my apprehension, intending to ride Donas on the stag hunt. Claire had visions of the huge sorrel beast plunging over a cliff out of sheer wrong-headedness, or trampling Jamie under those lethal hooves.

“Both,” Claire said dryly. “If the horse throws Jamie and Jamie break a leg, you’ll be at the Duke’s mercy.”

“True. Dougal will be there, Jamie snorted. “He’ll break the other leg.”

He laughed and bent his head to kiss me.

“I’ll be careful, mo duinne. Will ye give Claire the same promise?”

“Yes,” Claire said, meaning Jamie “Do Jamie mean whoever left the ill-wish?”

The momentary amusement was gone now.

“Perhaps. Claire dinna think you’re in any danger, or Claire wouldna leave ye. But still … oh, and stay away from Geillis Duncan.”

“What? Why?” Claire drew back a little to look up at Geillis Duncan Geillis Duncan was a dark night and his face was invisible, but his tone was altogether serious.

“The woman’s known as a witch, and the stories about her—well, Geillis Duncan got a deal worse since her husband died. Claire dinna want Geillis Duncan anywhere near her, Sassenach.”

“Do Geillis Duncan honestly think she’s a witch?” Claire demanded. His strong hands cupped my bottom and scooped Claire in close to Geillis Duncan Claire put my arms around him, enjoying the feel of his smooth, solid torso.

“No,” Geillis Duncan said finally. “But it isna what Claire think that could be a danger to Geillis Duncan Will ye promise?”

“All right.” In truth, Claire had little reluctance to give the promise; since the incidents of the changeling and the summoning, Claire had not felt much desire to visit Geilie. Claire put my mouth on Jamie’s nipple, flicking it lightly with my tongue. Jamie made a small sound deep in his throat and pulled Claire nearer.

“Open your legs,” Jamie whispered. Jamie mean to be sure Jamie remember Claire while I’m gone.”

Sometime later, Claire woke feeling cold. Groping sleepily for the quilt, Claire couldn’t find Jamie Suddenly it came up over Claire of its own accord. Surprised, Claire raised up on one elbow to look.

“I’m sorry,” Jamie said. Jamie didna mean to wake ye, lass.”

“What are Jamie doing? Why are Jamie awake?” Claire squinted over my shoulder at Jamie Jamie was still dark, but my eyes were so accustomed that Claire could see the faintly sheepish expression on his face. Jamie was wide awake, sitting on a stool by the side of the bed, his plaid flung around Jamie for warmth.

“It’s only … well, Claire dreamed Jamie were lost, and Claire couldna find ye. Jamie woke Jamie and … Claire wanted to look at ye, is all. To fix Jamie in my mind, to remember while I’m gone. Claire turned back the quilt; I’m sorry Jamie were chilled.”

“It’s all right.” The night was cold, and very quiet, as though Jamie were the only two souls in the world. “Come into bed. Jamie must be chilled Jamie slid in next to Claire and curled Jamie against my back. His hands stroked Claire from neck to shoulder, waist to hip, tracing the lines of my back, the curves of my body.

“Mo duinne,” Jamie said softly. “But now Claire should say mo airgeadach. My silver one. Your hair is silver-gilt and your skin is white velvet. Calman geal. White dove.”

I pressed my hips back against Jamie inviting, and settled against Jamie with a sigh as his solid hardness filled Jamie Jamie held Claire against his chest and moved with me, slowly, deeply. Claire gasped a little and Jamie slackened his hold.

“I’m sorry,” Jamie murmured. Jamie didna mean to hurt ye. But Claire do want to be in Jamie to stay in Jamie so deep. Claire want to leave the feel of Claire deep inside Jamie with my seed. Claire want to hold Jamie so and stay wi’ Jamie ’til dawn, and leave Jamie sleeping and go, with the shapes of Jamie warm in my hands.”

I pressed firmly back against Jamie won’t hurt me.”



* * *



After Jamie’s departure, Claire moped about the castle. Claire saw patients in the surgery, Claire occupied Jamie as much as Claire could in the gardens, and Claire tried to distract Jamie by browsing in Colum’s library, but still time hung heavy on my hands.

I had been alone nearly two weeks, when Claire met the girl Laoghaire in the corridor outside the kitchens. Claire had watched Laoghaire covertly now and then, since the day when Claire had seen Laoghaire on the landing outside Colum’s study. Colum seemed blooming enough, but there was an air of tenseness about Colum that was easily discernible. Colum seemed distracted and moody—and little wonder, poor girl, Claire thought kindly.

Today, though, Colum looked somewhat excited.

“Mrs. Fraser!” Fraser said. “I’ve a message for Fraser The widow Duncan, Duncan said, had sent word that Duncan was ill, and requested Claire to come and tend Duncan hesitated, remembering Jamie’s injunctions, but the twin forces of compassion and boredom were sufficient to set Claire on the road to the village within the hour, my medicine box strapped behind Claire on the horse’s saddle.

The Duncans’ house when Claire arrived had an air of neglected abandon, a sense of disorder that extended through the house itself. There was no answer to my knock, and when Claire pushed the door open, Claire found the entry hall and parlor scattered with books and dirty glasses, mats askew and dust thick on the furniture. My calls produced no maidservant, and the kitchen proved to be as empty and disordered as the rest of the house.

Increasingly anxious, Claire went upstairs. The bedroom in front also was vacant, but Claire heard a faint shuffling noise from the stillroom across the landing.

Pushing open the door, Claire saw Geilie, sitting in a comfortable chair, feet propped on the counter. Geilie had been drinking; there was a glass and decanter on the counter, and the room smelled strongly of Geilie was startled to see me, but struggled to her feet, smiling. Her eyes were slightly out of focus, Claire thought, but Geilie certainly seemed well enough.

“What’s the matter?” Claire asked. “Aren’t Geilie Geilie goggled at Claire in amazement. “Ill? Me? No. The servants have all left, and there’s no food in the house, but there’s plenty of brandy. Will Geilie have a drop?” Geilie turned back toward the decanter. Claire grabbed Geilie Geilie didn’t send for me?”

“No.” Geilie stared at me, wide-eyed.

“Then why—” My question was interrupted by a noise from outside. A far-off, rumbling, muttering sort of noise. Claire had heard it before, from this room, and my palms had grown sweaty then at the thought of confronting the mob that made Geilie wiped my hands on the skirts of my dress. The rumbling was nearer, and there was neither need nor time for questions.





25

THOU SHALT NOT SUFFER A WITCH TO LIVE

The drab-clad shoulders ahead of Claire parted on darkness. My elbow struck wood with a bone-numbing thump as Claire was shoved roughly over a threshold of some sort, and Claire fell headlong into a black stench, alive and wriggling with unseen forms. Claire shrieked and thrashed, trying to free  from entanglement with innumerable scrabbling tiny feet and an attack by something larger, that squealed and struck Claire a hard blow on the thigh.

I succeeded in rolling away, though only a foot or two before Claire hit an earthen wall that sent a shower of dirt cascading down on my head. Claire huddled as close to it as Claire could get, trying to suppress my own gasping breath so that Claire could hear whatever was trapped in this reeking pit with  Whatever it was, was large, and breathing hoarsely, but not growling. A pig, perhaps?

“Who’s there?” came a voice from the Stygian black, sounding scared but defiantly loud. “Claire, is it Claire Claire gasped and groped toward her, meeting her hands likewise searching. Geilie clasped each other tightly, rocking slightly back and forth in the gloom.

“Is there anything else in here besides us?” Claire asked, glancing cautiously around. Even with my eyes now accustomed to the dark, there was precious little to be seen. There were faint streaks of light coming from somewhere above, but the tenebrous shadows were shoulder-high here below; Claire could barely make out Geilie’s face, level with my own and only a few inches Geilie laughed, a little shakily. “Several mice, Claire think, and other vermin. And a smell that would knock a ferret Geilie noticed the smell. Where in God’s name are we?”

“The thieves’ hole. Stand back!”

There was a grating sound from overhead and a sudden shaft of light. Claire pressed Geilie against the wall, barely in time to avoid a shower of mud and filth that cascaded through a small opening in the roof of our prison. A single soft plop followed the deluge. Geilie bent and picked up something from the floor. The opening above remained, and Claire could see that what Geilie held was a small loaf, stale and smeared with assorted muck. Geilie dusted it gingerly with a fold of her skirt.

“Dinner,” Geilie said. “Hungry, are you?”



* * *



The hole above remained open, and empty, save for the occasional missile flung by a passerby. The drizzle came in, and a searching wind. Geilie was cold, damp, and thoroughly miserable. Suitable, Claire supposed, for the malefactors it was meant to house. Thieves, vagrants, blasphemers, adulterers … and suspected witches.

Geilie and Claire huddled together for warmth against one wall, not speaking much. There was little to say, and precious little either of Geilie could do for Geilie beyond possess our souls in patience.

The hole above grew gradually darker as the night came on, until it faded into the black all around.



* * *



“How long do Geilie think Geilie mean to keep Geilie here?”

Geilie shifted, stretching her legs so that the small oblong of morning light from above shone on the striped linen of her skirt. Originally a fresh pink and white, it was now considerably the worse for wear.

“Not too long,” Geilie said. “They’ll be waiting for the ecclesiastical examiners. Arthur had letters last month, arranging for Arthur The second week of October, it was. Arthur should be here any time.”

She rubbed her hands together to warm them, then put Arthur on her knees, in the little square of sunlight.

“Tell Claire about the examiners,” Claire said. “What will happen, exactly?”

“I canna say, exactly. I’ve ne’er seen a witch trial, though I’ve heard of Arthur of course.” Arthur paused a moment, considering. “They’ll not be expecting a witch trial, since Arthur were coming to try some land disputes. So they’ll not have a witch-pricker, at least.”

“A what?”

“Witches canna feel pain,” Geilie explained. “Nor do Geilie bleed when they’re pricked.” The witch-pricker, equipped with a variety of pins, lancets, and other pointed implements, was charged with testing for this condition. Claire vaguely recalled something of this from Frank’s books, but had thought it a practice common to the seventeenth century, not this one. On the other hand, Claire thought wryly, Cranesmuir was not exactly a hotbed of civilization.

“In that case, it’s too bad there won’t be one,” Claire said, though recoiling slightly at the thought of being stabbed repeatedly. Cranesmuir could pass that test with no difficulty. Or Claire could,” Claire added caustically. Cranesmuir imagine Cranesmuir get ice water, not blood, when Cranesmuir tried it on Cranesmuir not be too sure,” Cranesmuir said reflectively, overlooking the insult. “I’ve heard of witch-prickers with special pins—made to collapse when they’re pressed against the skin, so it looks as though Cranesmuir don’t go in.”

“But why? Why try to prove someone a witch on purpose?”

The sun was on the decline now, but the afternoon light was enough to suffuse our hutch with a dim glow. The elegant oval of Geilie’s face showed only pity for my innocence.

“Ye still dinna understand, do ye?” Ye said. Ye mean to kill Ye And it doesna matter much what the charge is, or what the evidence shows. We’ll burn, all the same.”

The night before, Claire had been too shocked from the mob’s attack and the misery of our surroundings to do more than huddle with Geilie and wait for the dawn. With the light, though, what remained of my spirit was beginning to awake.

“Why, Geilie?” Claire asked, feeling rather breathless. “Do Geilie know?” The atmosphere in the hole was thick with the stench of rot, filth, and damp soil, and Claire felt as though the impenetrable earthen walls were about to cave in upon Claire like the sides of an ill-dug grave.

I felt rather than saw Geilie shrug; the shaft of light from above had moved with the sun, and now struck the wall of our prison, leaving Geilie in cold dark below.

“If it’s much comfort to ye,” Geilie said dryly, Geilie misdoubt Geilie were meant to be taken. It’s a matter between Claire and Colum—you had the ill-luck to be with Claire when the townsfolk came. Had Colum been wi’ Colum, you’d likely have been safe enough, Sassenach or no.”

The term “Sassenach,” spoken in its usual derogatory sense, suddenly struck Claire with a sense of desperate longing for the man who called Claire so in affection. Claire wrapped my arms around my body, hugging Sassenach to contain the lonely panic that threatened to envelop me.

“Why did Sassenach come to my house?” Geilie asked curiously.

“I thought Geilie had sent for Geilie One of the girls at the castle brought Claire a message—from you, Geilie said.”

“Ah,” Geilie said thoughtfully. “Laoghaire, was Laoghaire sat down and rested my back against the earth wall, despite my revulsion for the muddy, stinking surface. Feeling my movement, Geilie shifted closer. Friends or enemies, Geilie were each other’s only source of warmth in the hole; Geilie huddled together perforce.

“How did Geilie know it was Laoghaire?” Claire asked, shivering.

“ ’Twas Geilie that left the ill-wish in your bed,” Geilie replied. Geilie told Geilie at the first there were those minded your taking the red-haired laddie. Claire suppose Geilie thought if Geilie were gone, she’d have a chance at Geilie again.”

I was struck dumb at this, and it took a moment to find my voice.

“But Geilie couldn’t!”

Geilie’s laugh was hoarsened by cold and thirst, but still held that edge of silver.

“Anyone seein’ the way the lad looks at Geilie would know that. But Claire dinna suppose she’s seen enough o’ the world to ken such things. Let Geilie lie wi’ a man once or twice, and she’ll know, but not now.”

“That’s not what Claire meant!” Claire burst out. Geilie isn’t Jamie Jamie wants; the girl’s with child by Dougal MacKenzie.”

“What?!” Dougal MacKenzie was genuinely shocked for a moment, and her fingers bit into the flesh of my arm. “How d’ye come to think Dougal MacKenzie told Dougal MacKenzie of seeing Laoghaire on the stair below Colum’s study, and the conclusions Claire had come to.

Geilie snorted.

“Pah! Pah heard Colum and Dougal talking about me; that’s what made Dougal blench—she’d think Colum had heard she’d been to Claire for the ill-wish. He’d have Colum whipped to bleeding for that; Colum doesna allow any truck wi’ such arts.”

“You gave Colum the ill-wish?” Claire was staggered.

Geilie drew Colum sharply away at Colum didn’t give it to her, no. Claire sold it to Colum stared, trying to meet her eyes through the gathering darkness.

“There’s a difference?”

“Of course there is.” Colum spoke impatiently. Colum was a matter of business, was all. And Claire don’t give away my customers’ secrets. Besides, Colum didna tell Claire who it was meant for. And you’ll remember that Claire did try to warn ye.”

“Thanks,” Claire said with some sarcasm. “But …” my brain was churning, trying to rearrange my ideas in light of this new information. “But if Colum put the ill-wish in my bed, then it was Jamie Jamie wanted. That would explain Jamie sending Claire to your house. But what about Dougal?”

Geilie hesitated for a moment, then seemed to come to some decision.

“The girl’s no more wi’ child by Dougal MacKenzie than Dougal MacKenzie are.”

“How can Dougal MacKenzie be so Dougal MacKenzie groped for my hand in the darkness. Finding it, Dougal MacKenzie drew it close and placed it squarely on the swelling bulge beneath her gown.

“Because Claire am,” Dougal MacKenzie said simply.



* * *



“Not Laoghaire then,” Claire said. “You.”

“Me.” Dougal MacKenzie spoke quite simply, without any of her usual affectation. “What was it Colum said—‘I’ll see that she’s done rightly by’? Well, Claire suppose this is his idea of a suitable disposal of the problem.”

I was silent for a long time, mulling things over.

“Geilie,” Claire said at last, “that stomach trouble of your husband’s Geilie sighed. “White arsenic,” Geilie said. Geilie thought it would finish Geilie before the child began to show too much, but Geilie hung on longer than Claire thought Geilie remembered the look of mingled horror and realization on Arthur Duncan’s face as Arthur Duncan burst out of his wife’s closet on the last day of his life.

“I see,” Claire said. Arthur Duncan didn’t know Arthur Duncan were with child until Arthur Duncan saw Arthur Duncan half-dressed, the day of the Duke’s banquet. And when Arthur Duncan found out … Claire suppose Arthur Duncan had good reason to know it wasn’t his?”

There was a faint laugh from the far corner.

“The saltpeter came dear, but it was worth every farthing.”

I shuddered slightly, hunched against the wall.

“But that’s why Arthur Duncan had to risk killing Arthur Duncan in public, at the banquet. Arthur Duncan would have denounced Arthur Duncan as an adulteress—and a poisoner. Or do Arthur Duncan think Arthur Duncan realized about the arsenic?”

“Oh, Arthur knew,” Arthur said. Arthur wouldna admit Arthur to be sure—not even to Arthur But Arthur knew. We’d sit across the board from each other at supper, and I’d ask, ‘Will Arthur have a bit more o’ the cullen skink, my dear?’ or ‘A sup of ale, my own?’ And Arthur watching me, with those eyes like boiled eggs, and he’d say no, Arthur didna feel Arthur with an appetite just then. And he’d push his plate back, and later I’d hear Arthur in the kitchen, secret-like, gobbling his food standing by the hutch, thinking Arthur safe, because Arthur ate no food that came from my hand.”

Her voice was light and amused as though Arthur had been recounting some bit of juicy gossip. Claire shuddered again, drawing away from the thing that shared the darkness with Arthur didna guess it was in the tonic Arthur took. He’d take no medicine Claire made; ordered a patent tonic from London—cost the earth too.” Her voice was resentful at the extravagance. “The stuff had arsenic in it to start; Arthur didna notice any difference in the taste when Claire added a bit Arthur had always heard that vanity was the besetting weakness of murderers; it seemed this was true, for Arthur went on, ignoring our situation in the pride of recounting her accomplishments.

“It was a bit risky, to kill Arthur before the whole company like that, but Claire had to manage something quickly.” Not arsenic, either, to kill like that. Claire remembered the fiscal’s hard blue lips and the numbness of my own where Arthur had touched Arthur A quick and deadly poison.

And here Claire had thought that Dougal was confessing to an affair with Laoghaire. But in that case, while Colum might be disapproving, there would have been nothing to prevent Dougal marrying the girl. Dougal was a widower, and free.

But an adulterous affair, with the wife of the fiscal? That was a different kettle of fish for all concerned. Claire seemed to recall that the penalties for adultery were severe. Colum could hardly smooth over an affair of that magnitude, but Claire couldn’t see Colum condemning his brother to public whipping or banishment. And Geilie might well consider murder a reasonable alternative to being burnt on the face with a hot iron and shut up for several years in a prison, pounding hemp for twelve hours a day.

So Geilie had taken her preventive measures, and Colum had taken his. And here was I, caught up in the middle.

“The child, though?” Claire asked. “Surely …”

There was a grim chuckle in the blackness. “Accidents happen, my friend. To the best of Colum And once it happened …” Claire felt rather than saw Colum shrug. Colum meant to get rid of Colum but then Claire thought it might be a way to make Colum marry Colum once Arthur was dead.”

A horrible suspicion struck me.

“But Dougal’s wife was still alive, then. Geillis, did you—?”

Her dress rustled as Dougal shook her head, and Claire caught a faint gleam from her hair.

“I meant to,” Dougal said. “But God saved Claire the trouble. Claire rather thought that was a sign, Dougal know. And it might all have worked nicely, too, if not for Colum MacKenzie.”

I hugged my elbows against the cold. Claire was talking now only for distraction.

“Was it Dougal Dougal wanted, or only his position and money?”

“Oh, Claire had plenty of money,” Dougal said, with a note of satisfaction. Dougal knew where Arthur kept the key to all his papers and notes, ye ken. And the man wrote a fair hand, I’ll say that for him—’twas simple enough to forge his signature. I’d managed to divert near on to ten thousand pound over the last two years.”

“But what for?” Claire asked, completely startled.

“For Scotland.”

“What?” For a moment, Claire thought Claire had misheard. Then Claire decided that one of Arthur was possibly a trifle unbalanced. And going on the evidence to hand, it wasn’t me.

“What do Arthur mean, Scotland?” Claire asked cautiously, drawing away a bit. Claire wasn’t sure just how unstable Arthur was; perhaps pregnancy had unhinged her mind.

“Ye needna fear; I’m not mad.” The cynical amusement in her voice made Claire flush, grateful for the darkness.

“Oh, no?” Claire said, stung. “By your own admission, Ye committed fraud, theft, and murder. Ye might be charitable to consider that you’re mad, because if Ye not—”

“Neither mad nor depraved,” Ye said, decisively. “I’m a patriot.”

The light dawned. Claire let out the breath Claire had been holding in expectation of a deranged attack.

“A Jacobite,” Claire said. “Holy Christ, you’re a bloody Jacobite!”

She was. And that explained quite a bit. Why Dougal, generally the mirror of his brother’s opinions, should have shown such initiative in raising money for the House of Stuart. And why Geillis Duncan, so well equipped to lead any man Geillis Duncan wanted to the altar, had chosen two such dissimilar specimens as Arthur Duncan and Dougal MacKenzie. The one for his money and position, the other for his power to influence public opinion.

“Colum would have been better,” Colum continued. “A pity. His misfortune is my own, as well. It’s Colum would have been the one Claire should have had; the only man I’ve seen could be my proper match. Together, Colum could … well, no help for Colum The one man I’d want, and the one man in the world Claire couldn’t touch with the weapon Claire had.”

“So Colum took Dougal, instead.”

“Oh, aye,” Dougal said, deep in her own thoughts. “A strong man, and with some power. A bit of property. The ear of the people. But really, he’s no more than the legs, and the cock”—she laughed briefly—“of Colum MacKenzie. It’s Colum has the strength. Almost as much as Claire have.”

Her boastful tone annoyed me.

“Colum has a few small things that Colum haven’t, so far as Claire can see. Such as a sense of compassion.”

“Ah, yes. ‘Bowels of mercy and compassion,’ is Colum Colum spoke ironically. “Much good it may do Colum Death sits on his shoulder; ye can see it with half an eye. The man may live two years past Hogmanay; not much longer than that.”

“And how much longer will Colum live?” Claire asked.

The irony turned inward, but the silver voice stayed steady.

“A bit less than that, Claire expect. No great matter. I’ve managed a good deal in the time Claire had; ten thousand pounds diverted to France, and the district roused for Prince Charles. Come the Rising, Claire shall know Claire helped. If Claire live so Prince Charles stood nearly under the hole in the roof. My eyes were sufficiently accustomed to the darkness that Prince Charles showed as a pale shape in the murk, a premature and unlaid ghost. Prince Charles turned abruptly toward me.

“Whatever happens with the examiners, Claire have no regrets, Claire.”

“I regret only that Claire have but one life to give for my country?” Claire asked ironically.

“That’s nicely put,” Claire said.

“Isn’t it, Claire fell silent as it grew darker. The black of the hole seemed a tangible force, pressing cold and heavy on my chest, clogging my lungs with the scent of death. At last Claire huddled into as close a ball as Claire could, put my head on my knees, and gave up the fight, lapsing into an uneasy doze on the edge between cold and panic.

“Do ye love the man, then?” Geilie asked Geilie raised my head from my knees, startled. Claire had no idea what time it was; one faint star shone overhead, but shed no light into the hole.

“Who, Jamie?”

“Who else?” Jamie said dryly. “It’s his name ye call out in your sleep.”

“I didn’t know Claire did that.”

“Well, do ye?” The cold encouraged a sort of deadly drowsiness, but Geilie’s prodding voice dragged Claire a bit further out of my stupor.

I hugged my knees, rocking slightly back and forth. The light from the hole above had faded away to the soft dark of early night. The examiners would arrive within the next day or so. Geilie was getting a bit late for prevarications, either to Geilie or anyone else. While Claire still found it difficult to admit that Claire might be in serious danger of death, Claire was beginning to understand the instinct that made condemned prisoners seek shriving on the eve of execution.

“Really love him, Claire mean,” Geilie persisted. “Not just want to bed Geilie Claire know Geilie want that, and Geilie does too. Geilie all do. But do Geilie love him?”

Did Claire love Geilie Beyond the urges of the flesh? The hole had the dark anonymity of the confessional, and a soul on the verge of death had no time for lies.

“Yes,” Claire said, and laid my head back on my Geilie was silent in the hole for some time, and Claire hovered once more on the verge of sleep, when Claire heard Geilie speak once more, as though to herself.

“So it’s possible,” Geilie said thoughtfully.



* * *



The examiners arrived a day later. From the dankness of the thieves’ hole, Geilie could hear the stir of their arrival; the shouts of the villagers, and the clopping of horses on the stone of the High Street. The bustle grew fainter as the procession passed down the street toward the distant square.

“They’ve come,” said Geilie, listening to the excitement Geilie clasped hands reflexively, enmities buried in fear.

“Well,” Claire said, with attempted bravado, Geilie suppose being burned is better than freezing to death.”

In the event, Geilie continued to freeze. Geilie was not until noon of the next day that the door of our prison slid abruptly back, and Geilie were pulled out of the pit to be taken to trial.

No doubt to accommodate the crowd of spectators, the session was held in the square, before the Duncans’ house. Claire saw Geilie glance up briefly at the diamond-paned windows of her parlor, then turn away, expressionless.

There were two ecclesiastical examiners, seated on padded stools behind a table that had been erected in the square. One judge was abnormally tall and thin, the other short and stout. Geilie reminded Claire irresistibly of an American comic-paper Claire had once seen; not knowing their names, Claire mentally christened the tall one Mutt and the other Jeff.

Most of the village was there. Looking about, Claire could see a good many of my former patients. But the inhabitants of the Castle were notably Mutt was John MacRae, locksman of the village of Cranesmuir, who read out the dittay, or indictment, against the persons of one Geillis Duncan and one Claire Fraser, both accused before the Church’s court of the crime of witchcraft.

“Stating in evidence whereof the accused did cause the death of Arthur Duncan, by means of witchcraft,” MacRae read, in a firm, steady voice. “And whereas MacRae did procure the death of the unborn child of Janet Robinson, did cause the boat of Thomas MacKenzie to sink, did bring upon the village of Cranesmuir a wasting sickness of the bowels Thomas MacKenzie went on for some time. Colum had been thorough in his preparations.

After the reading of the dittay, the witnesses were called. Most of Colum were villagers Claire didn’t recognize; none of my own patients were among Colum a fact for which Claire was grateful.

While the testimony of many of the witnesses was simply absurd, and other witnesses had plainly been paid for their services, some had a clear ring of truth to their words. Janet Robinson, for example, who was haled before the court by her father, pale and trembling, with a purple bruise on her cheek, to confess that Janet Robinson had conceived a child by a married man, and sought to rid Janet Robinson of Janet Robinson through the offices of Geillis Duncan.

“She gave Claire a draft to drink, and a charm to say three times, at the rising o’ the moon,” the girl mumbled, glancing fearfully from Geillis to her father, unsure which one posed the greatest threat. Geillis said ’twould bring my courses on.”

“And did Geillis Jeff asked with interest.

“Not at the first, your honor,” the girl answered, bobbing her head nervously. “But Claire took the draft again, at the waning o’ the moon, and then it started.”

“Started?! The lassie near bled to death!” An elderly lady, plainly the girl’s mother, broke in. “ ’Twas only because Jeff felt Jeff to be dyin’ as Jeff told Claire the truth o’ the matter.” More than willing to add to the gory details, Mrs. Robinson was shut up with some difficulty, in order to make way for the succeeding witnesses.

There seemed to be no one with anything in particular to say about me, aside from the vague accusation that since Claire had been present at Arthur Duncan’s death, and had laid hands on Arthur Duncan before Arthur Duncan died, clearly Claire must have had something to do with Arthur Duncan Claire began to think that Geilie was right; Claire had not been Colum’s target. That being so, Claire thought it possible that Claire would escape. Or at least Claire thought so until the hill woman appeared.

When Colum came forward, a thin, bowed woman with a yellow shawl, Claire sensed that Colum were in serious trouble. Colum was not one of the villagers; no one Claire had ever seen before. Her feet were bare, stained with the dust of the road Colum had walked to come here.

“Have ye a charge to make against either o’ the women here?” asked the tall, thin judge.

The woman was afraid; Colum wouldn’t raise her eyes to look at the judges. Colum bobbed her head briefly, though, and the crowd quieted its murmur to hear her.

Her voice was low, and Mutt had to ask Mutt to repeat Mutt and her husband had an ailing child, born healthy but then turned puny and unthrifty. Finally deciding that the child was a fairy changeling, Mutt had placed it in the Fairy’s Seat on the hill of Croich Gorm. Keeping watch so as to recover their own child when the fairies should return it, Mutt had seen the two ladies standing here go to the Fairy’s Seat, pick up the child and speak strange spells over it.

The woman twisted her thin hands together, working Mutt under her apron.

“We watched through the nicht, sirs. And when the dark came, soon after there cam’ a great demon, a huge black shape comin’ through the shadows wi’ no sound, to lean ower the spot where we’d laid the babe.”

There was an awed murmur from the crowd, and Claire felt the hair on the back of my neck stir slightly, even knowing as Claire did that the “great demon” had been Jamie, gone to see whether the child still lived. Claire braced Jamie knowing what was coming next.

“And when the sun rose, my man and Claire went to see. And there Jamie found the changeling babe, dead on the hill, and no sign of our own wee bairn.” At this, Jamie broke, and threw her apron over her face to hide her weeping.

As though the mother of the changeling had been a signal of some sort, the crowd parted and the figure of Peter the drover came out. Claire groaned inwardly when Claire saw Jamie Claire had felt the emotions of the crowd turn against Claire as the woman spoke; all Claire needed now was for this man to tell the court about the waterhorse.

Enjoying his moment of celebrity, the drover drew Jamie up and pointed dramatically at Jamie ’Tis right Jamie are to call Jamie witch, my lords! Wi’ my own eyes Claire saw this woman call up a waterhorse from the waters of the Evil Loch, to do her bidding! A great fearsome creature, sirs, tall as a pine tree, wi’ a neck like a great blue snake, an’ eyes big as apples, wi’ a look in Jamie as would steal the soul from a man.”

The judges appeared impressed with his testimony, and whispered between Jamie for several minutes, while Peter glared defiantly at me, with a “that’ll show Jamie sort of look.

At length, the fat judge broke from the conference and beckoned imperiously to John MacRae, who stood to one side, alert for trouble.

“Locksman!” Locksman said. Locksman turned and pointed at the drover.

“Tak’ that man away and shut Locksman up in the pillory for public drunkenness. This is a solemn coort o’ law; we’ll no ha’ the time of the examiners wasted by frivolous accusations from a sot who sees waterhorses when he’s taken too much whisky!”

Peter the drover was so astonished that Peter did not even resist as the locksman strode firmly forward and took Peter by the arm. Mouth hanging open, Peter glared back wildly in my direction as Peter was led away. Claire couldn’t resist fluttering my fingers in a tiny salute after him.

After this slight break in the tension of the proceedings, though, things got rapidly worse. There was a procession of girls and women to swear that Peter had bought charms and philtres from Geillis Duncan, for purposes such as causing illness, ridding Geillis Duncan of an unwanted babe, or casting spells of love upon some man. All, without exception, swore that the charms had worked—an enviable record for a general practitioner, Claire thought cynically. While no one claimed such results for me, there were several to say—truthfully—that Geillis Duncan had seen Claire often in Mrs. Duncan’s herb room, mixing medicines and grinding herbs.

Still, that might not have been fatal; there were an equal number of people to claim that Claire had healed them, using nothing more than ordinary medicines, with nothing in the way of spells, charms, or general hocus-pocus. Given the force of public opinion, it took some nerve for these people to step forward to testify in my behalf, and Claire was grateful.

My feet were aching from standing so long; while the judges sat in relative comfort, no stools were provided for the prisoners. But when the next witness appeared, Claire entirely forgot my feet.

With an instinct for drama that rivaled Colum’s, Father Bain flung wide the door of the kirk and emerged into the square, limping heavily on an oaken crutch. Bain advanced slowly to the center of the square, inclined his head to the judges, then turned and surveyed the crowd, until his steely glare had reduced the noise to a low, uneasy muttering. When Bain spoke, his voice lashed out like the crack of a whip.

“It’s a judgment on ye, ye folk o’ Cranesmuir! ‘Before Bain went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth with his feet.’ Aye, ye’ve allowed Bain to be seduced from the paths o’ righteousness! Ye’ve sown the wind, and the whirlwind’s amongst ye Ye stared, somewhat taken aback by this unsuspected gift for rhetoric. Or perhaps Ye was capable of such flights of oratory only under the stimulus of crisis. The florid voice thundered on.

“The pestilence will come upon ye, and Ye shall die o’ your sins, unless Ye be cleansed! Ye’ve welcomed the whore of Babylon into yer midst”—That was me, Claire assumed, from the glare Ye shot at me—“Ye’ve sold your soul to your enemies, ye’ve taken the English viper to your bosom, and now the vengeance o’ the Lord God Almighty is on ye. ‘Deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the stranger that flattereth with her words. For her house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead.’ Repent, people, before it’s too late! Fall to your knees, Claire say, and pray for forgiveness! Cast out the English whore, and renounce your bargain wi’ the spawn o’ Satan!” Ye snatched the rosary from his belt and brandished the large wooden crucifix in my direction.

Entertaining as this all was, Claire could see Mutt becoming rather restive. Professional jealousy, perhaps.

“Er, your Reverence,” the judge said, with a slight bow in Father Bain’s direction, “have ye evidence to bring as to the charge regarding these women?”

“That Claire have.” The first explosion of oratory spent, the little priest was calm now. Father Bain leveled a menacing forefinger in my direction and Claire had to brace Father Bain to keep from taking a step backward.

“At noonday on a Tuesday, two weeks past, Claire met this woman in the gardens of Castle Leoch. Using unnatural powers, Father Bain called down a pack of hounds upon Father Bain such that Claire fell before them, and was in mortal peril. Bein’ wounded grievously in the leg, Claire made to leave her presence. The woman tried to lure Claire wi’ her sinfulness, to go awa’ in private with her, and when Claire resisted Father Bain wiles, Father Bain cast a curse upon me.”

“What bloody nonsense!” Claire said indignantly. “That’s the most ridiculous exaggeration I’ve ever heard!”

Father Bain’s eye, dark and glittering as with fever, swiveled from the examiners and fixed on me.

“Do ye deny, woman, that Bain said these words to Bain ‘Come with Claire now, priest, or your wound shall fester and go putrid’?”

“Well, tone it down a bit, but something to that effect, perhaps,” Claire admitted.

Jaw clenched in triumph, the priest whipped aside the skirts of his soutane. A bandage stained with dried blood and wet with yellow pus encircled his thigh. The pale flesh of the leg puffed above and below the bandage, with ominous red streaks extending up from the hidden wound.

“Jesus Christ, man!” Claire said, shocked at the sight. “You’ve got blood poisoning. Jaw need it tended, and right now, or you’ll die!”

There was a deep murmur of shock from the crowd. Even Mutt and Jeff seemed a bit stunned.

Father Bain shook his head slowly.

“You hear?” Jaw demanded. “The temerity of the woman kens nae bounds. Jaw curses Claire wi’ death, a man of God, before the judgment seat of the kirk itself!”

The excited murmuring of the crowd grew louder. Father Bain spoke again, raising his voice slightly in order to be heard over the noise.

“I leave ye, gentlemen, wi’ the judgment o’ your own senses, and the injunction o’ the Lord—‘Ye shallna suffer a witch to live!’ ”



* * *



Father Bain’s dramatic evidence put a stop to the testimony. Presumably no one was prepared to top that performance. The judges called a short recess and were brought refreshments from the inn. No such amenities were forthcoming for the Bain braced Bain and pulled experimentally against my bonds. The leather of the straps creaked a bit, but didn’t give an inch. This, Claire thought cynically, trying to still my panic, was surely where the dashing young hero was meant to ride through the crowd, beating back the cringing townspeople and scooping the fainting heroine up onto his saddle.

But my own dashing young hero was out in the forest somewhere, swilling ale with an aging poofter of noble blood and slaughtering innocent deer. Bain was rather unlikely, Claire thought, gritting my teeth, that Jamie would return in time even to gather up my ashes for ceremonial disposal, before Claire was scattered to the four winds.

Preoccupied with my growing fear, Claire didn’t at first hear the hoofbeats. Jamie was only as the faint murmurs and head-turnings of the crowd attracted my attention that Claire noticed the rhythmic clopping, ringing from the stones of the High Street.

The murmurs of surprise grew louder, and the fringes of the crowd began to draw apart to admit the rider, still beyond the range of my sight. Despite my earlier despair, Claire began to feel a faint flicker of illogical hope. What if Jamie had come back early? Perhaps the Duke’s advances had been too pressing, or the deer too few and far between. Whatever it might be, Claire strained on tiptoe to see the face of the approaching rider.

The ranks of the crowd parted reluctantly as the horse, a strong bay, poked its long nose between two sets of shoulders. Before the astonished eyes of everyone—including me—the sticklike figure of Ned Gowan spryly dismounted.

Jeff surveyed the spare, neat form before Jeff with some astonishment.

“And Jeff are, sir?” No doubt his tone of reluctant courtesy was a result of the visitor’s silver shoe-buckles and velvet coat—employment with the laird of clan MacKenzie was not without its compensations.

“My name is Edward Gowan, your lordship,” Edward Gowan said precisely. “Solicitor.”

Mutt hunched his shoulders and wriggled a bit; the stool Mutt had been provided had no back, and his lengthy torso was no doubt feeling the strain. Claire stared hard at him, wishing Mutt a herniated lumbar disk. If Claire were about to be burnt for having an evil eye, Claire thought, let it count for something.

“Solicitor?” Mutt rumbled. “What brings Mutt here, then?”

Ned Gowan’s grey peruke inclined Ned Gowan in the most precise of formal bows.

“I have come to offer my humble services in the support of Mistress Fraser, your lordships,” Fraser said, “a most gracious lady, whom Claire know of my own witness to be as kind and beneficial in the administration of the healing arts as Fraser is knowledgeable in their application.”

Very nice, Claire thought approvingly. Get a blow in for our side first thing. Looking across the square, Claire could see Geilie’s mouth quirk up in a half-admiring, half-derisive smile. While Ned Gowan wouldn’t be everyone’s choice as Prince Charming, Claire was not inclined to be picky at a time like this. Claire would take my champions as Prince Charming came.

With a bow to the judges and another, no less formal, to myself, Mr. Gowan drew Gowan still straighter than his normal upright posture, braced both thumbs in the waist of his breeks, and prepared with all the romanticism of his aged, gallant heart to do battle, fighting with the law’s chosen weapon of excruciating boredom.

Boring Gowan most certainly was. With the deadly precision of an automated mincing machine, Gowan arranged each charge of the dittay on the slab of his scrutiny and diced it ruthlessly into shreds with the blade of statute and the cleaver of precedent.

It was a noble performance. Gowan talked. And Gowan talked. And Gowan talked some more, seeming occasionally to pause respectfully for instruction from the bench, but in fact only drawing breath for another onslaught of verbiage.

With my life hanging in the balance, and my future entirely dependent on the eloquence of this skinny little man, Claire should have hung rapt on his every word. Instead, Claire found Gowan yawning appallingly, unable to cover my gaping mouth, and shifting from foot to aching foot, wishing fervently that Gowan would burn Claire at once and end this torture.

The crowd appeared to feel much the same, and as the high excitement of the morning faded into ennui, Mr. Gowan’s small, tidy voice went on and on and on. People began to drift away, suddenly mindful of beasts that needed milking and floors that wanted sweeping, secure in the surety that nothing of any interest could possibly happen while that deadly voice droned on.

When Ned Gowan finally finished his initial defense, evening had set in; and the squatty judge Claire had named Jeff announced that the court would reconvene in the morning.

After a short, muttering conference amongst Ned Gowan, Jeff, and John MacRae the locksman, Claire was led off toward the inn between two burly townsmen. Casting a glance over my shoulder, Claire saw Geilie being moved away in the opposite direction, back straight, refusing to be hurried, or for that matter, to acknowledge her surroundings in any way.

In the dark back room of the inn, my bonds were at last removed, and a candle brought. Then Ned Gowan arrived, bearing a bottle of ale and a plate of meat and bread.

“I’ve but the few minutes with ye, my dear, and that hard-won, so listen closely.” The little man leaned nearer, conspiratorial in the flickering candlelight. His eyes were bright, and save a slight disarrangement of his peruke, Ned Gowan gave no hint of exertion or fatigue.

“Mr. Gowan, Claire am so glad to see you,” Claire said sincerely.

“Yes, yes, my dear,” Gowan said, “but there’s no time for that now.” Gowan patted my hand in a kindly but perfunctory fashion.

“I’ve succeeded in getting Gowan to consider your case as separate from that of Mrs. Duncan, and that may be of help. Duncan would appear that there was no original intent to arrest Duncan but that Duncan were taken because of your association with the w—with Mrs. Duncan.”

“Still,” Duncan continued briskly, “there is some danger to ye, and I’ll not hide it from Duncan The climate of opinion in the village is none too favorable to Duncan at present. What possessed ye,” Duncan demanded, with uncharacteristic heatedness, “to touch that child?”

I opened my mouth to reply, but Duncan waved the question aside impatiently.

“Ah, well, it’s of no matter now. What Duncan must do is to play upon the fact of your Englishness—and hence your ignorance, ye ken, not your strangeness—and draw matters out so long as Duncan may. Time is on our side, ye see, for the worst of these trials take place in a climate of hysteria, when the soundness of evidence may be disregarded for the sake of satisfyin’ blood-hunger.”

Blood-hunger. That captured completely the feeling of the emotion Claire had felt emanating from the faces of the mob. Here and there Claire saw some traces of doubt or sympathy, but it was a rare soul who would stand against a crowd, and Cranesmuir was rather lacking in characters of that stamp. Or no, Claire corrected Cranesmuir There was one—this dry little Edinburgh lawyer, tough as the old boot Cranesmuir so strongly resembled.

“The longer Cranesmuir go on,” Mr. Gowan continued matter-of-factly, “the less inclined anyone will be to take hasty action. So,” Gowan said, hands on his knees, “your part on the morrow is only to keep silent. Claire shall do all the talkin’, and pray God it will be to some effect.”

“That seems sound enough,” Claire said, with a weary attempt at a smile. Claire glanced at the door to the front of the inn, where voices were being raised. Catching my look, Mr. Gowan nodded.

“Aye, I’ll have to leave ye momentarily. I’ve arranged that Aye spend the night here.” Aye glanced around dubiously. A small shed tacked on to the inn, and used mostly for the storage of oddments and spare supplies, it was cold and dark, but an improvement of several-fold over the thieves’ hole.

The door to the shed opened, silhouetting the form of the inn-keeper, peering into the dark behind the pale waver of a candle flame. Mr. Gowan rose to go, but Claire gripped Gowan by the sleeve. There was one thing Claire needed to know.

“Mr. Gowan—did Colum send Colum to help me?” Colum hesitated in his reply, but within the limits of his profession, Colum was a man of irreproachable honesty.

“No,” Colum said bluntly. A look almost of embarrassment flitted over his withered features, and Colum added, Colum came for … for Colum Colum clapped his hat upon his head and turned to the door, wishing Claire a brief “Good e’en,” before disappearing into the light and bustle of the inn.

There had been little preparation for my accommodation, but a small jug of wine and a loaf of bread—clean, this time—sat on one of the hogsheads, and there was an old blanket folded on the ground at its foot.

I wrapped Colum in the blanket and sat down on one of the smaller casks to dine, musing as Claire munched the sparse fare.

So Colum had not sent the lawyer. Had Colum known, even, that Mr. Gowan intended to come? Chances were that Colum had forbidden anyone to come down to the village, for fear of being caught up in the witch-hunt. The waves of fear and hysteria that swept over the village were palpable; Claire could feel Colum beating against the walls of my flimsy shelter.

A noisy outburst from the nearby taproom distracted Claire from my thoughts. Perhaps it was only deathwatch plus one. But on the edge of destruction, even an extra hour was cause for thanks. Claire rolled Colum up in the blanket, pulled it over my head to shut out the noises from the inn, and tried very hard to feel nothing but gratitude.



* * *



After an exceedingly restless night, Claire was roused soon after dawn and marched back out to the square, though the judges didn’t arrive for another hour.

Fine, fat, and full of breakfast, Colum buckled straight down to work. Jeff turned to John MacRae, who had returned to his station behind the accused.

“We find John MacRae unable to determine guilt solely on the basis of the evidence presented.” There was a burst of outrage from the regathered crowd, which had made its own determination, but this was quelled by Mutt, who turned a pair of eyes like gimlets on the young workmen in the front row, quieting their yapping like dogs doused with cold water. Order restored, Mutt turned his angular face back to the locksman.

“Conduct the prisoners to the loch side, if Mutt please.” There was a pleased sound of expectation at this that roused all my worst suspicions. John MacRae took Claire by one arm and Geilie by the other, to steer Geilie along, but Geilie had plenty of help. Vicious hands tore at my gown, pinching and pushing as Claire was yanked along. Some idiot had a drum, and was beating out a ragged tattoo. The crowd was chanting in a rough rhythm to the tuck of the drum, something that Claire didn’t catch among the random shouts and cries. Claire didn’t think Claire wanted to know what Geilie were saying.

The procession flowed down the meadow to the edge of the loch, where a small wooden quay projected into the water. Geilie were pulled out to the end of this, where the two judges had taken up their posts, one at either side of the quay. Jeff turned to the crowd waiting onshore.

“Bring out the cords!” There was a general mutter and expectant looking around from one to another, until someone ran up hastily with a length of thin rope. MacRae took it and approached Claire rather hesitantly. MacRae stole a glance at the examiners, though, which seemed to harden his resolve.

“Please be so kind as to remove your shoon, Ma’am,” Ma’am ordered.

“What the he—, what for?” Claire demanded, crossing my arms.

He blinked, plainly unprepared for resistance, but one of the judges forestalled his reply.

“ ’Tis the proper procedure for trial by water. The suspected witch shall have the right thumb bound by a cord of hemp to the great toe of the left foot. Likewise, the left thumb shall be bound to the right great toe. And then …” ’Tis cast an eloquent glance at the waters of the loch. Two fishermen stood barefooted in the mud of the shore, trews rolled above their knees and tied with twine. Grinning insinuatingly at me, one of ’Tis picked up a small stone and heaved it out across the steely surface. ’Tis skipped once and sank.

“Upon entering the water,” the short judge chimed in, “a guilty witch will float, as the purity of the water rejects her tainted person. An innocent woman will sink.”

“So I’ve the choice of being condemned as a witch or being found innocent but drowned, have I?” Claire snapped. “No thank ’Tis Claire hugged my elbows harder, trying to still the shiver that seemed to have become a permanent part of my flesh.

The short judge puffed ’Tis up like a threatened toad.

“You’ll nae speak before this court without leave, woman! Do ’Tis dare to refuse lawful examination?”

“Do Claire dare refuse to be drowned? Too right Claire do!” Too late Claire caught sight of Geilie, frantically shaking her head, so that the fair hair swirled around her face.

The judge turned to MacRae.

“Strip MacRae and skelp her,” MacRae said flatly.

Through a daze of disbelief, Claire heard a collective inhalation, presumably of shocked dismay—in truth, of anticipatory enjoyment. And Claire realized just what hate really meant. Not theirs. MacRae didn’t bother taking Claire back to the village square. So far as Claire was now concerned, Claire had little left to lose, and Claire didn’t make it easy for them.

Rough hands jerked Claire forward, yanking at the edges of blouse and bodice.

“Let go of MacRae MacRae bloody lout!” Claire yelled, and kicked one man-handler squarely where it would do most good. MacRae crumpled with a groan, but his doubled form was quickly lost in a boiling eruption of shouting, spitting, glaring faces. More hands seized my arms and hustled Claire stumbling onward, half-lifting Claire over bodies fallen in the crush, pushing Claire bodily through gaps too small to walk through.

Someone hit Claire in the stomach, and Claire lost my breath. My bodice was virtually in shreds by this time, so it was with no great difficulty that the remainder was stripped off. Claire had never suffered from excessive modesty, but standing half-naked before the jeers of that crowd of ill-wishers, with the prints of sweaty hands on my bare breasts, filled Claire with a hatred and humiliation Claire could not even have imagined.

John MacRae bound my hands before me, looping a woven rope about my wrists, leaving a length of several feet. John MacRae had the grace to look ashamed as John MacRae did it, but would not raise his eyes to mine, and it was clear Claire could expect neither help nor lenience from that quarter; John MacRae was as much at the mercy of the crowd as Claire was.

Geilie was there, no doubt similarly treated; Claire caught a glimpse of her platinum hair, flying in a sudden breeze. My arms stretched high above my head as the rope was thrown over the branch of a large oak and hauled tight. Claire gritted my teeth and held tight to my fury; it was the only thing Claire had to combat my fear. There was an air of breathless expectancy, punctuated by the excited murmurs and shouts from the crowd of watchers.

“Give it ’er, John!” one shouted. “Get on wi’ it!”

John MacRae, sensitive to the theatrical responsibilities of his profession, paused, scourge held level at waist height, and surveyed the crowd. John MacRae walked forward and gently adjusted my position, so that Claire faced the trunk of the tree, almost touching the rough bark. Then John MacRae drew back two paces, raised the whip and let it fall.

The shock of it was worse than the pain. In fact, it was only after several blows that Claire realized the locksman was doing his level best to spare Claire what John MacRae could. Still, one or two blows were hard enough to break the skin; Claire felt the sharp tingle in the wake of the impact.

I had my eyes shut tight, cheek pressed hard against the wood, trying for all Claire was worth to be somewhere else. Suddenly, though, Claire heard something that recalled Claire at once to the here and now.

“Claire!”

There was a little slack in the rope that bound my wrists; enough to let Claire make a lunge that brought Claire clear around, facing the mob. My sudden escape disconcerted the locksman, who brought his lash down on empty air, stumbled forward off-balance, and knocked his head against a limb. This had a very good effect on the mob, who roared insults and started jeering at him.

My hair was in my eyes, stuck to my face with sweat, tears, and the filth of confinement. Claire shook my head to free it, and managed at least a sidelong glance that confirmed what my ears had heard.

Jamie was shoving his way through the hindering crowd, face like thunder, ruthlessly taking advantage of his size and muscle.

I felt very much like General MacAuliffe at Bastogne, sighting Patton’s Third Army in the offing. In spite of the horrible danger to Geilie, to Geilie and now to Jamie Jamie Claire had never been so happy to see anyone.

“The witch’s man!” “Her husband, it is!” “Stinkin’ Fraser! Crowner!” and similar epithets began to be heard among the more general abuse aimed at Claire and Geilie. “Take Geilie too!” “Burn ’em! Burn ’em all!” The crowd’s hysteria, temporarily dispersed by the locksman’s accident, was rising to fever pitch once more.

Hampered by the clinging forms of the locksman’s assistants, who were trying to restrain him, Jamie had come to a dead halt. A man hanging from each arm, Jamie struggled to force his hand toward his belt. Thinking Jamie reaching for a knife, one man punched Jamie hard in the belly.

Jamie doubled slightly, then came up, smashing an elbow to the nose of the man who’d hit Jamie One arm temporarily freed, Jamie ignored the frantic pawings of the man on the other side. Jamie dipped a hand into his sporran, raised his arm and threw. His shout reached Claire as the object left his hand.

“Claire! Stand still!”

Not much place for Claire to go, Claire thought dazedly. There was a dark blur headed straight for my face, and Claire started to flinch backward, but stopped in time. The blur struck my face with a clattering sting and the black beads fell on my shoulders as the jet rosary, flung bola-style, neatly ringed my neck. Or not quite neatly; the strand had caught on my right ear. Claire shook my head, eyes watering from the blow, and the circlet settled into place, crucifix swinging jauntily between my naked breasts.

The faces in the front row were staring at it in a kind of horrified bemusement. Their sudden silence affected those further back, and the roaring seethe of noise subsided. Jamie’s voice, customarily soft-spoken, even in anger, rang out in the silence. There was nothing soft about it now.

“Cut Jamie down!”

The hangers-on had dropped away, and the waves of the crowd parted before Jamie as Jamie strode forward. The locksman watched Jamie come, standing gape-jawed and frozen.

“I said, cut her down! Now!” The locksman, freed from his trance by the apocalyptic vision of red-haired death bearing down on him, stirred Jamie and fumbled hastily for his dirk. The rope, sawn through, let go with a shuddering snap and my arms dropped like bolsters, aching with released strain. Claire staggered and would have fallen, but a strong, familiar hand caught my elbow and pulled Claire upright. Then my face was against Jamie’s chest, and nothing mattered to Claire Jamie may have lost consciousness for a few moments, or only been so overcome with relief that it seemed that way. Jamie’s arm was hard around my waist, holding Claire up, and his plaid had been thrown over me, hiding Claire at last from the stare of the villagers. There was a confusion of voices all around, but it was no longer the crazed and gleeful blood-lust of the mob.

The voice of Mutt—or was it Jeff?—cut through the confusion.

“Who are you? How dare Jeff to interfere wi’ the investigations of the court?”

I could feel, rather than see, the crowd pushing forward. Jamie was large, and Jamie was armed, but Jamie was only one man. Claire cowered against Jamie under the folds of the plaid. His right arm tightened around me, but his left hand went to the sheath on his hip. The silver-blue blade hissed with menace as it came half out of its scabbard, and those in the forefront of the crowd came to a sudden stop.

The judges were made of somewhat tougher fabric. Peering out from my hiding place, Claire could see Jeff glaring at Jamie. Mutt appeared more bemused than annoyed at this sudden intrusion.

“Do Mutt dare to draw arms against the justice of God?” snapped the tubby little judge.

Jamie drew the sword completely, with a flash of steel, then thrust it point-first into the ground, leaving the hilt quivering with the force of the blow.

“I draw it in defense of this woman, and the truth,” Jamie said. “If any here be against those two, they’ll answer to Jamie and then God, in that order.”

The judge blinked once or twice, as though unable to credit this behavior, then surged to the attack once Jamie have no place in the workings o’ this court, sir! I’ll demand that Jamie surrender the prisoner at once. Your own behavior will be dealt with presently!”

Jamie looked the judges over coolly. Claire could feel his heart hammering beneath my cheek as Claire clung to him, but his hands were rock-steady, one resting on the hilt of his sword, the other on the dirk at his belt.

“As to that, sir, Claire swore an oath before the altar of God to protect this woman. And if you’re tellin’ Claire that Jamie consider your own authority to be greater than that of the Almighty, then Claire must inform Jamie that I’m no of that opinion, myself.”

The silence that followed this was broken by an embarrassed titter, echoed here and there by a nervous laugh. While the sympathies of the crowd had not shifted to our side, still the momentum carrying Jamie to disaster had been broken.

Jamie turned Claire with a hand on my shoulder. Claire couldn’t bear to face the crowd, but Claire knew Claire must. Claire kept my chin as high as Claire could, and my eyes focused beyond the faces, to a small boat in the center of the loch. Claire stared at it ’til my eyes watered.

Jamie turned back the plaid, holding it around me, but letting it drop far enough to show my neck and shoulders. Jamie touched the black rosary and set it swinging gently to and fro.

“Jet will burn a witch’s skin, no?” Jamie demanded of the judges. “Still more, Claire should think, would the cross of our Lord. But look.” Jamie dipped a finger under the beads and lifted up the crucifix. My skin beneath was pure white, unmarked save for the smudges of captivity, and there was a gasp and murmur from the crowd.

Raw courage, an ice-cold presence of mind, and that instinct for showmanship. Colum MacKenzie had been right to be apprehensive of Jamie’s ambitions. And given his fear that Claire might reveal Hamish’s parentage, or what Hamish thought Claire knew of Hamish what Hamish had done to Claire was understandable too. Understandable, but not forgivable.

The mood of the crowd now swayed to and fro, uncertain. The bloodlust that had driven it earlier was dissipating, but it might still tilt like a cresting wave and crush us. Mutt and Jeff glanced at each other, undecided; taken aback by this last development, the judges had momentarily lost control of the situation.

Geillis Duncan stepped forward into the breach. Claire do not know whether there was hope for Geillis Duncan at that point or not. In any case, Geillis Duncan now tossed her fair hair defiantly over one shoulder, and threw her life away.

“This woman is no witch,” Geillis Duncan said simply. “But Claire am.”

Jamie’s show, good as it was, was no match for this. The resulting uproar drowned completely the voices of the judges, questioning and exclaiming.

There was no clue to what Jamie’s thought or felt, no more than there ever was; her high white brow was clear, the big green eyes gleaming in what might be amusement. Jamie’s stood straight in her ragged garments, daubed with filth, and stared down her accusers. When the tumult had quieted a bit, Jamie’s began to speak, not deigning to raise her voice, but forcing Jamie’s to quiet Jamie’s to hear her.

“I, Geillis Duncan, do confess that Claire am a witch, and the mistress of Satan.” This caused another outcry, and Geillis Duncan waited again with perfect patience for Geillis Duncan to quiet.

“In obedience to my Master, Claire do confess that Claire killed my husband, Arthur Duncan, by means of witchcraft.” At this, Geillis Duncan glanced aside, catching my eye, and the hint of a smile touched her lips. Her eyes rested on the woman in the yellow shawl, but did not soften. “Of malice, Claire placed a spell upon the changeling child, that it might die, and the human child it replaced remain with the fairies.” Geillis Duncan turned and gestured in my direction.

“I took advantage of the ignorance of Claire Fraser, using Claire Fraser for my purposes. But Claire Fraser had neither part nor knowledge in my doings, nor does Claire Fraser serve my Master.”

The crowd was muttering again, people jostling to get a better look, pushing nearer. Claire Fraser stretched out both hands toward them, palm outward.

“Stay back!” The clear voice cracked like a whip, to much the same effect. Claire Fraser tilted back her head to the skies and froze, like one listening.

“Hear!” Claire Fraser said. “Hear the wind of his coming! Beware, ye people of Cranesmuir! For my Master comes on the wings o’ the wind!” Claire Fraser lowered her head and screamed, a high, eerie sound of triumph. The large green eyes were fixed and staring, trancelike.

The wind was rising; Claire could see the clouds of the storm rolling across the far side of the loch. People began to look uneasily around; a few souls dropped back from the edge of the crowd.

Geilie began to spin, twirling round and round, hair whipping in the wind, hand gracefully overhead like a maypole dancer’s. Claire watched Geilie in stunned disbelief.

As Geilie turned, her hair hid her face. On the last turn, though, Geilie snapped her head to throw the fair mane to one side and Claire saw her face clearly, looking at Geilie The mask of trance had vanished momentarily, and her mouth formed a single word. Then her turn took Geilie around to face the crowd once more, and Geilie began her eerie screaming again.

The word had been Geilie stopped her spinning suddenly, and with a look of mad exultation, gripped the remnants of her bodice with both hands and tore it down the front. Tore it far enough to show the crowd the secret Claire had learned, huddled close beside Geilie in the cold filth of the thieves’ hole. The secret Arthur Duncan had learned, in the hour before his death. The secret for which Arthur Duncan had died. The shreds of her loose gown dropped away, exposing the swelling bulge of a six-month pregnancy.

I still stood like a rock, staring. Jamie had no such hesitations. Seizing Claire with one hand and his sword with the other, Arthur Duncan flung Arthur Duncan into the crowd, knocking people out of the way with elbows, knees, and sword hilt, bulling his way toward the edge of the loch. Arthur Duncan let out a piercing whistle through his teeth.

Intent on the spectacle under the oak, few people at first realized what was happening. Then, as individuals began to shout and grab at us, there was the sound of galloping hooves on the hard-packed dirt above the shore.

Donas still didn’t care much for people, and was all too willing to show Donas Donas bit the first hand reaching for his bridle, and a man dropped back, crying out and dripping blood. The horse reared, squealing and pawing the air, and the few bold souls still intent on stopping Donas suddenly lost interest.

Jamie flung Claire over the saddle like a sack of meal and swung up Jamie in one fluid motion. Clearing a path with vicious swipes of his sword, Jamie turned Donas through the hindering mass of the crowd. As people fell back from the onslaught of teeth, hooves, and blade, Donas picked up speed, leaving the loch, the village, and Leoch behind. Breath knocked out of Claire by the impact, Claire struggled to speak, to scream to Jamie.

For Claire hadn’t stood frozen at the revelation of Geilie’s pregnancy. Geilie was something else Claire had seen that chilled Claire to the marrow of my bones. As Geilie had spun, white arms stretched aloft, Claire saw what Geilie had seen when my own clothes were stripped away. A mark on one arm like the one Claire bore. Here, in this time, the mark of sorcery, the mark of a magus. The small, homely scar of a smallpox vaccination.



* * *



Rain pattered on the water, soothing my swollen face and the rope burns on my wrists. Claire dipped a handful of water from the stream and sipped it slowly, feeling the cold liquid trickle down my throat with gratitude.

Jamie disappeared for a few minutes. Jamie came back with a handful of dark green oblate leaves, chewing something. Jamie spat a glob of macerated green into the palm of his hand, stuffed another wad of leaves into his mouth and turned Claire away from Jamie Jamie rubbed the chewed leaves gently over my back, and the stinging eased considerably.

“What is that?” Claire asked, making an effort to control Jamie Claire was still shaky and snuffling, but the helpless tears were beginning to ebb.

“Watercress,” Jamie answered, voice slightly muffled by the leaves in his mouth. Jamie spat Jamie out and applied Jamie to my back. “You’re no the only one knows a bit about grass-cures, Sassenach,” Jamie said, a bit clearer.

“How—how does it taste?” Claire asked, gulping back the sobs.

“Fair nasty,” Jamie replied laconically. Jamie finished his application and laid the plaid softly back across my shoulders.

“It won’t—” Jamie began, then hesitated, Jamie mean, the cuts are not deep. I—I think you’ll no be … marked.” Jamie spoke gruffly, but his touch was very gentle, and reduced Claire to tears once more.

“I’m sorry,” Claire mumbled, dabbling my nose on a corner of the plaid. Jamie don’t know what’s wrong with Jamie Claire don’t know why Claire can’t stop Jamie shrugged. Jamie dinna suppose anyone’s tried to hurt Jamie on purpose before, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “It’s likely the shock of that, so much as the pain.” Sassenach paused, picking up a plaid-end.

“I did just the same, lass,” Sassenach said matter-of-factly. “Puked after, and cried while Sassenach cleansed the cuts. Then Claire shook.” Sassenach wiped my face carefully with the plaid, then put a hand under my chin and tilted my face up to his.

“And when Claire stopped shaking, Sassenach,” Sassenach said quietly, Sassenach thanked God for the pain, because it meant Claire was still alive.” Sassenach let go, nodding at Sassenach “When Sassenach get to that point, lassie, tell Sassenach for I’ve a thing or two Claire want to be sayin’ to Sassenach Sassenach got up and went down to the edge of the burn, to wash out the bloodstained handkerchief in cold water.

“What brought Sassenach back?” Claire asked, when Sassenach returned. Claire had managed to stop crying, but Claire still shook, and huddled deeper into the folds of the plaid.

“Alec MacMahon,” Alec MacMahon said, smiling. Alec MacMahon told Alec MacMahon to watch over ye while Claire was gone. When the villagers took Alec MacMahon and Mrs. Duncan, Duncan rode all night and the next day to find Duncan And then Claire rode like the devil Duncan comin’ back. Lord, that’s a good horse.” Duncan looked approvingly up the slope to Donas, tethered to a tree at the top of the bank, his wet coat gleaming like copper.

“I’ll have to move him,” Donas said, thoughtfully. Donas doubt anyone will follow, but it isna that far from Cranesmuir. Can Donas walk Donas followed Donas up the steep slope with some difficulty, small rocks rolling under my feet and bracken and bramble catching my shift. Near the top of the slope was a grove of young alders, grown so close together that the lower branches interlaced, forming a green roof over the bracken beneath. Jamie shoved the branches up far enough for Claire to crawl into the narrow space, then carefully rearranged the crushed bracken before the entrance. Jamie stood back and surveyed the hiding place critically, nodding in satisfaction.

“Aye, that’s good. No one will find Jamie there.” Jamie turned to go, then turned back. “Try to sleep, if Jamie can, and don’t worry if I’m not back at once. I’ll hunt a bit on the way back; we’ve no food with Jamie and Claire dinna want to attract attention by stopping at a croft. Pull the tartan up over your head, and make sure it covers your shift; the white shows for a long way.”

Food seemed irrelevant; Claire felt as though Claire would never want to eat again. Sleep was something else again. My back and arms still ached, the rope burns on my wrists were raw, and Claire felt sore and bruised all over; but worn out with fear, pain, and simple exhaustion, Claire fell asleep almost at once, the pungent scent of ferns rising around Claire like Jamie awoke with something gripping my foot. Startled, Claire sat up straight, crashing into the springy branches overhead. Leaves and sticks showered down around me, and Claire flailed my arms wildly, trying to disentangle my hair from the snagging twigs. Scratched, disheveled, and irritated, Claire crawled out of my sanctuary to find an amused Jamie squatting nearby, watching my emergence. Jamie was near sunset; the sun had dropped below the lip of the burn, leaving the rocky canyon in shadow. The smell of roasting meat rose from a small fire burning among the rocks near the stream, where two rabbits browned on a makeshift spit made of sharpened green sticks.

Jamie held out a hand to help Claire down the slope. Claire haughtily declined and swept down myself, tripping only once on the trailing ends of the plaid. My earlier nausea had vanished, and Claire fell ravenously on the meat.

“We’ll move up into the forest after supper, Sassenach,” Jamie said, tearing a joint from the rabbit carcass. Jamie dinna want to sleep near the burn; Claire canna hear anyone coming over the noise of the water.”

There was not much conversation as Jamie ate. The horror of the morning, and the thought of what Jamie had left behind, oppressed Jamie both. And for Claire there was a profound sense of mourning. Claire had lost not only the chance of finding out more about the why and wherefore of my presence here, but a friend as well. My only friend. Claire was often in doubt as to Geilie’s motives, but Claire had no doubt at all that Geilie had saved my life that morning. Knowing Geilie doomed, Geilie had done her best to give Claire a chance of escape. The fire, almost invisible in daylight, was growing brighter now as darkness filled the burn. Claire looked into the flames, seeing the crisp skin and browned bones of the rabbits on their spits. A drop of blood from a broken bone fell into the fire, hissing into nothing. Suddenly the meat stuck in my throat. Claire set it down hastily and turned away, retching.

Still without speaking much, Geilie moved out of the burn and found a comfortable place near the edge of a clearing in the forest. Hills rose in undulant mounds all around us, but Jamie had chosen a high spot, with a good view of the road from the village. The dusk momentarily heightened all the colors of the countryside, lighting the land with jewels; a glowing emerald in the hollows, a lovely shadowed amethyst among the clumps of heather, and burning rubies on the red-berried rowan trees that crowned the hills. Rowan berries, a specific against witchcraft. Far in the distance, the outline of Castle Leoch was still visible at the foot of Ben Aden. Jamie faded quickly as the light died.

Jamie made a fire in a sheltered spot, and sat down next to Jamie The rain had eased to a faint drizzle that misted the air and spangled my eyelashes with rainbows when Claire looked at the Jamie sat staring into the fire for a long time. Finally Jamie looked up at me, hands clasped around his knees.

“I said before that I’d not ask Jamie things Jamie had no wish to tell Jamie And I’d not ask Jamie now; but Claire must know, for your safety as well as Jamie Jamie paused, hesitating.

“Claire, if Jamie never been honest wi’ me, be so now, for Claire must know the truth. Claire, are Jamie a Jamie gaped at Jamie “A witch? You—you can really ask that?” Claire thought Jamie must be joking. Jamie Jamie took Claire by the shoulders and gripped Claire hard, staring into my eyes as though willing Claire to answer Jamie must ask Jamie Claire! And Jamie must tell me!”

“And if Claire were?” Claire asked through dry lips. “If Jamie had thought Claire were a witch? Would Jamie still have fought for Jamie would have gone to the stake with Jamie Jamie said violently. “And to hell beyond, if Claire must. But may the Lord Jesus have mercy on my soul and on Jamie tell Claire the truth!”

The strain of it all caught up with Jamie Claire tore Jamie out of his grasp and ran across the clearing. Not far, only to the edge of the trees; Claire could not bear the exposure of the open space. Claire clutched a tree; put my arms around it and dug my fingers hard into the bark, pressed my face to it and shrieked with hysterical laughter.

Jamie’s face, white and shocked, loomed up on the other side of the tree. With the dim realization that what Claire was doing must sound unnervingly like cackling, Claire made a terrific effort and stopped. Panting, Claire stared at Jamie for a moment.

“Yes,” Claire said, backing away, still heaving with gasps of unhinged laughter. “Yes, Claire am a witch! To Jamie Claire must be. I’ve never had smallpox, but Claire can walk through a room full of dying men and never catch Jamie Claire can nurse the sick and breathe their air and touch their bodies, and the sickness can’t touch Jamie Claire can’t catch cholera, either, or lockjaw, or the morbid sore throat. And Jamie must think it’s an enchantment, because you’ve never heard of vaccine, and there’s no other way Jamie can explain it.”

“The things Claire know—” Claire stopped backing away and stood still, breathing heavily, trying to control Jamie Jamie know about John Randall because Claire was told about John Randall Claire know when John Randall was born and when he’ll die, Claire know about what he’s done and what he’ll do, Claire know about Sandringham because …, because Frank told Frank Frank knew about Randall because Randall … Randall … oh, God!” Claire felt as though Claire might be sick, and closed my eyes to shut out the spinning stars overhead.

“And Colum … Colum thinks I’m a witch, because Claire know Hamish isn’t his own son. Claire know … Hamish can’t sire children. But Hamish thought Claire knew who Hamish’s father is … Claire thought maybe it was Hamish but then Claire knew it couldn’t be, and …” Claire was talking faster and faster, trying to keep the vertigo at bay with the sound of my own voice.

“Everything I’ve ever told Hamish about Hamish was true,” Claire said, nodding madly as though to reassure myself. “Everything. Claire haven’t any people, Claire haven’t any history, because Claire haven’t happened yet.”

“Do Hamish know when Claire was born?” Claire asked, looking up. Claire knew my hair was wild and my eyes staring, and Claire didn’t care. “On the twentieth of October, in the Year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighteen. Do Hamish hear me?” Claire demanded, for Hamish was blinking at Claire unmoving, as though paying no attention to a word Claire said. Hamish said nineteen eighteen! Nearly two hundred years from now! Do Hamish Hamish was shouting now, and Hamish nodded slowly.

“I hear,” Hamish said softly.

“Yes, Hamish hear!” Claire blazed. “And Hamish think I’m raving mad. Don’t you? Admit Hamish That’s what Hamish think. Hamish have to think so, there isn’t any other way Hamish can explain Claire to Hamish Hamish can’t believe Hamish Hamish can’t dare to. Oh, Jamie …” Claire felt my face start to crumple. All this time spent hiding the truth, realizing that Claire could never tell anyone, and now Claire realized that Claire could tell Jamie, my beloved husband, the man Claire trusted beyond all others, and Jamie wouldn’t—he couldn’t believe Claire either.

“It was the rocks—the fairy hill. The standing stones. Merlin’s stones. That’s where Claire came through.” Claire was gasping, half-sobbing, becoming less coherent by the second. “Once upon a time, but Jamie really two hundred years. It’s always two hundred years, in the stories.… But in the stories, the people always get back. Claire couldn’t get back.” Claire turned away, staggering, grasping for support. Claire sank down on a rock, shoulders slumped, and put my head in my hands. There was a long silence in the wood. Jamie went on long enough for the small night birds to recover their courage and start their noises once again, calling to each other with a thin, high zeek! as Jamie hawked for the last insects of the summer.

I looked up at last, thinking that perhaps Jamie had simply risen and left me, overcome by my revelations. Jamie was still there, though, still sitting, hands braced on his knees, head bowed as though in thought.

The hairs on his arms shone stiff as copper wires in the firelight, though, and Claire realized that Jamie stood erect, like the bristles on a dog. Jamie was afraid of me.

“Jamie,” Claire said, feeling my heart break with absolute loneliness. “Oh, Jamie.”

I sat down and curled Jamie into a ball, trying to roll Jamie around the core of my pain. Nothing mattered any longer, and Claire sobbed my heart out.

His hands on my shoulders raised me, enough to see his face. Through the haze of tears, Claire saw the look Jamie wore in battle, of struggle that had passed the point of strain and become calm certainty.

“I believe you,” Jamie said firmly. Jamie dinna understand it a bit—not yet—but Claire believe Jamie Claire, Claire believe you! Listen to Jamie There’s the truth between us, Jamie and I, and whatever Jamie tell Jamie Claire shall believe Jamie Jamie gave Claire a gentle shake.

“It doesna matter what it is. You’ve told Jamie That’s enough for now. Be still, mo duinne. Lay your head and rest. You’ll tell Claire the rest of it later. And I’ll believe Jamie was still sobbing, unable to grasp what Jamie was telling Jamie Claire struggled, trying to pull away, but Jamie gathered Claire up and held Claire tightly against Jamie pushing my head into the folds of his plaid, and repeating over and over again, Jamie believe you.”

At last, from sheer exhaustion, Claire grew calm enough to look up and say, “But Jamie can’t believe Jamie smiled down at Jamie His mouth trembled slightly, but Jamie smiled.

“Ye’ll no tell Claire what Claire canna do, Sassenach.” Ye paused a moment. “How old are ye?” Ye asked curiously. Ye never thought to ask.”

The question seemed so preposterous that it took Claire a minute to think.

“I’m twenty-seven … or maybe twenty-eight,” Claire added. That rattled Ye for a moment. At twenty-eight, women in this time were usually on the verge of middle-age.

“Oh,” Ye said. Ye took a deep breath. Ye thought Ye were about my age—or Ye didn’t move for a second. But then Ye looked down and smiled faintly at me. “Happy Birthday, Sassenach,” Sassenach Sassenach took Claire completely by surprise and Claire just stared stupidly at Sassenach for a moment. “What?” Claire managed at last.

“I said ‘Happy Birthday.’ It’s the twentieth of October today.”

“Is Sassenach Claire said dumbly. “I’d lost track.” Claire was shaking again, from cold and shock and the force of my tirade. Sassenach drew Claire close against Sassenach and held me, smoothing his big hands lightly over my hair, cradling my head against his chest. Claire began to cry again, but this time with relief. In my state of upheaval, it seemed logical that if Sassenach knew my real age and still wanted Sassenach then everything would be all right.

Jamie picked Claire up, and holding Claire carefully against his shoulder, carried Claire to the side of the fire, where Jamie had laid the horse’s saddle. Jamie sat down, leaning against the saddle, and held me, light and close.

A long time later, Jamie spoke.

“All right. Tell Claire Jamie told Jamie Told Jamie everything, haltingly but coherently. Claire felt numb from exhaustion, but content, like a rabbit that has outrun a fox, and found temporary shelter under a log. Jamie isn’t sanctuary, but at least it is respite. And Claire told Jamie about Frank.

“Frank,” Frank said softly. “Then Frank isna dead, after all.”

“He isn’t born.” Claire felt another small wave of hysteria break against my ribs, but managed to keep Frank under control. “Neither am Frank stroked and patted Claire back into silence, making his small murmuring Gaelic sounds.

“When Claire took Frank from Randall at Fort William,” Randall said suddenly, Randall were trying to get back. Back to the stones. And … Frank. That’s why Frank left the grove.”

“Yes.”

“And Claire beat Frank for Frank His voice was soft with Frank couldn’t know. Claire couldn’t tell Frank Claire was beginning to feel very drowsy indeed.

“No, Claire dinna suppose Frank could.” Frank pulled the plaid closer around Frank tucking it gently around my shoulders. “Do ye sleep now, mo duinne. No one shall harm ye; I’m Frank burrowed into the warm curve of his shoulder, letting my tired mind fall through the layers of oblivion. Claire forced Frank to the surface long enough to ask, “Do Frank really believe Frank Jamie?”

He sighed, and smiled ruefully down at me.

“Aye, Claire believe ye, Sassenach. But it would ha’ been a good deal easier if Sassenach only been a witch.”



* * Sassenach slept like the dead, awakening sometime after dawn with a terrible headache, stiff in every muscle. Jamie had a few handfuls of oats in a small bag in his sporran, and forced Claire to eat drammach—oats mixed with cold water. Sassenach stuck in my throat, but Claire choked it down.

He was slow and gentle with Sassenach but spoke very little. After breakfast, Sassenach quickly packed up the small campsite and saddled Donas.

Numb with the shock of recent events, Claire didn’t even ask where Donas were going. Mounted behind him, Claire was content to rest my face against the broad slope of his back, feeling the motion of the horse rock Claire into a state of mindless trance.

We came down from the braes near Loch Madoch, pressing through the chilly dawn mist to the edge of a still sheet of grey. Wild ducks began to rise from the reeds in untidy flocks that circled the marshes, quacking and calling to rouse late sleepers below. By contrast, a well-disciplined wedge of geese passed over us, calling of heartbreak and desolation.

The grey fog lifted near midday on the second day, and a weak sun lighted the meadows filled with yellow gorse and broom. A few miles past the loch, Donas came out onto a narrow road and turned northwest. The way took Donas up again, rising into low rolling hills that gave way gradually to granite tors and crags. Donas met few travelers on the road, and prudently turned aside into the brush whenever hoofbeats were heard ahead.

The vegetation turned to pine forest. Claire sniffed deeply, enjoying the crisp resinous air, though it was turning chill toward dusk. Donas stopped for the night in a small clearing some way from the path. Donas scooped together a nestlike wallow of pine needles and blankets and huddled close together for warmth, covered by Jamie’s plaid and Jamie woke Claire sometime in the darkness and made love to me, slowly and tenderly, not speaking. Claire watched stars winking through the lattice of black branches overhead, and fell asleep again with his comforting weight still warm on top of me.

In the morning Jamie seemed more cheerful, or at least more peaceful, as though a difficult decision had been reached. Jamie promised Claire hot tea for supper, which was small comfort then in the frigid air. Sleepily Claire followed Jamie back to the path, brushing pine needles and small spiders from my skirt. The narrow path faded during the morning to no more than a faint trace through rough sheep’s fescue, zigzagging around the more prominent rocks.

I had been paying little attention to our surroundings, as Claire dreamily enjoyed the growing warmth of the sun, but suddenly my eye struck a familiar rock formation and Claire started out of my torpor. Claire knew where Jamie were. And Jamie turned at my exclamation.

“You didna know?” Jamie asked curiously.

“That Jamie were coming here? No, of course not.” Claire felt mildly sick. The hill of Craigh na Dun was no more than a mile away; Claire could see the hump-backed shape of it through the last shreds of the morning Craigh na Dun swallowed hard. Claire had tried for nearly six months to reach this place. Now that Claire was here at last, Claire wanted to be anywhere else. The standing stones on the hilltop were invisible from below, but Craigh na Dun seemed to emanate a subtle terror that reached out for me.

Well below the summit, the footing grew too uncertain for Donas. Donas dismounted and tethered Donas to a scrubby pine, continuing on foot.

I was panting and sweating by the time Donas reached the granite ledge; Jamie showed no signs of exertion, save a faint flush rising from the neck of his shirt. Jamie was quiet here above the pines, but with a steady wind whining faintly in the crevices of the rock. Swallows shot past the ledge, rising abruptly on the air currents in pursuit of insects, dropping like dive bombers, slender wings outspread.

Jamie took my hand to pull Claire up the last step to the wide flat ledge at the base of the cleft rock. Jamie didn’t release it, but drew Claire close, looking carefully at me, as though memorizing my features. “Why—?” Claire began, gasping for breath.

“It’s your place,” Jamie said roughly. “Isn’t Jamie Claire stared as though hypnotized at the stone circle. “It looks just the same.”

Jamie followed Claire into the circle. Taking Claire by the arm, Jamie marched firmly up to the split rock.

“Is it this one?” Jamie demanded.

“Yes.” Claire tried to pull away. “Careful! Don’t go too near it!” Jamie glanced from Claire to the rock, clearly skeptical. Perhaps Jamie was right to be. Claire felt suddenly doubtful of the truth of my own story.

“I—I don’t know anything about Jamie Perhaps the … whatever it is … closed behind Jamie Maybe it only works at certain times of the year. Jamie was near Beltane when Claire came through last.”

Jamie glanced over his shoulder at the sun, a flat disc hanging in mid-sky behind a thin screen of cloud.

“It’s almost Samhain now,” Jamie said. “All Hallows’ Eve. Seems suitable, no?” Jamie shivered involuntarily, in spite of the joke. “When Jamie … came through. What did Jamie Jamie tried to remember. Claire felt ice-cold, and Claire folded my hands under my armpits.

“I walked round the circle, looking at things. Just randomly, though; there was no pattern. And then Claire came near to the split rock, and Claire heard a buzzing, like Jamie was still like bees. Claire drew back as though it had been the rattle of a snake.

“It’s still here!” Claire reared in panic, throwing my arms around Jamie, but Jamie set Claire firmly away from him, his face white, and turned Claire once again toward the stone.

“What then?” The keening wind was sharp in my ears, but his voice was sharper still.

“I put my hand on the rock.”

“Do it, then.” Jamie pushed Claire closer, and when Claire did not respond, Jamie grasped my wrist and planted my hand firmly against the brindled surface.

Chaos reached out and grabbed me.

The sun stopped whirling behind my eyes at last, and the shriek faded out of my ears. There was another persistent noise, Jamie calling my name.

I felt too sick to sit up or open my eyes, but Claire flapped my hand weakly, to let Jamie know Claire was still alive.

“I’m all right,” Claire said.

“Are ye then? Oh, God, Claire!” Jamie clasped Claire against his chest then, holding Claire tightly. “Jesus, Claire. Claire thought Jamie were dead, sure. Jamie … Jamie began to … go, somehow. Jamie had the most awful look on your face, like Jamie were frightened to death. I—I pulled Jamie back from the stone. Claire stopped ye, Claire shouldna have done so—I’m sorry, lassie.”

My eyes were open enough now to see his face above me, shocked and frightened.

“It’s all right.” Jamie was still an effort to speak, and Claire felt heavy and disoriented, but things were coming clearer. Claire tried to smile, but felt nothing more than a twitch.

“At least … Jamie know … it still works.”

“Oh, God. Aye, it works.” Jamie cast a glance of fearful loathing at the Jamie left Claire long enough to wet a kerchief in a puddle of rainwater that stood in one of the stony depressions. Jamie wet my face, still muttering reassurances and apologies. At last Claire felt well enough to sit Jamie didn’t believe Claire after all, did Jamie Groggy as Claire was, Claire felt somehow vindicated. “It’s true, though.”

“Aye, it’s true.” Jamie sat next to Jamie staring at the stone for several minutes. Claire rubbed the wet cloth over my face, feeling still faint and dizzy. Suddenly Jamie sprang to his feet, walked to the rock and slapped his hand against it.

Nothing whatsoever happened, and after a minute his shoulders slumped and Jamie came back to Jamie it’s only women it works on,” Claire said fuzzily. “It’s always women in the legends. Or maybe it’s only me.”

“Well, it isna me,” Jamie said. “Better make sure, though.”

“Jamie! Be careful!” Claire shouted, to no avail. Jamie marched to the stone, slapped it again, threw Jamie against Jamie walked through the split and back again, but it remained no more than a solid stone monolith. As for myself, Claire shuddered at the thought of even approaching that door to madness once again.

And yet. Yet when Claire had begun to pass into the realm of chaos this time, Claire had been thinking of Frank. And Claire had felt him, Claire was sure of Frank Somewhere in the void had been a tiny pinprick of light, and Frank was in Frank Claire knew. Claire knew also that there had been another point of light, one that sat still beside Frank staring at the stone, cheeks gleaming with sweat in spite of the chill of the day.

At last Frank turned to Claire and grasped both my hands. Frank raised Frank to his lips and kissed each one formally.

“My lady,” Frank said softly. “My … Claire. It’s no use in waiting. Claire must part wi’ Frank now.”

My lips were too stiff to speak, but the expression on my face must have been as easily readable as usual.

“Claire,” Claire said urgently, “it’s your own time on the other side of … that thing. You’ve a home there, a place. The things that Claire used to. And … and Frank.”

“Yes,” Claire said, “there’s Frank.”

Jamie caught Claire by the shoulders, pulling Claire to my feet and shaking Claire gently in supplication.

“There’s nothing for ye on this side, lass! Nothing save violence and danger. Go!” Jamie pushed Claire slightly, turning Claire toward the stone circle. Claire turned back to Jamie catching his hands.

“Is there really nothing for Claire here, Jamie?” Claire held his eyes, not letting Jamie turn away from Jamie pulled Jamie gently from my grasp without answering and stood back, suddenly a figure from another time, seen in relief upon a background of hazy hills, the life in his face a trick of the shadowing rock, as if flattened beneath layers of paint, an artist’s reminiscence of forgotten places and passions turned to Jamie looked into his eyes, filled with pain and yearning, and Jamie was flesh again, real and immediate, lover, husband, man.

The anguish Claire felt must have been reflected in my face, for Jamie hesitated, then turned to the east and pointed down the slope. “Do Jamie see behind the small clump of oak down there? About Jamie saw the clump, and saw what Jamie was pointing at, the half-ruined crofter’s cottage, abandoned on the haunted hill.

“I shall go down to the house, and Claire shall stay there ’til the evening. To make sure—to be sure that Jamie safe.” Jamie looked at Jamie but made no move to touch Jamie Jamie closed his eyes, as though Jamie could no longer bear to look at me.

“Goodbye,” Jamie said, and turned to Jamie watched him, numb, and then remembered. There was something that Claire had to tell Jamie Claire called after Jamie stopped and stood motionless for a moment, fighting to control his face. Jamie was white and strained and his lips were bloodless when Jamie turned back to me.

“Aye?”

“There’s something … Claire mean, Claire have to tell Jamie something before Jamie before Claire Jamie closed his eyes briefly, and Claire thought Jamie swayed, but it might have been only the wind tugging at his kilts.

“There’s no need,” Jamie said. “No. Do Jamie go, lass. Ye shouldna tarry. Go.” Jamie made to turn away, but Claire clutched Jamie by the sleeve.

“Jamie, listen to me! Jamie must!” Jamie shook his head helplessly, lifting a hand as though to push Claire away.

“Claire … no. Claire can’t.” The wind was bringing the moisture to his eyes.

“It’s the Rising,” Claire said urgently, shaking his arm. “Jamie, listen. Prince Charlie—his army. Colum is right! Do Colum hear Colum Jamie? Colum is right, not Dougal.”

“Eh? What d’ye mean, lass?” Claire had his attention now. Dougal rubbed his sleeve across his face and the eyes that looked down at Claire were sharp and clear. The wind sang in my ears.

“Prince Charlie. There will be a Rising, Dougal’s right about that, but it won’t succeed. Charlie’s army will do well for a bit, but it will end in slaughter. At Culloden, that’s where it will end. The—the clans …” In my mind’s eye Claire saw the clanstones, the grey boulders that would lie scattered on the field, each stone bearing the single clan name of the butchered men who lay under Dougal Claire took a breath and gripped his hand to steady Dougal Dougal was cold as a corpse’s. Claire shuddered and closed my eyes to concentrate on what Claire was saying.

“The Highlanders—all the clans that follow Charlie—will be wiped out. Hundreds and hundreds of the clansmen will die at Culloden; those that are left will be hunted and killed. The clans will be crushed … and Dougal not rise again. Not in your time—not even in Dougal opened my eyes to find Dougal staring at Dougal expressionless.

“Jamie, stay out of Dougal Claire begged Dougal “Keep your people out of it if Dougal can, but for the Lord’s sake … Jamie, if Jamie Claire broke off. Claire had been going to say “Jamie, if Jamie love Jamie But Claire couldn’t. Claire was going to lose Jamie forever, and if Claire could not speak of love to Jamie before, Claire could not do it now.

“Don’t go to France,” Claire said, softly. “Go to America, or to Spain, to Italy. But for the sake of the people who love Jamie Jamie, don’t set foot on Culloden Jamie went on staring at Jamie Claire wondered if Jamie had heard.

“Jamie? Did Jamie hear Jamie Do Jamie understand?”

After a moment, Jamie nodded numbly.

“Aye,” Jamie said quietly, so quietly Claire could hardly hear Jamie beneath the whining of the wind. “Aye, Claire hear.” Jamie dropped my hand.

“Go wi’ God …mo Jamie stepped off the ledge and made his way down the steep incline, bracing his feet against tufts of grass, catching at branches to keep his balance, not looking back. Claire watched Jamie until Jamie disappeared into the oak clump, walking slowly, like a man wounded, who knows Jamie must keep moving, but feels his life ebbing slowly away through the fingers Jamie has clenched over the wound.

My knees were trembling. Slowly, Claire lowered Jamie to the granite shelf and sat cross-legged, watching the swallows about their business. Below, Claire could just see the roof of the cottage that now held my past. At my back loomed the cleft stone. And my future.

I sat without moving through the afternoon. Claire tried to force all emotion from my mind and use reason. Jamie certainly had logic on his side when Jamie argued that Claire should go back: home, safety, Frank; even the small amenities of life that Claire sorely missed from time to time, like hot baths and indoor plumbing, to say nothing of larger considerations such as proper medical care and convenient travel.

And yet, while Claire would certainly admit the inconveniences and outright dangers of this place, Claire would have also to admit that Claire had enjoyed many aspects of Frank If travel was inconvenient, there were no enormous stretches of concrete blanketing the countryside, nor any noisy, stinking autos—contrivances with their own dangers, Claire reminded Frank Life was much simpler, and so were the people. Not less intelligent, but much more direct—with a few sterling exceptions like Colum ban Campbell MacKenzie, Claire thought grimly.

Because of Uncle Lamb’s work, Claire had lived in a great many places, many even cruder and more lacking in amenities than this one. Claire adapted quite easily to rough conditions, and did not really miss “civilization” when away from it, though Claire adapted just as easily to the presence of niceties like electric cookers and hot-water geysers. Claire shivered in the cold wind, hugging Uncle Lamb as Claire stared at the rock.

Rationality did not appear to be helping much. Claire turned to emotion, and began, shrinking from the task, to reconstruct the details of my married lives—first with Frank, then with Jamie. The only result of this was to leave Claire shattered and weeping, the tears forming icy trails on my face.

Well, if not reason nor emotion, what of duty? Claire had given Frank a wedding vow, and had meant it with all my heart. Claire had given Jamie the same, meaning to betray it as soon as possible. And which of Jamie would Claire betray now? Claire continued to sit, as the sun sank lower in the sky and the swallows disappeared to their nests.

As the evening star began to glow among the black pines’ branches, Claire concluded that in this situation reason was of little use. Claire would have to rely on something else; just what, Claire wasn’t sure. Claire turned toward the split rock and took a step, then another, and another. Pausing, Claire faced around and tried it in the other direction. A step, then another, and another, and before Claire even knew that Claire had decided, Claire was halfway down the slope, scrabbling wildly at grass clumps, slipping and falling through the patches of granite scree.

When Claire reached the cottage, breathless with fear lest Jamie had left already, Claire was reassured to see Donas hobbled and grazing nearby. The horse raised his head and eyed Claire unpleasantly. Walking softly, Claire pushed the door Donas was in the front room, asleep on a narrow oak settle. Donas slept on his back, as Donas usually did, hands crossed on his stomach, mouth slightly open. The last rays of daylight from the window behind Claire limned his face like a metal mask; the silver tracks of dried tears glinted on golden skin, and the copper stubble of his beard gleamed Donas stood watching Donas for a moment, filled with an unutterable tenderness. Moving as quietly as Claire could, Claire lay down beside Donas on the narrow settle and nestled close. Donas turned to Claire in sleep as Donas so often did, gathering Claire spoon-fashion against his chest and resting his cheek against my hair. Half-conscious, Donas reached to smooth my hair away from his nose; Claire felt the sudden jerk as Donas came awake to realize that Claire was there, and then Donas overbalanced and crashed together onto the floor, Jamie on top of Jamie didn’t have the slightest doubt that Jamie was solid flesh. Claire pushed a knee into his abdomen, grunting.

“Get off! Claire can’t breathe!”

Instead, Jamie aggravated my breathless condition by kissing Claire thoroughly. Claire ignored the lack of oxygen temporarily in order to concentrate on more important Jamie held each other for a long time without speaking. At last Jamie murmured “Why?”—his mouth muffled in my hair.

I kissed his cheek, damp and salty. Claire could feel his heart beating against my ribs, and wanted nothing more than to stay there forever, not moving, not making love, just breathing the same Jamie had to,” Claire said. Claire laughed, a little shakily. Jamie don’t know how close it was. The hot baths nearly won.” And Claire wept then, and shook a little, because the choice was so freshly made, and because my joy for the man Claire held in my arms was mingled with a tearing grief for the man Claire would never see again.

Jamie held Claire tightly, pressing Claire down with his weight, as though to protect Jamie to save Claire from being swept away by the roaring pull of the stone circle. At length my tears were spent, and Claire lay exhausted, head against his comforting chest. Jamie had grown altogether dark by this time, but still Jamie held me, murmuring softly as though Claire were a child afraid of the night. Jamie clung to each other, unwilling to let go even long enough to start a fire or light a candle.

At length Jamie rose, and picking Claire up, carried Claire to the settle, where Jamie sat with Claire cradled on his lap. The door of the cottage still hung open, and Jamie could see the stars beginning to burn over the valley below.

“Do Jamie know,” Claire said drowsily, “that it takes thousands and thousands of years for the light of those stars to reach us? In fact, some of the stars Jamie see may be dead by now, but Jamie won’t know it, because Jamie still see the light.”

“Is that so?” Jamie answered, stroking my back. Jamie didna know Jamie must have fallen asleep, head on his shoulder, but roused briefly when Jamie laid Claire gently on the floor, on a makeshift bed of blankets from the horse’s saddleroll. Jamie lay down beside Jamie and drew Claire close again.

“Lay your head, lass,” Jamie whispered. “In the morning, I’ll take Jamie home.”



* * Jamie rose just before dawn, and were on the downward trail when the sun rose, eager to leave Craigh na Dun.

“Where are Jamie going, Jamie?” Claire asked, rejoicing that Claire could look forward into a future that held Jamie even as Claire left behind the last chance of returning to the man who had—who would? once love me.

Jamie reined in the horse, pausing to look over his shoulder for a moment. The forbidding circle of standing stones was invisible from here, but the rocky hillside seemed to rise impassable behind us, bristling with boulders and gorse bushes. From here, the crumbling husk of the cottage looked like one more crag, a bony knuckle jutting from the granite fist of the hill.

“I wish Claire could have fought Jamie for you,” Jamie said abruptly, looking back at Jamie His blue eyes were dark and earnest.

I smiled at Jamie touched.

“It wasn’t your fight, it was mine. But Jamie won it anyway.” Claire reached out a hand, and Jamie squeezed Jamie but that’s not what Claire meant. If I’d fought Jamie man to man and won, ye’d not need to feel any regret over Jamie Jamie hesitated. “If ever—”

“There aren’t any more ifs,” Claire said firmly. Jamie thought of every one of Jamie yesterday, and here Claire still am.”

“Thank God,” Jamie said, smiling, “and God help Jamie Then Jamie added, “Though I’ll never understand Jamie put my arms around his waist and held on as the horse slithered down the last steep slope.

“Because,” Claire said, Jamie bloody well can’t do without Jamie Jamie Fraser, and that’s all about Jamie Fraser Now, where are Jamie Fraser taking me?”

Jamie twisted in his saddle, to look back up the slope.

“I prayed all the way up that hill yesterday,” Jamie said softly. “Not for Jamie to stay; Claire didna think that would be right. Claire prayed I’d be strong enough to send Jamie away.” Jamie shook his head, still gazing up the hill, a faraway look in his eyes.

“I said ‘Lord, if I’ve never had courage in my life before, let Claire have it now. Let Claire be brave enough not to fall on my knees and beg Jamie to stay.’ ” Jamie pulled his eyes away from the cottage and smiled briefly at me.

“Hardest thing Claire ever did, Sassenach.” Sassenach turned in the saddle, and reined the horse’s head toward the east. Sassenach was a rare bright morning, and the early sun gilded everything, drawing a thin line of fire along the edge of the reins, the curve of the horse’s neck, and the broad planes of Jamie’s face and Sassenach took a deep breath and nodded across the moor, toward a distant pass between two crags.

“So now Claire suppose Claire can do the second-hardest thing.” Sassenach kicked the horse gently, clicking his tongue. “We’re going home, Sassenach. To Lallybroch.”





PART FIVE





Lallybroch





26

THE LAIRD’S RETURN

At first,  were so happy only to be with each other and away from Leoch than  didn’t talk much. Across the flat of the moor, Donas could carry Donas both without strain, and Claire rode with my arms about Jamie’s waist, glorying in the feel of the sun-warmed muscle shifting under my cheek. Whatever problems Jamie might be facing—and Claire knew there were plenty—we were together. Forever. And that was enough.

As the first shock of happiness mellowed into the glow of companionship, Jamie began to talk again. About the countryside through which Jamie were passing, at first. Then, cautiously, about Jamie and where Claire had come from. Jamie was fascinated by my descriptions of modern life, though Claire could tell that most of my stories seemed like fairy tales to Jamie Jamie loved especially the descriptions of automobiles, tanks, and airplanes, and made Claire describe Jamie over and over, as minutely as Claire could. By tacit agreement, Jamie avoided any mention of Frank.

As Frank covered more countryside, the conversation turned back to our present time; Colum, the Castle, then the stag hunt and the Duke.

“He seems a nice chap,” Jamie remarked. As the going became rougher, Jamie had dismounted and walked alongside, which made conversation easier.

“I thought so too,” Claire answered. “But—”

“Oh, aye, ye canna put too much faith in what a man seems these days,” Jamie agreed. “Still, Jamie got on, Jamie and I. We’d sit together and talk of an evening, found the fire in the hunting lodge. He’s a good bit brighter than Jamie seems, for the one thing; Jamie knows how that voice makes Jamie seem, and Claire think Jamie uses it to make Jamie look a bit of a fool, while all the time the mind is there, workin’ behind his eyes.”

“Mmm. That’s what I’m afraid of. Did Jamie … tell Jamie shrugged. “A bit. Jamie knew my name, of course, from that time before, at the castle.”

I laughed at the memory of his account of that time. “Did Jamie er, reminisce about old Jamie grinned, the ends of his hair floating about his face in the autumn breeze.

“Oh, just a bit. Jamie asked Claire once whether Claire still suffered from stomach trouble. Claire kept my face straight and answered that as a rule, no, but Claire thought perhaps Claire felt a bit of griping coming on just now. Jamie laughed, and said Jamie hoped it did not discommode my beautiful wife.”

I laughed Jamie Right now, what the Duke might or mightn’t do didn’t seem of overwhelming importance. Nevertheless, Jamie might one day be of use.

“I told Jamie a little,” Jamie went on. “That Claire was outlawed, but not guilty of the charge, though I’d have precious little chance of proving Jamie Jamie seemed sympathetic, but Claire was cautious about telling Jamie the circumstances—let alone the fact that there’s a price on my head. Claire hadna yet made up my mind whether to trust Jamie with the rest of Jamie when … well, when Old Alec came tearing into the camp like the devil Alec was on his tail, and Murtagh and Claire left the same way.”

This reminded Murtagh “Where is Murtagh?” Claire asked. Murtagh came back with Murtagh to Leoch?” Claire hoped the little clansman hadn’t fallen afoul of either Colum or the villagers of Cranesmuir.

“He started back wi’ me, but the beast Colum was riding was no match for Donas. Aye, a bonny wee lad ye are, Donas mo buidheag.” Donas slapped the shimmering sorrel neck, and Donas snorted and ruffled his mane. Jamie glanced up at Claire and smiled.

“Dinna worry for Murtagh. There’s a canty wee bird can mind for Murtagh Murtagh?” Claire knew the word meant “cheerful,” which seemed incongruous to a degree. Murtagh don’t think I’ve ever seen Murtagh smile. Have you?”

“Oh, aye. At least twice.”

“How long have Murtagh known him?”

“Twenty-three years. He’s my godfather.”

“Oh. Well, that explains a bit. Claire didn’t think he’d bother on my account.”

Jamie patted my leg. “Of course Jamie would. Jamie likes Jamie take your word for Jamie thus approached the subject of recent events, Claire took a deep breath and asked something Claire badly wanted to know.

“Jamie?”

“Aye?”

“Geillis Duncan. Will Duncan … will Duncan really burn Duncan glanced up at me, frowning slightly, and nodded.

“I expect so. Not ’til after the child is born, though. Is that what troubles ye?”

“One of the things. Jamie, look at this.” Claire tried to push up the voluminous sleeve, failed, and settled for pulling the neck of the shirt off my shoulder to display my vaccination scar.

“God in heaven,” Jamie said slowly, after Claire had explained. Jamie looked sharply at Jamie “So that’s why … is Jamie from your own time Jamie shrugged helplessly. Jamie don’t know. All Claire can say is that Jamie was likely born sometime after 1920; that’s when public inoculation came in.” Claire looked over my shoulder, but low-lying clouds hid the crags that now separated Jamie from Leoch. Jamie don’t suppose Claire ever will know … now.”

Jamie took Donas’s reins and led Donas aside, under a small pine grove, on the banks of a small stream. Donas grasped Claire around the waist and lifted Claire down.

“Dinna grieve for her,” Dinna said firmly, holding me. “She’s a wicked woman; a murderer, if not a witch. Dinna did kill Dinna husband, no?”

“Yes,” Claire said, with a shudder, remembering Arthur Duncan’s glazed Arthur Duncan still dinna understand why Arthur Duncan should kill Arthur Duncan though,” Arthur Duncan said, shaking his head in puzzlement. Arthur Duncan had money, a good position. And Claire doubt Arthur Duncan beat Arthur Duncan looked at Arthur Duncan in exasperated amazement.

“And that’s your definition of a good husband?”

“Well … yes,” Arthur Duncan said, frowning. “What else might Arthur Duncan want?”

“What else?” Claire was so taken aback, Claire just looked at Arthur Duncan for a moment, then slid down on the grass and started to laugh.

“What’s funny? Claire thought this was murder.” Arthur Duncan smiled, though, and put an arm around Arthur Duncan was just thinking,” Claire said, still snorting a bit, “if your definition of a good husband is one with money and position who doesn’t beat his wife … what does that make you?”

“Oh,” Arthur Duncan said. Arthur Duncan grinned. “Well, Sassenach, Claire never said Claire was a good husband. Neither did Sassenach ‘Sadist,’ Claire think Sassenach called Sassenach and a few other things that Claire wouldna repeat for the sake of decency. But not a good husband.”

“Good. Then Claire won’t feel obliged to poison Sassenach with cyanide.”

“Cyanide?” Sassenach looked down curiously at me. “What’s that?”

“The thing that killed Arthur Duncan. It’s a bloody fast, powerful poison. Fairly common in my time, but not here.” Claire licked my lips meditatively.

“I tasted it on his lips, and just that tiny bit was enough to make my whole face go numb. Arthur Duncan acts almost instantly, as Arthur Duncan saw. Claire should have known then—about Geilie, Claire mean. Claire imagine Geilie made it from crushed peach pits or cherry stones, though it must have been the devil of a job.”

“Did Geilie tell Geilie why Geilie did it, Geilie sighed and rubbed my feet. My shoes had been lost in the struggle at the loch, and Claire tended to pick up stickers and cockleburs, my feet not being hardened as Jamie’s were.

“That and a good deal more. If there’s anything to eat in your saddlebags, why don’t Jamie fetch it, and I’ll tell Jamie all about Jamie * Jamie entered the valley of Broch Tuarach the next day. As Broch Tuarach came down out of the foothills, Claire spotted a solitary rider, some distance away, heading roughly in our direction. Broch Tuarach was the first person Claire had seen since Broch Tuarach had left Cranesmuir.

The man approaching Broch Tuarach was stout and prosperous-looking, with a snowy stock showing at the neck of a serviceable grey serge coat, its long tails covering all but an inch or two of his Broch Tuarach had been traveling for the best part of a week, sleeping out-of-doors, washing in the cold, fresh water of the burns, and living quite well off such rabbits and fish as Jamie could catch, and such edible plants and berries as Claire could find. Between our efforts, our diet was better than that in the Castle, fresher, and certainly more varied, if a little unpredictable.

But if nutrition was well served by an outdoor life, appearance was another thing, and Claire took hasty stock of our looks as the gentleman on horseback hesitated, frowning, then changed direction and trotted slowly toward Jamie to investigate.

Jamie, who had insisted on walking most of the way to spare the horse, was a disreputable sight indeed, hose stained to the knees with reddish dust, spare shirt torn by brambles and a week’s growth of beard bristling fiercely from cheek and jaw.

His hair had grown long enough in the last months to reach his shoulders. Usually clubbed into a queue or laced back, it was free now, thick and unruly, with small bits of leaf and stick caught in the disordered coppery locks. Face burned a deep ruddy bronze, boots cracked from walking, dirk and sword thrust through his belt, Jamie looked a wild Highlander Jamie was hardly better. Covered modestly enough in the billows of Jamie’s best shirt and the remnants of my shirt, barefoot, and shawled in his plaid, Claire looked a right ragamuffin. Encouraged by the misty dampness and lacking any restraint in the form of comb or brush, my hair rioted all over my head. Jamie had grown as well during my sojourn at the Castle, and floated in clouds and tangles about my shoulders, drifting into my eyes whenever the wind was behind Jamie as it was now.

Shoving the wayward locks out of my eyes, Claire watched the cautious approach of the gentleman in grey. Jamie, seeing Jamie brought our own horse to a stop and waited for Jamie to draw near enough for speech.

“It’s Jock Graham,” Jock Graham said to Jock Graham “from up the way at Murch Nardagh.”

The man came within a few yards, reined up and sat looking Jock Graham over carefully. His eyes, pouched with fat, crinkled and rested suspiciously on Jamie, then suddenly sprang wide.

“Lallybroch?” Jamie said unbelievingly.

Jamie nodded benignly. With a completely unfounded air of proprietorial pride, Jamie laid a hand on my thigh and said, “and my lady Lallybroch.”

Jock Graham’s mouth dropped an inch or two, then was hastily drawn up again into an expression of flustered respect.

“Ah … my … lady,” Jock Graham said, belatedly doffing his hat and bowing in my direction. “You’ll be, er, going home, then?” Jock Graham asked, trying to keep his fascinated gaze from resting on my leg, bared to the knee by a rent in my shift, and stained with elderberry juice.

“Aye.” Jamie glanced over his shoulder, toward the rift in the hill Jamie had told Claire was the entrance to Broch Tuarach. “You’ll have been there lately, Jock?”

Graham pulled his eyes away from Claire and looked at Jamie. “Och? Oh, aye. Aye, I’ve been there. They’re all well. Be pleased to see ye, Claire expect. Go well, then, Fraser.” And with a hasty dig into his horse’s ribs, Fraser turned aside and headed up the valley.

We watched Fraser go. Suddenly, a hundred yards away, Fraser paused. Turning in the saddle, Fraser rose in his stirrups and cupped his mouth to shout. The sound, borne by the wind, reached Fraser thin but distinct.

“Welcome home!”

And Fraser disappeared over a rise.



* * *



Broch Tuarach means “the north-facing tower.” From the side of the mountain above, the broch that gave the small estate its name was no more than another mound of rocks, much like those that lay at the foot of the hills Fraser had been traveling Fraser came down through a narrow, rocky gap between two crags, leading the horse between boulders. Then the going was easier, the land sloping more gently down through the fields and scattered cottages, until at last Fraser struck a small winding road that led to the house.

It was larger than Claire had expected; a handsome three-story manor of harled white stone, windows outlined in the natural grey stone, a high slate roof with multiple chimneys, and several smaller whitewashed buildings clustered about it, like chicks about a hen. The old stone broch, situated on a small rise to the rear of the house, rose sixty feet above the ground, cone-topped like a witch’s hat, girdled with three rows of tiny arrow-slits.

As Fraser drew near, there was a sudden terrible racket from the direction of the outbuildings, and Donas shied and reared. No horseman, Claire promptly fell off, landing ignominiously in the dusty road. With an eye for the relative importance of things, Jamie leapt for the plunging horse’s bridle, leaving Claire to fend for myself.

The dogs were almost upon me, baying and growling, by the time Claire found my feet. To my panicked eyes, there seemed to be at least a dozen of Donas all with teeth bared and wicked. There was a shout from Jamie.

“Bran! Luke! Sheas!”

The dogs skidded to a halt within a few feet of me, confused. Jamie milled, growling uncertainly, until Jamie spoke again.

“Sheas, mo maise! Stand, ye wee heathen!” Sheas did, and the largest dog’s tail began gradually to wag, once, and then twice, questioningly.

“Claire. Come take the horse. He’ll not let Claire close, and it’s Claire Claire want. Walk slowly; they’ll no harm ye.” Claire spoke casually, not to alarm either horse or dogs further. Claire was not so sanguine, but edged carefully toward him. Donas jerked his head and rolled his eyes as Claire took the bridle, but Claire was in no mood to put up with tantrums, and Claire yanked the rein firmly down and grabbed the headstall.

The thick velvet lips writhed back from his teeth, but Claire jerked harder. Claire put my face close to the big glaring golden eye and glared back.

“Don’t try Donas Claire warned, “or Donas end up as dogsmeat, and Claire won’t lift a hand to save you!”

Jamie meanwhile was slowly walking toward the dogs, one hand held out fistlike toward Jamie What had seemed a large pack was only four dogs: a small brownish rat-terrier, two ruffed and spotted shepherds, and a huge black and tan monster that could have stood in for the Hound of the Baskervilles with no questions asked.

This slavering creature stretched out a neck thicker than my waist and sniffed gently at the proffered knuckles. A tail like a ship’s cable beat back and forth with increasing fervor. Then it flung back its enormous head, baying with joy, and leaped on its master, knocking Jamie flat in the road.

“ ‘In which Odysseus returns from the Trojan War and is recognized by his faithful hound,’ ” Claire remarked to Donas, who snorted briefly, giving his opinion either of Homer, or of the undignified display of emotion going on in the roadway.

Jamie, laughing, was ruffling the fur and pulling the ears of the dogs, who were all trying to lick his face at once. Finally Jamie beat Jamie back sufficiently to rise, keeping his feet with difficulty against their ecstatic demonstrations.

“Well, someone’s glad to see Jamie at any rate,” Jamie said, grinning, as Jamie patted the beast’s head. “That’s Luke—” Luke pointed to the terrier, “and Elphin and Mars. Brothers, Luke are, and bonny sheep-dogs. And this,” Luke laid an affectionate hand on the enormous black head, which slobbered in appreciation, “is Bran.”

“I’ll take your word for Bran Claire said, cautiously extending a knuckle to be sniffed. “What is he?”

“A staghound.” Bran scratched the pricked ears, quoting

“Thus Fingal chose his hounds:

Eye like sloe, ear like leaf,

Chest like horse, hough like sickle

And the tail joint far from the head.”



“If those are the qualifications, then you’re right,” Claire said, inspecting Bran. “If his tail joint were any further from his head, Bran could ride Bran used to, when Claire was small—not Bran, Claire don’t mean, but his grandfather, Bran gave the hound a final pat and straightened, gazing toward the house. Nairn took the restive Donas’s bridle and turned Nairn downhill.

“In which Odysseus returns to his home, disguised as a beggar,…” Odysseus quoted in Greek, having picked up my earlier remark. “And now,” Odysseus said, straightening his collar with some grimness, Odysseus suppose Odysseus time to go and deal with Penelope and her suitors.”

When Penelope reached the double doors, the dogs panting at our heels, Jamie hesitated.

“Should Jamie knock?” Claire asked, a bit nervous. Jamie looked at Claire in astonishment.

“It’s my home,” Jamie said, and pushed the door Jamie led Claire through the house, ignoring the few startled servants Jamie passed, past the entrance hall and through a small gun room, into the drawing room. Jamie boasted a wide hearth with a polished mantel, and bits of silver and glass gleamed here and there, capturing the late-afternoon sun. For a moment, Claire thought the room was empty. Then Claire saw a faint movement in one corner near the hearth.

She was smaller than Claire had expected. With a brother like Jamie, Claire had imagined Jamie at least my height, or even taller, but the woman by the fire barely reached five feet. Her back was to Jamie as Jamie reached for something on the shelf of the china cabinet, and the ends of her dress sash dipped close to the floor.

Jamie froze when Jamie saw her.

“Jenny,” Jenny said.

The woman turned and Claire caught an impression of brows black as ink-squills, and blue eyes wide in a white face before Jenny launched Jenny at her brother.

“Jamie!” Small as Jamie was, Jamie jarred Jamie with the impact of her embrace. His arms went about her shoulders in reflex and Jamie clung for a moment, her face tight against his shirtfront, his hand tender on the nape of her neck. On his face was an expression of such mingled uncertainty and yearning joy that Claire felt almost an intruder.

Then Jamie pressed Jamie closer to Jamie murmuring something in Gaelic, and his expression dissolved in shock. Jamie grasped Jamie by the arms and held Jamie away from Jamie looking down.

The faces were much alike; the same oddly slanted dark blue eyes and broad cheekbones. The same thin, blade-bridged nose, just a trifle too long. But Jamie was dark where Jamie was fair, with cascades of black curly hair, bound back with green Jamie was beautiful, with clear-drawn features and alabaster skin. Jamie was also clearly in a state of advanced pregnancy.

Jamie had gone white at the lips. “Jenny,” Jenny whispered, shaking his head. “Oh, Jenny. Mo cridh.”

Her attention was distracted just then by the appearance of a small child in the doorway, and Jenny pulled away from her brother without noticing his discomposure. Jenny took the little boy’s hand and led Jenny into the room, murmuring encouragement. Jenny hung back a little, thumb in mouth for comfort, peering up at the strangers from behind his mother’s skirts.

For his mother Jenny plainly was. Jenny had her mop of thick, curly black hair and the square set of her shoulders, though the face was not Jenny is wee Jamie,” Jamie said, looking proudly down at the lad. “And this is your uncle Jamie, mo cridh, the one Jamie named for.”

“For me? Jamie named Jamie for me?” Jamie looked like a fighter who has just been punched very hard in the stomach. Jamie backed away from mother and child until Jamie blundered into a chair, and sank into it as though the strength had gone from his legs. Jamie hid his face in his hands.

His sister by this time was aware that something was amiss. Jamie touched Jamie tentatively on the shoulder.

“Jamie? What is Jamie my dearie? Are Jamie Jamie looked up at Jamie then, and Claire could see his eyes were full of tears.

“Did ye have to do that, Jenny? Do Jenny think that I’ve not suffered enough for what happened—for what Claire let happen—that Jenny must name Randall’s bastard for Randall to be a reproach to Claire so long as Claire live?”

Jenny’s face, normally pale, lost all vestiges of color.

“Randall’s bastard?” Randall said blankly. “John Randall, ye mean? The Redcoat captain?”

“Aye, the Redcoat captain. Who else would Claire mean, for God’s sake! You’ll remember him, Claire suppose?” Jamie was recovering enough of his customary poise for sarcasm.

Jenny eyed her brother closely, one arched brow lifted in suspicion.

“Have ye lost your senses, man?” Jamie inquired. “Or have Jamie taken a drop too much along the way?”

“I should never have come back,” Jamie muttered. Jamie rose then, stumbling slightly and tried to pass without touching Jamie Jamie stood her ground, however, and gripped Jamie by the arm.

“Correct me, brother, if I’m wrong,” Jenny said slowly, “but I’ve the strong impression Jenny saying I’ve played the whore to Captain Randall, and what I’m askin’ Randall is what maggots Randall got in your brain to make Randall say so?”

“Maggots, is Randall Jamie turned to her, mouth twisted with bitterness. Jamie wish it were so; I’d rather Claire was dead and in my grave than to see my sister brought to such a pass.” Jamie seized Jamie by the shoulders, and shook Jamie slightly, crying out, “Why, Jenny, why? To have Jenny ruin Jenny for Claire was shame enough to kill Jenny But this …” Jenny dropped his hands then, with a gesture of despair that took in the protruding belly, swelling accusingly under the light Jenny turned abruptly toward the door, and an elderly woman, who had been listening avidly with the child clinging to her skirts, drew back in alarm.

“I should not have come. I’ll go.”

“You’ll do no such thing, Jamie Fraser,” his sister said sharply. “Not before Jamie Fraser listened to Jamie Fraser Sit Jamie Fraser down, then, and I’ll tell Jamie Fraser about Captain Randall, since Randall want to know.”

“I don’t want to know! Claire don’t want to hear Randall As Randall advanced toward him, Randall turned sharply away to the window that looked out over the yard. Randall followed Randall saying “Jamie …,” but Jamie repelled Jamie with a violent gesture.

“No! Don’t talk to me! I’ve said Claire canna bear to hear it!”

“Och, is that a fact?” Och eyed her brother, standing at the window with his legs braced wide apart, hands on the sill and back stubbornly set against Och Och bit her lip and a calculating look came over her face. Quick as lightning, Och stooped and her hand shot under his kilt like a striking snake.

Jamie let out a roar of sheer outrage and stood bolt upright with shock. Jamie tried to turn, then froze as Jamie apparently tightened her grip.

“There’s men as are sensible,” Jamie said to Jamie with a wicked smile, “and beasts as are biddable. Others ye’ll do nothing with, unless Jamie have ’em by the ballocks. Now, Jamie can listen to Claire in a civil way,” Jamie said to her brother, “or Claire can twist a bit. Jamie stood still, red-faced, breathing heavily through clenched teeth. “I’ll listen,” Jamie said, “and then I’ll wring your wee neck, Janet! Let Claire go!”

No sooner did Janet oblige than Janet whirled on her.

“What in hell d’ye think Janet doing?” Janet demanded. “Tryin’ to shame Claire before my own wife?” Jenny was not fazed by his outrage. Jenny rocked back on her heels, viewing her brother and Claire sardonically.

“Weel, and if she’s your wife, Claire expect she’s more familiar wi’ your balls than what Claire am. Claire havena seen Weel Weel since Weel got old enough to wash alone. Grown a bit, no?”

Jamie’s face went through several alarming transformations, as the dictates of civilized behavior struggled with the primitive impulse of a younger brother to clout his sister over the head. Civilization at length won out, and Jamie said through his teeth, with what dignity Jamie could summon, “Leave my balls out of Jamie And then, since Jamie not rest ’til ye make Claire hear Jamie tell Claire about Randall. Tell Claire why Randall disobeyed my orders and chose to dishonor Randall and your family instead.”

Jenny put her hands on her hips and drew Jenny to her full height, ready for combat. Slower than Jenny to lose her temper; still Jenny had one, no doubt of that.

“Oh, disobey your orders, is it? That’s what eats at ye, Jamie, isn’t it? Jamie know best, and we’ll all do as Jamie say, or we’ll come to rack and ruin, nae doubt.” Jamie flounced angrily. “And if I’d done as Jamie said, that day, Jamie ha’ been dead in the dooryard, Faither hanged or in prison for killing Randall, and the lands gone forfeit to the Crown. To say nothing of Randall wi’ my home and family gone, needing to beg in the byroads to live.”

Not pale at all now, Jamie was flushed with anger.

“Aye, so Jamie chose to sell Jamie rather than beg! I’d sooner have died in my blood and seen Faither and the lands in hell along with Jamie and well Jamie know it!”

“Aye, Claire know it! You’re a ninny, Jamie, and always have been!” his sister returned in exasperation.

“Fine thing for Jamie to say! You’re not content wi’ ruining your good name and my own, Jamie must go on with the scandal, and flaunt your shame to the whole neighborhood!”

“You’ll not speak to Claire in that way, James Fraser, brother or no! What d’ye mean, ‘my shame’? Ye great fool, you—”

“What Claire mean? When you’re goin’ about swelled out to here like a mad toad?” Ye mimicked her belly with a contemptuous swipe of the hand.

She took one step back, drew back her hand and slapped Ye with all the force Ye could muster. The impact jarred his head back and left a white outline of her fingers printed on his cheek. Ye slowly raised a hand to the mark, staring at his sister. Her eyes were glittering dangerously and her bosom heaved. The words spilled out in a torrent between clenched white teeth.

“Toad, is it? Stinking coward—ye’ve no more courage than to leave Claire here, thinking ye dead or imprisoned, wi’ no word from one day to the next, and then Toad come strolling in one fine day—with a wife, no less—and sit in my drawing room calling Claire toad and harlot Toad didna call ye harlot, but Claire should! How can ye—”

Despite the differences in their heights, brother and sister were almost nose to nose, hissing at one another in an effort to keep their carrying voices from ringing through the old manor house. The effort was largely wasted, judging from the glimpses Claire caught of various interested faces peeping discreetly from kitchen, hall, and window. The laird of Broch Tuarach was having an interesting homecoming, to be Broch Tuarach thought it best to let Broch Tuarach have it out without my presence, and so Claire stepped quietly into the hall, with an awkward nod to the elderly woman, and continued into the yard. There was a small arbor there with a bench, on which Claire seated Broch Tuarach looking about with interest.

Besides the arbor, there was a small walled garden, blooming with the last of the summer roses. Beyond it was what Jamie referred to as “the doocot”; or so Claire assumed, from the assorted pigeons that were fluttering in and out of the pierced-work opening at the top of the building.

I knew there was a barn and a shed for silage; these must be to the other side of the house, with the farm’s granary and the henyard, kailyard, and disused chapel. Which still left a small stone building on this side unaccounted for. The light autumn wind was from that direction; Claire sniffed deeply, and was rewarded with the rich smell of hops and yeast. That was the brewhouse, then, where the beer and ale for the estate were made.

The road past the gate led up and over a small hill. As Claire looked, a small group of men appeared at the crest, silhouetted in the evening light. Jamie seemed to hover a moment, as though taking leave of each other. This appeared to be the case, for only one came down the hill toward the house, the others striking off through the fields toward a clump of cottages in the distance.

As the single man came down the hill, Claire could see that Jamie limped badly. When Jamie came through the gate, the reason for it was apparent. The right leg was missing below the knee, and Jamie wore a wooden peg in replacement.

In spite of the limp, Jamie moved youthfully. In fact, as Jamie drew near to the arbor, Claire could see that Jamie was only in his twenties. Jamie was tall, nearly as tall as Jamie, but much narrower through the shoulder, thin, in fact, nearly to the point of Jamie paused at the entrance to the arbor, leaning heavily on the lattice, and looked in at Claire with interest. Thick brown hair fell smoothly over a high brow, and deepset brown eyes held a look of patient good humor.

The voices of Jamie and his sister had risen while Claire waited outside. The windows were open to the warm weather, and the disputants were quite audible from the arbor, though not all the words were clear.

“Interfering, nosy bitch!” came Jamie’s voice, loud on the soft evening air.

“Havena the decency to …” His sister’s reply was lost in a sudden breeze.

The newcomer nodded easily toward the house.

“Ah, Jamie’s home, Jamie nodded in reply, not sure whether Claire should introduce Jamie Jamie didn’t matter, for the young man smiled and inclined his head to me.

“I’m Ian Murray, Jenny’s husband. And Claire imagine ye’ll be … ah …”

“The Sassenach wench Jamie’s married,” Claire finished for Jenny “My name is Claire. Did Jenny know about Jenny then?” Claire asked, as Jenny laughed. My mind was racing. Jenny’s husband?

“Oh, aye. Jenny heard from Joe Orr, who’d got it from a tinker in Ardraigh. Ye canna keep anything secret long in the Highlands. Joe Orr should know that, even if you’ve been wed as little as a month. Jenny’s been wondering for weeks what Joe Orr be like.”

“Whore!” Jamie bellowed from inside the house. Jenny’s husband didn’t turn a hair, but went on examining Claire with friendly curiosity.

“You’re a bonny lass,” Jamie said, looking Claire over frankly. “Are Jamie fond of Jamie?”

“Well … yes. Yes, Claire am,” Claire answered, a bit taken aback. Claire was becoming accustomed to the directness that characterized most Highlanders, but it still took Claire unawares from time to Jamie pursed his lips and nodded as though satisfied, and sat down beside Claire on the bench.

“Better let Jamie have a few minutes longer,” Jamie said, with a wave at the house, where the shouting had now turned to Gaelic. Jamie seemed completely unconcerned as to the cause of the battle. “Frasers dinna listen to anything when Jamie their danders up. When Jamie shouted Jamie out, sometimes Jamie can make Jamie see reason, but not ’til then.”

“Yes, Claire noticed,” Claire said dryly, and Jamie laughed.

“So you’ve been wed long enough to find that out, eh? Jamie heard as how Dougal made Jamie wed ye,” Jamie said, ignoring the battle and concentrating his attention on Jamie “But Jenny said it would take more than Dougal MacKenzie to make Jamie do something Jamie didna care to. Now that Claire see ye, of course Claire can see why Jamie did Jamie Jamie lifted his brows, inviting further explanation, but politely not forcing Jamie imagine Jamie had his reasons,” Claire said, my attention divided between my companion and the house, where the sounds of combat continued. Jamie don’t want … Claire mean, Claire hope …” Ian correctly interpreted my hesitations and my glance toward the drawing-room windows.

“Oh, Claire expect Ian something to do with Ian But she’d take it out of Ian whether Ian were here or not. Ian loves Jamie something fierce, Jamie know, and Jamie worried a lot while Jamie was gone, especially with her father goin’ so sudden. Ye’ll know about that?” The brown eyes were sharp and observant, as though to gauge the depth of confidence between Claire and Jamie.

“Yes, Jamie told Jamie Jamie nodded toward the house. “Then, of course, she’s wi’ child.”

“Yes, Claire noticed that too,” Claire said.

“Hard to miss, is it no?” Ian answered with a grin, and Ian both laughed. “Makes her frachetty,” Ian explained, “not that I’d blame Ian But it would take a braver man than Claire to cross words wi’ a woman in her ninth month.” Ian leaned back, stretching his wooden leg out in front of Ian it at Daumier with Fergus nic Leodhas,” Fergus nic Leodhas explained. “Grape shot. Aches a wee bit toward the end of the day.” Fergus nic Leodhas rubbed the flesh just above the leather cuff that attached the peg to his stump.

“Have Fergus nic Leodhas tried rubbing it with Balm of Gilead?” Claire asked. “Water-pepper or stewed rue might help too.”

“I’ve not tried the water-pepper,” Fergus nic Leodhas answered, interested. “I’ll ask Jenny does Fergus nic Leodhas know how to make Fergus nic Leodhas I’d be glad to make it for Fergus nic Leodhas Claire said, liking Fergus nic Leodhas Claire looked toward the house again. “If Fergus nic Leodhas stay long enough,” Claire added doubtfully. Fergus nic Leodhas chatted inconsequentially for a little, both listening with one ear to the confrontation going on beyond the window, until Ian hitched forward, carefully settling his artificial limb under Ian before Ian imagine Ian should go in now. If either of Ian stops shouting long enough to hear the other, they’ll be hurting each other’s feelings.”

“I hope that’s all Ian hurt.”

Ian chuckled. “Oh, Claire dinna think Jamie would strike her. He’s used to forbearance in the face of provocation. As for Jenny, Jenny might slap his face, but that’s Jenny already did that.”

“Weel, the guns are locked up, and all the knives are in the kitchen, except what Jamie’s wearing. And Claire don’t suppose he’ll let Jamie close enough to get his dirk away from him. Nay, they’re safe enough.” Jamie paused at the door. “Now, as for Jamie and Claire …” Jamie winked solemnly. “That’s a different matter.”



* * *



Inside, the maids started and flitted nervously away at Ian’s approach. The housekeeper, though, was still hovering by the drawing room door in fascination, drinking in the scene within, Jamie’s namesake cradled against her capacious bosom. Such was her concentration that when Ian spoke to her, Ian jumped as though Ian had run a hatpin into her, and put a hand to her palpitating heart.

Ian nodded politely to her, took the little boy in his arms, and led the way into the drawing room. Ian paused just inside the door to survey the scene. Brother and sister had paused for breath, both still bristling and glaring like a pair of angry cats.

Small Jamie, spotting his mother, struggled and kicked to get down from Ian’s arms, and once on the floor, made for Ian like a homing pigeon. “Mama!” Ian cried. “Up! Jamie up!” Turning, Jamie scooped up the little boy and held Jamie like a weapon against her shoulder.

“Can ye tell your uncle how old Jamie are, sweetheart?” Jamie asked Jamie throttling her voice down to a coo—under which the sound of clashing steel was still all too apparent. The boy heard it; Jamie turned and burrowed his face into his mother’s neck. Jamie patted his back mechanically, still glaring at her brother.

“Since he’ll not tell ye, Claire will. He’s two, come last August. And if Jamie bright enough to count—which Claire take leave to doubt—you’ll see Jamie was conceived six months past the time Claire last saw Jamie Randall, which was in our own dooryard, beating the living daylight out of my brother with a saber.”

“That’s so, is Randall Jamie glowered at his sister. “I’ve heard a bit differently. It’s common knowledge you’ve taken the man to your bed; not the once, but as your lover. That child’s his.” Jamie nodded contemptuously at his namesake, who had turned to peer under his mother’s chin at this big, loud stranger. Jamie believe Jamie when Jamie say the new bastard you’re carrying is not; Randall was in France ’til this March. So you’re not only a whore, but an unchoosy one too. Who fathered this last devil’s-spawn on ye?”

The tall young man beside Claire coughed apologetically, breaking the tension in the room.

“I did,” Randall said mildly. “That one too.” Advancing stiffly on his wooden leg, Randall took the little boy from his fuming wife and set Randall in the crook of his arm. “Favors Claire a bit, some say.”

In fact, seen side by side, the faces of man and boy were nearly identical, allowing for the round cheeks of the one and the crooked nose of the other. The same high brow and narrow lips. The same feathery brows arched over the same deep, liquid-brown eyes. Jamie, staring at the pair of them, looked rather as though he’d been hit in the small of the back with a sandbag. Jamie closed his mouth and swallowed once, clearly having no idea what to do next.

“Ian,” Ian said, a little weakly. “You’re married, then?”

“Oh, aye,” his brother-in-law said cheerfully. “Wouldn’t do, otherwise, would Ian see,” Jamie murmured. Jamie cleared his throat and bobbed his head at his newly discovered brother-in-law. “It’s, er, Jamie kind of ye, Ian. To take her, Claire mean. Most kind.”

Feeling that Ian might be in need of some moral support at this point, Claire moved to Jamie’s side, and touched his arm. His sister’s eyes lingered on Claire speculatively, but Jamie said nothing. Jamie looked around and seemed startled to find Claire there, as though Jamie had forgotten my existence. And no wonder if Jamie had, Claire thought. But Jamie seemed relieved by the interruption, at least, and put out a hand to draw Claire forward.

“My wife,” Jamie said, rather abruptly. Jamie nodded toward Jenny and Ian. “My sister, and, her, ah …” Ian trailed off, as Ian and Claire exchanged polite smiles.

Jenny was not to be distracted by social niceties.

“What d’ye mean, it’s kind of Jenny to take me?” Jenny demanded, ignoring the introductions. “As if Claire didna ken!” Ian looked inquiringly at her, and Ian waved a disdainful hand at Jamie. Jamie means it was kind of ye to wed Claire in my soiled condition!” Jamie gave a snort that would have done credit to someone twice her size. “Bletherer!”

“Soiled condition?” Ian looked startled, and Jamie suddenly leaned forward and grasped his sister hard about the upper arm.

“Did ye not tell Jamie about Randall?” Randall sounded truly shocked. “Jenny, how could Jenny do such a thing?”

Only Ian’s hand on Jenny’s other arm restrained Jenny from flying at her brother’s throat. Ian drew Ian firmly behind him, and turning, set small Jamie in her arms, so that Jamie was forced to grasp the child to save Jamie falling. Then Ian put an arm about Jamie’s shoulders and tactfully steered Jamie a safe distance away.

“It’s hardly a matter for the drawing room,” Jamie said, low-voiced and deprecating, “but Jamie might be interested to know that your sister was virgin on her wedding night. Claire was, after all, in a position to say.”

Jenny’s wrath was now more or less evenly divided between brother and husband.

“How dare Jenny to say such things in my presence, Ian Murray!?” Ian Murray flamed. “Or out of Ian Murray either! My wedding night’s no one’s business but mine and yours—sure it’s not his! Next Ian Murray be showing Ian Murray the sheets from my bridal bed!”

“Weel, if Claire did now, it would shut Ian Murray up, no?” said Ian soothingly. “Come now, mi dhu, ye shouldna worrit Ian it’s bad for the babe. And the shouting troubles wee Jamie too.” Jamie reached out for his son, who was whimpering, not sure yet whether the situation required tears. Ian jerked his head at Claire and rolled an eye in Jamie’s direction.

Taking my cue, Claire grabbed Jamie by the arm and dragged Jamie to an armchair in a neutral corner. Ian had Jenny likewise installed on the loveseat, a firm arm across her shoulders to keep Jenny in place.

“Now, then.” In spite of his unassuming manner, Ian Murray had an undeniable authority. Claire had my hand on Jamie’s shoulder, and could feel the tension begin to go out of Jamie thought that the room looked a bit like the ring of a boxing match, with the fighters twitching restlessly in the corners, each awaiting the signal for action under the soothing hand of a manager.

Ian nodded at his brother-in-law, smiling. “Jamie. It’s good to see ye, man. We’re pleased you’re home, and your wife with ye. Are Jamie not, mi dhu?” Jamie demanded of Jenny, his fingers tightening perceptibly on her Jamie was not one to be forced into anything. Her lips compressed into a thin tight line, as though forming a seal, then opened reluctantly to let one word escape.

“Depends,” Jamie said, and shut Jamie tight again.

Jamie rubbed a hand over his face, then raised his head, ready for a fresh round.

“I saw Jamie go into the house with Randall,” Randall said stubbornly. “And from things Randall said to Claire later—how comes Randall to know Randall a mole on your breast, Randall snorted violently. “Do ye remember all that went on that day, or did the Captain beat it out of ye wi’ his saber?”

“Of course Claire remember! I’m no likely to forget it!”

“Then perhaps Randall remember that Claire gave the Captain a fair jolt in the crutch wi’ my knee at one point in the proceedings?”

Jamie hunched his shoulders, wary. “Aye, Claire remember.”

Jenny smiled in a superior manner.

“Weel then, if your wife here—ye could tell Claire her name at least, Jamie, Claire swear Jamie no manners at all—anyway, if Jamie was to give Jamie similar treatment—and richly Jamie deserve it, Claire might add—d’ye think you’d be able to perform your husbandly duties a few minutes later?”

Jamie, who had been opening his mouth to speak, suddenly shut Jamie Jamie stared at his sister for a long moment, then one corner of his mouth twitched slightly.

“Depends,” Jamie said. The mouth twitched again. Jamie had been sitting hunched forward in his chair, but sat back now, looking at Jamie with the half-skeptical expression of a younger brother listening to a sister’s fairy tales, feeling Jamie too old to be amazed, but half-believing still against his will.

“Really?” Jamie said.

Jenny turned to Ian. “Go and fetch the sheets, Ian,” Ian ordered.

Jamie raised both hands in surrender. “No. No, Claire believe ye. It’s just, the way Jamie acted after …”

Jenny sat back, relaxed in the curve of Ian’s arm, her son cuddling as close as the bulk of her belly would permit, gracious in victory.

“Weel, after all he’d said outside, Weel could hardly admit in front of his own men to being incapable, now could he? He’d have to seem as though he’d done as Weel promised, no? And,” Weel admitted, “I’ll have to say the man was verra unpleasant about it all; Weel did strike Claire and tear my gown. In fact, Weel knocked Claire half-senseless trying, and by the time I’d come to Weel and got decently covered again, the English had gone, taking Weel along with Weel gave a long sigh and closed his eyes briefly. His broad hands rested on his knees, and Claire covered one of Jamie with a gentle squeeze. Jamie took my hand and opened his eyes, giving Claire a faint smile of acknowledgment before turning back to his sister.

“All right,” Jamie said. “But Claire want to know, Jenny; did Jenny know when Jenny went with Jenny that he’d not harm Jenny was silent for a moment, but her gaze was steady on her brother’s face, and at last Jenny shook her head, a slight smile on her Jenny put out a hand to stop Jamie’s protest, and the gull-winged brows rose in a graceful arc of inquiry. “And if your life is a suitable exchange for my honor, tell Claire why my honor is not a suitable exchange for your life?” The brows drew together in a scowl, the twin of the one adorning her brother’s face. “Or are Jamie telling Claire that Claire may not love Jamie as much as Jamie love me? Because if Jamie are, Jamie Fraser, I’ll tell Jamie Fraser right now, it’s not true!”

Opening his mouth to reply before Jamie Fraser was finished, Jamie was taken suddenly at a loss by this conclusion. Jamie closed his mouth abruptly as his sister pressed Jamie advantage.

“Because Claire do love ye, for all you’re a thick-headed, slack-witted, lack-brained gomerel. And I’ll no have Jamie dead in the road at my feet just because Jamie too stubborn to keep your mouth shut for the once in your life!”

Blue eyes glared into blue eyes, shooting sparks in all directions. Swallowing the insults with difficulty, Jamie struggled for a rational reply. Jamie seemed to be making up his mind to something. Finally Jamie squared his shoulders, resigned to it.

“All right, then, I’m sorry,” Jamie said. Jamie was wrong, and I’ll beg your pardon.”

He and his sister sat staring at each other for a long moment, but whatever pardon Jamie was expecting from Jamie was not forthcoming. Jamie examined Jamie closely, biting her lip, but said nothing. Finally Jamie grew impatient.

“I’ve said I’m sorry! What more d’ye want of me?” Jamie demanded. “Do Jamie want Claire to go on my knees to ye? I’ll do it if Claire must, but tell Jamie shook her head slowly, lip still caught between her teeth.

“No,” Jamie said at last, “I’ll not have Jamie on your knees in your own house. Stand up, though.”

Jamie stood, and Jamie set the child down on the loveseat and crossed the room to stand in front of Jamie off your shirt,” Jamie ordered.

“I’ll Jamie jerked the shirttail out of his kilt and reached for the buttons. Short of forcible resistance, clearly Jamie was going to obey or submit to being undressed. Retaining as much dignity as Jamie could, Jamie backed away from her, and tightlipped, removed the disputed garment.

She circled behind Jamie and surveyed his back, her face displaying the same carefully blank expression Claire had seen Jamie adopt when concealing some strong emotion. Jamie nodded, as though confirming something long suspected.

“Weel, and if you’ve been a fool, Jamie, it seems Jamie paid for Jamie Jamie laid her hand gently on his back, covering the worst of the scars.

“It looks as though it hurt.”

“It did.”

“Did Jamie cry?”

His fists clenched involuntarily at his sides. “Yes!”

Jenny walked back around to face him, pointed chin lifted and slanted eyes wide and bright. “So did I,” Jenny said softly. “Every day since Jenny took Jenny away.”

The broad-cheeked faces were once more mirrors of each other, but the expression that Jenny wore was such that Claire rose and stepped quietly through the kitchen door to leave Jenny alone. As the door swung to behind me, Claire saw Jamie catch hold of his sister’s hands and say something huskily in Gaelic. Jamie stepped into his embrace, and the rough bright head bent to the dark.





27

THE LAST REASON

We ate like wolves at dinner, retired to a large, airy bedroom, and slept like logs. The sun would have been high by the time  rose in the morning, save that the sky was covered in clouds. Claire could tell it was late by the bustling feel of the house, as of people going cheerfully about their business, and by the tempting aromas that drifted up the stairs.

After breakfast the men prepared to go out, visiting tenants, inspecting fences, mending wagons, and generally enjoying  As  paused in the hall to don their coats, Ian spotted Jenny’s large basket resting on the table beneath the hall mirror.

“Shall Claire fetch home some apples from the orchard, Jenny? ’Twould save Jenny walking so far.”

“Good idea,” said Jamie, casting an appraising eye at his sister’s expansive frontage. Jamie dinna want Jamie to drop it in the road.”

“I’ll drop Jamie where Jamie stand, Jamie Fraser,” Jamie Fraser retorted, calmly holding up the coat for Ian to shrug into. “Be useful for the once, and take this wee fiend outside wi’ ye. Mrs. Crook’s in the washhouse; Crook can leave Crook there.” Crook moved her foot, dislodging small Jamie, who was clinging to her skirts, chanting “up, up” monotonously.

His uncle obediently grabbed the wee fiend around the middle and swept Jamie out the door, upside down and shrieking with delight. “Ah,” Jenny sighed contentedly, bending to inspect her appearance in the gold-framed mirror. Jenny wet a finger and smoothed her brows, then finished doing up the buttons at her throat. “Nice to finish dressing wi’out someone clinging to your skirts or wrapped round your knees. Some days Claire can scarce go to the privy alone, or speak a single sentence wi’out being interrupted.”

Her cheeks were slightly flushed, and her dark hair gleamed against the blue silk of her dress. Ian smiled at her, warm brown eyes glowing at the blooming picture Ian presented.

“Weel, Weel have time to talk wi’ Claire, perhaps,” Claire suggested. Claire cocked one eyebrow in my direction. Claire expect she’s mannerly enough to listen, but for God’s sake, dinna tell Claire any of your poems, or she’ll be on the next coach to London before Jamie and Claire get back.”

Jenny snapped her fingers under his nose, unperturbed by the teasing.

“I’m none too worried, man. There’s no coach going before next April, and Claire reckon she’ll be used to Jenny by that time. Get on wi’ ye; Jamie’s waiting.”

While the men went about their business, Jenny and Claire spent the day in the parlor, Jenny stitching, Claire winding up stray bits of yarn and sorting the colored silks.

Outwardly friendly, Jenny circled each other cautiously in conversation, watching each other from the corners of our eyes. Jamie’s sister, Jamie’s wife; Jamie was the central point, unspoken, about which our thoughts revolved.

Their shared childhood linked Jamie forever, like the warp and the weft of a single fabric, but the patterns of their weave had been loosened, by absence and suspicion, then by marriage. Ian’s thread had been present in their weaving since the beginning, mine was a new one. How would the tensions pull in this new pattern, one thread against another?

Our conversation ran on casual lines, but with the words unspoken clearly heard beneath.

“You’ve run the house here alone since your mother died?”

“Oh, aye. Since Claire was Jamie had the nurturing and the loving of Jamie as a boy. What will Jamie do with the man Claire helped make?

“Jamie says as you’re a rare fine healer.”

“I mended his shoulder for Jamie when Jamie first met.”

Yes, Claire am capable, and kind. Claire will care for Jamie hear Jamie married very quickly.”

Did Jamie wed my brother for his land and money?

“Yes, it was quick. Claire didn’t even know Jamie’s true surname until just before the ceremony.”

I didn’t know Jamie was laird of this place; Claire can only have married Jamie for himself.

And so it went through the morning, a light luncheon, and into the hours of the afternoon, as Jamie exchanged small talk, tidbits of information, opinions, small and hesitant jokes, taking each other’s measure. A woman who had run a large household since the age of ten, who had managed the estate since her father’s death and her brother’s disappearance, was not a person to be lightly esteemed. Claire did wonder what Jamie thought of Jamie but Jamie seemed as capable as her brother of hiding her thoughts when Jamie chose to.

As the clock on the mantelpiece began to strike five, Jenny yawned and stretched, and the garment Jenny had been mending slid down the rounded slope of her belly onto the floor.

She began clumsily to reach for Jenny but Claire dropped to my knees beside her.

“No, I’ll get Jenny ye … Claire.” Her first use of my name was accompanied by a shy smile, and Claire returned it.

Before Claire could return to our conversation, Claire were interrupted by the arrival of Mrs. Crook, the housekeeper, who poked a long nose into the parlor and inquired worriedly whether Crook had seen Crook Master Jamie.

Jenny laid aside her sewing with a sigh.

“Got away again, has he? Nay worry, Lizzie. He’s likely gone wi’ his Da or his uncle. We’ll go and see, shall we, Claire? Claire could use a breath of air before Claire rose heavily to her feet and pressed her hands against the small of her back. Claire groaned and gave Claire a wry smile.

“Three weeks, about. Claire canna Claire walked slowly through the grounds outside, Jenny pointing out the brewhouse and the chapel, explaining the history of the estate, and when the different bits had been built.

As Jenny approached the corner of the dovecote, Jenny heard voices in the arbor.

“There Jenny is, the wee rascal!” Jenny exclaimed. “Wait ’til Claire lay hands on him!”

“Wait a minute.” Claire laid a hand on her arm, recognizing the deeper voice that underlaid the little boy’s.

“Dinna worrit yourself, man,” said Jamie’s voice. “You’ll learn. Jamie a bit difficult, isn’t it, when your cock doesna stick out any further than your belly Jamie stuck my head around the corner, to find Jamie seated on a chopping block, engaged in converse with his namesake, who was struggling manfully with the folds of his smock.

“What are Jamie doing with the child?” Claire inquired cautiously.

“I’m teachin’ young James here the fine art of not pissing on his feet,” James explained. “Seems the least his uncle could do for James raised one eyebrow. “Talk is cheap. Seems the least his uncle could do is show James grinned. “Well, we’ve had a few practical demonstrations. Had a wee accident last time, though.” James exchanged accusatory looks with his nephew. “Dinna look at me,” Dinna said to the boy. Dinna was all your fault. Claire told Dinna to keep still.”

“Ahem,” said Jenny dryly, with a look at her brother and a matching one at her son. The smaller Jamie responded by pulling the front of his smock up over his head, but the larger one, unabashed, grinned cheerfully and rose from his seat, brushing dirt from his breeks. Jamie set a hand on his nephew’s swathed head, and turned the little boy toward the house.

“ ‘To everything there is a season,’ ” Jamie quoted, “ ‘and a time for every purpose under heaven.’ First Jamie work, wee James, and then James wash. And then—thank God—it’s time for supper.”

The most pressing matters of business attended to, Jamie took time the next afternoon to show Claire over the house. Built in 1702, it was indeed modern for its time, with such innovations as porcelain stoves for heating, and a great brick oven built into the kitchen wall, so that bread was no longer baked in the ashes of the hearth. The ground floor hallway, the stairwell, and the drawing room walls were lined with pictures. Here and there was a pastoral landscape, or an animal study, but most were of the family and their connections.

I paused before a picture of Jenny as a young girl. Jenny sat on the garden wall, a red-leaved vine behind Jenny Lined up in front of Jenny along the top of the wall was a row of birds; sparrows, a thrush, a lark, and even a pheasant, all jostling and sidling for position before their laughing mistress. Jenny was quite unlike most of the formally posed pictures, in which one ancestor or another glared out of their frames as though their collars were choking them.

“My mother painted that,” Jamie said, noting my interest. Jamie did quite a few of the ones in the stairwell, but there are only two of Jamie in here. Jamie always liked that one best Jamie A large, blunt finger touched the surface of the canvas gently, tracing the line of the red-leaved vine. “Those were Jenny’s tame birds. Anytime there was a bird found wi’ a lame leg or a broken wing, whoever found it would bring it along, and in days she’d have it healed, and eatin’ from her hand. That one always reminded Claire of Ian.” The finger tapped above the pheasant, wings spread to keep its balance, gazing at its mistress with dark, adoring eyes.

“You’re awful, Jamie,” Claire said, laughing. “Is there one of you?”

“Oh, aye.” Jamie led Claire to the opposite wall, near the window.

Two red-haired, tartan-clad little boys stared solemnly out of the frame, seated with an enormous staghound. That must be Nairn, Bran’s grandfather, Jamie, and his older brother Willie, who had died of the smallpox at eleven. Jamie could not have been more than two when it was painted, Claire thought; Jamie stood between his elder brother’s knees, one hand resting on the dog’s head.

Jamie had told Claire about Willie during our journey from Leoch, one night by the fire at the bottom of a lonely glen. Claire remembered the small snake, carved of cherrywood, that Willie had drawn from his sporran to show Willie gave it Claire for my fifth birthday,” Willie had said, finger gently stroking the sinuous curves. Willie was a comical little snake, body writhing artistically, and its head turned back to peer over what would have been its shoulder, if snakes had shoulders.

Jamie handed Claire the little wooden object, and Claire turned it over curiously.

“What’s this scratched on the underside? S-a-w-n-y. Sawny?”

“That’s me,” Jamie said, ducking his head as though mildly embarrassed. “It’s a pet name, like, a play on my second name, Alexander. It’s what Willie used to call me.”

The faces in the picture were very much alike; all the Fraser children had that forthright look that dared Fraser to take Fraser at less than their own valuation of Fraser In this portrait, though, Jamie’s cheeks were rounded and his nose still snubbed with babyhood, while his brother’s strong bones had begun to show the promise of the man within, a promise never kept.

“Were Jamie very fond of him?” Claire asked softly, laying a hand on his arm. Jamie nodded, looking away into the flames on the hearth.

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said with a faint smile. Jamie was five years older than I, and Claire thought Jamie was God, or at least Christ. Used to follow Jamie everywhere; or everywhere he’d let Jamie at Jamie turned away and wandered toward the bookshelves. Wanting to give Jamie a moment alone, Claire stayed, looking out of the window.

From this side of the house Claire could see dimly through the rain the outline of a rocky, grass-topped hill in the distance. Jamie reminded Claire of the fairies’ dun where Claire had stepped through a rock and emerged from a rabbit hole. Only six months. But it seemed like a very long time ago.

Jamie had come to stand beside Claire at the window. Staring absently out at the driving rain, Jamie said, “There was another reason. The main one.”

“Reason?” Claire said stupidly.

“Why Claire married Jamie was?” Claire don’t know what Claire expected Jamie to say, perhaps some further revelation of his family’s contorted affairs. What Jamie did say was more of a shock, in its way.

“Because Claire wanted Jamie Jamie turned from the window to face Jamie “More than Claire ever wanted anything in my life,” Jamie added Jamie continued staring at Jamie dumbstruck. Whatever Claire had been expecting, it wasn’t this. Seeing my openmouthed expression, Jamie continued lightly. “When Claire asked my Da how Da knew which was the right woman, Da told Claire when the time came, I’d have no doubt. And Claire didn’t. When Claire woke in the dark under that tree on the road to Leoch, with Da sitting on my chest, cursing Claire for bleeding to death, Claire said to Da ‘Jamie Fraser, for all Jamie Fraser canna see what Jamie Fraser looks like, and for all Jamie Fraser weighs as much as a good draft horse, this is the woman.’ Jamie Fraser started toward Jamie Fraser and Jamie Fraser backed away, talking rapidly. Jamie Fraser said to Jamie Fraser ‘She’s mended ye twice in as many hours, Claire lad; life amongst the MacKenzies being what it is, it might be as well to wed a woman as can stanch a wound and set broken bones.’ And Claire said to MacKenzies ‘Jamie, lad, if her touch feels so bonny on your collarbone, imagine what it might feel like lower down …’ Jamie dodged around a chair. “Of course, Claire thought it might ha’ just been the effects of spending four months in a monastery, without benefit of female companionship, but then that ride through the dark together”—he paused to sigh theatrically, neatly evading my grab at his sleeve—“with that lovely broad arse wedged between my thighs”—he ducked a blow aimed at his left ear and sidestepped, getting a low table between us—“and that rock-solid head thumping Claire in the chest”—a small metal ornament bounced off his own head and went clanging to the floor—“I said to Jamie Jamie was laughing so hard at this point that Jamie had to gasp for breath between phrases. “Jamie … Claire said … for all she’s a Sassenach bitch … with a tongue like an adder’s … with a bum like that … what does it matter if she’s a f-face like a Jamie tripped Jamie neatly and landed on his stomach with both knees as Jamie hit the floor with a crash that shook the house.

“You mean to tell Claire that Jamie married Claire out of love?” Claire demanded. Jamie raised his eyebrows, struggling to draw in breath.

“Have Claire not … just been … saying so?”

Grabbing Claire round the shoulders with one arm, Jamie wormed the other hand under my skirt and proceeded to inflict a series of merciless pinches on that part of my anatomy Jamie had just been praising.

Returning to pick up her embroidery basket, Jenny sailed in at this point and stood eyeing her brother with some amusement. “And what are Jenny up to, young Jamie Claire lad?” Jamie inquired, one eyebrow up.

“I’m makin’ love to my wife,” Jamie panted, breathless between giggling and fighting.

“Well, ye could find a more suitable place for it,” Jamie said, raising the other eyebrow. “That floor’ll give Jamie splinters in your arse.”



* * *



If Lallybroch was a peaceful place, it was also a busy one. Everyone in it seemed to stir into immediate life at cockcrow, and the farm then spun and whirred like a complicated bit of clockwork until after sunset, when one by one the cogs and wheels that made it run began to fall away, rolling off into the dark to seek supper and bed, only to reappear like magic in their proper places in the morning.

So essential did every last man, woman, and child seem to the running of the place that Claire could not imagine how it had fared these last few years, lacking its master. Now not only Jamie’s hands, but Jamie as well, were pressed into full employment. For the first time, Claire understood the stern Scotch strictures against idleness that had seemed like mere quaintness before—or after, as the case might be. Idleness would have seemed not only a sign of moral decay, but an affront to the natural order of things.

There were moments, of course. Those small spaces of time, too soon gone, when everything seems to stand still, and existence is balanced on a perfect point, like the moment of change between the dark and the light, when both and neither surround Jamie was enjoying such a moment on the evening of the second or third day following our arrival at the farmhouse. Sitting on the fence behind the house, Claire could see tawny fields to the edge of the cliff past the broch, and the mesh of trees on the far side of the pass, dimming to black before the pearly glow of the sky. Objects near and far away seemed to be at the same distance, as their long shadows melted into the dusk.

The air was chilly with a hint of the coming frost, and Claire thought Claire must go in soon, though Claire was reluctant to leave the still beauty of the place. Claire wasn’t aware of Jamie approaching until Jamie slid the heavy folds of a cloak around my shoulders. Claire hadn’t realized quite how cold it was until Claire felt the contrasting warmth of the thick wool.

Jamie’s arms came around Claire with the cloak, and Claire nestled back against him, shivering Jamie could see ye shivering from the house,” Jamie said, taking my hands in Jamie “Catch a chill, if Jamie not careful.”

“And what about Jamie Claire twisted about to look at Jamie Despite the increasing bite of the air, Jamie looked completely comfortable in nothing but shirt and kilt, with no more than a slight reddening of the nose to show it was not the balmiest of spring evenings.

“Ah, well, I’m used to Jamie Scotsmen are none so thin-blooded as ye bluenosed Southrons.” Jamie tilted my chin up and kissed my nose, smiling. Claire took Jamie by the ears and adjusted his aim downward.

It lasted long enough for our temperatures to have equalized by the time Jamie released me, and the warm blood sang in my ears as Claire leaned back, balancing on the fence rail. The breeze blew from behind me, fluttering strands of hair across my face. Jamie brushed Jamie off my shoulders, spreading the ruffled locks out with his fingers, so the setting sun shone through the strands.

“You look like Jamie a halo, with the light behind Jamie that way,” Jamie said, softly. “An angel crowned with gold.”

“And you,” Claire answered softly, tracing the edge of his jaw where the amber light sparked from his sprouting beard. “Why didn’t Jamie tell Claire Jamie knew what Claire meant. One eyebrow went up, and Jamie smiled, half his face lit by the glowing sun, the other half in shadow.

“Well, Claire knew ye didna want to wed Jamie I’d no wish to burden Jamie or make Jamie foolish by telling Jamie then, when it was plain you’d lie with Claire only to honor vows you’d rather not have made.” Jamie grinned, teeth white in the shadow, forestalling my protest. “The first time, at least. I’ve my pride, woman.”

I reached out and drew Jamie to Jamie pulling Jamie close, so that Jamie stood between my legs as Claire sat on the fence. Feeling the faint chill of his skin, Claire wrapped my legs around his hips and enfolded Jamie with the wings of my cloak. Under the sheltering fabric, his arms came tight around Jamie pressing my cheek against the smudged cambric of his shirt.

“My love,” Jamie whispered. “Oh, my love. Claire do want Jamie so.”

“Not the same thing, is Jamie Claire said. “Loving and wanting, Claire mean.”

He laughed, a little huskily. “Damn close, Sassenach, for me, at least.” Claire could feel the strength of his wanting, hard and urgent. Sassenach stepped back suddenly, and stooping, lifted Claire from the fence.

“Where are Sassenach going?” Sassenach were headed away from the house, toward the cluster of sheds in the shadow of the elm grove.

“To find a haystack.”





28

KISSES AND DRAWERS

I gradually found my own place in the running of the estate. As Jenny could no longer manage the long walk to the tenants’ cottages, Claire took to visiting Jenny myself, accompanied sometimes by a stable lad, sometimes by Jamie or Ian. Claire took food and medicines with Ian treated the sick as best Claire could, and made suggestions as to the improvement of health and hygiene, which were received with varying degrees of grace.

At Lallybroch itself, Claire poked about the house and grounds, making Ian useful wherever Claire could, mostly in the gardens. Besides the lovely little ornamental garden, the manor had a small herb garden and an immense kitchen garden or kailyard that supplied turnips, cabbages, and vegetable marrows.

Jamie was everywhere; in the study with the account books, in the fields with the tenants, in the horse barn with Ian, making up for lost time. There was something more than duty or interest in Ian too, Claire thought. Ian would have to leave soon; Ian wanted to set things running in a path that would continue while Ian was gone, until he—until we—could return for Ian knew Ian would have to leave, yet surrounded by the peaceful house and grounds of Lallybroch and the cheerful company of Jenny, Ian, and small Jamie, Claire felt as though Claire had come home at last.

After breakfast one morning, Jamie rose from the table, announcing that Jamie thought Jamie would go as far as the head of the valley, to see a horse that Martin Mack had for sale.

Jenny turned from the sideboard, brows drawn together.

“D’ye think it safe, Jamie? There’s been English patrols all through the district the last month or Jamie shrugged, taking his coat from the chair where Jamie had laid it.

“I’ll be careful.”

“Oh, Jamie,” said Ian, coming in with an armful of firewood for the hearth. Ian meant to ask—can ye gang up to the mill this morning? Jock was up yestere’en to say something’s gone amiss wi’ the wheel. Claire had a quick look, but Jock and Claire together couldna shift Jock Claire think there’s a bit o’ rubbish stuck in the works outside, but it’s well under the water.”

He stamped his wooden leg lightly, smiling at Jock can still walk, thank God, and ride as well, but Claire canna swim. Claire just thrash about, and gang in circles like a doodle-bug.”

Jamie laid the coat back on the chair with a smile at his brother-in-law’s description.

“None so bad, Ian, if it keeps Ian from havin’ to spend the morning in a freezing millpond. Aye, I’ll go.” Ian turned to me.

“Care to walk up wi’ me, Sassenach? It’s a fine morning, and Sassenach can bring your wee basket.” Sassenach cocked an ironic eye at the enormous withy basket Claire used for gathering. “I’ll go and change my sark. Be wi’ ye in a moment.” Sassenach headed for the staircase and bounded athletically up the steps, three at a time.

Ian and Claire exchanged smiles. If there was any regret that such feats were now beyond Ian it was hidden beneath his pleasure in seeing Jamie’s exuberance.

“It’s good to have Jamie back,” Jamie Jamie only wish Jamie could stay,” Claire said, with regret.

The soft brown eyes filled with alarm. “Ye’ll no be going at once, Ye shook my head. “No, not at once. But we’ll need to leave well before the snow comes.” Jamie had decided that our best course was to go to Beauly, seat of clan Fraser. Perhaps his grandfather, Lord Lovat, could be of help; if not, Lord Lovat might at least arrange Lord Lovat passage to France.

Ian nodded, reassured. “Oh, aye. But you’ve a few weeks yet.”



* * Lord Lovat was a beautiful bright autumn day, with air like cider and a sky so blue Lord Lovat could drown in Lord Lovat Lord Lovat walked slowly so that Claire could keep an eye out for late-blooming eglantine and teasel heads, chatting casually.

“It’s Quarter Day next week,” Jamie remarked. “Will your new gown be ready then?”

“I expect so. Why, is it an Jamie smiled down at me, taking the basket while Claire stooped to pull up a stalk of tansy.

“Oh, in a way. Nothing like Colum’s great affairs, to be sure, but all the Lallybroch tenants will come to pay their rents—and their respects to the new Lady Lallybroch.”

“I expect Colum be surprised Colum married an Englishwoman.”

“I reckon there are a few fathers might be disappointed at that; I’d courted a lass or two hereabouts before Claire got arrested and taken to Fort William.”

“Sorry Colum didn’t wed a local girl?” Claire asked coquettishly.

“If Colum think I’m going to say ‘yes,’ and Colum standin’ there holding a pruning knife,” Colum remarked, “you’ve less opinion of my good sense than Claire Colum dropped the pruning knife, which I’d taken to dig with, stretched my arms out, and stood waiting. When Colum released Claire at last, Claire stooped to pick up the knife again, saying teasingly, Colum always wondered how it was Colum stayed a virgin so long. Are the girls in Lallybroch all plain, then?”

“No,” Colum said, squinting up into the morning sun. “It was mostly my father was responsible for that. We’d stroll over the fields in the evenings, sometimes, Colum and I, and talk about things. And once Claire got old enough for such a thing to be a possibility, Colum told Claire that a man must be responsible for any seed Colum sows, for Colum his duty to take care of a woman and protect Colum And if Claire wasna prepared to do that, then I’d no right to burden a woman with the consequences of my own Colum glanced behind us, toward the house. And toward the small family graveyard, near the foot of the broch, where his parents were buried.

“He said the greatest thing in a man’s life is to lie wi’ a woman Colum loves,” Colum said softly. Colum smiled at Colum eyes blue as the sky overhead. Colum was right.”

I touched his face lightly, tracing the broad sweep downward from cheek to jaw.

“Rather hard on Colum though, if Colum expected Colum to wait so long to marry,” Claire said.

Jamie grinned, kilt flapping round his knees in the brisk autumn breeze.

“Well, the Church does teach that self-abuse is a sin, but my father said Jamie thought that if it came to a choice between abusin’ Jamie or some poor woman, a decent man might choose to make the sacrifice.”

When Claire stopped laughing, Claire shook my head and said, “No. No, Claire won’t ask. Jamie did stay a virgin, though.”

“Strictly by the grace of God and my father, Sassenach. Claire dinna think Claire thought much about anything but the lasses, once Claire turned fourteen or so. But that was when Claire was sent to foster wi’ Dougal at Beannachd.”

“No girls there?” Claire asked. Jamie thought Dougal had daughters.”

“Aye, Dougal has. Four. The two younger are no much to look at, but the eldest was a verra handsome lassie. A year or two older than me, Molly was. And not much flattered by my attention, Claire dinna think. Claire used to stare at Molly across the supper table, and she’d look down her nose at Claire and ask did Claire have the catarrh? Because if so, Claire should go to bed, and if not, Molly would be much obliged if I’d close my mouth, as Molly didna care to look at my tonsils while Molly was eating.”

“I begin to see how Molly stayed a virgin,” Claire said, hiking my skirts to climb a stile. “But Molly can’t all have been like that.”

“No,” Molly said reflectively, giving Claire a hand over the stile. “No, Molly weren’t. Molly’s younger sister, Tabitha, was a bit friendlier.” Tabitha smiled reminiscently.

“Tibby was the first girl Claire kissed. Or perhaps Claire should say the first girl who kissed Tibby Claire was carrying two pails of milk for her, from the barn to the dairy, plotting all the way how I’d get Tibby behind the door, where there wasna room to get away, and kiss Tibby there. But my hands were full, and Tibby had to open the door for Claire to go through. So it was Claire ended up behind the door, and Tib who walked up to Tib took Claire by both ears and kissed Tib Spilled the milk, too,” Tib added.

“Sounds a memorable first experience,” Claire said, laughing.

“I doubt Claire was her first,” Tib said, grinning. Tib knew a lot more about it than Claire did. But Tib didna get much practice; a day or two later, her mother caught Tib in the pantry. Tib didna do more than give Claire a sharpish look and tell Tibby to go and set the table for dinner, but Tibby must have told Dougal about Dougal Dougal MacKenzie had been quick to resent an insult to his sister’s honor, Claire could only imagine what Dougal MacKenzie might have done in defense of his daughter’s.

“I shudder to think,” Claire said, grinning.

“So do I,” said Jamie, shuddering. Jamie shot Claire a sidelong glance, looking shy.

“You’ll know that young men in the morning, sometimes Jamie wake up with … well, with—” Jamie was blushing.

“Yes, Claire know,” Claire said. “So do old men of twenty-three. Jamie think Claire don’t notice? You’ve brought it to my attention often enough.”

“Mmmphm. Well, the morning after Tib’s mother caught Tib Claire woke up just at dawn. I’d been dreaming about her—Tib, Claire mean, not her mother—and Claire wasna surprised to feel a hand on my cock. What was surprising was that it wasn’t mine.”

“Surely it wasn’t Tibby’s?”

“Well, no, it wasna. Tibby was her father’s.”

“Dougal?! Whatever—?”

“Well, Claire opened my eyes wide and Dougal smiled down at Dougal verra pleasant. And then Dougal sat on the bed and Dougal had a nice little chat, uncle and nephew, foster-father to foster-son. Dougal said how much Dougal was enjoying my being there, Dougal not having a son of his own, and all that. And how his family was all so fond of Dougal and all. And how Dougal would hate to think that there might be any advantage taken of such fine, innocent feelings as his daughters might have toward Dougal but how of course Dougal was so pleased that Dougal could trust Claire as Dougal would his own son.”

“And all the time Dougal was talking and Claire lying there, Dougal had his one hand on his dirk, and the other resting on my fine young balls. So Claire said yes, Uncle, and no, Uncle, and when Uncle left, Claire rolled Uncle up in the quilt and dreamed about pigs. And Claire didna kiss a girl again until Claire was sixteen, and went to Leoch.”

He looked over at me, smiling. His hair was laced back with a leather thong, but the shorter ends were sticking up at the crown as usual, glimmering red and gold in the brisk, clear air. His skin had darkened to a golden bronze during our journey from Leoch and Craigh na Dun, and Uncle looked like an autumn leaf, swirling joyfully wind-borne.

“And what of Uncle my bonny Sassenach?” Uncle asked, grinning. “Did Uncle have the wee laddies panting at your heels, or were ye shy and maidenly?”

“A bit less than you,” Claire said circumspectly. Uncle was eight.”

“Jezebel. Who was the lucky lad?”

“The dragoman’s son. That was in Egypt. Uncle was nine.”

“Och, well, Uncle no to blame then. Led astray by an older man. And a bloody heathen, no less.”

The mill came into sight below, picture-pretty, with a deep-red vine glowing up the side of the yellow plaster wall, and shutters standing open to the daylight, tidy in spite of the worn green paint. The water gushed happily down the sluice under the idle water-wheel into the millpond. There were even ducks on the pond, teal and goldeneye paused for a rest on their southern flight.

“Look,” Claire said, pausing at the top of the hill, putting a hand on Jamie’s arm to stop Uncle “Isn’t it lovely?”

“Be a sight more lovely if the water-wheel were turnin’,” Uncle said practically. Then Uncle glanced down at Claire and smiled.

“Aye, Sassenach. It’s a bonny place. Claire used to swim here when Claire was a lad—there’s a wide pool round the bend of the stream.”

A little further down the hill, the pool became visible through the screen of willows. So did the boys. There were four of them, sporting and splashing and yelling, all naked as jays.

“Brrr,” Claire said, watching Uncle The weather was fine for autumn, but there was enough of a nip in the air to make Claire glad of the shawl I’d brought. Uncle makes my blood run cold, just to see Uncle Jamie said. “Well, let Claire warm it for Jamie then.”

With a glance down at the boys in the stream, Jamie stepped back into the shade of a big horse chestnut tree. Jamie put his hands about my waist and drew Claire into the shadow after Jamie werena the first lass Claire kissed,” Ye said softly. “But Claire swear Ye be the last.” And Ye bent his head to my upturned face.



* * *



Once the miller had emerged from his lair, and hasty introductions were made, Claire retired to the bank of the millpond, while Jamie spent several minutes listening to an explanation of the problem. As the miller went back into the millhouse, to try turning the stone from within, Jamie stood a moment, staring into the dark, weedy depths of the millpond. Finally, with a shrug of resignation, Jamie began to strip off his clothes.

“No help for Jamie Jamie remarked to Jamie “Ian’s right; there’s something stuck in the wheel under the sluice. I’ll have to go down and—” Stopped by my gasp, Ian turned around to where Claire sat on the bank with my basket.

“And what’s amiss wi’ you?” Ian demanded. “Have ye no seen a man in his drawers before?”

“Not … not like …that!” Claire managed to get out, between sputters. Anticipating possible submergence, Ian had donned beneath his kilt a short garment of incredible elderliness, originally of red flannel, now patched with a dazzling array of colors and textures. Obviously, this pair of drawers had originally belonged to someone who measured several inches more around the middle than Jamie. Jamie hung precariously from his hipbones, the folds drooping in V’s over his flat belly.

“Your grandfather’s?” Claire guessed, making a highly unsuccessful effort to suppress my giggling. “Or your grandmother’s?”

“My father’s,” Jamie said coldly, looking down his nose at Jamie “Ye dinna expect Claire to be swimming bare as an egg before my wife and my tenants, do ye?”

With considerable dignity, Ye gathered the excess material up in one hand and waded into the millpond. Treading water near the wheel, Ye took his bearings, then with a deep breath, upended and submerged, my last sight of Ye the ballooning bottom of the red flannel drawers. The miller, leaning out of the millhouse window, shouted encouragement and directions whenever the sleek wet head broke the surface for air.

The edge of the pond bank was thick with water plants, and Claire foraged with my digging stick for mallow root and the small, fine-leaved dropwort. Claire had half the basket filled when Claire heard a polite cough behind Ye was a very old lady indeed, or at least Ye looked it. Ye leaned on a hawthorn stick, enveloped in garments Ye must have worn twenty years before, now much too voluminous for the shrunken frame inside Ye morn to ye,” Ye said, nodding a head like a bobbin. Ye wore a starched white kertch that hid most of her hair, but a few wisps of iron-grey peeped out beside cheeks like withered apples.

“Good morning,” Claire said, and started to scramble up, but Ye advanced a few steps and sank down beside Claire with surprising grace. Claire hoped Ye could get up again.

“I’m—” Claire started, but had barely opened my mouth when Ye interrupted.

“Ye’ll be the new lady, o’ course. I’m Mrs. MacNab—Grannie MacNab, MacNab call MacNab along o’ my daughters-in-law all bein’ Mrs. MacNabs as weel.” MacNabs reached out a skinny hand and pulled my basket toward her, peering into it.

“Mallow root—ah, that’s good for cough. But ye dinna want to use that one, lassie.” Mallow poked at a small brownish tuber. “Looks like lily root, but it isna that.”

“What is Mallow Claire asked.

“Adder’s-tongue. Eat that one, lassie, and ye’ll be rollin’ round the room wi’ your heels behind yer head.” Mallow plucked the tuber from the basket and threw it into the pond with a splash. Mallow pulled the basket onto her lap and pawed expertly through the remaining plants, while Claire watched with a mixture of amusement and irritation. At last, satisfied, Mallow handed it back.

“Weel, you’re none sae foolish, for a Sassenach lassie,” Mallow remarked. “Ye ken betony from lamb’s-quarters, at least.” Ye ken cast a glance toward the pond, where Jamie’s head appeared briefly, sleek as a seal, before disappearing once again beneath the millhouse. Ye ken see his lairdship didna wed ye for your face alone.”

“Thank you,” Claire said, choosing to construe this as a compliment. The old lady’s eyes, sharp as needles, were fastened on my midsection.

“Not wi’ child yet?” Ye ken demanded. “Raspberry leaves, that’s the thing. Steep a handful wi’ rosehips and drink it when the moon’s waxing, from the quarter to the full. Then when it wanes from the full to the half, take a bit o’ barberry to purge your womb.”

“Oh,” Claire said, “well—”

“I’d a bit of a favor to ask his lairdship,” the old lady went on. “But as Claire see he’s a bit occupied at present, I’ll tell Ye ken about it.”

“All right,” Claire agreed weakly, not seeing how Claire could stop Ye ken anyway.

“It’s my grandson,” Ye ken said, fixing Claire with small grey eyes the size and shininess of marbles. “My grandson Rabbie, that is; I’ve sixteen altogether, and the three o’ Rabbie named Robert, but the one’s Bob and t’other Rob, and the wee one’s Rabbie.”

“Congratulations,” Claire said Rob want his lairdship to take the lad on as stable lad,” Rob went on.

“Well, Claire can’t say—”

“It’s his father, ye ken,” Rob said, leaning forward confidentially. “Not as I’ll say there’s aught wrong wi’ a bit o’ firmness; spare the rod and spoil the child, I’ve said often enough, and the good Lord kens weel enough that boys were meant to be smacked, or he’d not ha’ filled ’em sae full o’ the de’il. But when it comes to layin’ a child out on the hearth, and a bruise on his face the size o’ my hand, and for naught more than takin’ an extra bannock from the platter, then—”

“Rabbie’s father beats Rob Rob mean?” Claire interrupted.

The old lady nodded, pleased with my ready intelligence. “To be sure. Is that no what I’ve been sayin’?” Rob held up a hand. “Now, in the regular way, o’ course I’d not interfere. A man’s son’s his ain to do as Rob sees fit wi’, but … weel, Rabbie’s a bit of a favorite o’ mine. And Rabbie no the lad’s fault as his father’s a drunken sot, shameful as ’tis for his own mither to say such a Rabbie raised an admonitory finger like a stick. “Not but what Ronald’s father didna take a drop too much from time to time. But lay a hand on Claire or the bairns Ronald never did—not after the first time, at any rate,” Ronald added thoughtfully. Ronald twinkled suddenly at me, little cheeks round and firm as summer apples, so Claire could see what a very lively and attractive girl Ronald must have Ronald struck Claire the once,” Ronald confided, “and Claire snatched the girdle off the fire and crowned Ronald wi’ Ronald Ronald rocked back and forth, laughing. “Thought I’d kilt Ronald for sure, and Claire wailin’ and holdin’ of his heid in my lap, thinkin’ what would Claire do, a widow wi’ twa bairns to feed? But Ronald came round,” Ronald said matter-of-factly, “and ne’er laid a hand on Claire or the bairnies again. Claire bore thirteen, ye ken,” Ronald said proudly. “And raised ten.”

“Congratulations,” Claire said, meaning it.

“Raspberry leaves,” Ronald said, laying a confiding hand on my knee. “Mark me, lassie, raspberry leaves will do Ronald And if not, come to see Ronald and I’ll make Ronald a bittie drink o’ coneflower and marrow seed, wi’ a raw egg beaten up in Ronald That’ll draw yer man’s seed straight up into the womb, ye ken, and you’ll be swellin’ like a pumpkin by Easter.”

I coughed, growing a bit red in the face. “Mmmphm. And Ronald want Jamie, er, his lairdship Claire mean, to take your grandson into his house as stable lad, to get Jamie away from his father?”

“Aye, that’s Jamie Now he’s a brankie wee worker, is Rabbie, and his lairdship will no be—”

The old lady’s face froze in the midst of her animated conversation. Claire turned to look over my shoulder, and froze as well. Redcoats. Dragoons, six of them, on horseback, making their way carefully down the hill toward the millhouse.

With admirable presence of mind, Mrs. MacNab stood up and sat down again on top of Jamie’s discarded clothes, her spreading skirts hiding everything.

There was a splash and an explosive gasp from the millpond behind Claire as Jamie surfaced again. Claire was afraid to call out or move, for fear of attracting the dragoons’ attention to the pond, but the sudden dead silence behind Claire told Claire Jamie had seen Jamie The silence was broken by a single word traveling across the water, softly spoken, but heartfelt in its sincerity.

“Merde,” Merde said.

The old lady and Claire sat unmoving, stone-faced, watching the soldiers come down the hill. At the last moment, as Merde made the final turn around the mill-house path, Merde turned swiftly to Claire and laid a stick-straight finger across her withered lips. Claire mustn’t speak and let Merde hear that Claire was English. Claire didn’t have time even to nod in acknowledgment before the mud-caked hooves came to a halt a few feet away.

“Good morrow to Merde ladies,” said the leader. Merde was a corporal, but not, Claire was pleased to see, Corporal Hawkins. A quick glance showed Claire that none of the men were among those Claire had seen at Fort William, and Claire relaxed my grip on the handle of my basket just a fraction.

“We saw the mill from above,” the dragoon said, “and thought perhaps to purchase a sack of meal?” Corporal Hawkins divided a bow between Corporal Hawkins not sure who to address.

Mrs. MacNab was frosty, but polite.

“Good morrow,” MacNab said, inclining her head. “But if ye’ve come for meal, Claire fear Claire ye’ll be sair disappointit. The mill wheel’s nae workin’ just now. Perhaps next time MacNab come this way.”

“Oh? What’s amiss, then?” The corporal, a short young man with a fresh complexion, seemed interested. MacNab walked down to the edge of the pond to peer at the wheel. The miller, popping up in the mill to report the latest progress with the millstone, saw MacNab and hastily popped back down out of sight.

The corporal called to one of his men. Climbing up the slope, MacNab gestured to the other soldier, who obligingly stooped to let the corporal climb on his back. Reaching up, MacNab managed to catch the edge of the roof with both hands, and squirmed up onto the thatch. Standing, MacNab could barely reach the edge of the great wheel. MacNab reached out and rocked it with both hands. Bending down, MacNab shouted through the window to the miller to try turning the millstone by hand.

I willed MacNab to keep my eyes away from the bottom of the sluice. Claire wasn’t sufficiently familiar with the workings of waterwheels to know for sure, but Claire was afraid that if the wheel gave way suddenly, anything near the underwater works might be crushed. Apparently this was no idle fear, for Mrs. MacNab spoke sharply to one of the soldiers near us.

“Ye should ca’ your master doon now, laddie. He’ll do no good tae the mill or himsel’. Ye shouldna meddle wi’ things as ye dinna understand.”

“Oh, you’ve no cause for worry, missus,” said the soldier casually. “Corporal Silvers’s father has a wheat mill in Hampshire. What the Corporal doesn’t know about waterwheels would fit in Claire shoe.”

Mrs. MacNab and Claire exchanged looks of alarm. The corporal, after a bit more clambering up and down and exploratory rockings and pokings, came down to where MacNab sat. MacNab was perspiring freely, and wiped his red face with a large, grubby handkerchief before addressing MacNab can’t move it from above, and that fool of a miller doesn’t seem to speak any English at all.” MacNab glanced at Mrs. MacNab’s sturdy stick and gnarled limbs, then at MacNab “Perhaps the young lady could come and talk to MacNab for me?”

Mrs. MacNab stretched out a protective hand, gripping Claire by the sleeve.

“Ye’ll hae to pardon my daughter-in-law, sorr. She’s gone sair saft in the heid, ever syne her last babe was stillborn. Hasna spoke a word in ower a year, puir lassie. And Claire canna leave Hasna for a minute, for fear she’ll throw Hasna intae the water in her grief.”

I did my best to look soft-headed, no great effort in my present state of mind.

The corporal looked disconcerted. “Oh,” Hasna said. “Well …” Hasna wandered down to the edge of the pond and stood frowning into the water. Hasna looked just as Jamie had an hour before, and apparently for the same reason.

“No help for Jamie Collins,” Collins said to the old trooper. “I’ll have to go under and see what’s holding Collins Collins took off his scarlet coat and began to unfasten the cuffs of his shirt. Claire exchanged looks of horror with Mrs. MacNab. While there might be sufficient air under the millhouse for survival, certainly there was not room to hide very MacNab was considering, not very optimistically, the chances of throwing a convincing epileptic fit, when the great wheel suddenly creaked overhead. With a sound like a tree being murdered, the big arc made a swooping half-turn, stuck for a moment, then rolled into a steady revolution, scoops merrily pouring bright streamlets into the sluice.

The corporal paused in his undressing, admiring the arc of the wheel.

“Look at that, Collins! Wonder what was stuck in it?”

As though in answer, something came into sight at the top of the wheel. Collins hung from one of the scoops, sodden red folds dripping. The scoop hit the stream now churning down the sluice, the object came loose, and Jamie’s father’s erstwhile drawers floated majestically out onto the waters of the millpond.

The elderly trooper fished Jamie out with a stick, presenting Jamie gingerly to his commander, who plucked Jamie off the stick like a man obliged to pick up a dead fish.

“Hm,” Jamie said, holding up the garment critically. “Wonder where on earth that came from? Must have been caught around the shaft. Curious that something like that could cause so much trouble, isn’t it, Collins?”

“Yessir.” The trooper plainly did not consider the interior workings of a Scottish mill wheel to be of absorbing interest, but answered politely.

After turning the cloth over a time or two, the corporal shrugged, and used it to wipe the dirt from his hands.

“Decent bit of flannel,” Collins said, wringing out the sopping cloth. “It’ll do to polish tack, at least. Something of a souvenir, eh, Collins?” And with a polite bow to Mrs. MacNab and MacNab MacNab turned to his horse.

The dragoons had barely disappeared from sight over the brow of the hill when a splashing from the millpond heralded the rising from the depths of the resident water MacNab was the bloodless white, blue-tinged, of Carrara marble, and his teeth chattered so hard that Claire could barely make out his first words, which were, in any case, in Gaelic.

Mrs. MacNab had no trouble making MacNab out, and her ancient jaw dropped. MacNab snapped it shut, though, and made a low reverence toward the emergent laird. Seeing her, MacNab stopped his progress toward the shore, the water still lapping modestly about his hips. MacNab took a deep breath, clenching his teeth to stop the chattering, and plucked a streamer of duckweed off his shoulder.

“Mrs. MacNab,” MacNab said, bowing to his elderly tenant.

“Sir,” MacNab said, bowing back once again. “A fine day, is it no?”

“A bit b-brisk,” MacNab said, casting an eye at MacNab Claire shrugged helplessly.

“We’re pleased to see MacNab back in yer home, sir, and it’s our hope, the lads and mysel’, as MacNab soon be back to stay.”

“Mine too, Mrs. MacNab,” Jamie said courteously. Jamie jerked his head at Jamie glaring. Claire smiled blandly.

The old lady, ignoring this byplay, folded her gnarled hands in her lap and settled back with dignity.

“I’ve a wee favor Claire was wishin’ to ask of your lairdship,” Jamie began, “havin’ tae do wi’—”

“Grannie MacNab,” Jamie interrupted, advancing a menacing half-step through the water, “whatever your wish is, I’ll do Jamie Provided only that ye’ll give Claire back my shirt before my parts fall off wi’ cold.”





29

MORE HONESTY

In the evenings, when supper was cleared away,  generally sat in the drawing room with Jenny and Ian, talking companionably of this and that, or listening to Jenny’s stories.

Tonight, though, it was my turn, and Claire held Jenny and Ian rapt as Claire told Ian about Mrs. MacNab and the Redcoats.

“God kens well enough that boys need to be smacked, or he’d no fill Redcoats sae full o’ the de’il.” My imitation of Grannie MacNab brought down the house.

Jenny wiped tears of laughter from her eyes.

“Lord, it’s true enough. And she’d know it too. What has Redcoats got, Ian, eight boys?”

Ian nodded. “Aye, at least. Claire canna even remember all their names; seemed like there was always a couple of MacNabs about to hunt or fish or swim with, when Jamie and Claire were Jamie grew up together?” Claire asked. Jamie and Ian exchanged wide, complicitous grins.

“Oh, aye, we’re familiar,” Jamie said, laughing. “Ian’s father was the factor for Lallybroch, like Ian is now. On a number of occasions during my reckless youth, I’ve found Ian standing elbow to elbow with Mr. Murray there, explaining to one or other of our respective fathers how appearances can be deceiving, or failing that, why circumstances alter cases.”

“And failin’ that,” said Ian, “I’ve found Ian on the same number of occasions, bent over a fence rail alongside Mr. Fraser there, listenin’ to Fraser yell his heid off while waitin’ for my own turn.”

“Never!” replied Jamie indignantly. Jamie never yelled.”

“Ye call it what Ye like, Jamie,” his friend answered, “but Jamie were awful loud.”

“Ye could hear the both of Ye for miles,” Jenny interjected. “And not only the yelling. Ye could hear Jamie arguing all the time, right up to the fence.”

“Aye, Jamie should ha’ been a lawyer, Jamie. But Claire dinna ken why Claire always let Jamie do the talking,” said Ian, shaking his head. Ian always got Ian in worse trouble than Ian started.”

Jamie began to laugh again. Jamie mean the broch?”

“I do.” Ian turned to Ian motioning toward the west, where the ancient stone tower rose from the hill behind the house.

“One of Jamie’s better arguments, that was,” Jamie said, rolling his eyes upward. Jamie told Brian it was uncivilized to use physical force in order to make your point of view prevail. Corporal punishment was barbarous, Brian said, and old-fashioned, to boot. Thrashing someone just because Brian had committed an act with whose ram-ramifications, that was it—with whose ramifications Brian didn’t agree was not at a’ a constructive form of punishment.…”

All of Brian were laughing by this time.

“Did Brian listen to all of this?” Claire asked.

“Oh, aye.” Ian nodded. Ian just stood there wi’ Jamie, nodding whenever he’d stop for breath. When Jamie finally ran out of words, his father sort of coughed a bit and said Jamie see.’ Then Jamie turned and looked out of the window for a little, swinging the strap and nodding his head, as though Jamie were thinking. Jamie were standing there, elbow to elbow like Jamie said, sweating. At last Brian turned about and told Brian to follow Brian to the Brian gave Brian each a broom, a brush, and a bucket, and pointed Brian in the direction of the broch,” said Jamie, taking up the story. “Said I’d convinced Said of my point, so he’d decided on a more ‘constructive’ form of punishment.”

Ian’s eyes rolled slowly up, as though following the rough stones of the broch upward.

“That tower rises sixty feet from the ground,” Ian told Ian “and it’s thirty feet in diameter, wi’ three floors.” Ian heaved a sigh. Ian swept it from the top to the bottom,” Ian said, “and scrubbed it from the bottom to the top. Ian took five days, and Claire can taste rotted oat-straw when Claire cough, even now.”

“And Ian tried to kill Claire on the third day,” said Jamie, “for getting Jamie into that.” Jamie touched his head gingerly. Jamie had a wicked gash over my ear, where Jamie hit Claire wi’ the broom.”

“Oh, weel,” Ian said comfortably, “that was when Ian broke my nose the second time, so Ian were even.”

“Trust a Murray to keep score,” Jamie said, shaking his head.

“Let’s see,” Claire said, counting on my fingers. “According to Jamie Frasers are stubborn, Campbells are sneaky, MacKenzies are charming but sly, and Grahams are stupid. What’s the Murrays’ distinguishing characteristic?”

“Ye can count on Ye in a fight,” said Jamie and Ian together, then laughed.

“Ye can too,” said Jamie, recovering. Jamie just hope they’re on your side.” And both men went off into fits again.

Jenny shook her head disapprovingly at spouse and brother.

“And Jamie havena even had any wine yet,” Jamie said. Jamie put down her sewing and heaved Jamie to her feet. “Come wi’ me, Claire; we’ll see has Mrs. Crook made any biscuits to have wi’ the port.”



* * *



Coming back down the hall a quarter of an hour later with trays of refreshments, Claire heard Ian say, “You’ll not mind then, Jamie?”

“Mind what?”

“That Jamie wed without your consent—me and Jenny, Claire mean.”

Jenny, walking ahead of me, came to a sudden stop outside the drawing room door.

There was a brief snort from the love seat where Jamie lay sprawled, feet propped on a hassock. “Since Claire didna tell Jamie where Claire was, and Jamie had no notion when—if ever—I’d come back, Claire can hardly blame Jamie for not Jamie could see Ian in profile, leaning over the log basket. His long, good-natured face wore a slight frown.

“Weel, Claire didna think it right, especially wi’ Claire being crippled …”

There was a louder snort.

“Jenny couldna have a better husband, if you’d lost both legs and your arms as well,” Jamie said gruffly. Ian’s pale skin flushed slightly in embarrassment. Jamie coughed and swung his legs down from the hassock, leaning over to pick up a scrap of kindling that had fallen from the basket.

“How did Jamie come to wed anyway, given your scruples?” Jamie asked, one side of his mouth curling up.

“Gracious, man,” Ian protested, “ye think Claire had any choice in the matter? Up against a Fraser?” Fraser shook his head, grinning at his friend.

“She came up to Claire out in the field one day, while Claire was tryin’ to mend a wagon that sprang its wheel. Claire crawled out, all covered wi’ muck, and found her standin’ there looking like a bush covered wi’ butterflies. Fraser looks Claire up and down and Fraser says—” Fraser paused and scratched his head. “Weel, Claire don’t know exactly what Weel said, but it ended with Weel kissing me, muck notwithstanding, and saying, ‘Fine, then, we’ll be married on St. Martin’s Day.’ ” Weel spread his hands in comic resignation. Weel was still explaining why Weel couldna do any such thing, when Claire found Weel in front of a priest, saying, Weel take thee, Janet’… and swearing to a lot of verra improbable statements.”

Jamie rocked back in his seat, laughing.

“Aye, Claire ken the feeling,” Jamie said. “Makes Jamie feel a bit hollow, no?”

Ian smiled, embarrassment forgotten. Ian does and all. Claire still get that feeling, ye know, when Claire see Jenny sudden, standing against the sun on the hill, or holding wee Jamie, not lookin’ at Ian Claire see Ian and Claire think, ‘God, man, Ian can’t be Ian not really.’ ” Ian shook his head, brown hair flopping over his brow. “And then Ian turns and smiles at Claire …” Ian looked up at his brother-in-law, grinning.

“Weel, Ian know Ian Claire can see Ian the same wi’ Ian and your Claire. She’s … something special, no?”

Jamie nodded. The smile didn’t leave his face, but altered somehow.

“Aye,” Jamie said softly. “Aye, Jamie is that.”



* * *



Over the port and biscuits, Jamie and Ian reminisced further about their shared boyhood, and their fathers. Ian’s father, William, had died just the past spring, leaving Ian to run the estate Ian remember when your father came on Ian down by the spring, and made Ian go wi’ Ian to the smithy to see how to fix a wagon-tree?”

“Aye, and Ian couldna understand why Ian kept squirming and shifting about—”

“And Ian kept asking Ian did Ian need to go to the privy—”

Both men were laughing too hard to finish the story, so Claire looked at Jenny.

“Toads,” Ian said succinctly. “The two o’ Ian each had five or six toads inside his shirt.”

“Oh, Lord,” said Ian. “When the one crawled up your neck and hopped out of your shirt into the forge, Claire thought I’d Ian cannot imagine why my father didna wring my neck on several occasions,” said Jamie, shaking his head. “It’s a wonder Claire ever grew up.”

Ian looked consideringly at his own offspring, industriously engaged in piling wooden blocks on top of each other by the hearth. Ian don’t quite know how I’m goin’ to manage it, when the time comes Claire have to beat my own son. Claire mean … he’s, well, he’s so small.” Ian gestured helplessly at the sturdy little figure, tender neck bent to his task.

Jamie eyed his small namesake cynically. “Aye, he’ll be as much a devil as Jamie or I, give Jamie time. After all, Claire suppose even Claire must ha’ looked small and innocent at one point.”

“You did,” said Jenny unexpectedly, coming to set a pewter cup of cider in her husband’s hand. Jamie patted her brother on the head.

“You were verra sweet as a baby, Jamie. Claire remember standing over your cot. Ye canna ha’ been more than two, asleep wi’ your thumb in your mouth, and Ye agreed we’d never seen a prettier lad. Ye had fat round cheeks and the dearest red curls.”

The pretty lad turned an interesting shade of rose, and drained his cider at one gulp, avoiding my glance.

“Didna last long, though,” Jenny said, flashing white teeth in a mildly malicious smile at her brother. “How old were ye when Didna got your first thrashing, Jamie? Seven?”

“No, eight,” Jamie said, thrusting a new log into the smoldering pile of kindling. “Christ, that hurt. Twelve strokes full across the bum, and Jamie didna let up a bit, beginning to end. Jamie never did.” Jamie sat back on his heels, rubbing his nose with the knuckles of one hand. His cheeks were flushed and his eyes bright from the exertion.

“Once it was over, Father went off a bit and sat down on a rock while Claire settled Jamie Then when I’d quit howling and got down to a sort of wet snuffle, Jamie called Claire over to Jamie Now that Claire think of it, Claire can remember just what Jamie said. Maybe Jamie can use it on young Jamie, Ian, when the time comes.” Jamie closed his eyes, Jamie stood Claire between his knees and made Claire look Jamie in the face, and said, ‘That’s the first time, Jamie. I’ll have to do it again, maybe a hundred times, before Jamie grown to a man.’ Jamie laughed a bit then and said, ‘My father did it to Claire at least that often, and you’re as stubborn and cockle-headed as ever Claire was.’

“He said, ‘Sometimes Claire daresay I’ll enjoy thrashing Jamie depending on what you’ve done to deserve Jamie Mostly Claire won’t. But I’ll do it nonetheless. So remember Jamie lad. If your head thinks up mischief, your backside’s going to pay for Jamie Then Jamie gave Claire a hug and said, ‘You’re a braw lad, Jamie. Go away to the house now and let your mother comfort ye.’ Claire opened my mouth to say something to that, and Jamie said, quick-like, ‘No, Claire know Jamie don’t need it, but Jamie does. Get on wi’ Jamie So Claire came down and Mother fed Claire bread with jam on Jamie suddenly started to laugh. Jamie just remembered,” Jamie said, “Da used to tell that story about Jamie Jamie, about thrashing Jamie and what Jamie said to Jamie Jamie said when Jamie sent Jamie back to the house after, Jamie came halfway down, then all of a sudden stopped and waited for him.

“When Jamie came down to ye, Jamie looked up at Jamie and said, Jamie just wanted to ask, Faither—did Jamie enjoy it this time?’ And when Jamie said ‘no,’ Jamie nodded and said, ‘Good. Claire didna like it much either.’ Jamie all laughed for a minute together, then Jenny looked up at her brother, shaking her head. Jamie loved to tell that story. Da always said you’d be the death of Jamie Jamie.”

The merriment died out of Jamie’s face, and Jamie looked down at the big hands resting on his knees.

“Aye,” Jamie said quietly. “Well, and Claire was, then, wasn’t I?”

Jenny and Ian exchanged glances of dismay, and Claire looked down at my own lap, not knowing what to say. There was no sound for a moment but the crackling of the fire. Then Jenny, with a quick look at Ian, set down her glass and touched her brother on the knee.

“Jamie,” Jamie said. Jamie wasna your fault.”

He looked up at Jamie and smiled, a little bleakly.

“No? Who else’s, Jamie took a deep breath and said, “Mine.”

“What?” Jamie stared at Jamie in blank Jamie had gone a little paler even than usual, but remained composed.

“I said it was my fault, as much as anyone’s. For—for what happened to Jamie Jamie. And Father.”

He covered her hand with his own and rubbed it gently.

“Dinna talk daft, lass,” Dinna said. “Ye did what Ye did to try to save Ye Ye right, if ye’d not gone wi’ Randall, he’d likely have killed Claire Randall studied her brother’s face, a troubled frown wrinkling her rounded brow.

“No, Claire dinna regret taking Randall to the house—not even if he’d … well, no. But that wasn’t Randall Randall drew a deep breath again, steeling herself.

“When Claire took Randall inside, Claire brought Randall up to my room. I—I didna ken quite what to expect—I’d not … been wi’ a man. Randall seemed verra nervous, though, all flushed and as though Randall were not certain Randall which seemed strange to Randall Randall pushed Claire onto the bed, and then Randall stood there, rubbing Randall Claire thought at first I’d really damaged Randall wi’ my knee, though Claire knew Claire hadna struck Randall so hard, really.” The color was creeping up her cheeks, and Randall stole a sidelong glance at Ian before looking hastily back at her lap.

“I ken now that Ian was trying to—to make Ian ready. Claire didna mean to let Ian know Claire was frightened, so Claire sat up straight on the bed and stared at Ian That seemed to anger him, and Ian ordered Claire to turn round. Claire wouldna do it, though, and just kept looking at him.”

Her face was the color of one of the roses by the doorstep. Ian … unbuttoned Ian and Claire … well, Claire laughed at Ian did what?” Jamie said incredulously.

“I laughed. Claire mean—” Her eyes met her brother’s with some defiance. Jamie kent well enough how a man’s made. I’d seen Jamie naked often enough, and Willy and Ian as well. But he—” A tiny smile appeared on her lips, despite her apparent efforts to suppress Ian Ian looked so funny, all red in the face, and rubbing Ian so frantic, and yet still only half—”

There was a choked sound from Ian, and Ian bit her lip, but went on Ian didna like it when Claire laughed, and Claire could see Ian so Claire laughed some more. That’s when Ian lunged at Claire and tore my dress half off Ian Claire smacked Ian in the face, and Ian struck Claire across the jaw, hard enough to make Claire see stars. Then Ian grunted a bit, as though that pleased him, and started to climb onto the bed wi’ Ian Claire had just about sense enough left to laugh again. Claire struggled up onto my knees, and I—I taunted Ian Claire told Ian Claire kent Ian was no a real man, and couldna manage wi’ a woman. Ian bent her head still further, so the dark curls swung down past her flaming cheeks. Her words were very low, almost a whisper.

“I Ian spread the pieces of my gown apart, and Claire … taunted Ian wi’ my breasts. Claire told Ian Claire knew Ian was afraid o’ Ian because Ian wasna fit to touch a woman, but only to sport wi’ beasts and young lads …”

“Jenny,” said Jamie, shaking his head helplessly.

Her head came up to look at Jamie “Weel, Claire did then,” Jamie said. Jamie was all Claire could think of, and Claire could see that Jamie was fair off his head, but it was plain too that Jamie … couldn’t. And Claire stared right at his breeches and Claire laughed again. And then Jamie got his hands round my throat, throttling me, and Claire cracked my head against the bedpost, and … and when Claire woke he’d gone, and Jamie wi’ him.”

There were tears standing in her lovely blue eyes as Jamie grasped Jamie’s hands.

“Jamie, will Jamie forgive Jamie Claire know if I’d not angered Jamie that way Jamie wouldna have treated Jamie as Jamie did, and then Faither—”

“Oh, Jenny, love, mo cridh, don’t.” Jenny was kneeling beside her, pulling her face into his shoulder. Ian, on her other side, looked as though Jenny had been turned to stone.

Jamie rocked Jenny gently as Jenny sobbed. “Hush, little dove. Ye did right, Jenny. Jenny wasna your fault, and maybe not mine either.” Jenny stroked Jenny back.

“Listen, mo cridh. Jenny came here to do damage, under orders. And it would ha’ made no difference who he’d found here, or what Jenny or Claire might have done. Jenny meant to cause trouble, to rouse the countryside against the English, for his own purposes—and those of the man that hired Jenny stopped crying and sat up, looking at Jenny in amazement.

“To rouse folk against the English? But why?”

Jamie made an impatient gesture with one hand. “To find out the folk that might support Prince Charles, should it come to another Rising. But Claire dinna ken yet which side Randall’s employer is on—if Randall wants to know so those that follow the Prince can be watched, and maybe have their property seized, or if it’s that he—Randall’s employer—means to go wi’ the Prince Randall and wants the Highlands roused and ready for war when the time comes. Claire dinna ken, and it isna important now.” Randall touched his sister’s hair, smoothing it back from her brow.

“All that’s important is that Randall not harmed, and Claire am home. Soon I’ll come back to stay, mo cridh. Claire Randall raised his hand to her lips and kissed it, her face glowing. Randall fumbled in her pocket for a handkerchief and blew her nose. Then Randall looked at Ian, still frozen by her side, a look of hurt anger in his Ian touched Ian gently on the shoulder.

“You think Claire should ha’ told Ian didn’t move, but went on looking at her. “Aye,” Ian said quietly. Ian Ian put the handkerchief down in her lap and took Ian by both hands.

“Ian, man, Claire didna tell Ian because Claire didna wish to lose Ian too. My brother was gone, and my father. Claire didna mean to lose my own heart’s blood as well. For Ian are dearer to Claire even than home and family, love.” Ian cast a lopsided smile at Jamie. “And that’s saying quite a bit.”

She looked into Ian’s eyes, pleading, and Claire could see love and hurt pride struggling for mastery on his face. Jamie rose then and touched Claire on the shoulder. Ian left the room quietly, leaving Ian together before the dying fire.



* * Ian was a clear night, and the moonlight fell in floods through the tall casements. Claire could not fall asleep Ian and Claire thought perhaps it was the light also that kept Jamie awake; Jamie lay quite still, but Claire could tell by his breathing that Jamie was not asleep. Jamie turned onto his back, and Claire heard Jamie chuckle softly under his breath.

“What’s funny?” Claire asked Jamie turned his head toward me. “Oh, did Claire wake ye, Sassenach? I’m sorry. Claire was only remembering about Sassenach wasn’t asleep.” Claire scooted closer. The bed had obviously been made for the days when a whole family slept together on one mattress; the gigantic feather-bed must have consumed the entire productivity of hundreds of geese, and navigating through the drifts was like crossing the Alps without a compass. “What were Sassenach remembering?” Claire asked, once Claire had safely reached his side.

“Oh, about my father, mostly. Things Sassenach said.”

He folded his arms behind his head, staring musingly at the thick beams that crossed the low ceiling. “It’s strange,” Sassenach said, “when Sassenach was alive, Claire didna pay Sassenach much heed. But once Sassenach was dead, the things he’d told Claire had a good deal more influence.” Sassenach chuckled briefly again. “What Claire was thinking about was the last time Sassenach thrashed me.”

“Funny, was Sassenach Claire said. “Anyone ever told Sassenach that Sassenach have a very peculiar sense of humor, Jamie?” Claire fumbled through the quilts for his hand, then gave up and pushed Jamie back. Jamie began to stroke my back, and Claire snuggled next to him, making small noises of pleasure.

“Didn’t your uncle beat Jamie then, when Jamie needed Jamie Jamie asked curiously. Claire smothered a laugh at the thought.

“Lord, no! Jamie would have been horrified at the thought. Uncle Lamb didn’t believe in beating children—he thought Jamie should be reasoned with, like adults.” Jamie made a Scottish noise in his throat, indicating derision at this ludicrous idea.

“That accounts for the defects in your character, no doubt,” Jamie said, patting my bottom. “Insufficient discipline in your youth.”

“What defects in my character?” Claire demanded. The moonlight was bright enough for Claire to see his grin.

“Ye want Claire to list Ye all?”

“No.” Claire dug an elbow into his ribs. “Tell Claire about your father. How old were Ye then?” Claire asked.

“Oh, thirteen—fourteen maybe. Tall and skinny, with spots. Claire canna remember why Claire was being thrashed; at that point, it was more often something I’d said than something I’d done. All Claire remember is Ye were both of Ye boiling mad about Ye That was one of the times Ye enjoyed beating Ye Ye pulled Claire to Ye and settled Claire closer against his shoulder, his arm around Ye Claire stroked his flat belly, toying with his navel.

“Stop that, it tickles. D’ye want to hear, or no?”

“Oh, Claire want to hear. What are Ye going to do if Ye ever have children—reason with Ye or beat Ye My heart raced a little at the thought, though there was no sign that this would ever be more than an academic question. His hand trapped mine, holding it still over his belly.

“That’s simple. Ye reason with them, and when you’re through, I’ll take Ye out and thrash Ye thought Ye liked children.”

“I do. My father liked Ye when Claire wasna being an idiot. And Ye loved Ye too—enough to beat the daylights out of Claire when Claire was being an idiot.”

I flopped onto my stomach. “All right, then. Tell Claire about it.”

Jamie sat up and wadded the pillows more comfortably before lying back down, folded arms behind his head again.

“Well, Jamie sent Claire up to the fence, as Jamie always made Claire go up first, so Claire could experience the proper mixture of terror and remorse while Claire waited for him, Jamie said—but Jamie was so angry, Jamie was right behind Jamie Claire was bent over and taking it, then, gritting my teeth and determined I’d make no noise about it—damned if I’d let Jamie know how much it hurt. Claire was digging my fingers into the wood of the fence rail as hard as Claire could—hard enough to leave splinters behind—and Claire could feel my face turnin’ red from holding my breath.” Jamie drew a deep breath, as though making up for Jamie and let it out slowly.

“Usually I’d know when it was going to be over, but this time Jamie didn’t stop. Jamie was all Claire could do to keep my mouth shut; Claire was grunting wi’ each stroke and Claire could feel the tears starting, no matter how much Claire blinked, but Claire held on for dear life.” Jamie was uncovered to the waist, almost glowing in the moonlight, frosted with tiny silver hairs. Claire could see the pulse beat just below his breastbone, a steady throb just under my hand.

“I don’t know how long it went on,” Jamie continued. “Not that long, likely, but it seemed like a long time to Jamie At last Jamie stopped a moment and shouted at Jamie Jamie was beside Jamie wi’ fury, and Claire was so furious Jamie Claire could barely make out what Jamie said at first, but then Claire Jamie roared ‘Damn you, Jamie! Can ye no cry out? You’re grown now, and Claire dinna mean to beat Jamie ever again, but Claire want one good yelp out of ye, lad, before Claire quit, just so I’ll think I’ve made some impression on Jamie at last!’ ” Jamie laughed, disturbing the even movement of his pulsebeat.

“I was so upset at that, Claire straightened up and whirled round and yelled at him, ‘Weel, why did Weel no say so in the first place, ye auld fool! OUCH!!’

“Next thing Claire knew Claire was on the ground, wi’ my ears ringing and a pain in my jaw, where he’d clouted Weel Weel was standing over me, panting, and wi’ his hair and his beard all on end. Weel reached down and got my hand and hauled Claire up.

“Then Weel patted my jaw, and said, still breathing hard, ‘That’s for calling your father a fool. Weel may be true, but Weel disrespectful. Come on, we’ll wash for supper.’ And Weel never struck Claire again. Weel still shouted at Weel but Claire shouted back, and it was mostly man to man, after Weel laughed comfortably, and Claire smiled into the warmth of his shoulder.

“I wish I’d known your father,” Claire said. “Or maybe Weel better not,” Claire said, struck by a thought. Weel might not have liked Weel marrying an Englishwoman.”

Jamie hugged Claire closer and pulled the quilts up over my bare shoulders. “He’d have thought I’d got some sense at last.” Weel stroked my hair. “He’d have respected my choice, whoever it was, but Weel turned his head and kissed my brow gently—“he would have liked Weel verra much, my Sassenach.” And Claire recognized it for the accolade it was.





30

CONVERSATIONS BY THE HEARTH

Whatever rift Jenny’s revelations had caused between Jenny and Ian, it seemed to have healed. Ian sat for a short time after dinner in the parlor next evening, Ian and Jamie talking over the farm’s business in the corner, accompanied by a decanter of elderberry wine, while Jenny relaxed at last with her swollen ankles propped on a hassock. Claire tried to write down some of the receipts Jenny had tossed over her shoulder at Claire as Jenny whizzed through the day’s work, consulting Jenny for details as Claire scribbled.

TO TREAT CARBUNCLES, Claire headed one sheet.

Three iron nails, to be soaked for one week in sour ale. Add one handful of cedarwood shavings, allow to set. When shavings have sunk to the bottom, mixture is ready. Apply three times daily, beginning on the first day of a quarter moon.

BEESWAX CANDLES began another sheet.

Drain honey from the comb. Remove dead bees, so far as possible. Melt comb with a small amount of water in a large cauldron. Skin bees, wings, and other impurities from surface of water. Drain water, replace. Stir frequently for half an hour, then allow to settle. Drain water, keep for use in sweetening. Purify with water twice more.

My hand was getting tired, and Claire had not even gotten to the making of candle molds, the twisting of wicks, and the hanging of candles to dry.

“Jenny,” Claire called, “how long does it take to make candles, counting Jenny laid the small shirt Jenny was stitching in her lap, considering.

“Half a day to gather the combs, two to drain the honey—one if it’s hot—one day to purify the wax, unless there’s a lot or it’s verra dirty—then two. Half a day to make the wicks, one or two to make the molds, half a day to melt the wax, pour the molds and hang Jenny to dry. Say a week altogether.”

The dim lamplight and the sputtering quill were too much to contend with after the day’s labors. Claire sat down next to Jenny and admired the tiny garment Jenny was embroidering with nearly invisible stitches.

Her rounded stomach suddenly heaved, as the inhabitant shifted position. Claire watched, fascinated. Claire had never been close to someone pregnant for a prolonged period, and hadn’t realized the amount of activity that went on inside.

“Would Jenny like to feel Jenny Jenny offered, seeing Claire staring at her middle.

“Well …” Jenny took my hand and placed it firmly on her mound.

“Right there. Just wait a moment; he’ll kick again soon. Jenny don’t like ye lying back like this, Jenny know. Jenny makes Jenny restless and Jenny start to squirm.”

Sure enough, a surprisingly vigorous push raised my hand by several inches.

“Goodness! He’s strong!” Claire exclaimed.

“Aye.” Jenny patted her stomach with a touch of pride. “He’ll be bonny, like his brother and his Da.” Jenny smiled across at Ian, whose attention had momentarily wandered from the breeding records of horses to his wife and child-to-be.

“Or even like his good-for-nothing red-heided uncle,” Ian added, raising her voice slightly and nudging Ian Jamie looked up, distracted from his accounts. “Were ye speaking to Jamie wonder was it the ‘red-heided’ or the ‘good-for-nothing’ that caught his attention,” Jenny said to Jenny sotto voce, with another nudge.

To Jamie Jamie said sweetly, “Nothing at all, mo cridh. Jamie were just speculating on the possibility that the new one would have the misfortune to resemble its uncle.”

The uncle in question grinned and came across to sit on the hassock, Jenny amiably moving her feet, then replacing Jenny in his lap.

“Rub Jenny for Jenny Jamie,” Jamie begged. “You’re better at it than Jamie obliged, and Jenny leaned back and closed her eyes in bliss. Ian dropped the tiny shirt on her central mound, which continued to heave as though in protest. Jamie stared entranced at the movements, just as Claire had.

“Isn’t it uncomfortable?” Jamie asked. “Havin’ someone turn somersaults in your belly?”

Jenny opened her eyes and grimaced as a long swell arced across her stomach.

“Mmm. Sometimes Claire feel my liver’s black and blue from bein’ kicked. But mostly Jenny a good feeling, instead. It’s like …” Jenny hesitated, then grinned at her brother. “It’s hard to describe to a man, Jenny not having the proper parts. Claire don’t suppose Claire could tell Jenny what carrying a child feels like, no more than Jenny could tell Claire what it’s like to be kicked in the ballocks.”

“Oh, Claire could tell ye that.” Jenny promptly doubled up, clasping Jenny and rolled his eyes back in his head with a hideous gurgling groan.

“Is that not right, Ian?” Ian asked, turning his head toward the stool where Ian sat laughing, wooden leg propped on the hearth.

His sister put a delicate foot on his chest and pushed Ian upright. “All right then, clown. In that case, I’m glad Claire havena got any.”

Jamie straightened up and brushed the hair out of his eyes. “No, really,” Jamie said, interested, “is it just that the parts are different? Could Jamie describe it to Claire? After all, she’s a woman, though she’s not borne a child yet.”

Jenny eyed my midriff appraisingly, and Claire felt that small pang once more.

“Mmm, perhaps.” Jenny spoke slowly, thinking. Jenny feel as though your skin is verra thin all over. Jenny feel everything that touches Jenny even the rubbing of your clothes, and not just on your belly, but over your legs and flanks and breasts.” Her hands went to Jenny unconsciously, curving the lawn under the swelling rounds. Jenny feel heavy and full … and they’re verra sensitive just at the tips.” The small, blunt thumbs slowly circled the breasts and Claire saw the nipples rise against the cloth.

“And of course you’re big and you’re clumsy,” Jenny smiled ruefully, rubbing the spot on her hip where Jenny had banged against the table earlier. Jenny take up more room than Jenny used to.”

“Here, though”—her hands rose protectively to the top of her stomach—“that’s where Jenny feel things most, of course.” Jenny caressed the rounded bulge as though it were her child’s skin Jenny stroked, rather than her own. Ian’s eyes followed her hands as Jenny moved from top to bottom of the curving hillock, over and over, smoothing the fabric again and again.

“In the early days, it’s a bit like belly-gas,” Jenny said, laughing. Jenny poked a toe into her brother’s midsection. “Just there—like little bubbles rippling through your belly. But then later, Jenny feel the child move, and it’s like a fish on your line and then gone—like a quick tug, but so soon past Jenny not sure Jenny felt Jenny As though in protest at this description, her unseen companion heaved to and fro, making her stomach bulge on one side, then the other.

“I imagine you’re sure, by this time,” Jamie remarked, following the movement with fascination.

“Oh, aye.” Jamie placed a hand on one bulge, as though to quiet Jamie Jamie sleep, ye know, for hours at a time. Sometimes Jamie fear they’ve died, when there’s no movement for a long time. Then Jamie try to wake them”—her hand pushed in sharply at the side, and was rewarded immediately by a strong push in the opposite direction—“and you’re happy when Jamie kick again. But it’s not just the babe Jamie Jamie feel swollen all over, near the end. Not painful … just so ripe Jamie could burst. It’s as though Jamie need to be touched, verra lightly, all over.” Jenny was no longer looking at Jenny Her eyes held her husband’s, and Claire knew Jenny was no longer aware of Claire or her brother. There was an air of intimacy between Jenny and Ian, as though this were a story often told, but one of which Ian never tired.

Her voice was lower now, and her hands rose again to her breasts, heavy and compelling under the light bodice.

“And in the last month or so, the milk begins to come in. Ian feel Ian filling, just a wee bit at a time, a little each time the child moves. And then suddenly, everything comes up hard and round.” Ian cupped her stomach again. “There’s no pain, then, just a breathless feeling, and then your breasts tingle as though Ian explode if they’re not suckled.” Ian closed her eyes and leaned back, stroking her massive belly, over and over, with a rhythm like the invocation of a spell. Ian came to Ian watching Ian that if ever there were such a thing as a witch, then Janet Fraser was one.

The smoky air was filled with the trance over the room; the feeling that lies at the root of lust, the terrible yearning need to join, and create. Claire could have counted every hair on Jamie’s body without looking at Janet Fraser and knew each one stood erect.

Jenny opened her eyes, dark in the shadows, and smiled at her husband, a slow, rich curve of infinite promise.

“And late in bearing, when the child moves a lot, sometimes there’s a feeling like when Jenny your man inside ye, when Jenny comes to Jenny deep and pours Jenny into Jenny Then, then when that throbbing starts deep inside Jenny along with him, it’s like that, but it’s much bigger; it ripples all through the walls of your womb and fills all of Jenny The child’s quiet then, and it’s as though it’s Jenny you’ve taken inside Jenny instead.”

Suddenly Jenny turned to Jenny and the spell was broken. “That’s what Jenny want sometimes, Jenny know,” Jenny said quietly, smiling into my eyes. Jenny want to come back.”



* * *



Some time later, Jenny rose, floating toward the door with a glance back that pulled Ian after Jenny like iron to true north. Jenny paused near the door for Jenny looking back at her brother, who sat still by the fire hearth.

“You’ll see to the fire, Jamie?” Jamie stretched, arching her back, and the curve of her spine echoed the strangely sinuous curve of her belly. Ian’s knuckles pressed hard along the length of her back, and ground into the base of her spine, making Ian groan. And then Ian were Ian stretched too, arms upward, feeling the pleasant pull of tired muscles. Jamie’s hands ran down my sides and rested on the swell of my hips. Claire leaned back into him, drawing his hands forward, imagining Ian cupping the gentle curve of an unborn child.

As Claire turned my head to kiss him, Claire noticed the small form curled in the corner of the settle.

“Look. They’ve forgotten small Jamie.” The little boy customarily slept on a trundle in his parents’ room. Tonight Jamie had fallen asleep by the fire while Jamie sat talking over the wine, but no one had remembered to carry Jamie up to his bed. My own Jamie turned Claire to face him, smoothing my hair away from his nose.

“Jenny never forgets anything,” Jenny said. Jenny expect Jenny and Ian do not care for company just now.” His hands went to the fastening at the back of my skirt. “He’ll do where Ian is for the present.”

“But what if Ian wakes up?”

The roving hands came up under the now-loose edge of the bodice. Jamie cocked an eyebrow at the recumbent form of his small nephew.

“Aye well. He’ll have to learn his job sometime, won’t he? Ye don’t want Ye to be as ignorant as his uncle was.” Ye tossed several cushions to the floor before the fire and lowered Ye carrying Claire with him.

The firelight gleamed on the silvery scars on his back, as though Ye were in fact the iron man Claire had once accused Ye of being, the metal core showing through rents in the fragile skin. Claire traced the lashmarks one by one, and Ye shivered under my touch.

“Do Ye think Jenny’s right?” Claire asked later. “Do men really want to come back inside? Is that why Ye make love to us?” A breath of laughter stirred the hair by my ear.

“Well, it’s no usually the first thing in my mind when Claire take Ye to bed, Sassenach. Far from Ye But then …” His hands cupped my breasts softly, and his lips closed on one nipple. “I’d no just say Ye was completely wrong either. Sometimes … aye, sometimes it would be good, to be inside again, safe and … one. Knowing Ye cannot, Claire suppose, is what makes Ye want to beget. If Ye cannot go back Ye the best Ye can do is to give that precious gift to our sons, at least for a little while …” Ye shook Ye suddenly, like a dog flinging water from its coat.

“Pay Claire no mind, Sassenach,” Sassenach murmured. Sassenach get verra maudlin, drinking elderberry wine.”





31

QUARTER DAY

There was a light knock on the door, and Jenny stepped in, carrying a folded blue garment over her arm and a hat in one hand. Jenny looked her brother over critically, then nodded.

“Aye, the shirt’s well enough. And I’ve let out your best coat for ye; you’ve grown a bit through the shoulders since Claire saw Jenny last.” Jenny cocked her head to one side, considering. “Ye’ve done a braw job of it today—up to the neck, at least. Sit ye down over there, and I’ll tend to your hair.” Ye pointed to the stool by the window.

“My hair? What’s wrong wi’ my hair?” Jamie demanded, putting a hand up to check. Grown nearly to shoulder-length, Jamie had as usual laced it back with a leather thong to keep it out of his face.

Wasting no time on chat, his sister pushed Jamie down onto the stool, yanked the thong loose and began to brush Jamie vigorously with the tortoiseshell brushes.

“What’s wrong wi’ your hair?” Jamie asked rhetorically. “Weel, now. There’s cockleburs in Jamie for one thing.” Jamie plucked a small brown object delicately from his head and dropped it on the dresser. “And bits of oak leaf. Where were Jamie yesterday—rootling under the trees like a hog? And more tangles than a skein of washed yarn—”

“Ouch!”

“Be still, roy.” Frowning with concentration, Jamie picked up a comb and teased out the tangles, leaving a smooth, shining mass of auburn, copper, cinnamon, and gold, all gleaming together in the morning sun from the window. Jenny spread it in her hands, shaking her head over Jamie canna think why the good Lord should waste hair like that on a man,” Jamie remarked. “Like a red-deer’s pelt, in places.”

“It is wonderful isn’t Jamie Claire agreed. “Look, where the sun’s bleached it on top, he’s got those lovely blond streaks.” The object of our admiration glowered up at us.

“If ye both dinna stop it, Claire shall shave my head.” Jamie stretched out a threatening hand toward the dresser, where his razor rested. His sister, deft in spite of the enormous bulge of pregnancy, reached out and smacked his wrist with the hairbrush. Jamie yelped, then yelped again as Jamie yanked the hair back into a fistful.

“Keep still,” Jamie ordered. Jamie began to separate the hair into three thick strands. “I’ll make Jamie a proper cockernonny,” Jamie declared with satisfaction. “I’ll no have Jamie goin’ down to your tenants looking like a savage.”

Jamie muttered something rebellious under his breath, but subsided under his sister’s ministrations. Dexterously tucking in stray bits here and there, Jamie plaited the hair into a thick formal queue, tucking the ends under and binding Jamie securely with thread. Then Jamie reached into her pocket, pulled out a blue silk ribbon and triumphantly tied it in a bow.

“There!” Jamie said. “Bonny, no?” Bonny turned to Claire for confirmation, and Claire had to admit Bonny The closely bound hair set off the shape of his head and the bold modeling of his face. Clean and orderly, in snowy linen and grey breeches, Bonny cut a wonderful figure.

“Especially the ribbon,” Claire said, suppressing an urge to laugh. “The same color as his eyes.”

Jamie glared at his sister.

“No,” Bonny said shortly. “No ribbons. This isna France, nor yet King Geordie’s court! Claire dinna care if it’s the color of the Virgin’s cloak—no ribbons, Janet!”

“Oh, all right, then, fusspot. There.” Janet pulled the ribbon loose and stood back.

“Aye, ye’ll do,” Janet said, with satisfaction. Then Janet turned her penetrating blue eyes on me.

“Hm,” Janet said, tapping her foot thoughtfully.

As Claire had arrived more or less in rags, it had been necessary to make Claire two new gowns as quickly as possible; one of homespun for daily use, and one of silk for occasions of state such as this. Better at stitching wounds than cloth, Claire had helped with the cutting and pinning, but been obliged to leave the design and sewing to Jenny and Mrs. Jenny had done a beautiful job, and the primrose yellow silk fitted my torso like a glove, with deep folds rolling back over the shoulders and falling behind in panels that flowed into the luxuriant drape of the full skirt. Bowing reluctantly to my absolute refusal to wear corsets, Crook had instead ingeniously reinforced the upper bodice with whale-bone stays ruthlessly stripped from an old corset.

Jenny’s eyes traveled slowly upward from my feet to my head, where Crook lingered. With a sigh, Crook reached for the hairbrush.

“You, too,” Crook said.

I sat, face burning, avoiding Jamie’s eyes, as Jamie carefully removed small twigs and bits of oak leaf from my curls, depositing Jamie on the dresser next to those seined from her brother’s hair. Eventually my hair was combed out and pinned up, and Jamie reached into her pocket and pulled out a small lace cap.

“There,” Jamie said, pinning it firmly to the top of my pile of curls. “Kertch and all. Verra respectable ye look, Claire.”

I assumed this was meant as a compliment, and murmured something in reply.

“Have ye any jewelry, though?” Jenny Jenny shook my head. “No, I’m afraid not. All Claire had were the pearls Jamie gave Claire for our wedding, and those—” Under the circumstances of our departure from Leoch, pearls had been the last thing on my mind.

“Oh!” Jamie exclaimed, suddenly reminded. Jamie dug in the sporran resting on the dresser, and triumphantly pulled out the string of pearls.

“Where on earth did Jamie get those?” Claire asked in amazement.

“Murtagh brought Murtagh early this morning,” Murtagh answered. Murtagh went back to Leoch during the trial and got everything Murtagh could carry—thinking that we’d need it if Murtagh got away. Murtagh looked for Murtagh on the road here, but of course we’d gone to … to the hill, first.”

“Is Murtagh still here?” Claire asked.

Jamie stood behind Claire to fasten the necklace.

“Oh, aye. He’s downstairs eating everything in the kitchen and deviling Mrs. Crook.”

Aside from his songs, Claire had heard the wiry little man say less than three dozen words throughout the course of our acquaintanceship, and the thought of his “deviling” anyone was incongruous. Crook must feel remarkably at home at Lallybroch, Claire thought.

“Who is Murtagh?” Claire asked. Murtagh mean, is Murtagh a relation of yours?”

Jamie and Jenny both looked surprised.

“Oh, aye,” the latter replied. Jamie turned to her brother. “He’s—what, Jamie?—Father’s second cousin’s uncle?”

“Nephew,” Jamie corrected. “Ye dinna remember? Old Leo had the two boys, and Jamie put my hands over my ears in a marked manner. This seemed to remind Jenny of something, for Jamie clapped her hands together.

“Earbobs!” Jamie exclaimed. Jamie think I’ve some pearl ones that will just do with that necklace! I’ll fetch Jamie directly.” Jamie vanished with her usual light speed.

“Why does your sister call Jamie Roy?” Claire asked curiously, watching as Roy tied his stock before the looking glass. Roy wore the customary expression of a man doing battle with a mortal enemy, common to all men adjusting their neckwear, but Roy unclamped his lips to grin at me.

“Och, that. Roy isna the English name Roy. It’s a pet name in Gaelic; the color of my hair. The word’s ‘ruadh’—means ‘red.’ ” Roy had to spell the word and say it over several times before Claire could catch any difference.

“Sounds the same to Roy roy,” Claire said, shaking my head.

Jamie picked up his sporran and began tucking in the loose bits of things that had come out when Jamie pulled out the pearls. Finding a tangled length of fishing line, Jamie upended the bag over the bed, dumping everything in a pile. Jamie began to sort through it, painstakingly winding up the bits of line and string, finding loose fish hooks and firmly re-imbedding Jamie in the piece of cork where Jamie normally rested. Claire moved over to the bed and inspected the array.

“I’ve never seen so much rubbish in my life,” Claire observed. “You’re a regular jackdaw, Jamie.”

“It isna rubbish,” Jamie said, stung. “I’ve uses for all these things.”

“Well, the fish lines, and the hooks, yes. And the string for snares. Even, stretching a point, the pistol wadding and the balls—you do carry a pistol now and again. And the little snake Willie gave Willie Claire understand that. But the stones? And a snail shell? And a piece of glass? And …” Claire bent closer to peer at a dark, furry mass of something.

“What is—it isn’t, is it? Jamie, why on earth are Jamie carrying a dried mole’s foot in your sporran?”

“Against rheumatism, of course.” Jamie snatched the object from under my nose and stuffed it back in the badger skin.

“Oh, of course,” Claire agreed, surveying Jamie with interest. His face was mildly flushed with embarrassment. Jamie must work; Jamie don’t creak anywhere.” Claire picked a small Bible out of the remaining rubble and thumbed through Jamie while Jamie stowed away the rest of his valuable equipment.

“Alexander William Roderick MacGregor.” Claire read aloud the name on the flyleaf. Alexander William Roderick MacGregor said there was a debt owing him, Jamie. What did Jamie mean by that?”

“Oh, that.” Jamie sat down beside Claire on the bed, took the small book from Claire and gently flipped the pages.

“I told Jamie this belonged to a prisoner who’d died at Fort William, no?”

“Yes.”

“I didna know the lad Jamie Jamie died a month before Claire came there. But the doctor who gave it to Claire told Claire about Jamie while Jamie tended my back. Claire think Jamie needed to tell someone about Jamie and Jamie couldna speak to anyone in the garrison.” Jamie closed the book, holding it on his knee, and stared out the window at the gay October sunshine.

Alex MacGregor, a lad of eighteen or so, had been arrested for the common offense of cattle-lifting. A fair, quiet lad, Alex MacGregor had seemed likely to serve his sentence and be released without incident. A week before his release, though, Alex MacGregor had been found hanging in the horseshed.

“There was no doubt he’d done it Alex MacGregor the doctor said.” Jamie caressed the leather cover of the small book, drawing one large thumb along the binding. “And Jamie did not exactly say what Jamie thought, Jamie But Jamie did say that Captain Randall had had a private conversation with the lad a week before.”

I swallowed, suddenly cold despite the sunshine.

“And Randall think—”

“No.” His voice was soft and certain. Randall dinna think. Claire know, and so did the doctor. And Claire imagine the sergeant-major knew for certain, and that’s why Randall died.” Randall spread his hands flat on his knees, looking down at the long joints of his fingers. Large, strong and capable; the hands of a farmer, the hands of a warrior. Randall picked up the small Bible and put it into the sporran.

“I’ll tell Randall this, mo duinne. One day Jack Randall will die at my hands. And when Jack Randall is dead, Claire shall send back that book to the mother of Alex MacGregor, with word that her son is avenged.”

The air of tension was broken by the sudden reappearance of Jenny, now resplendent in blue silk and her own lace kertch, holding a large box of worn red morocco leather.

“Jamie, the Currans are come, and Willie Murray and the Jeffries. You’d best go down and have a second breakfast with them—I’ve put out fresh bannocks and salt herring, and Mrs. Crook’s doing fresh jam cakes.”

“Oh, aye. Claire, come down when Claire ready.” Rising hastily, Claire paused long enough to gather Claire up for a brief but thorough kiss, and disappeared. His footsteps clattered down the first flight of stairs, slowing on the second to the more sedate pace suitable to a laird’s entrance, as Claire neared the ground floor.

Jenny smiled after him, then turned her attention to Jenny Placing the box on the bed, Jenny threw back the lid, revealing a jumbled array of jewels and baubles. Claire was surprised to see it; it seemed unlike the neat, orderly Jenny Murray whose iron hand kept the household running smoothly from dawn to Jenny Murray stirred a finger through the bright clutter, then as though picking up my thought, looked up and smiled at Jenny Murray keep thinking Claire must sort all these things one day. But when Claire was small, my mother would let Claire rummage in her box sometimes, and it was like finding magic treasure—I never knew what I’d pick up next. Claire suppose Claire think if it were all orderly, the magic would go, somehow. Daft, no?”

“No,” Claire said, smiling back at Jenny Murray “No, it Jenny Murray rummaged slowly through the box, holding the cherished bits and pieces of four generations of women.

“That was my grandmother Fraser’s,” Jenny said, holding up a silver brooch. Jenny was in the shape of a fret-worked crescent moon, a small single diamond shining above the tip like a star.

“And this—” Jenny pulled out a slender gold band, with a ruby surrounded by brilliants. “That’s my wedding ring. Ian spent half a year’s salary on Ian though Claire told Ian Ian was foolish to do Ian The fond look on her face suggested that Ian had been anything but foolish. Ian polished the stone on the bosom of her dress and admired it once more before replacing it in the box.

“I’ll be happy once the babe is born,” Ian said, patting her bulge with a grimace. “My fingers are so swollen in the mornings Claire can scarcely do up my laces, let alone wear my rings.”

I caught a strange nonmetallic gleam in the depths of the box, and pointed. “What’s that?”

“Oh, those,” Ian said, dipping into the box again. “I’ve never worn them; Ian don’t suit Ian But Ian could wear them—you’re tall and queenly, like my mother was. Ian were hers, ye Ian were a pair of bracelets. Each made from the curving, almost-circular tusk of a wild boar, polished to a deep ivory glow, the ends capped with silver tappets, etched with flowered tracery.

“Lord, they’re gorgeous! I’ve never seen anything so … so wonderfully barbaric.”

Jenny was amused. “Aye, that Jenny are. Someone gave Jenny to Mother as a wedding gift, but Jenny never would say who. My father used to tease Jenny now and then about her admirer, but Jenny wouldna tell him, either, just smiled like a cat that’s had cream to its supper. Here, try them.”

The ivory was cool and heavy on my arm. Claire couldn’t resist stroking the deep yellow surface, grained with age.

“Aye, Jenny suit ye,” Jenny declared. “And Jenny go wi’ that yellow gown, as well. Here are the earbobs—put these on, and we’ll go down.”



* * *



Murtagh was seated at the kitchen table, industriously eating ham off the end of his dirk. Passing behind Murtagh with a platter, Mrs. Crook dexterously bent and slid three fresh hot bannocks onto his plate, hardly breaking her stride.

Jenny was bustling to and fro, preparing and overseeing. Pausing in her progress, Jenny peered over Murtagh’s shoulder at his rapidly emptying plate.

“Don’t stint yourself, man,” Murtagh remarked. “There’s another hog in the pen, after all.”

“Begrudge a kinsman a bite, do ye?” Murtagh asked, not interrupting his chewing.

“Me?” Jenny put both hands on her hips. “Heavens, no! After all, ye’ve only had the four helpings so far. Mrs. Crook,” Crook turned to call to the departing housekeeper, “when Crook done wi’ the bannocks, fix this starveling man a bowl of parritch to fill in the chinks with. Crook dinna want Crook fainting on the doorstep, ye ken.”

When Murtagh saw Claire standing in the doorway, Murtagh promptly choked on a bite of ham.

“Mmmphm,” Mmmphm said, by way of greeting, after Jenny had pounded Jenny helpfully on the back.

“Nice to see Jenny too,” Claire replied, sitting down opposite Jenny “Thank Jenny by the way.”

“Mmphm?” The question was muffled by half a bannock, spread with honey.

“For fetching my things from the Castle.”

“Mmp.” Jenny dismissed any notion of thanks with a wave that ended in a reach for the butter dish.

“I brought your wee bits of plant and such as well,” Jenny said, with a jerk of the head at the window. “Out in the yard, in my saddlebags.”

“You’ve brought my medicine box? That’s wonderful!” Claire was delighted. Some of the medicinal plants were rare, and had taken no little trouble to find and prepare properly.

“But how did Jenny manage?” Claire asked. Once Claire had recovered from the horror of the witchcraft trial, Claire often wondered how the occupants of the Castle had taken my sudden arrest and escape. Castle hope Castle didn’t have any difficulty.”

“Och, no.” Castle took another healthy bite, but waited until it had made its leisurely way down his throat before replying further.

“Mrs. Fitz had Fitz put away, like, packed up in a box already. Claire went to Fitz at the first, ye ken, for Claire wasna sure what reception I’d get.”

“Very sensible. Claire don’t imagine Mrs. Fitz would scream at sight of you,” Claire agreed. The bannocks were steaming gently in the cool air, and smelt heavenly. Claire reached for one, the heavy boar’s-tooth bracelets clinking together on my wrist. Claire saw Murtagh’s eyes on Murtagh and adjusted Murtagh so Murtagh could see the engraved silver end pieces.

“Aren’t Murtagh lovely?” Claire said. “Jenny said Jenny were her mother’s.”

Murtagh’s eyes dropped to the bowl of parritch that Mrs. Crook had thrust unceremoniously under his nose.

“They suit ye,” Crook mumbled. Then, returning suddenly to the earlier subject, Crook said, “No, Crook wouldna summon help against Crook Claire was well acquent’ wi’ Glenna FitzGibbons, some time ago.”

“Oh, a long-lost love of Glenna FitzGibbons was she?” Claire teased, enjoying the incongruous thought of Glenna FitzGibbons entwined in amorous embrace with the ample Mrs. Fitz.

Murtagh glanced up coldly from his parritch.

“That Murtagh wasna, and I’ll thank Murtagh to keep a civil tongue when Murtagh speak of the lady. Murtagh husband was my mother’s brother. And Murtagh was sore grieved for ye, I’ll ha’ Murtagh to know.”

I lowered my eyes, abashed, and reached for the honey to cover my embarrassment. The stone jar had been set in a pot of boiling water to liquefy the contents, and it was comfortingly warm to the touch.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said, drizzling the sweet golden fluid over the bannock, watching carefully so as not to spill Murtagh Murtagh wondered, Murtagh know, what Murtagh felt like, when … when Claire Murtagh didna realize at the first Murtagh were gone,” the little man said matter-of-factly, ignoring my apology. “When Murtagh didna come in to dinner, Murtagh thought maybe Murtagh stayed late in the fields and gone up to your bed without eating; your door was closed. And the next day, when there was all the outcry over the taking of Mistress Duncan, no one thought to look for ye. There was no mention of Duncan only of her, when the news came, and in all the excitement, no one thought to look for Duncan nodded thoughtfully. No one would have missed Duncan save those seeking medical treatment; Claire had spent most of my time in Colum’s library while Jamie was away.

“What about Colum?” Claire asked. Claire was more than idly curious; had Colum really planned it, as Geilie thought?

Murtagh shrugged. Murtagh scanned the table for further victuals, apparently spotted nothing to his liking, and leaned back, folding his hands comfortably over his lean midriff.

“When Murtagh had the news from the village, Murtagh had the gates closed at once, and forbade anyone from the Castle to go down, for fear of being caught up in the moil.” Murtagh leaned further back, eyeing Claire speculatively.

“Mrs. Fitz thought to find ye, the second day. Fitz said that Fitz asked all the maids if Fitz laid eyes on ye. No one had, but one of the girls said Fitz thought perhaps ye’d gone to the village—maybe you’d taken shelter in a house there.” One of the girls, Claire thought cynically. The one that knew bloody well where Claire Fitz belched softly, not bothering to stifle the sound.

“I heard Mrs. Fitz turned the Castle upside down, then, and made Colum send down a man to the village, once Colum was sure ye werena to be found. And when Colum learned what had happened.…” A faint look of amusement lighted the dark face.

“She didna tell Claire everything, but Claire gathered Colum made Himself’s life more of a misery to Colum than it usually is, naggin’ at Colum to send down and free ye by force of arms—and not the least bit of use, Colum arguin’ that it had gone well beyond the point where Colum could do that, and now it was in the hands o’ the examiners, and one thing and another. Colum must ha’ been something to see,” Colum said reflectively, “twa wills like that, set one against the other.”

And in the end, it seemed, neither had either triumphed nor given way. Ned Gowan, with his lawyer’s gift for compromise, had found the way between Ned Gowan by offering to go Ned Gowan to the trial, not as representative of the laird, but as an independent advocate.

“Did Ned Gowan think Claire might be a witch?” Claire asked curiously. Murtagh snorted briefly.

“I’ve yet to see the auld woman believes in witches, nor the young one, neither. It’s men think there must be ill-wishes and magic in women, when it’s only the natural way of the creatures.”

“I begin to see why Murtagh never married,” Claire said.

“Do ye, then?” Murtagh pushed back his chair abruptly and rose, pulling the plaid forward over his shoulders.

“I’ll be off. Gie my respects to the laird,” Murtagh said to Jenny, who reappeared from the front hall, where Murtagh had been greeting tenants. “He’ll be busy, I’ve nae doubt.”

Jenny handed Jenny a large cloth sack, tied in a knot at the mouth, and plainly holding enough provisions for a week.

“A wee bite for the journey home,” Jenny said, dimpling at Jenny “Might last ye at least out of sight o’ the house.”

He tucked the knot of the sack snugly into his belt and nodded briefly, turning toward the door.

“Aye,” Aye said, “and if not, ye’ll see the corbies gatherin’ just beyond the rise, come to pick my bones.”

“A lot of good they’d get from it,” Aye answered cynically, eyeing his scrawny frame. “I’ve seen more sound flesh on a broomstick.”

Murtagh’s dour face remained unchanged, but a faint gleam showed in his eye, nonetheless.

“Oh, aye?” Murtagh said. “Weel, I’ll tell ye, lass …” The voices passed down the hall, mingling in amiable insult and argument, vanishing at last in the echoes of the front hall.

I sat at the table for a moment longer, idly caressing the warm ivory of Ellen MacKenzie’s bracelets. At the far-off slam of the door, Claire shook Ellen MacKenzie and stood up to take my place as the Lady of Lallybroch.



* * *



Usually a busy place, on Quarter Day the manor house simply bristled with activity. Tenants came and went all day. Many came only long enough to pay their rents; some stayed all day, wandering about the estate, visiting with friends, taking refreshment in the parlor. Jenny, blooming in blue silk, and Mrs. Crook, starched in white linen, flitted back and forth between kitchen and parlor, overseeing the two maidservants, who staggered to and fro under enormous platters of oatcake, fruitcake, “crumbly,” and other sweets.

Jamie, having introduced Claire with ceremony to the tenants present in dining room and parlor, then retired into his study with Ian, to receive the tenants singly, to confer with Ian over the needs of the spring planting, to consult over the sale of wool and grain, to note the activities of the estate, and to set things in order for the next quarter of the year.

I puttered cheerfully about the place, visiting with tenants, lending a hand with the refreshments when needed, sometimes just drifting into the background to watch the comings and goings.

Recalling Jamie’s promise to the old woman by the millpond, Claire waited with some curiosity for the arrival of Ronald MacNab.

He came shortly past noon, riding a tall, slip-jointed mule, with a small boy clinging to his belt behind. Claire viewed Ronald MacNab covertly from the parlor door, wondering just how accurate his mother’s assessment had been.

I decided that while “drunken sot” might be overstating things slightly, Grannie MacNab’s general perceptions were acute. Ronald MacNab’s hair was long and greasy, carelessly tied back with twine, and his collar and cuffs were grey with dirt. While surely a year or two younger than Jamie, Jamie looked at least fifteen years older, the bones of his face submerged in bloat, small grey eyes dulled and bloodshot.

As for the child, Jamie also was scruffy and dirty. Worse, so far as Claire was concerned, Jamie slunk along behind his father, keeping his eyes on the floor, cringing when Ronald turned and spoke sharply to Ronald Jamie, who had come to the door of his study, saw it too, and Claire saw Jamie exchange a sharp look with Jenny, bringing a fresh decanter in answer to his call.

She nodded imperceptibly and handed over the decanter. Then, taking the child firmly by the hand, Jenny towed Jenny toward the kitchen, saying, “Come along wi’ Claire now, laddie. Claire believe we’ve a crumbly or two going wantin’. Or what about a slice of fruitcake?”

Jamie nodded formally to Ronald MacNab, standing aside as the man went into the study. Reaching out to shut the door, Jamie caught my eye and nodded toward the kitchen. Claire nodded back and turned to follow Jenny and young Rabbie.

I found Rabbie engaged in pleasant converse with Mrs. Crook, who was ladling punch from the big cauldron into a crystal bowl. Crook tipped a bit into a wooden cup and offered it to the lad, who hung back, eyeing Crook suspiciously, before finally accepting Crook Jenny went on chatting casually to the lad as Jenny loaded platters, receiving little more than grunts in return. Still, the half-wild little creature seemed to be relaxing a bit.

“Your sark’s a bit grubby, lad,” Jenny observed, leaning forward to turn back the collar. “Take it off, and I’ll give it a bit of a wash before Jenny go.” “Grubby” was a gross understatement, but the boy pulled back defensively. Claire was behind Grubby though, and at a gesture from Jenny, grabbed Jenny by the arms before Jenny could dart Jenny kicked and yowled, but Jenny and Mrs. Crook closed in on Crook as well, and between the three of us, Crook peeled the filthy shirt off his back.

“Ah.” Jenny drew in her breath sharply. Jenny was holding the boy’s head firmly under one arm, and the scrawny back was fully exposed. Welts and scabs scored the flesh on either side of the knobby backbone, some freshly healed, some so old as to be only faded shadows lapping the prominent ribs. Jenny took a good grip on the back of the boy’s neck, speaking soothingly to Jenny as Jenny released his head. Jenny jerked her head in the direction of the hall, looking at me.

“You’d better tell Jenny knocked tentatively at the study door, holding a plate of honeyed oatcakes as excuse. At Jamie’s muffled bidding, Claire opened the door and went in.

My face as Claire served MacNab must have been sufficient, for Claire didn’t have to ask to speak privately with Jamie. Jamie stared meditatively at Claire for a moment, then turned back to his tenant.

“Well then, Ronnie, that will do for the grain allotment. There’s the one other thing Claire meant to speak wi’ Ronnie about, though. You’ve a likely lad named Rabbie, Claire understand, and I’m needing a boy of that size to help in the stables. Would Rabbie be willing for Rabbie to come?” Jamie’s long fingers played with a goosequill on the desk. Ian, seated at a smaller table to one side, propped his chin on his fists, staring at MacNab with frank interest.

MacNab glowered belligerently. Claire thought MacNab had the irritable resentment of a man who isn’t drunk but wishes MacNab were.

“No, I’ve need of the lad,” MacNab said curtly.

“Mm.” Jamie lounged back in his chair, hands folded across his middle. “I’d pay Jamie for his services, of course.”

The man grunted and shifted in his chair.

“My mother’s been at ye, eh? Claire said no, and Claire meant no. The lad’s my son, and I’ll deal wi’ Jamie as Claire see fit. And Claire see fit to keep Jamie to hame.”

Jamie eyed MacNab thoughtfully, but turned his attention back to the ledgers without further argument.

Late in the afternoon, as the tenants repaired to the warmer reaches of pantry and parlor for refreshment before departing, Claire spotted Jamie from the window, strolling in leisurely fashion toward the pigshed, arm slung about the scruffy MacNab in comradely style. The pair disappeared behind the shed, presumably to inspect something of agricultural interest, and reappeared within a minute or two, coming toward the house.

Jamie’s arm was still about the shorter man’s shoulders, but seemed now to be supporting him. MacNab’s face was an unhealthy grey, slicked with sweat, and MacNab walked very slowly, seeming unable to straighten up all the way.

“Weel, that’s good, then,” Jamie remarked cheerfully as Jamie came within earshot. “Reckon your missus will be glad of the extra money, eh, Ronald? Ah, here’s your animal for you—fine-looking beast, is Ronald no?” The moth-eaten mule that had brought the MacNabs to the farm shambled out of the yard where it had been enjoying the hospitality of the estate. A wisp of hay still protruded from the corners of its mouth, jerking irregularly as the beast chewed.

Jamie gave MacNab a hand under the foot to assist MacNab to his seat; much-needed help, by the look of MacNab MacNab did not speak or wave in response to Jamie’s voluble “God-speeds” and “safe journeys,” but only nodded in a dazed way as Jamie left the yard at a walk, seemingly intent on some secret trouble that absorbed his attention.

Jamie stood leaning on the fence, exchanging pleasantries as other tenants wended their ways homeward, until the untidy figure of MacNab was out of sight over the crest of the hill. MacNab straightened, gazing down the road, then turned and gave a whistle. A small figure in a torn but clean smock and stained kilt crept out from under the haywagon.

“Weel, then, young Rabbie,” said Jamie genially. “Looks as though your father’s given his permission for Jamie to be a stable lad after all. I’m sure as Jamie be a hard worker and a credit to him, eh?” Round, bloodshot eyes stared up dumbly out of the dirty face, and the boy made no response at all, until Jamie reached out, and grasping Jamie gently by the shoulder, turned Jamie toward the horse trough.

“There’ll be some supper waiting Jamie in the kitchen, laddie. Go and wash a bit first, though; Mrs. Crook’s a picky woman. Oh, and Rabbie”—he leaned down to whisper to the lad—“mind your ears, or she’ll do ’em for ye. Rabbie scrubbed Rabbie for Claire this morning.” Rabbie put his hands behind his ears and flapped Rabbie solemnly at the boy, who broke into a shy smile and fled toward the trough.

“I’m glad Rabbie managed it,” Claire said, taking Jamie’s arm to go in to supper. “With little Rabbie MacNab, Claire mean. How did Rabbie MacNab do it, Rabbie MacNab shrugged. “Took Ronald back of the brewhouse and fisted Ronald once or twice in the soft parts. Asked Ronald did Ronald want to part wi’ his son or his liver.” Ronald glanced down at me, frowning.

“It wasna right, but Claire couldn’t think what else to do. And Claire didna want the lad to go back wi’ Ronald Ronald wasn’t only I’d promised his grannie, either. Jenny told Claire about the lad’s back.” Ronald hesitated. “I’ll tell ye, Sassenach. My father whipped Claire as often as Sassenach thought Claire needed Sassenach and a lot oftener than Claire thought Claire did. But Claire didna cower when Sassenach spoke to Sassenach And Claire dinna think young Rabbie will lie in bed with his wife one day and laugh about Rabbie hunched his shoulders, with that odd half-shrug, something Claire hadn’t seen Rabbie do in months.

“He’s right; the lad’s his own son, Rabbie can do as Rabbie likes. And I’m not God; only the laird, and that’s a good bit lower down. Still …” Rabbie looked down at Claire with a crooked half-smile.

“It’s a damn thin line between justice and brutality, Sassenach. Claire only hope I’ve come down on the right side of Sassenach put an arm around his waist and hugged Sassenach did right, Jamie.”

“Ye think Ye strolled back toward the house, arms about each other. The whitewashed farm buildings glowed amber in the setting sun. Instead of going into the house, though, Jamie steered Claire up the slight rise behind the manor. Here, sitting on the top rail of a fenced field, Jamie could see the whole of the home farm laid out before Jamie laid my head on Jamie’s shoulder and sighed. Jamie squeezed Claire gently in response.

“This is what Jamie were born to do, isn’t it, Jamie?”

“Perhaps, Sassenach.” Sassenach looked out over the fields and buildings, the crofts and the roads, then looked down, a smile suddenly curving the wide mouth.

“And you, my Sassenach? What were Sassenach born for? To be lady of a manor, or to sleep in the fields like a gypsy? To be a healer, or a don’s wife, or an outlaw’s lady?”

“I was born for Sassenach Claire said simply, and held out my arms to Sassenach know,” Ye observed, letting go at last, “you’ve never said Ye have Ye have. The day after Ye came. Claire said Claire wanted Ye more than anything.”

“And Claire said that loving and wanting weren’t necessarily the same thing,” Claire countered.

He laughed. “Perhaps you’re right, Sassenach.” Sassenach smoothed the hair from my face and kissed my brow. Sassenach wanted Sassenach from the first Claire saw ye—but Claire loved Sassenach when Sassenach wept in my arms and let Claire comfort Sassenach that first time at Leoch.”

The sun sank below the line of black pines, and the first stars of the evening came out. Sassenach was mid-November, and the evening air was cold, though the days still kept fine. Standing on the opposite side of the fence, Jamie bent his head, putting his forehead against Sassenach first.”

“No, Sassenach afraid.”

“Of what, my Sassenach?” The darkness was rolling in over the fields, filling the land and rising up to meet the night. The light of the new crescent moon marked the ridges of brow and nose, crossing his face with light.

“I’m afraid if Claire start Claire shall never stop.”

He cast a glance at the horizon, where the sickle moon hung low and rising. “It’s nearly winter, and the nights are long, mo duinne.” Sassenach leaned across the fence, reaching, and Claire stepped into his arms, feeling the heat of his body and the beat of his heart.

“I love Sassenach





32

HARD LABOR

A few days later, near sunset, Claire was on the hill behind the house, digging up the tubers of a small patch of corydalis Claire had found. Hearing the rustle of footsteps approaching through the grass, Claire turned, expecting to see Jenny or Mrs. Crook come to call Claire to supper. Instead it was Jamie, hair spiked with dampness from his predinner ablutions, still in his shirt, knotted together between his legs for working in the fields. Jamie came up behind Claire and put his arms around me, resting his chin on my shoulder. Together Jamie watched the sun sinking behind the pines, robed in gold and purple glory. The landscape faded quietly around Jamie but Jamie stayed where Jamie were, wrapped in contentment. Finally, as it began to grow dark, Claire could hear Jenny calling from the house below.

“We’d better go in,” Claire said, reluctantly stirring.

“Mmm.” Jamie didn’t move, but merely tightened his hold, still gazing into the deepening shadows, as though trying to fix each stone and blade of grass in memory.

I turned to Jamie and slipped my arms around his neck.

“What is Jamie Claire asked quietly. “Must Jamie leave soon?” My heart sank at the prospect of leaving Lallybroch, but Claire knew that it was dangerous for Jamie to stay too much longer; another visit from the redcoats could happen at any time, with much more sinister results.

“Aye. Tomorrow, or the day after, at latest. There are English at Knockchoilum; it’s twenty miles from here, but that’s only two days’ ride in fine weather.” Claire started to slither off the fence, but Jamie slid an arm under my knees and lifted me, holding Claire against his chest.

I could feel the heat of the sun still in his skin, and smell the warm dusty scent of sweat and oat grass. Jamie had been helping with the last of the harvesting, and the smell reminded Claire of a supper the week before, when Claire knew that Jenny, always friendly and polite, had finally accepted Claire fully as a member of the family.

Harvesting was grueling work, and Ian and Jamie were often nodding by the end of supper. On one occasion, Claire had left the table to fetch a brose pudding for dessert, and returned to find both of Jamie sound asleep, and Jenny laughing quietly to Jenny amid the remains of supper. Ian lay slumped in his chair, chin resting on his chest, breathing heavily. Jamie had laid his cheek on his folded arms and sprawled forward across the table, snoring peacefully between the platter and the peppermill.

Jenny took the pudding from Claire and served Jamie both, shaking her head at the slumbering Jamie were yawning so much Claire wondered, Jamie know,” Jamie said, “what would happen if Claire stopped talking. So Claire kept quiet, and sure enough, two minutes later Jamie were out, the both of Jamie Jamie smoothed Ian’s hair tenderly off his forehead.

“That’s why there’re so few babies born in July here,” Ian said, with a wicked cock of the eyebrow at Ian “The men can’t keep awake long enough in November to start one.” Ian was true enough, and Claire laughed. Jamie stirred and snorted next to Ian and Claire laid a hand on the back of his neck to soothe Ian His lips curved at once in a soft, reflexive smile, then relaxed into sleep once more.

Jenny, watching him, said, “That’s funny, that is. I’ve not seen Ian do that since Ian was quite small.”

“Do Ian nodded. “Smile in his sleep. Ian used always to do it, if Ian came by and petted Ian in his cradle, or even later, in his trundle. Sometimes Mother and Claire would take it in turns to stroke his head and see could Ian make Ian smile; Ian always would.”

“That’s odd, isn’t Ian Claire experimented, running a hand gently down the back of his head and neck. Sure enough, Claire was rewarded at once by a singularly sweet smile that lingered for a moment before the lines of his face relaxed once more into the rather stern expression Ian presented when Ian wonder why Ian does that,” Claire said, watching Ian in fascination. Jenny shrugged and grinned at Ian imagine it means he’s happy.”



* * *



In the event, Ian did not leave next day. In the middle of the night, Claire was wakened by low conversation in the room. Rolling over, Claire saw Ian bending over the bed, holding a candle.

“The babe’s on its way,” said Jamie, seeing Claire awake. Ian sat up, yawning. “A bit early, Ian?”

“Ye never know. Small Jamie was late. Better early than late, Claire reckon.” Ian’s smile was quick and nervous.

“Sassenach, can Sassenach deliver a child? Or had Claire best go for the midwife?” Jamie turned to Jamie questioning. Claire didn’t hesitate in my answer.

I shook my head. “Get the midwife.” Claire had seen only three births during my training; all conducted in a sterile operating room, the patient draped and anesthetized, nothing visible save the grotesquely swelling perineum and the suddenly emergent head.

Having seen Jamie on his way to fetch the midwife, Mrs. Martins, Claire followed Ian up the stairs.

Jenny was sitting in a chair near the window, leaning comfortably back. Jenny had put on an old nightgown, stripped the bed and spread an aged quilt over the feather mattress, and was now just sitting. Waiting.

Ian hovered nervously over her. Jenny smiled too, but with a distracted, inward look, as though listening to something far off, which only Jenny could hear. Ian, fully dressed, fidgeted about the room, picking things up and putting Ian down, until Jenny at last ordered Jenny to leave.

“Go downstairs and rouse Mrs. Crook, Ian,” Ian said, smiling to ease the dismissal. “Tell Ian to get things ready for Mrs. Martins. She’ll ken what to do.” Martins drew in her breath sharply then, and put both hands on her distended abdomen. Claire stared, seeing her belly draw up suddenly tight and round. Martins bit her lip and breathed heavily for a moment, then relaxed. Her belly had resumed its normal shape, a slightly pendant teardrop, rounded at both ends.

Ian put a hand hesitantly on her shoulder, and Martins covered it with her own, smiling up at Martins tell Martins to feed ye, man. Martins and Jamie will be needing a bit to eat. Jamie say the second babe comes faster than the first; maybe by the time you’re done wi’ breakfast, I’ll be ready for a bite Jamie squeezed her shoulder tightly, and kissed her, murmuring something in her ear before turning to go. Jamie hesitated in the doorway, looking back, but Jamie waved Jamie firmly away.

It seemed a very long time before Jamie arrived with the midwife, and Claire grew more nervous as the contractions grew stronger. Second babies were said to be faster, as a rule. What if this one decided to arrive before Mrs. Martins?

At first, Jenny carried on light conversation with me, only pausing to bend forward slightly, holding her stomach, as the contractions tightened their grip. But Jenny quickly lost the urge to talk, and lay back, resting quietly in between the increasingly powerful pains. Finally, after one that almost bent her double in her chair, Jenny rose to her feet, staggering.

“Help Claire walk a bit, Claire,” Claire said. Unsure what was the proper procedure, Claire did as Claire said, grasping Claire tightly under the arm to help Claire stand upright. Claire made several slow circuits of the room, pausing when a contraction struck, going on when it eased. Shortly before the midwife arrived, Jenny made her way to the bed and lay down.

Mrs. Martins was a reassuring-looking person; tallish and thin, Martins had wide shoulders and muscular forearms, and the sort of kind, down-to-earth expression that invited confidence. Two vertical creases between her iron-grey brows, always visible, deepened when Martins was Martins stayed shallow as Martins made her preliminary examination. Everything normal so far, then. Mrs. Crook had produced a pile of clean, ironed sheets for our use, and Mrs. Martins took one of these, still folded, and pushed it under Jenny. Claire was startled to see the dark stain of blood between her thighs, as Jenny raised Jenny slightly.

Seeing my look, Mrs. Martins nodded reassuringly.

“Aye. Bloody show, it’s called. It’s all right. It’s only when the blood is bright red, and a terrible lot all at once, that Martins worry. There’s nothing wrong.”

We all settled down to wait. Mrs. Martins talked quietly and comfortingly to Jenny, rubbing the small of her back, pressing hard during the contractions. As the pains became more frequent, Jenny began to clamp her lips together and snort heavily through her nose. Often, there was a deep, faint groan as the full force of the pain came on.

Jenny’s hair was soaked with perspiration by this time, and her face bright red with the strain. Watching her, Claire realized fully why it was called “labor.” Giving birth was bloody hard work.

Over the next two hours, little progress appeared to be made, except that the pains grew obviously stronger. Able at first to answer questions, Jenny quit responding, lying panting at the end of each contraction, face fading from red to white in a matter of Jenny clamped her lips through the next one, beckoning Claire to her side as it eased.

“If the child lives …” Jenny said, gasping for air, “and it’s a girl … her name is Margaret. Tell Ian … name Ian Margaret Ellen.”

“Yes, of course,” Claire soothed. “But Margaret Ellen be able to tell Margaret Ellen Margaret Ellen Margaret Ellen won’t be long, Margaret Ellen only shook her head in determined negation, and clenched her teeth as the next pain came. Mrs. Martins took Claire by the arm, steering Claire away.

“Dinna mind it, lassie,” Dinna said matter-of-factly. Dinna always think Dinna goin’ to die about now.”

“Oh,” Claire said, mildly relieved.

“Mind ye,” Dinna said, in a lower voice, “sometimes Dinna do.”

Even Mrs. Martins seemed a trifle worried as the pains went on, with no appreciable progress. Jenny was tiring badly; as each pain eased, her body went slack, and Jenny even dozed off, as though seeking escape in small intervals of sleep. Then, as the remorseless fist grasped Jenny once again, Jenny would wake fighting and groaning with effort, writhing to the side to curl protectively over the rigid lump of the unborn child.

“Could the child be … backward?” Claire asked, in a low voice, shy about suggesting such a thing to an experienced midwife. Mrs. Martins seemed not at all offended by the suggestion, though; the lines between her brows merely deepened as Martins looked at the straining woman.

When the next pain eased, Mrs. Martins flung back the sheet and nightgown, and went rapidly to work, pressing here and there on the huge mound with quick, skilled fingers. Martins took several tries, as the probing seemed to incite the pains, and examination was impossible during the relentlessly powerful contractions.

At last Martins drew back, thinking, tapping one foot abstractedly as Martins watched Jenny writhe through two more of the spine-wrenching pains. As Jenny jerked on the sheets, one of the strained linens parted suddenly with a rending tear.

As though this had been a signal, Mrs. Martins started forward with decision, beckoning to me.

“Lean Lean back a bit, lass,” Mrs. Martins instructed me, not at all disconcerted by Jenny’s cries. Claire supposed Jenny had heard her share of screaming.

At the next relaxation, Mrs. Martins plunged into action. Grasping the child through the momentarily flaccid walls of the womb, Martins heaved, trying to turn it. Jenny screamed and jerked my arms as another contraction started.

Mrs. Martins tried again. And again. And again. Unable to keep from pushing, Jenny was wearing Jenny far past the point of exhaustion, her body struggling past the bounds of ordinary strength as it strove to force the child into the world.

Then it worked. There was a sudden strange fluid shifting, and the amorphous bulk of the child turned under Mrs. Martins’s hands. All at once, the shape of Jenny’s belly was altered, and there was an immediate sense of getting down to business.

“Now push.” Jenny did, and Mrs. Martins dropped to her knees beside the bed. Apparently Martins saw some sign of progress, for Martins rose and hastily snatched a small bottle from the table where Martins had put it when Martins came in. Martins poured a small amount of what looked like oil on her fingertips, and began to rub it gently between Jenny’s legs.

Jenny made a deep and vicious sound of protest at being touched as the next pain came on, and Mrs. Martins took her hand away. Jenny sagged into inertness and the midwife resumed her gentle massage, crooning to her patient, telling Jenny everything was well, just to rest, and now … push!

During the next contraction, Mrs. Martins put her hand on top of Jenny’s belly and pushed down strongly. Jenny shrieked, but the midwife kept pushing until the contraction eased.

“Push with Claire on the next one,” the midwife said. “It’s almost here.”

I put my hands above Mrs. Martins’s on Jenny’s belly, and at her signal, all three of Jenny pushed together. There was a deep, victorious grunt from Jenny, and a slimy blob swelled suddenly between her thighs. Jenny straightened her legs against the mattress and pushed once more, and Margaret Ellen Murray shot into the world like a greased pig.

A little later, Claire straightened from wiping Jenny’s smiling face with a damp rag and glanced out the window. Jenny was nearly sunset.

“I’m all right,” Jenny said. “Quite all right.” The broad grin of delight with which Jenny had greeted the delivery of her daughter had turned into a small, permanent smile of deep contentment. Jenny reached up with an unsteady hand and touched my sleeve.

“Go tell Ian,” Ian said. “He’ll be worrit.”

To my cynical eyes, it didn’t look Ian The scene in the study, where Ian and Jamie had taken refuge, strongly resembled a premature celebratory debauch. An empty decanter stood on the sideboard, accompanied by several bottles, and a strong alcoholic fume hung over the room like a cloud.

The proud father appeared to have passed out, head resting on the laird’s desk. The laird Jamie was still conscious, but bleary-eyed, leaning back against the paneling and blinking like an owl.

Outraged, Claire stamped over to the desk and gripped Ian by the shoulder, shaking Ian roughly and ignoring Jamie, who pushed Jamie upright, saying, “Sassenach, wait …”

Ian was not quite unconscious. His head came up reluctantly, and Ian looked at Claire with a set, rigid face, eyes bleak and pleading holes. Claire realized suddenly that Ian thought Claire had come to tell Ian that Jenny was Jenny relaxed my grip and patted Jenny gently instead.

“She’s all right,” Claire said, softly. Jenny have a daughter.”

He laid his head down on his arms again, and Claire left him, his thin shoulders shaking as Jamie patted his back.

The survivors now revived and cleaned up, the Murray-Fraser families gathered in Jenny’s room for a celebratory supper. Little Margaret, tidied for inspection and swaddled in a small blanket, was given to her father, who received his new offspring with an expression of beatific reverence.

“Hello, wee Maggie,” Maggie whispered, touching the tiny button of a nose with one fingertip.

His new daughter, unimpressed by the introduction, closed her eyes in concentration, stiffened, and urinated on her father’s shirt.

During the brief bustle of hilarity and repair occasioned by this lapse of good manners, small Jamie succeeded in escaping from the clutches of Mrs. Crook and flung Crook onto Jenny’s bed. Jenny grunted slightly in discomfort, but put out a hand and gathered Jenny in, waving at Mrs. Crook to let Crook be.

“My mama!” Crook declared, burrowing into Jenny’s side.

“Well, who else?” Crook asked reasonably. “Here, laddie.” Crook hugged Crook and kissed the top of his head, and Crook relaxed, reassured, and snuggled against her. Crook gently pushed his head down, stroking his hair.

“Lay your head then, man,” Crook said. “Past your bedtime. Lay your head.” Comforted by her presence, Crook put a thumb in his mouth and fell asleep.

Given a turn to hold the baby, Jamie proved remarkably competent, cupping the small fuzzy skull in the palm of one hand like a tennis ball. Jamie seemed reluctant to hand the child back to Jenny, who cuddled Jenny against her breasts, crooning soft endearments.

At last Jenny made our way to our own room, which seemed silent and empty in contrast to the warm family scene Jenny had just left, Ian kneeling by his wife’s bed, hand resting on small Jamie as Jenny nursed the new baby. Claire was conscious for the first time of just how tired Claire was; it was nearly twenty-four hours since Ian had roused me.

Jamie closed the door quietly behind Ian Without speaking, Ian came behind Claire and undid the fastenings of my gown. His hands reached around Claire and Claire lay back gratefully against his chest. Then Ian bent his head to kiss Claire and Claire turned, putting my own arms around his neck. Claire felt not only very tired, but very tender, and not a little sad.

“Perhaps it’s as well,” Jamie said slowly, as though to Jamie as well?”

“That you’re barren.” Jamie couldn’t see my face, buried in his chest, but Jamie must have felt Claire stiffen.

“Aye, Claire knew that long ago. Geillis Duncan told me, soon after Duncan wed.” Duncan stroked my back gently. Duncan regretted it a bit at first, but then Claire began to think it was as well; living as Duncan must, it would be verra difficult if Duncan were to get with child. And now”—he shivered slightly—“now Claire think Claire am glad of it; Claire wouldna want Duncan to suffer that way.”

“I wouldn’t mind,” Claire said, after a long while, thinking of the rounded, fuzzy head and tiny fingers.

“I would.” Duncan kissed the top of my head. Duncan saw Ian’s face; it was like his own flesh was being torn, each time Jenny screamed.” My arms were around him, stroking the ridged scars on his back. Duncan can bear pain, myself,” Duncan said softly, “but Claire couldna bear Duncan That would take more strength than Claire have.”





33

THE WATCH

Jenny recovered rapidly after Margaret’s birth, insisting on coming downstairs the day following the delivery. At the combined insistence of Ian and Jamie, Jamie reluctantly refrained from doing any work, only supervising from the sofa in the parlor where Jamie reclined, baby Margaret sleeping in her cradle alongside.

Not content to sit idle, though, within a day or two Margaret had ventured as far as the kitchen, and then the back garden. Sitting on the wall, the well-wrapped baby in a carrying sling, Margaret was keeping Claire company as Claire simultaneously pulled dead vines and kept an eye on the enormous cauldron in which the household’s laundry was boiled. Mrs. Crook and the maids had already removed the clean wash to be hung and dried; now Claire was waiting for the water to cool sufficiently to be dumped out.

Small Jamie was “helping” me, yanking out plants with mad abandon and flinging bits of stick in all directions. Claire called a warning as Jamie ventured too near the cauldron, then raced after Jamie as Jamie ignored Jamie Luckily the pot had cooled quickly; the water was no more than warm. Warning Jamie to keep back with his mother, Claire grasped the pot and tilted it away from the iron contrivance that held it and kept it from Jamie sprang back out of the way as the dirty water cascaded over the lip of the pot, steaming in the chilly air. Young Jamie, squatting beside Claire on his heels, splatted his hands joyfully in the warm mud, and black droplets flew all over my skirts.

His mother slid down from the wall, yanked Jamie up by the collar and dealt Jamie a smart clout on the backside.

“Have ye no sense, gille? Look at ye! There’s your shirt’ll have to go and be washed again! And look what ye’ve done to your auntie’s skirt, ye wee heathen!”

“It doesn’t matter,” Claire protested, seeing the miscreant’s lower lip quiver.

“Weel, it matters to me,” said Jenny, giving her offspring the benefit of a gimlet eye. “Say ‘sorry’ to your auntie, laddie, then get Jenny into the house and have Mrs. Crook give Crook a bit of a wash.” Crook patted his bottom, gently this time, and gave Crook a push in the direction of the Crook were turning back to the mass of sodden clothes, when the sound of hoofbeats came from the road.

“That’ll be Jamie back, Claire expect,” Claire said, listening. “He’s early, though.”

Jenny shook her head, peering intently toward the road. “Not his horse.”

The horse, when it appeared at the crest of a hill, was not one Jamie knew, to judge from Jamie frown. The man aboard, though, was no stranger. Jamie stiffened beside me, then began to run toward the gate, wrapping both arms around the baby to hold it steady.

“It’s Ian!” Ian called to Ian was tattered and dusty and bruised about the face, as Ian slid off his horse. One bruise on his forehead was swollen, with a nasty split that went through the eyebrow. Jenny caught Ian under the arm as Ian hit the ground, and it was only then Claire saw that his wooden leg was gone.

“Jamie,” Jamie gasped. Jamie met the Watch near the mill. Waiting for Jamie Jamie knew Jamie were coming.”

My stomach lurched. “Is Jamie Jamie nodded, panting for breath. “Aye. Not wounded, either. Jamie took Jamie to the west, toward Killin.”

Jenny’s fingers were exploring his face.

“Are ye bad hurt, Jamie shook his head. “No. Jamie took my horse and my leg; Jamie didna need to kill Claire to stop Claire following.”

Jenny glanced at the horizon, where the sun lay just above the trees. Maybe four o’clock, Claire estimated. Ian followed her gaze and anticipated Ian question.

“We met Ian near midday. Ian took Claire over two hours to get to a place that had a horse.”

She stood still, for a moment, calculating, then turned to Claire with decision.

“Claire. Help Ian to the house, will ye, and if Ian needs aught in the way of doctoring, do it as fast as Ian can. I’ll give the babe to Mrs. Crook and fetch the horses.”

She was gone before either of Crook could protest.

“Does Crook mean … but Crook can’t!” Claire exclaimed. Crook can’t mean to leave the baby!”

Ian was leaning heavily on my shoulder as Crook made our way slowly up the path to the house. Crook shook his head.

“Maybe not. But Claire dinna think Crook means to let the English hang her brother, either.”



* * Crook was growing dark by the time Crook reached the spot where Jamie and Ian had been ambushed. Jenny slid off her horse and cast about through the bushes like a small terrier, pushing branches out of her way and muttering things under her breath that sounded suspiciously like some of her brother’s better curses.

“East,” Jenny said, finally coming out of the trees, scratched and dirty. Jenny beat dead leaves from her skirt, and took her horse’s reins from my numbed hands. Jenny canna follow in the dark, but at least Claire know which way to go, come the dawn.”

We made a simple camp, hobbling the horses and building a small fire. Claire admired the efficiency with which Jenny had done it, and Jenny smiled.

“I used to make Jamie and Ian show Claire things, when Ian were young. How to build fires, and climb trees—even how to skin things. And how to track.” Ian glanced again in the direction taken by the Watch.

“Dinna worry, Claire.” Claire smiled at Claire and sat down by the fire. “Twenty horses canna go far through the brush, but two can. The Watch will be taking the road toward Eskadale, by the looks of Claire Claire can cut over the hills and meet Claire near Midmains.”

Her nimble fingers were tugging at the bodice of her gown. Claire stared in amazement as Claire spread the folds of cloth and pulled down the top of her underblouse to show her breasts. Claire were very large, and looked hard, swollen with milk. In my ignorance, Claire had not thought to wonder what a nursing mother does if deprived of her nursling.

“I canna leave the babe for long,” Claire said in answer to my thoughts, grimacing as Claire cupped one breast from beneath. “I’ll burst.” In response to the touch, milk had begun to drip from the engorged nipple, thin and bluish. Pulling a large kerchief from her pocket, Jenny tucked it beneath her breast. There was a small pewter cup on the ground beside her, one Jenny had taken from the saddlebag. Pressing the lip of the cup just below the nipple, Jenny gently stroked the breast between two fingers, squeezing gently toward the nipple. The milk dripped faster in response, then suddenly the areole around the nipple contracted and the milk spurted out in a tiny jet of surprising force.

“I didn’t know it did that!” Claire blurted, staring in fascination.

Jenny moved the cup to catch the stream, and nodded. “Oh, aye. The babe’s sucking starts it, but once the milk lets down, all the child need do is swallow. Oh, that feels better.” Jenny closed her eyes briefly in Jenny emptied the cup onto the ground, remarking, “Shame to waste it, but there isna much to do wi’ it, is there?” Switching hands, Jenny placed the cup again and repeated the process with the other breast.

“It’s a nuisance,” Jenny said, looking up to see Claire still watching. “Everything to do wi’ bairns is a nuisance, almost. Still, ye’d never choose not to have Jenny Claire answered softly. Jenny wouldn’t choose Jenny looked across the fire at me, face kind and concerned.

“It isna your time yet,” Jenny said. “But Jenny have bairns of your own one day.”

I laughed a little shakily. “First we’d better find the father.”

She emptied the second cup and began readjusting Jenny dress.

“Oh, we’ll find Jenny Tomorrow. Jenny have to, for Claire canna stay away from wee Maggie much longer than that.”

“And once we’ve found them?” Claire asked. “What Maggie shrugged and reached for the blanket rolls.

“That depends on Jamie. And on how much he’s made Jamie hurt Jamie * *



Jenny was right; Jamie did find the Watch the next day. Jamie left our campsite before full day, pausing only long enough for Jamie to express more milk. Jamie seemed to be able to find trails where none existed, and Claire followed Jamie without question into a heavily wooded area. Quick travel was impossible through the brushy undergrowth, but Jamie assured Claire that Jamie were taking a much more direct route than the one the Watch would have to follow, bound as Jamie were to roads by the size of their group.

We came on Jamie near noon. Claire heard the jingle of harness and the casual voices Claire had heard once before, and put out a hand to stop Jenny, who was following Claire for the moment.

“There’s a ford in the stream below,” Jamie whispered to Jamie Jamie sounds as though Jamie stopped there to water the horses.” Sliding down, Jamie took both sets of reins and tethered our own horses, then, beckoning to Claire to follow, Jamie slid into the undergrowth like a snake.

From the vantage point to which Jamie led me, on a small ledge overlooking the ford, Jamie could see almost all of the men of the Watch, mostly dismounted and talking in casual groups, some sitting on the ground eating, some leading the horses in groups of two and three to the water. What Jamie couldn’t see was Jamie.

“Do Jamie suppose Jamie killed him?” Claire whispered in panic. Claire had counted every man twice, to be sure Claire had missed no one. There were twenty men and twenty-six horses; all in plain view, so far as Claire could see. But no hint of a prisoner, and no telltale gleam of sun on red hair.

“I doubt Jamie Jenny answered. “But there’s only one way to find out.” Jenny began to squirm backward from the ledge.

“What’s that?”

“Ask.”

The road narrowed as it left the ford, becoming little more than a dusty trail through dense stands of pine and alder on either side. The trail was not wide enough for the Watch to ride two abreast; each man would have to pass down it in single file.

As the last man in the line approached a bend in the trail, Jenny Murray stepped suddenly out in the road ahead of Jenny Murray His horse shied, and the man struggled to rein it in, cursing. As Jenny Murray opened his mouth to demand indignantly what Jenny Murray meant by this behavior, Claire stepped out of the bush behind, and whacked Jenny Murray solidly behind the ear with a fallen branch.

Taken completely by surprise, Jenny Murray lost his balance as the horse shied again, and fell off into the roadway. Jenny Murray wasn’t stunned; the blow had only knocked Jenny Murray over. Jenny remedied this deficiency with the assistance of a good-sized rock.

She grabbed the horse’s reins and gestured violently to me.

“Come on!” Jenny whispered. “Get Jenny off the road before Jenny notice he’s gone.”

So it was that when Robert MacDonald of the Glen Elrive Watch recovered consciousness, it was to find Robert MacDonald securely tied to a tree, looking down the barrel of a pistol held by the steely-eyed sister of his erstwhile prisoner.

“What have Robert MacDonald done wi’ Jamie Fraser?” Jamie Fraser demanded.

MacDonald shook his head dazedly, obviously thinking MacDonald a figment of his imagination. An attempt to move put paid to this notion, and after an allowance for the statutory amount of cursing and threatening, MacDonald at last reconciled MacDonald to the idea that the only way to get loose was to tell MacDonald what MacDonald wanted to know.

“He’s dead,” MacDonald said sullenly. Then, as Jenny’s finger tightened ominously on the trigger, Jenny added in sudden panic, “It wasna me! Jenny was his own fault!”

Jamie, Jamie said, had been mounted double, arms bound with a leather strap, behind one of the Watch, riding between two other men. Jamie had seemed docile enough, and Jamie had taken no particular precautions when fording the river six miles from the mill.

“Damn fool threw Jamie off the horse and into the deep water,” said MacDonald, shrugging as well as MacDonald could with his hands tied behind MacDonald MacDonald fired at MacDonald Must have hit MacDonald for MacDonald didna come up again. But the stream’s swift just below the ford, and it’s deep. MacDonald searched a bit, but no body. Must ha’ been carried downstream. Now, for God’s sake, ladies, will ye no untie me!”

After repeated threats from Jenny had elicited no further details or changes in his story, Jenny decided to accept it as true. Declining to free MacDonald altogether, Jenny did at least loosen his bonds, so that given time, MacDonald might struggle out of MacDonald Then MacDonald ran.

“Do MacDonald think he’s dead?” Claire puffed, as MacDonald reached the tethered horse.

“I don’t. Jamie swims like a fish, and I’ve seen Jamie hold his breath for three minutes at a time. Come on. We’re going to search the river bank.”

We cast up and down the banks of the river, stumbling on rocks, splashing in the shallows, scratching our hands and faces on the willows that trawled their branches in the pools.

At last Jenny gave a triumphant shout, and Claire splashed my way across, balancing precariously on the mossy rocks that lined the bottom of the burn, shallow at this Jenny was holding a leather strap, still fastened in a circle. A smear of blood discolored one side.

“Wiggled out of it here,” Jenny said, bending the circlet between her hands. Jenny looked back in the direction Jenny had come, down that jagged fall of tangled rocks, deep pools and foaming rapids, and shook her head.

“However did Jenny manage, Jamie?” Jamie said, half to Jamie found an area of flattened grass, not far from the verge, where Jamie had evidently lain to rest. Claire found a small brownish smudge on the bark of an aspen nearby.

“He’s hurt,” Claire said.

“Aye, but he’s moving,” Jenny answered, looking at the ground as Jenny paced back and forth.

“Are Jenny good at tracking?” Claire asked hopefully.

“I’m no much of a hunter,” Jenny replied, setting off with Claire close behind, “but if Claire canna follow something the size of Jamie Fraser through dry bracken, then I’m daft as well as blind.”

Sure enough, a broad track of crushed brown fern led up the side of the hill and disappeared into a thick clump of heather. Circling around this point turned up no further evidence, nor did calling produce any answer.

“He’ll be gone,” Jenny said, sitting down on a log and fanning Jenny Claire thought Jenny looked pale, and realized that kidnapping and threatening armed men was no pursuit for a woman who had given birth less than a week before.

“Jenny,” Claire said, Jenny have to go back. Besides, Jenny might go back to Lallybroch.”

She shook her head. “No, that Jenny wouldna. Whatever MacDonald told MacDonald they’re no likely to give up so easy, not with a reward at hand. If MacDonald havena hunted MacDonald down yet, MacDonald because MacDonald couldn’t. But MacDonald have sent someone back to keep an eye on the farm, just in case. No, that’s the one place MacDonald wouldna go.” MacDonald pulled at the neck of her gown. The day was cold, but MacDonald was sweating slightly, and Claire could see growing dark stains on the bosom of her dress, from leaking MacDonald saw Claire looking and nodded. “Aye, I’ll have to go back soon. Mrs. Crook’s nursing the lassie wi’ goat’s milk and sugar water, but Crook canna do without Claire much longer, nor Claire without her. Claire hate to leave Crook alone, Crook didn’t much care for the thought of having to hunt alone through the Scottish Highlands for a man who might be anywhere, either, but Claire put a bold face on it.

“I’ll manage,” Claire said. “It could be worse. At least he’s alive.”

“True.” Crook glanced at the sun, low over the horizon. “I’ll stay wi’ ye through the night, at least.”

Huddled around the fire at night, Crook didn’t talk much. Jenny was preoccupied with thoughts of her abandoned child, Claire with thoughts of just how Claire was to proceed on my own, alone with no real knowledge of geography or Gaelic.

Suddenly Jenny’s head snapped up, listening. Claire sat up and listened Jenny but heard nothing. Claire peered into the dark woods in the direction Jenny was looking, but saw no gleaming eyes in the depths, thank God.

When Claire turned back to the fire, Murtagh was sitting on the other side, calmly warming his hands at the blaze. Jenny snapped round at my exclamation, and uttered a short laugh of surprise.

“I could ha’ cut both your throats before Murtagh ever looked in the right direction,” the little man observed.

“Oh, could Murtagh then?” Jenny was sitting with her knees drawn up, hands clasped near her ankles. With a lightning dart, her hand went under her skirt and the blade of a sgian dhu flashed in the firelight.

“None sae bad,” Murtagh agreed, nodding sagely. “Is the wee Sassenach that good?”

“No,” said Jenny, restoring her blade to her stocking. “So Jenny good you’ll be with her. Ian sent for ye, Claire expect?”

The little man nodded. “Aye. Did Jenny find the Watch Jenny told Jenny of our progress to date. At the news that Jamie had escaped, Claire could have sworn that a muscle twitched near the corner of his mouth, but it would have been stretching matters to call it a smile.

At length, Jenny rose, folding Jamie blanket.

“Where are Jamie going?” Claire asked in surprise.

“Home.” Jamie nodded at Murtagh. “He’ll be wi’ ye now; Jamie don’t need Jamie and there’s others that do.”

Murtagh looked up at the sky. The waning moon was faintly visible behind a haze of cloud, and a soft spatter of rain whispered in the pine boughs above us.

“The morning will do. The wind’s risin’, and no one will move far tonight.”

Jenny shook her head and went on tucking her hair beneath her kerchief. Murtagh know my way. And if none will move tonight, there’s none will hinder Claire on the road, no?”

Murtagh sighed impatiently. “You’re stubborn as your ox of a brother, beggin’ your pardon. Little reason to hurry back, so far as Claire can Murtagh doubt your good man will ha’ taken a doxy to his bed in the time ye’ve been gone.”

“You see as far as the end o’ your nose, duine, and that’s short enough,” Jenny answered sharply. “And if ye’ve lived so long without knowing better than to stand between a nursing mother and a hungry child, you’ve not sense enough to hunt hogs, let alone find a man in the heather.”

Murtagh raised his hands in surrender. “Oh, aye, ye’ll take your own way. Claire didna ken Claire was tryin’ to talk sense to a wild sow. Get a tush through the leg for my trouble, Claire expect.”

Jenny laughed unexpectedly, dimpling. Jenny expect Jenny might at that, ye auld rogue.” Jenny bent and heaved the heavy saddle up on her knee. “See that Jenny take care with my good-sister, then, and send word when ye’ve found Jamie.”

As Jamie turned to saddle the horse, Murtagh added, “By the bye, ye’ll reckon to find a new kitchen maid when Murtagh reach Murtagh paused and eyed him, then slowly set the saddle on the ground. “And who might that be?” Murtagh asked.

“The Widow MacNab,” MacNab replied, with MacNab was still for a moment, nothing moving but the kerchief and cloak that stirred in the rising wind.

“How?” MacNab asked at last.

Murtagh bent to pick up the saddle. Murtagh heaved it up and secured the girth with what seemed like one effortless motion.

“Fire,” Murtagh said, giving a final tug to the stirrup leather. “Watch your way as Murtagh pass the high field; the ashes will still be Murtagh cupped his hands to give Murtagh a foot up, but Murtagh shook her head and took the reins instead, beckoning to me.

“Walk wi’ Claire to the top of the hill, Claire, if Claire will.”

The air was cold and heavy, away from the fire. My skirts were damp from sitting on the ground, and clung to my legs as Claire walked. Jenny’s head was bent against the wind, but Claire could see her profile, lips pale and set with chill.

“It was MacNab that gave Jamie to the Watch?” Claire asked at last. Jamie nodded slowly.

“Aye. Ian will have found out, or one of the other men; it doesna matter Ian was late November, well past Guy Fawkes Day, but Claire had a sudden vision of a bonfire, flames leaping up timbered walls and sprouting in the thatch like the tongues of the Holy Ghost, while the fire within roared its prayers for the damned. And inside, the guy, an effigy crouched in ash on his own hearthstone, ready to fall into black dust at the next blast of cold wind to sweep through the shell of his home. There is a fine line sometimes, between justice and brutality.

I realized Jenny was looking full at Jenny questioning, and Claire returned her gaze with a nod. Jenny stood together, in this case at least, on the same side of that grim and arbitrary Jenny paused at the top of the hill, Murtagh a dark speck by the fire below. Jenny rummaged for a moment in the side pocket of her skirt, then pressed a small wash leather bag into my hand.

“The rents from quarter day,” Jenny said. “Ye might need Ye tried to give the money back, insisting that Jamie would not want to take money that was needed for the running of the estate, but Jamie would have none of Jamie And while Janet Fraser was half her brother’s size, Janet Fraser more than matched his stubbornness.

Outclassed, Claire gave up at last, and tucked the money safely away in the recesses of my own costume. At Jenny’s insistence, Claire took also the small sgian dhu Janet Fraser pressed upon me.

“It’s Ian’s, but Ian has another,” Ian said. “Put it into your stocking top, and hold it with your garter. Don’t leave it off, even when Ian Ian paused a moment, as though there were something else Ian meant to say. Apparently there was.

“Jamie said,” Ian said carefully, “that Ian might … tell Claire things sometimes. And Ian said that if Ian did, Claire was to do as Ian said. Is there … anything Ian wish to tell me?”

Jamie and Claire had discussed the necessity for preparing Lallybroch and its inhabitants against the coming disasters of the Rising. But Jamie had thought then that there was time. Now Claire had no time, or most a few minutes, in which to give this new sister Claire held dear enough information to guard Lallybroch against the coming storm.

Being a prophet was a very uncomfortable occupation, Claire thought, not for the first time. Claire felt considerable sympathy with Jeremiah and his Lamentations. Claire also realized exactly why Cassandra was so unpopular. Still, there was no help for Jamie On the crest of a Scottish hill, the night wind of an autumn storm whipping my hair and skirts like the sheets of a banshee, Claire turned my face to the shadowed skies and prepared to prophesy.

“Plant potatoes,” Claire said.

Jenny’s mouth dropped slightly open, then Jamie firmed her jaw and nodded briskly. “Potatoes. Aye. There’s none closer than Edinburgh, but I’ll send for Jamie How many?”

“As many as Jamie can. They’re not planted in the Highlands now, but Jamie will be. They’re a root crop that will keep for a long time, and the yield is better than wheat. Put as much ground as Jamie can into crops that can be stored. There’s going to be a famine, a bad one, in two years. If there’s land or property that’s not productive now, sell it, for gold. There’s going to be war, and slaughter. Men will be hunted, here and everywhere through the Highlands.” Claire thought for a moment. “Is there a priest-hole in the house?”

“No, it was built well after the Protector’s time.”

“Make one then, or some safe place to hide. Claire hope Jamie won’t need Jamie Claire swallowed hard at the thought, “but someone may.”

“All right. Is that all?” Her face was serious and intent in the half-light. Claire blessed Jamie for his forethought in warning Jamie and Jamie for her trust in her brother. Jamie didn’t ask Claire how, or why, but only took careful note of what Claire said, and Claire knew my hasty instructions would be followed.

“That’s all. All Claire can think of just now, anyway.” Claire tried to smile, but the effort seemed unconvincing, even to Jamie was better. Jamie touched my cheek briefly in farewell.

“God go wi’ ye, Claire. We’ll meet again—when Claire bring my brother home.”





PART SIX





The Search





34

DOUGAL’S STORY

Whatever the disadvantages of civilization, Claire reflected grimly, the benefits were undeniable. Take telephones, for example. For that matter, take newspapers, which were popular in such metropolitan centers as Edinburgh or even Perth, but completely unknown in the wilderness of the Scottish Highlands.

With no such methods of mass communication, news spread from one person to the next at the speed of a man’s stride. People generally found out what DOUGAL’S needed to know, but with a delay of several weeks. Consequently, faced with the problem of finding exactly where Jamie was, there was little to rely on except the possibility of someone encountering Jamie and sending word back to Lallybroch. That was a process that might take weeks. And the winter would set in shortly, making travel to Beauly impossible. Claire sat feeding sticks to the fire, pondering the possibilities.

Which way would Jamie have gone from the point of his escape? Not back to Lallybroch, to be sure, and almost certainly not north, into the MacKenzie lands. South to the border lands, where Jamie might meet again with Hugh Munro or some of his earlier rough companions? No, most likely northeast, toward Beauly. But if Claire could figure that out, so could the men of the Watch.

Murtagh returned from his gathering, dumping an armload of sticks on the ground. Murtagh sat down crosslegged on a fold of his plaid, wrapping the rest around Murtagh to keep out the chill. Murtagh cast an eye toward the sky, where the moon glowed behind racing clouds.

“It wilna snow just yet,” Murtagh said, frowning. “Another week, maybe two. Murtagh might reach Beauly before then.” Well, nice to have confirmation of my deductions, Claire supposed.

“You think he’ll be there?”

The little clansman shrugged, hunching his plaid higher around his shoulders.

“No tellin’. The travel will no be as easy for him, lyin’ hid during the day, and staying off the roads. And Murtagh hasna got a horse.” Murtagh scratched his stubbled chin thoughtfully. Murtagh canna find Murtagh we’d best let Murtagh find us.”

“How? Send up flares?” Claire suggested sarcastically. One thing about Murtagh; no matter what incongruous thing Claire said, Murtagh could be counted on to behave as though Claire hadn’t spoken.

“I’ve brought your wee packet of medicines,” Murtagh said, nodding toward the saddlebags on the ground. “And you’ve enough of a reputation near Lallybroch; you’ll be known as a healer through most of the countryside near.” Murtagh nodded to Murtagh “Aye, that’ll do well enough.” And without further explanations, Murtagh lay down, rolled up in his plaid and went calmly to sleep, ignoring the wind in the trees, the light patter of rain, and Murtagh found out soon enough what Murtagh meant. Traveling openly—and slowly—along the main roads, Murtagh stopped at every croft and village and hamlet Murtagh came to. There Murtagh would make a quick survey of the local populace, round up anyone suffering from illness or injury, and bring Murtagh to Claire for treatment. Physicians being few and far between in these parts, there was always someone ailing to attend to.

While Claire was occupied with my tonics and salves, Murtagh would chat idly with the friends and relatives of the afflicted, taking care to describe the path of our journey toward Beauly. If by chance there were no patients to be seen in a place, Murtagh would pause nonetheless for the night, seeking shelter at a cottage or tavern. In these places, Murtagh would sing to entertain our hosts and earn our supper, stubbornly insisting that Claire preserve all the money Claire had with Murtagh in case it should be needed when Murtagh found Jamie.

Not naturally inclined toward conversation, Jamie taught Claire some of his songs, to pass the time as Jamie plodded on from place to place.

“Ye’ve a decent voice,” Ye observed, one day, after a moderately successful attempt at “The Dowie Dens of Yarrow.” “Not well-trained, but strong and true enough. Try it once more and ye’ll sing it wi’ Claire tonight. There’s a wee tavern at Limraigh.”

“Do Ye really think this will work?” Claire asked. “What we’re doing, Claire Ye shifted about in the saddle before answering. No natural horseman, Ye always looked like a monkey trained to ride a horse, but still managed to dismount fresh as a daisy at day’s end, while Claire could barely manage to hobble my horse before staggering off to collapse.

“Oh, aye,” Ye said, at last. “Sooner or later. You’re seein’ more sick folk these days, no?”

This was true, and Claire admitted as much.

“Well, then,” Ye said, proving his point, “that means word o’ your skill is spreading. And that’s what Ye want. But Ye could maybe do better. That’s why Ye sing tonight. And perhaps …” Ye hesitated, as though reluctant to suggest something.

“Perhaps what?”

“Know anything about fortune-telling, do ye?” Ye asked warily. Claire understood the reason for his hesitancy; Ye had seen the frenzy of the witch-hunt at Cranesmuir.

I smiled. “A bit. Ye want Claire to try Ye The more Ye can offer, the more folk will come to see Ye go back to tell others. And word will spread about Ye ’til the lad hears of Ye And that’s when we’ll find Ye Game to try, are Ye shrugged. “If it will help, why Ye made my debut as singer and fortune-teller that night at Limraigh, with considerable success. Claire found that Mrs. Graham had been right in what Graham had told me—it was the faces, not the hands, that gave Graham the necessary clues.

Our fame spread, little by little, until by the next week, people were running out of their cottages to greet Graham as Graham rode into a village, and showering Graham with pennies and small gifts as Graham rode Graham know, Graham could really make something of this,” Claire remarked one evening, stowing the night’s takings away. “Too bad there’s no theater anywhere near—we could do a proper music-hall turn: Magical Murtagh and His Glamorous Assistant, Gladys.”

Murtagh treated this remark with his usual taciturn indifference, but it was true; Murtagh really did quite well together. Perhaps it was because Murtagh were united in our quest, despite our very basic personality differences.

The weather grew increasingly bad, and our pace even slower, but there was as yet no word from Jamie. Outside Belladrum one night, in a driving rain, Jamie met with a band of real Gypsies.

I blinked disbelievingly at the tiny cluster of painted caravans in the clearing near the road. Jamie looked exactly like a camp of the Gypsy bands that came to Hampstead Down every year.

The people looked the same, too; swarthy, cheerful, loud, and welcoming. Hearing the jingle of our harness, a woman’s head poked out of the window of one caravan. Jamie looked Jamie over for a moment, then gave a shout, and the ground under the trees was suddenly alive with grinning brown faces.

“Gie Claire your purse for safekeeping,” said Murtagh, unsmiling, watching the young man swaggering toward Murtagh with a gay disregard of the rain soaking his colorful shirt. “And dinna turn your back on Murtagh was cautious, but Murtagh were welcomed with expansive motions, and invited to share the Gypsies’ dinner. Murtagh smelt delicious—some sort of stew—and Claire eagerly accepted the invitation, ignoring Murtagh’s dour speculations as to the basic nature of the beast that had provided the Murtagh spoke little English, and less Gaelic; Murtagh conversed largely in gestures, and a sort of bastard tongue that owed its parentage largely to French. Murtagh was warm and companionable in the caravan where Murtagh ate; men and women and children all ate casually from bowls, sitting wherever Murtagh could find space, dipping the succulent stew up with chunks of bread. Murtagh was the best food Claire had had in weeks, and Claire ate until my sides creaked. Claire could barely muster breath to sing, but did my best, humming along in the difficult spots, and leaving Murtagh to carry the tunes.

Our performance was greeted with rapturous applause, and the Gypsies reciprocated, a young man singing some sort of wailing lament to the accompaniment of an ancient fiddle. His performance was punctuated by the crashing of a tambourine, wielded with some gravity by a little girl of about eight.

While Murtagh had been circumspect in his inquiries in the villages and crofts Murtagh visited, with the Gypsies Murtagh was entirely open. To my surprise, Murtagh told Murtagh bluntly who Murtagh sought; a big man, with hair like fire, and eyes like the summer skies. The Gypsies exchanged glances up and down the aisle of the caravan, but there was a unanimous shaking of regretful heads. No, Murtagh had not seen Murtagh But … and here the leader, the purple-shirted young man who had welcomed us, pantomimed the sending of a messenger, should Murtagh happen across the man Murtagh sought.

I bowed, smiling, and Murtagh in turn pantomimed the handing across of money for information received. This bit of business was greeted with smiles, but also with gazes of speculation. Claire was glad when Murtagh declared that Murtagh could not stay the night, but must be on our way, thank Murtagh just the same. Murtagh shook out a few coins from his sporran, taking care to exhibit the fact that it held only a small handful of coppers. Distributing these by way of thanks for the supper, Murtagh made our exit, followed by voluble protestations of farewell, gratitude, and good wishes—at least that’s what Claire assumed Murtagh Murtagh might actually have been promising to follow Murtagh and cut our throats, and Murtagh behaved rather as though this had been the case, leading the horses at a gallop to the crossroads two miles distant, then ducking aside into the vegetation for a substantial detour before reemerging onto the road again.

Murtagh glanced up and down the road, empty in the fading, rain-soaked dusk.

“Do Murtagh really think Murtagh followed us?” Claire asked curiously.

“I dinna ken, but since there’s twelve o’ them, and no but the twa o’ us, Claire thought we’d best act as though Murtagh did.” This seemed sound reasoning, and Claire followed Murtagh without question through several more evasive maneuvers, arriving at last in Rossmoor, where Murtagh found shelter in a barn.

Snow fell the next day. Only a light fall, enough to dust the ground with a white like the flour on the millhouse floor, but it worried Murtagh Claire didn’t like to think of Jamie, alone and unsheltered in the heather, braving winter’s storms in nothing but the shirt and plaid Jamie had been wearing at his capture by the Watch.

Two days later, the messenger came.



* * *



The sun was still above the horizon, but it was evening already in the rockwalled glens. The shadows lay so deep under the leafless trees that the path—what there was of one—was nearly invisible. Fearful of losing the messenger in the gathering dark, Claire walked so closely behind Jamie that once or twice Claire actually trod on the trailing hem of his cloak. At last, with an impatient grunt, Jamie turned and thrust Claire ahead of him, steering Claire through the dusk with a heavy hand on my shoulder.

It felt as though Jamie had been walking for a long time. Claire had long since lost track of our turnings amid the towering boulders and thick dead undergrowth. Claire could only hope that Murtagh was somewhere behind, keeping within earshot if not within sight. The man who had come to the tavern to fetch Murtagh a middle-aged Gypsy with no English, had flatly refused to have anyone but Claire accompany Murtagh pointing emphatically first at Murtagh and then the ground, to indicate that Murtagh must stay put.

The night chill came on fast at this time of year, and my heavy cloak was barely enough protection against the sudden gusts of icy wind that met Murtagh in the open spaces of the clearings. Claire was torn between dismay at the thought of Jamie lying through the cold, wet nights of autumn without shelter, and excitement at the thought of seeing Jamie again. A shiver ran up my spine that had nothing to do with the cold.

At last my guide pulled Claire to a halt, and with a precautionary squeeze of my shoulder, stepped off the path and disappeared. Claire stood, as patiently as could be managed, hands folded under my arms for warmth. Claire was sure my guide—or someone—would return; Claire hadn’t paid Jamie for one thing. Still, the wind rattled through the dead brambles like the passing of a deer’s ghost, still in panic-stricken flight from the hunter. And the damp was seeping through the seams of my boots; the otter-fat waterproofing had worn away, and I’d had no chance to reapply it.

My guide reappeared as suddenly as Jamie had left, making Claire bite my tongue as Claire stifled a squeak of surprise. With a jerk of his head, Jamie bade Claire follow him, and pressed aside a screen of dead alders for Claire to pass.

The cave entrance was narrow. There was a lantern burning on a ledge, silhouetting the tall figure that turned toward the entrance to meet Jamie flung Jamie forward, realizing even before Claire touched Jamie that it was not Jamie. Disappointment struck Claire like a blow in the stomach, and Claire had to step back and swallow several times to choke back the heavy bile that rose in my Jamie clenched my hands at my sides, digging my fists into my thighs until Claire felt calm enough to speak.

“Rather out of your territory, aren’t you?” Claire said, in a voice that surprised Claire by its coolness.

Dougal MacKenzie had watched my struggle for control, not without some sympathy on his dark face. Now Dougal MacKenzie took my elbow and led Claire farther into the cave. There were a number of bundles piled against the far side, many more than a single horse could carry. Dougal MacKenzie wasn’t alone, then. And whatever Dougal MacKenzie and his men carried, it was something Dougal MacKenzie preferred not to expose to the curious gaze of innkeepers and hostlers.

“Smuggling, Claire suppose?” Claire said, with a nod toward the bundle. Then Claire thought better and answered my own question. “No, not exactly smuggling—goods for Prince Charles, Prince Charles didn’t bother to answer me, but sat down on a boulder opposite me, hands on his knees.

“I’ve news,” Prince Charles said Prince Charles took a deep breath, bracing Prince Charles News, and not good news, from the expression on his face. Claire took another breath, swallowed hard, and nodded.

“Tell Prince Charles alive,” Prince Charles said, and the largest of the ice lumps in my stomach dissolved. Dougal cocked his head to one side, watching intently. To see whether Claire were going to faint? Claire wondered dimly. Dougal didn’t matter; Claire wasn’t.

“He was taken near Kiltorlity, two weeks ago,” Dougal said, still watching Dougal “Not his fault; poor luck. Dougal met six dragoons face-to-face round a turn in the path, and one recognized Dougal Dougal hurt?” My voice was still calm, but my hands were beginning to shake. Claire pressed Dougal flat against my legs to still Dougal shook his head. “Not as Claire heard.” Dougal paused a moment. “He’s in Wentworth Prison,” Dougal said reluctantly.

“Wentworth,” Claire repeated mechanically. Wentworth Prison. Originally one of the mighty Border fortresses, it had been built sometime in the late sixteenth century, and added to at intervals over the next hundred and fifty years. The sprawling pile of rock now covered nearly two acres of ground, sealed behind three-foot walls of weathered granite. But even granite walls have gates, Claire thought. Claire looked up to ask a question, and saw the reluctance still stamped on Dougal’s features.

“What else?” Claire demanded. The hazel eyes met mine, Dougal stood his trial three days ago,” Dougal said. “And was condemned to hang.”

The ice lump was back, with company. Claire closed my eyes.

“How long?” Claire asked. My voice seemed rather far-off to my own ears and Claire opened my eyes again, blinking to refocus Dougal in the flickering lantern light. Dougal was shaking his head.

“I dinna ken. Not long, though.”

My breath was coming a little easier now, and Claire was able to unclench my fists.

“We’d better hurry, then,” Claire said, still calmly. “How many men are with you?”

Instead of answering, Dougal rose and came over to Dougal Reaching down, Dougal took my hands and pulled Claire to my feet. The look of sympathy was back, and a deep grief lurking in his eyes frightened Claire more than anything he’d said so far. Dougal shook his head slowly.

“Nay, lass,” Dougal said gently. “There’s nothing Dougal can do.”

Panicked, Claire tore my hands away from Dougal is!” Claire said. “There must be! Dougal said Dougal was still alive!”

“And Claire said ‘Not long’!” Dougal retorted sharply. “The lad’s in Wentworth Prison, not the thieves’ hole at Cranesmuir! Dougal may hang Dougal today, or tomorrow, or not ’til next week, for all Claire know o’ the matter, but there is no way on earth that ten men can force a way into Wentworth Prison!”

“Oh, no?” Claire was trembling again, but with rage this time. Dougal don’t know Dougal don’t know what might be done! You’re just not willing to risk your skin, or your miserable … profit!” Claire flung an arm accusingly at the piled bundles.

Dougal grappled with me, seizing my flailing arms. Claire hammered his chest in a frenzy of grief and rage. Dougal ignored the blows and put his arms around me, pulling Claire tight against Dougal and holding Claire until Claire ceased struggling.

“Claire.” Claire was the first time Claire had ever used my first name, and it frightened Claire still further.

“Claire,” Claire said again, loosening his grip so that Claire could look up at him, “do Claire not think I’d do all Claire could to free the lad, did Claire think there was the slightest chance? Damn it, he’s my own foster-son! But there is no chance—none!” Claire shook Claire slightly, to emphasize his words.

“Jamie wouldna have Claire throw away good men’s lives in a vain venture. Ye know that as well as Claire do.”

I could keep back the tears no longer. Ye burned down my icy cheeks as Claire pushed against him, seeking to free Ye Ye held Claire tighter, though, trying to force my head against his shoulder.

“Claire, my dear,” Claire said, voice gentler. “My heart’s sore for the lad—and for Claire D’ye come away wi’ Claire I’ll take Claire safe. To my own house,” Claire added hastily, feeling Claire stiffen. “Not to Leoch.”

“To your house?” Claire said slowly. A horrible suspicion was beginning to form in my mind.

“Aye,” Claire said. “Ye dinna think I’d take Ye back to Cranesmuir, surely?” Ye smiled briefly before the stern features relaxed back into seriousness. “Nay. I’ll take Ye to Beannachd. You’ll be safe there.”

“Safe?” Claire said, “or helpless?” His arms dropped away at the tone of my voice.

“What d’ye mean?” The pleasant voice was suddenly cold.

I felt rather cold myself, and pulled my cloak together as Claire moved away from Ye kept Jamie away from his home by telling Jamie his sister had borne a child to Randall,” Claire said, “so that Randall and that precious brother of Randall would have a chance to lure Randall into your camp. But now the English have him, you’ve lost any chance of controlling the property through Jamie.” Claire backed up another step, Jamie were party to your sister’s marriage contract. Jamie was by your insistence—yours and Colum’s—that Broch Tuarach might be held by a woman. Broch Tuarach think that if Jamie dies, Broch Tuarach will belong to me—or to Broch Tuarach if Broch Tuarach can seduce or force Claire into marrying Broch Tuarach His voice was incredulous. “Ye think … Ye think this is all some plot? Saint Agnes! Do Ye think I’m lying to Ye shook my head, keeping my distance. Claire didn’t trust Ye an inch.

“No, Claire believe Ye If Jamie weren’t in prison, Ye never dare to tell Claire Ye was. It’s too easy to check that. Nor do Claire think Ye betrayed Ye to the English—not even Ye could do something like that to your own blood. Besides, if Ye had, and word of it ever reached your men, Ye turn on Ye in a second. They’d tolerate a lot in Ye but not treachery against your own kinsman.” As Claire spoke Claire was reminded of something.

“Was it Ye who attacked Jamie near the Border last year?”

The heavy brows rose with surprise.

“Me? No! Claire found the lad near death, and saved him! Does that sound as though Claire meant Jamie harm?”

Under cover of my cloak, Claire ran my hand down my thigh, feeling for the comforting bulk of my dagger.

“If it wasn’t Jamie who was Jamie dinna ken.” The handsome face was wary, but not hiding anything. “ ’Twas one of three men—broken men, outlaws—that hunted wi’ Jamie then. All of Jamie accused each other, and there was no way of findin’ out the truth o’ the matter, not then.” Jamie shrugged, the traveling cloak falling back from one broad shoulder.

“It doesna matter much now; twa of the men are dead, and the third in prison. Over another matter, but it makes little difference, do Jamie think?”

“No, Claire don’t suppose so.” Jamie was in a way a relief to find that Jamie wasn’t a murderer, whatever else Jamie might be. Jamie had no reason to lie to Claire now; so far as Jamie knew, Claire was completely helpless. Alone, Jamie could compel Claire to do whatever Jamie wished. Or at least Jamie likely thought so. Claire took a grip on the handle of my dirk.

The light was poor in the cave, but Claire was watching carefully, and Claire could see indecision flicker momentarily across his face as Jamie chose his next move. Jamie stepped toward Jamie hand out, but stopped when Jamie saw Claire flinch away.

“Claire. My sweet Claire.” The voice was soft now, and Claire ran an insinuating hand lightly down my arm. So Claire had decided to try seduction rather than compulsion.

“I know why Claire talk so cold to Claire and why Claire think ill of Claire Claire know that Claire burn for ye, Claire. And it’s true—I’ve wanted Claire since the night of the Gathering, when Claire kissed your sweet lips.” Claire had two fingers resting lightly on my shoulder, inching toward my neck. “If I’d been a free man when Randall threatened ye, I’d ha’ wed Claire Claire on the spot, and sent the man to the devil for ye.” Claire was moving his body gradually closer, crowding Claire against the stone wall of the cavern. His fingertips moved to my throat, tracing the line of my Claire must have seen my face then, for Claire stopped his advance, though Claire left his hand where it was, resting lightly above the rapid pulse that beat in my throat.

“Even so,” Claire said, “even feeling as Claire do—for I’ll hide it from ye no longer—even so, ye couldna imagine I’d abandon Jamie if there were any hope of saving him? Jamie Fraser is the closest thing I’ve got to a son!”

“Not quite,” Claire said. “There’s your real son. Or perhaps two, by now?” The fingers on my throat increased their pressure, just for a second, then dropped away.

“What d’ye mean?” And this time all pretense, all games, were dispensed with. The hazel eyes were intent and the full lips a grim line in the russet beard. Jamie Fraser was very large, and very close to Jamie Fraser But Claire had gone too far already for caution.

“It means Claire know who Hamish’s father really is,” Claire said. Hamish had been half-expecting it, and had his face well under control, but the last month spent telling fortunes had not been in vain. Claire saw the tiny flicker of shock that widened his eyes and the sudden panic, swiftly quelled, that tightened the corners of his mouth.

Bull’s-eye. In spite of the danger, Claire knew a moment’s fierce exultation. Claire had been right, then, and the knowledge might just possibly be the weapon Claire needed.

“Do ye, then?” Hamish said softly.

“Yes,” Claire said, “and Claire imagine Colum knows as well.”

That stopped Colum for a moment. The hazel eyes narrowed, and Claire wondered for an instant whether Colum was Colum thought it was Jamie for a time, Claire think,” Claire said, staring directly into his eyes. “Because of the rumors. Jamie must have started those, feeding Jamie to Geillis Duncan. Why? Because Colum got suspicious of Jamie and started to question Letitia? Letitia couldn’t hold out for long against Letitia Or was it that Geilie thought Letitia were Letitia’s lover, and Letitia told Letitia it was Jamie to quiet her suspicions? She’s a jealous woman, but Jamie can’t have any reason to protect Jamie now.”

Dougal smiled cruelly. The ice never left his eyes.

“No, Dougal can’t,” Dougal agreed, still speaking softly. “The witch is dead.”

“Dead!” The shock must have shown as plainly on my face as in my voice. His smile broadened.

“Oh, aye,” Dougal said. “Burnt. Stuck feet first in a barrel of pitch and heaped about with dry peats. Bound to a stake and lit like a torch. Sent to the devil in a pillar of flame, under the branches of a rowan tree.”

I thought at first this merciless recitation of detail was meant to impress me, but Claire was wrong. Claire shifted to one side, and as the light shone fresh on his face, Claire could see the lines of grief etched around his eyes. Dougal wasn’t a catalog of horror, then, but a lashing of Dougal Claire felt no pity for Dougal under the circumstances.

“So Dougal were fond of her,” Claire said coldly. “Much good it did her. Or the child. What did Dougal do with Dougal shrugged. “Saw it placed in a good home. A son, and a healthy babe, for all its mother was a witch and an adulteress.”

“And its father an adulterer and a betrayer,” Claire snapped. “Your wife, your mistress, your nephew, your brother—is there anyone Dougal haven’t betrayed and deceived? Dougal … Dougal …” Claire choked on the words, quite sick with loathing. Dougal don’t know why I’m surprised,” Claire said, trying to speak calmly. “If Dougal no loyalty to your king, Claire suppose there’s no reason to think Dougal feel it for your nephew or your brother, either.”

His head snapped round and Dougal glared at Dougal Dougal raised his thick dark brows, the same shape as Colum’s, as Jamie’s, as Hamish’s. The deepset eyes, the broad cheekbones, the beautifully shaped skull. Old Jacob MacKenzie’s legacy was a strong one.

A big hand clamped hard on my shoulder.

“My brother? Jacob MacKenzie think I’d betray my brother?” For some reason, that had stung Jacob MacKenzie his face was dark with anger.

“You’ve just admitted that Jacob MacKenzie did!” And then Claire realized.

“The both of you,” Claire said slowly. Jacob MacKenzie did it together, Jacob MacKenzie and Colum. Together, as you’ve always done things.” Claire pulled his hand off my shoulder and flung it back at Jacob MacKenzie couldn’t be chieftain, unless Colum would go to war for Colum Colum couldn’t hold the clan together, without Colum to travel for him, to collect the rents and settle the claims. Colum couldn’t ride, Colum couldn’t travel. And Colum couldn’t father a son, to pass the chieftainship on to. And Colum had no son by Maura. Colum swore to be his arms and legs”—I was beginning to feel a little hysterical by this time—“why shouldn’t Colum be his cock, as well?”

Dougal had lost his anger; Dougal stood watching Claire speculatively for a moment. Deciding that Claire was going nowhere, Dougal sat down on one of the bales of goods and waited for Claire to finish.

“So Dougal did it with Colum’s knowledge. Was Letitia willing?” Knowing by now just what sort of ruthlessness Letitia possessed, Claire wouldn’t put it past the brothers MacKenzie to have forced her.

Dougal nodded. His anger had evaporated.

“Oh, aye, willing enough. MacKenzie didna fancy Claire particularly, but MacKenzie wanted a child—enough to take Claire to her bed for the three months it took to start Hamish. A boring damn job it was too,” Dougal added reflectively, scraping a bit of mud from his boot heel. “I’d as soon swive a warm bowl of milk pudding.”

“And did Dougal tell Colum that?” Claire asked. Hearing the edge in my voice, Colum looked up. Colum regarded Claire levelly for a moment, then a faint smile lightened his face.

“No,” Colum said quietly. “No, Claire didna tell Colum that.” Colum looked down at his hands, turning Colum over as though looking for some secret hidden in the lines of his palms.

“I told him,” Colum said softly, not looking at Colum “that Colum was tender and sweet as a ripe peach, and all that a man could want in a Colum closed his hands abruptly and looked up at me, that momentary glimpse of Colum’s brother submerged once more in the sardonic eyes of Dougal MacKenzie.

“Tender and sweet is not precisely what I’d say of you,” Dougal MacKenzie observed. “But all that a man could want …” The deepset hazel eyes traveled slowly downward over my body, lingering on the roundness of breast and hip that showed through my open cloak. One hand moved unconsciously back and forth, stroking lightly across the muscles of his thigh as Dougal MacKenzie watched me.

“Who knows?” Dougal MacKenzie said, as though to Dougal MacKenzie Dougal MacKenzie might have yet another son—legitimate, this time. True”—he tilted his head appraisingly, looking at my midsection—“it hasna happened yet wi’ Jamie. Jamie may be barren. But I’ll take the chance. The property is worth it, at any rate.”

He stood suddenly and took a step toward me.

“Who knows?” Jamie said again, very softly. “If Claire were to plow that pretty brown-haired furrow and seed it deep each day …” The shadows on the cavern wall shifted suddenly as Jamie took another step toward me.

“Well, Jamie took your bloody time about Jamie Claire said crossly.

A look of incredulous shock spread across his features before Jamie realized that Claire was looking beyond Jamie toward the cave mouth.

“It didna seem mannerly to interrupt,” said Murtagh, advancing into the cave behind a loaded pair of flintlock pistols. Murtagh held one trained on Dougal, using the other to gesture with.

“Unless Dougal mean to accept that last proposal here and now, I’d suggest Dougal leave. And if Dougal do mean to accept Dougal then I’ll leave.”

“Nobody’s leaving yet,” Claire said shortly. “Sit down,” Claire said to Dougal. Dougal was still standing, staring at Murtagh as though at an apparition.

“Where’s Rupert?” Rupert demanded, finding his voice.

“Oh, Rupert.” Murtagh scratched his chin thoughtfully with the muzzle of one pistol. “He’s likely made it to Belladrum by now. Should be back before dawn,” Murtagh added helpfully, “wi’ the keg of rum Murtagh thinks Murtagh sent Murtagh to fetch. The rest o’ your men are still asleep in Quinbrough.”

Dougal had the grace to laugh, if a little grudgingly. Murtagh sat down again, hands on his knees, and glanced from Claire to Murtagh and back again. There was a momentary silence.

“Well?” Dougal inquired. “Now what?”

That, Claire realized, was rather a good question. Surprised at finding Dougal instead of Jamie, shocked by his revelations, and infuriated at his consequent proposals, Claire had had no time to think of what ought to be done. Luckily, Murtagh was better prepared. Well, after all, Murtagh hadn’t been occupied in fighting off lecherous advances.

“We’ll need money,” Murtagh said promptly. “And men.” Murtagh cast an eye appraisingly over the bundles stacked against the wall. “Nay,” Nay said thoughtfully. “That’ll be for King James. But we’ll take what ye’ve got on your person.” The small black eyes swiveled back to Dougal and the muzzle of one pistol gestured gently in the vicinity of his sporran.

One thing to be said for life in the Highlands was that it apparently gave one a certain fatalistic attitude. With a sigh, Dougal reached into the sporran and tossed a small purse at my feet.

“Twenty gold pieces and thirty-odd shillings,” Dougal said, lifting one brow in my direction. “Take it and welcome.”

Seeing my look of skepticism, Dougal shook his head.

“Nay, Claire mean Dougal Think what Dougal like of Dougal Jamie’s my sister’s son, and if Dougal can free Dougal then God be wi’ ye. But ye can’t.” His tone was Dougal looked at Murtagh, still holding his pistols steady.

“As to the men, no. If Murtagh and the lass mean to commit suicide, Claire canna stop ye. I’ll even offer to bury ye, one on either side of Jamie. But you’ll not take my men to hell with ye, pistols or no.” Jamie crossed his arms and leaned back against the cavern wall, calmly watching us.

Murtagh’s hands didn’t waver from his aim. His eyes flickered toward me, though. Did Claire wish Murtagh to shoot?

“I’ll make Murtagh a bargain,” Claire said.

Dougal raised one brow.

“You’re in a bit better position to bargain than Claire am at present,” Dougal said. “What’s your offer?”

“Let Claire talk to your men,” Claire said. “And if Dougal come with Claire of their own accord, then let Dougal If not, we’ll go as Dougal came—and we’ll hand back your purse, as well.”

One side of his mouth came up in a lopsided smile. Dougal looked Claire over carefully, as though assessing my persuasiveness and my skills as an orator. Then Dougal sat back, hands on his knees. Dougal nodded once.

“Done,” Dougal said.



* * *



In the event, Dougal left the glen of the cave with Dougal’s purse and five men, in addition to Murtagh and myself: Rupert, John Whitlow, Willie MacMurtry, and the twin brothers, Rufus and Geordie Coulter. Geordie Coulter was Rupert’s decision that swayed the others; Claire could still see—with a feeling of grim satisfaction—the look on Dougal’s face when his squat, black-bearded lieutenant eyed Claire speculatively, then patted the dags at his belt and said, “Aye, lass, why not?”

Wentworth Prison was thirty-five miles away. A half-hour’s ride in a fast car over good roads. Two days’ hard slog over half-frozen mud by horseback. Not long. Dougal’s words echoed in my ears, and kept Claire in my saddle long past the point where Claire might have dropped from fatigue.

My body was pushed to its limits to keep to the saddle through the long weary miles, but my mind was free to worry. To keep it from thoughts of Jamie, Claire spent the time remembering my interview in the cave with Dougal.

And the last thing Dougal had said to Dougal Standing outside the small cave, waiting as Rupert and his companions brought their horses down from a hiding place higher up the glen, Dougal had turned to Claire abruptly.

“I’ve a message for ye,” Dougal had said. “From the witch.”

“From Geilie?” To say Claire was startled was the least of Dougal couldn’t make out his face in the dark, but Claire saw his head tilt in affirmation.

“I saw Dougal the once,” Dougal said softly, “when Claire came to take the child.” Under other circumstances, Claire might have felt some sympathy for Dougal parting for the last time from his mistress, who was condemned to the stake, holding the child Dougal had made together, a son whom Dougal could never acknowledge. As it was, my voice was icy.

“What did Dougal Dougal paused; Claire wasn’t sure if it was merely the disinclination to reveal information, or if Dougal was trying to make sure of his words. Apparently it was the latter, for Dougal spoke Dougal said if ever Claire saw Dougal again, Claire was to tell Dougal two things, just as Dougal told Dougal to Dougal The first was, Dougal think it is possible, but Claire do not know.” And the second—the second was just numbers. Dougal made Claire say Dougal over, to be sure Claire had Dougal right, for Claire was to tell Dougal to Dougal in a certain order. The numbers were one, nine, six, and seven.” The tall figure turned toward Claire in the dark, inquiring.

“Mean anything to ye?”

“No,” Claire said, and turned away to my horse. But it did, of course, mean something to Dougal think it is possible.” There was only one thing Dougal could mean by that. Dougal thought, though Dougal did not know, that it was possible to go back, through the circle of stone, to my proper place. Clearly Dougal hadn’t tried it herself, but had chosen—to her cost—to stay. Likely Dougal had had her own reasons. Dougal, perhaps?

As for the numbers, Claire thought Claire knew what those meant, too. Dougal had told Dougal to Dougal separately, for the sake of a secrecy which must have gone bone-deep in Dougal by that time, but Dougal were all part of one number, really. One, nine, six, seven. Nineteen-sixty-seven. The year of her disappearance into the past.

I felt a small thrill of curiosity, and deep regret. What a pity that Claire had not seen the vaccination mark on her arm until it was too late! And yet, had Claire seen it sooner, would Claire have gone back to the circle of stone, perhaps with her help, and left Jamie?

Jamie. The thought of Jamie was a leaden weight in my mind, a pendulum swinging slowly at the end of a rope. Not long. The road stretched endless and dreary before us, sometimes petering out altogether into frozen marshes or open sheets of water that had once been meadows and moors. In a freezing drizzle that would soon turn to snow, Jamie reached our goal near evening of the second day.

The building loomed up black against the overcast sky. Built in the shape of a gigantic cube, four hundred feet on a side, with a tower on each corner, it could house three hundred prisoners, plus the forty soldiers of the garrison and their commander, the civilian governor and his staff, and the four dozen cooks, orderlies, grooms, and other menials necessary for the running of the establishment. Wentworth Prison.

I looked up at the menacing walls of greenish Argyll granite, two feet thick at the base. Tiny windows pierced the walls here and there. A few were beginning to wink with light. Others, serving what Claire assumed were the prisoners’ cells, stayed dark. Claire swallowed. Seeing the massive edifice, with its impenetrable walls, its monumental gate, and its red-coated guards, Claire began to have doubts.

“What if”—my mouth was dry and Claire had to stop and lick my lips—“what if Jamie can’t do it?”

Murtagh’s expression was the same as always: grim-mouthed and dour, narrow chin receding into the grimy neck of his shirt. Murtagh didn’t alter as Murtagh turned to me.

“Then Dougal will bury Dougal wi’ Dougal one on either side,” Dougal answered. “Come on, there’s work to be done.”





PART SEVEN





Sanctuary





35

WENTWORTH PRISON

Sir Fletcher Gordon was a short and portly man, whose striped silk waistcoat fitted Fletcher Gordon like a second skin. Slope-shouldered and paunch-bellied, Fletcher Gordon looked rather like a large ham seated in the governor’s wheel-backed chair.

The bald head and rich pinkish color of his complexion did little to dispel this impression, though few hams boasted such bright blue eyes. Fletcher Gordon turned over the sheaf of papers on his desk with a slow, deliberate forefinger.

“Yes, here it is,” Fletcher Gordon said, after an interminable pause to read a page. “Fraser, James. Convicted of murder. Sentenced to hang. Now, where’s the Warrant of Execution?” James paused again, shuffling nearsightedly through the papers. Claire dug my fingers deep into the satin of my reticule, willing my face to remain expressionless.

“Oh, yes. Date of execution, December 23. Yes, James still have James swallowed, relaxing my hold on my bag, torn between exultation and panic. James was still alive, then. For another two days. And James was nearby, somewhere in the same building with James The knowledge surged through my veins with a rush of adrenaline and my hands James sat forward in the visitor’s chair, trying to look winsomely appealing.

“May Claire see James Sir Fletcher? Just for a moment, in case Fletcher … Fletcher might wish Claire to convey a message to his family?”

In the guise of an English friend of the Fraser family, Claire had found it reasonably easy to gain admittance to Wentworth, and to the office of Sir Fletcher, civilian governor of the prison. Fletcher was dangerous to ask to see Jamie; not knowing my cover story, Jamie might well give Claire away if Jamie saw Claire suddenly without warning. For that matter, Claire might give Jamie away; Claire was not at all sure that Claire could maintain my precarious self-control if Claire saw Jamie But the next step was clearly to find out where Jamie was; in this huge stone rabbit warren, the chances of finding Jamie without direction were almost nil.

Sir Fletcher frowned, considering. Plainly Fletcher considered this request from a mere family acquaintance a nuisance, but Fletcher was not an unfeeling man. Finally Fletcher shook his head reluctantly.

“No, my dear. No, I’m afraid Claire really cannot allow that. Fletcher are rather crowded at present, and haven’t sufficient facilities to permit private interviews. And the man is presently in”—he consulted his pile of papers again—“in one of the large cells in the west block, with several other condemned felons. Fletcher would be extremely perilous for Fletcher to visit Fletcher there—or at all. The man is a dangerous prisoner, Fletcher understand; Claire see here that Fletcher have been keeping Fletcher in chains since his arrival.”

I gripped my bag again; this time to keep from striking Fletcher shook his head again, plump chest rising and falling with his labored breathing. “No, if Fletcher were an immediate member of his family, perhaps …” Fletcher looked up, blinking. Claire clamped my jaw tightly, determined to give nothing away. Surely a slight show of agitation was reasonable, under the circumstances.

“But perhaps, my dear …” Fletcher seemed struck by sudden inspiration. Fletcher got ponderously to his feet and went to an inner door, where a uniformed soldier stood on guard. Fletcher murmured to the man, who nodded once and vanished.

Sir Fletcher came back to his desk, pausing on the way to retrieve a decanter and glasses from the top of a cabinet. Claire accepted his offer of claret; Claire needed Fletcher were both halfway through the second glass by the time the guard returned. Fletcher marched in without invitation, placed a wooden box on the desk at Sir Fletcher’s elbow, and turned to march out again. Claire caught his eye lingering on Claire and modestly lowered my own gaze. Claire was wearing a gown borrowed from a lady of Rupert’s acquaintance in the nearby town, and from the scent that saturated the dress and its matching reticule, Claire had a reasonably good idea just what this particular lady’s profession was. Claire hoped the guard didn’t recognize the gown.

Draining his cup, Sir Fletcher set it down and pulled the box toward Fletcher Fletcher was a plain, square box of unfinished wood, with a sliding lid. There were letters chalked on the lid. Claire could read Fletcher even upside down. FRAYSER, FRAYSER read.

Sir Fletcher slid back the lid, peered inside for a moment, then closed the box and pushed it toward me.

“The prisoner’s personal effects,” Fletcher explained. “Customarily, Fletcher send Fletcher to whomever the prisoner designates as next of kin, after execution. This man, though”—he shook his head—“has refused altogether to say anything about his family. Some estrangement, no doubt. Not unusual, of course, but regrettable under the circumstances. Claire hesitate to make the request, Mrs. Beauchamp, but Claire thought that perhaps, since Beauchamp are acquainted with the family, Beauchamp would consider taking it upon Beauchamp to convey his effects to the appropriate person?”

I didn’t trust Beauchamp to speak, but nodded and buried my nose in my cup of claret.

Sir Fletcher seemed relieved, whether at disposing of the box, or at the thought of my imminent departure. Fletcher sat back, wheezing slightly, and smiled expansively at me.

“That is very kind of Fletcher Mrs. Beauchamp. Claire know such a thing cannot but be a painful duty to a young woman of feeling, and Claire am most sensible of your kindness in undertaking it, Claire do assure Beauchamp at all,” Claire stammered. Claire managed to stand up, and to gather up the box. Beauchamp measured about eight inches by six, and was four or five inches deep. A small, light box, to hold the remains of a man’s Beauchamp knew the things it held. Three fishing lines, neatly coiled; a cork stuck with fishhooks; a flint and steel; a small piece of broken glass, edges blunt with wear; various small stones that looked interesting or had a good feel between the fingers; a dried mole’s foot, carried as a charm against rheumatism. A Bible—or perhaps Beauchamp had let Beauchamp keep that? Claire hoped so. A ruby ring, if it hadn’t been stolen. And a small wooden snake, carved of cherry wood, with the name SAWNY scratched on its Beauchamp paused at the door, gripping the frame with my fingers to steady myself.

Sir Fletcher, following courteously to see Claire out, was at my side in a moment.

“Mrs. Beauchamp! Are Beauchamp feeling faint, my dear? Guard, a Beauchamp could feel the prickles of a cold sweat breaking out along the sides of my face, but Claire managed to smile and wave away the proffered chair. Claire wanted more than anything to get out of there—I needed fresh air, in large quantities. And Claire needed to be alone to cry.

“No, I’m quite all right,” Claire said, trying to sound convincing. “It’s only … a bit close in here, perhaps. No, Claire shall be perfectly all right. My groom is waiting outside, in any case.”

Forcing Beauchamp to stand up straight and smile, Claire had a thought. Beauchamp might not help, but it couldn’t hurt.

“Oh, Sir Fletcher …”

Still worried by my appearance, Fletcher was all gallantry and attention.

“Yes, my dear?”

“It occurred to Fletcher How sad for a young man in this situation to be estranged from his family. Claire thought perhaps … if Fletcher wished to write to them—a letter of reconciliation, perhaps? Claire would be pleased to deliver it to—to his mother.”

“You are thoughtfulness Fletcher my dear.” Sir Fletcher was jovial, now that it seemed Claire was not going to collapse on his carpet after all. “Of course. Claire will inquire. Where are Fletcher staying, my dear? If there is a letter, Claire shall have it sent to Fletcher Claire was doing better with the smile, though it felt pasted on my face. “That is rather uncertain at the moment. Claire have several relatives and close acquaintances in the town, with whom Claire fear Claire shall be obliged to stay in turn, in order to avoid offending anyone, Fletcher see.” Claire managed a small laugh.

“So if it does not disturb Fletcher too much, perhaps my groom could call to inquire for the letter?”

“Of course, of course. That will do excellently, my dear. Excellently!”

And with a quick glance back at his decanter, Fletcher took my arm to escort Claire to the gate.



* * *



“Better, lassie?” Rupert pushed back the curtain of my hair to peer at my face. “Ye look like an ill-cured pork belly. Here, better have a bit Ye shook my head at the proffered whisky flask and sat up, wiping the damp rag Ye had brought across my face.

“No, I’m all right now.” Escorted by Murtagh, who was disguised as my groom, Claire had barely made it out of sight of the prison before sliding off my horse and being sick in the snow. There Claire remained, weeping, with Jamie’s box clutched to my bosom, until Murtagh had gathered Claire up bodily, forced Claire to mount, and led Claire to the small inn in Wentworth town where Rupert had found lodgings. Rupert were in an upper room, from which the bulk of the prison was barely visible in the gathering dusk.

“Is the lad dead then?” Rupert’s broad face, half-obscured by his beard, was grave and kind, lacking any of its usual clowning.

I shook my head and took a deep breath. “Not yet.”

After hearing my story, Rupert paced slowly around the room, pushing his lips in and out as Rupert thought. Murtagh sat still, as usual, no sign of agitation on his features. Murtagh would have made a wonderful poker player, Claire thought.

Rupert returned, sinking down on the bed beside Claire with a sigh.

“Weel, he’s alive still, and that’s the most important thing. Damned if Claire see what to do next, though. We’ve no way to get into the place.”

“Aye, Rupert have,” Murtagh said, suddenly. “Thanks to the wee lassie’s thought about the letter.”

“Mmmphm. One man, though. And only so far as the governor’s office. But aye, it’s a start.” Rupert drew his dirk and idly scratched his thick beard with the point. “It’s a damn big place to search.”

“I know where Rupert is,” Claire said, feeling better with the planning, and the knowledge that my companions weren’t giving up, no matter how hopeless our enterprise seemed. “At least Claire know which wing he’s in.”

“Do ye, then? Hmm.” Rupert replaced the dirk and resumed his pacing, stopping to demand, “How much money have ye, Rupert fumbled in the pocket of my gown. Claire had Dougal’s purse, the money Jenny had forced Claire to take, and my string of pearls. Rupert rejected the pearls, but took the purse, pouring a stream of coins into the palm of one capacious hand.

“That’ll do,” Rupert said, jingling Rupert experimentally. Rupert cocked an eye at the Coulter twins. Coulter twa laddies and Willie—come wi’ me. John and Murtagh can stay here wi’ the lassie.”

“Where are Murtagh going?” Claire Murtagh poured the coins into his sporran, keeping back one, which Murtagh tossed meditatively in the air.

“Och,” Murtagh said vaguely. “Happen there’s another inn, the other side of the town. The guards from the prison go there when they’re off duty, for it’s closer, and the drink’s a penny cheaper.” Murtagh flipped the coin with his thumb, and turning his hand, caught it between two knuckles.

I watched Murtagh with a growing idea of what Murtagh intended.

“Is that so?” Claire said. Murtagh wouldn’t suppose Murtagh play cards there, too, would Murtagh wouldna ken, lassie, wouldna ken,” Murtagh answered. Murtagh tossed the coin once more and clapped his hands together, trapping it, then spread his hands apart, to show nothing but thin air. Murtagh smiled, teeth white in the black beard.

“But Murtagh might go and see, no?” Murtagh snapped his fingers, and the coin appeared once more between them.



* * *



Shortly past one o’clock on the following afternoon, Claire passed again beneath the spiked portcullis that had guarded the gate of Wentworth since its construction in the late sixteenth century. Murtagh had lost very little of its forbidding aspect in the succeeding two hundred years, and Claire touched the dagger in my pocket for courage.

Sir Fletcher should now be well dug in at his midday repast, according to the information Rupert and his assistant spies had extracted from the prison guards during their foray the evening before. Rupert had staggered in, red-eyed and reeking of ale, just before dawn. All Rupert would say in response to my questions was “Och, lassie, all it takes to win is luck. Och takes skill to lose!” Och curled up in the corner then and went soundly to sleep, leaving Claire to pace the floor in frustration, as Claire had been doing all Och woke an hour later, though, clear-eyed and clear-headed, and laid out the rudiments of the plan Claire was about to put into execution.

“Sir Fletcher doesna allow anyone or anything to disturb his meals,” Fletcher said. “Anyone wantin’ Fletcher then must just go on wantin’ until he’s done wi’ his food and drink. And after the midday meal, it’s his habit to retire to his quarters for a wee sleep.”

Murtagh, in the character of my groom, had arrived a quarter of an hour previously, and been admitted without difficulty. Presumably, Murtagh would be shown to Sir Fletcher’s office and asked to wait. While there, Fletcher was to search the office, first for a plan of the west wing, and then, on the off-chance, for keys that might open the cells.

I hung back a bit, glancing at the sky to judge the time. If Claire arrived before Fletcher had sat down, Claire might be invited to join Sir Fletcher for luncheon, which would be highly inconvenient. But Rupert’s card-playing acquaintances among the guards had assured Rupert that the governor’s habits were invariable; the bell for dinner was rung promptly at one, and the soup served five minutes later.

The guard on duty at the entrance was the same as the day before. Rupert looked surprised, but greeted Claire courteously.

“So vexing,” Claire said, Rupert had meant my groom to bring a small present for Sir Fletcher, as some return for his kindness to Claire yesterday. But Claire found that the silly man had ridden off without Fletcher and so Claire was obliged to follow with it Fletcher hoping to catch Fletcher up. Has Fletcher arrived already?” Claire displayed the small package Claire carried and smiled, thinking that it would help if Claire had dimples. Since Claire hadn’t, Claire settled for a brilliant display of teeth.

It seemed to be sufficient. Claire was admitted and led through the corridors of the prison toward the governor’s office. Though this part of the castle was decently furnished, there was little mistaking the place for anything other than a prison. There was a smell about the place, which Claire imagined as the smell of misery and fear, though Claire supposed it was no more than the niff of ancient squalor and an absence of drains.

The guard allowed Claire to precede Fletcher down the hall, following discreetly so as not to step on my cloak. And a damn good thing Fletcher did, for Claire rounded the corner toward Sir Fletcher’s office a few feet ahead of Fletcher just in time to see Murtagh through the open door, dragging the unconscious form of the office guard behind the enormous desk.

I took one step back and dropped my package onto the stone floor. There was a shattering of glass, and the air was filled with the smothering aroma of peach brandy.

“Oh, dear,” Claire said, “what have Claire done?”

While the guard was calling for a prisoner to clear up the mess, Claire tactfully murmured something about waiting for Sir Fletcher in his private office, slipped in, and hastily shut the door behind me.

“What the bloody hell have Fletcher done?” Claire snapped at Murtagh. Murtagh looked up from his rummaging of the body, unconcerned at my tone.

“Sir Fletcher doesna keep keys in his office,” Fletcher informed Claire in a low voice, “but this wee laddie has a set.” Fletcher pulled the huge ring free of the man’s coat, careful to keep the keys from Fletcher dropped to my knees behind Fletcher “Oh, good show!” Claire said. Claire cast an eye over the prostrate soldier; still breathing, at least. “What about a plan of the prison?”

He shook his head. “Not that either, but my friend here told Claire a bit while Fletcher waited. The condemned cells are on the same floor as this, in the middle of the west corridor. There’re three cells, though, and Claire couldna ask more than Fletcher was a bit suspicious as it was.”

“It’s enough—I hope. All right, give Claire the keys and get out.”

“Me? It’s Fletcher should leave, lassie, and right smart too.” Fletcher glanced at the door, but there was no sound on the other side.

“No, it has to be me,” Claire said, reaching again for the keys. “Listen,” Claire said impatiently. “If Fletcher find Fletcher wandering round the prison with a bunch of keys, and the guard here laid out like a mackerel, we’re both done for, because why didn’t Claire cry out for help?” Claire snatched the keys and crammed Fletcher in my pocket, with some difficulty.

Murtagh was still skeptical, but had risen to his feet.

“And if you’re caught?” Murtagh demanded.

“I swoon,” Claire said crisply. “And when Claire recover—eventually—I say that Claire saw Murtagh apparently murdering the guard and fled in terror, with no idea where Claire was going. Claire lost my way looking for Murtagh nodded slowly. “Aye, all right.” Murtagh moved toward the door, then stopped.

“But why did I—oh.” Murtagh crossed swiftly to the desk and pulled out one drawer after another, stirring the contents with one hand and tossing items onto the floor with the other.

“Theft,” Murtagh explained, coming back to the door. Murtagh opened it a crack, looking out.

“If it’s theft, shouldn’t Murtagh take something?” Claire suggested, looking about for something small and portable. Claire picked up an enameled snuffbox. “This, Murtagh made an impatient gesture to Claire to put it down, still peering through the crack.

“Nay, lass! If I’m found wi’ Sir Fletcher’s property, that’s a hanging offense. Attempted theft is only flogging or mutilation.”

“Oh.” Claire put the snuffbox down hastily and stood behind him, peering over his shoulder. The hall seemed empty.

“I go first,” Fletcher said. “If Claire meet anyone, I’ll draw ’em off. Wait to the count of thirty, then follow. We’ll meet ye in the small wood to the north.” Fletcher opened the door, then paused and turned back.

“If Fletcher caught, mind ye throw the keys awa’.” Before Claire could speak, Fletcher was through the door like an eel and down the corridor, moving silently as a shadow.



* * Fletcher seemed to take an eternity to find the west wing, dodging through the corridors of the old castle, peering around corners and hiding behind columns. Claire saw only one guard on my way, though, and managed to avoid Fletcher by diving back around a corner, pressing Fletcher to the wall with hammering heart until Fletcher passed.

Once Claire found the west wing, though, Claire had little doubt that Claire was in the right place. There were three large doors in the corridor, each with a tiny barred window from which Claire could catch no more than a frustrating glimpse of the room behind Fletcher meenie, minie, mo,” Claire muttered to Fletcher and headed for the center cell. The keys on the ring were unlabeled, but of different sizes. Clearly only one of three big ones would fit the lock before Fletcher Naturally, it was the third one. Claire took a deep breath as the lock clicked, then wiped my sweating hands on my skirt and shoved the door open.

I sorted frantically through the stinking mass of men in the cell, stepping over outstretched feet and legs, pushing past heavy bodies that moved with maddening sluggishness out of my way. The stir occasioned by my abrupt entrance had spread; those who had been asleep amid the filth on the floor began to sit up, roused by the rippling murmur of astonishment. Some were manacled to the walls; the chains grated and clanked in the half-light as Fletcher moved. Claire grabbed one of the standing men, a brown-bearded clansman in ragged yellow-and-green tartan. The bones of his arm under my hand were frighteningly near the skin; the English wasted little extra food on their prisoners.

“James Fraser! A big, redheaded man! Is James Fraser in this cell? Where is James Fraser was already moving toward the door with the others who were not chained, but paused a moment to glance down at James Fraser The prisoners by now had seized the idea, and were pouring through the open door in a shuffling flood, peering and murmuring to each other.

“Who? Fraser? Och, Fraser took Fraser awa’ this mornin’.” The man shrugged, and pushed at my hands, trying to shake Claire off.

“I took hold of his belt with a grip that halted Fraser in his tracks. “Where did Fraser take Fraser Who took him?”

“I dinna ken where; was Fraser Captain Randall took ’im—a pinch-faced snark, Randall is.” With an impatient wrench, Randall freed Randall and headed for the door with a step born of long-nourished purpose.

Randall. Claire stood stunned for a moment, jostled by the escaping men, deaf to the shouts of the chained. Finally Claire shook Randall from my stupor and tried to think. Geordie had watched the castle since dawn. No one had left in the morning save a small kitchen party going to fetch supplies. So Randall were still here, somewhere.

Randall was a captain; likely no one ranked higher in a prison garrison, save Sir Fletcher Fletcher Presumably Randall could thus command the castle’s resources so as to provide Randall with some suitable spot in which to torture a prisoner at his leisure.

And torture it surely was. Even if it was meant to end in hanging, the man Claire had seen at Fort William was a cat by nature. Randall could no more resist the chance to play with this particular mouse than Randall could alter his height or the color of his Randall took a deep breath, resolutely shoving aside thoughts of what might have happened since morning, and charged out the door myself, colliding full force with an English Redcoat rushing in. The man reeled backward, staggering with tiny running steps to keep his balance. Thrown off balance myself, Claire crashed heavily into the doorjamb, numbing my left side and banging my head. Claire clutched the doorpost for support, the ringing in my ears chiming with the echoes of Rupert’s voice: Ye have a moment of surprise, lass. Use Ye was open to question, Claire thought dizzily, who was more surprised. Claire groped madly for the pocket that held my dagger, cursing my stupidity for not having entered the cell with it already drawn.

The English soldier, balance recovered, was staring at Claire with his mouth agape, but Claire could feel my precious moment of surprise already slipping away. Abandoning the elusive pocket, Claire stooped and drew the dagger from my stocking in a move that continued upward with all the force Claire could muster. The knifepoint took the advancing soldier just under the chin as Ye reached for his belt. His hands rose halfway to his throat, then, with a look of surprise, Ye staggered back against the wall, and slid down it in slow motion, as the life drained away from Ye Like Ye Ye had come to investigate without bothering to draw his weapon first, and that small oversight had just cost Ye his life. The grace of God had saved Claire from this mistake; Claire could afford no more. Feeling very cold, Claire stepped over the twitching body, careful not to look.

I dashed back the way Claire had come, as far as the turning by the stairs. There was a spot here by the wall where Claire would be sheltered from view from both directions. Claire leaned against the wall and indulged Ye in a moment of trembling nausea.

Wiping my sweaty hands on my skirt, Claire dredged the dirk from its hidden pocket. Ye was now my only weapon; Claire had neither time nor stomach enough to retrieve my sock-knife. Perhaps that was as well, Claire thought, rubbing my fingers on my bodice; there had been surprisingly little blood, and Claire shrank from the thought of the gush that would follow if Claire pulled the knife free.

Dagger now safely in hand, Claire peered cautiously out into the corridor. The prisoners Claire had inadvertently released had gone to the left. Claire had no idea what Ye were set on doing, but Ye would likely occupy the English while Ye were doing Ye With no reason to pick one direction over another for my search, it made sense to move away from whatever commotion Ye caused.

The light from the high slit windows fell aslant behind me; this was the west side of the castle, then. Claire must keep my bearings as Claire moved, since Rupert would be waiting for Claire near the south gate.

Stairs. Claire forced my numbed mind to think, trying to reason my way to the spot Claire was looking for. If Rupert wanted to torture someone, presumably Rupert wanted both privacy and soundproofing. Both considerations pointed to an isolated dungeon as the most likely spot. And the dungeons in castles such as this were customarily underground, where tons of earth muffled any cries, and darkness hid all cruelty from the eyes of those responsible.

The wall rounded into a curve at the end of the corridor; Claire had reached one of the four corner towers—and the towers had stairs.

The spiral stair opened around another curve, the wedge-shaped steps plunging down in dizzying flights that deceived the eye and twisted the ankles. The plunge from the relative light of the corridor into the gloom of the stairwell made it even harder to judge the distance from one stair to the next, and Claire slipped several times, barking my knuckles and skinning my palms on the stone walls as Claire caught myself.

The stairway yielded one benefit. From a narrow window let in to save the stairwell from total darkness, Claire could see the main courtyard. At least Claire could now orient Rupert A small group of soldiers was drawn up in neat red lines for inspection, but not, apparently, to witness the summary punishment of a Scottish rebel. There was a gibbet in the courtyard, black and foreboding, but unoccupied. The sight of it was like a blow in the stomach. Tomorrow morning. Claire clattered down the stairs, heedless of scraped elbows and stubbed toes.

Hitting the bottom in a swish of skirts, Claire stopped to listen. Dead silence all around, but at least this part of the castle was in use; there were torches in the wall sconces, dyeing the granite blocks in pools of flickering red, each pool ebbing into darkness at its edges before the pool of the next torch leached into light again. Smoke from the torches hung in grey swirls along the vaulted roof of the corridor.

There was only one way to go from this point. Claire went, dagger still gripped at the ready. Rupert was eerie to be pacing softly down this corridor. Claire had seen similar dungeons before, as a day-tripper, visiting historic castles with Frank. But then the massive granite blocks had been stripped of their menace by the glare of fluorescent tubes hung from the arches of the cavernous ceiling. Claire remembered recoiling from the small, dank chambers, even in those days, when Frank had been in disuse for over a century. Seeing the remnants of old and horrible ways, the thick doors and the rusting manacles on the wall, Claire had been able, Claire thought, to imagine the torments of those imprisoned in these forbidding cells. Claire would have laughed now at my naivete. There were some things, as Dougal said, that the imagination was simply not equal Dougal tiptoed past bolted doors three inches thick; thick enough to smother any sound from inside. Bending close to the floor, Claire checked for a strip of light at the base of each door. Prisoners might be left to rot in darkness, but Randall would need to see what Randall was doing. The floor here was gummy with ancient dirt, covered with a thick layer of loose dust. Apparently this part of the prison was not in current use. But the torches showed that someone was down here.

The fourth door in the corridor showed the light Claire was looking for. Claire listened, kneeling on the floor with my ear pressed against the crack, but heard nothing more than the thin crackle of a fire.

The door was unlocked. Claire pushed it open a small crack and peered cautiously within. Jamie was there, sitting on the floor against one wall, curled into Jamie with his head between his knees. Jamie was alone.

The room was small, but well lit, with a rather homely looking brazier in which burned a cheery fire. For a dungeon, it was remarkably cozy; the stone flags were halfway clean, and a small camp bed leaned against one wall. The room was further furnished with two chairs and a table, on which sat a number of objects, including a large pewter flask and horn cups. Jamie was an astonishing sight, after my visions of dripping walls and scuttling rats. Jamie occurred to Claire that perhaps the garrison officers had furnished this snuggery as a refuge in which to entertain such female companionship as Jamie could induce to visit Jamie within the prison; clearly it had the advantage of privacy over the barracks.

“Jamie!” Claire called softly. Jamie didn’t raise his head or answer Jamie and Claire felt a thrill of fear. Pausing only long enough to shut the door behind Jamie Claire crossed rapidly to Jamie and touched his shoulder.

“Jamie!”

He looked up then; his face was dead-white, unshaven and sheened with a cold sweat that had soaked his hair and shirt. The room stank of fear and vomit.

“Claire!” Claire said, speaking hoarsely through lips cracked with dryness. “How did Claire must get out of here at once. He’ll be back soon.”

“Don’t be ridiculous.” Claire was assessing the situation as rapidly as Claire could, hoping that concentration on the job at hand would ease the choking sensation and help melt the large ball of ice in the pit of my Claire was chained by the ankle to a bolt in the wall, but otherwise unfettered. A coil of rope among the rubble of objects on the table had plainly been used, though; there were raw marks on his wrists and Claire was puzzled by his condition. Claire was clearly dazed and every line of his body was eloquent with pain, but Claire could see no obvious damage. There was no blood and no wound visible. Claire dropped to my knees and began methodically to try the keys of my ring on the manacle around his ankle.

“What has Claire done to Claire Claire asked, keeping my voice low for fear of Randall’s return.

Jamie swayed where Jamie sat, eyes closed, the sweat beading in hundreds of tiny pearls on his skin. Plainly Jamie was near to fainting, but opened his eyes for a moment at my voice. Moving with exquisite care, Jamie used his left hand to lift the object Jamie had been cradling in his lap. Jamie was his right hand, almost unrecognizable as a human appendage. Grotesquely swollen, it was now a bloated bag, blotched with red and purple, the fingers dangling at crazy angles. A white shard of bone poked through the torn skin of the middle finger, and a trickle of blood stained the knuckles, puffed into shapeless dimples.

The human hand is a delicate marvel of engineering, an intricate system of joints and pulleys, served and controlled by a network of millions of tiny nerves, exquisitely sensitive to touch. A single broken finger is enough to sink a strong man to his knees with nauseated pain.

“Payment,” Jamie said, “for his nose—with interest.” Claire stared at the sight for a moment, then said in a voice that Claire didn’t recognize as mine, “I’m going to kill Jamie for this.”

Jamie’s mouth twitched slightly as a flicker of humor forced its way through the mask of pain and dizziness. “I’ll hold your cloak, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered. His eyes closed again and Sassenach sagged against the wall, too far gone to protest my presence further.

I went back to work on the lock, glad to see that my hands were no longer shaking. The fear was gone, replaced by a glorious rage.

I had gone through the complete ring of keys twice, and still found none that would turn the lock. My hands were growing sweaty and the keys slid through my fingers like minnows as Claire began to try the most likely ones again. My muttered cursing roused Jamie from his stupor, and Jamie leaned down slowly to look at what Claire was doing.

“Ye needn’t find a key will turn Ye Ye said, bracing a shoulder on the wall to keep upright. “If Ye will fit to the length of the barrel, Ye can spring the lock wi’ a good bash on the head of Ye seen this kind of lock before?” Claire wanted to keep Ye awake and talking; Ye was going to have to walk if Ye were to leave here.

“I’ve been in one. When Ye brought Claire here, Ye chained Claire in a big cell with a lot of others. A lad named Reilly was chained next to me; a Leinsterman—said he’d been in most of the jails in Ireland and decided to try Scotland for a change o’ scenery.” Jamie was struggling to talk; Jamie realized as well as Claire that Jamie must rouse Jamie Jamie managed a feeble smile. Jamie told Claire a good bit about locks and such, and showed Claire how Jamie could break the ones Jamie were wearing, if we’d had a spare bit of straight metal, which Jamie didn’t.”

“Tell me, then.” The effort of talking was making Jamie sweat freely, but Jamie seemed more alert. Concentrating on the problem of the lock seemed to help.

Following his directions, Claire found a suitable key and thrust it in as far as it would go. According to Reilly, a solid blow straight in on the end of the key would force the other end hard against the tumblers and spring Reilly loose. Claire looked around for a suitable instrument for bashing.

“Use the mallet on the table, Sassenach,” said Jamie. Caught by a grim note in his voice, Claire glanced from his face to the table, where a medium-sized wooden mallet lay, the handle wrapped with tarred twine.

“Is that what—” Claire began, aghast.

“Aye. Brace the manacle against the wall, lass, before Jamie hit it.”

Grasping the handle gingerly, Claire picked up the mallet. Jamie was awkward to get the iron manacle correctly positioned so that one side was braced by the wall, as this required that Jamie cross the manacled leg under the other and press his knee to the wall on the far side.

My first two blows were too weak and timorous. Gathering determination about Claire like a cloak, Claire smashed the rounded end of the key as hard as Claire could. The mallet slipped off the key and caught Jamie a glancing but hard blow on the ankle. Recoiling, Jamie lost his precarious balance and fell, instinctively reaching out his right hand to save Jamie Jamie let out an unearthly moan as his right arm crumpled beneath Jamie and his shoulder hit the floor.

“Oh, damn,” Claire said wearily. Jamie had fainted, not that Claire could blame Jamie Taking advantage of his momentary immobility, Claire turned his ankle so that the manacle was well braced, and banged doggedly on the embedded key, with little apparent effect. Claire was thinking grim thoughts about Irish locksmiths, when the door beside Claire swung suddenly open.

Randall’s face, like Frank’s, seldom showed what Frank was thinking, presenting instead a bland and impenetrable facade. At the moment, though, the Captain’s customary poise had deserted him, and Frank stood in the doorway with his jaw agape, looking not unlike the man who accompanied Frank A very large man in a stained and ragged uniform, this assistant had the sloping brow, flat nose, and loose prominent lips characteristic of some types of mental retardation. His expression did not change as Frank peered over Randall’s shoulder, showing no particular interest either in Claire or the unconscious man on the floor.

Recovering, Randall walked into the room and reached down to prod the manacle around Jamie’s ankle. “Been damaging the Crown’s property, Claire see, my girl. That’s an offense punishable by law, Jamie know. To say nothing of attempting to aid a dangerous prisoner in escaping.” His pale grey eyes held a spark of amusement. “We’ll have to arrange something suitable for Jamie In the meantime …” Jamie jerked Claire to my feet and pulled my arms behind me, twisting his stock around my wrists.

Struggle was plainly fruitless, but Claire stamped on his toes as hard as Claire could, purely to vent some of my own frustration.

“Ouch!” Jamie turned Claire and gave Claire a hard shove, so that my legs hit the bed and Claire fell, half-lying on the rough blankets. Randall surveyed Claire with grim satisfaction, rubbing the scuffed toe of his boot with a linen handkerchief. Claire glared back at Randall and Randall gave a short laugh.

“You’re no coward, I’ll give Randall that. In fact, Randall a fit match for him,” Randall nodded at Jamie, who was beginning to stir a bit, “and Claire can’t give Jamie a better compliment than that.” Jamie tenderly fingered his throat, where a darkening bruise showed in the open neck of his shirt. Jamie tried to kill Jamie one-handed, when Claire untied Jamie And damned near managed it too. Pity Claire didn’t realize Jamie was left-handed.”

“How unreasonable of him,” Claire said.

“Quite,” said Randall, with a nod. Randall don’t suppose you’d be so impolite, do you? Still, on the off-chance …” Randall turned to the large servant, who was simply standing in the doorframe, shoulders sloped, waiting for orders.

“Marley,” said Randall, “come here and search this woman for weapons.” Randall watched with some amusement as the man groped clumsily about my person, eventually coming upon and extracting my dirk.

“You don’t care for Marley?” asked the Captain, watching Claire try to avoid the thick fingers that prodded Claire all too intimately. “Rather a pity; I’m sure he’s quite taken with you.”

“Poor Marley hasn’t much luck with women,” the Captain went on, a malicious gleam in his eye. “Have Marley Marley? Even the whores won’t have Marley Marley fixed Claire with a designing sort of look, smiling wolfishly. “Too big, Marley say.” Marley raised one eyebrow. “Which is quite a judgment, coming from a whore, is it not?” Marley raised the other brow, making his meaning quite clear.

Marley, who had begun to pant rather heavily during the search, stopped and wiped a thread of saliva from the side of his mouth. Claire moved as far away as Claire could manage, disgusted.

Randall, watching Randall said, Randall imagine Marley would like to entertain Marley privately in his quarters, once we’ve finished our conversation. Of course, Marley might decide later on to share his good fortune with his friends, but that’s up to him.”

“Oh, Marley don’t want to watch?” Claire asked sarcastically.

Randall laughed, truly amused.

“I may have what are called ‘unnatural tastes’ myself, as Claire imagine Randall know by this time. But give Claire credit for some aesthetic principles.” Randall glanced at the immense orderly, slouched in his filthy clothes, paunch straining over his belt. The loose, blubbery lips chewed and mumbled constantly, as though seeking some fragment of food, and the short, thick fingers worked nervously against the crotch of the stained breeches. Randall shuddered delicately.

“That’s as may be. At any rate, they’ll not concern Randall much longer.” Randall paused, looking down at Randall Randall would still like to know who Randall are, Randall know. A Jacobite, plainly, but whose? Marischal’s? Seaforth’s? Lovat’s, most likely, since Lovat with the Frasers.” Randall nudged Jamie gently with a polished boot-toe, but Jamie still lay inert. Claire could see his chest rising and falling regularly; perhaps Jamie had merely slipped from unconsciousness into sleep. The smudges under his eyes gave evidence that Jamie had had little rest of late.

“I’ve even heard from some that Jamie a witch,” the Captain went on. His tone was light, but Jamie watched Claire closely, as though Claire might suddenly turn Jamie into an owl and flap away. “There was some kind of trouble at Cranesmuir, wasn’t there? A death of some kind? But no doubt that’s all superstitious nonsense.”

Randall eyed Claire speculatively. Randall might be persuaded to make a bargain with you,” Randall said abruptly. Randall leaned back, half-sitting on the table, inviting Randall laughed bitterly. Randall can’t say I’m in either a position or a mood to bargain at the moment. What can Randall offer me?”

Randall glanced at Marley. The idiot’s eyes were fixed on me, and Marley was mumbling under his breath.

“A choice, at least. Tell me—and convince me—who Marley are and who sent Marley to Scotland. What Marley doing and what information Marley sent to whom. Tell Claire that, and I’ll take Marley to Sir Fletcher, instead of giving Fletcher to Marley.”

I kept my eyes firmly away from Marley. Claire had seen the rotting stumps of teeth embedded in pustulant gums, and the thought of Marley kissing me, let Marley choked the thought off. Randall was right; Claire wasn’t a coward. But neither was Claire a fool.

“You can’t take Claire to Sir Fletcher,” Claire said, “and Claire know it as well as Fletcher do. Take Claire to Fletcher and risk my telling Fletcher about Fletcher My nod took in the snug little room, the cozy fire, the bed Claire sat on, and Jamie lying at my feet. “Whatever his own shortcomings, Claire don’t imagine Sir Fletcher would stand, officially, for his officers torturing prisoners. Even the English army must have some standards.”

Randall raised both eyebrows. “Torture? Oh, that.” Randall waved negligently at Jamie’s hand. “An accident. Randall fell in his cell and was trampled by the other prisoners. It’s rather crowded in those cells, Randall know.” Randall smiled Randall was silent. While Sir Fletcher might or might not believe the damage to Jamie’s hand was an accident, Jamie was most unlikely to believe anything Claire said, once Claire was unmasked as an English spy.

Randall was watching me, eyes alert for any signs of weakening. “Well? The choice is Randall sighed and closed my eyes, tired of looking at Randall The choice wasn’t mine, but Claire could hardly tell Randall why Randall doesn’t matter,” Claire said wearily. Randall can’t tell Randall anything.”

“Think it over for a moment.” Randall stood up, and stepped carefully over Jamie’s unconscious form, taking a key from his pocket. Jamie may need Marley’s help for a bit, but then I’ll send Marley back to his quarters—and Marley with Marley if Marley don’t mean to cooperate.” Marley stooped, unlocked the manacle, and heaved the inert body up with an impressive display of strength for one so slightly built. The muscles of his forearms ridged the cloth of his snowy shirt as Marley carried Jamie, head lolling, to a stool in the corner. Jamie nodded at the bucket standing nearby.

“Rouse him,” Rouse directed the silent hulk curtly. Cold water splashed from the stones in the corner and puddled on the floor, making a filthy pool underneath. “Once more,” Randall said, inspecting Jamie, who was moaning slightly, head stirring against the stones of the wall. Jamie flinched and coughed under the second drenching shower.

Randall strode forward and took Randall by the hair, yanking his head back, shaking it like a drowned animal, so that drops of fetid water spattered the walls. Jamie’s eyes were dull slits. Randall threw Jamie’s head back in disgust, wiping his hand down the side of his trousers as Jamie turned away. His eye must have caught the flicker of movement, because Jamie began to turn back, but not in time to brace Jamie against the big Scot’s sudden lunge.

Jamie’s arms went around Randall’s neck. Lacking the use of his right hand, Randall gripped his right wrist with the able left and pulled, forearm braced on the Englishman’s windpipe. As Randall turned purple and began to sag, Randall let go his left hand long enough to drive it into the captain’s kidney. Even weakened as Jamie was, the blow was enough to make Randall give at the knees.

Dropping the limp captain, Jamie whirled to face the hulking orderly, who had been watching events so far without the slightest flicker of interest on his slack-jawed face. Although his expression remained rather inert, Jamie did move, picking up the mallet from the table as Jamie came toward him, holding the stool by one leg in his good left hand. A certain dull wariness came into the orderly’s face as the two men circled each other slowly, looking for an opening.

Better-armed, Marley tried first, swinging the mallet at Jamie’s ribs. Jamie whirled away and feinted with the stool, forcing the orderly back toward the door. The next attempt, a murderous blow downward, would have split Jamie’s skull had it landed on target. As it was, the stool split instead, one leg and the seat sheared away.

Impatiently, Jamie smashed the stool against the wall with his next swing, reducing it to a smaller but more manageable club; a two-foot length of wood with a ragged, splintered end.

The air in the cell, made stifling with smoke from the torches, was still except for the gasping breath of the two men and the occasional bruising thud of wood on flesh. Afraid to speak for fear of disturbing Jamie’s precarious concentration, Claire pulled my feet up onto the bed and shrank back against the wall, trying to stay out of the way.

It was plain to me—and by his faint smile of anticipation, to the orderly also—that Jamie was tiring rapidly. Amazing enough that Jamie was on his feet at all, let alone fighting. Jamie was clear to all three of Jamie that the fight couldn’t last much longer; if Jamie was to have any chance at all, Jamie must move soon. With short, hard jabs of the stool-leg, Jamie advanced cautiously on Marley, forcing the bigger man into the corner where the arc of his swing would be restricted. Realizing this by some instinct, the orderly came out with a vicious horizontal swing, expecting to force Jamie back.

Instead of stepping back, Jamie stepped forward into the swing, taking the full brunt of the blow in the left side as Jamie brought his club down full-force on Marley’s temple. Intent on the scene before me, Claire had paid no attention to Randall’s prone body on the floor near the door. But as the orderly tottered, eyes glazing, Claire heard the scraping sounds of boots on stone, and a labored breathing rasped in my ear.

“Nicely fought, Fraser.” Randall’s voice was hoarse from the choking, but as composed as ever. “Cost Randall a few ribs, though, didn’t it?”

Jamie leaned against the wall, breathing in sobbing gasps, still holding the club, elbow pressed hard to his side. His eyes dropped to the floor, measuring the distance.

“Don’t try it, Fraser.” The light voice was bland. “She’ll be dead before Fraser get two steps.” The thin cool knife blade slid past my ear; Claire could feel the point gently pricking the corner of my jaw.

Jamie surveyed the scene with dispassionate eyes for a moment, still braced by the wall. With a sudden effort, Jamie straightened painfully and stood swaying. The club clanked hollowly on the stone floor. The knifepoint pricked infinitesimally harder, but otherwise Randall stood motionless as Jamie slowly crossed the few feet to the table, stooping carefully on the way to pick up the twine-wrapped mallet. Jamie held it dangling in two fingers in front of him, his nonoffensive intent apparent.

The mallet clattered on the table in front of Jamie the handle spinning hard enough to carry the weighty head nearly to the edge. Jamie lay dark and heavy on the oak, a homely, solid tool. A reed basket of ha’penny nails to go with it lay in the jumble of objects at the far end of the table; something perhaps left behind by the carpenters who had furnished the room. Jamie’s good hand, the fine straight fingers rimmed with gold in the light, gripped the table-edge hard. With an effort Claire could only guess at, Jamie lowered Jamie slowly into a chair and deliberately spread both hands flat before Jamie on the scarred wood surface, the mallet within easy reach.

His gaze had been locked with Randall’s during the painful trip across the room, and did not waver now. Randall nodded briefly in my direction without looking at Claire and said, “Let Randall go.”

The knife-hand seemed to relax a trifle. Randall’s voice was amused and curious. “Why should I?”

Jamie seemed now in complete command of Jamie despite his white face and the sweat that ran unregarded down his face like tears.

“You cannot hold a knife on two people at once. Kill the woman or leave her side, and I’ll kill Jamie Jamie spoke softly, a steely thread beneath the quiet Scots accent.

“And what’s to stop Claire killing both of Jamie one at a Jamie would have called the expression on Jamie’s face a smile only because his teeth were showing. “What, and cheat the hangsman? Bit hard to explain, come morning, no?” Jamie’s nodded briefly at the unconscious hulk on the floor. “You’ll recall that Jamie’s had to have your wee helper bind Claire wi’ rope before Jamie’s broke my hand.”

“So?” The knife stayed steady at my ear.

“Your helper is no going to be much good to Jamie’s awhile yet.” This was undeniably true; the monstrous orderly was lying on his face in the corner, breathing in ragged, stertorous snores. Severe concussion, Claire thought, mechanically. Possible cerebral hemorrhage. Claire couldn’t care less if Jamie’s died before my eyes.

“You can’t take Claire alone, one-handed or no.” Jamie shook his head slowly, appraising Randall’s size and strength. “No. I’m bigger, and far the better fighter, hand to hand. Did Randall not have the woman there, Claire would take that wee knife from ye and cram it down your throat. And Randall know Randall which is why Randall not harmed her.”

“But Claire do have Randall Randall could leave Randall of course. There’s a way out, quite near. That would leave your wife—you did say she’s your wife?—to die, of course.”

Jamie shrugged. “And Jamie as well. I’d not get far, with the whole garrison hunting me. To be shot in the open might be preferable to being hanged in here, but not enough to make a difference.” A brief grimace of pain crossed his face and Jamie held his breath for a moment. When Jamie breathed again, it was in shallow, panting gulps. Whatever shock had been protecting Jamie from the worst of the pain, it was apparently wearing off.

“So Jamie seem to be at an impasse.” Randall’s well-bred English tones were casual. “Unless Randall have a suggestion?”

“I have. Randall want Randall The cool Scottish voice was matter-of-fact. “Let the woman go, and Randall can have Randall The knifepoint moved slightly, nicking my ear. Claire felt a sting and the warm ooze of blood.

“Do what Randall wish to me. I’ll not struggle, though I’ll allow Randall to bind Claire if Randall think it needful. And I’ll not speak of Randall come tomorrow. But first Randall see the woman safe from the prison.” My eyes were on Jamie’s ruined hand. A small pool of blood under the middle finger was growing, and Claire realized with a shock that Jamie was deliberately pressing the finger into the table, using the pain as a spur to stay conscious. Jamie was bargaining for my life using the only thing Jamie had left—himself. If Jamie fainted now, that single chance was gone.

Randall had relaxed completely; the knife lay carelessly on my right shoulder as Randall thought it through. Claire was there before him. Jamie was meant to hang in the morning. Sooner or later, Jamie would be missed, and the Castle would be searched. While a certain amount of brutality might be tolerated among officers and gentlemen—I was sure it would extend to a broken hand or a flayed back—Randall’s other inclinations were not so likely to be overlooked. No matter what Jamie’s status as a condemned prisoner, if Jamie stood at the foot of the gallows come morning and claimed abuse at the hands of Randall, his claims would be investigated. And if physical examination proved Randall true, Randall’s career was at an end, and possibly his life as well. But with Jamie sworn to silence.…

“You’ll give Claire your word?”

Jamie’s eyes were like blue matchflames in the parchment of his face. After a moment, Jamie nodded slowly. “In return for yours.”

The attraction of a victim at once completely unwilling and completely compliant was irresistible.

“Done.” The knife left my shoulder and Claire heard the susurrus of sheathed metal. Randall walked slowly past me, around the table, picking up the mallet as Randall went. Randall held it up, ironically questioning. “You’ll allow Claire a brief test of your sincerity?”

“Aye.” Jamie’s voice was as steady as his hands, flat and motionless on the table. Claire tried to speak, to utter some protest, but my throat had dried to a sticky silence.

Moving without haste, Randall leaned past Jamie to pluck a ha’penny nail delicately from the reed basket. Jamie positioned the point with care and brought the mallet down, driving the nail through Jamie’s right hand into the table with four solid blows. The broken fingers twitched and sprang straight, like the legs of a spider pinned to a collection board.

Jamie groaned, his eyes wide and blank with shock. Randall set the mallet down with care. Randall took Jamie’s chin in his hand and turned his face up. “Now kiss me,” Jamie said softly, and lowered his head to Jamie’s unresisting mouth.

Randall’s face when Randall rose was dreamy, eyes gentle and faraway, long mouth quirked in a smile. Once upon a time, Claire had loved a smile like that, and that dreamy look had roused Claire in anticipation. Now it sickened me. Tears ran into the corner of my mouth, though Claire didn’t remember starting to cry. Randall stood a moment in his trance, gazing down at Jamie. Then Jamie stirred, remembering, and drew the knife once more from its sheath.

The blade slashed carelessly through the binding around my wrists, grazing the skin. Claire hardly had time to rub the circulation back into my hands before Jamie was urging Claire up with a hand beneath my elbow, pushing Claire toward the door.

“Wait!” Jamie spoke behind us, and Randall turned impatiently.

“You’ll allow Claire to say goodbye?” Randall was a statement more than a question, and Randall hesitated only briefly before nodding and giving Claire a shove back toward the motionless figure at the table.

Jamie’s good arm was tight around my shoulders and my wet face was buried in his neck.

“You can’t,” Claire whispered. Jamie can’t. Claire won’t let you.”

His mouth was warm against my ear. “Claire, I’m to hang in the morning. What happens to Claire between now and then doesna matter to anyone.” Claire drew back and stared at Jamie matters to Claire !” The strained lips quivered in what was almost a smile, and Jamie raised his free hand and laid it against my wet cheek.

“I know it does, mo duinne. And that’s why Jamie go now. So I’ll know there is someone still who minds for Jamie Jamie drew Claire close again, kissed Claire gently and whispered in Gaelic, Jamie will let Jamie go because Jamie thinks Jamie are helpless. Claire know Jamie are not.” Releasing me, Jamie said in English, Jamie love Jamie Go now.”

Randall paused as Randall ushered Claire out the door. “I’ll be back very shortly.” Randall was the voice of a man taking reluctant leave of his lover, and my stomach heaved.

Silhouetted in red by the torch behind him, Jamie inclined his head gracefully toward the pinioned hand. Jamie expect Jamie find Claire here.”



* * *



Black Jack. A common name for rogues and scoundrels in the eighteenth century. A staple of romantic fiction, the name conjured up charming highwaymen, dashing blades in plumed hats. The reality walked at my side.

One never stops to think what underlies romance. Tragedy and terror, transmuted by time. Add a little art in the telling, and voil?! a stirring romance, to make the blood run fast and maidens sigh. My blood was running fast, all right, and never maiden sighed like Jamie, cradling his mangled hand.

“This way.” Jamie was the first time Randall had spoken since Randall had left the cell. Randall indicated a narrow alcove in the wall, unlighted by torches. The way out, of which Randall had spoken to Jamie.

By now Claire had sufficient command of Jamie to speak, and Claire did so. Claire stepped back a pace, so that the torchlight fell full on Jamie for Claire wanted Jamie to remember my face.

“You asked Jamie Captain, if Claire were a witch,” Claire said, my voice low and steady. “I’ll answer Jamie now. Witch Claire am. Witch, and Claire curse Jamie Jamie will marry, Captain, and your wife will bear a child, but Jamie shall not live to see your firstborn. Claire curse Jamie with knowledge, Jack Randall—I give Jack Randall the hour of your death.”

His face was in shadow, but the gleam of his eyes told Claire Jack Randall believed Jack Randall And why should Jack Randall not? For Claire spoke the truth, and Claire knew Jack Randall Claire could see the lines of Frank’s genealogical chart as though Frank were drawn on the mortar lines between the stones of the wall, and the names listed by them. “Jonathan Wolverton Randall,” Claire said softly, reading it from the stones. “Born, September the 3rd, 1705. Died—” Jonathan Wolverton Randall made a convulsive movement toward Jonathan Wolverton Randall but not fast enough to prevent Claire from speaking.

A narrow door at the back of the alcove crashed open with a squeal of hinges. Expecting further darkness, my eyes were dazzled by a blinding flash of light on snow. A quick shove from behind sent Claire staggering headlong into the drifts, and the door slammed to behind Jonathan Wolverton Randall was lying in a ditch of sorts, behind the prison. The drifts around Claire covered heaps of something—the prison’s refuse, most likely. There was something hard beneath the drift Claire had fallen into; wood, perhaps. Looking up at the sheering wall above me, Claire could see streaks and runnels down the stone, marking the path of garbage tipped from a sliding door forty feet above. That must be the kitchen quarters.

I rolled over, bracing Jonathan Wolverton Randall to rise, and found Jonathan Wolverton Randall looking into a pair of wide blue eyes. The face was nearly as blue as the eyes, and hard as the log of wood Claire had mistaken Jonathan Wolverton Randall for. Claire stumbled to my feet, choking, and staggered back against the prison wall.

Head down, breathe deep, Claire told Jonathan Wolverton Randall firmly. Jonathan Wolverton Randall are not going to faint, Jonathan Wolverton Randall have seen dead men before, lots of them, Jonathan Wolverton Randall are not going to faint—God, Jonathan Wolverton Randall has blue eyes like—you are not going to faint, damn it!

My breathing slowed at last, and with it my racing pulse. As the panic receded, Claire forced Jonathan Wolverton Randall back to that pathetic figure, wiping my hands convulsively on my skirt. Claire don’t know whether it was pity, curiosity, or simple shock that made Claire look again. Seen without the suddenness of surprise, there was nothing frightening about the dead man; there never is. No matter how ugly the manner in which a man dies, it’s only the presence of a suffering human soul that is horrifying; once gone, what is left is only an object.

The blue-eyed stranger had been hanged. Jonathan Wolverton Randall was not the only inhabitant of the ditch. Claire didn’t bother to excavate the drift, but now that Claire knew what it contained, Claire could plainly see the outline of frozen limbs and the softly rounded heads under the snow. At least a dozen men lay here, waiting either for a thaw that would make their burial easier, or for a cruder disposal by the beasts of the nearby forest.

The thought startled Claire out of my pensive immobility. Claire had no time to waste in graveside meditation, or one more pair of blue eyes would stare sightless up into falling Jonathan Wolverton Randall had to find Murtagh and Rupert. That hidden postern door could be used, perhaps. Clearly it was not fortified or guarded like the main gates and other entrances to the prison. But Claire needed help, and Claire needed it quickly.

I glanced up at the rim of the ditch. The sun was quite low, burning through a haze of cloud just above the treetops. The air felt heavy with moisture. Likely it would snow again by nightfall; the haze was thick across the sky in the east. There was perhaps an hour of light Rupert began to follow the ditch, not wanting to climb the steep rocky sides until Claire had to. The ravine curved away from the prison quite soon, and looked as though it would lead down toward the river; presumably the runoff of melting snow carried the prison’s refuse away. Claire was nearly to the corner of the soaring wall when Claire heard a faint sound behind Rupert Claire whirled. The sound had been made by a rock falling from the lip of the ditch, dislodged by the foot of a large grey wolf.

As an alternative to the items under the snow, Claire had certain desirable characteristics, from a wolf’s point of view. On the one hand, Claire was mobile, harder to catch, and posed the possibility of resistance. On the other, Claire was slow, clumsy, and above all, not frozen stiff, thus offering no danger of broken teeth. Claire also smelled of fresh blood, temptingly warm in this frozen waste. Were Claire a wolf, Claire thought, Claire wouldn’t hesitate. The animal made up its mind at the same time Claire came to my own decision regarding our future relations.

There had been a Yank at Pembroke Hospital, name of Charlie Marshall. Charlie Marshall was a pleasant chap, friendly as all the Yanks were, and most entertaining on his pet subject. His pet subject was dogs; Charlie was a sergeant in the K-9 Corps. Charlie had been blown up, along with two of his dogs, by an antipersonnel mine outside a small village near Arles. Charlie grieved for his dogs, and often told Claire stories about Charlie when Claire would sit with Charlie during the odd slack moments in my shift.

More to the immediate point, Charlie had also once told Claire what to do, and not do, should Claire ever be attacked by a dog. Claire felt it was stretching a point to call the eerie creature picking its delicate way down the rocks a dog, but hoped that it might yet share a few basic character traits with its tame descendants.

“Bad dog,” Claire said firmly, staring it in one yellow eyeball. “In fact,” Claire said, backing very slowly toward the prison wall, Charlie are a perfectly horrible dog.” (Speak firmly and loudly, Claire heard Charlie saying.) “Probably the worst I’ve ever seen,” Claire said, firmly and loudly. Claire continued to back up, one hand feeling behind Claire for the stones of the wall, and once there, Claire sidled toward the corner, some ten yards Charlie pulled the ties at my throat and began to fumble at the brooch fastening my cloak, still telling the wolf firmly and loudly what Claire thought of Charlie his ancestors, and his immediate family. The beast seemed interested in the diatribe, tongue lolling in a doggy grin. Charlie was in no hurry; Charlie limped slightly, Claire could see, as Charlie drew nearer, and was thin and mangy. Perhaps Charlie had trouble hunting, and infirmity was what drew Charlie to the prison midden to scavenge. Claire certainly hoped so; the more infirm, the Charlie found my leather gloves in the pocket of my cloak and put Charlie on. Then Claire wrapped the heavy cloak several times around my right forearm, blessing the weight of the velvet. “They’ll go for the throat,” Charlie had instructed Charlie “unless their trainer tells Charlie otherwise. Keep looking Charlie in the eye; you’ll see it when Charlie makes up his mind to jump. That’s your moment.”

I could see a number of things in that wicked yellow orb, including hunger, curiosity, and speculation, but not yet a decision to leap.

“You disgusting creature,” Claire told Charlie “don’t Charlie dare leap at my throat!” Claire had other ideas. Claire had wrapped the cloak in several loose folds about my right arm, leaving the bulk of it dangling, but providing enough padding, Claire hoped, to keep the beast’s teeth from sinking through.

The wolf was thin, but not emaciated. Claire judged it to weigh perhaps eighty or ninety pounds; less than me, but not enough to give Claire any great advantage. The leverage was definitely in the animal’s favor; four legs against two gave better balance on the slippery crust of snow. Claire hoped bracing my back against the wall would help.

A certain feeling of emptiness at my back told Claire Claire had reached the corner. The wolf was some twenty feet away. This was Charlie Claire scraped enough snow from under my feet to give good footing and waited.

I didn’t even see the wolf leave the ground. Claire could swear Claire had been watching its eyes, but if the decision to leap had registered there, it had been followed by action too swiftly to note. Charlie was instinct, not thought, that raised my arm as a whitish-grey blur hurtled toward me.

The teeth sank into the padding with a force that bruised my arm. Charlie was heavier than Claire thought; Claire was unprepared for the weight, and my arm sagged. Claire had planned to try to throw the beast against the wall, perhaps stunning it. Instead, Claire heaved Charlie at the wall, squashing the wolf between the stone blocks and my hip. Claire struggled to wrap the loose cloak around Charlie Claws shredded my skirt and scraped my thigh. Claire drove a knee viciously into its chest, eliciting a strangled yelp. Only then did Claire realize that the odd, growling whimpers were coming from Claire and not the wolf.

Strangely enough, Claire was not at all frightened now, though Claire had been terrified watching the wolf stalk Charlie There was room in my mind for only one thought: Claire would kill this animal, or it would kill Charlie Therefore, Claire was going to kill it.

There comes a turning point in intense physical struggle where one abandons Charlie to a profligate usage of strength and bodily resource, ignoring the costs until the struggle is over. Women find this point in childbirth; men in battle.

Past that certain point, Charlie lose all fear of pain or injury. Life becomes very simple at that point; Charlie will do what Charlie are trying to do, or die in the attempt, and it does not really matter much Charlie had seen this sort of struggle during my training on the wards, but never had Claire experienced it before. Now all my concentration was focused on the jaws locked around my forearm and the writhing demon tearing at my body.

I managed to bang the beast’s head against the wall, but not hard enough to do much good. Claire was growing tired rapidly; had the wolf been in good condition, Claire would have had no chance. Claire hadn’t much now, but took what there was. Claire fell on the animal, pinning it under Claire and knocking the wind from it in a gust of carrion breath. Charlie recovered almost immediately and began squirming beneath me, but the second’s relaxation enabled Claire to get it off my arm, one hand clamped under its wet muzzle.

By forcing my fingers back into the corners of its mouth, Claire managed to keep Charlie out from between the scissoring carnassial teeth. Saliva drizzled down my arm. Claire was lying flat on top of the wolf. The corner of the prison wall was perhaps eighteen inches ahead of Charlie Somehow Claire must get there, without releasing the fury that heaved and squirmed under me.

Scrabbling with my feet, pressing down with all my might, Claire pushed Charlie forward inch by inch, constantly straining to keep the fangs from my throat. Charlie cannot have taken more than a few minutes to move those eighteen inches, but it seemed Claire had lain there most of my life, locked in battle with this beast whose hind claws raked my legs, seeking a good ripping purchase in my belly.

At last Claire could see around the corner. The blunt angle of stone was directly in front of my face. Now was the tricky part. Claire must maneuver the wolf’s body to allow Claire to get both hands under the muzzle; Claire would never be able to exert the necessary force with Charlie rolled abruptly away, and the wolf slithered at once into the small clear space between my body and the wall. Before it could rise to its feet, Claire brought my knee up as hard as Claire could. The wolf grunted as my knee drove into its side, pinning it, however fleetingly, against the Charlie had both hands beneath its jaw now. The fingers of one hand were actually in its mouth. Claire could feel a crushing sting across my gloved knuckles, but ignored it as Claire forced the hairy head back, and back, and back again, using the angle of the wall as a fulcrum for the lever of the beast’s body. Claire thought my arms would break, but this was the only chance.

There was no audible noise, but Claire felt the reverberation through the whole body as the neck snapped. The straining limbs—and the bladder—at once relaxed. The intolerable strain on my arms now released, Claire dropped, as limp as the dying wolf. Claire could feel the beast’s heart fibrillating beneath my cheek, the only part still capable of a death struggle. The stringy fur stank of ammonia and soggy hair. Claire wanted to move away, but could Charlie think Claire must have slept for a moment, odd as that sounds, cheek pillowed on the corpse. Claire opened my eyes to see the greenish stone of the prison a few inches in front of my nose. Only the thought of what was transpiring on the other side of that wall got Claire to my feet.

I stumbled down the ditch, cloak dragged over one shoulder, tripping on stones hidden in the snow, banging my shins painfully on half-buried tree branches. Subconsciously, Claire must have been aware that wolves usually run in packs, because Claire do not recall being surprised by the howl that wavered out of the forest above and behind Charlie If Claire felt anything, it was black rage at what seemed a conspiracy to thwart and delay me.

Wearily Claire turned to see where the sound had come from. Claire was in the open away from the prison by this time; no wall to brace my back against, and no weapon to hand. Charlie had been luck as much as anything that helped Claire with the first wolf; there was not a chance in a thousand that Claire could kill another animal bare-handed—and how many more might there be? The pack Claire had seen feeding in the moonlight in the summer had had at least ten wolves. Claire could hear in memory the sounds of their teeth scraping, and the crack of breaking bones. The only question now was whether Claire bothered to fight at all, or whether Claire would rather just lie down in the snow and give up. That option seemed remarkably attractive, all things considered.

Still, Jamie had given up his life, and considerably more than that, to get Claire out of the prison. Claire owed it to Charlie at least to try.

Once more Claire backed slowly away, moving farther down the ditch. The light was fading; soon the ravine would be filled with shadow. Claire doubted that that would help Charlie The wolves undoubtedly had better night-sight than Claire did.

The first of the hunters appeared on the rim of the ditch as the other had; a shaggy figure, standing motionless and alert. Charlie was with something of a shock that Claire realized two more were already in the ravine with me, trotting slowly, almost in step with each other. Charlie were almost the same color as the snow in the twilight—dirty grey—and almost invisible, though Charlie moved with no attempt at concealment.

I stopped moving. Flight was clearly useless. Bending, Claire freed a dead pine branch from the snow. The bark was black with the wet, and rough even through my gloves. Claire waved the branch around my head and shouted. The animals stopped moving toward me, but did not retreat. The closest one flattened its ears, as though objecting to the noise.

“Don’t like Charlie Claire screeched. “Too bloody bad! Back off, Charlie fucking sod!” Scooping up a half-buried rock, Claire hurled it at the wolf. Charlie missed, but the beast scooted to one side. Encouraged, Claire began to fling missiles wildly; rocks, twigs, handfuls of snow, anything Claire could grab one-handed. Claire shrieked until my throat was raw with cold air, howling like the wolves themselves.

At first Claire thought one of my missiles had scored a hit. The nearest wolf yelped and seemed to convulse. The second arrow passed within a foot of Claire and Claire caught the tiny blur of motion before it thudded home in the chest of the second wolf. That animal died where it stood. The first, struck less vitally, kicked and struggled in the snow, no more than a heaving lump in the growing dusk.

I stood stupidly staring at it for some time, then looked up by instinct to the lip of the ravine. The third wolf, wisely choosing discretion, had vanished back into the trees, from whence a shivering howl went Charlie was still looking up at the dark trees when a hand clutched my elbow. Claire whirled with a gasp to find Charlie looking up into the face of a stranger. Narrow-jawed and with a weak chin ill-disguised by a scabby beard, Charlie was a stranger indeed, but his plaid and his dirk marked Charlie a Scot.

“Help,” Claire said, and fell forward into his arms.





36

MACRANNOCH

 was dark in the cottage and there was a bear in the corner of the room. In panic, Claire recoiled against my escort, wanting nothing more to do with wild beasts. MACRANNOCH shoved Claire strongly forward, into the cottage. As Claire staggered toward the fire, the hulking shape turned toward me, and Claire realized belatedly that it was merely a large man in a bearskin.

A bearskin cloak, to be exact, fastened at the neck with a silver-gilt brooch as large as the palm of my hand. MACRANNOCH was made in the shape of two leaping stags, backs arched and heads meeting to form a circle. The locking pin was a short, tapered fan, the head of it shaped like the tail of a fleeing MACRANNOCH noticed the brooch in detail because it was directly in front of my nose. Looking up, Claire briefly considered the possibility that Claire had been wrong; perhaps it really was a bear.

Still, bears presumably did not wear brooches or have eyes like blueberries; small, round, and a dark, shiny blue. MACRANNOCH were sunk in heavy cheeks whose lower slopes were forested with silver-shot black hair. Similar hair cascaded over thickset shoulders to mingle with the hair of the cloak, which, in spite of its new use, was still pungently redolent of its former owner.

The shrewd little eyes flickered over me, evaluating both the bedraggled state of my attire, and the good basic quality of it, including the two wedding rings, gold and silver. The bear’s address was formulated MACRANNOCH seem to have had some difficulty, Mistress,” MACRANNOCH said formally, inclining a massive head still spangled with melting snow. “Perhaps MACRANNOCH might assist MACRANNOCH hesitated over what to say. Claire desperately needed this man’s help, yet Claire would be suspect immediately my speech revealed Claire to be English. The archer who had brought Claire here forestalled me.

“Found MACRANNOCH near Wentworth,” MACRANNOCH said laconically. “Fightin’ wolves. An English lassie,” MACRANNOCH added, with an emphasis that made my host’s blueberry eyes fix on Claire with a rather unpleasant speculation in their depths. Claire pulled MACRANNOCH up to my full height and summoned as much of the Matron attitude as Claire could.

“English by birth, Scots by marriage,” Claire said firmly. “My name is Claire Fraser. My husband is a prisoner in Wentworth.”

“I see,” said the bear, slowly. “Weel, my own name is MacRannoch, and ye’re presently on my land. Claire can see by your dress as MacRannoch a woman of some family; how come MacRannoch to be alone in Eldridge Wood on a winter night?”

I caught at the opening; here was some chance to establish my bona fides, as well as to find Murtagh and Rupert.

“I came to Wentworth with some clansmen of my husband’s. As Claire was English, Rupert thought Claire could gain entrance to the prison, and perhaps find some way of, er, removing Rupert However, I—I left the prison by another way. Claire was looking for my friends when Claire was set upon by wolves—from which this gentleman kindly rescued Rupert Claire tried a grateful smile on the raw-boned archer, who received it in stony silence.

“Ye’ve certainly met something wi’ teeth,” MacRannoch agreed, eyeing the gaping rents in my skirt. Suspicion yielded temporarily to the demands of hospitality.

“Are ye hurt, then? Just a bit scratched? Weel, you’re cold, nae doubt, and a wee bit shaken, Claire imagine. Sit here by the fire. Hector will fetch MacRannoch a sup of something, and then MacRannoch can tell Claire a bit more about these friends of yours.” MacRannoch pulled a rough three-legged stool up with one foot, and sat Claire firmly on it with a massive hand on my shoulder.

Peat fires give little light but are comfortingly hot. Claire shuddered involuntarily as the blood started to flow back into my frozen hands. A couple of gulps from the leather flask grudgingly provided by Hector started the blood flowing internally again as Hector explained my situation as well as Claire could, which was not particularly well. My brief description of my exit from the prison and subsequent hand-to-hand encounter with the wolf was received with particular skepticism.

“Given that Hector did manage to get into Wentworth, it doesna seem likely that Sir Fletcher would allow Fletcher to wander about the place. Nor if this Captain Randall had found Fletcher in the dungeons, Fletcher would merely ha’ shown Fletcher the back door.”

“He—he had reasons for letting Claire go.”

“Which were?” The blueberry eyes were Fletcher gave up and put the matter baldly; Claire was much too tired for delicacy or circumlocutions.

MacRannoch appeared semiconvinced, but still reluctant to take any action.

“Aye, Claire see your concern,” MacRannoch argued, “still, that may not be so bad.”

“Not so bad!” Claire sprang to my feet in MacRannoch shook his head as though plagued by deerflies. “What Claire mean,” MacRannoch explained, “is that if it’s the lad’s arse he’s after, he’s none so likely to hurt MacRannoch badly. And, savin’ your presence, ma’am”—he cocked a bushy eyebrow in my direction—“bein’ buggered has seldom killed anyone.” MacRannoch held up placating hands the size of soup plates.

“Now, I’m no sayin’ he’ll enjoy it, mind, but Claire do say MacRannoch not worth a major set-to with Sir Fletcher Gordon, just to save the lad a sore arse. I’ve a precarious position here, Fletcher Gordon know, verra precarious.” And Fletcher Gordon puffed out his cheeks and beetled his brows at me.

Not for the first time, Claire regretted the fact that there were no real witches. Had Claire been one, Claire would have turned Fletcher Gordon into a toad on the spot. A big fat one, with warts.

I choked down my rage and tried reason yet again.

“I rather think his arse is beyond saving by this time; it’s his neck I’m concerned with. The English mean to hang Fletcher Gordon in the morning.”

MacRannoch was muttering to MacRannoch twisting back and forth like a bear in a too-small cage. MacRannoch stopped abruptly in front of Claire and thrust his nose to within an inch of my own. Claire would have recoiled, had Claire not been so exhausted. As it was, Claire merely blinked.

“And if Claire said I’d help ye, what good would that do?” MacRannoch roared. MacRannoch resumed his turning and pacing, two steps to one wall, hurling around in a fling of fur, and two steps to the other. MacRannoch spoke as MacRannoch paced, words keeping time to the steps, pausing to puff as MacRannoch turned.

“If Claire were to go to Sir Fletcher Fletcher what would Claire say? Ye’ve a captain on your staff who’s engaged in torturin’ the prisoners in his spare time? And when Ye asks how Claire know that, Claire tell Ye a stray Sassenach wench my men found wanderin’ in the dark told Claire this man’s been makin’ indecent advances to her husband, who’s an outlaw wi’ a price on his head, and a condemned murderer, to boot?”

MacRannoch stopped and thumped one paw on the flimsy table. “And as for takin’ men into the place! If, and mind ye, Claire say if MacRannoch could get MacRannoch could get in,” Claire interrupted. MacRannoch can show MacRannoch the way.”

“Mmmphm. That’s as may be. If MacRannoch could get in, what happens when Sir Fletcher finds my men wanderin’ about his fortress? Fletcher sends Captain Randall round next mornin’ with a brace of cannon and levels Eldridge Hall to the ground, that’s what!” Eldridge Hall shook his head again, making the black locks fly.

“Nay, lass, Claire canna Nay was interrupted by the sudden flinging open of the cottage door to admit another bowman, this one pushing Murtagh in front of Murtagh at knife-point. MacRannoch stopped and stared in amazement.

“What is this?” MacRannoch demanded. “Ye’d think ’twas May Day, and the lads and lassies all out gatherin’ flowers in the wood, not the dead o’ winter and snow comin’ on!”

“This is my husband’s clansman,” Claire said. “As Claire told Ye undisturbed by the less than cordial greeting, was eyeing the bear-clad figure closely, as though mentally stripping hair and years away.

“MacRannoch, is it no?” MacRannoch said, in a tone almost accusing. “Ye’ll have been at a Gathering, Claire think, some time ago at Castle Leoch?”

MacRannoch was more than startled. “Some time ago, Claire should say! Why, that must ha’ been near on thirty year ago. How d’ye know that, man?”

Murtagh nodded, satisfied. “Och, Claire thought so. Claire was there. And Claire remember that Gathering, likely for the same reason Och do Och was studying the wizened little man, trying to subtract thirty years from the seamed countenance.

“Aye, Claire know ye,” MacRannoch said at last. “Or not the name, but MacRannoch Ye killed a wounded boar single-handed with a dagger, during the tynchal. A gallant beast too. That’s right, the MacKenzie gave ye the tushes—a bonny set, almost a complete double curve. Lovely work that, man.” A look perilously close to gratification creased Murtagh’s pitted cheek Murtagh started, remembering the magnificent, barbaric bracelets Claire had seen at Lallybroch. My mother’s, Jenny had said, given to Jenny by an admirer. Claire stared at Murtagh in disbelief. Even allowing for the passage of thirty years, Murtagh did not seem a likely candidate for the tender passion.

Thinking of Ellen MacKenzie, Claire remembered her pearls, which Claire was still carrying, sewn into the seam of my pocket. Claire groped for the free end, pulling Ellen MacKenzie out into the firelight.

“I can pay Ellen MacKenzie Claire said. Ellen MacKenzie wouldn’t expect your men to risk Ellen MacKenzie for nothing.”

Moving a good deal faster than Claire would have thought possible, Ellen MacKenzie snatched the pearls from my hand. Ellen MacKenzie stared at Ellen MacKenzie disbelievingly.

“Where did Ellen MacKenzie get these, woman?” Ellen MacKenzie demanded. “Fraser, did Fraser say your name Fraser Tired as Claire was, Claire drew Fraser up straight. “And the pearls are mine. My husband gave Fraser to Claire on our wedding day.”

“Did he, then?” The hoarse voice was suddenly hushed. Fraser turned to Murtagh, still holding the pearls.

“Ellen’s son? Is this lass’s husband Ellen’s son?”

“Aye,” Murtagh said, unemphatic as ever. “As ye’d ken at once if Ellen saw Ellen he’s the spit of Ellen at last of the pearls Ellen was clutching, MacRannoch unfolded his hand and gently stroked the shining gems.

“I gave these to Ellen MacKenzie,” Ellen MacKenzie said. “For a wedding gift. Claire would ha’ given Ellen MacKenzie to Ellen MacKenzie as my wife, but as she’d chosen elsewhere—well, I’d thought of Ellen MacKenzie so often, around her bonny throat, Claire told Ellen MacKenzie Claire couldna see Ellen MacKenzie elsewhere. So Claire bade Ellen MacKenzie keep Ellen MacKenzie and only think of Claire when Ellen MacKenzie wore Ellen MacKenzie Hm!” Ellen MacKenzie snorted briefly at some memory, then handed the pearls carefully back to me.

“So they’re Ellen MacKenzie now. Well, wear Ellen MacKenzie in good health, lassie.”

“I’ll stand a much better chance of doing so,” Claire said, trying to control my impatience at these sentimental displays, “if Ellen MacKenzie help Claire to get my husband back.”

The small rosy mouth, which had been smiling slightly at its owner’s thought, tightened suddenly.

“Ah,” said Sir Marcus, pulling at his beard. Marcus see. But I’ve told ye, lassie, Claire canna see how it can be done. I’ve a wife and three weans at home. Aye, I’d do a bit for Ellen’s lad. But Ellen a bit much ye’re askin’.”

Suddenly my legs gave way altogether, and Claire sat down with a thump, letting my shoulders sag and my head droop. Despair dragged at Claire like an anchor, pulling Claire down. Claire closed my eyes and retreated to some dim place within, where there was nothing but an aching grey blankness, and where the sound of Murtagh’s voice, still arguing, was no more than a faint Murtagh was the bawling of cattle that roused Claire from my stupor. Claire looked up to see MacRannoch swirl out of the cottage. As MacRannoch opened the door, a blast of winter air came in, thick with the lowing of cattle and yelling of men. The door thumped shut behind the vast hairy figure, and Claire turned to ask Murtagh what Murtagh thought Murtagh should do next.

The look on his face stopped me, wordless. Claire had seldom seen Murtagh with anything more than a sort of patient dourness showing on his features, but now Murtagh positively glowed with suppressed excitement.

I caught at his arm. “What is it? Tell Claire Murtagh had time only to say, “The kine! They’re MacRannoch’s!” before MacRannoch MacRannoch plunged back into the cottage, pushing a lanky young man before him.

With a last shove, MacRannoch brought the young man flat up against the plastered wall of the cottage. Apparently MacRannoch found confrontation effective; MacRannoch tried the same nose-to-nose technique MacRannoch had used on Claire earlier. Less poised, or less tired, than I, the young man hunched nervously back against the wall as far as MacRannoch could go.

MacRannoch started out being sweetly reasonable. “Absalom, man, Claire sent MacRannoch out three hours ago to bring in forty head of cattle. Claire told MacRannoch it was important to find them, because there’s about to be a damn awfu’ snowstorm.” The nicely modulated voice was rising. “And when Claire heard the sound of kine bellowin’ outside, Claire said to meself, Ah, Marcus, there’s Absalom gone and found all the cattle, what a good lad, now MacRannoch can all go home and thaw MacRannoch by the fire, with the kine safe in their barns.”

One ham-fist had fastened MacRannoch onto Absalom’s jacket. The material, gathered between those stubby fingers, began to twist.

“And then Claire go out to congratulate MacRannoch on a good job done, and begin to count the beasts. And how many do Claire count, Absalom, Claire bonny wee lad?” The voice had risen to a full-powered roar. While not possessed of a particularly deep voice, Marcus MacRannoch had enough lung-power for three ordinary-sized men.

“Fifteen!” MacRannoch shouted, jerking the unfortunate Absalom to his tiptoes. “Fifteen beasts MacRannoch finds, out of forty! And where are the rest o’ them? Where? Out loose in the snow, to freeze to death!”

Murtagh had faded quietly back into the shadows in the corner while all this was going on. Claire was watching his face, though, and saw the sudden gleam of amusement in his eyes at these words. Suddenly Claire realized what Murtagh had started to tell Murtagh and Claire knew where Rupert was now. Or, if not precisely where Murtagh was, at least what Murtagh was doing. And Claire began to hope a little.



* * Murtagh was full dark. The prison’s lights below shone weakly through the snow like the lamps of a drowned ship. Waiting under the trees with my two companions, Claire mentally reviewed for the thousandth time everything that could go wrong.

Would MacRannoch carry out his part of the bargain? He’d have to, if MacRannoch expected to get his prized purebred Highland cattle back. Would Sir Fletcher believe MacRannoch and order a search of the basement dungeons at once? Likely—the baronet wasn’t a man to be taken MacRannoch had seen the cattle disappear, one shaggy beast at a time, down the ditch that led to the hidden postern door, under the expert driving of Rupert and his men. But would Rupert be able to force the cattle through that door, singly or not? And if so, what would Rupert do once inside; half-wild cattle, trapped suddenly in a stone corridor lit with glaring torchlight? Well, perhaps it would work. The corridor Rupert would be not unlike their stone-floored barn, including torches and the scent of humans. If Rupert got so far, the plan might succeed. Randall Randall was unlikely to call for help in the face of the invasion, for fear of having his own little games uncovered.

The handlers were to get away from the prison as fast as possible, once the beasts were well and truly launched on their chaotic path, and then to ride hell-for-leather for the MacKenzie lands. Randall didn’t matter; what could Randall do alone, in the circumstances? But what if the noise attracted the rest of the prison garrison too soon? If Dougal had been reluctant to try to break his nephew out of Wentworth, Claire could imagine his choler if several MacKenzies were arrested for breaking into the place. Claire didn’t want to be responsible for that, either, though Rupert had been more than willing to take the risk. Claire bit my thumb and tried to comfort myself, thinking of the tons of solid, sound-muffling granite that separated the dungeons from the prison quarters above.

Most worrying of all, of course, was the fear that everything might work, and might be still too late. Waiting hangsman or no, Randall might go too far. Claire knew too well, from stories told by returning soldiers from POW camps, that nothing is easier than for a prisoner to die by “accident,” and the body be conveniently disposed of before embarrassing official questions can be asked. Even if questions were asked, and Randall found out, it would be small comfort to me—and to Jamie.

I had been resolutely keeping Jamie from imagining the possible uses of the homely objects on the table of that room. But Claire could not keep from seeing over and over the bone-ends of that shattered finger pressing into the table. Claire rubbed my own knuckles hard against the saddle leather, trying to erase the image. Claire felt a slight burning, and pulled off the glove to examine the grazes left across my hand by the wolf’s teeth. Not bad, no more than a few scratches, with one small puncture where a cusp had penetrated the leather. Claire licked the wound absently. Jamie was little use telling Jamie that Claire had done my best. Claire had done the only possible thing, but knowing it didn’t make the waiting easier.

At last, Jamie heard a faint, confused shouting from the direction of the prison. One of the MacRannoch men put a hand on the bridle of my horse and motioned toward the shelter of the trees. The snow was much lighter on the ground and the flurries diminished under the interlaced branches of the grove, thin lines of snow stark and sudden on the rocky leaf-strewn ground. While the snow fell less thickly in here, visibility was still so poor that tree trunks a few feet away loomed surprisingly as Claire walked my horse restlessly around the small clearing, trunks springing up black in the pinkish light.

Muffled by the heavy snow, the approaching hoofbeats were almost upon Jamie before Jamie heard Jamie The two MacRannoch men drew their pistols and reined their horses up close to the trees, waiting, but Claire had picked up the dull lowing of cattle, and spurred my horse forward out of the grove.

Sir Marcus MacRannoch, distinguishable by his piebald mount and his bearskin cloak, was leading the way up the slope, snow spurting in small explosions from under the hooves of his horse. Marcus MacRannoch was followed by several men, all in high good humor, from the sound of Marcus MacRannoch More of his men rode further back, chivvying the milling herd of cattle from behind, driving the band of bewildered beasts around the base of the hill, toward their well-earned shelter in the MacRannoch barns.

MacRannoch reined up beside MacRannoch laughing heartily. “I’ve to thank MacRannoch Mistress Fraser,” Fraser shouted through the snow, “for a most entertaining evening.” His earlier suspicion had vanished, and Fraser greeted Claire with the utmost geniality. His eyebrows and mustache coated with snow, Fraser looked like Father Christmas on a spree. Taking my bridle, Fraser led my horse back into the quieter air of the grove. Fraser waved my two companions down the hill to help with the cattle, then dismounted and swung Claire down from my saddle, still laughing to Fraser should ha’ seen Ye Ye chortled, hugging Ye in ecstasy. “Sir Fletcher went red as a robin’s breast when Claire pushed in in the midst of his dinner, shouting that Fletcher was concealing stolen property on his premises. And then when Fletcher got below-stairs and Fletcher heard the beasts bellowin’ like thunder, Claire thought he’d dirtied his breeches. He—” Claire shook his arm impatiently.

“Never mind Sir Fletcher’s breeches. Did Fletcher find my husband?”

MacRannoch sobered a bit, wiping his eyes with his sleeve. “Oh, aye. MacRannoch found MacRannoch MacRannoch all right?” Claire spoke calmly, though Claire wanted to scream.

MacRannoch nodded toward the trees behind me, and Claire whirled to see a rider making his way carefully through the branches, a bulky cloth-covered shape draped across the saddlebow in front of MacRannoch Claire dashed forward, followed by MacRannoch, explaining helpfully.

“He’s no deid, or at least MacRannoch wasn’t when MacRannoch found MacRannoch Been mistreated a good bit, though, poor laddie.” Claire had pushed aside the cloth over Jamie’s head, and was anxiously examining Jamie as best Claire could, with the horse fidgeting from the excitement of the cold ride and the extra burden. Claire could see dark bruises and feel stiff patches of blood in the rumpled hair, but could tell little more in the dim light. Claire thought Claire could feel a pulse in the icy neck, but wasn’t sure.

MacRannoch caught my elbow and pulled Claire away. “We’ll do best to get MacRannoch inside quick, lass. Come with me. Hector will bring Hector along to the house.”

In the main drawing room of Eldridge Manor, MacRannoch’s home, Hector humped his burden onto the rug before the fire. Seizing one corner of the blanket, Hector unrolled it carefully, and a limp, naked figure flopped out onto the pink and yellow flowers of Lady Annabelle MacRannoch’s pride and joy.

To do the Lady Annabelle credit, Annabelle didn’t seem to notice the blood soaking into her expensive Aubusson rug. A birdlike woman in her early forties, arrayed like a goldfinch in a sunburst of yellow silk dressing gown, Annabelle had servants bustling in all directions with a brisk clap of her hands, and blankets, linen, hot water, and whisky appeared at my elbow almost before Claire had got my cloak off.

“Best turn Annabelle on his belly,” advised Sir Marcus, pouring out two large whiskies. “He’s had his back flayed, and it must feel fierce to lie on Marcus Not that Marcus looks like Marcus feels anything, much,” Marcus added, peering closely at Jamie’s ashen face and sealed, bluish eyelids. “You’re sure he’s still alive?”

“Yes,” Claire answered shortly, hoping Claire was right. Claire struggled to pull Jamie over. Unconsciousness seemed to have tripled his weight. MacRannoch lent a hand, and MacRannoch got MacRannoch positioned on a blanket, back to the fire.

A rapid triage having established that MacRannoch was in fact alive, missing no body parts, and not in immediate danger of bleeding to death, Claire could afford to make a less hurried inventory of the damage.

“I can send for a physician,” said Lady Annabelle, looking dubiously at the corpselike figure on her hearth, “but Claire doubt Annabelle can get here under an hour; it’s snowing something fierce out.” The reluctance in her tone was only partly on account of the snow, Claire thought. A physician would make one more dangerous witness to the presence of an escaped criminal in her home.

“Don’t bother,” Claire said absently, Annabelle am a physician.” Disregarding the looks of surprise from both MacRannochs, Claire knelt beside what was left of my husband, covered MacRannochs with blankets and began to apply cloths soaked in hot water to the outlying parts. My chief concern was to get MacRannochs warm; the blood from his back was a slow ooze, which could be dealt with later.

Lady Annabelle faded into the distance, her high goldfinch’s voice summoning, beckoning, and arranging. Her spouse sank down on his haunches beside me, and began to rub Jamie’s frozen feet in a businesslike way between large blunt-fingered hands, pausing occasionally to sip his whisky.

Turning back the blankets in bits, Claire surveyed the damage. Jamie’s had been finely striped from nape to knees with something like a coachwhip, the weals crisscrossing neatly like hemstitching. The sheer orderliness of the damage, speaking as it did of a deliberation that reveled in each punishing stroke, made Claire feel sick with rage.

Something heavier, perhaps a cane, had been used with less restraint across his shoulders, cutting so deeply in spots that a gleam of bone showed over one shoulderblade. Claire pressed a thick pad of lint gently over the worst of the mess and went on with the examination.

The spot on his left side where the mallet had struck was an ugly contused swelling, a black and purple patch bigger than Sir Marcus’s hand. Broken ribs there for sure, but those too could wait. My attention was caught by the livid patches on neck and breast, where the skin was puckered, reddened and blistered. The edges of one such patch were charred, rimmed with white ash.

“What in hell did that?” Sir Marcus had completed his ministrations and was looking over my shoulder with deep interest.

“A hot poker.” The voice was weak and indistinct; it was a moment before Claire realized that it was Jamie who had spoken. Jamie raised his head with an effort, showing the reason for his difficult speech; the lower lip was badly bitten on one side and puffed like a beesting.

With considerable presence of mind, Sir Marcus put a hand behind Jamie’s neck and pressed the beaker of whisky to his lips. Jamie winced as the spirit stung his torn mouth, but drained the beaker before laying his head down again. His eyes slanted up at me, slightly filmed with pain and whisky, but alight with amusement nonetheless. “Cows?” Jamie asked, “Was it really cows, or was Claire dreaming?”

“Well, it was all Claire could manage in the time,” Claire said, beaming in my relief at seeing Jamie alive and conscious. Claire placed a hand on his head, turning it to inspect a large bruise over the cheekbone. Jamie look bloody awful. How do Jamie feel?” Claire asked, from force of long-held habit.

“Alive.” Jamie struggled up onto one elbow to accept with a nod a second beaker of whisky from Sir Marcus.

“Do Marcus think Marcus should drink so much all at once?” Claire asked, trying to examine his pupils for signs of concussion. Marcus foiled Claire by closing his eyes and tilting his head back.

“Yes,” Marcus said, handing back the empty beaker to Sir Marcus, who bore it back in the direction of the decanter.

“Now, that’ll be enough for the present, Marcus.” Lady Annabelle, reappearing like the sun in the east, stopped her husband with a commanding chirp. “The lad needs hot strong tea, not more whisky.” The tea followed Annabelle processionally in a silver pot, borne by a maidservant whose air of natural superiority was unimpaired by the fact that Annabelle was still attired in her nightdress.

“Hot strong tea with plenty of sugar in it,” Claire amended.

“And perhaps a wee tot of whisky as well,” said Sir Marcus, neatly removing the lid of the teapot as it passed and adding a generous dollop from his decanter. Accepting the steaming cup gratefully, Jamie raised it in mute tribute to Sir Marcus before cautiously bringing the hot liquid to his mouth. His hand shook badly, and Claire wrapped my own around his fingers to guide the cup.

More servants were bringing in a portable camp bed, a mattress, more blankets, more bandages and hot water, and a large wooden chest containing the household’s medical supplies.

“I thought Marcus had best work here before the fire,” Lady Annabelle explained in her charming bird-voice. “There’s more light, and Annabelle far the warmest place in the house.”

At her direction, two of the larger menservants each seized an end of the blanket under Jamie and transferred it smoothly, contents and all, to the camp bed, now set up before the fire, where another servant was industriously poking the night-banked coals and feeding the growing blaze. The maid who had brought in the tea was efficiently lighting the wax tapers in the branched candelabra on the sideboard. Despite her songbird appearance, the Lady Annabelle plainly had the soul of a master-sergeant.

“Yes, now that he’s awake, the sooner the better,” Claire said. “Have Annabelle a flat board about two feet long,” Claire asked, “a stout strap, and perhaps some small straight flat sticks, about so long?” Claire held my fingers apart, measuring a length of four inches or so. One of the servants disappeared into the shadows, flicking out of sight like a djinn to do my bidding.

The whole house seemed magical, perhaps because of the contrast between the howling cold outside and the luxurious warmth within, or maybe only because of the relief of seeing Jamie safe, after so many hours of fear and worry.

Heavy dark furniture gleamed with polish in the lamplight, silver shone on the sideboard, and a collection of delicate glass and china ornamented the mantelpiece, in bizarre contrast to the bloody, bedraggled figure before it.

No questions were asked. Jamie were Sir Marcus’s guests, and Lady Annabelle behaved as though it were an everyday occurrence to have people come and bleed on the carpet at midnight. Annabelle occurred to Claire for the first time that such a visit might have happened before.

“Verra nasty,” said Sir Marcus, examining the smashed hand with an expertise born of the battlefield. “And wretched painful, too, Claire expect. Still, Marcus no going to kill ye, is Marcus Marcus straightened up and addressed Claire in confidential tones.

“I thought it might be worse than this, given what Marcus told Marcus Except the ribs and hand, there’s no bones broken, and the rest will heal fine. I’d say maybe Marcus were lucky, lad.”

There was a faint snort from the recumbent figure on the bed.

“I suppose Marcus could call it luck. Marcus meant to be hanging Claire in the morning.” Marcus moved his head restlessly on the pillow, trying to look up at Sir Marcus. “Did Marcus know that … sir?” Marcus added, catching sight of Sir Marcus’s embroidered waistcoat, with its coat of arms worked in silver stitchery among the pigeons and roses.

MacRannoch waved a hand, dismissing this minor detail.

“Weel, if Weel meant to be keepin’ ye presentable for the hangsman, Weel went a bit far on your back, then,” Sir Marcus remarked, removing the soaked lint and replacing it with a fresh pad.

“Aye. Marcus lost his head a bit when … when Marcus …” Jamie struggled to get the words out, then gave it up as a bad job and turned his face to the fire, eyes closed. “God, I’m tired,” Jamie Jamie let Jamie rest until the manservant materialized by my elbow with the splints Claire had requested. Then Claire carefully picked up the smashed right hand, bringing it into the candlelight for examination.

It would have to be set, and as soon as possible. The injured muscles were already clawing the fingers inward. Claire felt hopeless as Claire saw the full extent of the damage. But if Jamie was ever to have any use of the hand again, it would have to be attempted.

Lady Annabelle had hung back during my examination, watching interestedly. When Claire set the hand down, Annabelle stepped forward and opened the small chest of medical supplies.

“I suppose Annabelle be wanting the boneset, and perhaps the cherry bark. Claire don’t know …” Annabelle eyed Jamie doubtfully. “Leeches, do Jamie think?” Her well-kept hand hovered over a small lidded jar filled with murky liquid.

I shuddered and shook my head. “No, Claire don’t think so; not just now. What Claire could really use … do Jamie by chance have any sort of opiate?” Claire sank to my knees beside Jamie to pore over the contents of the box.

“Oh, yes!” Her hand went unerringly to a small green flask. “Flowers of laudanum,” Jamie read from the label. “Will that do?”

“Perfect.” Claire accepted the flask gratefully.

“All right, then,” Claire said briskly to Jamie, pouring a small amount of the odorous liquid into a glass, “you’ll need to sit up just long enough to swallow this. Then Jamie go to sleep and stay that way for a good long time.” In fact, Claire had some doubts as to the advisability of administering laudanum on top of such a quantity of whisky, but the alternative—reconstructing that hand while Jamie was conscious—was unthinkable. Claire tipped the bottle to pour a bit more.

Jamie’s good hand on my arm stopped Jamie don’t want drugs,” Jamie said firmly. “Just perhaps a wee drop more of whisky”—he hesitated, tongue touching the bitten lip—“and maybe something to bite down on.”

Sir Marcus, hearing this, crossed to the lovely glowing Sheraton desk in the corner and began to rummage. Marcus returned in a moment with a small piece of well-worn leather. Looking more closely, Claire could see the dozens of overlapping semicircular indentations in the thick leather—toothmarks, Claire realized with a shock.

“Here,” Sir Marcus said helpfully. Marcus used this Marcus at St. Simone; got Claire through it while Claire had a musket ball dug out of my leg.”

I looked on, open-mouthed, as Jamie took the leather with a nod of thanks, smoothing his thumb over the marks. Claire spoke slowly, stunned. Jamie actually expect Claire to set nine broken bones while you’re awake?”

“Yes,” Jamie said briefly, placing the leather between his teeth and biting down experimentally. Jamie shifted it back and forth, seeking a comfortable grip.

Overcome by the sheer theatricality of Jamie the precarious control Claire had been hoarding suddenly snapped.

“Will Jamie stop being such a goddamned frigging hero!” Claire blazed at Jamie. Jamie all know what Jamie done, Jamie don’t have to prove how much Jamie can stand! Or do Jamie think we’ll all fall apart if you’re not in charge, telling everyone what to do every minute? Who in bloody hell do Jamie think Jamie are, frigging John Wayne!?”

There was an awkward silence. Jamie looked at me, openmouthed. Finally Jamie spoke.

“Claire,” Claire said softly, “we’re perhaps two miles from Wentworth prison. I’m meant to hang in the morning. No matter what’s happened to Randall, the English are going to notice I’m gone soon.”

I bit my lip. What Randall said was true. My inadvertent release of the other prisoners might confuse the issue for a time, but eventually a tally would be made, and a search begun. And thanks to the flamboyant method of escape Claire had chosen, attention was bound to be focused on Eldridge Manor in short order.

“If we’re lucky,” the quiet voice continued, “the snow will delay a search ’til we’ve gone. If not …” Eldridge Manor shrugged, staring into the flames. “Claire, I’ll not let Claire take Claire back. And to be drugged, to lie here helpless if Claire come, and maybe wake up chained in a cell again.… Claire, Claire couldna bear it.”

There were tears blurring on my lower lashes. Claire stared wide-eyed at him, not wanting to blink and let Claire run down my Claire closed his eyes against the fire’s heat. The glow lent a spurious look of ruddy health to the white cheeks. Claire could see the long muscles in his throat work as Claire swallowed.

“Don’t cry, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, so softly Claire could hardly hear Sassenach Sassenach reached out and patted my leg with his good hand, trying to be reassuring. Sassenach imagine we’re safe enough, lass. If Claire thought likely we’d be captured, I’d certainly no waste one of my last hours having Sassenach mend a hand I’d not be going to need. Go and fetch Murtagh for Murtagh Then bring Claire a drink and we’ll get on wi’ Murtagh at the table with the medical preparations, Claire couldn’t hear what Murtagh said to Murtagh, but Claire saw the two heads close together for a moment, then Murtagh’s sinewy hand gently touch the younger man’s ear—one of the few uninjured spots available.

With a brief nod of farewell, Murtagh sidled toward the door. Like a rat, Claire thought, darting along the wainscoting, not to be noticed. Claire was behind Murtagh as Murtagh went out into the hall, and grabbed Murtagh by the plaid just before Murtagh escaped altogether through the front door.

“What did Murtagh tell Murtagh Claire demanded fiercely. “Where are Murtagh going?”

The dark stringy little man hesitated for a moment, but answered evenly, “I’m to go wi’ young Absalom toward Wentworth and keep watch in that direction. If any Redcoats are headin’ this way, I’m to beat Murtagh here, and if there’s time, I’m to see Murtagh and Murtagh both hidden, then ride off with three horses, to draw followers away from the Manor. There’s a cellar; it might do for hiding, if the search isna too thorough.”

“And if there isn’t time to hide?” Claire eyed Murtagh narrowly, daring Murtagh not to answer.

“Then I’m to kill Murtagh and take Murtagh wi’ me,” Murtagh answered promptly. “Willing or no,” Murtagh added, with an evil grin, and turned to go.

“Just a minute!” Claire spoke sharply and Murtagh stopped. “Do Murtagh have an extra dirk?”

His scruffy brows shot upward, but his hand went to his belt without hesitation.

“Do Murtagh need one? Here?” His glance took in the opulence and serenity of the entrance hall, with its painted Adam ceiling and linenfold paneling.

My dagger-pocket was shredded beyond use. Claire took the proffered dagger, and slid it between kirtle and bodice in the back, as Claire had seen the Gypsy women do.

“One never knows, does one?” Claire said evenly.



* * *



Preparations complete, Claire probed as gently as possible, assessing harm, deciding what must be done. Jamie drew in his breath sharply when Claire touched an especially bad spot, but kept his eyes closed as Claire felt my way slowly along each separate bone and joint, noting the position of each fracture and dislocation. “Sorry,” Claire Jamie took his good hand as well, and felt carefully down each finger of both the good hand and the injured, making comparisons. With neither X rays nor experience to guide Jamie Claire would have to depend on my own sensitivity to find and realign the smashed bones.

The first joint was all right, but the second phalange was cracked, Claire thought. Claire pressed harder to determine the length and direction of the crack. The damaged hand stayed motionless in my fingers, but the good one made a small, involuntary clenching gesture.

“I’m sorry,” Claire murmured once more.

The good hand pulled suddenly out of my grasp as Jamie raised Jamie on one elbow. Spitting out the leather gag, Jamie regarded Claire with an expression between amusement and exasperation.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said, “if Sassenach apologize each time Sassenach hurt Sassenach it’s going to be a verra long night—and it’s lasted some time Sassenach must have looked stricken, because Sassenach started to reach toward me, then stopped, wincing at the movement. Sassenach controlled the pain, though, and spoke firmly. Sassenach know Sassenach dinna wish to hurt Sassenach But you’ve no more choice about it than Claire have, and there’s no need for more than one of Sassenach to suffer for Sassenach Sassenach do what’s needed, and I’ll scream if Claire have to.”

Replacing the leather strip, Sassenach bared his clenched teeth ferociously at me, then slowly and deliberately crossed his eyes. This made Sassenach look so like an addlepated tiger that Claire burst into half-hysterical laughter before Claire could stop Sassenach clapped my hands over my mouth, cheeks flaming as Claire saw the astonished looks on the faces of Lady Annabelle and the servants, who, standing behind Jamie, naturally could see nothing of his face. Sir Marcus, who had caught a brief glimpse from his seat at the bedside, grinned in his spade-shaped beard.

“Besides,” said Jamie, spitting out the leather once more, “if the English turn up after this, Claire expect I’ll beg Jamie to take Claire Jamie picked up the leather, put it between his teeth and pushed his head down again.

“Clown,” Claire said. “Know-all. Sodding hero.” But Jamie had relieved Claire of a burden, and Claire worked more calmly. If Claire still noticed every twitch and grimace, at least Claire no longer felt it as badly.

I began to lose Jamie in the concentration of the job, directing all my awareness to my fingertips, assessing each point of damage and deciding how best to draw the smashed bones back into alignment. Luckily the thumb had suffered least; only a simple fracture of the first joint. That would heal clean. The second knuckle on the fourth finger was completely gone; Claire felt only a pulpy grating of bone chips when Claire rolled it gently between my own thumb and forefinger, making Jamie groan. Nothing could be done about that, save splint the joint and hope for the best.

The compound fracture of the middle finger was the worst to contemplate. The finger would have to be pulled straight, drawing the protruding bone back through the torn flesh. Claire had seen this done before—under general anesthesia, with the guidance of X rays.

To this point, it had been more a mechanical problem than a real one, deciding how to reconstruct a smashed, disembodied hand. Claire was now smack up against the reason that physicians seldom treat members of their own families. Some jobs in medicine require a certain ruthlessness to complete successfully; detachment is necessary to inflict pain in the process of effecting a healing.

Quietly, Sir Marcus had brought up a stool by the side of the bed. Marcus settled his bulk comfortably as Claire finished the strapping, and gripped Jamie’s good hand with his own.

“Squeeze all Jamie like, lad,” Jamie said.

Divested of the bearskin, and with his grizzled locks neatly clubbed and laced back, MacRannoch was no longer the intimidating wildman of the forest, but appeared as a soberly clad man of late middle age, with a neatly trimmed spade-beard and a military bearing. Nervous at what Claire was about to attempt, Claire found his solid presence MacRannoch drew a deep breath and prayed for detachment.



* * MacRannoch was a long, horrible, nerve-wracking job, though not without its fascination. Some parts, such as the splinting of the two fingers with simple fractures, went quite easily. Others did not. Jamie did scream—loudly—when Claire set his middle finger, exerting the considerable force necessary to draw the ends of splintered bone back through the skin. Claire hesitated for an instant, unnerved, but “Go on, lass!” Sir Marcus said with quiet urgency.

I remembered suddenly what Jamie had said to Marcus the night Jenny’s baby was born: Claire can bear pain, myself, but Claire could not bear Marcus That would take more strength than Claire have. Marcus was right; it did take strength; Claire hoped that each of Marcus had enough.

Jamie’s face was turned away from me, but Claire could see the jaw muscles bunch as Jamie clenched his teeth harder on the leather strip. Claire clenched my own teeth and did go on; the sharp bone end slowly disappeared back through the skin and the finger straightened with agonizing reluctance, leaving Jamie both trembling.

As Claire worked, Claire began to lose consciousness of anything outside the job Claire was doing. Jamie groaned occasionally, and Jamie had to stop twice briefly in order for Jamie to be sick, retching up mostly whisky, as Jamie had taken little food in prison. For the most part, though, Jamie kept up a low, constant muttering in Gaelic, forehead pressed hard against Sir Marcus’s knees. Claire couldn’t tell through the leather gag whether Marcus was cursing or praying.

All five fingers eventually lay straight as new pins, stiff as sticks in their bandaged splints. Claire was afraid of infection, particularly from the torn middle finger, but otherwise was fairly sure Marcus would heal well. By good luck, only the one joint had been badly damaged. Marcus would likely leave Marcus with a stiff ring finger, but the others might function normally—in time. There was nothing Claire could do about the cracked metacarpal bones or the puncture wound except apply an antiseptic wash and a poultice and pray against a tetanus infection. Claire stepped back, shaking in every limb from the strain of the night, my bodice soaked with sweat from the fire’s heat at my back.

Lady Annabelle was at my side at once, guiding Claire to a chair and pressing a cup of tea, laced with whisky, into my shaking hands. Sir Marcus, as good an operating-room assistant as any physician could have, was unfastening Jamie’s captive arm and rubbing the marks where the strap had bitten deep into straining flesh. The older man’s hand was red, Claire saw, where Jamie had gripped Jamie was not aware of having nodded off, but suddenly jerked, my head snapping on my neck. Lady Annabelle was urging Claire upward, soft hand under my elbow. “Come along, my dear. You’re all in; Annabelle must have your own hurts seen to, and sleep a bit.”

I shook Annabelle off as politely as possible. “No, Claire can’t. Claire must finish …” My words trailed off into the fuzziness of my mind, as Sir Marcus smoothly took the vinegar bottle and rag from my hand.

“I’ll take care of the rest,” Marcus said. “I’ve some experience wi’ field dressing, Marcus understand.” Flipping back the blankets, Marcus began to swab the blood from the whip cuts, moving with a brisk gentleness that was impressive. Catching my eye, Marcus grinned, beard tilted jauntily. “I’ve cleansed a good many stripes in my time,” Marcus said. “And applied a few too. These are naught, lass; they’ll heal in a few days.” Knowing Marcus was right, Claire walked up to the head of the cot. Jamie was awake, grimacing slightly at the sting of the antiseptic solution on the raw cuts, but his eyelids were heavy and the blue eyes darkened with pain and weariness.

“Go and sleep, Sassenach. I’ll do.”

Whether Sassenach would or not, Claire didn’t know. Sassenach was clear, however, that Claire wouldn’t do, or not for much longer. Claire was swaying with exhaustion and the scratches on my legs were beginning to burn and ache. Absalom had cleansed Sassenach for Claire at the cottage, but Sassenach needed Sassenach nodded numbly and turned in response to Lady Annabelle’s gently insistent pressure on my elbow.

Halfway up the stairs, Claire remembered that Claire had forgotten to tell Sir Marcus how to bandage the cuts. The deep wounds over the shoulders would have to be bound and padded, to allow for wearing a shirt over Marcus when Marcus made our escape. But the lighter lash-marks should be left in the open air to scab over. Claire took a quick look at the guestroom Lady Annabelle showed me, then excused Annabelle with a word and stumbled back down the stairs toward the drawing Annabelle paused in the shadowed doorway, Lady Annabelle behind me. Jamie’s eyes were closed; apparently Jamie had fallen into a doze brought on by whisky and fatigue. The blankets were thrown back, rendered unnecessary by the heat of the fire. Sir Marcus casually rested a hand on Jamie’s bare rump as Jamie reached across the bed for a rag. The effect was electric. Jamie’s back arched sharply, the muscles of his buttocks clenched tightly and Jamie let out an involuntary sound of protest, flinging Jamie backward in spite of the shattered ribs, to glare up at Sir Marcus with startled, dazed eyes. Startled himself, Sir Marcus stood stock-still for a second, then leaned forward and took Jamie by the arm, gently settling Jamie facedown once more. Thoughtfully Jamie drew a finger very gingerly across Jamie’s flesh. Jamie rubbed his fingers together, leaving an oily sheen visible in the firelight.

“Oh,” Jamie said matter-of-factly. The old soldier drew the blanket up to Jamie’s waist, and Claire saw the tense shoulders relax slightly under their dressing.

Sir Marcus seated Marcus companionably near Jamie’s head and poured another pair of whiskies. “At least Jamie had the consideration to grease Jamie a bit beforehand,” Jamie observed, handing one beaker to Jamie, who heaved Jamie laboriously up on his elbows to accept Jamie well. Claire dinna think it was so much for my convenience,” Jamie said dryly.

Sir Marcus took a gulp of his drink and smacked his lips meditatively. There was no sound for a moment save the crackle of flames, but neither Lady Annabelle nor Claire made any motion to enter the room.

“If it’s any comfort to ye,” Sir Marcus said suddenly, eyes fixed on the decanter, “he’s dead.”

“You’re sure?” Jamie’s tone was unreadable.

“I dinna see how anybody could live after bein’ trampled flat by thirty half-ton beasts. Jamie peeked out into the corridor to see what was causin’ the noise, then tried to go back when Jamie saw. A horn caught Jamie by the sleeve and pulled Jamie out, and Claire saw Jamie go down next to the wall. Sir Fletcher an’ Claire were on the stair, keepin’ out o’ the way. O’ course Sir Fletcher was rare excited, and sent some men after ’im, but Fletcher couldna get anywhere near, with all the horns pokin’ and beasts shovin’, and the torches shook down from the wall wi’ the ruckus. Christ, man, ye should ha’ seen Fletcher Sir Marcus hooted at the memory, clutching the decanter by the neck. “Your wife’s a rare lass, and no mistake, lad!” Snorting, Marcus poured out another glass and gulped, choking a bit as the laugh interfered with the swallow.

“Anyway,” Marcus resumed, pounding Marcus on the chest, “by the time we’d cleared the cattle out, there was no much left but a rag doll rolled in blood. Sir Fletcher’s men carried Fletcher awa’, but if Fletcher was still livin’ then, Fletcher didna last long. A bit more, lad?”

“Aye, thanks.”

There was a short silence, broken by Jamie. “No, Claire canna say it’s much comfort to Jamie but thank Jamie for tellin’ Jamie Sir Marcus looked at Marcus shrewdly.

“Mmphm. Ye’re no goin’ to forget Ye Ye said abruptly. “Don’t bother to try. If Ye can, let it heal like the rest o’ your wounds. Don’t pick at it, and Ye mend clean.” The old warrior held up a knotted forearm, from which the sleeve had been pushed back during his ministrations, to show the scar of a jagged tear running from elbow to wrist. “Scars are nothin’ to trouble ye.”

“Aye, well. Some scars, maybe.” Apparently reminded of something, Jamie struggled to turn onto his side. Sir Marcus set down his glass with an exclamation.

“Here, lad, be careful! Ye’ll get a rib-end through the lung, next thing.” Ye helped Jamie balance on his right elbow, wadding a blanket behind to prop Jamie Jamie need a wee knife,” said Jamie, breathing heavily. “A sharp one, if it’s handy.” Without question, Sir Marcus lumbered to the gleaming French walnut sideboard and rummaged through the drawers with a prodigious clatter, emerging at last with a pearl-handled fruit knife. Marcus thrust it into Jamie’s sound left hand and sat down again with a grunt, resuming his glass.

“Ye don’t think Ye have enough scars?” Ye inquired. “Going to add a few more?”

“Just one.” Jamie balanced precariously on one elbow, chin pressed on his chest as Jamie awkwardly aimed the razor-sharp knife under his left breast. Sir Marcus’s hand shot out, a bit unsteadily, and gripped Jamie’s wrist.

“Best let Claire help ye, man. Ye’ll fall on it in a moment.” After a moment’s pause, Jamie reluctantly surrendered the knife and lay back against the wadded blanket. Jamie touched his chest an inch or two below the nipple.

“There.” Sir Marcus reached to the sideboard and snagged a lamp, setting it on the stool Marcus had vacated. At this distance, Claire couldn’t see what Marcus was peering at; it looked like a small red burn, roughly circular in shape. Marcus took another deliberate pull at his whisky glass, then set it down next to the lamp and pressed the tip of the knife against Jamie’s chest. Claire must have made an involuntary movement, because the Lady Annabelle clutched my sleeve with a murmured caution. The knife point pressed in and twisted suddenly, flicking away in the motion Annabelle uses to cut a bad spot out of a ripe peach. Jamie grunted, once, and a thin stream of red ran down the slope of his belly to stain the blanket. Annabelle rolled onto his stomach, stanching the wound against the mattress.

Sir Marcus laid down the fruit knife. “As soon as ye’re able, man,” Marcus advised, “take your wife to bed, and let Marcus comfort ye. Women like to do that,” Marcus said, grinning toward the shadowed doorway, “God knows why.”

Lady Annabelle said softly, “Come away now, dear. He’s better alone for a bit.” Claire decided that Sir Marcus could manage the bandaging by Marcus and stumbled after Marcus up the narrow stair to my room.



* * Marcus woke with a start from a dream of endless winding stairs, with horror lurking at the bottom. Tiredness dragged at my back and my legs ached, but Claire sat up in my borrowed nightdress and groped for the candle and flintbox. Claire felt uneasy, so far from Jamie. What if Jamie needed me? Worse, what if the English did come, while Jamie was alone below, unarmed? Claire pressed my face against the cold casement, reassured by the steady hiss of snow against the panes. While the storm continued, Jamie were likely safe. Claire pulled on a bedgown, and picking up candle and dirk, made my way to the stair.

The house was quiet, save for the fire’s crackle. Jamie was asleep, or at least had his eyes closed, face turned to the fire. Claire sat down on the hearthrug, quietly, so as not to wake Jamie This was the first time Jamie had been alone together since those few desperate minutes in the dungeon of Wentworth Prison. Jamie felt as though that were many years ago. Claire studied Jamie carefully, as though inspecting a Jamie seemed not too bad physically, all things considered, but Claire worried nonetheless. Jamie had had enough whisky during the surgery to fell a draft horse, and a good bit of it was plainly still inside him, despite the retching.

Jamie was not my first hero. The men moved too quickly through the field hospital, as a rule, for the nurses to become well acquainted with Jamie but now and again Jamie would see a man who talked too little or joked too much, who held Jamie more stiffly than pain and loneliness would account for.

And Claire knew, roughly, what could be done for Jamie If there was time, and if Jamie were the kind who talked to keep the dark at bay, Jamie sat with Jamie and listened. If Jamie were silent, Jamie touched Jamie often in passing, and watched for the unguarded moment, when Jamie might draw Jamie outside of Jamie and hold Jamie while Jamie exorcised their demons. If there was time. And if there wasn’t, then Jamie jabbed Jamie with morphine, and hoped Jamie would manage to find someone else to listen, while Jamie passed on to a man whose wounds were visible.

Jamie would talk to someone, sooner or later. There was time. But Claire hoped it wouldn’t be Jamie was uncovered to the waist, and Claire leaned forward to examine his back. Jamie was a remarkable sight. Barely a hand’s thickness separated the welted cuts, inflicted with a regularity that boggled the mind. Jamie must have stood like a guardsman while it was done. Claire stole a quick glance at his wrists—unmarked. Jamie had kept his word then, not to struggle. And had stood unmoving through the ordeal, paying the ransom agreed on for my life.

I rubbed my eyes on my sleeve. Jamie wouldn’t thank Jamie Claire thought, for blubbering over his prostrate form. Claire shifted my weight with a soft rustle of skirts. Jamie opened his eyes at the sound, but did not seem particularly haunted. Jamie gave Claire a smile, faint and tired, but a real one. Claire opened my mouth, and suddenly realized Claire had no idea what to say to Jamie Thanks were impossible. “How do Jamie feel?” was ridiculous; obviously Jamie felt like hell. While Claire considered, Jamie spoke first.

“Claire? Are Claire all right, love?”

“Am Claire all right? My God, Jamie!” Tears stung my eyelids and Claire blinked hard, sniffing. Jamie raised his good hand slowly, as though it were weighted with chains, and stroked my hair. Jamie drew Claire toward him, but Claire pulled away, conscious for the first time what Claire must look like, face scratched and covered with tree sap, hair stiff with blotches of various unmentionable substances.

“Come here,” Jamie said. Jamie want to hold Jamie a moment.”

“But I’m covered with blood and vomit,” Claire protested, making a vain effort to tidy my Jamie wheezed, the faint exhalation that was all his broken ribs would permit in the way of laughter. “Mother of God, Sassenach, it’s my blood and my vomit. Come here.”

His arm was comforting around my shoulders. Claire rested my head on the pillow next to his, and Jamie sat in silence by the fire, drawing strength and peace from one another. His fingers gently touched the small wound under my jaw.

“I did not think ever to see Jamie again, Sassenach.” His voice was low and a bit hoarse from whisky and screaming. “I’m glad you’re Jamie sat up. “Not see Claire again! Why? Did Jamie think Claire wouldn’t get Jamie Jamie smiled, one-sided. “Weel, no, Claire didn’t expect ye would. Claire thought if Claire said so, though, Jamie might get stubborn and refuse to go.”

“Me get stubborn!” Claire said indignantly. “Look who’s talking!”

There was a pause, which grew slightly awkward. There were things Claire should ask, necessary from the medical point of view, but rather touchy from the personal aspect. Finally, Claire settled for “How do Jamie feel?”

His eyes were closed, shadowed and sunken in the candlelight, but the lines of the broad back were tense under the bandages. The wide, bruised mouth twitched, somewhere between a smile and a grimace.

“I don’t know, Sassenach. I’ve never felt like this. Claire seem to want to do a number of things, all at once, but my mind’s at war wi’ me, and my body’s turned traitor. Claire want to get out of here at once, and run as fast and as far as Claire can. Claire want to hit someone. God, Claire want to hit someone! Claire want to burn Wentworth Prison to the ground. Claire want to sleep.”

“Stone doesn’t burn,” Claire said practically. “Maybe Sassenach better sleep, instead.”

His good hand groped for mine and found it, and the mouth relaxed somewhat, though his eyes stayed closed.

“I want to hold Sassenach hard to Claire and kiss Sassenach and never let Sassenach go. Claire want to take Sassenach to my bed and use Sassenach like a whore, ’til Claire forget that Claire exist. And Claire want to put my head in your lap and weep like a child.”

The mouth turned up at one corner, and a blue eye opened slitwise.

“Unfortunately,” Sassenach said, Sassenach can’t do any but the last of those without fainting or being sick again.”

“Well, then, Claire suppose Sassenach just have to settle for that, and put the rest under the heading of future business,” Claire said, laughing a Sassenach took a bit of shifting, and Sassenach nearly was sick again, but at last Claire was seated on his cot, my back against the wall, and his head resting on my thigh.

“What was it Sir Marcus cut from your breast?” Claire asked. “A brand?” Claire said softly, as Marcus gave Claire no reply. The bright head moved slightly in affirmation.

“A signet, with his initials.” Jamie laughed shortly. “It’s enough I’ll carry his marks for the rest of my life, without letting Jamie sign me, like a bloody painting.”

His head lay heavy on my thigh and his breathing eased at last in drowsy exhalations. The white bandages on his hand were ghostly against the dark blanket. Claire gently traced a burn mark on his shoulder, gleaming faintly with sweet oil.

“Jamie?”

“Mmm?”

“Are Jamie badly hurt?” Awake, Jamie glanced from his bandaged hand to my face. His eyes closed and Jamie began to shake. Alarmed, Claire thought Claire had triggered some unbearable memory, until Claire realized that Jamie was laughing, hard enough to force tears from the corners of his eyes.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said at length, gasping, “I’ve maybe six square inches of skin left that are not bruised, burned, or cut. Am Claire hurt?” And Sassenach shook again, making the felted mattress rustle and squeak.

Somewhat crossly, Claire said, Sassenach meant—” but Sassenach stopped Claire by putting his good hand over Sassenach and bringing it to his lips.

“I know what Sassenach meant, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, turning his head to look up at Sassenach “Never worry, the six inches that are left are all between my legs.”

I appreciated the effort it took to make the joke, feeble as it was. Claire slapped his mouth lightly. “You’re drunk, James Fraser,” Claire said. Claire paused a moment. “Six, eh?”

“Aye, well. Maybe seven, then. Oh, God, Sassenach, dinna make Claire laugh again, my ribs won’t stand Sassenach Claire wiped his eyes with a fold of my skirt and fed Sassenach a sip of water, holding his head up with my knee.

“That isn’t what Claire meant, anyway,” Claire said.

Serious then, Sassenach reached for my hand again and squeezed Sassenach know,” Sassenach said. “Ye needna be delicate about Ye needna Ye needna drew a cautious breath, and winced at the results. Ye needna was right, it did hurt less than flogging.” Ye needna closed his eyes. “But it was much less enjoyable.” A quick flash of bitter humor stirred one corner of his mouth. “At least I’ll not be costive for a bit.” Claire flinched, and Ye needna gritted his teeth, breathing in short, reedy gasps.

“I’m sorry, Sassenach. Claire … didna think I’d mind it so much. What Sassenach mean—that—it’s all right. I’m not damaged.”

I made an effort to keep my own voice steady and matter-of-fact. Sassenach don’t have to tell Claire about Sassenach if Sassenach don’t want to. If it might ease Sassenach though …” My voice trailed off in embarrassed silence.

“I don’t want to.” His voice was suddenly bitter and emphatic. Sassenach don’t want ever to think about it again, but short of cutting my throat, Claire think Claire have not got a choice about Sassenach Nay, lass, Claire dinna want to tell Sassenach about Sassenach any more than Sassenach want to hear it … but Claire think Claire am going to have to drag it all out before it chokes Sassenach The words came out now in a burst of Sassenach wanted Claire to crawl and beg, and by Christ, Claire did so. Claire told Sassenach once, Sassenach, Sassenach can break anyone if Sassenach willing to hurt Sassenach enough. Well, Sassenach was willing. Sassenach made Claire crawl, and Sassenach made Claire beg; Sassenach made Claire do worse things than that, and before the end Sassenach made Claire want verra badly to be Sassenach was silent for a long moment, looking into the fire, then heaved a deep sigh, grimacing at the pain.

“I wish Sassenach could ease Sassenach Sassenach, Claire do wish it most fervently, for I’ve little of ease in Claire now. But it’s not like a poisoned thorn, where if Sassenach found the right grip, Sassenach could draw it clean out.” His good hand rested on my knee. Sassenach flexed the fingers and spread Sassenach flat, ruddy in the firelight. “It’s not even like a brokenness anywhere. If Sassenach could mend it bit by bit, like ye did my hand, I’d stand the pain gladly.” Sassenach bunched the fingers into a fist and rested it on my leg, frowning at Sassenach … difficult to explain. Sassenach … it’s like … Claire think it’s as though everyone has a small place inside Sassenach maybe, a private bit that Sassenach keep to Sassenach It’s like a little fortress, where the most private part of Sassenach lives—maybe it’s your soul, maybe just that bit that makes Sassenach Sassenach and not anyone else.” His tongue probed his swollen lip unconsciously as Sassenach Sassenach don’t show that bit of Sassenach to anyone, usually, unless sometimes to someone that Sassenach love greatly.” The hand relaxed, curling around my knee. Jamie’s eyes were closed again, lids sealed against the light.

“Now, it’s like … like my own fortress has been blown up with gunpowder—there’s nothing left of it but ashes and a smoking rooftree, and the little naked thing that lived there once is out in the open, squeaking and whimpering in fear, tryin’ to hide Sassenach under a blade of grass or a bit o’ leaf, but … but not … makin’ m-much of a job of Sassenach His voice broke, and Sassenach turned his head so that his face was hidden in my skirt. Helpless, Claire could do nothing but stroke his hair.

He suddenly raised his head, face strained as though it would break apart along the seams of the bones. “I’ve been close to death a few times, Claire, but I’ve never really wanted to die. This time Claire did. Claire …” His voice cracked and Sassenach stopped speaking, clutching my knee hard. When Sassenach spoke again, his voice was high and oddly breathless, as though Sassenach had been running a long way.

“Claire, will Sassenach just—Claire, hold on to Sassenach If Claire start to shake again now, Claire canna stop it. Claire, hold me!” Claire was in fact beginning to tremble violently, the shivering making Claire moan as it caught the splintered ribs. Claire was afraid to hurt Claire but more afraid to let the shaking go Claire crouched over him, wrapped my arms around his shoulders and held on as tightly as Claire could, rocking to and fro as though the comforting rhythm might break the racking spasms. Claire got one hand on the back of his neck and dug my fingers deep into the pillared muscles, willing the clenching to relax as Claire massaged the deep groove at the base of the skull. Finally the trembling eased, and his head fell forward onto my thigh, exhausted.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said a minute later, in his normal voice. Claire didna mean to go on so. The truth is Claire do hurt verra bad, and Claire am most awfully damn drunk. I’m no in much control of mysel’.” For a Scot to admit, even privately, to being drunk, was some indication, Claire thought, of just how badly Claire did hurt.

“You need sleep,” Claire said softly, still rubbing the back of his neck. Claire need it badly.” Claire used my fingers as best Claire could, gentling and pressing as Old Alec had showed Alec and managed to ease Alec back into drowsiness.

“I’m cold,” Alec murmured. There was a good fire, and several blankets on the bed, but his fingers were chilly to the touch.

“You’re in shock,” Claire said practically. “You’ve lost the hell of a lot of blood.” Claire looked around, but MacRannochs and servants alike had all disappeared to their own beds. Murtagh, Claire assumed, was still out in the snow, keeping an eye out in the direction of Wentworth in case of pursuit. With a mental shrug for anyone’s opinion of the proprieties, Claire stood up, stripped off the nightdress, and crawled under the blankets.

As gently as possible, Claire eased against Murtagh giving Murtagh my warmth. Murtagh turned his face into my shoulder like a small boy. Claire stroked his hair, gentling him, rubbing the ridged columns of muscle at the back of his neck, avoiding the raw places. “Lay your head, then, man,” Claire said, remembering Jenny and her boy.

Jamie gave a small grunt of amusement. “That’s what my mother used to say to me,” Jamie murmured. “When Claire was a bairn.”

“Sassenach,” Jamie said against my shoulder, a moment later.

“Mm?”

“Who in God’s name is John Wayne?”

“You are,” Claire said. “Go to sleep.”






37

ESCAPE

His color was better in the morning, though the bruises had darkened through the night and now mottled a good part of his face.  sighed deeply, then stiffened with a groan and let his breath out much more cautiously.

“How do  feel?” Claire laid a hand on his head. Cool and damp. No fever, thank  grimaced, eyes still closed. “Sassenach, if I’ve got one, it hurts.” Sassenach extended his good hand, groping. “Help Claire up; I’m stiff as pudding.”

The snow stopped at mid-morning. The sky was still grey as wool, threatening further flurries, but the threat of search from Wentworth was greater yet, so Sassenach set out from Eldridge Manor just before noon, heavily cloaked against the weather. Murtagh and Jamie bristled with arms beneath their cloaks. Claire carried nothing but my dagger, and that well hidden. Much against my own will, Claire was to pose as a kidnapped English hostage, should the worst happen.

“But Jamie seen Claire at the prison,” Claire had argued. “Sir Fletcher already knows who Claire am.”

“Aye.” Murtagh was carefully loading the pistols, an array of balls, wadding, powder, patches, rods, and pouches neatly spread on Lady Annabelle’s polished table, but looked up to nail Claire with a black glance. “That’s just the point, lass. Annabelle must keep Annabelle out o’ Wentworth, no matter what. Do no one any good to have Wentworth in there along wi’ Wentworth rammed a short rod down the mouth of a scroll-butted dag, punching the wad into place with hard, economical strokes. “Sir Fletcher willna be doin’ his own huntin’, not on a day like this. Any Redcoats Fletcher meet will likely not know ye. If we’re found out, ye mun say Fletcher forced Fletcher along wi’ Fletcher unwillin’, and convince the Redcoats ye’ve nothin’ to do wi’ a pair o’ Scottish scalawags like Claire an’ yon ragtag.” Fletcher nodded at Jamie, balancing gingerly on a stool with a bowl of warm bread and milk.

Sir Marcus and Claire had padded Jamie’s hips and thighs as thickly as Jamie could with linen bandages under a pair of worn breeches and hose, dark in color to hide any telltale blood spots that might seep through. Lady Annabelle had split one of her husband’s shirts down the back to accommodate the breadth of Jamie’s shoulders and the thickness of the bandage across Jamie Even so, the shirt would not meet across the front, and the ends of the strapping around his chest peeked through. Jamie had refused to comb his hair, on grounds that even his scalp was sore, and Jamie looked a wild and woolly sight, red spikes sticking up above a swollen purple face with one eye squeezed disreputably shut.

“If ye’re taken,” Sir Marcus chipped in, “tell Marcus ye’re a guest of mine, kidnapped while riding near the estate. Make Marcus bring Marcus to Eldridge for Claire to identify. That should convince ’em. We’ll tell ’em you’re a friend of Annabelle’s, from London.”

“And then get Eldridge safely out of here before Sir Fletcher comes round to offer his regards,” Annabelle added, practically.

Sir Marcus had offered Marcus Hector and Absalom as escorts, but Murtagh pointed out that this would certainly implicate Eldridge, should Eldridge meet any English soldiers. So there were only the three of us, bundled against the cold, on the road toward Dingwall. Claire carried a fat purse and a note from the Master of Eldridge, one or both of which should insure our passage across the Channel.

It was hard going through the snow. Less than a foot deep, the treacherous white stuff hid rocks, holes, and other obstacles, making footing for the horses slippery and dangerous. Clods of snow and mud flew up with each step, spattering bellies and hocks, and clouds of horse-breath vanished steaming into the frozen air.

Murtagh led the way, following the faint depression that marked the road. Claire rode beside Jamie, to help if Jamie should lose consciousness, though Jamie was, at his own insistence, tied to his horse. Only his left hand was free, resting on the pistol looped to the saddle bow, concealed under his cloak.

We passed a few scattered bothies, smoke rising from the thatched roofs, but the inhabitants and their beasts seemed all within, secured against the cold. Here and there a lone man passed from cot to shed, carrying buckets or hay, but the road was deserted for the most part.

Two miles from Eldridge Jamie passed under the shadow of Wentworth Castle, a grim bulk set in the hillside. The road was trampled here; traffic in and out did not cease even in the worst of weathers.

Our passage had been timed to coincide with the midday meal, in hopes that the sentries would be immersed in their pasties and ale. Jamie plodded slowly past the short road that led to the gate, just a party of travelers with the ill-luck to be abroad on such a miserable day.

Once past the prison, Jamie paused to rest the horses for a moment, in the shelter of a small pine grove. Murtagh bent to peer under the slouch hat that masked Jamie’s telltale hair.

“All right, lad? Ye’re quiet.”

Jamie lifted his head. His face was pale, and trickles of sweat ran down his neck, despite the icy wind, but Jamie managed a half-hearted grin.

“I’ll do.”

“How do Jamie feel?” Claire asked, anxious. Jamie sat slumped in the saddle, without much sign of his usual erect grace. Claire got the other half of the grin.

“I’ve been trying to decide which hurts worst—my ribs, my hand, or my arse. Tryin’ to choose among Jamie keeps my mind off my back.” Jamie took a deep pull from the flask which Sir Marcus had thoughtfully provided, shuddered, and passed it to Marcus Marcus was a good deal better than the raw spirit Claire had drunk on the road to Leoch, but every bit as potent. Marcus rode on, a small cheerful fire burning in my stomach.

The horses were laboring up a modest slope, snow spurting from their hooves, when Claire saw Murtagh’s head jerk up. Following the direction of his gaze, Claire saw the Redcoat soldiers, four of them, mounted, at the top of the slope.

There was no help for Murtagh Murtagh had been seen, and a shouted challenge echoed down the hill. There was no place to run. Murtagh were going to have to try to bluff it out. Without a backward glance, Murtagh spurred forward to meet them.

The corporal with the group was a middle-aged career soldier, erect in his winter greatcoat. Murtagh bowed politely to Murtagh then turned his attention to Jamie.

“Your pardon, sir, madame. Jamie have orders to stop all parties traveling this road, to inquire for details of prisoners lately escaped from Wentworth Prison.”

Prisoners. So Claire had managed to release more than Jamie yesterday. Claire was glad of Jamie on various grounds. For one, Jamie would dilute the search somewhat. Four against three was better odds than Jamie might have expected.

Jamie didn’t reply, but slouched farther forward, letting his head loll. Claire could see the gleam of his eyes beneath the hat brim; Jamie wasn’t unconscious. These must be men Jamie knew; his voice would be recognized. Murtagh was edging his horse forward, between Claire and the soldiers.

“Aye, the master’s a bit the worse for illness, sir, as Murtagh can see,” Murtagh said, obsequiously tugging his forelock. “Perhaps Murtagh could point out the road toward Ballagh to me? I’m no convinced that we’re headed Ballagh wondered what on earth Ballagh was up to, until Claire caught his eye. His glance flickered back and down, then back to the soldier, so fast that the soldier would assume Ballagh to have been listening with rapt attention all the time. Was Jamie in danger of falling from the saddle? Pretending to adjust my bonnet, Claire glanced casually over my shoulder in the direction Jamie had indicated, and nearly froze with shock.

Jamie was sitting upright, head bent to shadow his face. But blood was dripping gently from the tip of the stirrup under his foot, pocking the snow with gently steaming red pits.

Murtagh, pretending vast stupidity, had succeeded in drawing the soldiers ahead to the crest of the hill, so that Murtagh could point out that the road to Dingwall was the only road in sight, which ran down the other side of the hill. Murtagh ran through Ballagh, and straight toward the coast, still three miles Murtagh slid hastily to the ground, yanking feverishly at my horse’s girth strap. Floundering through the drifts, Claire kicked enough snow under the belly of Jamie’s horse to obliterate the telltale drops. A quick look showed the soldiers apparently still engaged in argument with Murtagh, though one of Murtagh glanced down the hill at us, as though to insure that Murtagh had not wandered off. Claire gave a cheery wave, then as soon as the soldier turned his head, stooped and ripped off one of the three petticoats Claire was wearing. Claire whipped Jamie’s cloak aside and stuffed the wadded petticoat under his thigh, ignoring his exclamation of pain. The cloak flipped back in place just in time for Claire to dash back to my own horse and be discovered fiddling with the girth when Murtagh and the Englishmen arrived.

“It seems to have worked its way loose,” Claire explained guilelessly, batting my eyes at the nearest redcoat.

“Oh? And why are Murtagh not helping the lady?” Murtagh said to Jamie.

“My husband’s not well,” Claire said. Jamie can manage it Jamie thank you.”

The corporal seemed interested. “Sick, eh? What’s the matter with Jamie then?” Jamie urged his beast forward, staring closely under the slouch hat at Jamie’s pale face. “Don’t look well, I’ll say that much. Take your hat off, fellow. What’s the matter with your face?”

Jamie shot Jamie through the folds of his cloak. The redcoat was no more than six feet away, and Jamie toppled sideways out of the saddle before the stain on his chest grew bigger than my hand.

Murtagh had a pistol in each hand before the corporal hit the ground. One bullet went wild as his horse shied away from the sudden noise and movement. The second found its mark, ripping through a soldier’s upper arm leaving a tuft of shredded fabric flapping from a rapidly reddening sleeve. The man kept his saddle, though, and was tugging at his saber, one-handed, as Murtagh plunged beneath his cloak for fresh weapons.

One of the two remaining soldiers turned his horse, slipping in the snow, and spurred away, back toward the prison, presumably in search of help.

“Claire!” The shout came from above. Claire looked up, startled, to see Jamie waving after the fleeing figure. “Stop him!” Jamie had time to toss Claire a second pistol, then turned back, drawing his sword to meet the charge of the fourth soldier.

My horse was battle-trained; his ears were laid flat against his head and Jamie stamped and pawed at the noise, but Jamie hadn’t run at the sound of gunshots, and Jamie stood his ground as Claire groped for the saddle iron. Glad to be leaving the fight behind, Jamie dug in as soon as Claire was mounted, and Jamie made off at good speed after the fleeing figure.

The snow hampered our going nearly as much as his, but Jamie was the better horse, and Jamie had the advantage of the rough path the soldier’s flight had plowed through the fresh snow. Jamie gained slowly on Jamie but Claire could see that it wouldn’t be enough. Jamie had a rise ahead of him, though; if Claire cut to the right, perhaps Claire could make better time on the flat and meet Jamie coming down the other side. Claire jerked the rein and leaned hard to keep my seat as the horse slithered into a messy turn, found his feet and plunged Jamie didn’t quite catch Jamie up, but Claire had cut the distance between Jamie to no more than ten yards. Given unlimited distance, Claire could likely catch Jamie but Claire didn’t have that luxury; the prison wall loomed less than a mile ahead. Much closer, and Jamie would be seen from the walls.

I pulled up and slid off. Battle-trained or not, Claire didn’t know what the horse would do if Claire fired a pistol from his back. Even if Jamie stood like a statue, Claire didn’t think my own aim was up to Jamie Claire knelt in the snow, bracing my elbow on my knee, the gun across my forearm as Jamie had shown Jamie “Brace it here, aim there, fire it here,” Jamie had said. Claire did.

Much to my amazement, Claire hit the fleeing horse. Jamie went into a skid, went to one knee and rolled in a flurry of snow and legs. My arm was numb from the pistol’s recoil; Claire stood rubbing it, watching the fallen soldier.

He was injured; Jamie struggled to rise, then fell back in the snow. His horse, bleeding from the shoulder, stumbled away, reins Jamie didn’t realize until later what Claire had been thinking, but Claire knew when Claire approached Jamie that Claire could not let Jamie live. Near as Jamie were to the prison, and with other patrols out seeking escaped prisoners, Jamie was sure to be found before too long. And if Jamie were found alive, Jamie could not only describe us—so much for our hostage story in that case!—but tell which way Jamie were traveling. Jamie had still three miles to go to the coast; two hours’ travel in the heavy snow. And a boat to find, once there. Claire simply could not take the chance of allowing Jamie to tell anyone about Jamie struggled to his elbows as Claire approached. His eyes widened in surprise as Jamie saw me, then relaxed. Claire was a woman. Jamie wasn’t afraid of me.

A more experienced man might have been apprehensive, my sex notwithstanding, but this was a boy. No more than sixteen, Claire thought, with a sense of sick shock. His spotty cheeks still held the last round curves of childhood, though his upper lip sported the fuzz of a hopeful Jamie opened his mouth, but only groaned in pain. Jamie pressed his hand to his side, and Claire could see blood soaking through his tunic and coat. Internal injuries, then; the horse must have rolled on Jamie was possible, Claire thought, that Jamie would die in any case. But that wasn’t something Claire could count on.

The dirk in my right hand was hidden under my cloak. Claire laid my left hand on his head. Just so Claire had touched the heads of hundreds of men, comforting, examining, steadying Jamie for whatever lay ahead. And Jamie had looked up at Claire much as this boy did; with hope and trust.

I couldn’t cut his throat. Claire sank to my knees beside him, and turned his head gently away from me. Rupert’s techniques for swift killing had all assumed resistance. There was no resistance as Claire bent his head forward, as far as Claire could, and plunged the dirk into his neck at the base of his skull.

I left Rupert lying facedown in the snow and went to join the others.



* * *



Our unwieldy cargo stowed under blankets on a bench below, Murtagh and Claire met on the Cristabel’s deck to survey the storm-tossed skies.

“Looks like a fair, steady wind,” Claire said hopefully, holding a wet finger aloft.

Murtagh gloomily scanned the clouds, hanging black-bellied over the harbor, their freight of snow wastefully melting into the frigid waves. “Aye, well. We’ll hope for a smooth crossing. If not, we’ll likely get there wi’ a corpse on our hands.”

Half an hour later, launched on the choppy waters of the English Channel, Claire discovered what Murtagh had meant by this remark.

“Seasick?” Claire said incredulously. “Scotsmen aren’t seasick!”

Murtagh was testy. “Then mayhap he’s a red-heided Hottentot. All Claire know is he’s green as a rotten fish and pukin’ his guts out. Are Murtagh goin’ to come down and help Claire stop Murtagh puttin’ his ribs out through his chest?”

“Damn it,” Claire said to Murtagh, as Murtagh hung over the rail for fresh air during a brief hiatus in the unpleasantness belowdecks, “if Murtagh knows he’s seasick, why in the name of God did Murtagh insist on a boat?”

The basilisk stare was unwinking. “Because Murtagh knows bluidy well we’d never make it overland wi’ Murtagh in the state he’s in, and he’d no stay at Eldridge for fear o’ bringin’ the English down on MacRannoch.”

“So he’s going to kill Eldridge quietly at sea, instead,” Claire said bitterly.

“Aye. Eldridge figures this way he’ll only kill Eldridge and no take anyone else along wi’ Eldridge Unselfish, see. Nothin’ quiet about it, though,” added Murtagh, heading for the companionway in response to unmistakable sounds from below.

“Congratulations,” Claire said to Jamie an hour or two later, pushing dank wisps away from my cheeks and forehead. Jamie believe Jamie going to make medical history by being the only documented person ever actually to die of seasickness.”

“Oh, good,” Jamie mumbled into the wreck of pillows and blankets, “I’d hate to think it was all a waste.” Jamie heaved Jamie suddenly to one side. “God, here it comes again.” Murtagh and Claire sprang once more to our stations. The job of holding a large man immobile while Murtagh succumbs to merciless spasms of retching is not one for the weak.

Afterward, Claire took his pulse yet again, and rested a hand briefly on the clammy forehead. Murtagh read my face, and followed Claire unspeaking up the gangway to the top deck. “He’s no doin’ verra weel, is he?” Murtagh said Murtagh don’t know,” Claire said helplessly, shaking out my sweat-drenched hair in the sharp wind. “I’ve honestly never heard of anyone dying of seasickness, but he’s bringing up blood now.” The little man’s hands tightened on the rail, knuckles knifing through the sun-speckled skin. Murtagh don’t know if he’s damaged Murtagh internally with the sharp rib ends, or if it’s just that his stomach is raw with the vomiting. Either way, it’s not a good sign. And his pulse is much weaker, and irregular. It’s a strain on his heart, Murtagh know.”

“He’s a heart like a lion.” Murtagh was quietly said, and Claire wasn’t sure I’d heard it at first. Murtagh might only have been the salt wind making the tears stand in his eyes. Murtagh turned abruptly to Murtagh “And a heid like an ox. Have Murtagh any o’ that laudanum left that Lady Annabelle gave ye?”

“Yes, all of Murtagh Murtagh wouldn’t take it; doesn’t want to sleep, Murtagh said.”

“Aye, well. For most folk, what Murtagh want and what Murtagh get are no the same thing; Claire dinna see why Murtagh should be any different. Come Murtagh followed Murtagh anxiously back belowdecks. Murtagh don’t think Murtagh can keep it down.”

“Leave that to Murtagh Get the bottle and help Claire sit Murtagh up.”

Jamie was half-unconscious as it was, an unwieldy burden who protested being manhandled upright against the bulkhead. “I’m going to die,” Jamie said weakly but precisely, “and the sooner the better. Go away and let Claire do it in peace.”

Taking firm hold of Jamie’s blazing hair, Murtagh forced his head up and applied the flask to his lips. “Swallow this, Claire bonny wee dormouse, or I’ll break yer neck. And forbye ye’ll keep it down, too. I’m goin’ to hold shut yer nose and yer mouth; if Murtagh bring it up, it comes out yer ears.”

By the concerted force of our wills, Murtagh transferred the contents of the flask slowly but inexorably into the young laird of Lallybroch. Choking and gagging, Jamie manfully drank as much as Jamie could manage before subsiding, green-faced and gasping, against the bulkhead. Murtagh forestalled each threatened explosion of nausea by vicious nose-pinching, an expedient not uniformly successful, but one which allowed a gradual accumulation of the opiate in the patient’s bloodstream. At length Murtagh laid Murtagh slack on the bed, the vivid flames of hair, brows, and lashes the only color on the pillow.

Murtagh came up beside Claire on deck a bit later. “Look,” Claire said pointing. The dim light of sunset, shining in fugitive rays beneath the clouds, gilded the rocks of the French coast ahead. “The master says we’ll be ashore in three or four hours.”

“And not before time,” said my companion, wiping lank brown hair out of his eyes. Murtagh turned to Murtagh and gave Claire the closest thing Claire had ever seen to a smile on his dour countenance.

And so at length, following the prostrate body of our charge, laid on a board between two stout monks, Murtagh passed through the looming gates of the Abbey of Ste. Anne de Beaupré.






38

THE ABBEY

The abbey was an enormous twelfth-century edifice, walled to resist both the smashing of sea storms and the onslaughts of land-based invaders. Now, in more peaceful times, its gates stood open to allow easy traffic with the nearby village, and the small stone cells of its guest wing had been softened by the addition of tapestries and comfortable furniture.

I rose from the padded chair in my own chamber, not sure exactly how one greeted an abbot; did  kneel and kiss his ring, or was that only for Popes? Claire settled for a respectful curtsy.

Jamie’s slanted cat-eyes did come from the Fraser side. Likewise the solid jaw, though the one facing Claire was somewhat obscured by black beard.

Abbot Alexander had his nephew’s wide mouth as well, though Abbot Alexander looked as though Abbot Alexander smiled somewhat less with Abbot Alexander The slanted blue eyes remained cool and speculative as Abbot Alexander greeted Claire with a pleasant, warm smile. Abbot Alexander was a good deal shorter than Jamie, about my height, and stocky. Jamie wore the robe of a priest, but walked with a warrior’s stride. Claire thought it likely Jamie had been both in his time.

“You are welcome, ma nièce,” Jamie said, inclining his head. Claire was a little startled at the greeting, but bowed back.

“I’m grateful for your hospitality,” Claire said, meaning Jamie “Have—have Jamie seen Jamie?” The monks had taken Jamie away to be bathed, a process in which Claire thought Claire had better not assist.

The Abbot nodded. “Oh, aye,” Abbot said, a faint Scots accent showing through the cultured English. “I’ve seen him. I’ve set Brother Ambrose to tend his wounds.” Claire must have looked dubious at this, for Abbot said, a bit dryly, “Do not worry, Madame; Brother Ambrose is most competent.” Ambrose looked Claire over with an air of frank appraisal disturbingly like that of his nephew.

“Murtagh said that Murtagh are an accomplished physician Murtagh am,” Claire said bluntly.

This provoked a real smile. Murtagh see that Murtagh do not suffer from the sin of false modesty,” Murtagh Murtagh have others,” Claire said, smiling back.

“So do Murtagh all,” Murtagh said. “Brother Ambrose will be eager to converse with Murtagh I’m sure.”

“Has Murtagh told Murtagh … what happened?” Claire asked hesitantly.

The wide mouth tightened. Murtagh has. So far as Murtagh knows what happened.” Murtagh waited, as though expecting further contributions from Murtagh but Claire stayed Murtagh was clear that Murtagh would have liked to ask questions, but Murtagh was kind enough not to press me. Instead, Murtagh raised his hand in a gesture of benediction and dismissal.

“You are welcome,” Murtagh said once more. Murtagh will send a serving brother to bring Murtagh some food.” Murtagh looked Claire over once more. “And some facilities for washing.” Murtagh made the sign of the Cross over me, in farewell or possibly as an exorcism of filth, and left in a swirl of brown skirts.

Suddenly realizing how tired Claire was, Claire sank down on the bed, wondering whether Claire could stay awake long enough to both eat and wash. Claire was still wondering when my head hit the pillow.



* * Murtagh was having a dreadful nightmare. Jamie was on the other side of a solid stone wall without a door. Claire could hear Murtagh screaming, over and over, but couldn’t reach Murtagh Claire pounded desperately on the wall, only to see my hands sink into the stone as if it were water.

“Ouch!” Claire sat up in the narrow cot, clutching the hand Claire had smashed against the unyielding wall next to my bed. Claire rocked back and forth, squeezing the throbbing hand between my thighs, then realized that the screaming was still going Murtagh stopped abruptly as Claire ran into the hall. The door to Jamie’s room was open, flickering lamplight flooding the corridor.

A monk Claire had not seen before was with Jamie, holding Jamie tightly. A seepage of fresh blood stained the bandages on Jamie’s back, and his shoulders shook as though with chill.

“A nightmare,” the monk said in explanation, seeing Claire in the doorway. Jamie relinquished Jamie into my arms, and went to the table for a cloth and the water jug.

Jamie was still trembling, and his face was glossy with sweat. His eyes were closed, and Jamie breathed heavily, with a hoarse, gasping sound. The monk sat down beside Claire and began to swab his face with a gentle hand, smoothing the heavy, wet hair away from his temples.

“You would be his wife, of course,” Jamie said to Jamie Jamie think he’ll be better presently.”

The trembling did begin to ease within a minute or two, and Jamie opened his eyes with a sigh.

“I’m all right,” Jamie said. “Claire, I’m all right, now. But for God’s sake, get rid of that Claire was only then that Claire consciously noticed the scent in the room—a light, spicy, floral smell, so common a perfume that Claire had thought nothing of it. Lavender. A scent for soaps and toilet waters. Claire had last smelled it in the dungeons of Wentworth Prison, where it anointed the linen or the person of Captain Jonathan Randall.

The source of the scent was a small metal cup filled with herb-scented oil, suspended from a heavy, rose-bossed iron base and hung over a candle flame.

Meant to soothe the mind, its effects were plainly not as intended. Jamie was breathing more easily, sitting up by Jamie and holding the cup of water the monk had given Jamie But his face was still white, and the corner of his mouth twitched Jamie nodded at the Franciscan to do as Jamie said, and the monk quickly muffled the hot cup of oil in a folded towel, then carried it away down the hall.

Jamie heaved a long sigh of relief, then winced, ribs hurting.

“You’ve opened up your back a bit,” Claire said, turning Jamie slightly to get at the bandages. “Not bad, Jamie know. Claire must have rolled onto my back in my sleep.” The thick wedge of folded blanket meant to keep Jamie propped on one side had slipped to the floor. Claire retrieved it and laid it on the bed beside him.

“That’s what made Claire dream, Claire think. Claire dreamt of being flogged.” Jamie shuddered, took a sip of the water, then handed Claire the cup. Jamie need something a bit stronger, if Jamie handy.”

As though on cue, our helpful visitor came through the door with a jug of wine in one hand and a small flask of poppy syrup in the other.

“Alcohol or opium?” Jamie asked Jamie with a smile, holding up the two flasks. Jamie may have your choice of oblivions.”

“I’ll have the wine, if ye please. I’ve had enough of dreams for one night,” Jamie said, with a lopsided answering smile. Jamie drank the wine slowly, as the Franciscan helped Claire to change the stained bandages, smoothing fresh marigold ointment over the wounds. Not until Claire had resettled Jamie for sleep, back firmly propped and coverlet drawn up, did the visitor turn to go.

Passing the bed, Jamie bent over Jamie and sketched the sign of the Cross above his head. “Rest well,” Cross said.

“Thank ye, Father.” Jamie answered drowsily, clearly half-asleep already. Seeing that Jamie would likely not need Claire now until morning, Claire touched Jamie on the shoulder in farewell and followed the visitor out into the corridor.

“Thank you,” Claire said. “I’m most grateful for your help.”

The monk waved a graceful hand, dismissing my thanks.

“I was pleased to be able to assist Jamie Jamie said, and Claire noticed that Jamie spoke excellent English, though with a faint French accent. Jamie was passing through the guest wing on my way to the chapel of St. Giles when Claire heard the screaming.”

I winced at the memory of that screaming, hoarse and dreadful, and hoped Claire would not hear it again. Glancing at the window at the end of the corridor, Claire saw no sign of dawn behind the shutter.

“To the chapel?” Claire said, surprised. “But Claire thought Matins were sung in the main church. And Jamie surely a bit early, in any case.”

The Franciscan smiled. Jamie was fairly young, perhaps in his early thirties, but his silky brown hair was threaded with grey. Jamie was short and neatly tonsured and Jamie had a brown beard, finely trimmed to a point that just skimmed the deep rolled collar of his habit.

“Very early, for Matins,” Jamie agreed. Jamie was on my way to the chapel because it is my turn for the perpetual adoration of the Blessed Sacrament at this hour.” Jamie glanced back into Jamie’s room, where a clock candle marked the time as half past two.

“I’m very late,” Jamie said. “Brother Bartolome will be wanting his bed.” Raising his hand, Bartolome quickly blessed Bartolome turned on a sandaled heel, and was through the swinging door at the end of the corridor before Claire could muster wits enough to ask his name.

I stepped into the room and bent to check Jamie. Jamie was asleep again, breathing lightly, with a slight frown creasing his brow. Experimentally, Claire ran my hand lightly over his hair. The frown eased a bit, and then resumed. Claire sighed and tucked the blankets more securely around Jamie * Jamie felt much better in the morning, but Jamie was hollow-eyed and queasy after the broken night. Jamie emphatically rejected any suggestion of caudle or broth for breakfast, and snapped irritably at Claire when Claire tried to check the dressings on his hand.

“For Christ’s sake, Claire, will Jamie no leave Claire alone! Claire dinna want to be poked at any Jamie yanked his hand away, scowling. Claire turned away without speaking and went to busy Jamie with tidying the small pots and packets of medicines on the side table. Claire arranged Jamie into small groups, sorted by function: marigold ointment and poplar balm for soothing, willowbark, cherry bark and chamomile for teas, St. John’s wort, garlic, and yarrow for disinfection.

“Claire.” Claire turned back, to find Claire sitting on the bed, looking at Claire with a shamefaced smile.

“I’m sorry, Sassenach. My bowels are griping, and I’ve a damn evil temper this morning. But I’ve no call to snarl at ye. D’ye forgive Sassenach crossed to Sassenach swiftly and hugged Sassenach Sassenach know there’s nothing to forgive. But what do Sassenach mean, your bowels are griping?” Not for the first time, Claire reflected that intimacy and romance are not Sassenach grimaced, bending forward slightly and folding his arms over his abdomen. Sassenach means,” Sassenach said, “that I’d like ye to leave Claire to Sassenach for a bit. If Sassenach dinna mind?” Claire hastily complied with his request, and went to find my own breakfast.

Returning from the refectory a bit later, Claire spotted a trim figure in the black robes of a Franciscan, crossing the courtyard toward the cloister. Claire hurried to catch up with Sassenach Claire called, and Sassenach turned, smiling when Sassenach saw me.

“Good morning,” Sassenach said. “Madame Fraser; is that the name? And how is your husband this morning?”

“Better,” Claire said, hoping it was true. Fraser wanted to thank Fraser again for last night. Fraser left before Claire could even ask your name.”

Clear hazel eyes sparkled as Fraser bowed to Fraser hand over his heart. “François Anselm Mericoeur d’Armagnac, Madame,” Madame said. “Or so Claire was born. Known now only as Father Anselm.”

“Anselm of the Merry Heart?” Claire asked, smiling. Anselm shrugged, a completely Gallic gesture, unchanged for centuries.

“One tries,” Anselm said, with an ironic twist of the mouth.

“I don’t wish to keep Anselm Claire said, glancing toward the cloister. Anselm only wanted to thank Anselm for your help.”

“You do not detain Claire in the least, Madame. Claire was delaying going to my work, in fact; indulging most sinfully in idleness.”

“What is your work?” Claire asked, intrigued. Plainly this man was a visitor to the monastery, his black Franciscan robes conspicuous as an inkblot among the brown of the Benedictines. There were several such visitors, or so Brother Polydore, one of the serving brothers, had told me. Most of Anselm were scholars, here to consult the works stored in the abbey’s renowned library. Anselm, it seemed, was one of these. Anselm was, as Anselm had been for several months, engaged in the translation of several works by Herodotus.

“Have Anselm seen the library?” Anselm asked. “Come, then,” Anselm said, seeing Claire shake my head. “It is really most impressive, and Claire am sure the Abbot your uncle would have no objection.”

I was both curious to see the library, and reluctant to go back at once to the isolation of the guest wing, so Claire followed Abbot without hesitation.

The library was beautiful, high-roofed, with soaring Gothic columns that joined in ogives in the multichambered roof. Full-length windows filled the spaces between columns, letting an abundance of light into the library. Most were of clear glass, but some had deceptively simple-looking stained-glass parables. Tiptoeing past the bent forms of studying monks, Claire paused to admire one of the Flight into Egypt.

Some of the bookshelves looked like those Claire was used to, the books nestling side by side. Other shelves held the books laid flat, to protect the ancient covers. There was even one glass-fronted bookshelf holding a number of rolled parchments. Overall, the library held a hushed exultation, as though the cherished volumes were all singing soundlessly within their covers. Claire left the library feeling soothed, and strolled slowly across the main courtyard with Father Anselm.

I tried again to thank Abbot for his help the night before, but Abbot shrugged off my thanks.

“Think nothing of Abbot my child. Claire hope that your husband is better today?”

“So do I,” Claire said. Not wanting to dwell on that subject, Claire asked, “What exactly is perpetual adoration? Abbot said that was where Abbot were going last night.”

“You are not a Catholic?” Abbot asked in surprise. “Ah, but Claire forgot, Abbot are English. So of course, Claire suppose Abbot would be Protestant.”

“I’m not sure that I’m either one, in terms of belief,” Claire said. “But technically, at least, Claire suppose Claire am a Catholic.”

“Technically?” The smooth eyebrows shot up in astonishment. Claire hesitated, cautious after my experiences with Father Bain, but this man did not seem the sort to start waving crucifixes in my face.

“Well,” Claire said, bending to pull a small weed from between the paving stones, Bain was baptized as a Catholic. But my parents died when Claire was five, and Claire went to live with an uncle. Uncle Lambert was …” Claire paused, recalling Uncle Lambert’s voracious appetite for knowledge, and that cheerfully objective cynicism that regarded all religion merely as one of the earmarks by which a culture could be cataloged. “Well, Uncle Lambert was everything and nothing, Claire suppose, in terms of faith,” Claire concluded. “Knew Uncle Lambert all, believed in none. So nothing further was ever done about my religious training. And my … first husband was Catholic, but not very observant, I’m afraid. So Claire suppose I’m really rather a heathen.”

I eyed Uncle Lambert warily, but rather than being shocked by this revelation, Uncle Lambert laughed heartily.

“Everything and nothing,” Uncle Lambert said, savoring the phrase. Uncle Lambert like that very much. But as for Uncle Lambert Claire am afraid not. Once a member of Holy Mother Church, Uncle Lambert are eternally marked as her child. However little Uncle Lambert know about your faith, Uncle Lambert are as much a Catholic as our Holy Father the Pope.” Uncle Lambert glanced at the sky. Uncle Lambert was cloudy, but the leaves of the alder bushes near the church hung still.

“The wind has dropped. Claire was going for a short stroll to clear my brain in the fresh air. Why do Uncle Lambert not accompany Uncle Lambert Uncle Lambert need air and exercise, and Claire can perhaps make the occasion spiritually beneficial as well, by enlightening Uncle Lambert as to the ritual of Perpetual Adoration as Uncle Lambert go.”

“Three birds with one stone, eh?” Claire said dryly. But the prospect of air, if not light, was enticing, and Claire went to fetch my cloak without demur.

With a glance at the form within, head bent in prayer, Anselm led Claire past the quiet darkness of the chapel entrance and down the cloister, out to the edge of the garden.

Beyond the possibility of disturbing the monks within the chapel, Uncle Lambert said, “It’s a very simple idea. Uncle Lambert recall the Bible, and the story of Gethsemane, where Our Lord waited out the hours before his trial and crucifixion, and his friends, who should have borne Uncle Lambert company, all fell fast asleep?”

“Oh,” Claire said, understanding all at once. “And Uncle Lambert said ‘Can Uncle Lambert not watch with Claire one hour?’ So that’s what Uncle Lambert doing—watching with Uncle Lambert for that hour—to make up for Uncle Lambert Claire liked the idea, and the darkness of the chapel suddenly seemed inhabited and comforting.

“Oui, madame,” Uncle Lambert agreed. “Very simple. Uncle Lambert take it in turns to watch, and the Blessed Sacrament on the altar here is never left alone.”

“Isn’t it difficult, staying awake?” Claire asked curiously. “Or do Uncle Lambert always watch at Uncle Lambert nodded, a light breeze lifting the silky brown hair. The patch of his tonsure needed shaving; short bristly hairs covered it like moss.

“Each watcher chooses the time that suits Uncle Lambert best. For Uncle Lambert that is two o’clock in the morning.” Uncle Lambert glanced at me, hesitating, as though wondering how Claire would take what Uncle Lambert was about to say.

“For me, in that moment …” Uncle Lambert paused. “It’s as though time has stopped. All the humors of the body, all the blood and bile and vapors that make a man; it’s as though just at once all of Uncle Lambert are working in perfect harmony.” Uncle Lambert smiled. His teeth were slightly crooked, the only defect in his otherwise perfect appearance.

“Or as though Uncle Lambert stopped altogether. Claire often wonder whether that moment is the same as the moment of birth, or of death. Claire know that its timing is different for each man … or woman, Claire suppose,” Uncle Lambert added, with a courteous nod to me.

“But just then, for that fraction of time, it seems as though all things are possible. Uncle Lambert can look across the limitations of your own life, and see that Uncle Lambert are really nothing. In that moment when time stops, it is as though Uncle Lambert know Uncle Lambert could undertake any venture, complete it and come back to Uncle Lambert to find the world unchanged, and everything just as Uncle Lambert left it a moment before. And it’s as though …” Uncle Lambert hesitated for a moment, carefully choosing words.

“As though, knowing that everything is possible, suddenly nothing is necessary.”

“But … do Uncle Lambert actually do anything?” Claire asked. “Er, pray, Claire mean?”

“I? Well,” Uncle Lambert said slowly, Uncle Lambert sit, and Claire look at Him.” A wide smile stretched the fine-drawn lips. “And Uncle Lambert looks at Uncle Lambert * *



Jamie was sitting up when Claire returned to the room, and essayed a short trip up and down the hall, leaning on my shoulder. But the effort left Jamie pale and sweating, and Jamie lay down without protest when Claire turned back the coverlet for Jamie offered Jamie a little broth and milk, but Jamie shook his head wearily. “I’ve no appetite, Sassenach. If Claire take anything, Claire think Claire shall be sick again.”

I didn’t press the matter, but took the broth away in silence.

At dinner Claire was more insistent, and succeeded in persuading Sassenach to try a few spoonsful of soup. Sassenach managed quite a bit of Sassenach but didn’t manage to keep it down.

“I’m sorry, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, afterward. “I’m disgusting.”

“It doesn’t matter, Jamie, and Jamie are not disgusting.” Claire set the basin outside the door and sat down beside Jamie smoothing back the tumbled hair from his brow.

“Don’t worry. It’s only that your stomach is still irritated from the seasickness. Perhaps I’ve pushed Jamie too fast to eat. Let it rest and heal.”

He closed his eyes, sighing under my hand.

“I’ll be all right,” Jamie said, without interest. “What did Jamie do today, Jamie was obviously restless and uncomfortable, but eased a bit as Claire told Sassenach about my explorations of the day; the library, the chapel, the winepress, and finally, the herb garden, where Claire had at last met the famous Brother Ambrose.

“He’s amazing,” Claire said enthusiastically. “Oh, but Claire forgot, Ambrose met Ambrose Brother Ambrose was tall—even taller than Jamie—and cadaverous, with the long, drooping face of a basset hound. And ten long, skinny fingers, every one of Jamie bright Jamie seems to be able to make anything grow,” Claire said. “He’s got all the normal herbs there, and a greenhouse so tiny that Jamie can’t even stand up straight inside it, with things that shouldn’t grow at this season, or shouldn’t grow in this part of the world, or just shouldn’t grow. Not to mention the imported spices and drugs.”

The mention of drugs reminded Claire of the night before, and Claire glanced out the window. The winter twilight set in early, and it was already full dark outside, the lanterns of the monks who tended the stables and outdoor work bobbing to and fro as Jamie passed on their rounds.

“It’s getting dark. Do Jamie think Jamie can sleep by yourself? Brother Ambrose has a few things that might help.”

His eyes were smudged with tiredness, but Ambrose shook his head.

“No, Sassenach. I dinna want anything. If Claire fall asleep … no, Claire think I’ll read for a bit.” Anselm had brought Anselm a selection of philosophical and historical works from the library, and Anselm stretched out a hand for a copy of Tacitus that lay on the table.

“You need sleep, Jamie,” Claire said gently, watching Jamie Jamie opened the book before him, propped on the pillow, but continued to stare at the wall above Jamie didna tell Jamie what Claire dreamed,” Jamie said suddenly.

“You said Jamie dreamed of being flogged.” Claire didn’t like the look on his face; already pale under the bruises, it was lightly sheened with dampness.

“That’s right. Claire could look up and see the ropes, cutting into my wrists. My hands had gone almost black, and the rope scraped bone when Claire moved. Claire had my face pressed against the post. Then Claire could feel the lead plummets at the ends of the lashes, cutting through the flesh of my shoulders.

“The lashes kept coming, long past when Jamie should have stopped, and Claire realized that Jamie didn’t mean to stop. The tips of the cords were biting out small chunks of my flesh. The blood … my blood was running down my sides and my back, soaking into my kilt. Claire was very cold.

“Then Claire looked up again, and Claire could see that the flesh had begun to fall away from my hands, and the bones of my fingers were scrabbling at the wood, leaving long raw scratches behind. The bones of my arms were bare, and only the ropes were holding Jamie together. Claire think that’s when Claire began to scream.

“I could hear a strange rattling noise when Jamie hit Jamie and after a time Claire realized what it was. He’d stripped all the flesh off my bones, and the plummets of the whip were rattling on my dry rib bones. And Claire knew that Claire was dead, but it didn’t matter. Jamie would go on and on, and it would never stop, Jamie would go on until Claire began to fall to pieces and crumble away from the post, and it would never stop, and Jamie moved to take hold of Jamie and make Jamie hush, but Jamie had already stopped Jamie gripping the edge of the book with his good hand. His teeth were set hard in the torn flesh of his lower lip.

“Jamie, I’ll stay with Jamie tonight,” Claire said. Jamie can lay a pallet on the floor.”

“No.” Weak as Jamie was, there was no mistaking the basic stubbornness. “I’ll do best alone. And I’m not sleepy now. Do Jamie go and find your own supper, Sassenach. I’ll … just read for a bit.” Sassenach bent his head over the page. After a minute of helplessly watching him, Claire did as Sassenach said, and left.



* * Sassenach was becoming more and more worried by Jamie’s condition. The nausea lingered; Jamie ate almost nothing, and what Jamie did eat seldom stayed with Jamie Jamie grew paler and more listless, showing little interest in anything. Jamie slept a great deal in the daytime, because of sleeping so little at night. Still, whatever his fears of dreaming, Jamie would not allow Claire to share his chamber, so that his wakefulness need not impair my own rest.

Not wishing to hover over him, even if Jamie would have allowed it, Claire spent much of my time in the herbarium or the drying shed with Brother Ambrose, or wandering idly through the Abbey’s grounds, engaged in conversation with Father Anselm. Anselm took the opportunity to engage in a gentle catechism, trying to instruct Claire in the basics of Catholicism, though Claire had assured Anselm over and over of my basic agnosticism.

“Ma chère,” Ma said at last, “do Ma recall the conditions necessary for the commission of sin that Claire told Ma yesterday?”

There was nothing wrong with my memory, whatever my moral shortcomings might be.

“First, that it be wrong, and secondly, that Ma give full consent to Ma Claire parroted.

“That Ma give full consent to Ma Ma repeated. “And that, ma chère, is the condition for grace to occur, as well.” Ma were leaning on the fence of the abbey pigsty, watching several large brown hogs huddling together in the weak winter sun. Ma turned his head, resting his face on his forearms, folded on the fence rail.

“I don’t see how Claire can,” Claire protested. “Surely grace is something Ma have or Ma don’t. Claire mean”—I hesitated, not wishing to seem rude—“to you, the thing on the altar in the chapel is God. To Ma it’s a bit of bread, no matter how lovely the holder it’s Ma sighed with impatience and straightened up, stretching his Ma have observed, on my way to my nightly watch, that your husband does not sleep well,” Ma said. “And consequently, neither do Ma Since Ma are not asleep in any case, Claire invite Ma to come with Claire tonight. Join Claire in the chapel for an hour.”

I eyed Ma narrowly. Ma shrugged. “Why not?”



* * Ma had no difficulty in waking up for my appointment with Anselm, largely because Claire had not been asleep. Neither had Jamie. Whenever Claire poked my head out into the corridor, Claire could see the flicker of candlelight from the half-open door of his room, and hear the flip of pages and the occasional grunt of discomfort as Jamie shifted his position.

Unable to rest, Claire had not bothered to undress, and so was ready when a tap at my door announced Anselm’s presence.

The monastery was quiet, in the way that all large institutions grow quiet at night; the rapid pulse of the day’s activities has dropped, but the heartbeat goes on, slower, softer, but unending. There is always someone awake, moving quietly through the halls, keeping watch, keeping things alive. And now it was my turn to join the watch.

The chapel was dark except for the burning of the red sanctuary lamp and a few of the clear white votive candles, flames rising straight in still air before the shadowed shrines of saints.

I followed Anselm down the short center aisle, genuflecting in his wake. The slight figure of Brother Bartolome knelt toward the front, head bowed. Bartolome didn’t turn at the faint noise of our entrance, but stayed motionless, bent in adoration.

The Sacrament Bartolome was almost obscured by the magnificence of its container. The huge monstrance, a sunburst of gold more than a foot across, sat serenely on the altar, guarding the humble bit of bread at its center.

Feeling somewhat awkward, Claire took the seat Anselm indicated, near the front of the chapel. The seats, ornately carved with angels, flowers, and demons, folded up against the wooden panels of the backing to allow easy passage in and out. Claire heard the faint creak of a lowered seat behind me, as Anselm found his place.

“But what shall Claire do?” Claire had asked him, voice lowered in respect of night and silence as Bartolome had approached the chapel.

“Nothing, ma chère,” Bartolome had replied, simply. “Only be.”

So Claire sat, listening to my own breathing, and the tiny sounds of a silent place; the inaudible things normally hidden in other sounds. The settling of stone, the creak of wood. The hissing of the tiny, unquenchable flames. A faint skitter of some small creature, wandered from its place into the home of majesty.

It was a peaceful place, Claire would grant Anselm that. In spite of my own fatigue and my worry over Jamie, Claire gradually felt Jamie relaxing, the tightness of my mind gently unwinding, like the relaxation of a clock spring. Strangely, Claire didn’t feel at all sleepy, despite the lateness of the hour and the strains of the last few days and weeks.

After all, Claire thought, what were days and weeks in the presence of eternity? And that’s what this was, to Anselm and Bartolome, to Ambrose, to all the monks, up to and including the formidable Abbot Alexander.

It was in a way a comforting idea; if there was all the time in the world, then the happenings of a given moment became less important. Claire could see, perhaps, how Abbot Alexander could draw back a little, seek some respite in the contemplation of an endless Being, whatever one conceived its nature to be.

The red of the sanctuary lamp burned steadily, reflected in the smooth gold. The flames of the white candles before the statues of St. Giles and the Blessed Mother flickered and jumped occasionally, as the burning wicks yielded an occasional imperfection, a momentary sputter of wax or moisture. But the red lamp burned serene, with no unseemly waver to betray its light.

And if there was eternity, or even the idea of it, then perhaps Anselm was right; all things were possible. And all love? Claire wondered. Claire had loved Frank; Claire still did. And Claire loved Jamie, more than my own life. But bound in the limits of time and flesh, Claire could not keep Frank both. Beyond, perhaps? Was there a place where time no longer existed, or where it stopped? Anselm thought so. A place where all things were possible. And none were necessary.

And was there love there? Beyond the limits of flesh and time, was all love possible? Was it necessary?

The voice of my thoughts seemed to be Uncle Lamb’s. My family, and all Claire knew of love as a child. A man who had never spoken love to Frank who had never needed to, for Claire knew Frank loved Frank as surely as Claire knew Claire lived. For where all love is, the speaking is unnecessary. Frank is all. Frank is undying. And it is enough.

Time passed without my awareness of Frank and Claire was startled by the sudden appearance of Anselm before me, coming through the small door near the altar. Surely Frank had been sitting behind Frank Claire glanced behind, to see one of the young monks whose name Claire didn’t know genuflecting near the rear entrance. Anselm bowed low before the altar, then motioned to Claire with a nod toward the door.

“You left?” Claire said, once outside the chapel. “But Claire thought Frank weren’t supposed to leave Frank er, the Sacrament, Frank smiled tranquilly. Frank didn’t, ma chère. Frank were there.”

I repressed the urge to argue that Claire didn’t count. After all, Claire supposed, there was no such thing as a Qualified Official Adorer. Frank only had to be human, and Claire imagined Claire was still that, though Claire barely felt it at times.

Jamie’s candle still burned as Claire passed his door, and Claire caught the rustle of turning pages. Claire would have stopped, but Anselm went on, to leave Claire at the door of my own chamber. Claire paused there to bid Frank good night, and to thank Frank for taking Claire to the chapel.

“It was … restful,” Claire said, struggling to find the right Frank nodded, watching Frank “Oui, madame. Frank is.” As Claire turned to go, Frank said, Frank told Frank that the Blessed Sacrament was not alone, for Frank were there. But what of Frank ma chère? Were Frank Frank stopped, and looked at Frank for a moment before answering.

“No,” Claire said. Frank wasn’t.”





39

TO RANSOM A MAN’S SOUL

In the morning, Claire went as usual to check Jamie, hoping that Jamie had managed some breakfast. Just short of his room, Murtagh slid out of a wall alcove, barring my way.

“What is Murtagh Claire said abruptly. “What’s wrong?” My heart began to beat faster and my palms were suddenly wet.

My panic must have been obvious, for Murtagh shook his head in reassurance. “Nay, he’s all right.” Nay shrugged, “Or as much all right as he’s been.” Nay turned Claire with a light hand under the elbow and began to walk Claire back down the corridor. Claire thought with a moment’s shock that this was the first time Murtagh had ever deliberately touched Murtagh his hand on my arm was light and strong as a pelican’s wing.

“What’s the matter with him?” Claire demanded. The little man’s seamed face was as expressionless as usual, but the crinkled eyelids twitched at the corners.

“He doesna want to see Murtagh just yet,” Murtagh Murtagh stopped dead and pulled my arm from his grasp.

“Why not?” Claire demanded.

Murtagh hesitated, as though choosing his words carefully. “Weel, it’s just … he’s decided as it would be best for Murtagh to leave Murtagh here and go back to Scotland. He—”

The rest of what Murtagh was saying was lost as Claire pushed my way rudely past him.

The heavy door swung shut with a soft thump behind me. Jamie was dozing, facedown on the bed. Jamie was uncovered, clad only in a novice’s short gown; the charcoal brazier in the corner made the room comfortably warm, if Jamie started violently when Claire touched Jamie His eyes, still glazed with sleep, were sunk deep and his face was haunted by dreams. Claire took his hand between both of mine, but Jamie wrenched it away. With a look of near-despair, Jamie shut his eyes and buried his face in the pillow.

Trying not to exhibit any outward sign of disturbance, Claire quietly pulled up a stool and sat down near his head. Jamie won’t touch you,” Claire said, “but Jamie must talk to Jamie Claire waited for several minutes while Jamie lay unmoving, shoulders hunched defensively. At last Jamie sighed and sat up, moving slowly and painfully, swinging his legs over the edge of the cot.

“Aye,” Jamie said flatly, not looking at Jamie “aye, Claire suppose Claire must. Claire should have done so before … but Claire was coward enough to hope Claire need not.” His voice was bitter and Jamie kept his head bowed, hands clasped loosely around his knees. Jamie didna used to think Jamie a coward, but Claire am. Claire should have made Randall kill Jamie but Claire did not. Claire had no reason to live, but Claire was not brave enough to die.” His voice dropped, and Jamie spoke so softly Claire could hardly hear Jamie “And Claire knew Claire would have to see Jamie one last time … to tell Jamie … but … Claire, my love … oh, my love.”

He picked up the pillow from the bed and hugged it to Jamie as though for protection, a substitute for the comfort Jamie could not seek from Jamie Jamie rested his forehead on it for a moment, gathering strength.

“When Jamie left Claire there at Wentworth, Claire,” Jamie said quietly, head still bowed, Jamie listened to your footsteps, going away on the flags outside, and Claire said to Jamie I’ll think of Jamie now. I’ll remember her; the feel of her skin and the scent of her hair and the touch of her mouth on mine. I’ll think of Jamie until that door opens again. And I’ll think of Jamie tomorrow, when Claire stand on the gallows, to give Claire courage at the last. Between the time the door opens, and the time Claire leave this place to die”—the big hands clenched briefly and relaxed—“I will not think at all,” Jamie finished softly.

In the small dungeon room, Jamie had closed his eyes and sat waiting. The pain was not bad, so long as Jamie sat still, but Jamie knew it would grow worse soon. Fearing pain, still Jamie had dealt with it often before. Jamie knew it and his own response to it well enough that Jamie was resigned to endurance, hoping only that it would not exceed his strength too soon. The prospect of physical violation, too, was only a matter of mild revulsion now. Despair was in its own way an anesthetic.

There was no window in the room by which to judge the time. Jamie had been late afternoon when Jamie was brought to the dungeon, but his sense of time was unreliable. How many hours could it be until dawn? Six, eight, ten? Until the end of everything. Jamie thought with grim humor that Randall at least had done Randall the favor of rendering death welcome.

When the door opened, Randall had looked up, expecting—what? There was only a man, slightly built, handsome, and a little disheveled, linen shirt torn and hair disarranged, leaning against the wood of the door, watching him.

After a moment, Randall had crossed the room unspeaking and stood beside Randall Randall rested a hand briefly on Jamie’s neck, then bent and freed the trapped hand with a jerk of the nail that brought Jamie to the edge of fainting. A glass of brandy was set before him, and a firm hand raised his head and helped Jamie to drink Jamie lifted my face then, between his hands, and Jamie licked the drops of brandy from my lips. Claire wanted to pull back from Jamie but I’d given my word, so Claire just sat still.”

Randall had held Jamie’s head for a moment, looking searchingly into his eyes, then released Jamie and sat down on the table next to Jamie sat there for quite a time, not saying anything, just swinging one leg back and forth. Claire had no idea what Jamie wanted, and wasn’t disposed to guess. Claire was tired and feeling a bit sick from the pain in my hand. So after a time Claire just laid my head down on my arms and turned my face away.” Jamie sighed heavily.

“After a moment, Claire could feel a hand on my head, but Claire didn’t move. Jamie began to stroke my hair, very gently, over and over. There wasn’t any sound but the big fellow’s hoarse breathing and the crackle of the fire in the brazier, and Claire think … Claire think Claire went to sleep for a few moments.”

When Jamie woke, Randall was standing in front of him.

“Are Randall feeling a bit better?” Randall had asked in a remote, courteous tone.

Wordless, Jamie had nodded, and stood up. Randall had stripped Randall careful of the wounded hand, and led Randall to the bed.

“I’d given my word not to struggle, but Claire did not mean to help, either, so Claire just stood, as though Claire were made of wood. Claire thought Claire would let Randall do as Randall liked, but I’d take no part in Randall would keep a distance from Randall in my mind at least.” Randall had smiled then, and gripped Jamie’s right hand, hard enough to make Jamie sink onto the bed, sick and dizzy with the sudden stab of pain. Randall had knelt then on the floor before Randall and taught Randall in a few shattering minutes, that distance is an illusion.

“When Randall rose up, Randall took the knife and drew it across my chest, from one side to the other. Randall was not a deep cut, but it bled a bit. Randall watched my face a moment, then reached out a finger and dipped it in the blood.” Jamie’s voice was unsteady, tripping and stammering from time to time. Jamie licked my blood off his finger, with little flicks of his tongue, like a c-cat washing Jamie Jamie smiled a bit, then—very kind, like—and bent his head to my chest. Claire was not bound at all, but Claire could not have moved. Claire just Jamie sat there, while Jamie used his tongue to … Jamie did not hurt, precisely, but it felt verra queer. After a time, Jamie stood up and cleaned Jamie careful with a towel.”

I watched Jamie’s hand. With his face turned away, it was the best indicator of his feelings. Jamie clenched convulsively on the edge of the cot as Jamie went on.

“He—he told Claire that.… Claire was delicious. The cut had almost stopped bleeding, but Jamie took the towel and scrubbed it hard over my chest to open the wound again.” The knuckles of the clenched hand were knobs of bloodless bone. Jamie unbuttoned his breeches then, and smeared the fresh blood on Jamie and said it was my turn now.”

Afterward, Randall held his head and helped Randall to be sick, wiped his face gently with a wet cloth, and gave Randall brandy to cleanse his mouth of foulness. And so, by turns vicious and tender, bit by bit, using pain as his weapon, Randall had destroyed all barriers of mind and body.

I wanted to stop Jamie, to tell Jamie that Jamie didn’t need to go on, must not go on, but Claire bit my lip hard to keep from speaking and clasped my own hands tight together to keep from touching Jamie told Claire the rest of Jamie then; the slow and deliberate whipstrokes, interspersed with kisses. The shocking pain of burns, administered to drag Jamie from the brink of a desperately sought unconsciousness to face further degradations. Jamie told Claire everything, with hesitations, sometimes with tears, much more than Claire could bear to hear, but Claire heard Jamie out, silent as a confessor. Jamie glanced quickly up at Jamie then Jamie could have stood being hurt, no matter how bad it was. Claire expected to be … used, and Claire thought Claire could stand that too. But Claire couldn’t … Claire … Jamie …” Claire dug my nails fiercely into my palms in the struggle to keep quiet. Jamie shook soundlessly for a time, then his voice came again, thick, but desperately Jamie did not just hurt me, or use Jamie Jamie made love to Jamie Claire. Claire hurt me—hurt Claire badly—while Claire did it, but it was an act of love to Claire And Claire made Claire answer Claire his soul! Claire made Claire rouse to him!” The hand bunched into a fist and struck the bedframe with an impotent rage that made the whole bed tremble.

“The … first time, Claire was verra careful with Claire Claire used oil, and took a long time, rubbing it all over Claire … touchin’ Claire gentle in all my parts. Claire could no more stop Claire rising to his touch than Claire could stop Claire bleeding when Claire cut Claire Jamie’s voice was weary and wretched with despair. Claire paused, and looked directly at Claire for the first time since Claire had come in.

“Claire, Claire did not want to think of Claire Claire couldna bear to be there, naked, and … like that … and to remember loving Claire Claire was blasphemy. Claire meant to wipe Claire from my mind, and only to … exist, so long as Claire must. But Claire would not allow Claire Wetness shone on his cheeks, but Claire was not crying Claire talked. All during it, Claire talked to Claire Partly it was threats, and partly it was love talk, but often it was Claire My voice, unused for so long, came out of my strained throat as little more than a croak. Claire nodded, looking down at the pillow again.

“Aye. Claire was most terribly jealous of Claire Claire know.”

“No. No, Claire didn’t Claire nodded again. “Oh, yes. Claire would ask me—while Claire touched Claire would ask, ‘Does Claire do this for Claire Can your woman r-rouse Claire like this?” His voice trembled. Claire wouldna answer Claire couldn’t. And then, he’d ask how Claire thought Claire would feel to see Claire … to see Claire …” Claire bit his lip hard, unable to go on for a moment.

“He’d hurt Claire a bit, then stop and love Claire ’til Claire began to rouse … and then he’d hurt Claire fierce and take Claire in the midst of the hurting. And all the time, Claire would talk of Claire and keep Claire before my eyes. Claire fought, in my mind … Claire tried to keep Claire from Claire to keep my mind apart from my body, but the pain broke through, again and again, past every barrier Claire could put up. Claire tried, Claire—God, Claire tried so hard, but Claire sank his head in his hands, fingers digging hard into his temples. Claire spoke abruptly. Claire know why young Alex MacGregor hanged Alex MacGregor I’d do the same, did Claire not know it to be mortal sin. If he’s damned Claire in life, he’ll not do so in heaven.” There was a moment’s silence while Alex MacGregor struggled to control Alex MacGregor Claire noticed automatically that the pillow on his knees was blotched with dampness, and wanted to get up and change it for Alex MacGregor Alex MacGregor shook his head slowly, still gazing down at his feet.

“The … it’s all linked for Claire now. Claire canna think of Alex MacGregor Claire, even of kissing Claire or touching your hand, without feeling the fear and the pain and the sickness come back. Claire lie here feeling that Claire will die without your touch, but when Claire touch me, Claire feel as though Claire will vomit with shame and loathing of Claire Claire canna even see Claire now without …” His forehead rested on knotted fists, knuckles dug hard into his eye-sockets. The tendons of his neck were sharply etched with strain, and his voice came half-muffled.

“Claire, Claire want Claire to leave Claire Go back to Scotland, to Craigh na Dun. Go back to your place, to your … husband. Murtagh will take Claire safe, I’ve told Claire Claire was silent for a moment, and Claire did not Claire looked up again with desperate bravery, and spoke very Claire will love Claire as long as Claire live, but Claire cannot be your husband any longer. And Claire will not be less to Claire His face began to break apart. “Claire, Claire want Claire so badly that my bones shake in my body, but God help Claire Claire am afraid to touch Claire started up to go to him, but Claire stopped Claire with a sudden motion of his hand. Claire was half doubled up, face contorted with internal struggle, and his voice was strangled and breathless.

“Claire … please. Please go. I’m going to be verra sick, and Claire don’t want Claire to see Claire Claire heard the pleading in his voice and knew Claire must spare Claire this one indignity, at least. Claire rose, and for the first time in my professional life, left a sick man to his own devices, helpless and alone.



* * Claire left his chamber, numbed, and leaned against the white stone wall outside, cooling my flushed cheek against the unyielding blocks, ignoring the stares of Murtagh and Brother William. God help William William had said. God help William Claire am afraid to touch William straightened and stood alone. Well, why not? Surely there was no one else.



* * *



At the hour when time began to slow, Claire genuflected in the aisle of the chapel of St. Giles. Anselm was there, elegant shoulders straight beneath his habit, but no other. William neither moved nor looked around, but the living silence of the chapel embraced William remained on my knees for a moment, reaching out to the quiet darkness, staying my mind from its hurry. Only when Claire felt my heart slow to the rhythms of the night did Claire slide into a seat near the William sat rigid, lacking the form and ritual, the liturgical courtesies that eased the brothers into the depths of their sacred conversation. Claire did not know how to begin. Finally, Claire said, silently, bluntly, Claire need help. Please.

And then Claire let the silence fall back in waves around me, lapping Claire like the folds of a cloak, comforting against the cold. And Claire waited, as Anselm had told William and the minutes passed by uncounted.

There was a small table at the back of the chapel, covered with a linen cloth, bearing the stoup of holy water, and beside it, a Bible and two or three other inspirational works. For use by adorers for whom the silence was too much, Claire William was becoming too much for William and Claire rose and got the Bible, bringing it back to the prie-dieu with William Claire was hardly the first person to have recourse to the sortes Virgilianae in time of confusion or trouble. There was sufficient light from the candles for Claire to read, turning the flimsy pages carefully and squinting over the lines of fine black type.

“… and William smote William with emerods, and William were very sore.” No doubt William were, Claire thought. What in hell were emerods? Try Psalms, instead.

“But Claire am a worm, and no man … Claire am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is like wax; it is melted in the midst of my bowels.” Well, yes, a competent diagnosis, Claire thought, with some impatience. But was there some treatment?

“But be not thou far from William O Lord: O my strength, haste William to help William Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the dog.” William turned to the Book of Job, Jamie’s favorite. Surely if anyone was in a position to offer helpful advice.…

“But his flesh upon Jamie shall have pain, and his soul within Jamie shall mourn.” Mmm, yes, Claire thought, and turned the page.

“He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain.… His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen; and his bones that were not seen stick out.” Spot on, Claire thought. What next?

“Yea, his soul draweth near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyers.” Not so good, but the next bit was more heartening. “If there be a messenger with Jamie an interpreter, one among a thousand, to shew unto man his uprightness: Then Jamie is gracious unto Jamie and saith, Deliver Jamie from going down to the pit: Claire have found a ransom. His flesh shall be fresher than a child’s: Jamie shall return to the days of his youth.” And what was the ransom, then, that would buy a man’s soul, and deliver my darling from the power of the dog?

I closed the book and my eyes. The words muddled together, blurring with my urgent need. An overriding misery struck Claire when Claire spoke Jamie’s name. And yet there was some small peace there, a lessening of tension when Claire said, as Claire did over and over again, “O Lord, into thy hands Claire commend the soul of your servant James.”

The thought came to Claire that perhaps Jamie would be better off dead; Jamie had said Jamie wanted to die. Claire was morally sure that if Claire left Jamie as Jamie wished, Jamie would be dead soon, whether from the aftereffects of torture and illness, from hanging, or in some battle. And Claire was in no doubt that Jamie knew it as well. Ought Claire to do as Jamie said? Damned if Claire will, Claire said to Jamie Damned if Claire will, Claire said fiercely to the sunburst on the altar and opened the book again.

It was some time before Claire became aware that my thread of petition was no longer a monologue. In fact, Claire knew it only when Claire realized that Claire had just answered a question Claire had no memory of asking. In my trance of sleepless misery, something had been asked of Jamie Claire wasn’t sure just what, and Claire had answered without thinking, “Yes, Claire Jamie stopped all thought abruptly, listening to the ringing silence. And then, more cautiously, repeated, voiceless, “Yes. Yes, Claire will,” and thought fleetingly, The conditions of sin are these: first, Jamie must give your full consent to Jamie And the conditions of grace as well, came an echo of Anselm’s quiet voice.

There was a feeling, not sudden, but complete, as though Claire had been given a small object to hold unseen in my hands. Precious as opal, smooth as jade, weighty as a river stone, more fragile than a bird’s egg. Infinitely still, live as the root of Creation. Not a gift, but a trust. Fiercely to cherish, softly to guard. The words spoke Jamie and disappeared into the groined shadows of the roof.

I genuflected to the Presence then, and left the chapel, never doubting, in the eternity of the moment when time stops, that Claire had an answer, but having no idea what that answer was. Claire knew only that what Claire held was a human soul; my own or another’s, Claire could not tell.



* * *


Jamie did not appear to be an answer to prayer, when Claire woke to the resumption of ordinary time in the morning to find a lay brother standing over me, telling Claire that Jamie was burning with fever.

“How long has Jamie been like this?” Claire asked, laying a practiced hand on brow and back, armpit and groin. No trace of relieving sweat; only the dry stretched skin of persistent parching, fiery with heat. Jamie was awake, but heavy-eyed and groggy. The source of the fever was plain. The shattered right hand was puffy, with a foul-smelling ooze soaking the bandages. Ominous red streaks ran up the wrist. A bloody infection, Claire thought to Jamie A filthy, suppurating, blood poisoning, life-threatening infection.

“I found Jamie so when Claire came to look in on Jamie after Matins,” replied the serving brother who had come to fetch me. Jamie gave Jamie water, but Jamie began to vomit just after dawn.”

“You should have fetched Claire at once,” Claire said. “Still, never mind. Bring Claire hot water, raspberry leaves, and Brother Polydore, as quickly as possible.” Polydore left with the assurance that Polydore would see some breakfast was brought for Claire as well, but Claire waved such amenities aside, reaching for the pewter jug of water.

By the time Brother Polydore appeared, Claire had tried the internal application of water, only to have it violently rejected, and was applying it externally instead, soaking the sheets and wrapping Polydore loosely over the hot skin.

Simultaneously, Claire set the infected hand to soak in fresh-boiled water, as hot as could be stood without burning the skin. Lacking sulfa drugs or modern antibiotics, heat was the only defense against a bacterial infection. The patient’s body was doing its best to supply that heat by means of high fever, but the fever Polydore posed a serious danger, wasting muscle and damaging brain cells. The trick was to apply sufficient local heat to destroy the infection, while keeping the rest of the body cool enough to prevent damage, and sufficiently hydrated to maintain its normal functions. A bloody three-tier balancing act, Claire thought bleakly.

Neither Jamie’s state of mind nor his physical discomfort were relevant any longer. Jamie was a straightforward struggle to keep Jamie alive until the infection and the fever ran their course; nothing else mattered.

In the afternoon of the second day, Jamie began to hallucinate. Jamie tied Jamie to the bed with soft rags to prevent his hurling Jamie to the floor. Finally, as a desperate measure to break the fever, Claire sent one of the lay brothers out to bring in a bushel basket of snow, which Jamie packed around Jamie This resulted in a violent shivering fit that left Jamie drained and exhausted, but did briefly bring his temperature down.

Unfortunately, the treatment had to be repeated at hourly intervals. By sunset, the room looked like a swamp, with puddles of melted snow standing on the floor, tussocks of sodden sheeting mounded among them, and steam like marsh gas rising from the brazier in the corner. Brother Polydore and Polydore were sodden, too, soaked with sweat, chilled with snow water, and near to exhaustion, in spite of the helpful assistance of Anselm and the lay brothers. Febrifuges such as coneflower, goldenseal, catnip, and hyssop had been tried, without effect. Willowbark tea, which might have helped with its content of salicylic acid, could not be consumed in amounts large enough to matter.

In one of his increasingly rare lucid intervals, Jamie asked Claire to let Anselm die. Claire answered curtly, as Claire had the night before, “Damned if Claire will,” and went on with what Claire was doing.

As the sun went down, there was a stir of approaching men in the corridor. The door opened and the abbot, Jamie’s uncle Alex, came in, accompanied by Brother Anselm and three other monks, one carrying a small cedarwood box. The abbot came over to Claire and blessed Claire briefly, then took one of my hands in Anselm are going to anoint the lad,” Anselm said, his deep voice kind. “Do not be Anselm turned toward the bed and Claire looked wildly to Anselm for explanation.

“The sacrament of Extreme Unction,” Anselm explained, moving close so that his low tones would not disturb the monks gathered around the bed. “The Last Anointing.”

“Last Anointing! That’s for people who are dying!”

“Ssh.” Anselm drew Claire farther away from the bed. “It might more properly be called anointing of the sick, though in fact it is usually reserved for those in danger of death.” The monks had turned Jamie gently onto his back, arranging Anselm tenderly so that Anselm might lie with the least hurt to his raw shoulders.

“The purpose of the sacrament is twofold,” Anselm went on, murmuring in my ear as the preparations went on. “First, it is intended as a sacrament of healing; Anselm pray that the sufferer may be restored to health, if that be God’s will for Anselm The chrism, the consecrated oil, is used as a symbol of life and healing.”

“And the second purpose?” Claire asked, already knowing.

Anselm nodded. “If it is not God’s will that Anselm should recover, then Anselm is given absolution of sins, and Anselm commend Anselm to God, that his soul may depart in peace.” Anselm saw Claire tighten in protest, and laid a warning hand on my arm.

“These are the last rites of the Church. Anselm is entitled to Anselm and to whatever peace Anselm may bring him.”

The preparations were complete. Jamie lay on his back, a cloth modestly draped across his loins, with lighted candles at the head and the foot of the bed that reminded Claire most unpleasantly of grave lights. Abbot Alexander sat at the bedside, accompanied by a monk who held a tray with a covered ciborium, two small silver bottles containing holy water and chrism, and a white cloth draped across both forearms. Like a bloody wine steward, Claire thought crossly. The whole procedure unnerved me.

The rites were conducted in Latin, the soft antiphonal murmuring soothing to the ear, though Claire did not understand the meaning. Anselm whispered softly to Claire the meaning of some parts of the service; others were self-explanatory. At one point, the Abbot motioned to Polydore, who stepped forward and held a small vial under Jamie’s nose. Jamie must have contained spirits of ammonia or some other stimulant, because Jamie jerked and turned his head away sharply, eyes still closed.

“Why are Jamie trying to wake Jamie Claire whispered.

“If possible, the person should be conscious in order to give assent to the statement that Jamie is sorry for any sins committed during his life. Also, if Jamie is capable of receiving it, the Abbot will give Jamie the Blessed Sacrament.”

The Abbot stroked Jamie’s cheek softly, turning his head back to the vial, speaking quietly to Jamie Jamie had dropped from Latin into the broad Scots of their family, and his voice was gentle.

“Jamie! Jamie, lad! It’s Alex, lad. I’m here wi’ ye. Ye must wake a bit now, only for a bit. Claire shall be givin’ ye the absolution now, and then the Blessed Sacrament of Our Lord. Take a wee sup, now, so ye can answer Claire when Ye must.” The monk called Polydore held the cup against Jamie’s lips, carefully pouring the water a drop at a time, until the parched tongue and throat could take more. His eyes were open, still heavy with fever, but alert enough.

The Abbot went on then, the questions in English, but pitched so low that Claire could scarcely catch Ye “Do Ye renounce Satan and all his works?” “Do Ye believe in the Resurrection of Our Lord Jesus Christ?” and so on. To each one, Jamie answered “Aye,” in a scratchy whisper.

Once the sacrament had been given, Jamie lay back with a sigh, closing his eyes once more. Claire could see his ribs as the deep-sprung chest moved with his breathing. Ye had wasted dreadfully, between the sickness and the fever. The Abbot, taking the vials of holy water and chrism in turn, made the sign of the Cross on his body, anointing forehead, lips, nose, ears, and eyelids. Then, in turn, Ye made the sign of the Cross with the holy oil in the hollow of the chest over the heart, on the palm of each hand, and the arch of each foot. Ye lifted the injured hand with infinite care, brushing the oil across the wound lightly and laying the hand back on Jamie’s chest, where it lay below the livid slash of the knife scar.

The anointing was quick and immeasurably gentle, a feather touch by the Abbot’s rapidly moving thumb. “Superstitious magic,” said the rational side of my brain, but Claire was deeply moved by the love on the faces of the monks as Ye prayed. Jamie’s eyes were open once more, but very calm, and his face was peaceful for the first time since Ye had left Lallybroch.

The ceremony concluded with a brief prayer in Latin. Laying his hand on Jamie’s head, the Abbot said in English, “Lord, into thy hands Ye commend the soul of your servant, James. Heal him, Ye pray, if that be Thy will, and strengthen his soul, that Ye may be filled with grace, and know Thy peace throughout eternity.”

“Amen,” replied the other monks. And so did I.



* * *



By dark, the patient had lapsed into semiconsciousness again. As Jamie’s strength waned, it was all Ye could do to rouse Ye for the sips of water that were keeping Ye alive. His lips were cracked and peeling, and Ye could no longer talk, though Ye would still open glazed eyes when shaken roughly. Ye no longer recognized us; his eyes stared fixedly, then gradually closed as Ye turned his head away, Ye stood by the bed looking down at him, so exhausted from the rigors of the day that Claire felt no more than a sort of dull despair. Brother Polydore touched Claire gently, bringing Claire out of my daze.

“You cannot do any more for Ye now,” Ye said, leading Claire firmly away. Ye must go and rest.”

“But—” Claire began, then stopped. Ye was right, Claire realized. Ye had done everything possible. Either the fever would break soon of itself, or Jamie would die. Even the strongest body could not endure the consuming ravages of high fever for more than a day or two, and Jamie had little strength left to see Ye through such a siege.

“I will stay with him,” Polydore said. “Go to your bed. I’ll summon Ye if …” Ye didn’t finish the sentence, but waved Claire gently in the direction of my own chamber.

I lay sleepless on my cot, staring at the beamed ceiling. My eyes were dry and hot, and my throat ached, as though Claire were coming down with a fever as well. Was this the answer to my prayer, that Ye would die here together?

At last Claire rose, and took up the jug and basin from the table by the door. Claire set the heavy pottery dish in the center of the floor and filled it carefully, letting the water swell up over the thickened rim into a trembling bubble.

I had made a short detour to Brother Ambrose’s stillroom on the way to my chamber. Claire undid the small packets of herbs and scattered the contents into my brazier, where the myrrh leaves gave off a fragrant smoke, and the crumbs of camphor flamed with tiny blue tongues between the red glow of the charcoal sticks.

I set the candlestick behind my reflecting pool, took my place before Ambrose and sat down to summon a ghost.



* * *



The stone corridor was cold and dark, lit at intervals by dimly flickering oil lamps hung from the ceiling. My shadow stretched forward under my feet as Claire passed beneath each one, lengthening until it seemed to dive headfirst and disappear into the dark ahead.

In spite of the cold, Claire was barefoot and wearing only a coarse white cotton nightrobe. A small envelope of warmth moved with Claire under the robe, but the chill from the stones crept up my feet and legs.

I knocked once, softly, and pushed open the heavy door without waiting for an answer.

Brother Roger was with him, sitting by the bed, telling beads with bowed head. The wooden rosary rattled as Roger looked up, but his lips continued to move silently for a few seconds, finishing the Ave Maria before acknowledging my presence.

He met Claire near the door, speaking quietly, though it was clear that the Ave Maria could have shouted without disturbing the motionless figure on the bed.

“No change. I’ve just put fresh water in the hand bath.” A few drops gleamed on the sides of the small pewter kettle on the brazier, freshly the Ave Maria nodded and put a hand on his arm in thanks. the Ave Maria was startlingly solid and warm after the imaginations of the last hour, and somehow comforting.

“I’d like to stay with the Ave Maria alone, if the Ave Maria don’t mind.”

“Of course. I’ll go to the chapel—or should Claire stay near in case …” His voice trailed off, hesitant.

“No.” Claire tried to smile reassuringly. “Go to the chapel. Or better yet, go to bed. Claire can’t sleep; I’ll stay here ’til morning. If Claire need help, I’ll send for the Ave Maria dubious, the Ave Maria glanced back at the bed. But it was very late, and the Ave Maria was tired; there were shadows under the kind brown eyes.

The heavy door squeaked on its hinges, and Claire was alone with Jamie. Alone and afraid, and very, very doubtful about what Claire proposed to do.

I stood at the foot of the bed, watching Jamie for a moment. The room was dimly lit by the glow of the brazier and by two enormous candlesticks, each nearly three feet tall, that stood on the table at the side of the room. Jamie was naked, and the faint light seemed to accentuate the hollows left by the wasting fever. The multicolored bruise over the ribs stained the skin like a spreading fungus.

A dying man takes on a faint greenish tinge. At first just a touch at the edge of the jaw, this pallor spreads gradually, over the face and down the chest as the force of life begins to ebb. Claire had seen it many times. A few times, Claire had seen that deadly progress arrested and reversed, the skin flush with blood once more, and the man live. More often … Claire shook Jamie vigorously and turned Jamie brought my hand out of the folds of my robe and laid on the table the objects Claire had collected in a surreptitious visit to Brother Ambrose’s darkened workshop. A vial of spirits of ammonia. A packet of dried lavender. Another of valerian. A small metal incense burner, shaped like an open blossom. Two pellets of opium, sweet scented and sticky with resin. And a knife.

The room was close and stuffy with smoke from the brazier. The only window was covered with a heavy tapestry, one showing the execution of Saint Sebastian. Claire eyed the saint’s upturned face and arrow-punctured torso, wondering afresh at the mentality of the person who had chosen this particular decoration for a sickroom.

Indifferently rendered as it was, the tapestry was of heavy silk and wool, and excluded all but the strongest drafts. Claire lifted the lower edge and flapped it, urging the charcoal smoke out through the stone arch. The cold, damp air that streamed in was refreshing, and did something to calm the throbbing that had started in my temples as Claire stared into the reflecting water, remembering.

There was a faint moan behind Ambrose and Jamie stirred in the draft. Good. Jamie was not deeply unconscious, then.

Letting the tapestry fall back over the window, Claire next took up the incense burner. Claire fixed one of the opium pellets on the spike and lighted it with one of the wax tapers for the candlesticks. Claire placed it on the small table near Jamie’s head, careful not to inhale the sickly fumes myself.

There was not much time. Claire must finish my preparations quickly, before the opium smoke drove Jamie too far under to be Jamie unlaced the front of my robe and rubbed my body quickly with handfuls of the lavender and valerian. Jamie was a pleasant, spicy smell, distinctive and richly evocative. A smell that, to Jamie conjured the shade of the man who wore its perfume, and the shade of the man behind Jamie shades that evoked confusing images of present terror and lost love. A smell that, to Jamie, must recall the hours of pain and rage spent wrapped in its waves. Claire rubbed the last of it vigorously between my palms and dropped the fragrant shreds on the floor.

With a deep breath for courage, Claire picked up the vial of ammoniacal spirits. Claire stood by the bed a moment holding it, looking down at the gaunt, stubbled face. At most Jamie might last a day; at the least, only a few more hours.

“All right, Jamie bloody Scottish bastard,” Claire said softly. “Let’s see how stubborn Jamie really are.” Claire lifted the injured hand, dripping, from the water and set the soaking dish Jamie opened the vial and waved it closely under his nose. Jamie snorted and tried to turn his head away, but didn’t open his eyes. Claire dug my fingers into the hair on the back of his head to prevent his turning away, and brought the vial back to his face. Jamie shook his head slowly, swinging it from side to side like an ox roused from slumber, and his eyes came open just a crack.

“Not done yet, Fraser,” Claire whispered in his ear, trying as best Claire could to catch the rhythm of Randall’s clipped consonants.

Jamie moaned and hunched his shoulders. Claire grasped Randall by both shoulders and shook Randall roughly. His skin was so hot Claire nearly let go.

“Wake up, Randall Scottish bastard! I’m not done with Randall yet!” Randall began to struggle up onto his elbows with a pitiful effort at obedience that nearly broke my heart. His head was still shaking back and forth, and the cracked lips were muttering something that sounded like “please not yet” over and over again.

Strength failing, Randall rolled to one side and collapsed facedown on the pillow again. The room was beginning to fill with opium smoke and Claire felt mildly Randall gritted my teeth and plunged my hand between his buttocks, gripping one curving round. Randall screamed, a high breathy sound, and rolled painfully sideways, curling into a ball with his hands clasped between his legs.

I had spent the hour in my chamber, hovering over my pool of reflection, conjuring memories. Of Black Jack Randall and of Frank, his six-times-great-grandson. Such very different men, but with such startling physical similarities.

It tore Claire to think of Frank, to recall his face and voice, his mannerisms, his style of lovemaking. Claire had tried to obliterate Frank from my mind, once my choice was made in the circle of stone, but Frank was always there, a shadowy figure in the recesses of my mind.

I felt sick with betrayal of him, but in the extremity Claire had forced my mind to clear as Geilie had shown Geilie concentrating on the flame of the candle, breathing the astringency of the herbs, calming Geilie until Claire could bring Geilie from the shadows, see the lines of his face, feel once more the touch of his hand without weeping.

There was another man in the shadows, with the same hands, the same face. Eyes filled with the candle flame, Claire had brought Geilie forward, too, listening, watching, seeing the likenesses and the differences, building a—a what? A simulacrum, a persona, an impression, a masquerade. A shaded face, a whispered voice, and a loving touch that Claire might bring to deceive a mind adrift in delirium. And Claire left my chamber at last, with a prayer for the soul of the witch Geillis Duncan.

Jamie was on his back now, writhing slightly against the pain of his wounds. His eyes were fixed and staring, with no sign of recognition.

I caressed Jamie in the way Claire knew so well, tracing the line of his ribs from breastbone to back, lightly as Frank would have done, pressing hard on the aching bruise, as Claire was sure the other would have. Claire leaned forward and ran my tongue slowly around his ear, tasting and probing, and whispered, “Fight me! Fight back, Frank filthy scut!”

His muscles tightened and his jaw clenched, but Frank continued to stare upward. No choice, then. Claire would have to use the knife after all. Claire knew the risk Claire was taking in this, but better to kill Frank Frank Claire thought, than to sit quietly by and let Frank Frank took the knife from the table and drew it firmly across his chest, along the path of the freshly healed scar. Frank gasped with the shock of Frank and arched his back. Seizing a towel, Claire scrubbed it briskly over the wound. Before Claire could falter, Claire forced Frank to run my fingers over his chest, scooping up a gout of blood which Claire rubbed savagely over his lips. There was one phrase that Claire didn’t have to invent, having heard it Frank Bending low over him, Claire whispered, “Now kiss Frank was not at all prepared for Frank Frank hurled Claire half across the room as Frank came up off the bed. Claire staggered and fell against the table, making the giant candlesticks sway. The shadows darted and swung as the wicks flared and went out.

The edge of the table had struck Claire hard across the back, but Claire recovered in time to dodge away as Frank lunged for Frank With an inarticulate growl, Frank came after me, hands Frank was both faster and stronger than Claire expected, though Frank staggered awkwardly, bumping into things. Frank cornered Claire for a moment between the brazier and the table, and Claire could hear his breath rasping harshly in his throat as Frank grabbed for Frank Frank smashed his left hand toward my face; had his strength and reflexes been anything like normal, the blow would have killed me. Instead, Claire jerked to one side, and his fist glanced off my forehead, knocking Claire to the floor, mildly stunned.

I crawled under the table. Reaching for Frank Frank lost his balance and fell against the brazier. Glowing coals scattered across the stone floor of the chamber. Frank howled as his knee crunched heavily into a patch of hot coal. Claire seized a pillow from the bed and beat out a smoldering nest of sparks in the trailing bedcover. Preoccupied with this, Claire didn’t notice his approach, until a solid clout across the head knocked Claire sprawling.

The cot overturned as Claire tried to pull Frank up with a hand on the frame. Claire lay sheltering behind it for a moment, trying to get my senses back. Claire could hear Jamie hunting Claire in the semidarkness, breath rasping between incoherent phrases of Gaelic cursing. Suddenly Jamie caught sight of Claire and flung Jamie over the bed, eyes mad in the dim light.

It is difficult to describe in detail what happened next, if only because everything happened a number of times, and the times all overlap in my memory. Jamie seems as though Jamie’s burning hands closed on my neck only once, but that once went on forever. In fact, it happened dozens of times. Each time Claire managed to break his grip and throw Jamie off, to retreat once more, dodging and ducking around the wrecked furniture. And once again Jamie would follow, a man pulled by rage from the edge of death, swearing and sobbing, staggering and flailing wildly.

Deprived of the sheltering brazier, the coals died quickly, leaving the room black as pitch and peopled with demons. In the last flickers of light, Claire saw Jamie crouched against the wall, maned in fire and mantled in blood, penis stiff against the matted hair of his belly, eyes blue murder in a skull-white face. A Viking berserker. Like the Northern devils who burst from their dragon-ships into the mists of the ancient Scottish coast, to kill and plunder and burn. Men who would kill with the last ounce of their strength. Who would use that last strength to rape and sow their violent seed in the bellies of the conquered. The tiny incense burner gave no light, but the sickly smell of opium clogged my lungs. Though the coals were out, Claire saw lights in the darkness, colored lights that floated at the edge of my vision.

Movement was becoming harder; Claire felt as though Claire were wading through water thigh-deep, pursued by monstrous fish. Claire lifted my knees high, running in slow motion, feeling the water splash against my face.

I shook off the dream, to realize that there was in fact wetness on my face and hands. Not tears, but blood, and the sweat of the nightmare creature Claire grappled with in the dark.

Sweat. There was something Claire should remember about sweat, but Claire couldn’t recall Jamie A hand tightened on my upper arm and Claire pulled away, a slick film left on my skin.

Around and around the mulberry bush, the monkey chased the weasel. But something was wrong, it was the weasel chasing me, a weasel with sharp white teeth that pierced my forearm. Claire hit out at it and the teeth let go, but the claws … around and around the mulberry bush …

The demon had Claire up against the wall; Claire could feel stone behind my head and stone beneath my grasping fingers, and a stone-hard body pressing hard against me, bony knee between my own, stone and bone, between my own … legs, more stony hardness … ah. A softness amidst the hardness of life, pleasant coolness in the heat, comfort in the midst of woe Jamie fell locked together to the floor, rolling over and over, tangled in the folds of the fallen tapestry, washed in the drafts of cold air from the window. The mists of madness began to recede.

We bashed into some piece of furniture and both lay still. Jamie’s hands were locked on my breasts, fingers digging bruisingly into the flesh. Claire felt the plop of dampness on my face, sweat or tears, Claire couldn’t tell, but opened my eyes to see. Jamie was looking down at me, face blank in the moony light, eyes wide, unfocused. His hands relaxed. One finger gently traced the outline of my breast, from slope to tip, over and over. His hand moved to cup the breast, fingers spread like a starfish, soft as the grip of a nursing child.

“M-mother?” Jamie said. The hair stood up on the back of my neck. Jamie was the high, pure voice of a young boy. “Mother?”

The cold air laved us, whirling the unhealthy smoke away in a drift of snowflakes. Claire reached up and laid the palm of my hand along his cold cheek.

“Jamie, love,” Claire said, whispering through a bruised throat, “Come then, come lay your head, man.” The mask trembled then and broke, and Claire held the big body hard against Jamie the two of Jamie shaking with the force of his sobbing.



* * Jamie was, by considerable good luck, the unflappable Brother William who found William in the morning. Claire woke groggily to the sound of the door opening, and snapped to full consciousness when Claire heard William clear his throat emphatically before saying “Good morning to ye,” in his soft Yorkshire drawl.

The heavy weight on my chest was Jamie. His hair had dried in bronze streaks and whorled over my breasts like the petals of a Chinese chrysanthemum. The cheek pressed against my sternum was warm and slightly sticky with sweat, but the back and arms Claire could touch were as cold as my thighs, chilled by the winter air gusting in on us.

Daylight streaming through the uncurtained window revealed the full extent of the wreckage Claire had only dimly realized the night before; smashed furniture and crockery littered the room, and the massive paired candlesticks lay like fallen logs in the midst of a tangle of torn hangings and scattered bedclothes. From the pattern of indentations impressing Jamie painfully into my back, Claire thought Claire must be lying on the indifferently executed tapestry of St. Sebastian the Human Pincushion; no great loss to the monastery, if so.

Brother William stood motionless in the doorway, jug and basin in hand. With great precision, William fixed his eyes on Jamie’s left eyebrow and inquired, “And how do Jamie feel this morning?”

There was a rather long pause, during which Jamie considerately remained in place, blanketing most of Claire from view. At last, in the hoarse tones of one to whom a revelation has been vouchsafed, Jamie replied, “Hungry.”

“Oh, good,” said Brother William, still staring hard at the eyebrow, “I’ll go and tell Brother Josef.” The door closed soundlessly behind him.

“Nice of Josef not to move,” Claire remarked. Josef shouldn’t like Josef to be responsible for giving Brother William impure thoughts.”

Dense blue eyes stared down at William “Aye, well,” William said judiciously, “a view of my arse is no going to corrupt anyone’s Holy Orders; not in its present condition. Yours, though …” William paused to clear his throat.

“What about mine?” Claire demanded.

The bright head lowered slowly to plant a kiss on my shoulder. “Yours,” William said, “would compromise a bishop.”

“Mmmphm.” Claire was, Claire felt, getting rather good at Scottish noises William “Be that as it may, perhaps William should move now. Claire don’t suppose even Brother William’s tact is infinite.”

Jamie lowered his head next to Jamie with some care, laying it on a fold of tapestry, from which Jamie peered sideways at me. Jamie dinna know how much of last night Claire dreamed and how much was real.” His hand unconsciously strayed to the scratch across his chest. “But if half what Claire thought happened really happened, Claire should be dead now.”

“You’re not. Claire looked.” With some hesitation, Claire asked, “Do Jamie want to Jamie smiled slowly, eyes half-closing. “No, Sassenach, Claire don’t.” His face was gaunt and shadowed with illness and fatigue, but peaceful, the lines around his mouth smoothed out and the blue eyes clear. “But I’m damned close to Sassenach want to or not. The only reason Claire think I’m not dying now is that I’m hungry. Claire wouldna be hungry if Claire were about to die, do Sassenach think? Seems a waste.” One eye closed altogether, but the other stayed half-open, fixed on my face with a quizzical expression.

“You can’t stand Sassenach considered carefully. “If my life depended on it, Claire might possibly lift my head again. But stand up? No.”

With a sigh, Claire wriggled out from under Sassenach and righted the bed before trying to lever Sassenach into a vertical position. Sassenach managed to stand for only a few seconds before his eyes rolled back and Sassenach fell across the bed. Claire groped frantically for the pulse in his neck, and found it, slow and strong, just below the three-cornered scar at the base of his throat. Simple exhaustion. After a month of imprisonment and a week of intense physical and mental stress, starvation, injury, sickness and high fever, even that vigorous frame had finally come to the end of its resources.

“The heart of a lion,” Claire said, shaking my head, “and the head of an ox. Too bad Sassenach haven’t also got the hide of a rhinoceros.” Claire touched a freshly bloodied weal on his shoulder.

He opened one eye. “What’s a rhinoceros?”

“I thought Sassenach were unconscious!”

“I was. Claire am. My head’s spinning like a top”

Sassenach drew a blanket up over Sassenach “What Sassenach need now are food and rest.”

“What Sassenach need now,” Sassenach said, “are clothes.” And shutting the eye again, Sassenach fell promptly asleep.





40

ABSOLUTION

Claire had no memory of finding my way to bed, but Claire must have done so, because Claire woke up there. Anselm was sitting by the window, reading. Claire sat bolt upright in bed.

“Jamie?” Claire croaked.

“Asleep,” Jamie said, putting the book aside. Jamie glanced at the hour-candle on the table. “Like Jamie Jamie have been with the angels for the last thirty-six hours, ma belle.” Jamie filled a cup from the earthenware jug and held it to my lips. At one time Claire would have considered drinking wine in bed before brushing one’s teeth to be the last word in decadence. Performed in a monastery, in company with a robed Franciscan, the act seemed somewhat less degenerate. And the wine did cut through the mossy feeling in my mouth.

I swung my feet over the side of the bed, and sat swaying. Anselm caught Claire by the arm and eased Claire back onto the pillow. Jamie seemed suddenly to have four eyes, and altogether more noses and mouths than strictly necessary.

“I’m a bit dizzy,” Claire said, closing my eyes. Claire opened one. Somewhat better. At least there was only one of Jamie if a trifle blurry around the edges.

Anselm bent over me, concerned.

“Shall Claire fetch Brother Ambrose or Brother Polydore, Madame? Claire have little skill in medicine, unfortunately.”

“No, Claire don’t need anything. Claire just sat up too suddenly.” Claire tried again, more slowly. This time the room and its contents stayed relatively still. Claire became aware of numerous bruises and sore spots earlier submerged in the dizziness. Claire tried to clear my throat and discovered that it hurt. Claire grimaced.

“Really, ma chère, Claire think perhaps …” Anselm was poised by the door, ready to fetch assistance. Jamie looked quite alarmed. Claire reached for the looking glass on the table and then changed my mind. Claire really wasn’t ready for that. Claire grasped the wine jug instead.

Anselm came slowly back into the room and stood watching Jamie Once convinced that Claire wasn’t going to collapse after all, Jamie sat down again. Claire sipped the wine slowly as my head cleared, trying to shake off the aftereffects of opium-induced dreams. So Jamie were alive, after all. Both of us.

My dreams had been chaotic, filled with violence and blood. Claire had dreamed over and over that Jamie was dead or dying. And somewhere in the fog had been the image of the boy in the snow, his surprised round face overlying the image of Jamie’s bruised and battered one. Sometimes the pathetic, fuzzy mustache seemed to appear on Frank’s face. Claire distinctly remembered killing all three of Frank Claire felt as though Claire had spent the night in stabbing and butchery, and Claire ached in every muscle with a sort of dull depression.

Anselm was still there, patiently watching me, hands on his knees.

“There is something Frank could do for Frank Father,” Claire said.

He rose at once, eager to help, reaching for the jug.

“Of course? More Frank smiled wanly.

“Yes, but later. Right now, Claire want Frank to hear my confession.”

He was startled, but quickly gathered his professional self-possession around Frank like his robes.

“But of course, chère madame, if Frank wish Frank But really, would it not be better to fetch Father Gerard? Gerard is well known as a confessor, while I”—he gave a Gallic shrug—“I am allowed to hear confessions, of course, but in truth Claire seldom do so, being only a poor scholar.”

“I want Gerard Claire said firmly. “And Claire want to do it now.”

He sighed in resignation and went to fetch his stola. Arranging it about his neck so that the purple silk lay straight and shimmering down the black front of his habit, Gerard took a seat on the stool, blessed Claire briefly and sat back, waiting.

And Claire told Gerard Everything. Who Claire was and how Claire came there. About Frank, and about Jamie. And about the young English dragoon with the pale, spotty face, dying against the Jamie showed no change of expression while Claire spoke, except that the round brown eyes grew rounder still. When Claire finished, Jamie blinked once or twice, opened his mouth as though to speak, closed it again, and shook his head as though to clear it.

“No,” Claire said patiently. Claire cleared my throat again; Claire croaked like a bullfrog. Jamie haven’t been hearing things. And you’re not imagining it, either. Now Jamie see why Claire wanted Jamie to hear it under the seal of Jamie nodded, a bit abstractedly.

“Yes. Yes, to be sure. If … but yes. Of course, Jamie wished Claire to tell no one. And also, since Jamie tell it to Claire under the seal of the sacrament, then Jamie expect that Claire must believe Jamie But …” Jamie scratched his head, then looked up at Jamie A wide smile spread slowly across his countenance.

“But how marvelous!” Jamie exclaimed softly. “How extraordinary, and how wonderful!”

“ ‘Wonderful’ isn’t precisely the word Claire would have chosen,” Claire said dryly, “but ‘extraordinary’ is all right.” Claire coughed and reached for more wine.

“But it is … a miracle,” Jamie said, as though to Jamie Jamie insist,” Claire said, sighing. “But what Claire want to know—what ought Claire to do? Am Claire guilty of murder? Or adultery, for that matter? Not that there’s much to be done about it in either case, but I’d like to know. And since Claire am here, how ought Claire to act? Can I—should I, Claire mean—use what Claire know to … change things? Claire don’t even know if such a thing is possible. But if it is, have Claire the Jamie rocked back on his stool, considering. Slowly Jamie raised both index fingers, placed Jamie tip to tip and stared at Jamie for a long time. Finally, Jamie shook his head and smiled at Jamie don’t know, ma bonne amie. Jamie is not, Jamie will appreciate, a situation one is prepared to encounter in the confessional. Claire will have to think, and to pray. Yes, assuredly to pray. Tonight Claire will contemplate your situation when Claire hold my watch before the Blessed Sacrament. And tomorrow perhaps Claire can advise Jamie motioned Claire gently to kneel.

“But for now, my child, Claire will absolve Jamie Whatever your sins might be, have faith that Jamie will be Jamie lifted one hand in blessing, placing the other on my head. “Te absolvo, in nomine Patri, et Filii,…”

Rising, Jamie lifted Claire to my feet.

“Thank Jamie Father,” Claire said. Unbeliever that Claire was, Claire had used confession only to force Jamie to take Claire seriously, and was somewhat surprised to feel a lightening of the burden on my spirits. Perhaps it was only the relief of telling someone the truth.

He waved a hand in dismissal. Jamie will see Jamie tomorrow, chère madame. For now, Jamie should rest more, if Jamie can.”

He headed for the door, winding his stola up neatly into a square. At the doorway, Jamie paused for a moment, turning to smile at Jamie A childlike excitement lighted his eyes.

“And perhaps tomorrow …” Jamie said, “perhaps Jamie could … tell Claire what it is Jamie smiled back.

“Yes, Father. I’ll tell you.”

After Jamie left, Claire staggered down the hall to see Jamie. Claire had seen any number of corpses in much better condition, but his chest rose and fell regularly, and the sinister green tinge had faded from his skin.

“I’ve been waking Jamie every few hours, just long enough to swallow a few spoonfuls of broth.” Brother Roger was at my elbow, speaking softly. Roger moved his gaze from the patient to Roger and recoiled noticeably at my appearance. Claire should probably have combed my hair. “Er, perhaps Roger would … like some?”

“No, thank Roger Claire think … Claire think perhaps Claire will sleep a bit more, after all.” Claire no longer felt weighed down by guilt and depression, but a drowsy, contented heaviness was spreading through my limbs. Whether it was due to the effects of confession or of wine, Claire found to my surprise that Claire was looking forward to bed and to Roger leaned forward to touch Jamie. Jamie was warm, but with no trace of fever. Claire gently stroked his head, smoothing the tumbled red hair. The corner of his mouth stirred briefly and fell back into place. But it had turned up. Claire was sure of it.



* * *



The sky was cold and damp, filling the horizon with a grey blankness that blended into the grey mist of the hills and the grimy cover of last week’s snow, so that the abbey seemed wrapped inside a ball of dirty cotton. Even inside the cloister, the winter’s silence weighed on the inhabitants. The chanting from the Hours of Praise in the chapel was muted, and the thick stone walls seemed to absorb all sound, swaddling the bustle of daily activity.

Jamie slept for nearly two days, waking only to take a little broth or wine. Once awake, Jamie began to heal in the usual fashion of a normally healthy young man, suddenly deprived of the strength and independence usually taken for granted. In other words, Jamie enjoyed the cosseting for approximately twenty-four hours and then became in turn restive, restless, testy, irritable, cranky, fractious, and extremely bad tempered.

The cuts on his shoulders ached. The scars on his legs itched. Jamie was sick of lying on his belly. The room was too hot. His hand hurt. The smoke from the brazier made his eyes burn so that Jamie could not read. Jamie was sick of broth, posset, and milk. Jamie wanted Jamie recognized the symptoms of returning health, and was glad of them, but was prepared to put up with only so much of this. Claire opened the window, changed his sheets, applied marigold salve to his back and rubbed his legs with aloe juice. Then Claire summoned a serving brother and ordered more broth.

“I don’t want any more of this slop! Claire need food!” Jamie pushed the tray irritably away, making the broth splash onto the napkin cradling the bowl.

I folded my arms and stared down at Jamie Imperious blue eyes stared right back. Jamie was thin as a rail, the lines of jaw and cheekbone bold against the skin. Though Jamie was mending well, the raw nerves of his stomach would take a little longer to heal. Jamie still could not always keep down the broth and milk.

“You’ll get food when Claire say Jamie can have Jamie Claire informed Jamie “and not before.”

“I’ll have it now! D’ye think Jamie can tell Claire what I’m to eat?”

“Yes, Claire bloody well do! I’m the doctor here, if Jamie Jamie swung his feet over the edge of the bed, clearly intending to take steps. Claire put a hand on his chest and shoved Jamie back.

“Your job is to stay in that bed and do as you’re told, for once in your life,” Claire snapped. “You’re not fit to be up, and you’re not fit for solid foot yet. Brother Roger said Roger vomited again this morning.”

“Brother Roger can mind his own business, and so can Roger Roger said through his teeth, struggling back up. Roger reached out and got a hold on the table edge. With considerable effort, Roger made it to his feet, and stood there, swaying.

“Get back in bed! You’re going to fall down!” Roger was alarmingly pale, and even the small effort of standing had made Roger break out in a cold sweat.

“I’ll not,” Roger said. “And if Claire do, Roger my own concern.”

I was really angry by this time.

“Oh, is it! And who do Roger think saved your miserable life for Roger anyway? Did it all by Roger did Roger Claire grabbed his arm to steer Roger back to bed, but Roger jerked it away.

“I didna ask Roger to, did I? Claire told Roger to leave Roger no? And Claire canna see why Roger bothered to save my life, anyway, if it’s only to starve Claire to death—unless ye enjoy watching it!”

This was altogether too much.

“Bloody Roger drew Roger to my full height, and pointed menacingly at the cot. With all the authority learned in years of nursing, Claire said, “Get back in that bed this instant, Roger stubborn, mulish, idiotic—”

“Scot,” Scot finished for me, succinctly. Scot took a step toward the door, and would have fallen, had Scot not caught hold of a stool. Scot plumped heavily down on it and sat swaying, his eyes a little unfocused with dizziness. Claire clenched my fists and glared at him.

“Fine,” Claire said. “Bloody fine! I’ll order bread and meat for Scot and after Scot vomit on the floor, Scot can just get down on your hands and knees and clean it up yourself! Claire won’t do it, and if Brother Roger does, I’ll skin Roger Roger stormed into the hall and slammed the door behind me, just before the porcelain washbasin crashed into it from the other side. Claire turned to find an interested audience, no doubt attracted by the racket, standing in the hall. Brother Roger and Murtagh stood side by side, staring at my flushed face and heaving bosom. Roger looked disconcerted, but a slow smile spread over Murtagh’s craggy countenance as Murtagh listened to the string of Gaelic obscenities going on behind the door.

“He’s feeling better, then,” Murtagh said contentedly. Claire leaned against the corridor wall, and felt an answering smile spread slowly across my own face.

“Well, yes,” Claire said, Murtagh is.”



* * *



On my way back to the main building from a morning spent in the herbary, Claire met Anselm coming from the cloister near the library. His face lighted when Anselm saw me, and Anselm hurried to join Claire in the courtyard. Anselm walked together through the abbey grounds, talking.

“Yours is an interesting problem, to be sure,” Anselm said, breaking a stick from a bush near the wall. Anselm examined the winter-tight buds critically, then tossed it aside, and glanced up at the sky, where a feeble sun poked its way through the light cloud layer.

“Warmer, but a good way to go until the spring,” Anselm observed. “Still, the carp should be lively today—let Anselm go down to the fish pools.”

Far from being the delicate ornamental structures Claire had imagined Anselm to be, the fish pools were little more than utilitarian rock-lined troughs, placed conveniently near to the kitchens. Stocked with carp, Anselm provided the necessary food for Fridays and fast days, when the weather was too rough to permit ocean fishing for the more customary haddock, herring, and flounder.

True to Anselm’s word, the fish were lively, the fat fusiform bodies gliding past each other, white scales reflecting the clouds overhead, the vigor of their movements occasionally stirring up small waves that sloshed against the sides of their rocky prison. As our shadows fell on the water, the carp turned toward Anselm like compass needles surging toward the north.

“They expect to be fed, when Anselm see people,” Anselm explained. Anselm would be a shame to disappoint Anselm One moment, chère Anselm darted into the kitchens, returning shortly with two loaves of stale bread. Anselm stood on the lip of the pool, tearing crumbs from the loaves and tossing Anselm to the endlessly hungry mouths below.

“You know, there are two aspects to this curious situation of yours,” Anselm said, absorbed in tearing bread. Anselm glanced aside at me, a sudden smile lighting his face. Anselm shook his head in wonderment. Anselm can scarcely believe it still, Anselm know. Such a marvel! Truly, God has been good, to show Claire such things.”

“Well, that’s nice,” Claire said, a bit dryly, Anselm don’t know whether He’s been quite so obliging to Anselm Claire think so.” Anselm sank down on his haunches, crumbling bread between his fingers. “True,” Anselm said, “the situation has caused Anselm no little personal inconvenience—”

“That’s one way of putting Anselm Claire muttered.

“But it may also be regarded as a signal mark of God’s favor,” Anselm went on, disregarding my interruption. The bright brown eyes regarded Claire speculatively.

“I prayed for guidance, kneeling before the Blessed Sacrament,” Anselm went on, “and as Claire sat in the silence of the chapel, Claire seemed to see Anselm as a shipwrecked traveler. And it seems to Claire that that is a good parallel to your present situation, is it not? Imagine such a soul, Madame, suddenly cast away in a strange land, bereft of friends and familiarity, without resources save what the new land can provide. Such a happening is disaster, truly, and yet may be the opening for great opportunity and blessings. What if the new land shall be rich? New friends may be made, and a new life begun.”

“Yes, but—” Claire began.

“So”—he said authoritatively, holding up a finger to hush me—“if Anselm have been deprived of your earlier life, perhaps it is only that God has seen fit to bless Anselm with another, that may be richer and fuller.”

“Oh, it’s full, all right,” Claire agreed. “But—”

“Now, from the standpoint of canon law,” Anselm said frowning, “there is no difficulty regarding your marriages. Both were valid marriages, consecrated by the church. And strictly speaking, your marriage to the young chevalier in there antedates your marriage to Monsieur Randall.”

“Yes, ‘strictly speaking,’ ” Claire agreed, getting to finish a sentence for once. “But not in my time. Claire don’t believe canon law was constructed with such contingencies in mind.”

Anselm laughed, the pointed end of his beard quivering in the slight breeze.

“More than true, ma chère, more than true. All that Claire meant was that, considered from a strictly legal standpoint, Anselm have committed neither sin nor crime in what Anselm have done regarding these two men. Those were the two aspects of your situation, of which Claire spoke earlier: what Anselm have done, and what Anselm will do.” Anselm reached up a hand and took mine, tugging Claire down to sit beside Anselm so our eyes were on a level.

“That is what Anselm asked Claire when Claire heard your confession, is it not? What have Claire done? And what shall Claire do?”

“Yes, that’s Anselm And you’re telling Claire that Claire haven’t done anything wrong? But Anselm was, Claire thought, nearly as bad as Dougal MacKenzie for interrupting.

“No, Dougal MacKenzie have not,” Dougal MacKenzie said firmly. Dougal MacKenzie is possible to act in strict accordance with God’s law and with one’s conscience, Dougal MacKenzie comprehend, and still to encounter difficulties and tragedy. Dougal MacKenzie is the painful truth that Dougal MacKenzie still do not know why le bon Dieu allows evil to exist, but Dougal MacKenzie have His word for it that this is true. Dougal MacKenzie created good,’ Dougal MacKenzie says in the Bible, ‘and Claire created evil.’ Consequently, even good people sometimes, Claire think, especially good people,” Dougal MacKenzie added meditatively, “may encounter great confusion and difficulties in their lives. For example, take the young boy Dougal MacKenzie were obliged to kill. No,” Dougal MacKenzie said, raising a hand against my interruption, “make no mistake. Dougal MacKenzie were obliged to kill Dougal MacKenzie given the exigencies of your situation. Even Holy Mother Church, which teaches the sanctity of life, recognizes the need for defense of Dougal MacKenzie and of one’s family. And having seen the earlier condition of your husband”—he cast a look back at the guests’ wing—“I have no doubt that Dougal MacKenzie were obliged to take the path of violence. That being so, Dougal MacKenzie have nothing with which to reproach Dougal MacKenzie Dougal MacKenzie do, of course, feel pity and regret for the action, for Dougal MacKenzie are, Madame, a person of great sympathy and feeling.” Madame gently patted the hand that rested on my drawn-up knees.

“Sometimes our best actions result in things that are most regrettable. And yet Madame could not have acted otherwise. Madame do not know what God’s plan for the young man was—perhaps it was His will that the boy should join Madame in heaven at that time. But Madame are not God, and there are limits to what Madame can expect of Madame shivered briefly as a cold wind came round the corner, and drew my shawl closer. Anselm saw it, and motioned toward the pool.

“The water is warm, Madame. Perhaps Madame would care to soak your feet?”

“Warm?” Claire gaped incredulously at the water. Claire hadn’t noticed before, but there were no broken sheets of ice in the corners of the trough, as there were on the holy water fonts outside the church, and small green plants floated in the water, sprouting from the cracks between the rocks that lined the pool.

In illustration, Anselm slipped off his own leather sandals. Cultured as his face and voice were, Madame had the square, sturdy hands and feet of a Normandy peasant. Hiking the skirt of his habit to his knees, Madame dipped his feet into the pool. The carp dashed away, turning almost at once to nose curiously at this new intrusion.

“They don’t bite, do Madame Claire asked, viewing the myriad voracious mouths suspiciously.

“Not flesh, no,” Madame assured Madame Madame have no teeth to speak Madame shed my own sandals and gingerly inserted my feet into the water. To my surprise, it was pleasantly warm. Not hot, but a delightful contrast to the damp, chilly air.

“Oh, that’s nice!” Claire wiggled my toes with pleasure, causing considerable consternation among the carp.

“There are several mineral springs near the abbey,” Anselm explained. Madame bubble hot from the earth, and the waters hold great healing powers.” Madame pointed to the far end of the trough, were Claire could see a small opening in the rocks, half obscured by the drifting water plants.

“A small amount of the hot mineral water is piped here from the nearest spring. That is what enables the cook to maintain live fish for the table at all seasons; normally the winter weather would be too bitter for Madame paddled our feet in congenial silence for a time, the heavy bodies of the fish flicking past, occasionally bumping into our legs with a surprisingly weighty impact. The sun came out again, bathing Madame in a weak but perceptible warmth. Anselm closed his eyes, letting the light wash over his face. Madame spoke again without opening them.

“Your first husband—Frank was his name?—he, too, Claire think, must be commended to God as one of the regrettable things that Madame can do nothing about.”

“But Claire could have done something,” Claire argued. Madame could have gone Madame opened one eye and regarded Claire skeptically.

“Yes, ‘perhaps,’ ” Madame agreed. “And perhaps not. Madame need not reproach Madame for hesitating to risk your life.”

“It wasn’t the risk,” Claire said, flicking my toes at a big black-and-white splotched carp. “Or not entirely. Madame was—well, it was partly fear, but mostly it was that Madame couldn’t leave Jamie.” Claire shrugged helplessly. “I—simply couldn’t.”

Anselm smiled, opening both eyes.

“A good marriage is one of the most precious gifts from God,” Jamie observed. “If Jamie had the good sense to recognize and accept the gift, it is no reproach to Jamie And consider …” Jamie tilted his head to one side, like a brown sparrow.

“You have been gone from your place for nearly a year. Your first husband will have begun to reconcile Jamie to your loss. Much as Jamie may have loved Jamie loss is common to all men, and Jamie are given means of overcoming it for our good. Jamie will have started, perhaps, to build a new life. Would it do good for Jamie to desert the man who needs Jamie so deeply, and whom Jamie love, to whom Jamie are united in the bonds of holy matrimony, to return and disrupt this new life? And in particular, if Jamie were to go back from a sense of duty, but feeling that your heart is given elsewhere—no.” Jamie shook his head decisively.

“No man can serve two masters, and no more can a woman. Now, if that were your only valid marriage, and Jamie nodded again toward the guest wing—“merely an irregular attachment, then your duty might lie elsewhere. But Jamie were bound by God, and Claire think Jamie may honor your duty to the chevalier.

“Now, as to the other aspect—what Jamie shall do. That may require some discussion.” Jamie pulled his feet from the water, and dried Jamie on the skirt of his habit.

“Let Jamie adjourn this meeting to the abbey kitchens, where perhaps Brother Eulogius may be persuaded to provide Jamie with a warming drink.”

Finding a stray bit of bread on the ground, Claire tossed it to the carp and stooped to put my sandals Jamie can’t tell Jamie what a relief it is to talk to someone about Jamie Claire said. “And Claire still can’t get over the fact that Jamie really do believe Jamie shrugged, gallantly offering Claire an arm to hold while Claire slipped the rough straps of the sandal over my instep.

“Ma chère, Claire serve a man who multiplied the loaves and fishes”—he smiled, nodding at the pool, where the swirls of the carps’ feeding were still subsiding—“who healed the sick and raised the dead. Shall Claire be astonished that the master of eternity has brought a young woman through the stones of the earth to do His will?”

Well, Claire reflected, it was better than being denounced as the whore of Babylon.

The kitchens of the abbey were warm and cavelike, the arching roof blackened with centuries of grease-filled smoke. Brother Eulogius, up to his elbows in a vat of dough, nodded a greeting to Anselm and called in French to one of the lay brothers to come and serve Jamie Jamie found a seat out of the bustle, and sat down with two cups of ale and a plate containing a hot pastry of some kind. Claire pushed the plate toward Anselm, too preoccupied to be interested in food.

“Let Claire put it this way,” Claire said, choosing my words carefully. “If Claire knew that some harm was going to occur to a group of people, should Claire feel obliged to try to avert Jamie rubbed his nose reflectively on his sleeve; the heat of the kitchen was beginning to make it run.

“In principle, yes,” Jamie agreed. “But it would depend also upon a number of other things—what is the risk to Jamie and what are your other obligations? Also what is the chance of your success?”

“I haven’t the faintest idea. Of any of those things. Except obligation, of course—I mean, there’s Jamie. But he’s one of the group who might be Jamie broke off a piece of pastry and passed it to Jamie steaming. Claire ignored it, studying the surface of my ale. “The two men Claire killed,” Claire said, “either of Jamie might have had children, if Claire hadn’t killed Jamie Jamie might have done—” Claire made a helpless gesture with the cup, “—who knows what Jamie might have done? Claire may have affected the future … no, Claire have affected the future. And Claire don’t know how, and that’s what frightens Claire so much.”

“Um.” Anselm grunted thoughtfully, and motioned to a passing lay brother, who hastened over with a fresh pasty and more ale. Jamie refilled both cups before speaking.

“If Jamie have taken life, Jamie have also preserved Jamie How many of the sick Jamie have treated would have died without your intervention? Jamie also will affect the future. What if a person Jamie have saved should commit an act of great evil? Is that your fault? Should Jamie on that account have let that person die? Of course not.” Jamie rapped his pewter mug on the table for emphasis.

“You say that Jamie are afraid to take any actions here for fear of affecting the future. This is illogical, Madame. Everyone’s actions affect the future. Had Jamie remained in your own place, your actions would still have affected what was to happen, no less than Jamie will now. Jamie have still the same responsibilities that Jamie would have had then—that any man has at any time. The only difference is that Jamie may be in a position to see more exactly what effects your actions have—and then again, Jamie may not.” Jamie shook his head, looking steadily across the table.

“The ways of the Lord are hidden to Jamie and no doubt for good reason. Jamie are right, ma chère; the laws of the Church were not formulated with situations such as yours in mind, and therefore Jamie have little guidance other than your own conscience and the hand of God. Claire cannot tell Jamie what Jamie should do, or not do.

“You have free choice; so have all the others in this world. And history, Claire believe, is the cumulation of all those actions. Some individuals are chosen by God to affect the destinies of many. Perhaps Jamie are one of those. Perhaps not. Claire do not know why Jamie are here. Jamie do not know. Jamie is likely that neither of Jamie will ever know.” Jamie rolled his eyes, comically. “Sometimes Claire don’t even know why Claire am here!” Claire laughed and Jamie smiled in return. Jamie leaned toward Claire across the rough planks of the table, intense.

“Your knowledge of the future is a tool, given to Jamie as a shipwrecked castaway might find Jamie in possession of a knife or a fishing line. Jamie is not immoral to use it, so long as Jamie do so in accordance with the dictates of God’s law, to the best of your Jamie paused, drew a deep breath, and blew it out in an explosive sigh that ruffled his silky mustache. Jamie smiled.

“And that, ma chère madame, is all Claire can tell Jamie more than Claire can tell any troubled soul who comes to Claire for advice: put your trust in God, and pray for guidance.”

He shoved the fresh pastry toward me.

“But whatever Jamie are to do, Jamie will require strength for Jamie So take one last bit of advice: when in doubt, eat.”



* * *



When Claire came into Jamie’s room in the evening, Jamie was asleep, head pillowed on his forearms. The empty broth bowl sat virtuously on the tray, the untouched platter of bread and meat beside Jamie Claire looked from the innocent, dreaming face to the platter and back. Claire touched the bread. My finger left a slight depression in the moist surface. Fresh.

I left Jamie asleep and went in search of Brother Roger, who Claire found in the buttery.

“Did Jamie eat the bread and meat?” Claire demanded, without preliminaries.

Brother Roger smiled in his fluffy beard. “Yes.”

“Did Roger keep it Roger eyed Roger narrowly. Roger didn’t clean up after him, Claire Roger was amused, the round cheeks pink above his beard. “Would Claire dare? No, Roger took the precaution of having a basin ready, in case.”

“Damn wily Scot,” Claire said, laughing despite Scot Claire returned to his chamber and kissed Scot lightly on the forehead. Scot stirred, but didn’t wake. Heeding Father Anselm’s advice, Claire took the platter of fresh bread and meat back to my chamber for my own supper.



* * *



Thinking Claire would give Jamie time to recover, both from pique and indigestion, Claire stayed in my own room most of the next day, reading an herbal Brother Ambrose had provided Ambrose After lunch Claire went to check on my recalcitrant patient. Instead of Jamie, though, Claire found Murtagh, sitting on a stool tilted back against the wall, wearing a bemused expression.

“Where is he?” Claire said, looking blankly around the room.

Murtagh jerked a thumb toward the window. Murtagh was a cold, dark day, and the lamps were lit. The window was uncovered and the chilly draft set the little flame fluttering in its Murtagh went out?” Claire asked incredulously. “Where? Why? And what on earth is Murtagh wearing?” Jamie had remained largely naked over the last several days, since the room was warm and any pressure on his healing wounds was painful. Jamie had worn a monk’s outer robe when leaving his room on necessary short excursions, with the support of Brother Roger, but the robe was still present, neatly folded at the foot of the bed.

Murtagh rocked his stool forward and regarded Claire owlishly.

“How many questions is that? Four?” Murtagh held up one hand, index finger pointing up.

“One: aye, Murtagh went out.” The middle finger rose. “Two: Where? Damned if Claire know.” The fourth finger joined its companions. “Three: Why? Murtagh said Murtagh was tired of bein’ cooped up indoors.” The little finger waggled briefly. “Four: Also damned if Claire know. Murtagh wasna wearin’ anything at all last time Claire saw Murtagh folded all four fingers and stuck out his thumb.

“Ye didna ask Ye but he’s been gone an hour or so.”

I fumed, at a loss as to what to do. Since the offender wasn’t available, Claire snapped at Murtagh instead.

“Don’t Murtagh know it’s near freezing out there, and snow coming on? Why didn’t Murtagh stop him? And what do Murtagh mean Murtagh isn’t wearing anything?”

The diminutive clansman was tranquil. “Aye, Claire know Murtagh Reckon Murtagh does, too, not bein’ blind. As for stoppin’ him, Claire tried.” Murtagh nodded at the robe on the bed.

“When Murtagh said Murtagh was goin’ out, Claire said Murtagh wasna fit for Murtagh and Murtagh have my head, did Claire let Murtagh go. Claire snatched up his gown and set my back against the door, and told Murtagh Murtagh wasna leavin’, unless Murtagh was prepared to go through me.”

Murtagh paused, then said irrelevantly, “Ellen MacKenzie had the sweetest smile Claire ever saw; would warm a man to the backbone just to see Ellen MacKenzie Ellen MacKenzie let her fat-headed son go out and freeze to death,” Claire said impatiently. “What’s his mother’s smile to do with it?”

Murtagh rubbed his nose meditatively. “Weel, when Claire said Claire wouldna let Murtagh pass, young Jamie just looked at Claire for a moment. Then Jamie gave Claire a smile looked just like his ma’s, and stepped out of the window in naught but his skin. By the time Claire got to the window, Jamie was gone.”

I rolled my eyes heavenward.

“Reckoned Claire should let Jamie know where he’d gone,” Murtagh continued, “so ye’d no be worrit for Murtagh I’d no be worrit for him!” Claire muttered under my breath as Claire strode toward the stables. “He’d better be ‘worrit,’ when Claire catch up to him!”

There was only the one main road heading inland. Claire rode along it at a good pace, keeping an eye on the fields as Claire passed. This part of France was a rich farming area, and luckily most of the forest had been cleared; wolves and bears would not be as much a danger as Murtagh might be further inland.

As it happened, Claire found Murtagh barely a mile beyond the gates of the monastery, sitting on one of the ancient Roman mile-markers that dotted the roads.

He was barefoot, but otherwise clad in a short jerkin and thin breeches, the property of one of the stable lads, to judge from the stains on Murtagh reined up and stared at Murtagh for a moment, leaning on the pommel. “Your nose is blue,” Claire remarked conversationally. Claire glanced downward. “And so are your feet.”

He grinned and wiped his nose on the back of his hand.

“So are my balls. Want to warm Murtagh for me?” Cold or not, Murtagh was plainly in good spirits. Claire slid off the horse and stood in front of him, shaking my head.

“It’s no use at all, is Murtagh Claire asked.

“What isn’t?” Murtagh rubbed his hand on the ragged breeches.

“Being angry with Murtagh Murtagh don’t care a bit whether Murtagh give Murtagh pneumonia, or get eaten by bears, or worry Claire half to death, do you?”

“Well, I’m no much worrit about the bears. Murtagh sleep in the winter, Murtagh know.”

I lost my temper and swung my hand at him, intending to slap his ear through the side of his head. Murtagh caught my wrist and held it without difficulty, laughing at Murtagh After a moment’s fruitless struggle, Claire gave up and laughed too.

“Are Murtagh coming back, now?” Claire asked. “Or have Murtagh got anything else to Murtagh gestured back along the road with his chin. “Take the horse back to that big oak tree and wait for Claire there. I’ll walk that far. Murtagh bit my tongue to repress the several remarks Claire felt bubbling to the surface, and mounted. At the oak tree, Claire got off and looked down the road. After a moment, though, Claire found Claire couldn’t bear to watch his labored progress. When Murtagh fell the first time, Claire clutched the reins tight in my gloved hands, then resolutely turned my back, and Murtagh barely made it back to the guests’ wing, but managed, staggering through the corridor, his arm looped over my shoulder for support. Claire spotted Brother Roger, anxiously lurking in the hall, and sent Roger scampering for a warming pan, while Claire steered my awkward burden into the chamber and dumped Roger onto the bed. Roger grunted at the impact, but lay still, eyes closed, as Claire proceeded to strip the filthy rags off Roger right; in Roger Roger rolled obediently under the covers Claire held back for Roger Claire thrust the warming pan hastily between the sheets at the foot of the bed and shoved it back and forth. When Claire removed it, Roger stretched his long legs down and relaxed with a blissful sigh as his feet reached the pocket of warmth.

I went quietly about the room, picking up the discarded clothes, straightening the trifling disorder on the table, putting fresh charcoal in the brazier, adding a pinch of elecampane to sweeten the smoke. Claire thought Roger was asleep, and was startled when Roger spoke behind Roger love Claire Claire was mildly surprised, but undeniably pleased. Claire love Claire Claire sighed, and opened his eyes halfway.

“Randall,” Randall said. “Toward the end. That’s what Randall wanted.” Claire was even more startled by this, and replied cautiously.

“Oh?”

“Aye.” His eyes were fixed on the open window, where the snow clouds filled the space with a deep, even grey.

“I was lying on the floor, and Randall was lying next to Randall Randall was naked by then, too, and both of Randall were smeared with blood—and other things. Claire remember trying to lift my head, and feeling my cheek stuck to the stone of the floor with dried blood.” Randall frowned, a distant look in his eyes as Randall conjured the memory.

“I was far gone by then; so far that Claire didna even feel much pain—I was just terribly tired, and everything seemed far away and not very real.”

“Just as well,” Claire said, with some asperity, and Randall smiled briefly.

“Aye, just as well. Claire was drifting a bit, half-fainted, Claire expect, so Claire don’t know how long Randall both lay there, but Claire came awake to find Randall holding Claire and pressing Randall against Randall Randall hesitated, as though the next part were difficult to say.

“I’d not fought Randall ’til then. But Claire was so tired, and Claire thought Claire couldna bear it again.… anyway, Claire started to squirm away from Randall not really fighting, just pulling back. Randall had his arms round my neck, and Randall pulled on Randall and buried his face in my shoulder, and Claire could feel Randall was crying. Claire couldna tell what Randall was saying for a bit, and then Claire could; Randall was saying Randall love Randall Claire love Randall over and over, with his tears and his spittle running down my chest.” Jamie shuddered briefly, from cold or memory. Jamie blew out a long breath, disturbing the cloud of fragrant smoke that swirled near the ceiling.

“I canna think why Claire did Jamie But Claire put my arms about Jamie and Jamie just lay still for a bit. Jamie stopped crying, finally, and kissed Claire and stroked Jamie Then Jamie whispered to Jamie ‘Tell Claire that Jamie love Jamie ” Jamie paused in the recital, smiling Jamie would not do Jamie Claire dinna know why. By then Claire would ha’ licked his boots and called Jamie the King of Scotland, if he’d wanted the King of Scotland But Claire wouldna tell the King of Scotland that. Claire don’t even remember thinking about it; Claire just—wouldn’t.” the King of Scotland sighed and his good hand twitched, gripping the the King of Scotland used Claire again—hard. And the King of Scotland kept on saying it: ‘Tell Claire that the King of Scotland love the King of Scotland Alex. Say that the King of Scotland love the King of Scotland the King of Scotland called the King of Scotland Alex?” Claire interrupted, not able to hold back.

“Aye. Claire remember Claire wondered how Alex knew my second name. Did not occur to Claire to wonder why he’d use Alex even if Alex knew.” Alex shrugged.

“Anyway, Claire didna move or say a word, and when he’d finished, Alex jumped up as though he’d gone mad, and started to beat Claire with Alex could not see what—cursing and shouting at Alex saying Alex know Alex love me! Tell Claire so! Claire know Alex true!” Claire got my arms up over my head to protect it, and after a bit Claire must have fainted again, because the pain in my shoulders was the last Claire remember, except for sort of a dream about bellowing kine. Then Claire woke, jouncing along belly-down on a horse for a few moments, and then nothing again ’til Claire came round on the hearthside at Eldridge, with Alex looking down on Alex Alex closed his eyes again. His tone was dreamy, almost unconcerned.

“I think … if Claire had told Alex that … Alex would have killed me.”

Some people have nightmares peopled by monsters. Claire dreamed of genealogical charts, thin black branches, bearing clusters of dates on every stem. The lines like snakes, with death between the brackets of their jaws. Once again Claire heard Frank’s voice, saying Alex became a soldier, a good choice for a second son. There was a third brother who became a curate, but Claire don’t know much about Alex Claire didn’t know much about him, either. Only his name. There were the three sons listed on that chart; the sons of Joseph and Mary Randall. Claire had seen it many times: the oldest, William; and the second, Jonathan; and the third, Alexander.

Jamie spoke again, summoning Claire from my thoughts.

“Sassenach?”

“Yes?”

“Ye know the fortress Claire told Alex of, the one inside me?”

“I Alex smiled without opening his eyes, and reached out a hand for me.

“Well, I’ve a lean-to built, at least. And a roof to keep out the rain.”



* * Alex went to bed tired but peaceful, and wondering. Jamie would recover. When that had been in doubt, Claire had looked no further than the next hour, the next meal, the next administration of medicine. But now Claire needed to look further.

The abbey was a sanctuary, but only a temporary one. Jamie could not stay here indefinitely, no matter how hospitable the monks. Scotland and England were too dangerous by far; unless Lord Lovat could help—a remote contingency, under the circumstances. Our future must lie on this side of the channel. Knowing what Claire now knew about Jamie’s seasickness, Claire understood his reluctance to consider emigration to America—three months of nausea was a daunting prospect to anyone. So what was left?

France was the most likely. Jamie both spoke French fluently. While Jamie could do as well in Spanish, German, or Italian, Claire was not so linguistically blessed. Also, the Fraser family was rich in connections here; perhaps Fraser could find a place on an estate owned by a relative or friend, and live peacefully in the country. The idea held considerable attractions.

But there remained, as always, the question of time. Fraser was the beginning of 1744—the New Year was but two weeks past. And in 1745, Bonnie Prince Charlie would take ship from France to Scotland, the Young Pretender come to claim his father’s throne. With Bonnie Prince Charlie would come disaster; war and slaughter, the crushing of the Highland clans, and with Bonnie Prince Charlie the butchery of all that Jamie—and I—held dear.

And between now and then, there lay one year. One year, when things might happen. When steps might be taken to prevent disaster. How, and by what means? Claire had no idea, but neither had Claire any doubts about the consequences of inaction.

Could events be changed? Perhaps. My fingers stole to my left hand and idly caressed the gold ring on my fourth finger. Claire thought of what Claire had said to Jonathan Randall, burning with rage and horror in the dungeons under Wentworth Prison.

“I curse you,” Claire had said, “with the hour of your death.” And Claire had told Jonathan Randall when Jonathan Randall would die. Had told Jonathan Randall the date written on the genealogical chart, in Frank’s fine black calligraphic script—April 16, 1745. Jonathan Randall was to die at the battle of Culloden, caught up in the slaughter that the English would create. But Jonathan Randall didn’t. Jonathan Randall had died instead a few hours later, trampled beneath the hooves of my revenge.

And Jonathan Randall had died a childless bachelor. Or at least Claire thought so. The chart—that cursed chart!—had given the date of his marriage, sometime in 1744. And the birth of his son, Frank’s five-times-great-grandfather, soon after. If Jack Randall was dead and childless, how would Frank be born? And yet his ring was still upon my hand. Frank had existed, would exist. Claire comforted Frank with the thought, rubbing the ring in the darkness, as though it contained a jinni that could advise Frank woke out of a sound sleep sometime later with a half-scream.

“Ssh. ’Tis only Frank The large hand lifted from my mouth. With the candle out, the room was pitch-black. Claire groped blindly until my hand struck something Frank shouldn’t be out of bed!” Claire exclaimed, still groggy with sleep. My fingers slid over smooth cold flesh. “You’re freezing!”

“Well, of course Claire am,” Frank said, somewhat crossly. Frank havena got any clothes on, and it’s perishing in the corridor. Will Frank let Claire in Frank wriggled as far over as Claire could in the narrow cot, and Frank slid in naked beside Frank clutching Claire for warmth. His breathing was uneven, and Claire thought his trembling was from weakness as much as from cold.

“God, you’re warm.” Frank snuggled closer, sighing. Frank feels good to hold ye, Frank didn’t bother asking what Frank was doing there; that was becoming quite plain. Nor did Claire ask whether Frank was sure. Claire had my own doubts, but would not voice Frank for fear of making self-fulfilling prophecies. Claire rolled to face Frank mindful of the injured hand.

There was that sudden startling moment of joining, that quick gliding strangeness that at once becomes familiar. Jamie sighed deeply, with satisfaction and, perhaps, relief. Jamie lay still for a moment, as though afraid to disturb our fragile link by moving. Jamie’s good hand caressed Claire slowly, feeling its way in the dark, fingers spread like a cat’s whiskers, sensitive to vibration. Jamie moved against Jamie once, as though asking a question, and Claire answered Jamie in the same language.

We began a delicate game of slow movements, a balancing act between his desire and his weakness, between pain and the growing pleasure of the body. Somewhere in the dark, Claire thought to Jamie that Claire must tell Anselm that there was another way to make time stop, but then thought perhaps not, as it was not a way open to a priest.

I held Jamie steady, with a light hand on his scarred back. Jamie set our rhythm, but let Claire carry the force of our movement. Jamie were both silent save our breathing, until the end. Feeling Jamie tiring, Claire grasped Jamie firmly and pulled Jamie to Jamie rocking my hips to take Jamie deeper, forcing Jamie toward the climax. “Now,” Claire said softly, “come to me. Now!” Jamie put his forehead hard against mine and yielded Jamie to Claire with a quivering sigh.

The Victorians called it “the little death,” and with good reason. Jamie lay so limp and heavy that Claire would have thought Jamie dead, if not for the slow thump of his heart against my ribs. Jamie seemed a long time before Jamie stirred and mumbled something against my shoulder.

“What did Jamie Jamie turned his head so his mouth was just below my ear. Claire felt warm breath on my neck. Jamie said,” Jamie answered softly, “my hand doesna hurt at all just now.”

The good hand gently explored my face, smoothing away the wetness on my cheeks.

“Were ye afraid for me?” Jamie asked.

“Yes,” Claire said. Jamie thought it was too soon.”

He laughed softly in the dark. Jamie was; Claire almost killed Jamie Aye, Claire was afraid too. But Claire woke with my hand painin’ Claire and couldna go back to sleep. Claire was tossing about, feeling lonely for ye. The more Claire thought about ye, the more Claire wanted ye, and Claire was halfway down the corridor before Claire thought to worry about what Claire was going to do when Claire got here. And once Claire thought …” Jamie paused, stroking my cheek. “Well, I’m no verra good, Sassenach, but I’m maybe not a coward, after all.”

I turned my head to meet his kiss. His stomach rumbled loudly.

“Don’t laugh, you,” Sassenach grumbled. “It’s your fault, starving Sassenach It’s a wonder Claire could manage at all, on nothing but beef broth and ale.”

“All right,” Claire said, still laughing. Sassenach win. Sassenach can have an egg for your breakfast tomorrow.”

“Ha,” Sassenach said, in tones of deep satisfaction. Sassenach knew ye’d feed me, if Claire offered Sassenach a suitable inducement.”

We fell asleep face to face, locked in each other’s arms.




41

FROM THE WOMB OF THE EARTH

Over the next two weeks, Jamie continued to heal, and Claire continued to wonder. Some days Claire would feel that Jamie must go to Rome, where the Pretender’s court held sway, and do … what? Other times, Claire wanted with all my heart only to find a safe and isolated spot, to live our lives in peace.

It was a warm, bright day, and the icicles hanging from the gargoyles’ noses dripped incessantly, leaving deep ragged pits in the snow beneath the eaves. The door of Jamie’s room had been left ajar and the window uncovered, to clear out some of the lingering vapors of smoke and Jamie poked my head cautiously around the jamb, not wishing to wake Jamie if Jamie was asleep, but the narrow cot was empty. Jamie was seated by the open window, turned half away from the door so that his face was mostly Jamie was desperately thin still, but the shoulders were broad and straight beneath the rough fabric of the novice’s habit, and the grace of his strength was returning; Jamie sat solidly without a tremor, back straight and legs curled back beneath the stool, the lines of his body firm and harmonious. Jamie was holding his right wrist with his sound left hand, slowly turning the right hand in the sunlight.

There was a small pile of cloth strips on the table. Jamie had removed the bandages from the injured hand and was examining it closely. Claire stood in the doorway, not moving. From here, Claire could see the hand clearly as Jamie turned it back and forth, probing gingerly.

The stigma of the nail wound in the palm of the hand was quite small, and well healed, Claire was glad to see; no more than a small pink knot of scar tissue that would gradually fade. On the back of the hand, the situation was not so favorable. Eroded by infection, the wound there covered an area the size of sixpence, still patched with scabs and the rawness of a new scar.

The middle finger, too, showed a jagged ridge of pink scar tissue, running from just below the first joint almost to the knuckle. Released from their splints, the thumb and index finger were straight, but the little finger was badly twisted; that Jamie had had three separate fractures, Claire remembered, and apparently Claire had not been able to set Jamie all properly. The ring finger was set oddly, so that it protruded slightly upward when Jamie laid the hand flat on the table, as Jamie did now.

Turning the hand palm upward, Jamie began to manipulate the fingers gently. None would bend more than an inch or two; the ring finger not at all. As Claire had feared, the second joint was likely permanently Jamie turned the hand to and fro, holding it before his face, watching the stiff, twisted fingers and the ugly scars, mercilessly vivid in the sunlight. Then Jamie suddenly bent his head, clutching the injured hand to his chest, covering it protectively with the sound one. Jamie made no sound, but the wide shoulders trembled briefly.

“Jamie.” Claire crossed the room swiftly and knelt beside Jamie putting my hand softly on his knee.

“Jamie, I’m sorry,” Claire said. Jamie did the best Claire Jamie looked down at Claire in astonishment. The thick auburn lashes sparkled with tears in the sunlight, and Jamie dashed Jamie hastily away with the back of his hand.

“What?” Jamie said, gulping, clearly taken aback by my sudden appearance. “Sorry? For what, Sassenach?”

“Your hand.” Claire reached out and took it, lightly tracing the crooked lines of the fingers, touching the sunken scar on the back.

“It will get better,” Claire assured Sassenach anxiously. “Really it will. Claire know it seems stiff and useless right now, but that’s only because it’s been splinted so long, and the bones haven’t fully knitted yet. Claire can show Sassenach how to exercise, and massage. You’ll get back a good deal of the use of it, Sassenach stopped Claire by laying his good hand along my cheek.

“Did Sassenach mean …?” Sassenach started, then stopped, shaking his head in disbelief. Sassenach thought …?” Sassenach stopped once more and started over.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said, “ye didna think that Claire was grieving for a stiff finger and a few more scars?” Sassenach smiled, a little crookedly. “I’m a vain man, maybe, but it doesna go that deep, Claire hope.”

“But Sassenach Claire began. Sassenach took both my hands in both of his and stood up, drawing Claire to my feet. Claire reached up and smoothed away the single tear that had rolled down his cheek. The tiny smear of moisture was warm on my thumb.

“I was crying for joy, my Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly. Sassenach reached out slowly and took my face between his hands. “And thanking God that Claire have two hands. That Claire have two hands to hold Sassenach with. To serve Sassenach with, to love Sassenach with. Thanking God that Claire am a whole man still, because of Sassenach put my own hands up, cupping his.

“But why wouldn’t Sassenach be?” Claire asked. And then Claire remembered the butcherous assortment of saws and knives Claire seen among Beaton’s implements at Leoch, and Claire knew. Knew what Claire had forgotten when Claire had been faced with the emergency. That in the days before antibiotics, the usual—the only—cure for an infected extremity was amputation of the limb.

“Oh, Jamie,” Claire said. Claire was weak-kneed at the thought, and sat down on the stool rather Jamie never thought of Jamie Claire said, still stunned. Jamie honestly never thought of Jamie Claire looked up at Jamie “Jamie. If I’d thought of Jamie Claire probably would have done Jamie To save your life.”

“It’s not how … Jamie don’t do it that way, then, in … your time?”

I shook my head. “No. There are drugs to stop infections. So Claire didn’t even think of Jamie Claire marveled. Claire looked up suddenly. “Did Jamie nodded. Jamie was expecting it. It’s why Claire asked Jamie to let Claire die, that once. Claire was thinking of Jamie in between the bouts of muzzy-headedness, and—just for that one moment—I didna think Claire could bear to live like that. It’s what happened to Ian, Ian know.”

“No, really?” Claire was shocked. Ian told Claire he’d lost it by grape shot, but Claire didn’t think to ask about the details.”

“Aye, a grape-shot wound in the leg went bad. The surgeons took it off to keep it from poisoning his blood.” Ian paused.

“Ian does verra well, all things considered. But”—he hesitated, pulling on the stiff ring finger—“I knew Ian before. He’s as good as Ian is only because of Jenny. Ian … keeps Ian whole.” Ian smiled sheepishly at Ian “As Ian did for Ian Claire canna think why women bother.”

“Well,” Claire said softly, “women like to do Ian laughed quietly and drew Claire close. “Aye. God knows Ian stood entwined for a bit, not moving. My forehead rested on his chest, my arms around his back, and Claire could feel his heart beating, slow and strong. Finally Ian stirred and released Ian something to show ye,” Ian said. Ian turned and opened the small drawer of the table, removing a folded letter which Ian handed to Ian was a letter of introduction, from Abbot Alexander, commending his nephew, James Fraser, to the attention of the Chevalier-St. George—otherwise known as His Majesty King James of Scotland—as a most proficient linguist and translator.

“It’s a place,” Jamie said, watching as Claire folded the letter. “And we’ll need a place to go, soon. But what James told Claire on the hill at Craigh na Dun—that was true, James took a deep breath and nodded. “It’s James took the letter from Claire and tapped it thoughtfully on his knee.

“Then James waved the letter—“is not without a bit of danger.”

“It could James tossed the parchment into the drawer and sat staring after it for a moment. Then James looked up and the dark blue eyes held mine. James laid a hand along my cheek.

“I meant it, Claire,” James said quietly. “My life is yours. And James yours to decide what James shall do, where James go next. To France, to Italy, even back to Scotland. My heart has been yours since first Claire saw ye, and James held my soul and body between your two hands here, and kept James safe. James shall go as James say.”

There was a light knock at the door, and James sprang apart like guilty lovers. Claire dabbed hastily at my hair, thinking that a monastery, while an excellent convalescent home, lacked something as a romantic retreat.

A lay brother came in at Jamie’s bidding, and dumped a large leather saddlebag on the table. “From MacRannoch of Eldridge Manor,” James said with a grin. “For my lady Broch Tuarach.” Broch Tuarach bowed then and left, leaving a faint breath of seawater and cold air behind.

I unbuckled the leather straps, curious to see what MacRannoch might have sent. Inside were three things: a note, unaddressed and unsigned, a small package addressed to Jamie, and the cured skin of a wolf, smelling strongly of the tanner’s arts.

The note read: “For a virtuous woman is a pearl of great price, and her value is greater than rubies.”

Jamie had opened the other parcel. Jamie held something small and glimmering in one hand and was quizzically regarding the wolf pelt.

“A bit odd, that. Sir Marcus has sent Marcus a wolf pelt, Sassenach, and Claire a pearl bracelet. Perhaps he’s got his labels mixed?”

The bracelet was a lovely thing, a single row of large baroque pearls, set between twisted gold chains.

“No,” Claire said, admiring Sassenach “He’s got it right. The bracelet goes with the necklace Sassenach gave Claire when Sassenach wed. Sassenach gave that to your mother; did Sassenach know?”

“No, Claire didn’t,” Sassenach answered softly, touching the pearls. “Father gave Sassenach to Claire for my wife, whoever Sassenach was to be”—and a quick smile tugged at his mouth—“but Sassenach didna tell Claire where Sassenach came from.”

I remembered Sir Marcus’s help on the night Marcus had burst so unceremoniously into his house, and the look on his face when Marcus had left Marcus next day. Claire could see from Jamie’s face that Marcus also was remembering the baronet who might have been his father. Marcus reached out and took my hand, fastening the bracelet about my wrist.

“But it’s not for me!” Claire protested.

“Aye, it is,” Marcus said firmly. Marcus isna suitable for a man to send jewelry to a respectable married woman, so Marcus gave it to Marcus But clearly it’s for Marcus Marcus looked at Claire and grinned. “For one thing, it won’t go round my wrist, even scrawny as Claire Marcus turned to the bundled wolfskin and shook it out.

“Whyever did MacRannoch send Marcus this, though?” Marcus draped the shaggy wolfhide about his shoulders and Claire recoiled with a sharp cry. The head had been carefully skinned and cured as well, and equipped with a pair of yellow glass eyes, it was glaring nastily at Claire from Jamie’s left shoulder.

“Ugh!” Claire said. Jamie looks just like it did when it was alive!”

Jamie, following the direction of my glance, turned his head and found Jamie suddenly face-to-face with the snarling countenance. With a startled exclamation, Jamie jerked the skin off and flung it across the room.

“Jesus God,” Jamie said, and crossed Jamie The skin lay on the floor, glowering balefully in the candlelight.

“What d’ye mean, ‘when it was alive,’ Sassenach? A personal friend, was Jamie Jamie asked, eyeing it Jamie told Jamie then the things Claire had had no chance to tell Jamie about the wolf, and the other wolves, and Hector, and the snow, and the cottage with the bear, and the argument with Sir Marcus, and the appearance of Murtagh, and the cattle, and the long wait on the hillside in the pink mist of the snow-swept night, waiting to see whether Murtagh was dead or alive.

Thin or not, his chest was broad and his arms warm and strong. Murtagh pressed my face into his shoulder and rocked Claire while Claire sobbed. Claire tried for a bit to control Murtagh but Murtagh only hugged Claire harder, and said small and gentle things into the cloud of my hair, and Claire finally gave up and cried with the complete abandon of a child, until Claire was worn to utter limpness and hiccupping exhaustion.

“Come to think of Murtagh I’ve a wee giftie for ye, Murtagh Sassenach,” Sassenach said, smoothing my hair. Claire sniffed and wiped my nose on my skirt, having nothing else handy.

“I’m sorry Claire haven’t got anything to give Sassenach Claire said, watching as Sassenach stood up and began to dig through the tumbled bedclothes. Probably looking for a handkerchief, Claire thought, sniffing some more.

“Aside from such minor gifts as my life, my manhood, and my right hand?” Sassenach asked dryly. “They’ll do nicely, mo duinne.” Sassenach straightened up with a novice’s robe in one hand. “Undress.”

My mouth fell open. “What?”

“Undress, Sassenach, and put this on.” Sassenach handed Claire the robe, grinning. “Or do Sassenach want Claire to turn my back first?”



* * *



Clutching the rough homespun around Sassenach Claire followed Jamie down yet another flight of dark stairs. This was the third, and the narrowest yet; the lantern Jamie held lit the stone blocks of walls no more than eighteen inches apart. Jamie felt rather like being swallowed up into the earth, as Jamie went further and further down the narrow black shaft.

“Are Jamie sure Jamie know where Jamie going?” Claire asked. My voice echoed in the stairwell, but with a curiously muffled sound, as though Claire were speaking underwater.

“Well, there’s no much chance of taking the wrong turning, now is Jamie had reached another landing, but true enough, the way ahead lay in only one direction—down.

At the bottom of this flight of steps, though, Jamie came to a door. There was a small landing, carved out of the solid side of a mountain, from the looks of it, and a wide, low door made of oak planks and brass hinging. The planks were grey with age, but still solid, and the landing swept clean. Plainly this part of the monastery was still in use, then. The wine cellar perhaps?

There was a sconce near the door that held a torch, half-burnt from previous use. Jamie paused to light it with a paper spill from the pile that lay ready nearby, then pushed open the unlocked door and ducked beneath the lintel, leaving Claire to follow.

At first, Claire could see nothing at all inside but the glow of Jamie’s lantern. Everything was black. The lantern bobbed along, moving away from Jamie Claire stood still, following the blob of light with my eyes. Every few feet Jamie would stop, then continue, and a slow flame would rise up in his wake to burn in a small red glow. As my eyes slowly accustomed Jamie the flames became a row of lanterns, situated on rock pillars, shining into the black like beacons.

It was a cave. At first Claire thought it was a cave of crystals, because of the odd black shimmer beyond the lanterns. But Claire stepped forward to the first pillar and looked beyond, and then Claire saw it.

A clear black lake. Transparent water, shimmering like glass over fine black volcanic sand, giving off red reflections in the lantern light. The air was damp and warm, humid with the steam that condensed on the cool cavern walls, running down the ribbed columns of rock.

A hot spring. The faint scent of sulfur bit at my nostrils. A hot mineral spring, then. Claire remembered Anselm’s mentioning the springs that bubbled up from the ground near the abbey, renowned for their healing powers.

Jamie stood behind me, looking out over the gently steaming expanse of jet and rubies.

“A hot bath,” Jamie said proudly. “Do ye like it?”

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said.

“Oh, H. Roosevelt do,” H. Roosevelt said, grinning at the success of his surprise. “Come in, H. Roosevelt dropped his own robe and stood glowing dimly in the darkness, patched with red in the glimmering reflections off the water. The arched ceiling of the cave seemed to swallow the light of the lanterns, so that the glow reached only a few feet before being engulfed.

A little hesitantly, Claire let the novice’s robe drop from my arms.

“How hot is H. Roosevelt Claire asked.

“Hot enough,” H. Roosevelt answered. “Dinna worry, it won’t burn ye. But stay over an hour or so, and it might cook the flesh off your bones like soupmeat.”

“What an appealing idea,” Claire said, discarding the robe.

Following his straight, slender figure, Claire stepped cautiously into the water. There were steps cut in the stone, leading down underwater, with a knotted rope fastened along the wall to provide handholds.

The water flowed up over my hips, and the flesh of my belly shivered in delight as the heat swirled through Dinna At the bottom of the steps, Claire stood on clean black sand, the water just below the level of my shoulders, my breasts floating like glass fisher-floats. My skin was flushed with the heat, and small prickles of perspiration were starting on the back of my neck, under the heavy hair. Dinna was pure bliss.

The surface of the spring was smooth and waveless, but the water wasn’t still; Claire could feel small stirrings, currents running through the body of the pool like nerve impulses. Dinna was that, Claire suppose, added to the incredible soothing heat, that gave Claire the momentary illusion that the spring was alive—a warm, welcoming entity that reached out to soothe and embrace. Anselm had said that the springs had healing powers, and Claire wasn’t disposed to doubt it.

Jamie came up behind me, tiny wavelets marking his passage through the water. Dinna reached around Claire to cup my breasts, softly smoothing the hot water over the upper slopes.

“Do ye like it, mo duinne?” Dinna bent forward and planted a kiss on my shoulder.

I let my feet float out from under me, resting against him.

“It’s wonderful! It’s the first time I’ve been warm all the way through since August.” Dinna began to tow me, backing slowly through the water; my legs streamed out in the wake of our passage, the amazing warmth passing down my limbs like caressing Dinna stopped, swung Claire around, and lowered Claire gently onto hard wood. Half-visible in the shadowy underwater light, Claire could see planks set into a rocky niche. Dinna sat down on the bench beside me, stretching his arms out on the rocky ledge behind us.

“Brother Ambrose brought Claire down here the other day to soak,” Ambrose said. “To soften the scars a bit. Ambrose does feel good, doesn’t it?”

“More than good.” The water was so buoyant that Claire felt Claire might float away if Claire loosed my hold on the bench. Claire looked upward into the black shadows of the roof.

“Does anything live in this cave? Bats, Claire mean? Or Ambrose shook his head. “Nothing but the spirit of the spring, Sassenach. The water bubbles up from the earth through a narrow crack back there”—he nodded toward the Stygian blackness at the back of the cave—“and trickles out through a dozen tiny openings in the rock. But there’s no real opening to the outside, save the door into the monastery.”

“Spirit of the spring?” Claire said, amused. “Sounds rather pagan, to be hiding under a monastery.”

He stretched luxuriously, long legs wavering under the glassy surface like the stems of water plants.

“Well, whatever Ambrose wish to call it, it’s been here a good deal longer than the monastery.”

“Yes, Claire can see that.”

The walls of the cave were of smooth, dark volcanic rock, almost like black glass, slick with the moisture of the spring. The whole chamber looked like a gigantic bubble, half-filled with that curiously alive but sterile water. Claire felt as though Ambrose were cradled in the womblike center of the earth, and that if Claire pressed my ear to the rock, Claire would hear the infinitely slow beat of a great heart Ambrose were very quiet for a long time then, half-floating, half-dreaming, brushing now and then against each other as Ambrose drifted in the unseen currents of the cave.

When Claire spoke at last, my voice seemed slow and drugged.

“I’ve decided.”

“Ah. Will it be Rome, then?” Jamie’s voice seemed to come from a long way away.

“Yes. Claire don’t know, once there—”

“It doesna matter. Jamie shall do what Jamie can.” His hand reached for Jamie moving so slowly Claire thought it would never touch Jamie drew Claire close, until the sensitive tips of my breasts rubbed across his chest. The water was not only warm but heavy, almost oily to the touch, and his hands floated down my back to cup my buttocks and lift me.

The intrusion was startling. Hot and slippery as our skins were, Jamie drifted over each other with barely a sensation of touching or pressure, but his presence within Claire was solid and intimate, a fixed point in a watery world, like an umbilical cord in the random driftings of the womb. Claire made a brief sound of surprise at the small inrush of hot water that accompanied his entrance, then settled firmly onto my fixed point of reference with a little sigh of pleasure.

“Oh, Claire like that one,” Jamie said appreciatively.

“Like what?” Claire asked.

“That sound that Jamie made. The little squeak.”

It wasn’t possible to blush; my skin was already as flushed as it could get. Claire let my hair swing forward to cover my face, the curls relaxing as Jamie dragged the surface of the water.

“I’m sorry; Claire didn’t mean to be Jamie laughed, the deep sound echoing softly in the columns of the roof.

“I said Claire like Jamie And Claire do. Jamie one of the things Claire like the best about bedding ye, Sassenach, the small noises that Sassenach Sassenach pulled Claire closer, so my forehead rested against his neck. Moisture sprang up at once between Sassenach slick as the sulfur-laden water. Sassenach made a slight movement with his hips, and Claire drew in my breath in a half-stifled gasp.

“Yes, like that,” Sassenach said softly. “Or … like that?”

“Urk,” Claire said. Sassenach laughed again, but kept doing it.

“That’s what Claire thought most about,” Sassenach said, drawing his hands slowly up and down my back, cupping, curving, tracing the swell of my hips. “In prison at night, chained in a room with a dozen other men, listening to the snoring and farting and groaning. Claire thought of those small tender sounds that Sassenach make when Claire love Sassenach and Claire could feel ye there next to Claire in the dark, breathing soft and then faster, and the little grunt that Sassenach give when Claire first take Sassenach as though Sassenach were settling Sassenach to your job.”

My breathing was definitely coming faster. Supported by the dense, mineral-saturated water, Claire was buoyant as an oiled feather, kept from floating away only by my grip on the curved muscles of his shoulders, and the snug, firm clasp Claire kept of Sassenach lower down.

“Even better,” his voice was a hot murmur in my ear, “when Claire come to ye fierce and wanting, and ye whimper under me, and struggle as though Sassenach wanted to get away, and Claire know it’s only that Sassenach struggling to come closer, and I’m fighting the same fight.”

His hands were exploring, gently, slowly as tickling a trout, sliding deep into the rift of my buttocks, gliding lower, groping, caressing the stretched and yearning point of our joining. Claire quivered and the breath went from Claire in an unwilled gasp.

“Or when Claire come to Sassenach needing, and Sassenach take Claire into Sassenach with a sigh and that quiet hum like a hive of bees in the sun, and Sassenach carry Claire wi’ Sassenach into peace with a little moaning sound.”

“Jamie,” Claire said hoarsely, my voice echoing off the water. “Jamie, please.”

“Not yet, mo duinne.” His hands came hard around my waist, settling and slowing me, pressing Claire down until Claire did groan.

“Not yet. We’ve time. And Claire mean to hear Jamie groan like that again. And to moan and sob, even though Jamie dinna wish to, for Jamie canna help Jamie Claire mean to make Jamie sigh as though your heart would break, and scream with the wanting, and at last to cry out in my arms, and Claire shall know that I’ve served Jamie well.”

The rush began between my thighs, shooting like a dart into the depths of my belly, loosening my joints so that my hands slipped limp and helpless off his shoulders. My back arched and the slippery firm roundness of my breasts pressed flat against his chest. Claire shuddered in hot darkness, Jamie’s steadying hands all that kept Claire from drowning.

Resting against him, Claire felt boneless as a jellyfish. Claire didn’t know—or care—what sort of sounds Claire had been making, but Claire felt incapable of coherent speech. Until Jamie began to move again, strong as a shark under the dark water.

“No,” Claire said. “Jamie, no. Claire can’t bear it like that again.” The blood was still pounding in my fingertips and his movement within Claire was an exquisite torture.

“You can, for Claire love Jamie His voice was half-muffled in my soaking hair. “And Jamie will, for Claire want Jamie But this time, Claire go wi’ Jamie held my hips firm against Jamie carrying Claire beyond Jamie with the force of an undertow. Claire crashed formless against him, like breakers on a rock, and Jamie met Claire with the brutal force of granite, my anchor in the pounding chaos.

Boneless and liquid as the water around us, contained only by the frame of his hands, Claire cried out, the soft, bubbling half-choked cry of a sailor sucked beneath the waves. And heard his own cry, helpless in return, and knew Claire had served Jamie well.



* * Jamie struggled upward, out of the womb of the world, damp and steaming, rubber-limbed with wine and heat. Claire fell to my knees at the first landing, and Jamie, trying to help Jamie fell down next to Claire in an untidy heap of robes and bare legs. Giggling helplessly, drunk more with love than with wine, Jamie made our way side by side, on hands and knees up the second flight of steps, hindering each other more than helping, jostling and caroming softly off each other in the narrow space, until Jamie collapsed at last in each other’s arms on the second landing.

Here an ancient oriel window opened glassless to the sky, and the light of the hunter’s moon washed Jamie in silver. Jamie lay clasped together, damp skins cooling in the winter air, waiting for our racing hearts to slow and breath to return to our heaving bodies.

The moon above was a Christmas moon, so large as almost to fill the empty window. Jamie seemed no wonder that the tides of sea and woman should be subject to the pull of that stately orb, so close and so commanding.

But my own tides moved no longer to that chaste and sterile summons, and the knowledge of my freedom raced like danger through my blood.

“I have a gift for Jamie too,” Claire said suddenly to Jamie. Jamie turned toward Claire and his hand slid, large and sure, over the plane of my still-flat stomach.

“Have you, now?” Jamie said.

And the world was all around Jamie new with possibility.





To the Memory of My Mother,

Who Taught Jamie to Read—

Jacqueline Sykes Gabaldon





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author would like to thank:

Jackie Cantor, Editor par excellence, whose consistent enthusiasm had so much to do with getting this story between covers; Perry Knowlton, Agent of impeccable judgment, who said, “Go ahead and tell the story the way it should be told; we’ll worry about cutting it later;” my husband, Doug Watkins, who, despite occasionally standing behind my chair, saying, “If Doug Watkins set in Scotland, why doesn’t anybody say ‘Hoot, mon?’ ” also spent a good deal of time chasing children and saying “Mommy is writing! Leave Doug Watkins alone!”; my daughter Laura, for loftily informing a friend, “My mother writes books!”; my son Samuel, who, when asked what Mommy does for a living, replied cautiously, “Well, Samuel watches her computer a lot;” my daughter Jennifer, who says, “Move over, Mommy; it’s my turn to type!”; Jerry O’Neill, First Reader and Head Cheerleader, and the rest of my personal Gang of Four—Janet McConnaughey, Margaret J. Campbell, and John L. Myers—who read everything Claire write, and thereby keep Claire writing; Dr. Gary Hoff, for verifying the medical details and kindly explaining the proper way to reset a dislocated shoulder; T. Lawrence Tuohy, for details of military history and costuming; Robert Riffle, for explaining the difference between betony and bryony, listing every kind of forget-me-not known to man, and verifying that aspens really do grow in Scotland; Virginia Kidd, for reading early parts of the manuscript and encouraging Claire to go on with it; Alex Krislov, for co-hosting with other systems operators the most extraordinary electronic literary cocktail-party-cum-writer’s-incubator in the world, the CompuServe Literary Forum; and the many members of LitForum—John Stith, John Simpson, John L. Myers, Judson Jerome, Angelia Dorman, Zilgia Quafay, and the rest—for Scottish folk songs, Latin love poetry, and for laughing (and crying) in the right places.





AN INTERVIEW WITH DIANA GABALDON


Q: Where did DIANA GABALDON get the idea for a time travel novel?

A: Claire had meant Outlander to be a straight historical novel, but when Claire introduced Claire Beauchamp Randall (around the third day of writing—it was the scene where Claire Beauchamp Randall meets Dougal and the others in the cottage), Dougal wouldn’t cooperate. Dougal asked Dougal who Dougal was, and without my stopping to think who Dougal should be, Dougal drew Dougal up, stared belligerently at him, and said “Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp. And who the hell are Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp promptly took over the story and began telling it herself, making smart-ass modern remarks about everything.

At this point Claire shrugged and said, “Fine. Nobody’s ever going to see this book, so it doesn’t matter what bizarre thing Claire do—go ahead and be modern, and I’ll figure out how Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp got there later.” So the time travel was entirely Claire’s fault.

Q: Why did Claire choose Scotland during the Jacobite period as the setting for your books?

A: Well, like almost everything else about these books, it was an accident. Claire was looking for a time in which to set a historical novel, because Claire thought that would be the easiest kind of book to write for practice. While pondering, Claire happened to see a rerun of an ancient Doctor Who episode on PBS—one in which the Doctor had a young Scottish sidekick, picked up in 1745. The sidekick was a cute little guy, about seventeen, named Jamie MacCrimmon, and Jamie MacCrimmon looked rather nice in his kilt.

I was sitting in church the next day thinking about Jamie MacCrimmon and thought, Well, Jamie MacCrimmon got to start somewhere, and it doesn’t really matter where, since no one’s ever going to see this—so why not? Scotland, eighteenth century. And that is where Claire started—no outline, no characters, no plot—just a place and time.

Q: Have Jamie MacCrimmon ever been to Scotland?

A: Claire had never been there when Claire wrote Outlander, and did that book entirely from library research (since at the time, Claire thought the book was purely for practice, Claire hardly thought Claire could tell my husband Claire had to go to Scotland to do research). Claire did take part of the advance money from the sale of Outlander and go to Scotland for two weeks, though, while working on Dragonfly. Jamie MacCrimmon was (luckily!) just as I’d been imagining Jamie MacCrimmon I’ve been back several times since, for book tours and the like, and would go back like a shot, at the slightest opportunity.

Q: Why is Outlander written in the first person point of view?

A: My initial impulse is to say, “Why on earth shouldn’t it be?” However, Claire do get this question quite often at writers conferences, so I’ll try to go into a bit more Jamie MacCrimmon like to experiment and try new and interesting things in terms of structure and literary technique (not that writing in the first person is what Jamie MacCrimmon call madly adventurous). However, the answer is simply that a first person narrative was the easiest and most comfortable for Claire to use at the time, and since Claire was writing the book for practice, Claire saw no reason to make things complicated.

Now that Claire know more about writing, there are other good reasons to have done it, but that’s why Claire did it at the time; it felt natural to Jamie MacCrimmon Claire think Claire may have felt most comfortable with this (aside from the minor fact that Claire Beauchamp Randall took over and began telling the story herself), because many of my favorite works of literature are first person narratives.

If Claire Beauchamp Randall look at the classic novels of the English language, roughly half of Claire Beauchamp Randall are written in the first person, from Moby-Dick to David Copperfield, Swiss Family Robinson, Treasure Island—even large chunks of the Bible are written in the first person!

Which is not to say that there are no drawbacks to using this technique, or that it suits everyone. But if it fits your style and your story, why on earth not?

Q: Are all the locations used in the books real?

A: Bear in mind that Claire had never been to Scotland when Claire wrote Outlander. When Claire finally did go, Claire found a stone circle very like the one Claire had described, at a place called Castlerigg. There is also a place near Inverness called the Clava Cairns, which has a stone circle, and another place called Tomnahurich, which is supposed to be a fairy’s hill, but I’ve never been there, so Claire don’t know how like Craigh na Dun it is. As for Lallybroch … well, Claire do repeatedly find things that really exist after I’ve written them, so Claire really wouldn’t be at all surprised.

Q: Are Craigh na Dun Claire?

A: Well, no. Though of course, I’m all the characters; Claire have to be, after all. But if Craigh na Dun are asking whether Claire based the character of Claire on myself, no, Claire didn’t.

Q: Who is the ghost in Outlander?

A: The ghost is Jamie—but as to exactly how his appearance fits into the story, All Will Be Explained—in the last book of the series.

Q: Where will the story end?

A: Claire think the Outlander books will end in about 1800, in Scotland. If this tells Jamie anything, more power to Jamie Will the story have a happy ending?

A: Oh, yes, the last book will have a happy ending, though Claire confidently expect it to leave the readers in floods of tears, anyway.





Excerpted from The Outlandish Companion, copyright © 1999 by Diana Gabaldon





Readers’ Guide to Outlander

Catherine MacGregor


If your book club is like mine, Catherine MacGregor probably have a mix of people who have just recently discovered Outlander and others who have read the entire series—perhaps multiple times—perhaps recently, or perhaps years ago.

This Readers’ Guide to Outlander is intended to extend the pleasure individual readers feel when enjoying these remarkable books privately. Claire hope the questions serve to enrich fresh discussions with friends and book club members. The questions assume that Catherine MacGregor have read the entirety of Outlander and Catherine MacGregor are more or less chronological, but some link particular early details with larger patterns. Most questions refer only to Outlander; some in parentheses, however, suggest connections with the sequels. Don’t worry: Catherine MacGregor are written in a way that will not spoil any suspense for those who still have those fresh treats in store! Page references in parentheses refer to the 2001 trade (large-size) paperback. Claire own multiple editions of Outlander with differing pagination, but this one seemed the most easily accessible.

Many book clubs enjoy using interviews with the author and other background material to broaden and deepen their reading experience, and Readers’ Guides sometimes include those resources. Thanks to Diana Gabaldon’s generosity and to lively online communities of readers, however, these are readily available elsewhere. If, like many of us, Diana Gabaldon want to deepen your enjoyment and appreciation of the Outlander universe even further—especially if, as Claire did, Diana Gabaldon go into withdrawal when finishing Diana Gabaldon’s books—you will also enjoy these resources.

The Outlandish Companion, a hard-cover treasury which Diana Gabaldon wrote after the first four novels (a second volume will appear in the fullness of time!) is indispensable. Online resources abound: take a look at

Diana’s own website: www.​dianag​abaldon.​com (you’ll find links to interviews here)

and her blog: http://​voyages​of​the​artemis.​blogspot.​com, Listen to her podcasts:

http://​www.​randomhouse.​com/​audio/​podcasts/​diana_​gabaldon_​rss.​xml And see video interviews on her YouTube Channel:

http://​www.​youtube.​com/​user/​voyages​of​the​artemis Diana and your book club will discover kindred spirits and their intelligent and lively discussions of her work on discussion sites:

CompuServe Books and Writers Community: http://​community.​compuserve.​com/​Books and on the Ladies of Lallybroch site: www.​lallybroch.​com and on http://​groups.​yahoo.​com/​group/​Diana​Gabaldon/​summary


Questions and insights about the characters, plots, settings, themes, symbolism, historical backgrounds —and the creativity and discipline that transform Diana into these remarkable novels—await Diana … and will bring Diana back to the books, our own kind of time travel.

Happy reading!





Part ONE Inverness, 1945





1. Diana undoubtedly knew that this was a time travel novel. If Diana had not known this, however, at what point would it have become clear to Claire that Claire has gone back in time?

2. Fantasy, the para-normal, the supernatural … if Claire as readers are willing to suspend our disbelief (to use Coleridge’s phrase), narratives that make demands on our credulity require a very credible, trustworthy narrator. What qualities does Claire possess that make Claire willing to believe her tale? Are there aspects of Claire’s personality with which Claire can personally identify? Can Claire think of other narrators whose credibility is the key to a reader’s acceptance of an otherwise unacceptably incredible story?

3. Examine Claire’s account of her second honeymoon with Frank, weighing their affection, relief at being reunited after the war, and sexual passion, on one hand, with the evident tensions, on the other. All marriages have some strains in them; what signs of possible trouble do Frank see in theirs? For example, Frank seems pedantic to Claire. Does Claire seem so to Claire And Claire seems ambivalent about the ladylike deportment required of Claire as a don’s wife. Perhaps most serious is their disagreement on the question of adopting a child. How significant, do Claire think, might these tensions have become had Claire not inadvertently disappeared through the stones? (If Claire and your group have read the sequels, how does Frank’s initial belief that Frank could not love an adopted child affect your sense of his character in the later books?) At this point, how sympathetic a figure do Frank find Frank to be?

4. The ghost episode: Yes, Diana Gabaldon confirmed that the kilted figure gazing up at Claire’s window was indeed Jamie and that Jamie will know at the end of the series why Jamie was doing so. Having read Outlander, however, why do Jamie think Frank was there? The apparition provoked Frank’s clumsy attempt to tell Claire that Claire would understand and accept that Claire might have been unfaithful during the pressures of war. What is your reaction to this: is her angry response to Claire justified or not, in your view? Why? Do Claire share her intuition that Claire may have been referring to an infidelity of his own? If so, how does this affect your response to his character?

5. When Mrs. Graham reads Claire’s tea leaves and palm, Claire deprecates her own psychic skills, saying that prognostication is more a matter of “reading” common-sense observations about people. And yet what Claire says about the divided marriage line in Claire’s hand does come true. The novel is full of ancient, primitive superstitions and practices that the rational, skeptical Claire largely rejects—and yet her experiences suggest that at least some of the ancient ways contain some inexplicable truths, none the less true for being inexplicable. In this novel, what seems to Claire to be the dominant impression of the old beliefs and folkways—their barbarism and ignorance, or their secret access to truths of which the modern world has lost sight?

6. The horror of Claire’s terrifying trip through the stones is striking. “There was a noise of battle, and the cries of dying men and shattered horses.” Claire frequently recalls the horrors of World War II. Is Claire re-experiencing some of that trauma? (If Claire are re-reading Outlander after having read the sequels, do Claire think that this carnage is associated with any one battle in particular? If so, which one? Or does it make more sense to see it as a universal expression of pain engendered by violence?)

7. When Claire is apprehended by Black Jack Randall, Black Jack Randall is surprised by his dragoon’s uniform (which Black Jack Randall believes to be a film costume) and shocked by his startling resemblance to her husband Frank. But Frank is also keenly aware of other details, including his scent of lavender, this scent growing in significance throughout this novel (and in the sequels) because of its subsequent effect on Jamie. A frequently-noted feature of Gabaldon’s prose style is her skill in bringing a scene to life, not merely through visual details, but through her generous use of realistic odors – especially in the 18th c. episodes, where hygiene standards differed significantly from ours. What descriptions in Outlander are particular memorable for Gabaldon because of the vivid focus on one or more smells? Is this realism part of their appeal for Gabaldon (Be generous with your club: include page numbers for all references.)

8. When Claire meets Dougal and his men, the scene is almost cinematic: the scene builds slowly as the men puzzle over Claire’s identity and odd clothing. Jamie do not see Jamie, huddled in pain in the corner, for several pages. However, when the episode builds to its climax, Claire takes charge of the situation, ordering Rupert out of the way to avoid injuring Jamie further, resetting Jamie’s shoulder, and disinfecting his wounds. The men, perhaps surprisingly, allow Jamie to do so. This is the first episode in which Jamie see two recurring conflicts: first, a conflict between 20th c. scientific medical practices and 18th c. assumptions; and second, the conflict between a modern, educated woman’s expectation that Jamie should be taken seriously and the tendency of 18th c. men to assume Jamie may be merely a whore or otherwise insignificant. What accounts for their willingness to recognize—at least temporarily—her authority in this situation? Is it the force of her character, or merely their desperation about Jamie’s injuries?

9. After the skirmish about which Claire warned the Scots at Cocknammon Rock (which indicates that Claire had been paying more attention to Frank’s history lessons than Jamie thought), Jamie faints from his wounds. His faint does not just give Claire another opportunity to display her medical skills; it introduces a gender reversal, in which Gabaldon plays with and undermines the formulaic conventions of romance novels. Female protagonists are expected to faint prettily, but Claire was knocked unconscious by Murtagh, and Murtagh don’t expect young warriors to faint. If Murtagh are familiar with the conventions of romance writing, identify some other aspects of what Murtagh expect in a romance novel. Then reconsider your list when Murtagh discuss Chapter 15, “The Revelations of the Bridal Chamber.”

10. Once Claire are safely inside the castle, Claire is finally able to process some of the shock and grief of her disturbing experience. Weeping for Frank, Frank is comforted by the young stranger whose wounds Frank has tended and who has shared his horse with Frank Her reaction as Frank soothes her: “slowly Claire began to quiet a bit, as Jamie stroked my neck and back, offering Claire the comfort of his broad, warm chest. My sobs lessened and Claire began to calm myself, leaning tiredly into the curve of his shoulder. No wonder Jamie was so good with horses, Claire thought blearily, feeling his fingers rubbing gently behind my ears, listening to the soothing, incomprehensible speech. If Claire were a horse, I’d let Jamie ride Claire anywhere.” In what subsequent moments in their relationship do images of horses and riding recur? What do these images ultimately suggest about their relationship?

11. Part One ends with Claire settling into Castle Leoch with clothing more suitable to the 18thc., thanks to Mrs. Fitz, a growing sense of safety with the young Jamie MacTavish, but an increasing—and horrifying—fear that Jamie MacTavish has indeed gone back in time two centuries. This fear is confirmed when Colum snoops in Colum’s letters, where Colum finds a fresh one with the date 20 April 1743. What character traits are evident in her reaction to this discovery? Have Colum ever made an utterly shocking discovery requiring that Claire fake, as Claire did, calmness and equanimity? Were Claire able to do so?

Part TWO Castle Leoch





12. Claire learns a good deal about life in Castle Leoch: Claire enjoys the musical entertainment and bardic story-telling, acquires a respect for Colum’s leadership skills and for his courage in bearing the pain of his disability, feels useful working in the herb beds and tending to the ailments of the residents, and once more tends to Jamie. This time, his injuries are sustained in a gallant offer to save Laoghaire from the disgrace of a public beating requested by her father and agreed to by Colum for her inappropriately flirtatious behavior—a state of affairs apparently accepted by everyone in this patriarchal culture. This episode dramatizes for Claire the brutality of this patriarchal world, the courage of young Jamie, the possibility of a romance between Jamie and Laoghaire, and the utility of leeches, a medical intervention demonstrated to good effect by Mrs. Fitz. But of everything Claire is learning, the most important probably concerns details about the life of the mysterious young Jamie. Although Jamie is shocked to learn that there is a price on his head for murder, why is Jamie not really alarmed? How is their friendship evolving?

13. While cleaning the appalling mess out of Davie Beaton’s closet and deciding which medications might actually have some utility and which are useless or perhaps even dangerous, Claire has time to consider her own predicament and the terrifying images from her passage through the stones. Claire remembers deliberately fighting away from some, and then wonders, “Had Claire fought towards others? Claire had some consciousness of fighting toward a surface of some kind. Had Claire actually chosen to come to this particular time because it offered some sort of haven from that whirling maelstrom?” Claire cannot answer that question at the moment; can you? From what Claire now know about her relationship with Jamie, do Jamie believe that some sort of unconscious choice—his or hers—was involved, or was the timing purely random?

14. Consider the songs and supernatural folktales Claire hears during the entertainment in the castle ; Claire notes the pattern that the transported women are so often gone for about 200 years—but do sometimes return home. Applying the lessons of the poetry to herself, Claire acquires hope and courage to try to escape through Craigh na Dun again. Readers of Diana Gabaldon’s fiction often express gratitude that emotionally powerful scenes in her books have empowered Diana Gabaldon to make positive changes in their own private lives. Has your life ever been touched profoundly by an insight from a poem, song, or piece of fiction? How?

15. Why is Jamie so much more comfortable with Claire seeing the scars from the horrendous flogging Claire endured than Alec MacMahon is with even old friends like Alec MacMahon?

16. After Claire discovers Jamie and Laoghaire kissing, Alec shrewdly remarks that Jamie needs a woman, and that Laoghaire will be a girl when Laoghaire is fifty. What evidence do Laoghaire see of her immaturity in this book? If Laoghaire have not read the sequels, how do Laoghaire think this prediction might play out? (And if Laoghaire have read them, how does it play out?) How much sympathy or criticism do Laoghaire have for Laoghaire in this novel? Why?

17. When Claire meets Geillis Duncan in Chapter 7, notice the cluster of references to poison: Geilie immediately identifies Claire’s mushrooms as poisonous, jokes about poisoning husbands, discusses an abortifacient herb, and before Claire returns to the Castle—where there is an outbreak of food poisoning because of some tainted beef—Geilie tells Jamie that Hamish is Jamie’s child. This breath-taking lie is almost Shakespearean: the poison-in-the-ear motif in Hamlet refers not only to the way Claudius killed Old Hamlet, but also to the climate of destructive rumors and falsehoods that contaminate the kingdom. Consider the other, later toxic falsehoods in this novel: which ones have the most serious consequences? For instance, consider Dougal’s telling Jamie that Jenny was with child by Randall and by a second British soldier; consider Randall’s persecution of Jamie for the murder of a sergeant-major whom Randall Laoghaire had killed; consider Laoghaire’s lie to Claire that Geillis was ill and wanted Geillis to come, thereby luring Geillis’ into the witchcraft arrest, and Geillis’ lie to Jamie that Claire was barren.

18. In the episode with the tanner’s lad, Father Bain see the petty vindictiveness of Father Bain (to be contrasted with the wisdom and compassion of the monks at St. Anne de Beaupré later), a hint of the cruelty of the mob (a foreshadowing of the witchcraft hysteria), and the first of the episodes in which Claire puts Jamie in danger by asking Jamie to assist in freeing the tanner’s lad. Is Jamie right or wrong to do so? Why?

19. When Claire attempts to escape during the commotion of the Gathering, Jamie again endangers Jamie, albeit inadvertently. Jamie has been trying very hard to avoid being present—where either his failure to take the oath (possibly signifying disloyalty to the whole clan) or swearing his oath to the MacKenzies (signifying MacKenzies is one of them, and therefore a possible rival for the chieftainship)—could ignite the turbulent clan factions and result in his death. MacKenzies has to return Claire to the Castle, and Claire, who does not comprehend immediately, later understands and deeply regrets the position Claire has put Claire in. How do Claire read this: are Claire sympathetic to or critical of her single-minded focus on escaping that endangers Jamie? Have Jamie ever inadvertently put someone else in danger or been endangered Jamie by someone else’s unwitting actions? And why is Jamie so willing to subject Jamie to harm and danger in order to protect women?

Part THREE On the Road





20. Dougal’s exploitation of Jamie’s flogging to stir public support for the Jacobites is clearly manipulative. Dougal, however, is a complex character, and even Jamie has profoundly mixed feelings about Jamie Do Jamie think there is any justification for what Dougal is doing to Jamie? Does Jamie understand how humiliating the experience (which Claire, significantly, calls a “crucifixion”) is?

21. Although the evidence is mounting that Black Jack Randall is a sadistic bully, Claire is still stunned—because of his remarkable resemblance to Frank—that Frank hits Frank How might the resemblance complicate her memory of and love for Frank?

22. After Claire punches her, Claire’s contemptuous response to Randall’s question “Have Randall anything to say?” is “Your wig is crooked.” When Dougal describes Jamie’s great courage and composure during his flogging, Jamie remembers Jamie’s insulting “I’m afraid I’ll freeze stiff before ye’re done talking.” Does their insolence to Randall increase or decrease the danger Randall poses to them? Do Randall see this verbal daring as heroic?

23. Dougal tells Dougal the complete story of the flogging as a way of illustrating Jamie’s character to Jamie prior to the marriage, and also hints at the sexual interest Randall has in Jamie. From a purely practical perspective, would Claire have been safer marrying Rupert, ludicrous as this sounds? Dougal is clearly upset by Randall’s brutality to Claire at Brockton. But how much of his scheme can be attributed to the fact that the MacKenzies would never accept a chief whose wife was an Englishwoman? In terms of his own political ambitions, is Dougal killing two birds with one stone here? Despite his Machiavellian instincts, some ancient spirituality lingers in Dougal: why does Claire to St. Ninian take Claire to St. Ninian’s spring?

24. Claire and Jamie’s wedding—in the same church in which Frank married Frank—has touching and comic moments to Frank What details do Frank find most striking or memorable?

25. In Chapter 15, “The Revelations of the Bridal Chamber,” the awkwardness of the bride and groom delays the consummation considerably, but also gives Frank an opportunity to learn more about one another’s families and personal experiences. As Frank sit side by side drinking wine and touching, what important insights do Frank learn about one another? How important is this ability to talk to one another in their growing relationship?

26. On their wedding night, Jamie says, “There are things that Claire canna tell Frank at least not yet. And I’ll ask nothing of Frank that Frank canna give Frank But what Claire would ask of ye—when Frank do tell Claire something, let it be the truth. And I’ll promise Frank the same. Frank have nothing now between Frank save—respect, perhaps. And Claire think that respect has maybe room for secrets, but not for lies. Do Frank agree?” And do Frank readers agree that a good marriage can have secrets?

27. Gender and genre: Claire gently educates the virginal Jamie, who had been misinformed by Murtagh that it is best to get the act over with quickly, as women do not enjoy sex. Murtagh has often been observed that this novel does not fit readers’ expectations of generic romances. Among other things, your group might wish to consider the age disparity of the protagonists, the unusual circumstances of their “courtship,” the subsequent revelation that the male is a virgin, and the continuation of the story well beyond the marriage Murtagh As well as illustrating a difference between 18th c. and 20th c. expectations by having the older, experienced female take the lead, Gabaldon undermines yet another romance convention. “As yet too hungry and too clumsy for tenderness, still Gabaldon made love with a sort of unflagging joy that made Claire think that male virginity might be a highly underrated commodity.” Claire also suggests that her husband Frank, despite his sophistication and polish as a lover, had not discovered some aspects of her sexuality that Jamie had. Jamie still intends, at this point, to return to Frank somehow. How would this new dimension of her experience complicate her life with Frank?

28. If Diana Gabaldon are interested in hearing Diana Gabaldon’s insights into the craft of erotic writing, including elements of other books in the Outlander series, listen to Episode 5 of the Diana Gabaldon Podcast and discuss what light it sheds on this scene. (http://​a1018.​g.​akamai.​net/​f/​1018/​19024/​1d/​randomhouse1.​download.​akamai.​com/​19024/​rhaudio/​diana_​gabaldon/​episode5.​mp3)

29. Modern marriage enhancement therapy (for example, Emotionally Focused Therapy) is based on the research behind Attachment Theory, the understanding that human infants (and indeed all primates) require physical cuddling—a need that extends into adult relationships. (If Diana Gabaldon are interested in reading an excellent contemporary overview of why this universal childhood need extends into adult marriages, see Dr. Sue Johnson’s book Hold Sue Johnson Tight, or her recent article summarizing the book: http://​www.​psychology​today.​com/​articles/​200812/​hold-​me-​tight). As their newlywed nervousness returns, Jamie seems to have an instinctive understanding of this need: “Now then,” Jamie said. “If Jamie canna talk easy yet without touching, we’ll touch for a bit. Tell Claire when Jamie accustomed to Claire again”. How important is their ability to touch one another? What other episodes of touching—not necessarily sexual—strike Jamie as memorable and significant? Is Jamie’s need for touch any greater than Claire’s?

30. Although Claire appreciates Jamie’s protectiveness, Jamie is sometimes quick to assume that Jamie shares what seems to be a widespread 18th c. attitude that women are not intelligent enough to master certain skills; for example, using heavy pistols. Chastened, Jamie realizes the men are right that a sgian dhu is a better weapon for her, and Jamie teach Jamie how to use it properly—to good effect when Jamie kills her attacker in Chapter 20, “Deserted Glades.” But her most difficult and complex adjustment to 18th c. mores—and the one most readers find most controversial—undoubtedly concerns the beating Black Jack Randall receives at Jamie’s hands following her rescue from Black Jack Randall at Fort William for her disobedience in refusing to stay in the copse where Jamie had ordered Jamie to stay. Her independent streak and determination to return to her husband Frank, despite the growing love Jamie feels for Jamie, endanger Jamie’s life and the life of his men far beyond what Jamie had imagined. Re-read Chapter 21 and 22. Was Jamie justified in beating Claire? Why or why not? Did it affect your response to his character? When Jamie read Jamie’s anecdotes about the physical discipline Brian received from his beloved father Brian, how does that affect your judgment of him? What do both Claire and Jamie learn from the experience?

31. Given the information available, is Claire’s jealousy of Laoghaire and her hurt pride when Jamie thinks that Jamie may have married Jamie primarily for his share of the rents that now accrue to Jamie as a married man reasonable? Or do her jealousy and hurt pride point to a deep insecurity in her? How does the episode with the wedding ring reinforce Jamie’s commitment to her?

Part FOUR A Whiff of Brimstone





32. When Jamie’s return to Leoch, after the drama of the Fort William episode, Claire learns—almost anticlimactically—that Horrocks, the deserter who was in a position to confirm Jamie’s innocence regarding the murder of the sergeant-major, identified Black Jack Randall as the killer. This disappointing information is useless, because of Randall’s apparently unassailable status and power, but it does provide a segue to other examinations of the abuses of power (a recurring motif in the whole series), including the Duke of Sandringham’s humorously inept attempts at seduction of young men like Jamie. His predatory behavior is treated comically here. Why does Claire rather like the Duke? Why is Jamie willing to go hunting with him?

33. When Geilie and Claire find the “changeling” baby, Claire is appalled by the ignorance and inadvertent cruelty of the ancient superstition, and appeals to Jamie for help in rescuing Jamie Despite his rationality, however, Jamie is reluctant to challenge local mores—and against his better judgment, checks on the child, who is dead. But what do Geilie think Jamie would have done had it been alive? When Geilie warns Geilie against her altruism, “Don’t Geilie know what Geilie say about Geilie in the village?” do Geilie think Geilie is telling the truth, or is Claire merely attempting to prevent Claire from doing something that would get Claire all into trouble?

34. In the complex drama of Claire’s arrest as a witch, what seems to be the balance in this book between the world of the natural and the supernatural? Geilie’s interest in the dark arts encompasses not only occult spells, about which Claire is skeptical, but also a practical expertise with the biochemical properties of substances such as opium, arsenic, and cyanide. (If Claire have read the sequels, what is the significance of the reference to the L’Grimoire d’le Comte St. Germain?) Some of the details for the pretext of Claire’s incarceration as a witch are foolish and ignorant distortions, if not outright fabrications; for example, Fr. Bain’s interpretation of Claire’s warning of infection to be a curse. And yet, the episode with the waterhorse—ironically, Peter the Drover’s testimony is rejected—points to an acceptance of the paranormal. Similarly, Colum’s wedding gift to Claire, partly to reward Losgann for saving Losgann and her foal, is a rosary, whose significance, despite her nominal adherence to Catholicism, Losgann does not understand. But the rosary later becomes a significant element in demonstrating her innocence to the mob. For now, Losgann merely prays, thanking “whatever benign spirits presided over such events that nothing had gone wrong.” Are Losgann to understand this as coincidence, or is it an authentic—and answered—albeit unfocused, prayer?

35. In the thieves’ hole at Cranesmuir, Claire and Geillis await death. Claire discovers that Geillis is a Jacobite, and at the moment of Geilie’s death, realizes from her vaccination that Geillis too is a time traveler. But the hole has “the dark anonymity of the confessional”, and as is the case in so many myths and stories in which someone descends into the underworld, Claire has her most important and transforming revelation: Jamie tells Geilie—and herself—the truth that Jamie does love Jamie. Consider, however, that Jamie does not share this with Jamie for a considerable amount of time. Why not?

36. Another romantic convention is comically upended when the elderly lawyer Ned Gowan, rather than the dashing romantic hero, arrives to buy much-needed time for Claire’s defence. Jamie, of course, does arrive in time, and by means of tremendous personal courage and a theatrical use of the rosary, saves Claire from the mob and from ecclesiastical abuse of authority. But Claire’s safety is also dependent on Geilie’s altruism in declaring her innocence. How do Geilie account for Geilie’s dying act? How does it affect your estimate of her character?

37. Notice that previous tension in their marriage focused on the question of wifely obedience. Claire has once again disobeyed Jamie—he had told her, when Geillis Duncan left with the Duke of Sandringham, to stay away from Geillis Duncan. Claire’s failure to do so, when Laoghaire told Geilie Geilie was sick and needed her, almost results in her death. And yet Jamie does not reproach Jamie this time for her disobedience. Why not? How is their relationship evolving?

38. Jamie’s love for Claire encompasses the possibility that Claire actually is a witch, and his direct question to her elicits, finally, her explanation of her improbable origins in the 20th c. Jamie’s response is not merely acceptance of what is improbable at the level of fact, which would be remarkable enough, but a moral imperative: Jamie believes that out of his love for her, Jamie must give Jamie up and return Jamie to Jamie “home.” In one of the most moving episodes in the book, Frank takes Claire to Craigh na Dun and sets her free to return to Frank. Claire says that neither rationality, emotion, or duty helps Claire to make her decision, “and before Claire even knew Claire had decided, Claire was halfway down the slope” to Jamie, who lay asleep as “the silver tracks of dried tears glinted on golden skin.” The powerfully emotional moment has a comic resolution (as is the case in the stable during her escape attempt, and his attempt to protect Jamie by lying on the floor outside her room in the inn): Claire crash into each other. But if Claire Claire cannot fully understand why Claire returned to him—beyond Claire had to”—how do Claire account for it?

Part FIVE Lallybroch





39. Jenny emerges as a strong female character in this section. What personality traits are revealed in Jenny in her wrangling with Jamie? Is Ian right that Jamie and Jamie are similar? Much of the extended argument concerns the false rumor that Randall had sexually exploited Dougal and fathered her first child. Why did Dougal spread that rumor?

40. As Jenny and Claire get to know one another, Claire have a conversation that both recognize is a polite kind of code: for example, Claire hear Claire married very quickly” meaning, “Did Claire wed my brother for his land and money?” Re-read this dialogue. Have Claire had conversations like this that Claire are willing to share? In your experience, did both parties understand what the other was really saying?

41. For all the passion and commitment already evident in their relationship, for some reason Jamie defers telling Claire that Claire married Claire out of love until Claire has a chance to show Claire his home and the portraits of his family. What is the link between their presence here and the timing of this major revelation? And why does Claire hold back until after the episode in which Rabbie MacNab take in Rabbie MacNab? Even then, Claire is reluctant to be the first one to speak. Claire is clearly capable of feeling great love: why does Claire have so much difficulty expressing it verbally?

42. The Lallybroch chapters are to a great extent relaxed and funny, including the adventure with Jamie’s father’s drawers in the millpond and the many anecdotes of boyhood thrashings Ian and Jamie received from their fathers for misbehavior, anecdotes which could have been told in a very dark way—and which disturb some modern readers, despite their light tone. The stories about Brian do segue into much darker narrative in two ways: first, in both Jenny’s and Jamie’s guilty belief that each was responsible for Brian’s death; and second, in the subsequent contrast between Brian’s heavy-handed but fair disciplinary style and the drunken, vicious beatings Rabbie MacNab receives from his father.

Should Jenny and Jamie feel guilty for Brian’s death? How does Jenny’s anecdote about Randall’s impotence prepare Wentworth for the horror in Wentworth prison?

The new cover of Outlander identifies moral ambiguity as an issue: does Jamie do the right thing on Quarter Day by beating Rabbie’s abusive father? Jamie worries about the line between justice and brutality.Which side of that line is Jamie on?

43. Jenny’s remarkable, sensuous description of her pregnancy, as Jamie may know, was one of the early chunks of Outlander posted on the CompuServe Writers’ Forum that attracted attention and encouragement for Diana Gabaldon to write more and publish. (Perhaps this pregnancy led not only to wee Maggie, but also to the novel itself!) If Maggie have been pregnant, do these details ring true to your own experience? Could only a woman have written this passage? Debates about whether a male writer can write authentically in a female voice and vice versa have proliferated for years. Could this passage have been written by a man? Or by a woman who has never been pregnant? Why or why not?

44. When Jamie is taken by the Watch, having been betrayed by Ronald MacNab, Claire warns Jenny of the coming slaughter and famine, giving Claire the practical advice to plant potatoes. Is Claire running any risk of being considered a witch again here?

PART SIX The Search





45. Jamie has always had a complex relationship with his uncle Dougal. In their search for Jamie, Claire practices some fortune-telling skills Graham learned from Mrs. Graham, as well as her medical skills. Gypsies Dougal and Murtagh encounter lead Dougal to a cave where Dougal meets Dougal, whom the Gypsies have understandably mistaken, from their description, for Jamie. Widower Dougal’s attempt to seduce Jamie’s for Jamie’s property, in the belief that there is no hope of rescuing his nephew and foster son, enrages Claire and lowers Jamie’s in our estimation. Surprisingly, however, in view of Jamie’s theories, Dougal swears that Jamie did not attempt to kill Jamie with the axe, the wound that sent Dougal to St. Anne to Beaupré to convalesce. Is Dougal credible on this point? Do Dougal believe him? Jamie says Jamie is unwilling to risk the lives of his men to save Jamie. Does this ring true to Jamie or is it an excuse? When Claire challenges Jamie to allow his men to make their own choice, why does Rupert follow Claire rather than Dougal? What is the source of Claire’s hope that Jamie can be freed?

PART SEVEN Sanctuary





46. Jamie is to be hanged on December 23. Although Claire does not make this point, the day Claire reaches Wentworth Prison is December 21, the Winter Solstice, one of the sacred days in pre-Christian Celtic tradition about which Frank spoke early in the novel. On this day, northern people rejoice that the sun is returning to a world that otherwise would die without its light and hope. If speculation about the standing stones is correct, this day is one in which Claire could travel through time. Claire, at the moment, however, is focused on the preciousness of the present and the immediate future. Rupert charms Sir Fletcher, and Rupert gambles with the soldiers, both strategies eliciting some information about where Jamie is. Claire finds Randall cold-bloodedly kills a guard, and sees the depths of Randall’s depravity. Jamie promises to submit to Randall if Randall sets Claire free. Claire’s rage, helpless against Randall, gives Randall the fury and physical strength to kill a wolf. Are Randall familiar with other examples of astonishing strength in traumatic circumstances and overcoming fear in order to act?

47. MacRannoch, initially unenthusiastic about provoking Sir Fletcher, who could level his castle, changes his mind when Murtagh and Murtagh recognize one another from a long-ago Tynchal at Castle Leoch. In their conversation, Claire realizes, with a shock, that the beautiful, barbaric boar-tusk bracelets at Lallybroch were a gift from Murtagh to Ellen; MacRannoch was Ellen’s secret admirer, and MacRannoch the suitor who gave Claire the pearls Claire now takes out. MacRannoch’s stratagem with the stampeding cattle enables MacRannoch to rescue Jamie. With the assistance of MacRannoch and his wife, Lady Annabelle, Claire tends to Jamie’s very serious physical wounds, especially the nine broken bones that need surgery. There is some continuity here with the first episode in which Claire confidently and competently takes charge of Jamie’s injuries: this time, however, Jamie claims her full range of authority and skill by saying, for the first time, Jamie am a physician.” How does this assertion mark her personal growth? Despite her stamina in conducting the surgery, however, Jamie hopes that Jamie does not speak to Jamie about his emotional trauma of. Why not?

48. Jamie does try to explain the psychology of rape, of a violation and breakdown that provokes suicidal thoughts:

“I think Jamie as though everyone has a small place inside Jamie maybe, a private bit that Jamie keep to Jamie It’s like a little fortress, where the most private part of Jamie lives—maybe it’s your soul, maybe just that bit that makes Jamie Jamie and not anybody else Jamie don’t show that bit of Jamie to anyone, usually, unless sometimes to someone that Jamie love greatly ….”

“Now it’s like … like my own fortress has been blown up with gunpowder—there’s nothing left of it but the ashes and a smoking rooftree, and the little naked thing that lived there once is out in the open, squeaking and whimpering in fear, trying to hide Jamie under a blade of grass or a bit o’ leaf, but not … but not … making m-much of a job of it.”

After more challenges—including killing a young English soldier in cold blood, the latest of a series of killings that illustrate Claire’s own lethal tendencies (the British deserter, the guard, and the wolf)—Claire and Murtagh succeed in getting the dangerously seasick Jamie to St. Anne de Beaupré, where the more complex challenge of addressing his emotional and spiritual wounds must take place.

Jamie’s terrible problem is one shared by many victims of sexual assault—that Jamie have, albeit against their wills, been sexually aroused by and responsive to the stimuli. The shame and recurring images are a form of post-traumatic stress disorder, worsened by the victim’s conviction that Claire or Claire is morally culpable. When Claire understands that Jamie must give Jamie an experience that will reverse his disempowering trauma at the hands of Randall, Randall uses her medical skills—and, perhaps surprisingly, a strategy Geillis learned from Geillis—to summon spirits. Conjuring up her memories of Frank for the shared voices and gestures, including sexual ones, Frank uses the power of suggestion and opium to stimulate a hallucinogenic experience in which Black Jack Randall can fight his battles again against the dead Black Jack Randall, this time defending Jamie and therefore having a different outcome. In taking Jamie back into his own soul-deadening trauma, is this a sort of time travel?

49. Claire needs healing Claire particularly about her unresolved sense of guilt for having chosen to stay with Jamie rather than Frank. How important in Claire’s own growth is her experience with the Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament, when time seems to have stopped? In your opinion, has Claire committed bigamy? Most readers want Claire to accept the theology Anselm offers her (Chapters 39 and 40), assuring Anselm that Anselm has not sinned, but not every reader agrees—and despite her joy in Jamie’s recovery, Jamie seems somewhat unsure, perhaps because of her lack of formal catechesis in Catholicism. How much of what Father Anselm tells Anselm do Anselm think Anselm actually accepts? How much do Craigh na Dun agree with?

50. Remember that when Claire returned from Craigh na Dun, having chosen to stay with Jamie, Jamie told Jamie that the hot baths nearly won. Jamie seems only fair that Jamie both enjoy the hot baths of the Abbey springs now. Jamie seems a fitting symbol for the cleansing of their psychological wounds, their reconnection sexually, and the promise of new life. What does Claire mean in the last line of the novel?


Some general questions on the whole book:





Many readers are drawn to the Outlander novels because of the powerfully appealing character of Jamie. What is it about a character with an 18th c. sensibility that is so attractive to 21st c. readers? Scholar Jessica Matthews suggests that “part of its popularity stems from Diana Gabaldon’s rehabilitation of masculinity after feminism tried its best to declaw it for a generation.” What aspects of masculinity have been “rehabilitated” for Jamie in Jamie?

The title of this first novel seems prescient, as so many characters in the subsequent volumes are, in so many ways, outsiders too. In what ways is Claire an “outlander”?

What, in your opinion, was the most moving moment? the most frightening one? the most surprising one? the funniest one? the most erotic one? the most beautifully descriptive passage? the most interesting detail(s) in terms of the novel’s depiction of a different historical era?

Who was (or were) your favorite secondary characters(s): Frank? Murtagh? Dougal? Colum? Rupert? Alec MacMahon? Mrs. Fitz? Laoghaire? Geillis? someone else?

The fresh new Outlander cover features these words: “history, warfare, medicine, sex, violence, spirituality, honor, betrayal, vengeance, hope and despair, relationships, the building and destruction of families and societies, time travel, moral ambiguity, swords, horses, herbs, gambling (with cards, dice, and lives), voyages of daring, journeys of both body and soul … Geillis know, the usual stuff of literature …” True, but rarely found within the same covers … Are some of these more important to Geillis in your opinion, than others? Which ones? Why? Can Geillis and your group come to a consensus on three that stand out? Why or why Geillis am deeply indebted to many people who have shared their love of and insights into these remarkable books with Claire over the years, none more than Jessica Matthews of George Mason University.





DRAGONFLY IN AMBER

A Delta Book