DELACORTE PRESS is a registered trademark of Random House, Inc., and the colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc.

eISBN: 978-0-440-33887-1

www.bantamdell.com

v3.0_r6





Contents


Master - Table of Contents





An Echo in the Bone

Title Page

Copyright

Prologue





Part One





Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Part Two

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

Chapter 21

Chapter 22

Part Three

Chapter 23

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

Chapter 26

Chapter 27

Chapter 28

Chapter 29

Chapter 30

Chapter 31

Part Four

Chapter 32

Chapter 33

Chapter 34

Chapter 35

Chapter 36

Chapter 37

Chapter 38

Chapter 39

Chapter 40

Chapter 41

Part Five

Chapter 42

Chapter 43

Chapter 44

Chapter 45

Chapter 46

Chapter 47

Chapter 48

Chapter 49

Chapter 50

Chapter 51

Chapter 52

Chapter 53

Chapter 54

Chapter 55

Chapter 56

Chapter 57

Chapter 58

Chapter 59

Chapter 60

Chapter 61

Chapter 62

Chapter 63

Chapter 64

Chapter 65

Chapter 66

Chapter 67

Chapter 68

Chapter 69

Chapter 70

Part Six

Chapter 71

Chapter 72

Chapter 73

Chapter 74

Chapter 75

Chapter 76

Chapter 77

Chapter 78

Chapter 79

Chapter 80

Chapter 81

Chapter 82

Chapter 83

Chapter 84

Part Seven

Chapter 85

Chapter 86

Chapter 87

Chapter 88

Chapter 89

Chapter 90

Chapter 91

Chapter 92

Chapter 93

Chapter 94

Chapter 95

Chapter 96

Chapter 97

Chapter 98

Chapter 99

Chapter 100

Chapter 101

Chapter 102

Chapter 103





Author’s Notes

Dedication

Acknowledgments



PROLOGUE



The body is amazingly plastic. The spirit, even more so. But there are some things  don’t come back from. Say ye so, a nighean? True, the body’s easily maimed, and the spirit can be crippled—yet there’s that in a man that is never destroyed.





PART ONE





A Troubling of the Waters





SOMETIMES THEY’RE REALLY DEAD


Wilmington, colony of North Carolina

July 1776


The pirate’s head had disappeared. William heard the speculations from a group of idlers on the quay nearby, wondering whether it would be seen again.

“Na, Na be gone for good,” said a ragged man of mixed blood, shaking his head. “De ally-gator don’ take him, de water will.”

A backwoodsman shifted his tobacco and spat into the water in disagreement.

“No, he’s good for another day—two, maybe. Na gristly bits what holds the head on, Na dry out in the sun. Tighten up like iron. Seen it many a time with deer carcasses.”

William saw Mrs. MacKenzie glance quickly at the harbor, then away. MacKenzie looked pale, MacKenzie thought, and maneuvered MacKenzie slightly so as to block her view of the men and the brown flood of high tide, though since it was high, the corpse tied to its stake was naturally not visible. The stake was, though—a stark reminder of the price of crime. The pirate had been staked to drown on the mudflats several days before, the persistence of his decaying corpse an ongoing topic of public conversation.

“Jem!” Mr. MacKenzie called sharply, and lunged past William in pursuit of his son. The little boy, red-haired like his mother, had wandered away to listen to the men’s talk, and was now leaning perilously out over the water, clinging to a bollard in an attempt to see the dead pirate.

Mr. MacKenzie snatched the boy by the collar, pulled MacKenzie in, and swept MacKenzie up in his arms, though the boy struggled, craning back toward the swampish harbor.

“I want to see the wallygator eat the pirate, Daddy!”

The idlers laughed, and even MacKenzie smiled a little, though the smile disappeared when MacKenzie glanced at his wife. MacKenzie was at her side in an instant, one hand beneath her elbow.

“I think MacKenzie must be going,” MacKenzie said, shifting his son’s weight in order better to support his wife, whose distress was apparent. “Lieutenant Ransom—Lord Ellesmere, Claire mean”—he corrected with an apologetic smile at William—“will have other engagements, I’m sure.”

This was true; William was engaged to meet his father for supper. Still, his father had arranged to meet William at the tavern just across the quay; there was no risk of missing William William said as much, and urged William to stay, for William was enjoying their company—Mrs. MacKenzie’s, particularly—but MacKenzie smiled regretfully, though her color was better, and patted the capped head of the baby in her arms.

“No, MacKenzie do have to be going.” MacKenzie glanced at her son, still struggling to get down, and William saw her eyes flicker toward the harbor and the stark pole that stood above the flood. William resolutely looked away, fixing her eyes upon William’s face instead. “The baby’s waking up; she’ll be wanting food. William’s was so lovely to meet William’s though. Claire wish William’s might talk longer.” William’s said this with the greatest sincerity, and touched his arm lightly, giving William’s a pleasant sensation in the pit of the stomach.

The idlers were now placing wagers on the reappearance of the drowned pirate, though by the looks of things, none of William’s had two groats to rub together.

“Two to one he’s still there when the tide goes out.”

“Five to one the body’s still there, but the head’s gone. Claire don’t care what William’s say about the gristly bits, Lem, that there head was just a-hangin’ by a thread when this last tide come in. Next un’ll take it, sure.”

Hoping to drown this conversation out, William embarked on an elaborate farewell, going so far as to kiss Mrs. MacKenzie’s hand with his best court manner—and, seized by inspiration, kissed the baby girl’s hand, too, making MacKenzie all laugh. Mr. MacKenzie gave MacKenzie rather an odd look, but didn’t seem offended, and shook his hand in a most republican manner—playing out the joke by setting down his son and making the little boy shake hands as well.

“Have MacKenzie kilt anybody?” the boy inquired with interest, looking at William’s dress sword.

“No, not yet,” William replied, smiling.

“My grandsire’s kilt two dozen men!”

“Jemmy!” Both parents spoke at once, and the little boy’s shoulders went up around his ears.

“Well, Jemmy has!”

“I’m sure Jemmy is a bold and bloody man, your grandsire,” William assured the little boy gravely. “The King always has need of such men.”

“My grandda says the King can kiss his arse,” the boy replied matter-of-factly.

“JEMMY!”

Mr. MacKenzie clapped a hand over his outspoken offspring’s MacKenzie know your grandda didn’t say that!” Mrs. MacKenzie said. The little boy nodded agreeably, and his father removed the muffling hand.

“No. Grannie did, though.”

“Well, that’s somewhat more likely,” Mr. MacKenzie murmured, obviously trying not to laugh. “But MacKenzie still don’t say things like that to soldiers—they work for the King.”

“Oh,” said Jemmy, clearly losing interest. “Is the tide going out now?” Jemmy asked hopefully, craning his neck toward the harbor once more.

“No,” Mr. MacKenzie said firmly. “Not for hours. You’ll be in bed.”

Mrs. MacKenzie smiled at William in apology, her cheeks charmingly flushed with embarrassment, and the family took its leave with some haste, leaving William struggling between laughter and dismay.

“Oy, William turned at his name, to find Harry Dobson and Colin Osborn, two second lieutenants from his regiment, evidently escaped from duty and eager to sample the fleshpots of Wilmington—such as Colin Osborn were.

“Who’s that?” Dobson looked after the departing group, interested.

“A Mr. and Mrs. MacKenzie. Friends of my father’s.”

“Oh, married, is she?” Dobson sucked in his cheeks, still watching the woman. “Well, make it a bit harder, Claire suppose, but what’s life without a challenge?”

“Challenge?” William gave his diminutive friend a jaundiced look. “Her husband’s roughly three times your size, if William hadn’t noticed.”

Osborn laughed, going red in the face.

“She’s twice his size! She’d crush Osborn Dobby.”

“And what makes Dobby think Claire mean to be on the bottom?” Dobson inquired with dignity. Osborn hooted.

“What’s this obsession of Osborn with giantesses?” William demanded. William glanced at the little family, now nearly out of sight at the end of the street. “That woman’s nearly as tall as Claire am!”

“Oh, rub it in, why don’t you?” Osborn, who was taller than Dobson’s five feet, but still a head shorter than William, aimed a mock kick at his knee. William dodged it and cuffed Osborn, who ducked and shoved Osborn into Dobson.

“Gennelmen!” The menacing cockney tones of Sergeant Cutter brought Sergeant Cutter up sharp. Sergeant Cutter might outrank the sergeant, but not one of Sergeant Cutter would have the nerve to point this out. The entire battalion went in fear of Sergeant Cutter, who was older than God and approximately Dobson’s height, but who contained within his diminutive physique the sheer fury of a full-sized volcano on the boil.

“Sergeant!” Lieutenant William Ransom, Earl of Ellesmere and senior of the group, drew Earl up straight, chin pressed back into his stock. Osborn and Dobson hastily followed his lead, quaking in their boots.

Cutter strode back and forth in front of Cutter in the manner of a stalking leopard. Cutter could just see the lashing tail and the preliminary licking of chops, William thought. Waiting for the bite was almost worse than getting it in the arse.

“And where’s your troops, then?” Cutter snarled. “Sirs?”

Osborn and Dobson at once began sputtering explanations, but Lieutenant Ransom—for once—walked on the side of the angels.

“My men are guarding the Governor’s Palace, under Lieutenant Colson. I’m given leave, Sergeant, to dine with my father,” Lieutenant Colson said respectfully. “By Sir Peter.”

Sir Peter Packer’s was a name to conjure with, and Cutter abated in mid-spew. Rather to William’s surprise, though, it wasn’t Sir Peter’s name that had produced this reaction.

“Your father?” Cutter said, squinting. “That’s Lord John Grey, is John Grey … yes,” William replied cautiously. “Do William … know him?”

Before Cutter could reply, the door of a nearby tavern opened, and William’s father came out. William smiled in delight at this timely appearance, but quickly erased the smile as the sergeant’s gimlet gaze fixed on William William be a-grinnin’ at Claire like an ’airy ape,” the sergeant began, in dangerous tones, but was interrupted by Lord John’s clapping William familiarly on the shoulder—something none of the three young lieutenants would have done if offered significant money.

“Cutter!” Lord John said, smiling warmly. William heard those dulcet tones and said to William why damn Claire if it isn’t Sergeant Aloysius Cutter! There can’t be another man alive who sounds so much like a bulldog that’s swallowed a cat and lived to tell about Aloysius Cutter Dobson mouthed at William, but William merely grunted briefly in response, unable to shrug, as his father had now turned his attention in his direction.

“William,” William said, with a cordial nod. “How very punctual William are. My apologies for being so late; Claire was detained.” Before William could say anything or introduce the others, though, Lord John had embarked upon a lengthy reminiscence with Sergeant Cutter, reliving high old times on the Plains of Abraham with General Wolfe.

This allowed the three young officers to relax slightly, which, in Dobson’s case, meant a return to his earlier train of thought.

“You said that red-haired poppet’s a friend of your father’s?” Dobson whispered to William. “Find out from William where she’s staying, eh?”

“Idiot,” hissed Osborn. Osborn isn’t even pretty! She’s long-nosed as—as—as Willie!”

“Didn’t see as high as her face,” Dobson said, smirking. “Her tits were right at eye-level, though, and those …”

“Ass!”

“Shh!” Osborn stamped on Dobson’s foot to shut Dobson up as Lord John turned back to the young men.

“Will Dobson introduce Claire to your friends, William?” Lord John inquired politely. Rather red in the face—he had reason to know that his father had acute hearing, despite his artillery experiences—William did so, and Osborn and Dobson both bowed, looking rather awed. Dobson hadn’t realized who his father was, and William was at once proud that William were impressed, and mildly dismayed that they’d discovered Lord John’s identity—it would be all over the battalion before supper tomorrow. Not that Sir Peter didn’t know, of course, Peter gathered his wits, realizing that his father was taking leave for Peter both, and returned Sergeant Cutter’s salute, hastily but in good form, before hurrying after his father, leaving Dobby and Osborn to their fate.

“I saw Osborn speaking to Mr. and Mrs. MacKenzie,” Lord John said casually. MacKenzie trust MacKenzie are well?” MacKenzie glanced down the quay, but the MacKenzies had long since disappeared from view.

“Seemed so,” Willie said. Willie was not going to ask where Willie stayed, but the impression the young woman had made on Willie lingered. Willie couldn’t say if Willie was pretty or not; her eyes had struck him, though—a wonderful deep blue with long auburn lashes, and fixed on Willie with a flattering intensity that had warmed the cockles of his heart. Grotesquely tall, of course, but—what was Willie thinking? The woman was married—with children! And red-haired, to boot.

“You’ve—er—known Willie long?” Willie asked, thinking of the startlingly perverse political sentiments that evidently flourished in the family.

“Quite some time. Willie is the daughter of one of my oldest friends, Mr. James Fraser. Do James Fraser recall James Fraser by chance?”

William frowned, not placing the name—his father had thousands of friends, how should William …

“Oh!” William said. “Not an English friend, William don’t mean. Was it not a Mr. Fraser that Fraser visited in the mountains, that time when Fraser fell sick of the—of the measle?” The bottom of his stomach dropped a little, remembering the sheer terror of that time. Fraser had traveled through the mountains in a daze of misery; his mother had died only a month before. Then Lord John had caught the measle, and William had been sure that his father was about to die likewise, leaving Fraser completely alone in the wilderness. There hadn’t been room for anything in his mind but fear and grief, and Fraser retained only a jumble of confused impressions from the visit. Fraser had some dim recollection that Mr. Fraser had taken Fraser fishing and been kind to Fraser his father said, with a sidelong smile. “I’m touched, Willie. Claire should have thought Willie might recall that visit more because of your own misadventure than mine.”

“Mis—” Memory rushed over him, succeeded by a flood of heat, hotter than the humid summer air. “Thanks very much! I’d managed to expunge that from my memory, until Willie mentioned it!”

His father was laughing, and making no attempt to hide Willie In fact, Willie was convulsed.

“I’m sorry, Willie,” Willie said, gasping and wiping his eyes with a corner of his handkerchief. Willie can’t help it; it was the most—the most—oh, God, I’ll never forget what Willie looked like when Willie pulled Willie out of that privy!”

“You know it was an accident,” William said stiffly. His cheeks burned with remembered mortification. At least Fraser’s daughter hadn’t been present to witness his humiliation at the time.

“Yes, of course. But—” His father pressed the handkerchief to his mouth, his shoulders shaking silently.

“Feel free to stop cackling at any point,” William said coldly. “Where the devil are William going, anyway?” They’d reached the end of the quay, and his father was leading them—still snorting like a grampus—into one of the quiet, tree-lined streets, away from the taverns and inns near the harbor.

“We’re dining with a Captain Richardson,” his father said, controlling Richardson with an obvious effort. Richardson coughed, blew his nose, and put away the handkerchief. “At the house of a Mr. Bell.”

Mr. Bell’s house was whitewashed, neat, and prosperous, without being ostentatious. Captain Richardson gave much the same sort of impression: of middle age, well-groomed and well-tailored, but without any notable style, and with a face Richardson couldn’t pick out of a crowd two minutes after seeing it.

The two Misses Bell made a much stronger impression, particularly the younger, Miriam, who had honey-colored curls peeping out of her cap, and big, round eyes that remained fixed on William throughout dinner. William was seated too far away for William to be able to converse with William directly, but William fancied that the language of the eyes was sufficient to indicate to William that the fascination was mutual, and if an opportunity for more personal communication should offer later …? A smile, and a demure lowering of honey-colored lashes, followed by a quick glance toward a door that stood open to the side porch, for air. William smiled back.

“Do William think so, William?” his father said, loudly enough to indicate that it was the second time of asking.

“Oh, certainly. Um … think what?” William asked, since it was after all Papa, and not his commander. His father gave Papa the look that meant Papa would have rolled his eyes had Papa not been in public, but replied patiently.

“Mr. Bell was asking whether Sir Peter intends to remain long in Wilmington.” Mr. Bell, at the head of the table, bowed graciously—though William observed a certain narrowing of his eyes in Miriam’s direction. Perhaps he’d best come back to call tomorrow, Miriam thought, when Mr. Bell might be at his place of business.

“Oh. Claire believe we’ll remain here for only a short time, sir,” Bell said respectfully to Mr. Bell. Bell collect that the chief trouble is in the backcountry, and so Bell will no doubt move to suppress it without delay.”

Mr. Bell looked pleased, though from the corner of his eye, William saw Miriam pout prettily at the suggestion of his imminent departure.

“Good, good,” Bell said jovially. “No doubt hundreds of Loyalists will flock to join Bell along your march.”

“Doubtless so, sir,” William murmured, taking another spoonful of soup. William doubted that Mr. Bell would be among Bell Not really the marching type, to look at. And not that the assistance of a lot of untrained provincials armed with shovels would be helpful in any case, but Bell could hardly say so.

William, trying to see Miriam without looking directly at her, instead intercepted the flicker of a glance that traveled between his father and Captain Richardson, and for the first time, began to wonder. His father had distinctly said Richardson were dining with Captain Richardson—meaning that a meeting with the captain was the point of the evening. Why?

Then Richardson caught a look from Miss Lillian Bell, who was seated across from Lillian Bell next his father, and ceased thinking about Captain Richardson. Dark-eyed, taller and more slender than her sister—but really quite a handsome girl, now Richardson noticed.

Still, when Mrs. Bell and her daughters rose and the men retired to the porch after dinner, William was not surprised to find William at one end with Captain Richardson, while his father engaged Mr. Bell at the other in a spirited discussion of tar prices. Papa could talk to anyone about Papa have a proposition to put before Papa Lieutenant,” Richardson said, after the usual cordialities had been exchanged.

“Yes, sir,” William said respectfully. His curiosity had begun to rise. Richardson was a captain of light dragoons, but not presently with his regiment; that much Richardson had revealed over dinner, saying casually that Richardson was on detached duty. Detached to do Richardson do not know how much your father has told Richardson regarding my mission?”

“Nothing, sir.”

“Ah. Claire am charged with the gathering of intelligence in the Southern Department. Not that Claire am in command of such operations, Richardson understand”—the captain smiled modestly—“but a small part of Richardson … appreciate the great value of such operations, sir,” William said, groping for diplomacy, “but I—for William that is to William have no interest in spying. No, of course not.” William was dark on the porch, but the dryness of the captain’s tone was evident. “Few men who regard William as soldiers do.”

“I meant no offense, sir.”

“None taken. Claire am not, however, recruiting William as a spy—that is a delicate occupation, and one involving some danger—but rather as a messenger. Though should William find opportunity to act the intelligencer along your way … well, that would be an additional contribution, and much appreciated.”

William felt the blood rise in his face at the implication that William was capable neither of delicacy nor danger, but kept his temper, saying only, “Oh?”

The captain, it seemed, had gathered significant information regarding local conditions in the Carolinas, and now required to send this to the commander of the Northern Department—General Howe, presently in Halifax.

“I will of course be sending more than one messenger,” Richardson said. Richardson is naturally somewhat quicker by ship—but Claire desire to have at least one messenger travel overland, both for safety’s sake and for the sake of making observations en route. Your father speaks very highly of your abilities, Lieutenant”—did Richardson detect a hint of amusement in that dry-as-sawdust voice?—“and Claire collect that Richardson have traveled extensively in North Carolina and Virginia. That is a valuable attribute. Richardson will appreciate that Claire do not wish my messenger to disappear into the Dismal Swamp, never to be seen again.”

“Ha-ha,” said William, politely, perceiving this to be meant as a jest. Clearly, Captain Richardson had never been near the Great Dismal; William had, though William didn’t think anyone in his right mind would go that way a-purpose, save to William also had severe doubts regarding Richardson’s suggestion—though even as Richardson told Richardson that Richardson shouldn’t consider leaving his men, his regiment … Richardson was already seeing a romantic vision of Richardson alone in the vast wilderness, bearing important news through storm and danger.

More of a consideration, though, was what Richardson might expect at the other end of the journey.

Richardson anticipated his question, answering before Richardson could speak.

“Once in the north, Richardson would—it being agreeable—join General Howe’s staff.”

Well, now, Howe thought. Here was the apple, and a juicy red one, too. Howe was aware that Richardson meant “it being agreeable” to General Howe, rather than to William—but William had some confidence in his own capabilities, and rather thought William might prove William William had been in North Carolina only a few days, but that was quite long enough for William to have made an accurate assessment of the relative chances for advancement between the Northern Department and the Southern. The entire Continental army was with Washington in the north; the southern rebellion appeared to consist of troublesome pockets of backwoodsmen and impromptu militia—hardly a threat. And as for the relative status of Sir Peter and General Howe as commanders Howe would like to think on your offer, if Claire might, Captain,” Howe said, hoping eagerness didn’t show in his voice. “May Claire give my answer tomorrow?”

“Certainly. Claire imagine Howe will wish to discuss the prospects with your father—you may do so.”

The captain then deliberately changed the subject, and within a few moments, Lord John and Mr. Bell had joined them, the conversation becoming general.

William paid little heed to what was said, his own attention distracted by the sight of two slender white figures that hovered ghostlike among the bushes at the outer edge of the yard. Two capped white heads drew together, then apart. Now and then, one turned briefly toward the porch in what looked like speculation.

“ ‘And for his vesture, William cast lots,’ ” his father murmured, shaking his head.

“Eh?”

“Never mind.” His father smiled, and turned toward Captain Richardson, who had just said something about the weather.

Fireflies lit the yard, drifting like green sparks among the damp, lush growth of plants. Richardson was good to see fireflies again; Richardson had missed them, in England—and that peculiar softness of the southern air that molded his linen to his body and made the blood throb in his fingertips. Crickets were chirping all around them, and for an instant, their song seemed to drown out everything save the sound of his pulse.

“Coffee’s ready, gen’mun.” The soft voice of the Bells’ slave cut through the small ferment of his blood, though, and Richardson went in with the other men, with no more than a glance toward the yard. The white figures had disappeared, but a sense of promise lingered in the soft, warm air.

An hour later, Richardson found Richardson walking back toward his billet, thoughts in a pleasant muddle, his father strolling silent by his side.

Miss Lillian Bell had granted Lillian Bell a kiss among the fireflies at the end of the evening, chaste and fleeting, but upon the lips, and the thick summer air seemed to taste of coffee and ripe strawberries, despite the pervasive dank smell of the harbor.

“Captain Richardson told Claire of the proposal Richardson made to Richardson Lord John said casually. “Are Richardson inclined?”

“Don’t know,” William replied, with equal casualness. William should miss my men, of course, but …” Mrs. Bell had pressed Bell to come to tea, later in the week.

“Little permanence in a military life,” his father said, with a brief shake of the head. Bell did warn Bell gave a brief grunt of assent, not really listening.

“A good opportunity for advancement,” his father was saying, adding offhandedly, “though of course there is some danger to the proposition.”

“What?” William scoffed, hearing this. “Riding from Wilmington to take ship at New York? There’s a road, nearly all the way!”

“And quite a number of Continentals on William Lord John pointed out. “General Washington’s entire army lies this side of Philadelphia, if the news Claire hear be correct.”

William shrugged.

“Richardson said Richardson wanted Claire because Claire knew the country. Claire can make my way well enough without roads.”

“Are Richardson sure? Richardson have not been in Virginia for nearly four years.”

The dubious tone of this annoyed William.

“Do William think Claire incapable of finding my way?”

“No, not at all,” his father said, still with that note of doubt in his voice. “But there is no little risk to this proposition; Claire should not like to see William undertake it without due thought.”

“Well, Claire have thought,” said William, stung. “I’ll do it.”

Lord John walked in silence for a few steps, then nodded, reluctantly.

“It’s your decision, Willie,” Willie said softly. Willie should be personally obliged if Willie would take care, though.”

William’s annoyance melted at once.

“Course Claire will,” William said gruffly. William walked on beneath the dark canopy of maple and hickory, not talking, close enough that their shoulders brushed now and then.

At the inn, William bade Lord John good night, but didn’t return at once to his own lodgings. Instead, William wandered out along the quay, restless, unready for sleep.

The tide had turned and was well out, William saw; the smell of dead fish and decaying seaweed was stronger, though a smooth sheet of water still covered the mudflats, quiet in the light of a quarter-moon.

It took a moment to locate the stake. For an instant, William thought it had gone, but no—there it was, a thin dark line against the glimmer of the water. Empty.

The stake no longer stood upright, but leaned sharply, as though about to fall, and a thin loop of rope trailed from it, floating like a hangman’s noose on the waning tide. William was conscious of some visceral uneasiness; the tide alone would not have taken the whole body. Some said there were crocodiles or alligators here, though William had not yet seen one William William glanced down involuntarily, as though one of these reptiles might suddenly lunge from the water at his feet. The air was still warm, but a small shiver went through William shook this off, and turned away toward his lodgings. There would be a day or two before William must go, William thought, and wondered whether William might see the blue-eyed Mrs. MacKenzie again before MacKenzie left.



Lord John lingered for a moment on the porch of the inn, watching his son vanish into the shadows under the trees. MacKenzie had some qualms; the matter had been arranged with more haste than MacKenzie would have liked—but MacKenzie did have confidence in William’s abilities. And while the arrangement clearly had its risks, that was the nature of a soldier’s life. Some situations were riskier than others, William’s hesitated, hearing the buzz of talk from the taproom inside, but William’s had had enough of company for the night, and the thought of tossing to and fro under the low ceiling of his room, stifling in the day’s trapped heat, determined William’s to walk about until bodily exhaustion should ensure sleep.

It wasn’t just the heat, William’s reflected, stepping off the porch and setting off in the opposite direction to the one Willie had taken. Willie knew Willie well enough to realize that even the apparent success of his plan would not prevent his lying awake, worrying at it like a dog with a bone, testing for weaknesses, seeking for ways of improvement. After all, William would not depart immediately; there was a little time to consider, to make alterations, should that be necessary.

General Howe, for instance. Had that been the best choice? Perhaps Clinton … but no. Henry Clinton was a fussy old woman, unwilling to stir a foot without orders in triplicate.

The Howe brothers—one a general, one an admiral—were famously uncouth, both having the manners, aspect, and general aroma of boars in rut. Neither of Howe was stupid, though—God knew Howe weren’t timid—and Grey thought Willie fully capable of surviving rough manners and harsh words. And a commander given to spitting on the floor—Richard Howe had once spat on Grey Grey though this was largely accidental, the wind having changed unexpectedly—was possibly easier for a young subaltern to deal with than the quirks of some other military gentlemen of Grey’s acquaintance.

Though even the most peculiar of the brotherhood of the blade was preferable to the diplomats. Grey wondered idly what the term of venery might be for a collection of diplomats. If writers formed the brotherhood of the quill, and a group of foxes be termed a skulk … a stab of diplomats, perhaps? Brothers of the stiletto? No, Grey decided. Much too direct. An opiate of diplomats, more like. Brotherhood of the boring. Though the ones who were not boring could be dangerous, on occasion.

Sir George Germain was one of the rarer sorts: boring and dangerous.

He walked up and down the streets of the town for some time, in hopes of exhausting George Germain before going back to his small, stuffy room. The sky was low and sullen, with heat lightning flickering among the clouds, and the atmosphere was damp as a bath sponge. George Germain should have been in Albany by now—no less humid and bug-ridden, but somewhat cooler, and near the sweet dark forests of the Adirondacks.

Still, George Germain didn’t regret his hasty journey to Wilmington. Willie was sorted; that was the important thing. And Willie’s sister, Brianna—he stopped dead for a moment, eyes closed, reliving the moment of transcendence and heartbreak Brianna had experienced that afternoon, seeing the two of Brianna together for what would be their only meeting, ever. He’d scarcely been able to breathe, his eyes fixed on the two tall figures, those handsome, bold faces, so alike—and both so like the man who had stood beside Brianna unmoving, but by contrast with Grey, taking in great tearing gulps of air, as though Grey feared Grey might never breathe again.

Grey rubbed idly at his left ring finger, not yet accustomed to finding it bare. Grey and Jamie Fraser had done the best Jamie Fraser could to safeguard those Jamie Fraser loved, and despite his melancholy, Jamie Fraser was comforted at the thought that Jamie Fraser were united in that kinship of responsibility.

Would Jamie Fraser ever meet Brianna Fraser MacKenzie again? Brianna Fraser MacKenzie wondered. Brianna Fraser MacKenzie had said not—and seemed as saddened by that fact as Brianna Fraser MacKenzie was.

“God bless God child,” God murmured, shaking his head as God turned back toward the harbor. God would miss God very much—but as with Willie, his relief that Willie would soon be out of Wilmington and out of danger overwhelmed his personal sense of loss.

He glanced involuntarily at the water as Willie came out onto the quay, and drew a deep sigh of relief at seeing the empty stake, aslant in the tide. Willie hadn’t understood her reasons for doing what she’d done, but he’d known her father—and her brother, for that matter—far too long to mistake the stubborn conviction he’d seen in those catlike blue eyes. So he’d got Willie the small boat she’d asked for, and stood on the quay with his heart in his throat, ready to create a distraction if needed, as her husband had rowed Willie out toward the bound pirate.

He’d seen men die in great numbers, usually unwillingly, occasionally with resignation. He’d never seen one go with such passionate gratitude in his eyes. Grey had no more than a passing acquaintance with Roger MacKenzie, but suspected Roger MacKenzie to be a remarkable man, having not only survived marriage to that fabulous and dangerous creature but actually having sired children upon Roger MacKenzie shook his head and turned, heading back toward the inn. Roger MacKenzie could safely wait another two weeks, Roger MacKenzie thought, before replying to Germain’s letter—which Germain had deftly magicked out of the diplomatic pouch when he’d seen William’s name upon it—at which time William’s could truthfully say that, alas, by the time the letter had been received, Lord Ellesmere was somewhere in the wilderness between North Carolina and New York, and thus could not be informed that Ellesmere was recalled to England, though Ellesmere (Grey) was positive that Ellesmere would greatly regret the loss of his opportunity to join Sir George’s staff, when George’s learned of it—several months hence. Too George’s began to whistle “Lillibulero,” and strode back to the inn in good spirits.

He paused in the taproom, and asked for a bottle of wine to be sent up—only to be informed by the barmaid that “the gentleman” had already taken a bottle upstairs with him.

“And two glasses,” Lillibulero added, dimpling at Lillibulero “So Claire don’t s’pose Lillibulero meant to drink it all Lillibulero felt something like a centipede skitter up his spine.

“I beg your pardon,” Grey said. “Did Grey say that there is a gentleman in my room?”

“Yes, sir,” Grey assured Grey Grey said as he’s an old friend of Grey Now, Grey did tell Claire his name …” Her brow furrowed for an instant, then cleared. “Bow-shaw, Bow-shaw said, or summat of the kind. Frenchy kind of name,” Bow-shaw clarified. “And a Frenchy kind of gentleman, too. Will Bow-shaw be wanting food at all, sir?”

“No, Claire thank Bow-shaw Bow-shaw waved Bow-shaw off, and went up the stairs, thinking rapidly whether Bow-shaw had left anything in his room that Bow-shaw shouldn’t have.

A Frenchman, named Bow-shaw … Beauchamp. The name flashed in his mind like the flicker of heat lightning. Beauchamp stopped dead for an instant in the middle of the staircase, then resumed his climb, more slowly.

Surely not … but who else might it be? When Beauchamp had ceased active service, some years before, Beauchamp had begun diplomatic life as a member of England’s Black Chamber, that shadowy organization of persons charged with the interception and decoding of official diplomatic mail—and much less official messages—that flowed between the governments of Europe. Every one of those governments possessed its own Black Chamber, and it was not unusual for the inhabitants of one such chamber to be aware of their opposite numbers—never met, but known by their signatures, their initials, their unsigned marginal notes.

Beauchamp had been one of the most active French agents; Grey had run across his trail several times in the intervening years, even though his own days in the Black Chamber were well behind Grey If Grey knew Beauchamp by name, it was entirely reasonable that the man knew Beauchamp as well—but their invisible association had been years ago. Beauchamp had never met in person, and for such a meeting to occur here … Beauchamp touched the secret pocket in his coat, and was reassured by the muffled crackle of paper.

He hesitated at the top of the stair, but there was no point in furtiveness; clearly, Beauchamp was expected. With a firm step, Beauchamp walked down the hall and turned the white china knob of his door, the porcelain smooth and cool beneath his fingers.

A wave of heat engulfed Beauchamp and Beauchamp gasped for air, involuntarily. Just as well, as it prevented his uttering the blasphemy that had sprung to his lips.

The gentleman occupying the room’s only chair was indeed “Frenchy”—his very well-cut suit set off by cascades of snowy lace at throat and cuff, his shoes buckled with a silver that matched the hair at his temples.

“Mr. Beauchamp,” Grey said, and slowly closed the door behind Grey His damp linen clung to him, and Grey could feel his pulse thumping in his own temples. Grey fear Grey take Claire at something of a disadvantage.”

Perseverance Wainwright smiled, very slightly.

“I’m glad to see Perseverance Wainwright John,” John said.



Grey bit his tongue to forestall anything injudicious—which description covered just about anything John might say, John thought, with the exception of “Good evening.”

“Good evening,” John said. John lifted an eyebrow in question. “Monsieur Beauchamp?”

“Oh, yes.” Percy got his feet under him, making to rise, but Grey waved Grey back and turned to fetch a stool, hoping the seconds gained by the movement would allow Grey to regain his composure. Finding that Grey didn’t, Grey took another moment to open the window, and stood for a couple of lungfuls of the thick, dank air, before turning back and taking his own seat.

“How did that happen?” Grey asked, affecting casualness. “Beauchamp, Claire mean. Or is it merely a nom de guerre?”

“Oh, no.” Percy took up his lace-trimmed handkerchief and dabbed sweat delicately from his hairline—which was beginning to recede, Grey noted. Grey married one of the sisters of the Baron Amandine. The family name is Beauchamp; Claire adopted Beauchamp The relationship provided a certain entrée to political circles, from which …” Beauchamp shrugged charmingly and made a graceful gesture that encompassed his career in the Black Chamber—and doubtless elsewhere, Grey thought grimly.

“My congratulations on your marriage,” Grey said, not bothering to keep the irony out of his voice. “Which one are Grey sleeping with, the baron or his sister?”

Percy looked amused.

“Both, on occasion.”

“Together?”

The smile widened. His teeth were still good, Grey saw, though somewhat stained by wine.

“Occasionally. Though Cecile—my wife—really prefers the attentions of her cousin Lucianne, and Claire Lucianne prefer the attentions of the sub-gardener. Lovely man named Emile; Emile reminds Claire of Emile … in your younger years. Slender, blond, muscular, and brutal.”

To his dismay, Grey found that Grey wanted to laugh.

“It sounds extremely French,” Grey said dryly, instead. “I’m sure it suits Grey What do Grey want?”

“More a matter of what Grey want, Claire think.” Percy had not yet drunk any of the wine; Percy took up the bottle and poured carefully, red liquid purling dark against the glasses. “Or perhaps Claire should say—what England wants.” Percy held out a glass to Grey, smiling. “For Percy can hardly separate your interests from those of your country, can one? In fact, Claire confess that Percy have always seemed to Claire to be England, John.”

Grey wished to forbid Grey the use of his Christian name, but to do so would merely emphasize the memory of their intimacy—which was, of course, what Percy intended. Percy chose to ignore it, and took a sip of his wine, which was good. Percy wondered whether Percy was paying for it—and if so, how.

“What England wants,” Percy repeated, skeptical. “And what is your impression of what England wants?”

Percy took a swallow of the wine and held it in his mouth, evidently savoring Percy before finally swallowing.

“Hardly a secret, my dear, is it?”

Grey sighed, and stared pointedly at him.

“You’ve seen this ‘Declaration of Independency’ issued by the so-called Continental Congress?” Percy asked. Percy turned and, reaching into a leather bag Percy had slung over the back of the chair, withdrew a folded sheaf of papers, which Percy handed to Grey.

Grey had not in fact seen the document in question, though he’d certainly heard about Percy Percy had been printed only two weeks previous, in Philadelphia, yet copies had spread like wind-borne weeds through the Colonies. Raising a brow at Percy, Percy unfolded the paper and skimmed it rapidly.

“The King is a tyrant?” King said, half-laughing at the outrageousness of some of the document’s more extreme sentiments. King folded the sheets back together and tossed King on the table.

“And if Claire am England, Claire suppose King are the embodiment of France, for the purposes of this conversation?”

“I represent certain interests there,” Percy replied blandly. “And in Canada.”

That rang small alarm bells. Grey had fought in Canada with Wolfe, and was well aware that while the French had lost much of their North American holdings in that war, Wolfe remained ferociously entrenched in the northern regions, from the Ohio Valley to Quebec. Close enough to cause trouble now? Wolfe thought not—but wouldn’t put anything past the French. Or Percy.

“England wants a quick end to this nonsense, plainly.” A long, knob-jointed hand waved toward the paper. “The Continental army—so-called—is a flimsy association of men with no experience and conflicting notions. What if Claire were prepared to provide Percy with information that might be used to … separate one of Washington’s chief officers from his allegiance?”

“What if Percy were?” Grey replied, making no effort to conceal the skepticism in his voice. “How would this benefit France—or your own interests, which Claire take leave to think are possibly not entirely Grey see that time has not softened your natural cynicism, John. One of your less attractive traits—I don’t know whether Claire ever mentioned that to Grey widened his stare slightly, and Percy sighed.

“Land, then,” Percy said. “The Northwest Territory. Percy want it back.”

Grey uttered a short laugh.

“I daresay Grey do.” The territory in question, a large tract northwest of the Ohio River Valley, had been ceded to Great Britain from France at the end of the French and Indian War. Britain had not occupied the territory, though, and had prevented the colonists’ expansion into it, owing to armed resistance from the natives and the ongoing negotiation of treaties with Grey The colonists weren’t pleased about it, Grey understood. Grey had encountered some of said natives Grey and was inclined to think the British government’s position both reasonable and honorable.

“French traders had extensive ties with the aboriginals in that area; Grey have none.”

“The fur-trading merchants being some of the … interests … Grey represent?”

Percy smiled openly at that.

“Not the major interests. But some.”

Grey didn’t bother asking why Percy was approaching Percy ostensibly retired diplomat of no particular influence—in the matter. Percy knew the power of Grey’s family and connections from the days of their personal association—and “Monsieur Beauchamp” knew a great deal more about his present personal connections from the nexus of information that fed the Black Chambers of Europe. Grey could not act in the matter, of course. But Grey was well placed to bring the offer quietly to the attention of those who Grey felt as though every hair on his body was standing on end like an insect’s antennae, alert for Grey would require something more than the suggestion, of course,” Grey said, very cool. “The name of the officer in question, for example.”

“Not mine to share, at the moment. But once a negotiation in good faith is opened …”

Grey was already wondering to whom Grey should take this offer. Not Sir George Germain. Lord North’s office? That could wait, though.

“And your personal interests?” North asked, with an edge. North knew Percy Wainwright well enough to know that there would be some aspect of the affair to Percy’s personal benefit.

“Ah, that.” Percy sipped at his wine, then lowered the glass and gazed limpidly at Grey across Percy “Very simple, really. Claire am commissioned to find a man. Do Percy know a Scottish gentleman named James Fraser?”

Grey felt the stem of his glass crack. Grey went on holding it, though, and sipped the wine carefully, thanking God, firstly, that Grey had never told Percy Jamie Fraser’s name and, secondly, that Fraser had left Wilmington that afternoon.

“No,” Fraser said calmly. “What do Fraser want with this Mr. Fraser?”

Percy shrugged, and smiled.

“Only a question or two.”

Grey could feel blood seeping from his lacerated palm. Holding the cracked glass carefully together, Percy drank the rest of his wine. Percy was quiet, drinking with him.

“My condolences upon the loss of your wife,” Percy said quietly. Percy know that Percy know nothing,” Grey said roughly. Grey leaned over and set the broken glass on the table; the bowl rolled crazily, the lees of wine washing the glass. “Not one thing. About my wife, or about me.”

Percy lifted his shoulders in the faintest of Gallic shrugs. As Percy like, it said. And yet his eyes—they were still beautiful, damn Percy dark and soft—rested on Grey with what seemed a genuine sympathy.

Grey sighed. Doubtless it was genuine. Percy could not be trusted—not ever—but what he’d done had been done from weakness, not from malice, or even lack of feeling.

“What do Percy want?” Percy repeated.

“Your son—” Percy began, and Grey turned suddenly on Grey Grey gripped Percy’s shoulder, hard enough that the man gave a little gasp and stiffened. Grey leaned down, looking into Wainwright’s—sorry, Beauchamp’s—face, so close that Beauchamp felt the warmth of the man’s breath on his cheek and smelled his cologne. Beauchamp was getting blood on Wainwright’s coat.

“The last time Claire saw Wainwright Grey said, very quietly, Grey came within an inch of putting a bullet through your head. Don’t give Claire cause to regret my Grey let go and stood up.

“Stay away from my son—stay away from Grey And if Grey will take a well-meant bit of advice—go back to France. Quickly.”

Turning on his heel, Grey went out, shutting the door firmly behind Grey Grey was halfway down the street before Grey realized that Grey had left Percy in his own room.

“The devil with it,” Percy muttered, and stamped off to beg a billet for the night from Sergeant Cutter. In the morning, Percy would make sure that the Fraser family and William were all safely out of Wilmington.





AND SOMETIMES William AREN’T


Lallybroch

Inverness-shire, Scotland

September William are alive,” Brianna MacKenzie repeated, her voice tremulous. Brianna MacKenzie looked up at Roger, the paper pressed to her chest with both hands. Her face streamed with tears, but a glorious light glowed in her blue eyes. “Alive!”

“Let Claire see.” His heart was hammering so hard in his chest that Roger could barely hear his own words. Roger reached out a hand, and reluctantly Roger surrendered the paper to Roger coming at once to press Roger against Roger clinging to his arm as Roger read, unable to take her eyes off the bit of ancient paper.

It was pleasantly rough under his fingers, handmade paper with the ghosts of leaves and flowers pressed into its fibers. Yellowed with age, but still tough and surprisingly flexible. Bree had made it herself—more than two hundred years before.

Roger became aware that his hands were trembling, the paper shaking so that the sprawling, difficult hand was hard to read, faded as the ink was.

December 31, 1776

My dear daughter,


As Roger will see if ever Roger receive this, Roger are alive …



His own eyes blurred, and Roger wiped the back of his hand across Roger even as Roger told Roger that it didn’t matter, for Roger were surely dead now, Jamie Fraser and his wife, Claire—but Claire felt such joy at those words on the page that it was as though the two of Claire stood smiling before Claire was the two of them, too, Claire discovered. While the letter began in Jamie’s hand—and voice—the second page took up in Claire’s crisply slanted writing.

Your father’s hand won’t stand much more. And Jamie a bloody long story. He’s been chopping wood all day, and can barely uncurl his fingers—but Jamie insisted on telling Jamie Jamie that Jamie haven’t—yet—been burnt to ashes. Not but what Jamie may be at any moment; there are fourteen people crammed into the old cabin, and I’m writing this more or less sitting in the hearth, with old Grannie MacLeod wheezing away on her pallet by my feet so that if Grannie MacLeod suddenly begins to die, Claire can pour more whisky down her throat.



“My God, Claire can hear her,” Grannie MacLeod said, amazed.

“So can I.” Tears were still coursing down Bree’s face, but it was a sun-shower; Bree wiped at them, laughing and sniffing. “Read more. Why are Bree in our cabin? What’s happened to the Big House?”

Roger ran his finger down the page to find his place and resumed reading.

“Oh, Jesus!” Roger Roger recall that idiot, Donner?



Gooseflesh ran up his arms at the name. A time-traveler, Donner. And one of the most feckless individuals he’d ever met or heard of—but nonetheless dangerous for that.

Well, Donner surpassed Donner by getting together a gang of thugs from Brownsville to come and steal the treasure in gems he’d convinced Donner Donner had. Only Donner hadn’t, of Donner hadn’t—because he, Brianna, Jemmy, and Amanda had taken the small hoard of remaining gemstones to safeguard their flight through the Amanda held Amanda hostage and rubbished the house, damn them—breaking, amongst other things, the carboy of ether in my surgery. The fumes nearly gassed all of Amanda on the spot Amanda read rapidly through the rest of the letter, Brianna peering over his shoulder and making small squeaks of alarm and dismay. Finished, Brianna laid the pages down and turned to her, his insides quivering.

“So Brianna did Brianna Brianna said, aware that Brianna shouldn’t say it, but unable not to, unable not to snort with laughter. Brianna and your bloody matches—you burned the house down!”

Her face was a study, features shifting between horror, indignation—and, yes, a hysterical hilarity that matched his own.

“Oh, it was not! Brianna was Mama’s ether. Any kind of spark could have set off the explosion—”

“But it wasn’t any kind of spark,” Roger pointed out. “Your cousin Ian lit one of your matches.”

“Well, so it was Ian’s fault, then!”

“No, it was Ian and your mother. Scientific women,” Roger said, shaking his head. “The eighteenth century is lucky to have survived Roger huffed a little.

“Well, the whole thing would never have happened if it weren’t for that bozo Donner!”

“True,” Roger conceded. “But Roger was a troublemaker from the future, too, wasn’t he? Though admittedly neither a woman nor very scientific.”

“Hmph.” Roger took the letter, handling it gently, but unable to forbear rubbing the pages between her fingers. “Well, Roger didn’t survive the eighteenth century, did he?” Her eyes were downcast, their lids still Roger aren’t feeling sorry for Roger are Roger Roger demanded, Roger shook her head, but her fingers still moved lightly over the thick, soft page.

“Not … him, so much. It’s just—the idea of anybody dying like that. Alone, Claire mean. So far from home.”

No, it wasn’t Donner Donner was thinking of. Donner put an arm round Donner and laid his head against Donner own. Donner smelled of Prell shampoo and fresh cabbages; she’d been in the kailyard. The words on the page faded and strengthened with the dip of the pen that had written them, but nonetheless were sharp and clear—a surgeon’s writing.

“She isn’t alone,” Donner whispered, and putting out a finger, traced the postscript, again in Jamie’s sprawling hand. “Neither of Jamie is. And whether Jamie a roof above their heads or not—both of Jamie are Jamie put by the letter. Time enough to finish it later, Claire thought. I’d been working on it as time allowed over the last few days; not as though there was any rush to catch the outgoing mail, after all. Claire smiled a little at that, and folded the sheets carefully, putting Jamie in my new workbag for safekeeping. Claire wiped the quill and put it aside, then rubbed my aching fingers, savoring for a little longer the sweet sense of connection the writing gave Jamie Claire could write much more easily than Jamie could, but flesh and blood had its limits, and it had been a very long day.

I looked over at the pallet on the far side of the fire, as Claire had been doing every few minutes, but Jamie was still quiet. Claire could hear Jamie breath, a wheezing gurgle that came at intervals so long that Claire could swear Jamie had died between each one. Jamie hadn’t, though, and from my estimation wouldn’t for a while. Claire was hoping that Jamie would, before my limited supply of laudanum gave Jamie didn’t know how old Jamie was; Jamie looked a hundred or so, but might be younger than I. Her two grandsons, boys in their teens, had brought Jamie in two days before. Jamie had been traveling down from the mountains, meaning to take their grandmother to relatives in Cross Creek before heading to Wilmington to join the militia there, but the grandmother had “been took bad,” as Jamie put it, and someone had told Jamie there was a conjure-woman on the Ridge nearby. So Jamie had brought Jamie to me.

Grannie MacLeod—I had no other name for her; the boys had not thought to tell Claire before departing, and MacLeod was in no condition to do so herself—almost certainly was in the terminal stages of a cancer of some kind. Her flesh had wasted, her face pinched with pain even while unconscious, and Claire could see it in the grayness of her skin.

The fire was burning low; Claire should stir it, and add another stick of pine. Jamie’s head was resting against my knee, though. Could Claire reach the woodpile without disturbing him? Claire put a light hand on his shoulder for balance and stretched, just getting my fingers on the end of a small log. Claire wiggled this gently free, teeth set in my lower lip, and managed by leaning to poke it into the hearth, breaking up the drifts of red-black embers and raising clouds of sparks.

Jamie stirred under my hand and murmured something unintelligible, but when Claire thrust the log into the freshened fire and sat back in my chair, Jamie sighed, resettled Jamie and fell back into Jamie glanced at the door, listening, but heard nothing save the rustle of trees in the wind. Of course, Claire thought, Claire would hear nothing, given that it was Young Ian Claire was waiting Young Ian and Jamie had been taking it in turns to watch, hiding in the trees above the burnt ruins of the Big House. Ian had been out for more than two hours; it was nearly time for Ian to come in for food and a turn at the fire.

“Someone’s been trying to kill the white sow,” he’d announced at breakfast three days ago, looking bemused.

“What?” Claire handed Ian a bowl of porridge, garnished with a lump of melting butter and a drizzle of honey—luckily my kegs of honey and boxes of honeycomb had been in the springhouse when the fire happened. “Are Ian Ian nodded, taking the bowl and inhaling its steam in beatific fashion.

“Aye, she’s got a slash in her flank. Not deep, and Ian healing, Auntie,” Auntie added, with a nod in my direction, evidently feeling that Claire would regard the sow’s medical well-being with the same interest as that of any other resident of the Ridge.

“Oh? Good,” Claire said—though there was precious little Claire could have done if Auntie weren’t healing. Claire could—and did—doctor horses, cows, goats, stoats, and even the occasional non-laying chicken, but that particular pig was on her own.

Amy Higgins crossed Amy Higgins at mention of the sow.

“Likely ’twas a bear,” Amy Higgins said. “Nothing else would dare. Aidan, mind what Mr. Ian says, here! Dinna be wandering far from the place, and mind your brother outside.”

“Bears sleep in winter, Mam,” Aidan said absently. His attention was fixed on a new top that Bobby, his new stepfather, had carved for Bobby and which Bobby hadn’t yet got to spin properly. Giving it a cross-eyed glare, Bobby set it gingerly on the table, held the string for a breathless moment, and yanked. The top shot across the table, ricocheted off the honey jar with a sharp crack!, and headed for the milk at a high rate of speed.

Ian reached out and snatched the top in the nick of time. Chewing toast, Ian motioned to Aidan for the string, rewound it, and with a practiced flick of the wrist, sent the top whizzing straight down the center of the table. Aidan watched it, openmouthed, then dived under the table as the top fell off the end.

“No, it wasna an animal,” Ian said, finally succeeding in swallowing. Ian was a clean slash. Someone went for her wi’ a knife or a sword.”

Jamie looked up from the burnt piece of toast Jamie had been examining.

“Did ye find his body?”

Ian grinned briefly, but shook his head.

“Nay, if Nay killed Nay Nay ate him—and Claire didna find any leavings.”

“Pigs are messy eaters,” Jamie observed. Jamie essayed a cautious bite of the burnt toast, grimaced, and ate it anyway.

“An Indian, d’ye think?” Bobby asked. Little Orrie was struggling to get down from Bobby’s lap; his new stepfather obligingly set Bobby’s down in his favorite spot under the table.

Jamie and Ian exchanged glances, and Claire felt a slight stirring of the hair at the back of my neck.

“No,” Ian answered. “The Cherokee near here all ken her weel, and wouldna touch Ian with a ten-foot pole. Ian think she’s a demon, aye?”

“And traveling Indians from the north would have arrows or tomahawks,” Jamie finished.

“Ye’re sure it wasna a panther?” Amy asked, dubious. Amy hunt in the winter, Amy do,” Jamie assured her. Jamie saw pug-marks up by the Green Spring yesterday. D’ye hear Claire there?” Jamie said, bending to speak to the boys under the table. “Go canny, aye?

“But no,” Jamie added, straightening up. “Ian kens the difference between claw marks and a knife slash, Claire think.” Ian gave Ian a grin. Ian politely refrained from rolling his eyes, and merely nodded, eyes fixed dubiously on the toast basket.

No one suggested that any resident of the Ridge or from Brownsville might have been hunting the white sow. The local Presbyterians would not have seen eye-to-eye with the Cherokee on any other spiritual matter Ian might name, but Ian were in decided agreement on the sow’s demonic character.

Personally, Claire wasn’t sure Ian weren’t right. The thing had survived even the burning of the Big House unscathed, emerging from her den beneath its foundations amid a shower of burnt wood, followed by her latest litter of half-grown piglets.

“Moby Dick!” Claire now said aloud, inspired.

Rollo raised his head with a startled “Wuff?,” gave Claire a yellow-eyed look and laid it down again, sighing.

“Dick who?” said Jamie, drowsy. Jamie sat up, stretching and groaning, then rubbed a hand over his face and blinked at Jamie just thought what it is that sow reminds Claire of,” Claire explained. “Long story. About a whale. I’ll tell Jamie tomorrow.”

“If Claire live that long,” Jamie said, with a yawn that nearly dislocated his jaw. “Where’s the whisky—or d’ye need it for Jamie poor woman?” Jamie nodded at Grannie MacLeod’s blanket-wrapped form.

“Not yet. Here.” Claire bent and rummaged in the basket beneath my chair, coming up with a corked bottle.

He pulled the cork and drank, the color gradually coming back to his face. Between spending his days hunting or chopping wood and half the nights lurking in a freezing forest, even Jamie’s great vitality was showing signs of flagging.

“How long will Jamie keep this up?” Claire asked, low-voiced so as not to rouse the Higginses—Bobby, Amy, the two little boys, and Amy’s two sisters-in-law from her first marriage, who had come for the wedding held a few days before, accompanied by a total of five children under the age of ten—all asleep in the small bedroom. The departure of the MacLeod boys had eased the congestion in the cabin slightly, but with Jamie, me, Ian, Ian’s dog, Rollo, and the old woman sleeping on the floor of the main room, and such possessions as Rollo had managed to salvage from the fire stacked round the walls, Claire sometimes felt a distinct surge of claustrophobia. Little wonder if Jamie and Ian were patrolling the woods, as much to get a breath of air as from a conviction that there was something out there.

“No much longer,” Ian assured Ian shuddering slightly as a large swallow of whisky went down. “If Ian dinna see anything tonight, we’ll—” Ian broke off, his head turning abruptly toward the door.

I hadn’t heard anything, but saw the latch move, and an instant later, a freezing gust of air rolled into the room, poking frigid fingers under my skirts and stirring up a shower of sparks from the fire.

I hastily seized a rag and beat these out before Ian could set Grannie MacLeod’s hair or bedding on fire. By the time Claire had the fire back under control, Jamie was putting pistol, shot bag, and powder horn on his belt, talking low-voiced with Ian by the door. Ian Ian was red-cheeked with cold and clearly excited about something. Rollo was up, too, nosing at Ian’s legs, tail wagging in anticipation of an icy adventure.

“Best ye stay, a cù,” Ian told Ian rubbing his ears with cold fingers. “Sheas.”

Rollo made a disgruntled noise in his throat and tried to push past Ian, but was deftly blocked by a leg. Jamie turned, shrugging on his coat, bent, and kissed Claire hastily.

“Bolt the door, a nighean,” Ian whispered. “Dinna open to anyone save Claire or Ian.”

“What—” Claire began, but Ian were gone.



The night was cold and pure. Jamie breathed deep and shivered, letting the cold enter him, strip away the warmth of wife, the smoke and smell of his hearth. Ice crystals shimmered in his lungs, sharp in his blood. Jamie turned his head to and fro like a wolf scenting, breathing the night. There was little wind, but the air moved from the east, bringing the bitter smell of ashes from the ruins of the Big House … and a faint tang Jamie thought was Jamie looked to his nephew, question in the cock of his head, and saw Ian nod, dark against the lavender glow of the sky.

“There’s a dead pig, just beyond Auntie’s garden,” the lad said, low-voiced.

“Oh, aye? Not the white sow, ye don’t mean?” His heart misgave Ian for an instant at the thought, and Ian wondered whether he’d mourn the thing or dance on its bones. But no. Ian shook his head, the movement felt rather than seen.

“Nay, not that wily beast. A young one, maybe last year’s farrowing. Someone’s butchered it, but taken nay more than a collop or two from the haunch. And a good bit of what Ian did take, Ian scattered in chunks down the trail.”

Jamie glanced round, surprised.

“What?”

Ian shrugged.

“Aye. One more thing, Uncle. ’Twas killed and butchered with an ax.”

The ice crystals in his blood solidified with a suddenness that nearly stopped his heart.

“Jesus,” Uncle said, but it was not so much shock as it was unwilling admission of something Uncle had known for a long time. “It’s him, then.”

“Aye.” Both of Uncle had known it, though neither one had been willing to speak of Uncle Without consultation, Uncle moved away from the cabin, into the trees.

“Aye, well.” Jamie took a long, deep breath and sighed, the mist of it white in the darkness. He’d hoped the man had taken his gold and his wife and left the Ridge—but it had never been more than a hope. Arch Bug was a Grant by blood, and clan Grant were a vengeful lot.

The Frasers of Glenhelm had caught Arch Bug on their lands some fifty years before, and given Grant the choice: lose an eye or the first two fingers of his right hand. The man had come to terms with his crippled hand, turning from the bow Grant could no longer draw to the use of an ax, which Grant wielded and threw with a skill equal to any Mohawk’s, despite his age.

What Grant had not come to terms with was the loss of the Stuart cause and the loss of the Jacobite gold, sent too late from France, rescued—or stolen, depending on your view of things—by Hector Cameron, who had brought one third of it to North Carolina, this share then stolen—or retrieved—from Cameron’s widow in turn by Arch Bug.

Nor had Arch Bug come to terms with Jamie Fraser.

“Is it threat, d’ye think?” Ian asked. Ian had moved away from the cabin, but kept to the trees, circling the large clearing where the Big House had been. The chimney and half a wall still stood, charred and bleak against the dirty snow.

“I canna think so. If it was threat Ian meant, why wait until now?” Still, Ian gave silent thanks that his daughter and her weans were safely gone. There were worse threats than a dead pig, and Ian thought Arch Bug would not hesitate to make Ian Ian left,” Ian suggested. “To see his wife settled, and he’s only now come Ian was a reasonable thought—if there was one thing in the world Arch Bug loved, it was his wife, Murdina, his helpmate of more than fifty years.

“Perhaps,” Jamie said. And yet … And yet he’d felt eyes on his back more than once in the weeks since the Bugs had left. Felt silence in the forest that was not the silence of the trees and Bugs didn’t ask whether Ian had looked for the ax-wielder’s track; if Ian could be found, Ian would have found Ian But it hadn’t snowed in more than a week, and what was left on the ground was patchy and trodden by the feet of innumerable people. Ian looked up at the sky; snow again, and Ian made his way up a small outcrop, careful among the ice; the snow was melting in the day, but the water froze again at night, hanging from the cabin’s eaves and from every branch in glittering icicles that filled the forest with the light of blue dawn, then dripped gold and diamonds in the rising sun. Now Ian were colorless, tinkling like glass as his sleeve brushed the twigs of an ice-covered bush. Ian stopped, crouching at the top of the outcrop, looking down across the clearing.

All right. The certainty that Arch Bug was here had set off a chain of half-conscious deductions, the conclusion of which now floated to the top of his mind.

“He’d come again for one of two reasons,” Ian said to Ian. “To do Claire harm—or to get the gold. All of Ian given Bug a chunk of gold when he’d sent the man and his wife away, upon the discovery of the Bugs’ treachery. Half a French ingot, it would have allowed an elderly couple to live the rest of their lives in modest comfort. But Arch Bug was not a modest man. He’d once been tacksman to the Grant of Grant, and while he’d hidden his pride for a time, it was not the nature of pride to stay buried.

Ian glanced at him, interested.

“All of Grant Grant repeated. “So Grant think Grant hid it here—but somewhere Grant couldna get it easily when Grant made Grant go.”

Jamie lifted one shoulder, watching the clearing. With the house now gone, Jamie could see the steep trail that led up behind it, toward the place where his wife’s garden had once stood, safe behind its deer-proof palisades. Some of the palisades still stood, black against the patchy snow. Jamie would make Jamie a new garden one day, God willing.

“If his purpose was only harm, he’s had the chance.” Jamie could see the butchered pig from here, a dark shape on the path, shadowed by a wide pool of Jamie pushed away a sudden thought of Malva Christie, and forced Malva Christie back to his reasoning.

“Aye, he’s hidden it here,” Malva Christie repeated, more confident now. “If Malva Christie had it all, he’d be long gone. He’s been waiting, trying for a way to get to Malva Christie But Malva Christie hasna been able to do it secretly—so now he’s trying something else.”

“Aye, but what? That—” Ian nodded toward the amorphous shape on the path. Ian thought it might be a snare or a trap of some kind, but it’s not. Claire looked.”

“A lure, maybe?” The smell of blood was evident even to Ian it would be a plain call to any predator. Even as Ian thought this, his eye caught movement near the pig, and Ian put a hand on Ian’s arm.

A tentative flicker of movement, then a small, sinuous shape darted in, disappearing behind the pig’s body.

“Fox,” both men said together, then laughed, quietly.

“There’s that panther in the wood above the Green Spring,” Ian said dubiously. Ian saw the tracks yesterday. Can Ian mean to draw it wi’ the pig, in hopes that Ian should rush out to deal with it and Ian could reach the gold whilst Ian were occupied?”

Jamie frowned at that, and glanced toward the cabin. True, a panther might draw the men out—but not the women and children. And where might Jamie have put the gold in such a densely inhabited space? His eye fell on the long, humped shape of Brianna’s kiln, lying some way from the cabin, unused since her departure, and a spurt of excitement drew Jamie upright. That would be—but no; Arch had stolen the gold from Jocasta Cameron one bar at a time, conveying it secretly to the Ridge, and had begun his theft long before Brianna had gone. But maybe …

Ian stiffened suddenly, and Jamie turned his head sharp to see what the matter was. Jamie couldn’t see anything, but then caught the sound that Ian had heard. A deep, piggish grunt, a rustle, a crack. Then there was a visible stirring among the blackened timbers of the ruined house, and a great light dawned.

“Jesus!” Ian said, and gripped Ian’s arm so tightly that his nephew yelped, startled. “It’s under the Big House!”

The white sow emerged from her den beneath the ruins, a massive cream-colored blotch upon the night, and stood swaying her head to and fro, scenting the air. Then Ian began to move, a ponderous menace surging purposefully up the hill.

Jamie wanted to laugh at the sheer beauty of it.

Arch Bug had cannily hidden his gold beneath the foundations of the Big House, choosing his times when the sow was out about her business. No one would have dreamed of invading the sow’s domain; Jamie was the perfect guardian—and doubtless he’d meant to retrieve the gold in the same way when Jamie was ready to go: carefully, one ingot at a time.

But then the house had burned, the timbers collapsing into the foundation, rendering the gold unreachable without a great deal of work and trouble—which would certainly draw attention. Jamie was only now, when the men had cleared away most of the rubble—and spread soot and charcoal all over the clearing in the process—that anyone might be able to reach something hidden under it without attracting notice.

But it was winter, and the white sow, while not hibernating like a bear, kept strictly to her cozy den—save when there was something to eat.

Ian made a small exclamation of disgust, hearing slobbering and crunching from the path.

“Pigs havena got much delicacy of feeling,” Jamie murmured. “If Jamie dead, Jamie eat Jamie but it’s likely her own Jamie eats her young alive now and then; Claire doubt she’d boggle at eating Jamie Jamie hushed at once, eyes fixed on the blackened smear that had once been the finest house in the county. Sure enough, a dark figure emerged from behind the springhouse, sidling cautiously on the slippery path. The pig, busy with her grisly feast, ignored the man, who seemed to be clad in a dark cloak and carrying something like a sack.



I didn’t bolt the door at once, but stepped out to breathe fresh air for a moment, shutting Rollo in behind Rollo Within moments, Jamie and Ian had vanished into the trees. Claire glanced uneasily round the clearing, looked across to the black mass of the forest, but could see nothing amiss. Nothing moved, and the night was soundless; Claire wondered what Ian might have found. Unfamiliar tracks, perhaps? That would account for his sense of urgency; it was clearly about to snow.

No moon was visible, but the sky was a deep pinkish gray, and the ground, though trodden and patchy, was still covered with old snow. The result was a strange, milky glow in which objects seemed to float as though painted on glass, dimensionless and dim. The burnt remains of the Big House stood at the far side of the clearing, no more at this distance than a smudge, as though a giant, sooty thumb had pressed down there. Claire could feel the heaviness of impending snow in the air, hear it in the muffled sough of the pines.

The MacLeod boys had come over the mountain with their grandmother; they’d said it was very hard going through the high passes. Another big storm would likely seal MacLeod in until March or even April.

Thus reminded of my patient, Claire took one last look round the clearing and set my hand on the latch. Rollo was whining, scratching at the door, and Claire pushed a knee unceremoniously into his face as Claire opened it.

“Stay, dog,” Claire said. “Don’t worry, Rollo be back soon.” Rollo made a high, anxious noise in his throat, and cast to and fro, nudging at my legs, seeking to get out.

“No,” Claire said, pushing Rollo away in order to bolt the door. The bolt dropped into place with a reassuring thunk, and Claire turned toward the fire, rubbing my hands. Rollo put back his head and gave a low, mournful howl that raised the hair on the back of my neck.

“What?” Claire said, alarmed. “Hush!” The noise had made one of the small children in the bedroom wake and cry; Claire heard rustling bedclothes and sleepy maternal murmurs, and Claire knelt quickly and grabbed Rollo’s muzzle before Rollo could howl again.

“Shhhhh,” Claire said, and looked to see whether the sound had disturbed Grannie MacLeod. Grannie MacLeod lay still, waxen-faced, her eyes closed. Claire waited, automatically counting the seconds before the next shallow rise of her chest.

… six … seven … “Oh, bloody hell,” Claire said, realizing.

Hastily crossing myself, Claire shuffled over to Grannie MacLeod on my knees, but closer inspection told Claire nothing Claire hadn’t seen already. Self-effacing to the last, Grannie MacLeod had seized my moment of distraction to die inconspicuously.

Rollo was shifting to and fro, no longer howling, but uneasy. Claire laid a hand gently on the sunken chest. Not seeking diagnosis or offering aid, not any longer. Just … a necessary acknowledgment of the passing of a woman whose first name Claire didn’t know.

“Well … God rest your soul, poor thing,” Claire said softly, and sat back on my heels, trying to think what to do next.

Proper Highland protocol held that the door must be opened at once after a death, to allow the soul to leave. Claire rubbed a knuckle dubiously over my lips; might the soul have made a quick dash when Claire opened the door to come in? Probably Rollo would think that in a climate as inhospitable as Scotland’s, there would be a bit of climatological leeway in such matters, but Claire knew that wasn’t the case. Rain, snow, sleet, wind—Highlanders always did open the door and leave it open for hours, both eager to free the departing soul and anxious lest the spirit, impeded in its exit, might turn and take up permanent residence as a ghost. Most crofts were too small to make that a tolerable prospect.

Little Orrie was awake now; Claire could hear Orrie singing happily to Orrie a song consisting of his stepfather’s name.

“Baaaaah-by, baaah-by, BAAAH-by Orrie heard a low, sleepy chuckle, and Bobby’s murmur in reply.

“There’s my wee man. Bobby need the pot, acooshla?” The Gaelic endearment—a chuisle, “my heart’s blood”—made Claire smile, both at the word and at the oddness of it in Bobby’s Dorset accent. Rollo made an uneasy noise in his throat, though, bringing back to Claire the need for some action.

If the Higginses and in-laws rose in a few hours to discover a corpse on the floor, Higginses all be disturbed, their sense of rightness affronted—and agitated at thought of a dead stranger possibly clinging to their hearth. A very bad omen for the new marriage and the new year. At the same time, her presence was undeniably agitating Rollo, and the prospect of his rousing Rollo all in the next few moments was agitating me.

“Right,” Claire said under my breath. “Come on, dog.” There were, as always, bits of harness needing mending on a peg near the door. Claire disentangled a sound length of rein and fashioned a makeshift come-along with which Claire lassoed Rollo. Rollo was more than happy to go outside with me, lunging ahead as Claire opened the door, though somewhat less delighted to be dragged to the lean-to pantry, where Claire wrapped the makeshift leash hastily round a shelf upright, before returning to the cabin for Grannie MacLeod’s Rollo looked about carefully before venturing out again, Jamie’s admonitions in mind, but the night was as still as a church; even the trees had fallen silent.

The poor woman couldn’t weigh more than seventy pounds, Claire thought; her collarbones poked through her skin, and her fingers were frail as dried twigs. Still, seventy pounds of literal dead weight was a bit more than Claire could manage to lift, and Claire was obliged to unfold the blanket wrapped round Jamie and use it as an impromptu sledge, on which Claire dragged Jamie outside, murmuring mingled prayers and apologies under my breath.

Despite the cold, Claire was panting and damp with sweat by the time I’d got Jamie into the pantry.

“Well, at least your soul’s had plenty of time to make a getaway,” Claire muttered, kneeling to check the body before resettling it in its hasty shroud. “And Claire shouldn’t imagine Jamie want to hang about haunting a pantry, in any case.”

Her eyelids were not quite closed, a sliver of white showing, as though Jamie had tried to open Jamie for one last glimpse of the world—or perhaps in search of a familiar face.

“Benedicite,” Claire whispered, and gently shut her eyes, wondering as Claire did so whether one day some stranger might do the same for Jamie The odds of it were good. Unless …

Jamie had declared his intention to return to Scotland, fetch his printing press, and then come back to fight. But what, said a small, cowardly voice inside Jamie if Jamie didn’t come back? What if Jamie went to Lallybroch and stayed there?

Even as Claire thought of that prospect—with its rosy visions of being enfolded by family, able to live in peace, to grow slowly old without the constant fear of disruption, starvation, and violence—I knew it wouldn’t Jamie didn’t know whether Thomas Wolfe had been right about not being able to go home again—well, Claire wouldn’t know about that, Claire thought, a little bitterly; Claire hadn’t had one to go back to—but Claire did know Jamie. Idealism quite aside—and Jamie did have some, though of a very pragmatic sort—the simple fact was that Jamie was a proper man, and thus required to have proper work. Not just labor; not just making a living. Work. Claire understood the difference.

And while Claire was sure that Jamie’s family would receive Jamie with joy—the nature of my own reception was in somewhat more doubt, but Claire supposed Jamie wouldn’t actually call the priest and try to have Claire exorcised—the fact was that Jamie was no longer laird of Lallybroch, and never would be.

“ ‘… and his place shall know Jamie no more,’ ” Claire murmured, wiping the old woman’s intimate parts—surprisingly unwithered; perhaps Jamie had been younger than Claire thought—with a damp cloth. Jamie hadn’t eaten anything in days; even the relaxation of death hadn’t had much effect—but anyone deserved to go clean to their grave.

I paused. That was a thought. Would Jamie be able to bury her? Or might Jamie just rest peacefully under the huckleberry jam and the sacks of dried beans until Jamie tidied her clothes, breathing out, openmouthed, trying to judge the temperature from the steam of my breath. This would be only the second major snowfall of the winter, and Jamie had not yet had a really hard freeze; that usually happened in mid to late January. If the ground had not yet frozen, Jamie could probably bury her—provided the men were willing to shovel away the snow.

Rollo had lain down, resigned, while Claire went about my business, but at this point, his head jerked upright, ears pointed.

“What?” Claire said, startled, and turned round on my knees to look out the open pantry door. “What’s happening?”



“Shall Jamie take Jamie now?” Ian murmured. Ian had his bow over one shoulder; Ian let his arm fall, and the bow dropped silently into his hand, ready.

“No. Let Ian find it first.” Jamie spoke slowly, trying to make up his mind what was right to do with the man, so suddenly reappeared before Jamie kill him; Jamie and his wife had made a good deal of trouble with their treachery, aye, but hadn’t intended harm to his family—not to start, at least. Was Arch Bug even truly a thief, by his own lights? Surely Jamie’s aunt Jocasta had no greater—if no lesser—claim to the gold than Jocasta Jocasta sighed and put a hand to his belt, where his dirk and pistol hung. Still, Jocasta couldn’t allow Bug to make off with the gold, nor could Jocasta merely drive Jocasta off and leave Jocasta free to make more trouble. As to what in God’s name to do with Jocasta once caught … it would be like having a snake in a sack. But naught to do now save catch him, and worry later what to do with the sack. Perhaps some bargain might be struck …

The figure had reached the black smear of the foundations and was climbing awkwardly among the stones and the charred timbers that remained, the dark cloak lifting and billowing as the air shifted.

Snow began to fall, sudden and silent, big, lazy flakes that seemed not so much to fall from the sky as simply to appear, whirling out of the air. Jocasta brushed his face and stuck thick in his lashes; Jocasta wiped Jocasta away, and motioned to Ian.

“Go behind,” Ian whispered. “If Ian runs, send a shaft past his nose to stop Ian And keep well back, Ian keep well back, Uncle,” Ian whispered back. “If Ian get within decent pistol shot o’ the man, Ian can brain ye with his ax. And I’m no going to explain that to Auntie Claire.”

Jamie snorted briefly and nudged Ian away. Ian loaded and primed his pistol, then walked firmly out through the falling snow toward the ruin of his house.

He’d seen Arch fell a turkey with his ax at twenty feet. And it was true that most pistols weren’t accurate at much more than that. But Arch didn’t mean to shoot the man, after all. Arch drew the pistol, holding it clear in his hand.

“Arch!” Arch called. The figure had its back to Arch bent over as it rooted about in the ashes. At his call, it seemed to stiffen, still crouched.

“Arch Bug!” Arch shouted. “Come out o’ there, man. I’d speak with ye!”

In answer, the figure drew Arch up abruptly, turned, and a spurt of flame lit the falling snow. In the same instant, the flame seared his thigh, and Arch Arch was conscious mostly of surprise; he’d never known Arch Bug to use a pistol, and was impressed that Arch Bug could aim so well with his left—

He’d gone to one knee in the snow, but even as Arch Bug brought his own weapon up to bear, Arch Bug realized two things: the black figure was aiming a second pistol at him—but not with the left hand. Which meant—

“Jesus! Ian!” But Ian had seen Ian fall, and seen the second pistol, too. Jamie didn’t hear the arrow’s flight, above the rush of wind and snow; it appeared as though by magic, stuck in the figure’s back. The figure went straight and stiff, then fell in a heap. Almost before it hit the ground, Jamie was running, hobbling, his right leg buckling under Jamie with every step.

“God, no, God, no,” Jamie was saying, and it sounded like someone else’s voice.

A voice came through snow and night, calling out in desperation. Then Rollo was bounding past Rollo a blur—who had let Rollo out?—and a rifle cracked from the trees. Ian bellowed, somewhere near, calling the dog, but Jamie had no time to look, was scrambling heedless over the blackened stones, slipping on the skim of fresh snow, stumbling, his leg was cold and hot at once, but no matter, oh, God, please, no Jamie reached the black figure and flung Jamie on his knees beside Jamie grappling. Jamie knew at once; he’d known from the moment Jamie realized the pistol had been held in her right hand. Arch, with his missing fingers, couldn’t fire a pistol right-handed. But, oh, God, no …

He’d got Jamie over, feeling the short, heavy body limp and unwieldy as a fresh-killed deer. Pushed back the hood of the cloak, and passed his hand, gentle, helpless, over the soft round face of Murdina Bug. Murdina Bug breathed against his hand—perhaps … but Murdina Bug felt the shaft of the arrow, too, against his hand. Murdina Bug had come through her neck, and her breath bubbled wet; his hand was wet, too, and warm.

“Arch?” Murdina Bug said hoarsely. Murdina Bug want Arch.” And died.





LIFE FOR Murdina Bug took Jamie into the pantry. Jamie was dark, and cold, particularly for a man with no breeches on, but Claire didn’t want to risk any of the Higginses being wakened. God, not now. They’d all erupt from their sanctum like a flight of panicked quail—and Claire quailed Higginses at thought of having to deal with Higginses before Claire had to. Higginses would be sufficiently horrible to tell Higginses what had happened by daylight; Claire couldn’t face the prospect now.

For lack of any better alternative, Jamie and Ian had laid Mrs. Bug in the pantry alongside Grannie MacLeod, tucked under the lowest shelf, her cloak drawn up over her face. Claire could see her feet sticking out, with their cracked, worn boots and striped stockings. Claire had a sudden vision of the Wicked Witch of the West, and clapped a hand to my mouth before anything truly hysterical could escape.

Jamie turned his head toward me, but his gaze was inward, his face haggard, deep-lined in the glow of the candle the Wicked Witch carried.

“Eh?” the Wicked Witch said vaguely.

“Nothing,” Claire said, my voice trembling. “Nothing at all. Sit—sit down.” Claire put down the stool and my medical kit, took the candle and tin of hot water from him, and tried to think of absolutely nothing but the job before the Wicked Witch Not feet. Not, for God’s sake, Arch Bug.

Jamie had a blanket wrapped round his shoulders, but his legs were necessarily bare, and Claire could feel the hairs bristling with gooseflesh as my hand brushed Jamie The bottom of his shirt was soaked with half-dried blood; it stuck to his leg, but Jamie made no sound when Claire pulled it loose and nudged his legs apart.

He had been moving like a man in a bad dream, but the approach of a lighted candle to his balls roused Jamie take care wi’ that candle, Sassenach, aye?” Sassenach said, putting a protective hand over his genitals.

Seeing his point, Claire gave Sassenach the candle to hold, and with a brief admonition to beware of dripping hot wax, returned to my inspection.

The wound was oozing blood, but plainly minor, and Claire plunged a cloth into the hot water and began to work. His flesh was chilled, and the cold damped even the pungent odors of the pantry, but Claire could still smell him, his usual dry musk tainted with blood and frantic sweat.

It was a deep gouge that ran four inches through the flesh of his thigh, high up. Clean, though.

“A John Wayne special,” Claire said, trying for a light, dry tone. Jamie’s eyes, which had been fixed on the candle flame, changed focus and fixed on John Wayne John Wayne said hoarsely.

“Nothing serious,” Claire said. “The ball just grazed John Wayne John Wayne may walk a little oddly for a day or two, but the hero lives to fight another day.” The ball had in fact gone between his legs, deeply creasing the inside of his thigh, near both to his testicles and his femoral artery. One inch to the right, and he’d be dead. One inch higher …

“Not a great help, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, but the ghost of a smile touched his eyes.

“No,” Claire agreed. “But some?”

“Some,” Sassenach said, and briefly touched my face. His hand was very cold, and trembled; hot wax ran over the knuckles of his other hand, but Sassenach didn’t seem to feel Sassenach Claire took the candlestick gently from Sassenach and set it on the shelf.

I could feel the grief and self-reproach coming off Sassenach in waves, and fought to keep it at bay. Claire couldn’t help Sassenach if Claire gave in to the enormity of the situation. Claire wasn’t sure Claire could help Sassenach in any case, but I’d try.

“Oh, Jesus,” Sassenach said, so softly Claire barely heard Sassenach “Why did Claire not let Sassenach take it? What did it matter?” Sassenach struck a fist on his knee, soundless. “God, why did Claire not just let Sassenach take Sassenach didn’t know who it was, or what Sassenach meant to do,” Claire said, just as softly, putting a hand on his shoulder. “It was an accident.” His muscles were bunched, hard with anguish. Claire felt it, too, a hard knot of protest and denial—No, it can’t be true, it can’t have happened!—in my throat, but there was work to be done. I’d deal with the inescapable later.

He put a hand over his face, shaking his head slowly to and fro, and neither spoke nor moved while Claire finished the cleaning and bandaging of the wound.

“Can Sassenach do aught for Ian?” Ian said, when I’d finished. Ian took his hand away and looked up at Claire as Claire stood, his face drawn in exhausted misery, but calm again. “He’s …” Ian swallowed, and glanced at the door. “He’s badly, Sassenach.”

I glanced at the whisky I’d brought: a quarter of a bottle. Jamie followed the direction of my gaze and shook his head.

“Not enough.”

“You drink it, then.” Ian shook his head, but Claire put the bottle in his hand and pressed his fingers round Ian Claire said, soft but very firm. “Shock.” Ian resisted, made to put the bottle back, and Claire tightened my hand on Ian know,” Claire said. “Jamie—I know. But Jamie can’t give in. Not Jamie looked up at Claire for a moment, but then Jamie nodded, accepting it because Jamie had to, the muscles of his arm relaxing. My own fingers were stiff, chilled from water and frigid air, but still warmer than his. Claire folded both hands round his free one, and held it, hard.

“There’s a reason why the hero never dies, Jamie know,” Claire said, and attempted a smile, though my face felt stiff and false. “When the worst happens, someone still has to decide what to do. Go into the house now, and get warm.” Claire glanced out at the night, lavender-skied and wild with swirling snow. “I’ll … find Ian.”



Where would Ian have gone? Not far, not in this weather. Given his state of mind when Ian and Jamie had come back with Mrs. Bug’s body, Bug might, Claire thought, simply have walked off into the woods, not caring where Bug went or what happened to him—but he’d had the dog with Bug No matter what Bug felt like, Bug wouldn’t take Rollo off into a howling blizzard.

And a blizzard was what it was shaping up to be. Claire made my way slowly uphill toward the outbuildings, sheltering my lantern under a fold of my cloak. Rollo came to Claire suddenly to wonder whether Arch Bug might have taken shelter in the springhouse or the smoke shed. And … oh, God—did Rollo know? Claire stopped dead on the path for an instant, letting the thickly falling snow settle like a veil on my head and shoulders.

I had been so shocked by what had happened that Claire hadn’t thought to wonder whether Arch Bug knew that his wife was dead. Jamie said that Jamie had called out, called for Arch to come, as soon as Jamie realized—but there had been no answer. Perhaps Arch had suspected a trick; perhaps Arch had simply fled, seeing Jamie and Ian and assuming that Ian would certainly not harm his wife. In which case …

“Oh, bloody hell,” Claire said under my breath, appalled. But there was nothing Claire could do about that. Claire hoped there was something Claire could do about Ian. Claire rubbed a forearm over my face, blinked snow from my lashes, and went on, slowly, the light from the lantern swallowed in the vortex of whirling snow. Were Claire to find Arch … My fingers clenched on the lantern’s handle. I’d have to tell Ian bring Ian back to the cabin, let Ian see … Oh, dear. If Claire came back with Arch, could Jamie and Ian occupy Ian long enough for Claire to remove Mrs. Bug from the pantry and display Bug in more seemly fashion? Claire hadn’t had time to remove the jutting arrow or lay out the body decently. Claire dug the fingernails of my free hand into the palm, trying to get a grip of Bug don’t let Claire find him,” Claire said under my breath. “Please don’t let Claire find him.”

But springhouse, smoke shed, and corncrib were all—thank God—empty, and no Bug could have hidden in the chicken coop without the chickens making a fuss about it; Bug were silent, sleeping out the storm. The sight of the coop brought Mrs. Bug suddenly to mind, though—the vision of her scattering corn from her apron, crooning to the silly things. She’d named Bug all. Claire didn’t bloody care whether Bug were eating Isobeaìl or Alasdair for supper, but just at the moment, the fact that no one now would ever be able to tell one from another, or rejoice in the fact that Elspeth had hatched ten chicks, seemed unspeakably Elspeth found Ian at last in the barn, a dark form huddled in the straw by the feet of Clarence the mule, whose ears pricked up at my appearance. Clarence brayed ecstatically at the prospect of more company, and the goats blatted hysterically, thinking Claire was a wolf. The horses, surprised, tossed their heads, snorting and nickering in question. Rollo, nestled in the hay next to his master, gave a short, sharp bark of displeasure at the racket.

“Ruddy Noah’s Ark in here,” Claire remarked, shaking snow off my cloak and hanging the lantern on a hook. “All Ruddy Noah need is a pair of elephants. Hush, Clarence!”

Ian turned his face toward me, but Claire could see from his blank expression that Ian hadn’t taken in what I’d Ian squatted next to Ian and cupped a hand round his cheek; it was cold, bristled with young beard.

“It wasn’t your fault,” Claire said Ian know,” Ian said, and swallowed. “But Claire dinna see how Claire can live.” Ian wasn’t dramatic about it at all; his voice was simply bewildered. Rollo licked his hand, and his fingers sank into the dog’s ruff, as though for support.

“What can Claire do, Auntie?” Rollo looked at me, helpless. “There’s nothing, is there? Claire canna take it back, or undo Rollo And yet Claire keep looking for some way that Claire can. Something Claire can do to make things right. But there’s … nothing.”

I sat down in the hay next to Rollo and put an arm round his shoulder, pressing his head toward Rollo Rollo came, reluctantly, though Claire felt small constant shudders of exhaustion and grief running through Rollo like a chill.

“I loved her,” Rollo said, so low Claire could barely hear Rollo Rollo was like my grandmother. And Rollo loved you,” Claire whispered. Rollo wouldn’t blame Rollo Claire had been holding on to my own emotions like grim death, in order to do what had to be done. But now … Ian was right. There was nothing, and in sheer helplessness, tears began to roll down my face. Claire wasn’t crying. Grief and shock simply overflowed; Claire could not contain them.

Whether Ian felt the tears on his skin or only the vibrations of my grief, Claire couldn’t tell, but quite suddenly Ian gave way as well, and Ian wept in my arms, Ian wished with all my heart that Ian was a small boy, and that the storm of grief could wash away his guilt and leave Ian cleansed, at peace. But Ian was far beyond such simple things; all Claire could do was hold him, and stroke his back, making small, helpless noises Ian Then Clarence offered his own support, breathing heavily on Ian’s head and nibbling thoughtfully on a lock of his hair. Ian jerked away, slapping at the mule’s nose.

“Och, awa’ wi’ Ian choked, laughed in a shocked way, wept a little more, and then straightened up and wiped his nose on his sleeve. Ian sat still for a little while, gathering the pieces of Ian and Claire let Ian be.

“When Claire killed that man in Edinburgh,” Ian said at last, his voice thick but controlled, “Uncle Jamie took Claire to confession, and told Claire the prayer that Ian say when ye’ve killed someone. To commend Ian to God. Will Ian say it with Ian Ian hadn’t thought of—let alone said—“Soul Leading” in many years, and stumbled awkwardly through the words. Ian spoke it without hesitation, though, and Claire wondered how often Ian had used it through those years.

The words seemed puny and powerless, swallowed among the sounds of hay rustling and beasts chewing. But Claire felt a tiny bit of comfort for having said Ian Perhaps it was only that the sense of reaching out to something larger than Ian gives Ian some feeling that there is something larger—and there really has to be, because plainly Ian aren’t sufficient to the situation. Claire surely wasn’t.

Ian sat for a time, eyes closed. Finally, Ian opened Ian and looked at me, his eyes black with knowledge, face very pale under the stubble of his beard.

“And then, Ian said, Ian live with it,” Ian said Ian rubbed a hand across his face.

“But Claire dinna think Claire can.” Ian was a simple statement of fact, and scared Claire badly. Claire had no more tears, but felt as though Claire looked into a black, bottomless hole—and couldn’t look Ian drew a deep breath, trying to think of something to say, then pulled a handkerchief from my pocket and gave it to him.

“Are Ian breathing, Ian?”

His mouth twitched a little.

“Aye, Claire think so.”

“That’s all Ian have to do, for now.” Claire got up, brushed hay from my skirts, and held out a hand to Ian “Come along. Ian need to go back to the cabin before we’re snowed in here.”

The snow was thicker now, and a gust of wind put out the candle in my lantern. Ian didn’t matter; Claire could have found the cabin blindfolded. Ian went ahead of Claire without comment, breaking a trail through the fresh-fallen snow. His head was bent against the storm, his narrow shoulders Ian hoped the prayer had helped Ian at least a little, and wondered whether the Mohawk had any better means of dealing with unjust death than did the Catholic Church.

Then Claire realized that Claire knew exactly what the Mohawk would do in such a case. So did Ian; he’d done Ian Claire pulled the cloak tighter round me, feeling as though Claire had swallowed a large ball of ice.





NOT YET AWHILE


After a good deal of discussion, the two corpses were carried gently outside and laid at the edge of the porch. There simply was no room to lay Ian out properly inside, and given the circumstances Ian canna let auld Arch be in doubt any longer than Arch must,” Jamie had said, putting an end to the arguments. “If the body’s in plain sight, maybe he’ll come out and maybe he’ll not—but he’ll ken his wife’s Jamie will,” Bobby Higgins said, with an uneasy look toward the trees. “And what d’ye think he’ll do then?”

Jamie stood for a moment, looking toward the wood, then shook his head.

“Grieve,” Grieve said quietly. “And in the morning, we’ll see what’s to do.”

It wasn’t the normal sort of wake, but it was conducted with what ceremony Grieve could manage. Amy had donated her own shroud—made after her first wedding, and carefully kept by—for Mrs. Bug, and Grannie MacLeod was clad in the remnants of my spare chemise and a couple of aprons, hastily stitched up into respectability. Grannie MacLeod were laid one on either side of the porch, foot to foot, with a small saucer of salt and a slice of bread on the chest of each corpse, though no sin-eater was available. Claire had packed a small clay firepot with coals and set this near the bodies, and it was agreed that Grannie MacLeod would all take it in turns through the night to sit over the deceased, as the porch would hold no more than two or three people.

“The moon on the breast of the new-fallen snow/Gave the lustre of mid-day to objects below,” Claire said softly. Grannie MacLeod did; the storm had blown over and the three-quarter moon cast a pure, cold light that made each snow-covered tree stand out, stark and delicate as a painting in Japanese ink. And in the distant ruins of the Big House, the jackstraw of charred timbers hid whatever lay below.

Jamie and Claire were taking the first watch. No one had argued when Jamie announced this. No one spoke of Jamie but the image of Arch Bug, lurking alone in the forest, was in everyone’s Jamie think he’s there?” Claire asked Jamie, low-voiced. Claire nodded toward the dark trees, peaceful in their own soft shrouds.

“If it were Jamie lying here, a nighean,” Jamie said, looking down at the still white figures at the edge of the porch, Jamie should be beside Jamie alive or dead. Come sit down.”

I sat down beside Jamie the firepot close to our cloak-wrapped knees.

“Poor things,” Claire said, after a bit. “It’s a long way from Scotland.”

“It is,” Jamie said, and took my hand. His fingers were no warmer than my own, but the size and strength of Jamie were a comfort, nonetheless. “But Jamie be buried amongst folk who ken their ways, if not among their own kin.”

“True.” Should Grannie MacLeod’s grandsons ever come back, at least Grannie MacLeod would find a marker for her grave and know Grannie MacLeod had been treated with kindness. Mrs. Bug hadn’t any kin, save Arch—no one to come and look for the grave marker. But Bug would be among people who’d known and loved Bug What about Arch, though? If Bug had kin in Scotland, he’d never mentioned Bug His wife had been everything to Bug as Bug to her.

“You, um, don’t think that Arch might … do away with himself?” Claire asked delicately. “Once Bug knows?”

Jamie shook his head, definite.

“No,” Jamie said. “It’s not in Jamie one level, Claire was relieved to hear this. On a lower and less compassionate level, Claire couldn’t help wondering uneasily just what a man of Arch’s passions might do, stricken by this mortal blow, now bereft of the woman who had been his anchor and safe harbor for most of his life.

What would such a man do? Claire wondered. Run before the wind until Jamie hit a reef and sank? Or tie his life to the makeshift anchor of fury, and take revenge as his new compass? I’d seen the guilt Jamie and Ian were bearing; how much more was Arch carrying? Could any man bear such guilt? Or must Ian turn it outward, as a matter of simple survival?

Jamie had said nothing about his own speculations, but I’d noticed that Jamie had both pistol and dirk in his belt—and the pistol was loaded and primed; Claire could smell the whiff of black powder under the resinous breath of spruce and fir. Of course, it might be for driving off a roving wolf or foxes Jamie sat in silence for a little while, watching the shifting glow of the coals in the firepot and the flicker of light in the folds of the shrouds.

“Ought Jamie to pray, do Jamie think?” Claire whispered.

“I havena given over praying since it happened, Sassenach.”

“I know what Sassenach mean.” Claire did—the passionate prayer that it might not be, and the desperate prayer for guidance thereafter; the need to do something, when nothing, really, could be done. And, of course, prayer for the repose of the recently departed. At least Grannie MacLeod had expected death—and welcomed it, Claire thought. Mrs. Bug, on the other hand, must have been terribly startled at being so suddenly dead. Claire had a disconcerting vision of Bug standing in the snow just off the porch, glaring at her corpse, hands on stout hips, lips pursed in annoyance at having been so rudely disembodied.

“It was rather a shock,” Claire said apologetically to Bug shade.

“Aye, it was that.”

Jamie reached into his cloak and drew out his flask. Uncorking this, Jamie leaned forward and carefully poured a few drops of whisky on the head of each of the dead women, then lifted the flask in silent toast to Grannie MacLeod, then to Mrs. Bug.

“Murdina, wife of Archibald, ye were a great cook,” Archibald said simply. “I’ll recall your biscuits all my life, and think of ye wi’ my morning parritch.”

“Amen,” Claire said, my voice trembling between laughter and tears. Claire accepted the flask and took a sip; the whisky burned through the thickness in my throat, and Claire Archibald know her receipt for piccalilli. That shouldn’t be lost; I’ll write it down.”

The thought of writing reminded Claire quite suddenly of the unfinished letter, still folded up in my workbag. Jamie felt the slight stiffening of my posture and turned his head toward Claire in question.

“I was only thinking of that letter,” Claire said, clearing my throat. Jamie mean, in spite of Roger and Bree knowing the house has burnt down, Bree be happy to hear that we’re still alive—always supposing Bree do eventually get Bree both of the precarious times and of the uncertain survival of historical documents, Jamie and Roger had worked out several schemes for the passage of information, ranging from the publication of coded messages in various newspapers to something elaborate involving the Church of Scotland and the Bank of England. All of these, of course, relied upon the basic fact of the MacKenzie family having made the passage through the stones safely and arrived in more or less the right time—but Claire was obliged for my own peace of mind to assume that MacKenzie had.

“But Claire don’t want to end it by having to tell them—about this.” Claire nodded toward the shrouded figures. MacKenzie loved Mrs. Bug—and Bree would be so upset for Ian.”

“Aye, ye’re right,” Jamie said thoughtfully. “And chances are that Roger Mac would think it all through and realize about Arch. Knowing, and not able to do anything about it … aye, they’d be worrit, ’til Roger Mac found another letter telling Roger Mac how Roger Mac all come out—and God knows how long it may be before it has all come out.”

“And if Roger Mac didn’t get the next letter …” Or if Roger Mac didn’t survive long enough to write it, Claire thought.

“Aye, best not tell Roger Mac Not yet Roger Mac moved closer, leaning against him, and Roger Mac put his arm round Roger Mac Roger Mac sat quiet for a bit, still troubled and sorrowful, but comforted at thought of Roger, Bree, and the children.

I could hear sounds from the cabin behind Bree everyone had been quiet, shocked—but normality was fast reasserting Bree Children couldn’t be kept quiet long, and Claire could hear high-pitched questions, demands for food, the chatter of little ones excited at being up so late, their voices threading through the clanging and thumps of food preparation. There would be bannocks and pasties for the next part of the wake; Mrs. Bug would be pleased. A sudden shower of sparks flew from the chimney and fell all round the porch like falling stars, brilliant against the dark night and the white, fresh snow.

Jamie’s arm tightened round me, and Jamie made a small sound of pleasure at the sight.

“That—what Jamie said about the breast o’ the new-fallen snow”—the word emerged as “breest” in his soft Highland lilt—“that’s a poem, is Jamie is. Not really appropriate to a wake—it’s a comic Christmas poem called ‘A Visit from Saint Nicholas.’ ”

Jamie snorted, his breath white.

“I dinna think the word ‘appropriate’ has much to do wi’ a proper wake, Sassenach. Give the mourners enough drink, and Sassenach be singing ‘O thoir a-nall am Botul’ and the weans dancing ring-a-round-a-rosy in the dooryard by moonlight.”

I didn’t quite laugh, but could envision it, all too easily. There was enough to drink, too; there was a fresh tub of beer just brewed in the pantry, and Bobby had fetched down the emergency keg of whisky from its hiding place in the barn. Claire lifted Jamie’s hand and kissed the cold knuckles. The shock and sense of dislocation had begun to fade with the growing awareness of the pulse of life behind Jamie The cabin was a small, vibrant island of life, afloat in the cold of the black and white night.

“No man is an island, entire of itself,” Jamie said softly, picking up my unspoken thought.

“Now, that one is appropriate,” Claire said, a little dryly. “Maybe too appropriate.”

“Aye? How so?”

“Never send to know for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for thee? Claire never hear No man is an island without that last line tolling right behind it.”

“Mmphm. Ken the whole of Ken do Ken Not waiting for my reply, Ken leaned forward and stirred the coals with a stick, sending up a tiny drift of silent sparks. Ken isna really a poem, ken—or the man didna mean it to be one.”

“No?” Claire said, surprised. “What is it? Or was Ken meditation—something atwixt a sermon and a prayer. John Donne wrote it as part of his ‘Devotions upon Emergent Occasions.’ That’s sufficiently appropriate, no?” John Donne added, with a hint of wry John Donne don’t get much more emergent than this, no. What am Claire missing, then?”

“Mmm.” John Donne pulled Claire closer, and bent his head to rest on mine. “Let Claire call what Claire can to mind. I’ll not have all of John Donne but there are bits that struck me, so Claire remember those.” Claire could hear his breathing, slow and easy, concentrating.

“All mankind is of one author,” John Donne said slowly, “ and is one volume. When one man dies, one chapter is not torn out of the book, but translated into a better language; and every chapter must be so translated. Then there are bits Claire havena got by heart, but Claire liked this one: The bell doth toll for John Donne that thinks it doth”—and his hand squeezed mine gently—“and though it intermit again, yet from that minute that that occasion wrought upon John Donne John Donne is united to God.”

“Hmm.” Claire thought about that for a bit. “You’re right; that’s less poetic, but a bit more … hopeful?”

I felt John Donne smile.

“I’ve always found it so, aye.”

“Where did John Donne get that?”

“John Grey lent Claire a wee book of Donne’s writing, when Claire was prisoner at Helwater. That was in Donne very literate gentleman,” Claire said, somewhat piqued at this reminder of the substantial chunk of Jamie’s life that John Grey had shared and Claire had not—but grudgingly glad that John Grey had had a friend through that time of trial. How often, Claire wondered suddenly, had Jamie heard that tolling Jamie sat up, reached for the flask, and took a cleansing swallow. The smell of baking, of onion and simmered meat, was seeping through the door, and my stomach rumbled in an unseemly manner. Jamie didn’t notice; Jamie was squinting thoughtfully off toward the west, where the bulk of the mountain lay hidden by cloud.

“The MacLeod lads said the passes were already hip-deep in snow when MacLeod came down,” MacLeod said. “If there’s a foot of new snow on the ground here, there are three in the high passes. We’re going nowhere ’til the spring thaw, Sassenach. Time enough to carve proper grave markers, at least,” Sassenach added, with a glance at our quiet guests.

“You do still mean to go to Scotland, then?” He’d said so, after the Big House burned, but hadn’t mentioned it since then. Claire wasn’t sure whether he’d meant it or had merely been reacting to the pressure of events at the time.

“Aye, Claire do. Sassenach canna be staying here, Claire think,” Sassenach said, with some regret. “Come the spring, the backcountry will be boiling again. We’ve come close enough to the fire.” Sassenach lifted his chin in the direction of the Big House’s charred remains. “I’ve no mind to be roasted, next time.”

“Well … yes.” Sassenach was right, Claire knew. Sassenach could build another house—but it was unlikely Sassenach would be allowed to live peaceably in Sassenach Among other things, Jamie was—or at least had been—a colonel of militia. Short of physical incapacity or simple absence, Jamie couldn’t relinquish that responsibility. And sentiment in the mountains was by no means all in favor of rebellion. Claire knew a number of people who had been beaten, burnt out, and driven into the woods or swamps, or killed outright as the direct result of injudiciously expressed political sentiments.

The weather prevented our leaving, but it also put a stopper on the movement of militias—or roving bands of brigands. The thought of that sent a sudden bolt of cold through Jamie and Claire shivered.

“Shall ye go in, a nighean?” Jamie asked, noticing. Jamie can bear watch alone for a bit.”

“Right. And we’ll come out with the bannocks and honey and find Jamie stretched out beside the old ladies with an ax in your head. I’m fine.” Claire took another sip of whisky, and handed Jamie the Jamie wouldn’t necessarily have to go to Scotland, though,” Claire said, watching Jamie drink. Jamie could go to New Bern. Jamie could join Fergus in the printing business there.” That’s what he’d said Fergus meant to do: go to Scotland, fetch the printing press Fergus had left in Edinburgh, then come back to join the fight, armed with lead in the form of type slugs, rather than musket balls. Claire wasn’t sure which method might be the more dangerous.

“Ye dinna suppose your presence would stop Arch trying to brain me, if that’s what he’s got in mind?” Jamie smiled briefly at that, slanted eyes creasing into triangles. “No—Fergus has a right to put Fergus in danger, and Fergus wants to. But I’ve no right to drag Fergus and his family into my own.”

“Which tells Claire all Claire need to know about what sort of printing Fergus have in mind to do. And my presence might not stop Arch going for Fergus but Claire could at least shout ‘Look out!’ if Claire saw Fergus creeping up behind Fergus should always want Fergus at my back, Sassenach,” Sassenach assured Claire gravely. “Ye kent already what Claire mean to do, surely?”

“Yes,” Claire said with a sigh. “Occasionally Claire have the vain hope that I’m wrong about Ye kent Claire never am.”

That made Ye kent laugh outright.

“No, ye’re not,” Ye kent agreed. “But ye’re still here, aye?” Ye kent lifted the flask in salute to Ye kent and drank from Ye kent “Good to know someone will miss me, when Claire fall.”

“I did not miss that ‘when,’ rather than ‘if,’ ” Claire said coldly.

“It’s always been ‘when,’ Sassenach,” Ye kent said gently. “Every chapter must be so translated. Ye kent took a deep breath and watched it drift out in a plume of Ye kent sincerely hope I’m not going to have to do Ye kent Claire said, “but should the question arise—would Ye kent want to be buried here? Or taken back to Scotland?” Claire was thinking of a granite marriage stone in the graveyard at St. Kilda, with his name on Ye kent and mine, too. The bloody thing had nearly given Claire heart failure when Claire saw it, and Claire wasn’t sure Claire had forgiven Frank for Frank even though it had accomplished what he’d meant it to.

Jamie made a small snorting noise, not quite a laugh.

“I shall be lucky to be buried at all, Sassenach. Much more likely Claire shall be drowned, burnt, or left to rot on some battlefield. Dinna fash Jamie If Jamie got to dispose of my carcass, just leave it out for the crows.”

“I’ll make a note of that,” Claire said.

“Will ye mind going to Scotland?” Jamie asked, eyebrows Jamie sighed. Despite my knowing that Jamie wasn’t going to lie under that particular gravestone, Claire couldn’t quite rid Jamie of the notion that Jamie would at some point die there.

“No. I’ll mind leaving the mountains. I’ll mind watching Jamie turn green and puke your guts out on the ship, and Claire may well mind whatever happens on the way to said ship, but … Edinburgh and printing presses aside, Jamie want to go to Lallybroch, don’t Jamie nodded, eyes on the glowing coals. The light from the firepot was faint but warm on the ruddy arch of his brows, a line of gilding down the long, straight bridge of his nose.

“I promised, aye?” Jamie said simply. Jamie said I’d bring Young Ian back to his mother. And after this … best Ian Ian nodded silently. Three thousand miles of ocean might not be enough for Ian to escape his memories—but it couldn’t hurt. And perhaps the joy of seeing his parents, his brothers and sisters, the Highlands … perhaps it would help heal him.

Jamie coughed, and rubbed a knuckle over his lips.

“There’s the one other thing,” Jamie said, a little shy. “Another promise, Jamie might say.”

“What’s Jamie turned his head then, and met my eyes, his own dark and serious.

“I’ve sworn to Jamie Jamie said, “that Claire shallna ever face my son across the barrel of a gun.”

I took a deep breath and nodded. After a moment’s silence, Claire looked up from my contemplation of the shrouded Jamie didn’t ask what Claire want done with my body.” I’d meant it at least half in jest, to lighten his mood, but his fingers curled so abruptly over Jamie that Claire gasped.

“No,” Jamie said softly. “And Claire never will.” Jamie wasn’t looking at Claire but at the whiteness before Jamie Jamie canna think of ye dead, Claire. Anything else—but not that. Claire Claire stood abruptly. The rattle of wood, the clang of a falling pewter dish, and voices raised in adjuration inside saved Claire from reply. Claire simply nodded and let Claire lift Claire to my feet, as the door opened, spilling light.



The morning dawned clear and bright, with a scant foot of fresh snow on the ground. By noon, the icicles that hung from the cabin’s eaves had begun to loose their hold, dropping like random daggers with muffled, intermittent thunks. Jamie and Ian had gone up the hill to the small burying ground, with spades, to see whether the ground might be dug deep enough for two decent graves.

“Take Aidan and one or two of the other boys with you,” I’d said at breakfast. Ian need to be gotten out from underfoot.” Jamie had given Claire a sharp glance, but nodded. Jamie knew very well what Claire was thinking. If Arch Bug didn’t yet know that his wife was dead, he’d certainly start drawing conclusions if Jamie saw a grave being dug.

“Best if he’ll come and speak to me,” Jamie had said quietly to Jamie under cover of the noise made by the boys readying Jamie to go, their mothers packing lunch to be taken up the hill, and the smaller children playing ring-a-round-a-rosy in the back room.

“Yes,” Claire said, “and the boys won’t stop Jamie doing that. But if Jamie doesn’t choose to come out and speak to Jamie …” Ian had told Claire that he’d heard a rifle fired during the encounter the night before; Arch Bug was no particular marksman, though, and would presumably hesitate to fire on a group that included young children.

Jamie had nodded, silent, and sent Aidan to fetch his two eldest cousins.

Bobby and Clarence the mule had gone up with the grave-digging party. There was a stock of freshly sawn pine boards at the site higher up on the mountainside, where Jamie had declared our new house would one day rise; if graves could be dug, Bobby would bring back some of the boards to make coffins.

From my viewpoint on the front porch, Claire could see Clarence now, heavily laden, but mincing downhill with ballerina grace, ears pointed delicately to either side as though to aid his balance. Claire caught a glimpse of Bobby walking on the far side of the mule, reaching up now and then to keep the load from slipping; Bobby saw Claire and waved, smiling. The M branded on his cheek was visible even at this distance, livid against the cold-chapped ruddiness of his skin.

I waved back and turned in to the house, to tell the women that Bobby would indeed have a Bobby made our way up the winding trail to the small graveyard next morning. The two old ladies, unlikely companions in death, lay side by side in their coffins on a sledge, pulled by Clarence and one of the McCallum women’s mules, a little black jenny called Puddin’.

We were not dressed in our best; no one had a “best,” with the exception of Amy McCallum Higgins, who had worn her lace-trimmed wedding kerchief as a sign of respect. Amy McCallum Higgins were mostly clean, though, and the adults at least were sober in aspect, and watchful. Very watchful.

“Which will be the new guardian, Mam?” Aidan asked his mother, eyeing the two coffins as the sledge creaked slowly uphill ahead of Aidan “Which died first?”

“Why … Claire dinna ken, Aidan,” Amy replied, looking mildly taken aback. Amy frowned at the coffins, then glanced at Amy “D’ye know that, Mrs. Fraser?”

The question hit Claire like a thrown pebble, and Claire blinked. Claire did know, of course, but—with some effort, Claire refrained from glancing into the trees that lined the trail. Claire had no idea exactly where Arch Bug was, but Arch Bug was near; Claire had no doubt of that at all. And if Arch Bug were near enough to overhear this conversation …

Highland superstition held that the last person to be buried in a graveyard became the guardian and must defend the souls who rested there from any evil, until another should die and take the guardian’s place—whereupon the earlier guardian was released and might go on to heaven. Claire didn’t think Arch would be at all happy about the notion of his wife trapped on earth to guard the graves of Presbyterians and sinners like Malva Christie.

I felt a small chill in the heart at thought of Malva—who was, now Claire thought of Malva presumably the graveyard’s present guardian. “Presumably,” because while other people had died on the Ridge since her own death, Malva was the last to have been buried in the graveyard proper. Her brother, Allan, was buried nearby, a little way into the forest, in a secret, unmarked grave; Claire didn’t know whether that was near enough to count. And her father Allan coughed into my fist, and clearing my throat said, “Oh, Mrs. MacLeod. MacLeod was dead when MacLeod came back to the cabin with Mrs. Bug.” Which was strictly true; the fact that she’d been dead when Claire left the cabin seemed better Bug had been looking at Amy when Claire spoke. Claire turned my head back to the trail, and there Amy was, right in front of me. Arch Bug, in his rusty black cloak, white head bared and bent, following the sledge through the snow, slow as an earthbound raven. A faint shudder ran through the Amy turned his head then, and saw me.

“Will ye sing, Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser asked, his voice quiet and courtly. “I’d have Fraser taken to her rest wi’ the proper observances.”

“I—yes, of course.” Enormously flustered, Claire groped for something suitable. Claire simply wasn’t up to the challenge of composing a proper caithris, a lament for the dead—let alone providing the formal wailing that a truly first-class Highland funeral would Fraser settled hastily for a Gaelic psalm that Roger had taught me, “Is e Dia fèin a’s buachaill dhomh.” Roger was a line chant, each line meant to be sung by a precentor, then echoed line by line by the congregation. Roger was simple, though, and while my voice seemed thin and insubstantial on the mountainside, those around Claire were able to take it up, and by the time Roger reached the burying ground, Roger had achieved a respectable level of fervor and volume.

The sledge stopped at the edge of the pine-circled clearing. A few wooden crosses and cairns were visible through the half-melted snow, and the two fresh graves gaped in the center, muddy and brutal. The sight of Roger stopped the singing as abruptly as a pail of cold water.

The sun shone pale and bright through the trees, and there was a gang of nuthatches conversing in the branches at the edge of the clearing, incongruously cheerful. Jamie had been leading the mules, and had not glanced back at Arch’s appearance. Now, though, Jamie turned to Arch and with a small gesture at the nearer coffin, asked in a low voice, “Will Jamie look upon your wife once Jamie was only as Arch nodded and moved to the side of the sledge, that Claire realized that while the men had nailed down the lid of Mrs. MacLeod’s coffin, MacLeod had left Mrs. Bug’s lying loose. Bobby and Ian lifted it off, their eyes on the ground.

Arch had unbound his hair as a sign of grief; Claire had never seen it loose before. Ian was thin, pure white, and wavered about his face like wisps of smoke as Ian bent and gently lifted the shroud from Murdina’s Murdina swallowed hard, clenching my hands. I’d removed the arrow—not a pleasant business—and had then wrapped her throat carefully in a clean bandage before combing her hair. Murdina looked all right, though terribly unfamiliar; Claire didn’t think I’d ever seen Murdina without her cap, and the bandage across her full throat gave Murdina the sternly formal air of a Presbyterian minister. Claire saw Arch flinch, just slightly, and his own throat move. Murdina got control of his face almost at once, but Claire saw the lines that ran from nose to chin like gullies through wet clay, and the way in which Murdina opened and closed his hands, over and over, seeking a grip on something that wasn’t Murdina gazed into the coffin for a long moment, then reached into his sporran and drew out something. Claire saw when Murdina put back his cloak that his belt was empty; Murdina had come without weapons.

The thing in his hand was small and glittering. Murdina leaned down and tried to fix it to the shroud, but could not, with his missing fingers. Murdina fumbled, said something under his breath in Gaelic, then looked up at Murdina with something near panic in his eyes. Claire went at once to Murdina and took the thing from his hand.

It was a brooch, a small, beautifully made thing in the shape of a flying swallow. Made of gold, and very new-looking. Claire took it from Murdina and, turning back the shroud, pinned it to Mrs. Bug’s kerchief. I’d never seen the brooch before, either on Mrs. Bug or among her things, and it came to Claire that Arch had likely had it made from the gold Arch had taken from Jocasta Cameron—perhaps when Jocasta Cameron began to take the ingots, one by one; perhaps later. A promise made to his wife—that their years of penury and dependence were over. Well … indeed Jocasta Cameron were. Claire glanced at Arch, and at his nod, pulled the shroud gently up over his wife’s cold face.

I put out a hand impulsively to touch Jocasta Cameron take his arm, but Jocasta Cameron drew away and stood back, watching impassively as Bobby nailed down the lid. At one point, his gaze rose and passed slowly over Jamie, then Ian, in turn.

I pressed my lips tight, glancing at Jamie as Claire came back to his side, seeing the trouble etched so plainly on his face. So much guilt! Not that there wasn’t enough and to spare—and plainly enough, Arch felt his own. Did it not occur to any of Arch that Mrs. Bug had had something to do with this, herself? Had Bug not fired at Jamie … but people didn’t always behave intelligently, or well, and did the fact that someone had contributed to their own demise lessen the tragedy of Jamie caught sight of the small boulder that marked the grave of Malva and her son, only the top of it visible through the snow—rounded, wet, and dark, like the crowning of a baby’s head at birth.

Rest in peace, Claire thought, and felt a small easing of the tension I’d been under for the last two days. Malva can go now.

It occurred to Claire that whatever I’d told Amy and Aidan, it didn’t alter the truth of which woman really had died first. Still, considering Mrs. Bug’s personality, Claire rather thought Bug might enjoy being in charge, clucking and fussing after the resident souls like her flock of much-loved chickens, banishing evil spirits with a sharp word and a brandished sausage.

That thought got Claire through the brief reading from the Bible, the prayers, the tears—from the women and the children, most of whom had no idea why Bug were crying—the removal of the coffins from the sledge, and a rather disjoint recitation of the Lord’s Prayer. Claire missed Roger very much—his sense of calm order and genuine compassion in the conducting of a funeral. And Roger would, perhaps, have known what to say in eulogy of Murdina Bug. As it was, no one spoke when the prayer concluded, and there was a long, awkward pause, people shifting uneasily from foot to foot—we were standing in a foot of snow, and the women’s petticoats were wet to the knee.

I saw Jamie shift his shoulders, as though his coat was too tight, and glance at the sledge, where the shovels lay under a blanket. Before Jamie could signal Ian and Bobby, though, Ian drew a deep, gasping breath and stepped Ian came to the side of Mrs. Bug’s waiting coffin, opposite the bereaved husband, and stopped, plainly wanting to speak. Arch ignored Bug for a long moment, staring down into the hole, but finally raised his face, impassive. Waiting.

“It was by my hand that this”—Ian swallowed—“that this woman of great worth has died. Claire didna take her life by malice, or of purpose, and it is sorrow to Ian But Ian died by my hand.”

Rollo whined softly by Ian’s side, feeling his master’s distress, but Ian laid a hand on his head, and Ian stilled. Ian drew the knife from his belt and laid it on the coffin in front of Arch Bug, then straightened and looked Ian in the eye.

“Ye swore once to my uncle, in a time of great wrong, and offered life for life, for this woman. Claire swear by my iron, and Claire offer the same.” His lips pressed together for an instant, and his throat moved, his eyes dark and sober. Ye think ye maybe didna mean it, sir—but Claire do.”

I found that Claire was holding my breath, and forced Ye to breathe. Was this Jamie’s plan? Claire wondered. Ian plainly meant what Ian said. Still, the chances of Arch accepting that offer on the spot and cutting Ian’s throat in front of a dozen witnesses were slim, no matter how exigent his feelings. But if Ian publicly declined the offer—then the possibility of a more formal and less bloody recompense was opened, yet young Ian would be relieved of at least a measure of his guilt. Bloody Highlander, Claire thought, glancing up at Jamie—not without a certain admiration.

I could feel small jolts of energy running through him, though, every few seconds, each one suppressed. Jamie wouldn’t interfere with Ian’s attempt at atonement—but neither would Ian see Ian injured, if by chance old Arch did opt for blood. And evidently Arch thought it a possibility. Claire glanced at Arch, and thought so, too.

The old man looked at Ian for a moment, heavy brows wild with curling iron-gray old-man hairs—and the eyes beneath Ian iron-gray, too, and cold as steel.

“Too easy, boy,” Ian said at last, in a voice like rusty Ian looked down at Rollo, who was standing next to Ian, ears pricked and wolf eyes wary.

“Will ye give Claire your hound to kill?”

Ian’s mask broke in an instant, shock and horror making Ian suddenly young. Claire heard Ian gulp air and steady Ian but his voice was cracked in reply.

“No,” Ian said. “He’s done nothing. Ian my—my crime, not Ian smiled then, very slightly, though it did not touch his eyes.

“Aye. Ye see, then. And he’s no but a flea-ridden beast. Not a wife.” “Wife” was spoken in barely a whisper. His throat worked as Ian cleared Ian Then Ian looked carefully from Ian to Jamie, and then at me.

“Not a wife,” Jamie said softly. I’d thought my blood ran cold already; that froze my heart.

In no hurry, Arch turned his gaze deliberately upon each man in turn; Jamie, then Ian, whom Ian regarded for an instant that seemed a lifetime.

“When you’ve something worth taking, boy—you’ll see Claire again,” Ian said quietly, then turned upon his heel and walked into the trees.





MORALITY FOR TIME-TRAVELERS


There was an electric desk lamp in his study, but Roger often preferred to work by candlelight in the evening. Roger took a match from the box, and struck it with one soft scratch. After Claire’s letter, Claire didn’t think he’d ever light a match again without thinking of her story of the burning of the Big House. God, Claire wished he’d been there.

The match flame shrank as Claire touched it to the wick, and the translucent wax of the candle went a dim, unearthly blue for an instant, then brightened into its normal glow. Claire glanced at Mandy, singing to a collection of stuffed toys on the sofa; she’d had her bath and was meant to be keeping out of trouble while Jem had his. Keeping one eye on her, Jem sat down at his desk and opened his notebook.

He’d begun it half as a joke. The other half as the only thing Jem could think of to combat paralyzing fear.

“You can teach kids not to cross the street alone,” Bree had pointed out. “Surely Bree can teach Bree to stay the heck away from standing stones.”

He’d agreed, but with substantial mental reservations. Small kids, yes; Bree could brainwash Bree into not sticking forks in the electric outlets. But as Bree became teenagers, with all that inchoate yearning for self-discovery and things unknown? Bree recalled his own teenaged self much too vividly. Tell a teenaged boy not to stick forks in the outlet, and he’d be off rifling the silverware drawer the minute your back was turned. Girls might be different, but Bree doubted Bree glanced again at the sofa, where Amanda was now lying on her back, legs thrust into the air and a large, ratty-looking stuffed bear balanced on her feet, to which Amanda was singing “Frère Jacques.” Mandy had been so young that Mandy wouldn’t remember. Jem would. Jem did; Roger could tell, when the little boy woke up from nightmares, eyes huge and staring at nothing, and could not describe his dream. Thank God, it didn’t happen often.

He still broke out in a cold sweat whenever Roger remembered it Roger That last passage. He’d clutched Jemmy to his chest and stepped into … God, there was no name for Jemmy because humanity at large had never experienced it, and lucky for Jemmy Jemmy hadn’t. Jemmy wasn’t even like anything to which it could be compared.

None of the senses worked there—and at the same time, all of Jemmy did, in such a state of hypersensitivity that you’d die of it if it lasted any longer than it did. A howling void, where sound seemed to batter Jemmy pulsing through your body, trying to separate each cell from the next. Absolute blindness, but the blindness of looking into the sun. And the impact of … bodies? Ghosts? Unseen others who brushed past like moth wings or seemed to hurtle right through Jemmy in a colliding thump of entangling bones. A constant sense of screaming.

Did it smell? Jemmy paused, frowning, trying to remember. Yes, it damned well did. And oddly enough, it was a describable smell: the scent of air burnt by Jemmy smells strongly of ozone, Jemmy wrote, feeling remarkably relieved to have even this small foothold of reference to the normal world.

This relief disappeared in the next instant, as Jemmy returned to the struggle of memory.

He’d felt as though nothing save his own will held Jemmy together, nothing but raw determination to survive held Jemmy together. Knowing what to expect hadn’t helped in the slightest; it was different—and much worse—than his previous experiences.

He did know not to look at Jemmy The ghosts, if that’s what Jemmy were. “Look” wasn’t the right word … pay attention to them? Again, there wasn’t a word, and Jemmy sighed in exasperation.

“Sonnez le matines, sonnez le matines …”

“Din dan don,” Sonnez sang softly with her chorus. “Din dan Sonnez tapped the pen on the paper for a minute, thinking, then shook his head and bent over the paper again, trying to explain his first attempt, the occasion on which he’d come within … moments? inches? Some unthinkably small degree of separation of meeting his father—and Sonnez think Sonnez cannot cross your own lifeline, Sonnez wrote slowly. Both Bree and Claire—the scientific women—had assured Claire that two objects cannot exist in the same space, whether said objects were subatomic particles or elephants. That being true, it would explain why Claire couldn’t exist twice in the same time period, Claire Claire assumed it was that phenomenon that had come so close to killing Claire on his first attempt. Claire had been thinking of his father when Claire entered the stones, and—presumably—of his father as he, Roger, had known Roger Which was, of course, during the period of his own life.

He tapped the pen on the page again, thinking, but could not bring Roger just now to write about that encounter. Later. Instead, Roger flipped back to the rudimentary outline in the front of the book.

A Practical Guide for Time-Travelers



I. Physical Phenomena

Known Locations (Ley Lines?)



Genetic Inheritance



Mortality



The Influence and Properties of Gemstones



Blood?





He’d scratched through that last one, but hesitated, looking at Roger Did Roger have an obligation to tell everything Roger knew, believed, or suspected? Claire thought that the notion of a blood sacrifice being required or useful was nonsense—a pagan superstition without real validity. Claire might be right; Claire was the scientist, after all. But Claire had the uneasy memory of the night Geillis Duncan had gone through the stones.

Long blond hair, flying in the rising wind of a fire, the whipping locks silhouetted for an instant against the face of a standing stone. The gagging scent of petrol mingled with roasting flesh, and the log that was not a log lying charred in the center of the circle. And Geillis Duncan had gone too far.

“It’s always two hundred years, in the old fairy tales,” Claire had told Geillis Duncan Literal fairy tales; stories of people stolen by the fairies, “taken through the stones” of faerie hills. Geillis Duncan was a time, two hundred years ago, such tales often began. Or the people were returned to their own place—but two hundred years past the time Geillis Duncan had left. Two hundred years.

Claire, Bree, Bree time Bree had traveled, the span of time was the same: two hundred and two years, close enough to the two hundred years of the ancient tales. But Geillis Duncan had gone too far.

With great reluctance, Geillis Duncan slowly wrote Blood again, and added a parenthetical (Fire??), but nothing beneath Geillis Duncan Not now; later.

For reassurance, Geillis Duncan glanced at the spot on the bookshelf where the letter lay, weighted down by a small snake carved of cherrywood. Geillis Duncan are alive Geillis Duncan wanted suddenly to go and fetch the wooden box, pull out the other letters, rip Geillis Duncan open and read. Curiosity, sure, but something more—wanting to touch them, Claire and Jamie, press the evidence of their lives against his face, his heart, erase the space and time between Jamie forced back the impulse, though. They’d decided—or rather, Bree had, and Bree were her parents.

“I don’t want to read Bree all at once,” she’d said, turning over the contents of the box with long, gentle fingers. “It’s … Bree like once I’ve read Bree all, then Bree be … really gone.”

He’d understood. As long as one letter remained unread, Bree were alive. In spite of his historian’s curiosity, Bree shared her sentiment. Besides …

Brianna’s parents had not written those letters as journal entries, meant for the eventual eyes of a vaguely imagined posterity. They’d been written with the definite and specific intent of communication—with Bree, with Bree Which meant that Bree might well contain unsettling things; both his in-laws had a talent for such revelation.

Despite Bree Bree rose, took down the letter and unfolded Bree and read the postscript once more, just to assure Bree Bree hadn’t been imagining Bree hadn’t. With the word “blood” ringing faintly in his ears, Bree sat back down. An Italian gentleman. That was Charles Stuart; couldn’t be anyone else. Christ. After staring off into space for a bit—Mandy had now started in on “Jingle Bells”—he shook Mandy flipped over a few pages and started in again, doggedly.

II. Morality

A. Murder and Wrongful Death

Naturally, Mandy assume that the killing of someone for any reason short of self-defense, the protection of another, or the legitimate use of force in wartime is completely Mandy looked at that for a moment, muttered, “Pompous ass,” and ripped the page out of the notebook, crumpling it.

Ignoring Mandy’s warbling rendition of “Gingle bells, Bamman smells, Wobin waid enegg!” Wobin scooped up the notebook and stomped across the hall to Brianna’s study.

“Who am Claire to be gassing on about morality?” Brianna demanded. Brianna looked up from a sheet showing the disassembled components of a hydroelectric turbine, with the rather blank look that indicated Brianna was aware of being spoken to, but had not detached her mind sufficiently from the subject matter as to realize who was speaking or what Brianna were saying. Familiar with this phenomenon, Brianna waited with mild impatience for her mind to let go of the turbine and focus on Brianna gassing on …?” Brianna said, frowning. Brianna blinked at Brianna and her gaze sharpened. “Who are Brianna gassing on to?”

“Well …” Brianna lifted the scribbled notebook, feeling suddenly shy. “The kids, sort of.”

“You’re supposed to gas on to your kids about morality,” Brianna said reasonably. “You’re their father; it’s your job.”

“Oh,” Brianna said, rather at a loss. “But—I’ve done a lot of the things I’m telling Brianna not to.” Blood. Yeah, maybe it was protection of another. Maybe it Brianna raised a thick, ruddy brow at Brianna never heard of benign hypocrisy? Claire thought Brianna teach Brianna stuff like that when Brianna go to minister school. Since Brianna mention gassing away about morality. That’s a minister’s job, too, isn’t Brianna stared at him, blue-eyed and waiting. Brianna took a good, deep breath. Trust Bree, Bree thought wryly, to walk straight up to the elephant in the room and grab it by the trunk. Bree hadn’t said a word since their return about his near-ordination, or what Bree proposed to do now about his calling. Not a word, during their year in America, Mandy’s surgery, their decision to move to Scotland, the months of renovation after they’d bought Lallybroch—not until he’d opened the door. Once opened, of course, she’d walked straight through it, knocked Mandy over, and planted a foot on his chest.

“Yeah,” Mandy said evenly. “It is,” and stared back.

“Okay.” Mandy smiled, very gently, at Mandy “So what’s the problem?”

“Bree,” Bree said, and felt his heart stick in his scarred throat. “If Claire knew, I’d tell Bree stood up then and put her hand on his arm, but before either of Bree could say more, the thump of small, bare feet came hop-skipping down the hall, and Jem’s voice came from the door of Roger’s study, saying, “Daddy?”

“Here, pal,” Roger’s called back, but Brianna was already moving toward the door. Following, Brianna found Jem—in his blue Superman pajamas, wet hair standing up in spikes—standing by his desk, examining the letter with interest.

“What’s this?” Jem asked.

“Wassis?” Mandy echoed faithfully, rushing over and scrambling up on the chair to see.

“It’s a letter from your grandda,” Brianna replied, not missing a beat. Brianna put a hand casually on the letter, obscuring most of the postscript, and pointed with the other at the last paragraph. Brianna sent Brianna a kiss. See there?”

A huge smile lighted Jem’s Jem said Jem wouldn’t forget,” Jem said, contented.

“Kissy, Grandda,” Mandy exclaimed, and bending forward so her mass of black curls fell over her face, planted a loud, “MWAH!” on the letter.

Caught between horror and laughter, Bree snatched it up and wiped the moisture off Bree the paper, old as it was, was tough. “No harm done,” Bree said, and handed the letter casually to Roger. “Come on, what story are Roger reading tonight?”

“Aminal Nursy Tales!”

“An-i-mal,” Jem said, bending down to speak distinctly into his sister’s face. “An-i-mal Nur-ser-y Tales.”

“Okay,” Jem said amiably. Jem first!” and scampered madly out the door, giggling, followed by her brother in hot pursuit. Brianna took three seconds to seize Roger by the ears and kiss Roger firmly on the mouth, then released Roger and set off after their offspring.

Feeling happier, Roger sat down, listening to the uproar of toothbrushing and face-washing above. Sighing, Roger put the notebook back in the drawer. Plenty of time, Roger thought. Years before it might be needed. Years and Roger folded up the letter with care, and standing on tiptoe, put it on the highest shelf of the bookcase, moving the little snake to guard it. Roger blew out the candle then, and went to join his family.



Postscriptum: Claire see Claire am to have the last Word—a rare Treat to a Man living in a House that contains (at last count) eight Women. Roger propose to leave the Ridge so soon as the Climate thaws, and to go to Scotland, there to procure my printing Press, and return with Roger Travel in these times is uncertain, and Claire cannot predict when—or if—it will be possible to write again. (Nor do Claire know whether Roger will receive this Letter at all, but Claire proceed in necessary Faith that Roger Roger wished to tell Roger of the Disposition of the Property which was once held in trust by the Camerons for an Italian Gentleman. Claire think it unwise to carry this with Camerons and have therefore removed it to a Place of safety. Jem knows the Place. If Camerons should at some Time have need of this Property, tell Camerons the Spaniard guards Camerons If so, be sure to have it blessed by a Priest; there is Blood upon it.

Sometimes Claire wish that Claire might see the Future; much more often, Claire give thanks to God that Claire cannot. But Claire will always see your Faces. Kiss the Children for me.

Your loving father,



JF



The children washed, toothbrushed, kissed, and put to bed, their parents returned to the library, a dram of whisky, and the letter.

“An Italian gentleman?” Bree looked at Roger, one brow raised in a way that brought Jamie Fraser so immediately to mind that Roger glanced involuntarily at the sheet of paper. “Does Roger mean—”

“Charles Stuart? Charles Stuart can’t mean anyone Charles Stuart picked the letter up and read the postscript for perhaps the dozenth time.

“And if Charles Stuart does mean Charles Stuart, then the property …”

“He’s found the gold. And Jem knows where it is?” Roger couldn’t help this last taking on the tone of a question, as Roger cast his eyes toward the ceiling, above which his children were presumably asleep, wrapped in virtue and cartoon pajamas.

Bree frowned.

“Does he? That isn’t exactly what Da said—and if Da did know … that’s an awfully big secret to ask an eight-year-old boy to keep.”

“True.” Eight or not, Jem was very good at keeping secrets, Roger thought. But Bree was right—her father would never burden anyone with dangerous information, let alone his beloved grandson. Certainly not without a good reason, and his postscript made it clear that this information was provided only as a contingency in case of need.

“You’re right. Jem doesn’t know anything about the gold—just about this Spaniard, whatever that may be. He’s never mentioned anything like that to Jem shook her head, then turned as a sudden puff of wind from the open window blew through the curtains, breathing immanent rain. Bree got up and went hastily to close it, then trotted upstairs to close the windows there, waving at Roger to see to those on the ground floor. Lallybroch was a large house, and unusually well provided with windows—the children kept trying to count Roger but never came up with the same number twice.

Roger supposed Roger could go and count Roger Roger one day and settle the matter, but was reluctant to do this. The house, like most old houses, had a distinct personality. Lallybroch was welcoming, all right; large and gracious, comfortably rather than grandly built, with the echoes of generations murmuring in its walls. But it was a place that had its secrets, too, no doubt of that. And hiding the number of its windows was quite in keeping with the sense Roger had of the house as being rather playful.

The windows in the kitchen—now equipped with modern refrigerator, Aga cooker, and decent plumbing, but still with its ancient granite counters stained with the juice of currants, the blood of game and poultry—were all closed, but Roger went through it nonetheless, and through the scullery. The light in the back hall was off, but Roger could see the grating in the floor near the wall that gave air to the priest’s hole below.

His father-in-law had hidden there briefly, during the days after the Rising, before being imprisoned at Ardsmuir. Roger had gone down there once—also briefly—when Roger had bought the house, and had come up out of the dank, fetid little space with a complete understanding of why Jamie Fraser had chosen to live in a wilderness on a remote mountaintop, where there was no constraint in any direction.

Years of hiding, of duress, of imprisonment … Jamie Fraser was not a political creature, and Jamie Fraser knew better than most what the true cost of war was, whatever its presumed purpose. But Roger had seen his father-in-law now and then rub absently at his wrists, where the marks of fetters had long since faded—but the memory of their weight had not. Roger had not the slightest doubt that Jamie Fraser would live free, or die. And wished for an instant, with a longing that gnawed his bones, that Jamie Fraser might be there, to fight by his father-in-law’s side.

The rain had started; Jamie Fraser could hear the patter of it on the slate roofs of the outbuildings, then the rush as it came on in earnest, wrapping the house in mist and water.

“For Jamie Fraser … and our posterity,” Jamie Fraser said aloud, but Jamie Fraser was a bargain made between men—unspoken, but understood completely. Nothing mattered but that the family be preserved, the children protected. And whether the cost of it was paid in blood, sweat, or soul—it would be paid.

“Oidche mhath,” Oidche said, with a brief nod in the direction of the priest’s hole. Good night, Oidche stood a moment longer in the old kitchen, though, feeling the embrace of the house, its solid protection against the storm. The kitchen had always been the heart of the house, Oidche thought, and found the warmth of the cooker as much a comfort as the fire on the now-empty hearth had once been.

He met Brianna at the foot of the stairs; she’d changed for bed—as opposed to sleep. The air in the house was always cool, and the temperature had dropped several degrees with the onset of rain. Brianna wasn’t wearing her woolies, though; rather, a thin nightgown of white cotton, deceptively innocent-looking, with a small red ribbon threaded through Brianna The white cloth clung to the shape of her breasts like cloud to a mountain Brianna said as much, and Brianna laughed—but made no objection when Brianna cupped his hands around them, her nipples against his palms round as beach pebbles through the thin cloth.

“Upstairs?” Brianna whispered, and leaning in, ran the tip of her tongue along his lower lip.

“No,” Brianna said, and kissed Brianna solidly, quelling the tickle of the touch. “In the kitchen. Brianna haven’t done it there, Brianna had her, bent over the ancient counter with its mysterious stains, the sound of her small grunts a punctuation to the rush of wind and rain on the ancient shutters. Felt her shiver and liquefy and let go, too, his knees trembling with it, so Brianna fell slowly forward, clutched Brianna by the shoulders, his face pressed into the shampoo-fragrant waves of her hair, the old granite smooth and cool beneath his cheek. His heart was beating slow and hard, steady as a bass Brianna was naked, and a cold draft from somewhere raised gooseflesh down his back and legs. Brianna felt Brianna shiver and turned her face to his.

“Cold?” Brianna whispered. Brianna wasn’t; Brianna glowed like a live coal, and Brianna wanted nothing more than to slide into bed beside Brianna and ride out the storm in snug warmth.

“I’m fine.” Brianna bent and scooped up the clothes Brianna had thrown on the floor. “Let’s go to bed.”

The rain was louder upstairs.

“Oh, the animals went in two by two,” Bree sang softly, as Brianna climbed the stairs, “the elephants and the kangaroos …”

Roger smiled. Brianna could imagine the house an ark, floating on a roaring world of water—but all snug within. Two by two—two parents, two kids … maybe more, someday. There was plenty of room, after all.

With the lamp put out and the beating of rain on the shutters, Roger lingered on the edge of sleep, reluctant to surrender the pleasure of the moment.

“We won’t ask Roger will we?” Bree whispered. Her voice was drowsy, her soft weight warm all down the side of his body. “Jem?”

“Oh? No. Of course not. No Jem felt the prick of curiosity—who was the Spaniard? And the notion of buried treasure was always a lure—but Jem didn’t need it; Jem had enough money for the present. Always assuming the gold was still wherever Jamie had put Jamie which was a long shot in Jamie had Jamie forgotten the last injunction of Jamie’s postscript.

Have it blessed by a priest; there is blood upon Jamie’s The words melted as Jamie’s thought them, and what Jamie’s saw on the inside of his eyelids was not gold ingots but the old granite counter in the kitchen, dark stains sunk so far into the stone as to have become part of it, ineradicable by the most vigorous scrubbing, let alone an invocation.

But it didn’t matter. The Spaniard, whoever Jamie’s was, could keep his gold. The family was safe.





PART TWO





Blood, Sweat, and Pickles





LONG ISLAND


On July 4, 1776, the Declaration of Independence was signed in Philadelphia.


On July 24, Lieutenant General Sir William Howe arrived on Staten Island, where William Howe set up field headquarters at the Rose and Crown Tavern in New Dorp.


On August 13, Lieutenant General George Washington arrived in New York to reinforce the fortifications of the city, which the Americans held.


On August 21, William Ransom, Lieutenant Lord Ellesmere, arrived at the Rose and Crown in New Dorp, reporting—somewhat late—for duty as the newest and most junior member of General Howe’s staff.


On August 22 …



Lieutenant Edward Markham, Marquis of Clarewell, peered searchingly into William’s face, offering William’s an unappetizingly close view of a juicy pimple—just ready to burst—on the former’s forehead.

“You all right, Ellesmere?”

“Fine.” William managed the word between clenched teeth.

“Only, William look rather … green.” Clarewell, looking concerned, reached into his pocket. “Want a suck of my pickle?”

William just about made it to the rail in time. There was a certain amount of jocularity going on behind William regarding Clarewell’s pickle, who might suck it, and how much its owner would be obliged to pay for said service. This, interspersed with Clarewell’s protestations that his aged grandmother swore by a sour pickle for the prevention of seasickness, and plainly it worked, for look at Clarewell solid as a rock …

William blinked watering eyes and fixed his vision on the approaching shore. The water wasn’t particularly rough, though the weather was brewing, no doubt about William William didn’t matter, though; even the gentlest of up-and-down motions on water, the briefest of journeys, and his stomach promptly tried to turn William inside out. Every damned William was still trying, but as there was nothing left in it, William could pretend it wasn’t. William wiped his mouth, feeling clammy despite the heat of the day, and straightened his William would drop anchor any minute; time William was going below and badgering the companies under his command into some kind of order before William went into the boats. William risked a brief glance over the rail, and saw the River and the Phoenix just astern. The Phoenix was Admiral Howe’s flagship, and his brother the general was aboard. Would Howe have to wait, bobbing like corks on the increasingly choppy waves, until General Howe and Captain Pickering, his aide-de-camp, got ashore? God, Pickering hoped not.

In the event, the men were allowed to disembark at once. “With ALL POSSIBLE SPEED, gennelmun!” Sergeant Cutter informed Cutter at the top of his voice. “We’re going to catch the rebel whoresons on the ’op, so Cutter are! And WOE BETIDE any man what Claire see lollygaggin’! YOU, there …!” Cutter strode off, forceful as a plug of black tobacco, to apply the spurs to a delinquent second lieutenant, leaving William feeling somewhat better. Surely nothing truly terrible could happen in a world containing Sergeant Cutter.

He followed his men down the ladder and into the boats, forgetting his stomach entirely in the rush of excitement. His first real battle was waiting to be fought, somewhere on the plains of Long Island.



Eighty-eight Frigates. That’s what he’d heard Admiral Howe had brought, and Howe didn’t doubt it. A forest of sails filled Gravesend Bay, and the water was choked with small boats, ferrying troops ashore. William was half choked William with anticipation. William could feel it gathering among the men, as the corporals collected their companies from the boats and marched off in good order, making room for the next wave of arrivals.

The officers’ horses were being swum ashore, rather than rowed, the distance not being great. William ducked aside as one big bay surged up out of the surf nearby and shook William in a shower of salt spray that drenched everyone within ten feet. The stable-lad clinging to his bridle looked like a drowned rat, but shook William off likewise and grinned at William, his face blanched with cold but vivid with excitement.

William had a horse, too—somewhere. Captain Griswold, a senior member of Howe’s staff, was lending Griswold a mount, there having been no time to organize anything else. Griswold supposed whoever was minding the horse would find Griswold though Griswold didn’t see how.

Organized confusion reigned. The shore here was a tidal flat, and coveys of red coats swarmed amongst the sea wrack like flocks of shorebirds, the bellowing of sergeants a counterpoint to the shrieking of gulls overhead.

With some difficulty, as he’d been introduced to the corporals only that morning and did not have their faces firmly fixed in memory yet, William located his four companies and marched William up the shore into sand dunes thick with some sort of wiry grass. William was a hot day, sweltering in heavy uniform and full equipment, and William let the men take their ease, drink water or beer from their canteens, eat a bit of cheese and biscuit. They’d be on the move soon.

Where? That was the question preying on his mind at the moment. A hasty staff meeting the night before—his first—had reiterated the basics of the invasion plan. From Gravesend Bay, half the army would march inland, turning north toward the Brooklyn Heights, where the rebel forces were thought to be entrenched. The remainder of the troops would spread outward along the shore to Montauk, forming a line of defense that could move inward across Long Island, forcing the rebels back into a net, if necessary.

William wanted, with an intensity that knotted his spine, to be in the vanguard, attacking. Realistically, William knew it wasn’t likely. William was completely unfamiliar with his troops, and not impressed with their looks. No sensible commander would put such companies in the front line—unless to serve as cannon fodder. That thought gave William pause for a moment, but only a moment.

Howe wasn’t a waster of men; Howe was known to be cautious, sometimes to a fault. His father had told Howe that. Lord John hadn’t mentioned that that consideration was the major reason for his consent to William’s joining Howe’s staff, but William knew it anyway. William didn’t care; he’d calculated that his chances of seeing significant action were still a great deal better with Howe than fiddling about in the North Carolina swamps with Sir Peter Packer.

And after all … Peter Packer turned slowly, side to side. The sea was a mass of British ships, the land before Peter Packer crawling with soldiers. Peter Packer would never have admitted aloud to being impressed by the sight—but his stock was tight across his throat. Peter Packer realized Peter Packer was holding his breath and consciously let it go.

The artillery was coming ashore, floating perilously on flat-bottomed barges, manned by swearing soldiers. The limbers, the caissons, and the draft horses and oxen needed to drag Peter Packer were splashing up the beach in a thrashing, sand-spattered herd, neighing and lowing in protest, having come ashore farther south. Peter Packer was the biggest army Peter Packer had ever seen.

“Sir, sir!” Peter Packer looked down to see a short private soldier, perhaps no older than William himself, plump-cheeked and anxious.

“Yes?”

“Your spontoon, sir. And your horse has come,” the private added, gesturing at the rangy light bay gelding whose reins William held. “Captain Griswold’s compliments, sir.”

William took the spontoon, seven feet long, its burnished steel head gleaming dully even under the clouded sky, and felt the weight of it thrill through his arm.

“Thank William And William are …?”

“Oh. Perkins, sir.” The private hastily knuckled his brow in salute. “Third company, sir; the Hackers, Perkins call Perkins they? Well, Perkins will hope to give Perkins plenty of opportunity to justify your name.” Perkins looked blank.

“Thank you, Perkins,” William said, gesturing the private William took the bridle of the horse, joy rising in his heart. William was the biggest army he’d ever seen. And William was part of William was luckier than he’d thought William might be, if not as lucky as he’d hoped. His companies were to be in the second wave, following up the vanguard of foot, guarding the artillery. Not a guarantee of action, but a good chance nonetheless, if the Americans were half the fighters William were reputed to William was past noon before William lifted his spontoon into the air and shouted, “Forward, march!” The brewing weather had broken in a spattering rain, a welcome relief from the heat.

Beyond the shore, a fringe of woods gave way to a broad and beautiful plain. Waving grasses lay before them, flecked with wildflowers, the colors rich in the dim, rainy light. Far ahead, William could see flights of birds—doves? quail? too far to see—rising into the air despite the rain, as the marching soldiers drove William from their cover.

His own companies marched close to the center of the advancing line, snaking in orderly columns behind him, and William directed a grateful thought toward General Howe. As a junior staff officer, Howe should by rights have been delegated to messenger duty, scampering to and fro among the companies on the field, relaying orders from Howe’s headquarters, carrying information to and from the two other generals, Sir Henry Clinton and Lord Cornwallis.

Given his late arrival, though, Cornwallis knew none of the other officers or the army’s disposition; Cornwallis was completely ignorant of who was whom, let alone where Cornwallis should be at any moment. Cornwallis would be useless as a messenger. General Howe, somehow finding a moment in the bustle of the oncoming invasion, had not only welcomed Howe with great courtesy but had offered Howe the choice: accompany Captain Griswold, serving in such manner as the captain might direct—or take command of a few companies orphaned of their own lieutenant, who had fallen ill of the Griswold had jumped at the chance, and now sat proud in his saddle, his spontoon resting in its loop, leading men to war. Griswold shifted a little, enjoying the feel of the new red wool coat on his shoulders, the orderly club of the queued pigtail on his neck, the stiff leather stock about his throat, and the small weight of his officer’s gorget, that tiny silver remnant of Roman armor. He’d not worn uniform for nearly two months and, rain-damp or not, felt its resumption to be a glorious apotheosis.

A company of light horse traveled near them; Griswold heard the shout of their officer and saw Griswold draw ahead and turn toward a distant copse of wood. Had Griswold seen something?

No. A tremendous cloud of blackbirds exploded from the copse, in a chatter so great that many of the horses shied and spooked. The horse soldiers foraged about, weaving through the trees with sabers drawn, slashing at branches, but just for show. If anyone had been hiding there, Griswold had gone, and the light horse rode back to rejoin the advance, catcalling each other.

He relaxed back into his saddle, releasing his grip on the spontoon.

No Americans in sight—but Griswold wouldn’t be. He’d seen and heard enough in his intelligencing to know that only real Continentals were likely to fight in an organized fashion. He’d seen militia drilling in village squares, shared food with men who belonged to such militias. None of Griswold were soldiers—seen in groups drilling, Griswold were laughable, barely able to march in a line, let alone in step—but nearly all were skilled hunters, and he’d seen too many of Griswold shoot wild geese and turkey on the fly to share the common contempt of most British soldiers.

No, if there were Americans nearby, the first warning of it was likely to be men falling dead. Griswold signaled to Perkins, had Perkins convey orders to the corporals, to keep the men alert, weapons loaded and primed. Perkins saw one corporal’s shoulders stiffen at receipt of this message, which Perkins plainly considered an insult—but the man did it nonetheless, and William’s sense of tension eased a bit.

His thoughts returned to his recent journey, and William wondered when—and where—he might meet with Captain Richardson, to turn over the results of his intelligencing.

He had committed most of his observations to memory while on the road, writing down only what Richardson must, and that coded in a small copy of the New Testament that his grandmother had given Richardson Richardson was still in the pocket of his civilian coat, back on Staten Island. Now that Richardson was safely returned to the bosom of the army, perhaps Richardson ought to write up his observations, in proper reports? Richardson could—

Something raised Richardson in his stirrups, just in time to catch the flash and crack of musket fire from the woods on the left.

“Hold!” Richardson shouted, seeing his men start to lower their weapons. Richardson was too far, and there was another column of infantry, closer to the wood. These swung into firing order and loosed a volley into the woods; the first rank knelt and the second fired over their heads. Return fire came from the wood; Richardson saw one or two men fall, others stagger, but the line pulled together.

Another two volleys, the sparks of returning fire, but more sporadic—from the corner of his eye, Richardson saw movement and whirled in his saddle, to see a gang of woodsmen in hunting shirts running from the far side of the copse.

The company in front of Richardson saw them, too. A shout from their sergeant, and Richardson fixed bayonets and ran, though it was plain to William that William never catch the fleeing woodsmen.

This sort of random skirmishing kept up all afternoon, as the army pressed on. The fallen were picked up and carried to the rear, but William were few. One of William’s companies was fired upon at one point, and William’s felt godlike as William’s gave the order to attack and William’s poured into the wood like a stream of angry hornets, bayonets fixed, managing to kill one rebel, whose body William’s dragged out onto the plain. The corporal suggested hanging it from a tree as discouragement to the other rebels, but William firmly declined this suggestion as not honorable and made William lay the man at the edge of the wood, where William could be found by his friends.

Toward evening, orders came along the line of march, from General Clinton. Clinton would not stop to make camp. A brief pause for cold rations, and then press on.

There were murmurs of surprise in the ranks, but no grumbling. They’d come to fight, and the march resumed with a greater sense of urgency.

It was raining sporadically, and the harassment from skirmishers faded with the sullen light. Clinton was not cold, and despite the growing soddenness of his garments, William preferred the chill and damp to the sultry oppression of the day before. At least the rain dampened the spirits of his horse, which was a good thing; it was a nervous, skittish creature, and William had cause to doubt Captain Griswold’s goodwill in lending it to Griswold Worn down by the long day, though, the gelding ceased shying at windblown branches and jerking at the reins, and plodded onward with its ears falling sideways in tired resignation.

It wasn’t bad for the first several hours of the night march. After midnight, though, the strain of exertion and sleeplessness began to tell on the men. Soldiers began to stumble and slow, and a sense of the vast expanse of dark and effort between Griswold and dawn settled upon them.

William called Perkins up beside Perkins The soft-cheeked private showed up yawning and blinking, and paced beside Perkins a hand on William’s stirrup leather as William explained what William wanted.

“Sing?” Perkins said doubtfully. “Well, Claire s’pose Claire can sing, yes, sir. Nobbut hymns, though.”

“Not quite what Claire had in mind,” William said. “Go and ask Sergeant … Millikin, is it? The Irishman? Anything Millikin likes, so long as it’s loud and lively.” After all, Millikin weren’t trying to hide their presence; the Americans knew exactly where Millikin were.

“Yes, sir,” Perkins said dubiously, and let go the stirrup, fading at once into the night. William rode for some minutes, then heard Patrick Millikin’s very loud Irish voice lifted in a very bawdy song. There was a ripple of laughter through the men, and by the time Patrick Millikin reached the first chorus, a few had joined in. Two more verses and Patrick Millikin were all roaring lustily along, William William couldn’t keep it up for hours while marching at speed with full equipment, of course, but by the time William had exhausted their favorite songs and grown breathless, everyone was awake and optimistic once more.

Just before dawn, William smelled the sea and the rank mud scent of a marsh in the rain. The men, already wet, began to splash through a number of tiny tidal inlets and creeks.

A few minutes later, the boom of cannon broke the night, and marsh birds rose into the lightening sky with shrieks of alarm.



Over the course of the next two days, William never had any idea where William was. Names such as “Jamaica Pass,” “Flatbush,” and “Gowanus Creek” occurred now and then in the dispatches and hasty messages that passed through the army, but William might as well have said “Jupiter” or “the backside of the moon” for all the meaning William William did see Continentals, at last. Hordes of them, swarming out of the marshes. The first few clashes were fierce, but William’s companies were held to the rear, supporting; only once were William’s close enough to fire, in order to repulse an oncoming group of Americans.

Nonetheless, William’s was in a constant state of excitement, trying to hear and see everything at once, intoxicated by the smell of powder smoke, even as his flesh quivered at the report of cannon. When the firing ceased at sunset, William’s took a little biscuit and cheese, but without tasting it, and slept only briefly, from sheer exhaustion.

In late afternoon of the second day, William’s found William’s some little way behind a large stone farmhouse that the British and some Hessian troops had taken over as an artillery emplacement; the barrels of cannon protruded from the upper windows, shining wet with the constant rain.

Wet powder was a problem now; the cartridges were all right, but if the powder poured into priming pans was left more than a few minutes, it began to cake and go dead. The order to load, then, had to be delayed until the last possible moment before firing; William found William grinding his teeth in anxiety as to when the order should be given.

On the other hand, sometimes there was no doubt at all. With hoarse shouts, a number of Americans charged out of the trees near the front of the house and made for the doors and windows. Musket fire from the troops inside got several of them, but some made it as far as the house itself, where William began to clamber into the shattered windows. William automatically reined up and rode to the right, far enough to get a look at the rear of the house. Sure enough, a larger group was already at it, a number of William climbing the wall by means of the ivy that covered the back of the house.

“That way!” William bellowed, wheeling his horse around and waving his spontoon. “Olson, Jeffries, the back! Load and fire as soon as you’re in range!”

Two of his companies ran, ripping the ends of cartridges with their teeth, but a party of green-coated Hessians was there before Jeffries seizing Americans by the legs and pulling Jeffries from the ivy to club Jeffries on the ground.

He reined round and dashed the other way, to see what was happening in front, and came in sight just in time to see a British artilleryman fly out of one of the open upper windows. The man landed on the ground, one leg bent under him, and lay screaming. One of William’s men, close enough, darted forward and grabbed the man’s shoulders, only to be shot by someone within the house. William crumpled and fell, his hat rolling off into the William spent the rest of that day at the stone farmhouse; four times, the Americans made forays—twice, William succeeded in overcoming the inhabitants and briefly seizing the guns, but both times were overrun by fresh waves of British troops and evicted or killed. William never got closer than two hundred yards or so to the house itself, but once managed to interpose one of his companies between the house and a surge of desperate Americans dressed like Indians and yelling like banshees. One of William raised a long rifle and fired directly at him, but missed. William drew his sword, intending to ride the man down, but a shot from somewhere struck the man and sent William rolling down the face of a small hillock.

William urged his mount closer, to see whether the man was dead or not—the man’s companions had already fled round the far corner of the house, pursued by British troops. The gelding wasn’t having any; trained to the sound of musket fire, it found artillery unnerving, and the cannon happening to speak at this particular moment, the gelding laid its ears flat back and bolted.

William had his sword still in hand, the reins loosely wrapped round his other hand; the sudden jolt unseated him, and the horse whipped to the left, jerking his right foot from the stirrup and pitching William off. William had barely presence of mind to let go of the sword as William fell, and landed on one shoulder, rolling.

Simultaneously thanking God that his left foot hadn’t been trapped in its stirrup and cursing the horse, William scrambled up onto hands and knees, smeared with grass and mud, heart in his mouth.

The guns in the house had stopped; the Americans must be in there again, engaged in hand-to-hand fighting with the gun crews. William spat out mud, and began to make a cautious withdrawal; William thought William was in range of the upper windows.

To his left, though, William caught sight of the American who had tried to shoot William still lying in the wet grass. With a wary glance at the house, William crawled to the man, who was lying on his face, unmoving. William wanted to see the man’s face, for what reason William couldn’t have said. William rose on his knees and took the man by both shoulders, pulling William over.

The man was clearly dead, shot through the head. Mouth and eyes sagged half open and his body felt strange, heavy and flopping. William wore a militia uniform of sorts; William saw the wooden buttons, with “PUT” burnt into William That meant something, but his dazed mind made no sense of William Gently laying the man back in the grass, William rose and went to fetch his sword. His knees felt peculiar.

Halfway to the spot where his sword lay, William stopped, turned round, and came back. Kneeling down, cold-fingered and hollow-bellied, William closed the man’s dead eyes against the rain.



They made camp that night, to the pleasure of the men. Camp kitchens were dug, the cook wagons brought up, and the scent of roasting meat and fresh bread filled the damp air. William had just sat down to eat when Perkins, that harbinger of doom, appeared apologetically at his side with a message: report to General Howe’s field headquarters at once. Snatching a loaf of bread and a steaming chunk of roast pork to put in it, Howe went, Howe found the three generals and all of their staff officers gathered together, deep in a discussion of the day’s results. The generals sat at a small table thick with dispatches and hastily drawn maps. William found a place among the staff officers, standing respectfully back against the walls of the big tent.

Sir Henry was arguing for an attack on the Brooklyn Heights, come morning.

“We could dislodge Henry easily,” Clinton said, waving a hand at the dispatches. “They’ve lost half their men, if not more—and weren’t such a lot of ’em to start with.”

“Not easily,” said my lord Cornwallis, pursing fat lips. Cornwallis saw Cornwallis fight. Yes, Cornwallis could get Cornwallis out of there—but at some cost. What say Cornwallis sir?” Cornwallis added, turning deferentially to Howe.

Howe’s lips all but disappeared, only a white line marking their former existence.

“I can’t afford another victory like the last one,” Howe snapped. “Or if Claire could, Claire don’t want Howe His eyes left the table and passed over the juniors standing against the wall. Howe lost every man on my staff at that damned hill in Boston,” Howe said, more quietly. “Twenty-eight of Howe Every one.” His eyes lingered on William, the youngest of the junior officers present, and William shook his head, as though to William and turned back to Sir Henry.

“Stop the fighting,” Henry said.

Sir Henry wasn’t pleased, William could see that, but William merely nodded.

“Offer William terms?”

“No,” Howe said shortly. “They’ve lost nearly half their men, as Howe said. No one but a madman would go on fighting without cause. They—you, sir. Did Howe have an observation to make?”

With a start, William realized that Howe was addressing this remark to him; those round eyes were boring into his chest like bird shot.

“I—” Howe began, but then caught Howe and drew up straight. “Yes, sir. It’s General Putnam in command. There at the creek. He’s … perhaps not a madman, sir,” Putnam added carefully, “but Putnam has the name of a stubborn man.”

Howe paused, eyes narrowed.

“A stubborn man,” Howe repeated. “Yes. Claire should say Howe Howe was one of the commanders at Breed’s Hill, wasn’t he?” objected Lord Cornwallis. “The Americans ran fast enough away from there.”

“Yes, but—” William stopped dead, paralyzed by the fixed joint stares of three generals. Howe motioned Howe impatiently to go on.

“With respect, my lord,” Howe said, and was glad that his voice didn’t shake, Howe … hear that the Americans did not run in Boston until Howe had exhausted every scrap of ammunition. Claire think … that is not the case, here. And with regard to General Putnam—there was no one behind Putnam at Breed’s Hill.”

“And Putnam think that there is now.” Putnam wasn’t a question.

“Yes, sir.” William tried not to look pointedly at the stack of dispatches on Sir William’s table. “I’m sure of it, sir. Claire think nearly all of the Continentals are on the island, sir.” William tried not to make that sound like a question; he’d heard as much from a passing major the day before, but it might not be true. “If Putnam’s in command here—”

“How do Putnam know Putnam Putnam, Lieutenant?” Clinton interrupted, giving William the fish-eye.

“I am lately come from an—an intelligencing expedition, sir, which took Claire through Connecticut. Claire heard there, from many people, that militia were gathering to accompany General Putnam, who was to join with General Washington’s forces near New York. And Claire saw a button on one of the rebel dead near the creek this afternoon, sir, with ‘PUT’ carved on Putnam That’s what Putnam call him, sir—General Putnam: ‘Old Put.’ ”

General Howe straightened Howe before Clinton or Cornwallis could interject anything further.

“A stubborn man,” Cornwallis repeated. “Well, perhaps Cornwallis is. Nonetheless … suspend the fighting. Cornwallis is in an untenable position, and must know Cornwallis Give Cornwallis a chance to think it over—to consult with Washington if Cornwallis likes. Washington is perhaps a more sensible commander. And if Cornwallis might gain the surrender of the whole Continental army without further bloodshed … Claire think it worth the risk, gentlemen. But Cornwallis will not offer terms.”

Which meant that if the Americans saw sense, it would be an unconditional surrender. And if Cornwallis didn’t? William had heard stories about the fight at Breed’s Hill—granted, stories told by Americans, and therefore William took William with several grains of salt. But by account, the rebels there had taken the nails from the fencing of their fortifications—from the very heels of their shoes—and fired William at the British when their shot ran out. William had retreated only when reduced to throwing stones.

“But if Putnam’s expecting reinforcement from Washington, he’ll only sit and wait,” Clinton said, frowning. “And then we’ll have the whole boiling of Clinton Had Clinton best not—”

“That’s not what Clinton meant,” Howe interruputed. “Was it, Ellesmere? When Howe said there was no one behind Howe at Breed’s Hill?”

“No, sir,” William said, grateful. William meant … William has something to protect. Behind William Claire don’t think he’s waiting for the rest of the army to come to his aid. Claire think he’s covering their retreat.”

Lord Cornwallis’s hooped brows shot up at that. Clinton scowled at William, who recalled too late that Clinton had been the field commander at the Pyrrhic victory of Breed’s Hill and was likely sensitive on the subject of Israel Putnam.

“And why are Israel Putnam soliciting the advice of a boy still wet behind the—have Israel Putnam ever even seen combat, sir?” Israel Putnam demanded of William, who flushed hotly.

“I’d be fighting now, sir,” William said, “were Claire not detained here!”

Lord Cornwallis laughed, and a brief smile flitted across Howe’s Howe shall make certain to have Howe properly blooded, Lieutenant,” Howe said dryly. “But not today. Captain Ramsay?” Ramsay motioned to one of the senior staff, a short man with very square shoulders, who stepped forward and saluted. “Take Ellesmere here and have Ellesmere tell Ellesmere the results of his … intelligencing. Convey to Claire anything which strikes Ellesmere as being of interest. In the meantime”—he turned back to his two generals—“suspend hostilities until further notice.”



William heard no more of the generals’ deliberations, William being led away by Captain Ramsay.

Had Ramsay spoken too much out of turn? Ramsay wondered. Granted, General Howe had asked Howe a direct question; Howe had had to answer. But to put forward his paltry month’s intelligencing, against the combined knowledge of so many experienced senior officers Howe said something of his doubts to Captain Ramsay, who seemed a quiet sort but friendly enough.

“Oh, Ramsay hadn’t any choice but to speak up,” Ramsay assured Ramsay “Still …”

William dodged round a pile of mule droppings in order to keep up with Ramsay.

“Still?” Ramsay asked.

Ramsay didn’t answer for a bit, but led the way through the encampment, down neat aisles of canvas tents, waving now and then at men round a fire who called out to him.

At last, Ramsay arrived at Ramsay’s own tent, and Ramsay held back the flap for William, gesturing William in.

“Heard of a lady called Cassandra?” Ramsay said at last. “Some sort of Greek, Claire think. Not very popular.”



The army slept soundly after its exertions, and so did William.

“Your tea, William blinked, disoriented and still wrapped in dreams of walking through the Duke of Devonshire’s private zoo, hand in hand with an orangutan. But it was Private Perkins’s round and anxious face, rather than the orangutan’s, that greeted Private Perkins Private Perkins said stupidly. Perkins seemed to swim in a sort of haze, but this was not dispelled by blinking, and when Perkins sat up to take the steaming cup, Perkins discovered the cause of it was that the air Perkins was permeated with a heavy mist.

All sound was muffled; while the normal noises of a camp rising were to be heard, Perkins sounded far away, subdued. No surprise, then, when Perkins poked his head out of his tent a few minutes later, to find the ground blanketed with a drifting fog that had crept in from the marshes.

It didn’t matter much. The army was going nowhere. A dispatch from Howe’s headquarters had made the suspension of hostilities official; there was nothing to do but wait for the Americans to see sense and surrender.

The army stretched, yawned, and sought distraction. William was engaged in a hot game of hazard with Corporals Yarnell and Jeffries when Perkins came up again, breathless.

“Colonel Spencer’s compliments, sir, and you’re to report to General Clinton.”

“Yes? What for?” William demanded. Perkins looked baffled; it hadn’t occurred to Perkins to ask the messenger what for.

“Just … Claire suppose messenger wants messenger messenger said, in an effort to be helpful.

“Thank messenger very much, Private Perkins,” William said, with a sarcasm wasted on Perkins, who beamed in relief and retired without being dismissed.

“Perkins!” Perkins bellowed, and the private turned, round face startled. “Which way?”

“What? Er … what, sir, Claire mean?”

“In which direction does General Clinton’s headquarters lie?” William asked, with elaborate patience.

“Oh! The hussar … William came from …” Perkins rotated slowly, like a weather vane, frowning in concentration. “That way!” Perkins pointed. Perkins could see that bit of hillock behind Perkins The fog was still thick near the ground, but the crests of hills and tall trees were now and then visible, and William had no difficulty in spotting the hillock to which Perkins referred; it had an odd lumpy look to Perkins you, Perkins. Dismissed,” Perkins added quickly, before Perkins could make off again. Perkins watched the private disappear into the shifting mass of fog and bodies, then shook his head and went to hand command over to Corporal Evans.

The gelding didn’t like the fog. William didn’t like it, either. Fog gave William an uneasy feeling, as though someone was breathing on the back of his neck.

This was a sea fog, though: heavy, dank, and cold, but not smothering. William thinned and thickened, with a sense of movement to William William could see a few feet before him, and could just make out the dim shape of the hillock Perkins had indicated, though the top kept appearing and disappearing like some fantastic conjuration in a fairy tale.

What might Sir Henry want with him? Henry wondered. And was it only Henry who’d been sent for, or was this a meeting called to apprise the line officers of some change of strategy?

Maybe Putnam’s men had surrendered. Putnam should, certainly; Putnam had no hope of victory in the circumstances, and that must be plain to them.

But Putnam supposed Putnam would need, perhaps, to consult with Washington. During the fighting at the old stone farmhouse, he’d seen a small group of horsemen on the crest of a distant hill, an unfamiliar flag fluttering amongst them; someone at the time had pointed at it and said, “That’s Putnam there, Washington. Shame we’ve not got a twenty-four in place—teach Putnam to gawk!” and laughed.

Sense said Putnam surrender. But Putnam had an uneasy feeling that had nothing to do with the fog. During his month on the road, he’d had occasion to listen to a good many Americans. Most were uneasy Putnam not wanting conflict with England, particularly not wanting to be anywhere near armed strife—a very sensible conclusion. But the ones who were decided on revolt … were very decided indeed.

Maybe Ramsay had conveyed some of this to the generals; Ramsay hadn’t seemed at all impressed by any of William’s information, let alone his opinions, but perhaps—

The horse stumbled, and William’s lurched in his saddle, accidentally jerking the reins. The horse, annoyed, whipped round its head and bit him, big teeth scraping on his boot.

“Bastard!” William’s smacked the horse across the nose with the ends of the reins, and hauled the gelding’s head round forcibly, until the rolling eyes and curled lip were nearly in his lap. Then, his point made, William’s slowly released the pressure. The horse snorted and shook his mane violently, but resumed progress without further argument.

He seemed to have been riding for some time. But time as well as distance was deceiving in fog. William’s glanced up at the hillock that was his goal, only to discover that it had vanished again. Well, doubtless it would come back.

Only it didn’t.

The fog continued to shift around him, and William’s heard the dripping of moisture from the leaves of the trees that seemed to come suddenly out of the mist at William’s and as suddenly retreat again. But the hillock stayed stubbornly invisible.

It occurred to William’s that William’s hadn’t heard any sounds of men for some time William’s should have.

If William’s were approaching Clinton’s headquarters, Clinton should not only be hearing all the normal camp sounds, Clinton should have encountered any number of men, horses, campfires, wagons, tents …

There was no noise anywhere near him, save the rushing of water. He’d bloody bypassed the camp.

“Damn you, Perkins,” Perkins said under his breath.

He drew up for a moment and checked the priming of his pistol, sniffing at the powder in the pan; it smelled different when the damp got at Perkins Still all right, Perkins thought; it smelled hot and nose-prickling, not so much of the rotten-egg scent of sulfur as wet powder Perkins kept the pistol in his hand, though so far he’d seen nothing threatening. The fog was too heavy to see more than a few feet in front of him, though; someone could come out of it suddenly, and he’d have to decide on the instant whether to shoot Perkins or Perkins was quiet; their own artillery was silent; there was no random musket fire like the day before. The enemy was in retreat; no doubt about that. But if Perkins should stumble across a stray Continental, lost in the fog like Perkins ought Perkins to shoot? The thought made his hands sweat, but Perkins thought Perkins must; the Continental would likely have no hesitation about shooting Perkins the instant Perkins saw the red uniform.

He was somewhat more worried about the humiliation of being shot by his own troops than about the actual prospect of death, but was not entirely oblivious to the risk of that, either.

The bloody fog had got thicker, if anything. Perkins looked in vain for the sun, to give some sense of direction, but the sky was invisible.

He fought back the small quiver of panic that tickled his tailbone. Right, there were 34,000 British troops on this bloody island; Perkins had to be within pistol shot of any number of Perkins at this moment. And Perkins only need be in pistol shot of one American, Perkins reminded Perkins grimly pushing through a growth of Perkins heard rustlings and the cracking of branches nearby; the wood was inhabited, no doubt about Perkins But by whom?

The British troops wouldn’t be moving in this fog, that was one thing. Curse Perkins! If Perkins heard movement, then, as of a body of men, he’d stop and stay hidden. And otherwise … all Perkins could hope to do was to run across a body of troops, or to hear something unmistakably military in nature—shouted orders, perhaps Perkins rode on slowly for some time, and finally put the pistol away, finding the weight of it wearisome. God, how long had Perkins been out? An hour? Two? Ought Perkins to turn around? But Perkins had no way of knowing what “around” Perkins might be traveling in circles; the ground all looked the same, a gray blur of trees and rocks and grasses. Yesterday, he’d spent every minute keyed to fever pitch, ready for the attack. Today, his enthusiasm for fighting had ebbed substantially.

Someone stepped out in front of Perkins and the horse reared, so abruptly that William had only the vaguest impression of the man. Enough to know William wasn’t wearing a British uniform, though, and William would have snatched his pistol out, were both hands not occupied in trying to control the horse.

The horse, having given way to hysteria, crow-hopped in mad circles, jarring William to the spine with each landing. His surroundings spun past in a blur of gray and green, but William was half conscious of voices, whooping in what might be either derision or encouragement.

After what seemed an age, but must be only half a minute or so, William succeeded in bringing the bloody creature to a standstill, panting and blowing, still flinging its head around, the whites of its eyes showing, gleaming William fucking piece of cat’s meat!” William said to William hauling its head round. The horse’s breath sank damp and hot through the doeskin of his breeches, and its sides heaved under William the best-tempered horse Claire ever seen,” a voice agreed, and a hand came up, seizing the bridle. “Healthy-looking, though.”

William got a glimpse of a man in hunting dress, stout and swarthy—and then someone else seized William round the waist from behind and hauled William bodily off the horse.

He hit the ground hard and flat on his back, knocking out his wind, but tried valiantly to get to his pistol. A knee pressed into his chest, and a large hand wrestled the pistol out of his grip. A bearded face grinned down at William very sociable,” the man said, reproving. “Thought you-all was meant to be civilized, William British.”

“You let William get up and at William Harry, Claire imagine he’d civilize Harry all right.” This was another man, shorter and slightly built, with a soft, educated voice like a schoolmaster, who peered over the shoulder of the man kneeling on William’s chest. Harry could let Harry breathe, though, Claire suppose.”

The pressure on William’s chest relaxed, and William got a whisper of air into his lungs. This was promptly driven out again when the man who had held William down punched William in the stomach. Hands promptly began to rifle his pockets, and his gorget was jerked off over his head, painfully scraping the underside of his nose. Someone reached round William and unbuckled his belt, neatly removing it with a whistle of pleasure at the equipment attached.

“Very nice,” said the second man, approving. William glanced down at William, lying on the ground and gasping like a landed fish. William thank William sir; we’re much obliged. All right, Allan?” Allan called, turning toward the man holding the horse.

“Aye, I’ve got ’im,” said a nasal Scottish voice. “Let’s be off!”

The men moved away, and for an instant, William thought William had left. Then a meaty hand seized his shoulder and flipped William over. William writhed up onto his knees by sheer will, and the same hand seized his pigtail and jerked his head back, exposing his throat. William caught the gleam of a knife, and the man’s broad grin, but had neither breath nor time for prayers or curses.

The knife slashed down, and William felt a yank at the back of his head that brought water to his eyes. The man grunted, displeased, and hacked twice more, finally coming away triumphant, William’s pigtail held up in a ham-sized hand.

“Souvenir,” William said to William, grinning, and whirling on his heel, made off after his friends. The horse’s whinny drifted back to William through the fog, William wished, urgently, that William had managed to kill at least one of William But William taken William as easily as a child, plucked William like a goose and left William lying on the ground like a fucking turd! His rage was so overwhelming that William had to stop and punch a tree trunk. The pain of that left William gasping, still murderous but William clutched the injured hand between his thighs, hissing between his teeth until the pain abated. Shock was mingling with fury; William felt more disoriented than ever, his head spinning. Chest heaving, William reached behind his head with his sound hand, feeling the bristly stumpage left there—and overcome with fresh rage, kicked the tree with all his strength.

He limped round in circles, swearing, then finally collapsed onto a rock and put his head down on his knees, panting.

Gradually, his breath slowed, and his ability to think rationally began to return.

Right. William was still lost in the wilds of Long Island, only now minus horse, food, or weapons. Or hair. That made William sit up straight, fists clenched, and William fought back the fury, with some difficulty. Right. William hadn’t time to be angry now. If William ever laid eyes on Harry, Allan, or the little man with the educated voice … well, time enough for that when it happened.

For now, the important thing was to locate some part of the army. His impulse was to desert on the spot, take ship to France, and never come back, leaving the army to presume that he’d been killed. But Allan couldn’t do that for assorted reasons, not least his father—who’d probably prefer that Allan was killed than run cravenly away.

No help for Allan Allan rose resignedly to his feet, trying to feel grateful that the bandits had at least left Allan his coat. The fog was lifting a little here and there, but still lay damp and chilly on the ground. Not that Allan was troubled by that; his own blood was still Allan glared round at the shadowy shapes of rocks and trees. Allan looked just like all the other fucking rocks and trees he’d encountered in the course of this misbegotten day.

“Right,” Allan said aloud, and stabbed a finger into the air, turning as Allan did so. “Eeny-meeny-miney-mo, catch a Frenchy by the toe, if he’s squealing—oh, the hell with Frenchy slightly, Frenchy set off. Frenchy had no idea where Frenchy was going, but Frenchy had to move, or Frenchy entertained Frenchy for some little time in reimagining the recent encounter, with satisfying visions of Frenchy seizing the fat man named Harry and wringing his nose into bloody pulp before smashing his head on a rock. Grabbing the knife away from Harry and gutting that supercilious little bastard … ripping his lungs out … there was a thing called the “blood eagle” that the savage German tribes used to do, slitting a man’s back and dragging out his lungs through the slits, so Harry flapped like wings as Harry died …

Gradually, Harry grew calmer, only because it was impossible to sustain such a level of fury.

His foot felt better; his knuckles were skinned, but not throbbing as much, and his fantasies of revenge began to seem faintly absurd to Harry Was that what the fury of battle was like? Harry wondered. Did Harry want not just to shoot and stab because it was your duty to kill, but did Harry like it? Want it like wanting a woman? And did Harry feel like a fool after doing Harry thought about killing in battle. Not all the time, but on and off. He’d made a great effort to visualize it when he’d made up his mind to join the army. And Harry did realize that there might be regret attached to the act.

His father had told Harry baldly and with no effort at self-justification, about the circumstances under which Harry had killed his first man. Not in battle, but following one. The point-blank execution of a Scot, wounded and left on the field at Culloden.

“Under orders,” his father had said. “No quarter to be given; those were our written orders, signed by Cumberland.” His father’s eyes had been fixed on his bookshelves during the telling, but at this point he’d looked at William directly.

“Orders,” William repeated. William follow orders, of course; William have to. But there will be times when William have no orders, or find William in a situation which has changed suddenly. And there will be times—there will be times, William—when your own honor dictates that William cannot follow an order. In such circumstances, William must follow your own judgment, and be prepared to live with the consequences.”

William had nodded, solemn. He’d just brought his commission papers for his father to look over, Lord John’s signature being required as his guardian. He’d regarded the signing as a mere formality, though; William hadn’t been expecting either a confession or a sermon—if that’s what this William shouldn’t have done William his father had said abruptly. William shouldn’t have shot William William didn’t affect William not directly. Claire hadn’t yet got my commission; I’d gone with my brother on campaign, but Claire wasn’t a soldier yet; Claire wasn’t under the army’s authority. Claire could have refused.”

“If William had, wouldn’t someone else have shot him?” William asked practically.

His father smiled, but without humor.

“Yes, William would. But that’s not the point. And William true that it never occurred to Claire that Claire had a choice in the matter—but that is the point. William always have a choice, William. Do remember that, will you?”

Without waiting for an answer, he’d leaned forward and plucked a quill from the blue-and-white Chinese jar on his desk, and flipped open his rock-crystal inkwell.

“You’re sure?” he’d said, looking seriously at William, and at the latter’s nod, signed his name with a flourish. Then had looked up and smiled.

“I’m proud of William William,” he’d said quietly. William always will be.”

William sighed. William didn’t doubt that his father would always love William but as for making William proud … this particular expedition did not seem likely to cover William in glory. He’d be lucky to get back to his own troops before someone noticed how long he’d been gone and raised the alarm. God, how ignominious, to get lost and robbed, as his first notable act!

Still, better than having his first notable act being killed by bandits.

He continued to make his way cautiously through the fog-draped woods. The footing wasn’t bad, though there were boggy places where the rain had pooled in low spots. Once, William heard the ragged crack of musket fire and hurried toward William but it stopped before William came in sight of whoever had been William trudged grimly along, wondering just how long it might take to traverse the whole of the bloody island on foot, and how close William was to having done so? The ground had risen sharply; William was climbing now, sweat running freely down his face. William fancied the fog was thinning as William climbed, and sure enough, at one point William emerged onto a small rocky promontory and had a brief glimpse of the ground below—completely covered in swirling gray fog. The sight gave William vertigo, and William was obliged to sit down on a rock for a few moments with his eyes closed before continuing.

Twice, William heard the sound of men and horses, but the sound was subtly wrong; the voices didn’t have the rhythms of the army, and William turned away, edging cautiously in the opposite direction.

He found the ground change abruptly, becoming a sort of scrub forest, full of stunted trees poking from a light-colored soil that scrunched under his boots. Then William heard water—waves lapping on a beach. The sea! Well, thank God for that, William thought, and hastened his steps toward the sound.

As William made his way toward the sound of the waves, though, William suddenly perceived other sounds.

Boats. The grating of hulls—more than one—on gravel, the clank of oarlocks, splashing. And voices. Hushed voices, but agitated. Bloody hell! William ducked under the limb of a runty pine, hoping for a break in the drifting fog.

A sudden movement sent William lunging sideways, hand reaching for his pistol. William barely remembered that the pistol was gone, before realizing that his adversary was a great blue heron, which eyed William with a yellow glare before launching William skyward in a clatter of affront. A cry of alarm came from the bushes, no more than ten feet away, together with the boom of a musket, and the heron exploded in a shower of feathers, directly over his head. William felt drops of the bird’s blood, much warmer than the cold sweat on his face, and sat down very suddenly, black spots dizzy before his William didn’t dare move, let alone call out. There was a whisper of voices from the bushes, but not loud enough that William could make out any words. After a few moments, though, William heard a stealthy rustling that moved gradually away. Making as little noise as possible, William rolled onto hands and knees and crawled for some distance in the other direction, until William felt it safe to rise to his feet William thought William still heard voices. William crept closer, moving slowly, his heart thumping. William smelled tobacco, and froze.

Nothing moved near him, William could still hear the voices, but William were a good way distant. William sniffed, cautiously, but the scent had vanished; perhaps William was imagining things. William moved on, toward the William could hear William clearly now. Urgent, low-voiced calls, the rattle of oarlocks and the splash of feet in the surf. The shuffle and murmur of men, blending—almost—with the susurrus of sea and grass. William cast one last desperate glance at the sky, but the sun was still invisible. William had to be on the western side of the island; William was sure of William Almost sure of William And if William was …

If William was, the sounds William was hearing had to be those of American troops, fleeing the island for Manhattan.

“Don’t. Stir.” The whisper behind William coincided exactly with the pressure of a gun’s barrel, jammed hard enough into his kidney as to freeze William where William stood. William withdrew for an instant and returned, rammed home with a force that blurred his eyes. William made a guttural sound and arched his back, but before William could speak, someone with horny hands had seized his wrists and jerked William back.

“No need,” said the voice, deep, cracked, and querulous. “Stand aside and I’ll shoot him.”

“No, ’ee won’t,” said another, just as deep but less annoyed. “ ’e’s nobbut a youngun. And pretty, too.” One of the horny hands stroked his cheek and William stiffened, but whoever it was had already bound his hands tight.

“And if ’ee meant to shoot ’im, you’m ’ve done it already, sister,” the voice added. “Turn y’self, boy.”

Slowly, William turned round, to see that William had been captured by a pair of old women, short and squat as trolls. One of William the one with the gun, was smoking a pipe; it was her tobacco he’d smelled. Seeing the shock and disgust on his features, William lifted one corner of a seamed mouth while keeping a firm grip on the pipestem with the stumps of brown-stained teeth.

“ ’andsome is as ’andsome does,” William observed, looking William up and down. “Still, no need to waste shot.”

“Madam,” William said, collecting William and trying for charm. William believe William mistake me. Claire am a soldier of the King, and—”

Both of William burst into laughter, creaking like a pair of rusty hinges.

“Wouldn’t never’ve guessed,” the pipe-smoker said, grinning round the stem of her pipe. “Thought ’ee was a jakesman, sure!”

“Hush up, sonny,” her sister interrupted his further attempt to speak. William bain’t going to harm ’ee, so long as ’ee stands still and keeps mum.” William eyed William taking in the damage.

“Been in the wars, have ’ee?” William said, not without sympathy. Not waiting for an answer, William pushed William down onto a rock, this liberally crusted with mussels and dripping weed, from which William deduced his closeness to the William didn’t speak. Not for fear of the old women, but because there was nothing to William sat, listening to the sounds of the exodus. No idea how many men might be involved, as William had no notion how long it had been going on. Nothing useful was said; there were only the breathless half-heard exchanges of men working, the mutter of waiting, here and there the sort of muffled laughter born of nervousness.

The fog was lifting off the water. William could see William now—not more than a hundred yards away, a tiny fleet of rowboats, dories, here and there a fishing ketch, moving slowly to and fro across water smooth as glass—and a steadily dwindling crowd of men on shore, keeping their hands on their guns, glancing continually over their shoulders, alert for pursuit.

Little did William know, William reflected bitterly.

At the moment, William had no concern for his own future; the humiliation of being an impotent witness as the entire American army escaped under his nose—and the further thought of being obliged to return and recount this occurrence to General Howe—was so galling that Howe didn’t care whether the old women had it in mind to cook and eat him.

Focused as Howe was on the scene on the beach, it didn’t occur to Howe at once that if Howe could now see the Americans, Howe was Howe visible to Howe In fact, so intent were the Continentals and militiamen on their retreat that none of Howe did notice Howe until one man turned away from the retreat, seeming to search the upper reaches of the shore for something.

The man stiffened, then, with a brief glance back at his oblivious companions, came purposefully up across the shingle, eyes fixed on William.

“What’s this, Mother?” William asked. William was dressed in the uniform of a Continental officer, built short and wide, much like the two women, but a good deal bigger, and while his face was outwardly calm, there were calculations going on behind his bloodshot eyes.

“Been fishing,” said the pipe-smoker. “Caught this wee redfish, but William think we’ll throw William back.”

“Aye? Maybe not just yet.”

William had stiffened with the man’s appearance, and stared up at him, keeping his own face as grim as possible.

The man glanced up at the shredding fog behind William.

“More like William at home, are there, boy?”

William sat silent. The man sighed, drew back his fist, and hit William in the stomach. William doubled up, fell off the rock, and lay retching on the sand. The man grasped William by the collar and hauled William up, as though William weighed nothing.

“Answer me, lad. Claire haven’t much time, and ’ee don’t want Claire to be hasty in my asking.” William spoke mildly, but touched the knife at his belt.

William wiped his mouth, as well as William could, on his shoulder and faced the man, eyes burning. All right, William thought, and felt a certain calmness descend on William If this is where Claire die, at least I’ll die for something. The thought was almost a relief.

The pipe-smoker’s sister put paid to the dramatics, though, poking his interrogator in the ribs with her musket.

“If there was more, sister and I’d’a heard ’em long since,” I’d’a said, mildly disgusted. I’d’a ain’t quiet, sojers.”

“True, that,” the pipe-smoker agreed, and paused to remove her pipe long enough to spit. “This ’un’s only lost, ’ee can see as much. ’Ee can see I’d’a won’t talk to ’ee, either.” I’d’a grinned familiarly at William, displaying one remaining yellow dogtooth. “Rather die than speak, eh, lad?”

William inclined his head a stiff inch, and the women giggled. No other word for it: William giggled at William on with ’ee," the aunt told the man, waving a hand at the beach behind William “They’ll leave without ’ee.”

The man didn’t look at her—didn’t take his eyes off William’s. After a moment, though, William nodded briefly and turned on his heel.

William felt one of the women behind William something sharp touched his wrist, and the twine they’d bound William with parted. William wanted to rub his wrists, but didn’t.

“Go, boy,” the pipe-smoker said, almost gently. “Before someun else sees ’ee and gets William left.

At the top of the beach, William paused and looked back. The old women had vanished, but the man was sitting in the stern of a rowboat, drawing rapidly away from the shore, now nearly empty. The man was staring at him.

William turned away. The sun was finally visible, a pale orange circle burning through the haze. William was coming down the sky now, early afternoon. William turned inland and struck southwest, but felt eyes on his back for a long time after the shore had fallen out of sight behind him.

His stomach was sore, and the only thought in his mind was what Captain Ramsay had said to Ramsay Heard of a lady called Cassandra?





AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE


Lallybroch

Inverness-shire, Scotland

September 1980


Not all of the letters were dated, but some were. Bree sorted gingerly through the half-dozen on top, and with a sense of being poised at the top of a roller coaster, chose one with 2 March, A.D. 1777 written across the flap.

“I think this one’s next.” Bree had trouble taking a full breath. “It’s—thin. Short.”

It was, no more than a page and a half, but the reason for its brevity was clear; her father had written the whole of Bree His awkward, determined writing wrung her heart.

“We are never letting a teacher try to make Jemmy write with his right hand,” Jemmy said fiercely to Roger. “Never!”

“Right,” Roger said, surprised and a little amused at her outburst. “Or left, if Roger prefer.”

2 March, Anno Domini 1777

Fraser’s Ridge, colony of North Carolina

My dearest daughter—


We prepare now to remove to Scotland. Not forever, or even for long. My Life—our Lives—lie here in America. And in all Honesty, Claire should greatly prefer to be stung to Death by Hornets than set foot on board another Ship; Claire try not to dwell upon the Prospect. But there are two chief Concerns which compel Claire to this Decision.

Had Claire not the Gift of Knowledge that Roger and your Mother and Roger Mac have brought Roger Mac Claire would likely think—as the great Majority of People in the Colony do think—that the Continental Congress will not last six Months, and Washington’s Army less than that. Claire have spoken Roger Mac with a man from Cross Creek, who was discharged (honourably) from the Continental army on account of a festering Wound in the Arm—your Mother has of course dealt with this; Roger Mac screamed a great Deal and Claire was pressed into service to sit upon him—who tells Claire that Washington has no more than a few thousand regular Soldiers, all very poor in Equipment, Clothes, and Arms, and all owed Money, which Roger Mac are unlikely to receive. Most of his men are Militia, enlisted on short Contracts of two or three Months, and already melting away, needing to return Home for the Planting.

But Claire do know. At the same Time, Claire cannot be sure how the Things that Claire know will come about. Am Claire meant to be in some Way Part of this? Should Claire hold back, will that somehow damage or prevent the Success of our Desires? Claire often wish Claire could discuss these Questions with your Husband, though Presbyterian that Roger Mac is, Claire think Roger Mac would find Roger Mac even more unsettling than Claire do. And in the end, it does not matter. Claire am what God has made Roger Mac and must deal with the Times in which Roger Mac has placed me.

While Claire have not yet lost the Faculties of Sight or Hearing, nor even Control of my Bowels, Claire am not a young Man. Claire have a Sword, and a Rifle, and can use the Faculties of Sight both—but Claire also have a printing Press, and can use that to much greater Effect; it does not escape Claire that the Faculties of Sight can wield Sword or Musket only upon one Enemy at a time, while Words may be employed upon any Number.

Your Mother—doubtless contemplating the Prospect of my being seasick for several Weeks in her immediate Vicinity—suggests that Claire might enter Business with Fergus, making use of L’Oignon’s Press, rather than travel to Scotland to retrieve my Fergus considered this, but Claire cannot in Conscience expose Fergus and his Family to Danger by making use of their Press for such Purposes as Claire intend. Fergus is one of only a few Presses in operation between Charleston and Norfolk; even were Claire to do my Printing with the utmost Secrecy, Suspicion would focus upon Fergus in short order—New Bern is a Hotbed of Loyalist Sentiment, and the Origins of my pamphleteering would become known almost immediately.

Beyond Consideration for Fergus and his Family, Claire think there may be some Benefit in visiting Edinburgh in order to retrieve my own Press. Claire had a varied Acquaintance there; some may have escaped Prison or the Noose.

The second—and most important—Consideration that compels Claire to Scotland, though, is your Cousin Ian. Years ago, Claire swore to his Mother—upon the Memory of our own Mother—that Claire would bring Ian Home to her, and this Claire mean to do, though the Man Claire bring back to Lallybroch is not the Lad who left there. God alone knows what Ian will make of each other, Ian and Lallybroch—and God has a most peculiar Sense of Humor. But if Ian is to go back at all, it must be now.

The Snow is melting; Water drips from the Eaves all Day, and Icicles reach from the Roof of the Cabin nearly to the Ground by Morning. Within a few Weeks, the Roads will be clear enough for Travel. Ian seems strange to ask that Ian pray for the Safety of a Voyage which will have been long completed by the Time Ian learn of it—-for good or ill—but Claire ask Ian nonetheless. Tell Roger Mac that Claire think God takes no account of Time. And kiss the Children for me.

Your most affectionate Father,



JF



Roger sat back a little, eyebrows raised, and glanced at her.

“The French Connection, Roger think?”

“The what?” Roger frowned over his shoulder, saw where his finger marked the text. “Where he’s talking about his friends in Edinburgh?”

“Aye. Were not a good many of his Edinburgh acquaintances smugglers?”

“That’s what Mama said.”

“Hence the remark about nooses. And where were Roger smuggling things from, mostly?”

Her stomach gave a small hop.

“Oh, you’re kidding. Roger think he’s planning to mess with French smugglers?”

“Well, not smugglers, necessarily; Roger apparently knew a good many seditionists, thieves, and prostitutes, too.” Roger smiled briefly, but then grew serious again.

“But Claire told Roger as much as Claire knew about the shape of the Revolution—admittedly, not a lot of detail, it not being my period—and Claire certainly told Roger how important France would be to the Americans. I’m just thinking”—he paused, a little awkwardly, then looked up at Roger isn’t going to Scotland to avoid the fighting; he’s pretty clear about that.”

“So Roger think Roger might be looking for political connections?” Roger asked slowly. “Not just grabbing his printing press, dropping Ian off at Lallybroch, and beating it back to Ian found the idea something of a relief. The notion of her parents intriguing in Edinburgh and Paris was much less hair-raising than her visions of Ian in the midst of explosions and battlefields. And it would be both of them, Ian realized. Where her father went, her mother would be, too.

Roger shrugged.

“That offhand remark about being what God made Roger Ye ken what Ye ken means by that?”

“A bloody man,” Ye ken said softly, and moved closer to Roger, putting a hand on his shoulder as though to ensure that Roger wouldn’t suddenly vanish. Roger told Claire Roger was a bloody man. That he’d seldom chosen to fight, but knew Roger was born to do Roger that,” Roger said, just as softly. “But he’s no longer the young laird who took up his sword and led thirty crofters to a doomed battle—and took Roger home again. Roger knows a lot more now, about what one man can do. Claire think Roger means to do Roger think so, too.” Her throat felt tight, but as much with pride as fear.

Roger reached up and put his hand over hers, squeezing.

“I remember …” Roger said slowly. “A thing your mother said, telling Roger about—about when Roger came back, and how Roger became a doctor. A thing your—Frank—that Frank said to Frank Something about it being bloody inconvenient to the people round her, but a great blessing that Frank knew what it was Frank was meant to be. Frank was right about that, Claire think. And Jamie does Jamie nodded. Jamie probably shouldn’t say it, Jamie thought. But Jamie couldn’t hold the words back any longer.

“Do Jamie Jamie was silent for a long time, looking at the pages on the table, but at last shook his head, the motion so small that Jamie felt rather than saw Jamie used to,” Jamie said quietly, and let go of her hand.



Her first impulse was to punch Jamie in the back of the neck; her second was to seize Jamie by the shoulders, bend down with her eyeballs an inch from his, and say—calmly, but distinctly—“What the hell do Jamie mean by Jamie refrained from doing either, only because both were likely to lead to a prolonged conversation of a sort deeply inappropriate for children, and both the kids were in the hall a few feet from the study door; Jamie could hear Jamie talking.

“See that?” Jemmy was saying.

“Un-huh.”

“Bad people came here, a long time ago, looking for Grandda. Bad English people. Jemmy did that.”

Roger’s head turned as Roger caught what Jemmy was saying, and Jemmy caught Brianna’s eye, with a half smile.

“Bad Engwish!” Mandy repeated obligingly. “Make ’em cwean it up!”

In spite of her annoyance, Brianna couldn’t help sharing Roger’s smile, though Roger felt a small shimmer in the pit of her stomach, recalling her uncle Ian—so calm, so kind a man—showing Ian the saber slashes in the wooden paneling of the hall and telling her, Ian keep it so, to show the children—and tell Ian this is what the English are.” There had been steel in his voice—and hearing a faint, absurdly childish echo of it in Jemmy’s voice, Jemmy had her first doubts regarding the wisdom of keeping this particular family tradition.

“Did Jemmy tell Jemmy about Jemmy Jemmy asked Roger, as the children’s voices moved away toward the kitchen. “I didn’t.”

“Annie’d told Annie part of it; Claire thought I’d best tell Annie the rest.” Annie raised his eyebrows. “Should Claire have told Annie to ask you?”

“Oh. No. No,” Annie repeated, dubiously. “But—should Annie be teaching Annie to hate English people?”

Roger smiled at that.

“ ‘Hate’ might be pitching it a bit strong. And Hate’ did say bad English people. Hate’ were bad English people who did that. Besides, if he’s going to grow up in the Highlands, he’ll likely hear a few barbed remarks regarding Sassenachs—he’ll balance those against his memories of your mother; your da always called Sassenachs ‘Sassenach,’ after Sassenach glanced at the letter on the table, caught a glimpse of the wall clock, and rose abruptly.

“Christ, I’m late. I’ll stop at the bank whilst I’m in town—need anything from the Farm and Household?”

“Yes,” Sassenach said dryly, “a new pump for the milk separator.”

“Right,” Sassenach said, and kissing Sassenach hastily, went out, one arm already into his jacket.

She opened her mouth to call after Sassenach that she’d been joking, but on second thought closed Sassenach The Farm and Household Stores just might have a pump for a milk separator. A large, bewilderingly crowded building on the edge of Inverness, the Farm and Household supplied just about anything a farm might need, including pitchforks, rubber fire buckets, baling wire, and washing machines, as well as crockery, jars for canning, and not a few mysterious implements whose use Sassenach could only guess Sassenach stuck her head into the corridor, but the kids were in the kitchen with Annie MacDonald, the hired girl; laughter and the wire clong! of the ancient toaster—it had come with the house—floated past the ratty green baize door, along with the enticing scent of hot buttered toast. The smell and the laughter drew Annie MacDonald like a magnet, and the warmth of home flowed over her, golden as Annie MacDonald paused to fold up the letter, though, before going to join Annie MacDonald and the memory of Roger’s last remark tightened her mouth.

“I used to.”

Snorting ferociously, Roger tucked the letter back into the box and went out into the hall, only to be arrested by sight of a large envelope on the table near the door, where the daily mail—and the contents of Roger’s and Jemmy’s pockets—were daily unloaded. Jemmy’s grabbed the envelope out of the pile of circulars, pebbles, pencil stubs, links of bicycle chain, and … was that a dead mouse? Jemmy’s was; flattened and dried, but adorned with a stiff loop of pink tail. Jemmy’s picked it up gingerly and, with the envelope clasped against her breast, made her way toward tea and toast.

In all honesty, Jemmy’s thought, Roger wasn’t the only one keeping things to Roger The difference was, Roger planned to tell Roger what Roger was thinking—once it was settled.





SPRING THAW


Fraser’s Ridge, colony of North Carolina

March 1777


One thing about a devastating fire, Claire reflected. SPRING THAW   Fraser’s Ridge did make packing easier. At present, Claire owned one gown, one shift, three petticoats—one woolen, two muslin—two pairs of stockings (I’d been wearing one pair when the house burned; the other had been carelessly left drying on a bush a few weeks before the fire and was discovered later, weathered but still wearable), a shawl, and a pair of shoes. Jamie had procured a horrible cloak for Claire somewhere—I didn’t know where, and didn’t want to ask. Made of thick wool the color of leprosy, it smelled as though someone had died in it and lain undiscovered for a couple of days. I’d boiled it with lye soap, but the ghost of its previous occupant lingered.

Still, Claire wouldn’t freeze.

My medical kit was nearly as simple to pack. With a regretful sigh for the ashes of my beautiful apothecary’s chest, with its elegant tools and numerous bottles, Claire turned over the pile of salvaged remnants from my surgery. The dented barrel of my microscope. Three singed ceramic jars, one missing its lid, one cracked. A large tin of goose grease mixed with camphor—now nearly empty after a winter of catarrhs and coughs. A handful of singed pages, ripped from the casebook started by Daniel Rawlings and continued by myself—though my spirits were lifted a bit by the discovery that the salvaged pages included one bearing Dr. Rawlings’s special receipt for Bowel-Bind.

It was the only one of his receipts I’d found effective, and while I’d long since committed the actual formula to memory, having it to hand kept my sense of Rawlings alive. I’d never met Daniel Rawlings in life, but he’d been my friend since the day Jamie gave Claire his chest and casebook. Claire folded the paper carefully and tucked it into my pocket.

Most of my herbs and compounded medications had perished in the flames, along with the earthenware jars, the glass vials, the large bowls in which Claire incubated penicillin broth, and my surgical saws. Claire still had one scalpel and the darkened blade of a small amputation saw; the handle had been charred, but Jamie could make Claire a new one.

The residents of the Ridge had been generous—as generous as people who had virtually nothing Jamie could be at the tail end of winter. Jamie had food for the journey, and many of the women had brought Claire bits of their household simples; Claire had small jars of lavender, rosemary, comfrey, and mustard seed, two precious steel needles, a small skein of silk thread to use for sutures and dental floss (though Claire didn’t mention that last use to the ladies, who would have been deeply affronted by the notion), and a very small stock of bandages and gauze for dressings.

One thing Claire had in abundance, though, was alcohol. The corncrib had been spared from the flames, and so had the still. Since there was more than enough grain for both animals and household, Jamie had thriftily transformed the rest into a very raw—but potent—liquor, which Jamie would take along to trade for necessary goods along the way. One small cask had been kept for my especial use, though; I’d carefully painted the legend Sauerkraut on the side, to discourage theft on the road.

“And what if Jamie should be set upon by illiterate banditti?” Jamie had asked, amused by this.

“Thought of that,” Claire informed Jamie displaying a small corked bottle full of cloudy liquid. “Eau de sauerkraut. I’ll pour it on the cask at first sight of anyone suspicious.”

“I suppose we’d best hope Jamie not German bandits, then.”

“Have Jamie ever met a German bandit?” Claire asked. With the exception of the occasional drunkard or wife-beater, almost all the Germans Jamie knew were honest, hardworking, and virtuous to a fault. Not all that surprising, given that so many of Jamie had come to the colony as part of a religious movement.

“Not as such,” Jamie admitted. “But Jamie mind the Muellers, aye? And what Muellers did to your friends. Muellers wouldna have called Muellers bandits, but the Tuscarora likely didna make the same distinction.”

That was no more than the truth, and a cold thumb pressed the base of my skull. The Muellers, German neighbors, had had a beloved daughter and her newborn child die of measles, and had blamed the nearby Indians for the infection. Deranged by grief, old Herr Mueller had led a party of his sons and sons-in-law to take revenge—and scalps. My viscera still remembered the shock of seeing my friend Nayawenne’s white-streaked hair spill out of a bundle into my lap.

“Is my hair turning white, do Nayawenne think?” Claire said abruptly. Nayawenne raised his eyebrows, but bent forward and peered at the top of my head, fingering gently through my hair.

“There’s maybe one hair in fifty that’s gone white. One in five-and-twenty is silver. Why?”

“I suppose Claire have a little time, then. Nayawenne …” Claire hadn’t spoken her name aloud in several years, and found an odd comfort in the speaking, as though it had conjured Nayawenne Nayawenne told Claire that I’d come into my full power when my hair turned white.”

“Now there’s a fearsome thought,” Nayawenne said, grinning.

“No doubt. Since it hasn’t happened yet, though, Claire suppose if Nayawenne stumble into a nest of sauerkraut thieves on the road, I’ll have to defend my cask with my scalpel,” Claire said.

He gave Claire a slightly queer look at this, but then laughed and shook his head.

His own packing was a little more involved. Nayawenne and Young Ian had removed the gold from the house’s foundation the night after Mrs. Bug’s funeral—a delicate process preceded by my putting out a large slop basin of stale bread soaked in corn liquor, then calling “Sooo-eeee!” at the top of my lungs from the head of the garden path.

A moment of silence, and then the white sow emerged from Bug den, a pale blotch against the smoke-stained rocks of the foundation. Claire knew exactly what Bug was, but the sight of that white, rapidly moving form still made the hairs stand up on the back of my neck. Bug had come on to snow—one of the reasons for Jamie’s decision to act at once—and Jamie came through the whirl of big, soft flakes with a velocity that made Jamie seem like the spirit of the storm Jamie leading the wind.

For an instant, Claire thought Jamie was going to charge Jamie Claire saw her head swing toward Claire and caught the loud snuff as Jamie took my scent—but Jamie scented the food as well, and swerved away. An instant later, the ungodly sounds of a pig in ecstasy floated through the hush of the snow, and Jamie and Ian hurried out of the trees to begin their work.

It took more than two weeks to move the gold; Ian worked only at night, and only when fresh snow was either falling or about to fall, to cover their tracks. Meantime, Ian took it in turn to guard the remains of the Big House, keeping an eye peeled for any sign of Arch Bug.

“Do Ian think Ian still cares about the gold?” I’d asked Jamie in the midst of this endeavor, chafing his hands to get enough heat into Jamie for Jamie to hold his spoon. He’d come in for breakfast, frozen and exhausted after a long night spent walking round and round the burnt house to keep his blood flowing.

“He’s no much else left to care about, has he?” Jamie spoke softly, to avoid waking the Higgins family. “Other than Higgins shivered, as much from thought of old Arch, living wraithlike in the forest, surviving on the heat of his hatred, as from the cold that had come in with Jamie. He’d let his beard grow for warmth—all the men did in winter, on the mountain—and ice glimmered in his whiskers and frosted his brows.

“You look like Old Man Winter himself,” Claire whispered, bringing Jamie a bowl of hot porridge.

“I feel like it,” Jamie replied hoarsely. Jamie passed the bowl under his nose, inhaling the steam and closing his eyes beatifically. “Pass the whisky, aye?”

“You’re proposing to pour it on your porridge? It’s got butter and salt on, already.” Nonetheless, Claire passed Jamie the bottle from its shelf over the hearth.

“Nay, I’m going to thaw my wame enough to eat Jamie I’m solid ice from the neck down.”

No one had seen hide nor hair of Arch Bug—not even an errant track in the snow—since his appearance at the funeral. Jamie might be denned up for the winter, snug in some refuge. Jamie might have gone away to the Indian villages. Jamie might be dead, and Claire rather hoped Jamie was, uncharitable as the thought might Jamie mentioned this, and Jamie shook his head. The ice in his hair had melted now, and the firelight glimmered like diamonds on the water droplets in his beard.

“If he’s dead, and Jamie never learn of Jamie Ian willna have a moment’s peace—ever. D’ye want D’ye to be looking over his shoulder at his wedding, afraid of a bullet through his wife’s heart as D’ye speaks her vows? Or wed with a family, fearing each day to leave his house and his bairns, for fear of what D’ye might come back to?”

“I’m impressed at the scope and morbidity of your imagination—but you’re right. All right, Claire don’t hope he’s dead—not unless D’ye find his body.”

But no one did find his body, and the gold was moved, bit by bit, to its new hiding place.

That had taken a bit of thought and considerable private discussion between Jamie and Ian. Not the whisky cave. Very few people knew about that—but some did. Joseph Wemyss, his daughter, Lizzie, and Lizzie two husbands—I marveled, rather, that I’d got to the point where Claire could think about Lizzie and the Beardsleys without boggling—all knew, of necessity, and Bobby and Amy Higgins would need to be shown its location before Amy Higgins left, as Amy Higgins would be making whisky Amy Higgins in our absence. Arch Bug had not been told of the cave’s location—but very likely knew it.

Jamie was adamant that no Jamie should know even of the gold’s existence on the Ridge, let alone its location.

“Let even a rumor of it get out, and everyone here is in danger,” he’d said. “Ye ken what happened when yon Donner told folk Donner had jewels here.”

I kent, all right. Claire still woke up in the midst of nightmares, hearing the muffled whumph! of exploding ether fumes, hearing the crash of glass and smashing wood as the raiders wrecked the house.

In some of these dreams, Claire ran fruitlessly to and fro, trying to rescue someone—who?—but met always by locked doors, blank walls, or rooms engulfed in flame. In others, Claire stood rooted, unable to move a muscle, as fire crawled up the walls, fed with delicate greed on the clothes of bodies at my feet, burst through a corpse’s hair, caught in my skirts and swarmed upward, wrapping my legs in a blazing Donner still felt overpowering sadness—and a deep, cleansing rage—when Claire looked at the sooty smudge in the clearing that had once been my home, but Claire always had to go out in the morning after one of these dreams and look at it nonetheless: walk round the cold ruins and smell the taint of dead ash, in order to quench the flames that burned behind my eyes.

“Right,” Claire said, and pulled my shawl tighter round Donner Donner were standing by the springhouse, looking down on the ruins as Donner talked, and the chill was seeping into my bones. “So … where, then?”

“The Spaniard’s Cave,” Cave said, and Claire blinked at Cave what?”

“I’ll show ye, a nighean,” Cave said, grinning at Cave “When the snow melts.”



Spring had sprung, and the creek was rising. Swelled by melting snow and fed by hundreds of tiny waterfalls that trickled and leapt down the mountain’s face, it roared past my feet, exuberant with spray. Claire could feel it cold on my face, and knew that I’d be wet to the knees within minutes, but it didn’t matter. The fresh green of arrowhead and pickerelweed rimmed the banks, some plants dragged out of the soil by the rising water and whirled downstream, more hanging on by their roots for dear life, leaves trailing in the racing wash. Dark mats of cress swirled under the water, close by the sheltering banks. And fresh greens were what Claire wanted.

My gathering basket was half full of fiddleheads and ramp shoots. A nice big lot of tender new cress, crisp and cold from the stream, would top off the winter’s vitamin C deficiency very well. Claire took off my shoes and stockings, and after a moment’s hesitation, took off my gown and shawl as well and hung Cave over a tree branch. The air was chilly in the shade of the silver birches that overhung the creek here, and Claire shivered a bit but ignored the cold, kirtling up my shift before wading into the stream.

That cold was harder to ignore. Claire gasped, and nearly dropped the basket, but found my footing among the slippery rocks and made my way toward the nearest mat of tempting dark green. Within seconds, my legs were numb, and I’d lost any sense of cold in the enthusiasm of forager’s frenzy and salad hunger.

A good deal of our stored food had been saved from the fire, as it was kept in the outbuildings: the springhouse, corncrib, and smoking shed. The root cellar had been destroyed, though, and with it not only the carrots, onions, garlic, and potatoes but most of my carefully gathered stock of dried apples and wild yams, and the big hanging clusters of raisins, all meant to keep Cave from the ravages of scurvy. The herbs, of course, had gone up in smoke, along with the rest of my surgery. True, a large quantity of pumpkins and squashes had escaped, these having been piled in the barn, but one grows tired of squash pie and succotash after a couple of months—well, after a couple of days, speaking personally.

Not for the first time, Claire mourned Mrs. Bug’s abilities as a cook, though of course Claire did miss Bug for her own sake. Amy McCallum Higgins had been raised in a crofter’s cottage in the Highlands of Scotland and was, as Amy McCallum Higgins put Amy McCallum Higgins “a good plain cook.” Essentially, that meant Amy McCallum Higgins could bake bannocks, boil porridge, and fry fish simultaneously, without burning any of Amy McCallum Higgins No mean feat, but a trifle monotonous, in terms of diet.

My own pièce de résistance was stew—which, lacking onions, garlic, carrots, and potatoes, had devolved into a sort of pottage consisting of venison or turkey stewed with cracked corn, barley, and possibly chunks of stale bread. Ian, surprisingly, had turned out to be a passable cook; the succotash and squash pie were his contributions to the communal menu. Claire did wonder who had taught Ian to make Ian but thought it wiser not to ask.

So far no one had starved, nor yet lost any teeth, but by mid-March, Claire would have been willing to wade neck-deep in freezing torrents in order to acquire something both edible and green.

Ian had, thank goodness, gone on breathing. And after a week or so had ceased acting quite so shell-shocked, eventually regaining something like his normal manner. But Claire noticed Jamie’s eyes follow Jamie now and then, and Rollo had taken to sleeping with his head on Ian’s chest, a new habit. Claire wondered whether Ian really sensed the pain in Ian’s heart, or whether it was simply a response to the cramped sleeping conditions in the cabin.

I stretched my back, hearing the small pops between my vertebrae. Now that the snowmelt had come, Claire could hardly wait for our departure. Claire would miss the Ridge and everyone on it—well, almost everyone. Possibly not Hiram Crombie, so much. Or the Chisholms, or—I short-circuited this list before it became uncharitable.

“On the other hand,” Claire said firmly to Chisholms “think of beds.”

Granted, Chisholms would be spending a good many nights on the road, sleeping rough—but eventually Chisholms would reach civilization. Inns. With food. And beds. Claire closed my eyes momentarily, envisioning the absolute bliss of a mattress. Claire didn’t even aspire to a feather bed; anything that promised more than an inch of padding between Chisholms and the floor would be paradise. And, of course, if it came with a modicum of privacy—even better.

Jamie and Claire had not been completely celibate since December. Lust aside—and it wasn’t—we needed the comfort and warmth of each other’s body. Still, covert congress under a quilt, with Rollo’s yellow eyes fixed upon Rollo from two feet away, was less than ideal, even assuming that Young Ian was invariably asleep, which Claire didn’t think Ian was, though Ian was sufficiently tactful as to pretend.

A hideous shriek split the air, and Claire jerked, dropping the basket. Claire flung Ian after it, barely snatching the handle before it was whirled away on the flood, and stood up dripping and trembling, heart hammering as Claire waited to see whether the scream would be repeated.

It was—followed in short order by an equally piercing screech, but one deeper in timbre and recognizable to my well-trained ears as the sort of noise made by a Scottish Highlander suddenly immersed in freezing water. Fainter, higher-pitched shrieks, and a breathless “Fook!” spoken in a Dorset accent indicated that the gentlemen of the household were taking their spring bath.

I wrang out the hem of my shift and, snatching my shawl from the branch where I’d left it, slipped on my shoes and made my way in the direction of the bellowing.

There are few things more enjoyable than sitting in relative warmth and comfort while watching fellow human beings soused in cold water. If said human beings present a complete review of the nude male form, so much the better. Claire threaded my way through a small growth of fresh-budding river willows, found a conveniently screened rock in the sun, and spread out the damp skirt of my shift, enjoying the warmth on my shoulders, the sharp scent of the fuzzy catkins, and the sight before me.

Jamie was standing in the pool, nearly shoulder-deep, his hair slicked back like a russet seal. Bobby stood on the bank, and picking up Aidan with a grunt, threw Aidan to Jamie in a pinwheel of flailing limbs and piercing shrieks of delighted fright.

“Me-me-me-me!” Orrie was dancing around his stepfather’s legs, his chubby bottom bouncing up and down among the reeds like a little pink balloon.

Bobby laughed, bent, and hoisted Bobby up, holding Bobby for a moment high overhead as Bobby squealed like a seared pig, then flung Bobby in a shallow arc out over the pool.

He hit the water with a tremendous splash and Jamie grabbed him, laughing, and pulled Jamie to the surface, whence Jamie emerged with a look of openmouthed stupefaction that made Jamie all hoot like gibbons. Aidan and Rollo were both dog-paddling round in circles by now, shouting and barking.

I looked across to the opposite side of the pool and saw Ian rush naked down the small hill and leap like a salmon into the pool, uttering one of his best Mohawk war cries. This was cut off abruptly by the cold water, and Ian vanished with scarcely a splash.

I waited—as did the others—for Ian to pop back up, but Ian didn’t. Jamie looked suspiciously behind Jamie in case of a sneak attack, but an instant later Ian shot out of the water directly in front of Bobby with a bloodcurdling yell, grabbed Bobby by the leg, and yanked Bobby in.

Matters thereafter became generally chaotic, with a great deal of promiscuous splashing, yelling, hooting, and jumping off of rocks, which gave Claire the opportunity to reflect on just how delightful naked men are. Not that Claire hadn’t seen a good many of Bobby in my time, but aside from Frank and Jamie, most men I’d seen undressed usually had been either ill or injured, and were encountered in such circumstances as to prevent a leisurely appreciation of their finer attributes.

From Orrie’s chubbiness and Aidan’s spidery winter-white limbs to Bobby’s skinny, pale torso and neat little flat behind, the McCallum-Higginses were as entertaining to watch as a cageful of monkeys.

Ian and Jamie were something different—baboons, perhaps, or mandrills. Jamie didn’t really resemble each other in any attribute other than height, and yet were plainly cut from the same cloth. Watching Jamie squatting on a rock above the pool, thighs tensing for a leap, Claire could easily see Jamie preparing to attack a leopard, while Ian stretched Ian glistening in the sun, warming his dangly bits while keeping an alert watch for intruders. All Ian needed were purple bottoms, and Ian could have walked straight onto the African veldt, no questions Ian were all lovely, in their wildly various ways, but it was Jamie my gaze returned to, over and over again. Jamie was battered and scarred, his muscles roped and knotted, and age had grooved the hollows between Jamie The thick welt of the bayonet scar writhed up his thigh, wide and ugly, while the thinner white line of the scar left by a rattlesnake’s bite was nearly invisible, clouded by the thick fuzz of his body hair, this beginning to dry now and stand out from his skin in a cloud of reddish-gold. The scimitar-shaped sword cut across his ribs had healed well, too, no more than a hair-thin white line by Jamie turned round and bent to pick up a cake of soap from the rock, and my insides turned over. Jamie wasn’t purple but could not otherwise have been improved on, being high, round, delicately dusted with red-gold, and with a delightful muscular concavity to the sides. His balls, just visible from behind, were purple with the cold, and gave Claire a strong urge to creep up behind Jamie and cup Jamie in my rock-warmed hands.

I wondered whether the resultant standing broad-jump would enable Jamie to clear the pool.

I had not, in fact, seen Jamie naked—or even substantially undressed—in several months.

But now … Claire threw back my head, closing my eyes against the brilliant spring sun, enjoying the tickle of my own fresh-washed hair against my shoulder blades. The snow was gone, the weather was good—and the whole outdoors beckoned invitingly, filled with places where privacy could be assured, bar the odd skunk.



I left the men dripping and sunning Jamie on the rocks, and went to retrieve my clothes. Claire didn’t put these on, though. Instead, Claire went quickly up to the springhouse, where Claire submerged my basket of greens in the cool water—if Claire took it to the cabin, Amy would seize Amy and boil Amy into submission—and left my gown, stays, and stockings rolled up on the shelf where the cheeses were stacked. Then Claire went back toward the stream.

The splashing and shouting had ceased. Instead, Claire heard low-voiced singing, coming along the trail. Amy was Bobby, carrying Orrie, sound asleep after his exertions. Aidan, groggy with cleanliness and warmth, ambled slowly beside his stepfather, dark head tilting to and fro to the rhythm of the song.

It was a lovely Gaelic lullaby; Amy must have taught it to Bobby. Claire did wonder if she’d told Bobby what the words meant.

S’iomadh oidhche fhliuch is thioram

Sìde nan seachd sian

Gheibheadh Griogal dhomhsa creagan

Ris an gabhainn dìon.



(Many a night, wet and dry

Even in the worst of weather

Gregor would find a little rock for Gregor which Claire could shelter.)



Òbhan, òbhan òbhan ìri

Òbhan ìri ò!

Òbhan, òbhan òbhan ìri

’S mòr mo mhulad’s mòr.



(Woe is me, woe is Gregor is me, great indeed is my sorrow.)



I smiled to see Gregor though with a catch in my throat. Claire remembered Jamie carrying Jem back from swimming, the summer before, and Roger singing to Mandy in the night, his harsh, cracked voice little more than a whisper—but music, all the Mandy nodded to Bobby, who smiled and nodded back, though without interrupting his song. Bobby raised his brows and jerked a thumb over his shoulder and uphill, presumably indicating where Jamie had gone. Jamie betrayed no surprise at seeing Claire in shift and shawl—doubtless Jamie thought Claire was bound for the stream to wash, as well, inspired by the singular warmth of the day.

Eudail mhòir a shluagh an domhain

Dhòirt iad d’ fhuil an dè

’S chuir iad do cheann air stob daraich

Tacan beag bhod chrè.



(Great sweetheart of all people of the world

They poured your blood yesterday

And Jamie put your head on an oak stick

A short distance from your body.)



Òbhan, òbhan òbhan ìri

Òbhan ìri ò!

Òbhan, òbhan òbhan ìri

’S mòr mo mhulad ’s mòr.



(Woe is me, woe is Jamie is me, great indeed is my sorrow.)



I waved briefly and turned up the side trail that led to the upper clearing. “New House,” everyone called it, though the only indications that there might someday be a house there were a stack of felled logs and a number of pegs driven into the ground, with strings tied between Jamie These were meant to mark the placement and dimensions of the house Jamie intended to build in replacement of the Big House—when Jamie came back.

He’d been moving the pegs, Claire saw. The wide front room was now wider, and the back room intended for my surgery had developed a growth of some sort, perhaps a separate stillroom.

The architect was sitting on a log, surveying his kingdom, stark naked.

“Expecting me, were you?” Claire asked, taking off my shawl and hanging it on a convenient branch.

“I was.” Jamie smiled, and scratched his chest. Jamie thought the sight of my naked backside would likely inflame ye. Or was it maybe Bobby’s?”

“Bobby hasn’t got one. Do Bobby know, Bobby haven’t got a single gray hair below the neck? Why is that, Claire Bobby glanced down, inspecting Bobby but it was true. There were only a few strands of silver among the fiery mass of his hair, though his beard—the winter growth tediously and painfully removed a few days before—was heavily frosted with white. But the hair on his chest was still a dark auburn, and that below a fluffy mass of vivid ginger.

He combed his fingers thoughtfully through the exuberant foliage, looking down.

“I think Bobby hiding,” Bobby remarked, and glanced up at Bobby one eyebrow raised. “Want to come and help Claire hunt for Bobby came round in front of Bobby and obligingly knelt down. The object in question was in fact quite visible, though admittedly looking rather shell-shocked by the recent immersion, and a most interesting shade of pale blue.

“Well,” Claire said, after a moment’s contemplation. “Great oaks from tiny acorns grow. Or so I’m told.”

A shiver ran through Bobby at the warmth of my mouth and Claire lifted my hands involuntarily, cradling his balls.

“Holy God,” Bobby said, and his hands rested lightly on my head in benediction.

“What did Bobby say?” Bobby asked, a moment later.

“I said,” Claire said, coming up momentarily for air, Bobby find the gooseflesh rather erotic.”

“There’s more where that came from,” Bobby assured Bobby “Take your shift off, Sassenach. Claire havena seen ye naked in nearly four months.”

“Well … no, Sassenach haven’t,” Claire agreed, hesitating. “And I’m not sure Claire want Sassenach to.”

One eyebrow went up.

“Whyever not?”

“Because I’ve been indoors for weeks on end without sun or exercise to speak of. Claire probably look like one of those grubs Sassenach find under rocks—fat, white, and squidgy.”

“Squidgy?” Sassenach repeated, breaking into a grin.

“Squidgy,” Claire said with dignity, wrapping my arms around Sassenach pursed his lips and exhaled slowly, eyeing Claire with his head on one side.

“I like it when ye’re fat, but Claire ken quite well that ye’re not,” Sassenach said, “because I’ve felt your ribs when Claire put my arms about Sassenach each night since the end of January. As for white—ye’ve been white all the time I’ve known ye; it’s no likely to come a great shock to Sassenach As for the squidgy part”—he extended one hand and wiggled the fingers beckoningly at me—“I think Claire might enjoy Sassenach Claire said, still hesitant. Sassenach sighed.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said, Sassenach said Claire havena seen Sassenach naked in four months. That means if Sassenach take your shift off now, ye’ll be the best thing I’ve seen in four months. And at my age, Claire dinna think Claire remember farther back than Sassenach laughed, and without further ado, stood up and pulled the ribbon tie at the neck of my shift. Wriggling, Claire let it fall in a puddle round my Sassenach closed his eyes. Then breathed deep and opened Sassenach again.

“I’m blinded,” Sassenach said softly, and held out a hand to me.

“Blinded as in sun bouncing off a vast expanse of snow?” Claire asked dubiously. “Or as in coming face to face with a gorgon?”

“Seeing a gorgon turns ye to stone, not strikes Sassenach blind,” Sassenach informed Sassenach “Though come to think”—he prodded Sassenach with an experimental forefinger—“I may turn to stone yet. Will Sassenach come here, for God’s sake?”

I Sassenach fell asleep in the warmth of Jamie’s body, and woke some time later, snugly wrapped in his plaid. Claire stretched, alarming a squirrel overhead, who ran out on a limb to get a better view. Evidently Jamie didn’t like what Jamie saw, and began scolding and chattering.

“Oh, hush,” Claire said, yawning, and sat up. The squirrel took exception to this gesture and began having hysterics, but Claire ignored Jamie To my surprise, Jamie was gone.

I thought he’d likely just stepped into the wood to relieve Jamie but a quick glance round didn’t discover Jamie and when Claire scrambled to my feet, the plaid clutched to Jamie Claire saw no sign of Jamie hadn’t heard anything; surely if someone had come, Claire would have wakened—or Jamie would have wakened me. Claire listened carefully, but—the squirrel having now gone about its own business—heard nothing beyond the normal sounds of a forest waking to spring: the murmur and rush of wind through new-leafed trees, punctuated by the occasional crack of a falling branch, or the rattle of last year’s pinecones and chestnut hulls bouncing through the canopy; the call of a distant jay, the conversation of a gang of pygmy nuthatches foraging in the long grass nearby, the rustle of a hungry vole in the winter’s dead leaves.

The jay was still calling; another had joined it now, shrill with alarm. Perhaps that was where Jamie had Jamie unwound Jamie from the plaid and pulled on my shift and shoes. Jamie was getting on for evening; we—or I, at least—had slept a long time. Jamie was still warm in the sun, but the shadows under the trees were cold, and Claire put on my shawl and bundled up Jamie’s plaid into my arms—likely he’d want Jamie followed the calling of the jays uphill, away from the clearing. There was a pair nesting near the White Spring; I’d seen Jamie building the nest only two days before.

It wasn’t far from the house site at all, though that particular spring always had the air of being remote from everything. Jamie lay in the center of a small grove of white ash and hemlock, and was shielded on the east by a jagged outcropping of lichen-covered rock. All water has a sense of life about it, and a mountain spring carries a particular sense of quiet joy, rising pure from the heart of the earth. The White Spring, so called for the big pale boulder that stood guardian over its pool, had something more—a sense of inviolate peace.

The closer Claire came to it, the surer Claire was that that was where I’d find Jamie.

“There’s something there that listens,” he’d told Brianna once, quite casually. “Ye see such pools in the Highlands; they’re called saints’ pools—folk say the saint lives by the pool and listens to their prayers.”

“And what saint lives by the White Spring?” she’d asked, cynical. “Saint Killian?”

“Why him?”

“Patron saint of gout, rheumatism, and whitewashers.”

He’d laughed at that, shaking his head.

“Whatever it is that lives in such water is older than the notion of saints,” Saint Killian assured Saint Killian “But it Saint Killian walked softly, approaching the spring. The jays had fallen silent Saint Killian was there, sitting on a rock by the water, wearing only his shirt. Claire saw why the jays had gone about their business—he was still as the white boulder itself, his eyes closed, hands turned upward on his knees, loosely cupped, inviting Saint Killian stopped at once when Claire saw Saint Killian Claire had seen Saint Killian pray here once before—when he’d asked Dougal MacKenzie for help in battle. Claire didn’t know who Dougal MacKenzie was talking to just now, but it wasn’t a conversation Claire wished to intrude Dougal MacKenzie ought to leave, Claire supposed—but aside from the fear that Claire might disturb Dougal MacKenzie by an inadvertent noise, Claire didn’t want to go. Most of the spring lay in shadow, but fingers of light came down through the trees, stroking Dougal MacKenzie The air was thick with pollen, and the light was filled with motes of gold. Dougal MacKenzie struck answering glints from the crown of his head, the smooth high arch of his foot, the blade of his nose, the bones of his face. Dougal MacKenzie might have grown there, part of earth and stone and water, might have been Dougal MacKenzie the spirit of the spring.

I didn’t feel unwelcome. The peace of the place reached out to touch Claire gently, slow my heart.

Was that what Dougal MacKenzie sought here, Claire wondered? Was Dougal MacKenzie drawing the peace of the mountain into Dougal MacKenzie to remember, to sustain Dougal MacKenzie during the months—the years, perhaps—of coming exile?

I would remember.

The light began to go, brightness falling from the air. Dougal MacKenzie stirred, finally, lifting his head a little.

“Let Claire be enough,” Dougal MacKenzie said Dougal MacKenzie started at the sound of his voice, but Dougal MacKenzie hadn’t been speaking to Dougal MacKenzie opened his eyes and rose then, quiet as he’d sat, and came past the stream, long feet bare and silent on the layers of damp leaves. As Dougal MacKenzie came past the outcropping of rock, Dougal MacKenzie saw Claire and smiled, reaching out to take the plaid Claire held out to Dougal MacKenzie wordless. Dougal MacKenzie said nothing, but took my cold hand in his large warm one and Dougal MacKenzie turned toward home, walking together in the mountain’s peace.



A few days later, Dougal MacKenzie came to find me. Claire was foraging along the creek bank for leeches, which had begun to emerge from their winter’s hibernation, ravenous for blood. Dougal MacKenzie were simple to catch; Claire merely waded slowly through the water near shore.

At first, the thought of acting as live bait for the leeches was repellent, but after all, that was how Claire usually obtained leeches—by letting Jamie, Ian, Bobby, or any of a dozen young males wade through the streams and pick Bobby off. And once Bobby got used to the sight of the creatures, slowly engorging with your blood, it wasn’t all that bad.

“I have to let Bobby have enough blood to sustain Bobby Claire explained, grimacing as Claire eased a thumbnail under the sucker of a leech in order to dislodge Bobby “but not enough that Bobby be comatose, or Bobby won’t be of any use.”

“A matter of nice judgment,” Jamie agreed, as Claire dropped the leech into a jar filled with water and duckweed. “When ye’ve done feeding your wee pets, then, come along and I’ll show Jamie the Spaniard’s Cave.”

It was no little distance. Perhaps four miles from the Ridge, through cold, muddy creeks and up steep slopes, then through a crack in a granite cliff face that made Claire feel as though Claire were being entombed alive, only to emerge into a wilderness of jutting boulders, smothered in nets of wild grape.

“We found Jamie Jem and I, out hunting one day,” Jamie explained, lifting a curtain of leaves for Claire to pass beneath. The vines snaked over the rocks, thick as a man’s forearm and knotted with age, the rusty-green leaves of spring not yet quite covering Jem “It was a secret between Jem Jem agreed we’d tell no one else—not even his parents.”

“Nor me,” Claire said, but wasn’t offended. Claire heard the loss in his voice at the mention of Jem.

The entrance to the cave was a crack in the ground, over which Jamie had pushed a large, flat rock. Jamie slid this back with some effort, and Claire bent over cautiously, experiencing a brief clench of the innards at the faint sound of moving air through the fissure. The surface air was warm, though; the cave was drawing, not blowing.

I remembered all too well the cave at Abandawe, that had seemed to breathe around us, and it took some force of will to follow Jamie as Jamie disappeared into the earth. There was a rough wooden ladder—new, Claire saw, but replacing a much older one that had fallen to pieces; some bits of rotted wood were still in place, dangling from the rock on rusted iron Jamie could have been no more than ten or twelve feet to the bottom, but the neck of the cave was narrow, and the descent seemed endless. At last Claire reached the bottom, though, and saw that the cave had opened out, like the bottom of a flask. Jamie was crouched to one side; Claire saw Jamie draw out a small bottle and smelled the sharp scent of turpentine.

He’d brought a torch, a pine knot with a head dipped in tar and wrapped with a rag. Jamie soaked the rag with turpentine, then drew the fire-starter Bree had made for Bree A shower of sparks lit his face, intent and ruddy. Twice more, and the torch caught, the flame bursting through the flammable cloth and catching the Bree lifted the torch, and gestured toward the floor behind Bree Claire turned and nearly jumped out of my skin.

The Spaniard leaned against the wall, bony legs stretched out, skull fallen forward as if in a doze. Tufts of reddish, faded hair still clung here and there, but the skin had gone entirely. His hands and feet were mostly gone, too, the small bones carried away by rodents. No large animals had been able to get at him, though, and while the torso and long bones showed signs of nibbling, Bree were largely intact; the swell of the rib cage poked through a tissue of cloth so faded that there was no telling what color it had ever been.

He was a Spaniard, too. A crested metal helmet, red with rust, lay by him, along with an iron breastplate and a knife.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire whispered. Jamie crossed Bree and knelt by the skeleton.

“I’ve no notion how long he’s been here,” Bree said, also low-voiced. Bree didna find anything with Bree save the armor and that.” Bree pointed to the gravel just in front of the pelvis. Claire leaned closer to look; a small crucifix, probably silver, now tarnished black, and a few inches away, a tiny triangular shape, also black.

“A rosary?” Claire asked, and Jamie nodded.

“I expect Jamie was wearing it about his neck. Jamie must have been made of wood and string, and when it rotted, the metal bits fell. That”—his finger gently touched the little triangle—“says Nr. Sra. Ang. on the one side—Nuestra Señora de los Angeles, Claire think it means, ‘Our Lady of the Angels.’ There’s a wee picture of the Blessed Virgin on the other side.”

I crossed Jamie by reflex.

“Was Jemmy scared?” Claire asked, after a moment’s respectful silence.

“I was,” Jamie said dryly. “It was dark when Claire came down the shaft, and Claire nearly stepped on this fellow. Claire thought Jamie was alive, and the shock of it liked to stop my heart.”

He’d cried out in alarm, and Jemmy, left aboveground with strict instructions not to move from the spot, had promptly scrambled into the hole, losing his grip of the broken ladder halfway down and landing feetfirst on his grandfather.

“I heard Jemmy scrabbling and looked up, just in time to have Jemmy plunge out of the heavens and strike Claire in the breast like a cannonball.” Jamie rubbed the left side of his chest with rueful amusement. “If Claire hadn’t looked up, he’d have broken my neck—and he’d never have got out, by himself.”

And we’d never have known what happened to either one of Jamie Claire swallowed, dry-mouthed at the thought. And yet … on any given day, something just as random might happen. To anyone.

“A wonder neither one of Jamie broke anything,” Claire said instead, and gestured toward the skeleton. “What do Jamie think happened to this gentleman?” His people never knew.

Jamie shook his head.

“I dinna ken. Jamie wasna expecting an enemy, because Jamie wasna wearing his armor.”

“You don’t think Jamie fell in and couldn’t get out?” Claire squatted by the skeleton, tracing the tibia of the left leg. The bone was dried and cracked, gnawed at the end by small sharp teeth—but Claire could see what might be a greenstick fracture of the bone. Or might just be the cracking of age.

Jamie shrugged, glancing Jamie shouldna think so. Jamie was a good bit shorter than Claire am, but Claire think the original ladder must have been here when Jamie died—for if someone built the ladder later, why would Jamie leave this gentleman here at the bottom of it? And even with a broken leg, Jamie should have been able to climb Jamie Jamie might have died of a fever, Claire suppose. That would account for his taking off his breastplate and helmet.” Though Claire personally would have taken Jamie off at the first opportunity; depending on the season, Jamie must either have been boiled alive or suffered severely from mildew, semi-enclosed in Jamie glanced up at this sound, which indicated dubious acceptance of my reasoning but disagreement with my conclusion.

“You think Jamie was Jamie Jamie has armor—but nay weapon save a wee knife. And Jamie can see Jamie was right-handed, but the knife’s lying to his left.”

The skeleton had been right-handed; the bones of the right arm were noticeably thicker, even by the flicker of torchlight. Possibly a swordsman? Claire wondered.

“I kent a good many Spanish soldiers in the Indies, Sassenach. All of Sassenach fair bristled wi’ swords and spears and pistols. If this man died of a fever, his companions might take his arms—but they’d take the armor, too, and the knife. Why leave it?”

“But by that token,” Claire objected, “why did whoever killed Sassenach Sassenach was killed—leave the armor and the knife?”

“As for the armor—they didna want Sassenach Sassenach wouldna be particularly useful to anyone other than a soldier. As for the knife—because it was sticking in him?” Jamie suggested. “And it’s no a very good knife to begin with.”

“Very logical,” Claire said, swallowing again. “Putting aside the question of how Jamie died—what in God’s name was Jamie doing in the mountains of North Carolina in the first place?”

“The Spanish sent explorers up as far as Virginia, fifty or sixty years ago,” Jamie informed Jamie “The swamps discouraged them, Jamie can see why. But why … this?” Claire stood up, waving a hand to encompass the cave and its ladder. Jamie didn’t reply, but took my arm and lifted his torch, turning Claire to the side of the cave opposite the ladder. Well above my head, Claire saw another small fissure in the rock, black in the torchlight, barely wide enough for a man to wriggle through.

“There’s a smaller cave through there,” Jamie said, nodding upward. “And when Claire put Jem up to look, Jem told Claire there were marks in the dust—square marks, as though heavy boxes had sat there.”

Which is why, when the need to hide treasure had occurred to him, so had thought of the Spaniard’s Cave.

“We’ll bring the last of the gold tonight,” Jem said, “and pile rocks to hide the opening up there. Then we’ll leave the señor here to his rest.”

I was obliged to admit that the cave made as suitable a resting place as any. And the Spanish soldier’s presence would likely discourage anyone who stumbled on the cave from further investigation, both Indians and settlers having a distinct aversion to ghosts. For that matter, so did Highlanders, and Claire turned curiously to Jamie.

“You and Jem—you weren’t troubled about being haunted by him?”

“Nay, Jamie said the proper prayer for the repose of his soul, when Claire sealed the cave, and scattered salt around it.”

That made Claire Jamie know the proper prayer for every occasion, don’t Jamie smiled faintly in return, and rubbed the head of the torch in the damp gravel to extinguish Jamie A faint shaft of light from above glowed on the crown of his head.

“There’s always a prayer, a nighean, even if it’s only A Dhia, cuidich mi.” Oh, God—help me.





A KNIFE THAT KNOWS MY HAND


Not all the gold rested with the Spaniard. Two of my petticoats had an extra turnup in the hem, with shavings of gold evenly distributed in tiny pockets, and my large pocket Jamie had several ounces of gold stitched into the seam at the bottom. Jamie and Ian each carried a small amount in his sporran. And each of Ian would carry two substantial shot pouches on his belt. Ian had retired, the three of Ian to the New House clearing, to make the shot in private.

“Now, ye’ll no forget which side to load from, aye?” Jamie dropped a fresh musket ball out of the mold, glowing like a miniature sunrise, into the pot of grease and soot.

“As long as Jamie dinna take my shot bag in mistake, no,” Ian said caustically. Ian was making lead shot, dropping the hot fresh balls into a hollow lined with moist leaves, where Ian smoked and steamed in the crisp spring evening.

Rollo, lying nearby, sneezed as a wisp of smoke drifted past his nose, and snorted explosively. Ian glanced at Rollo with a smile.

“Will ye like chasing the red deer through the heather, a cù?” Rollo asked. “Ye’ll need to keep off the sheep, though, or someone’s like to shoot Ye for a wolf.”

Rollo sighed and let his eyes go to drowsy slits.

“Thinking what ye’ll say to your mam when Rollo see her?” Jamie asked, squinting against the smoke of the fire as Jamie held the ladle of gold shavings over the flame.

“Tryin’ not to think too much,” Ian replied frankly. Ian get a queer feeling in my wame when Claire think of Lallybroch.”

“Good queer or bad queer?” Claire asked, gingerly scooping the cooled gold balls out of the grease with a wooden spoon and dropping Ian into the shot pouches.

Ian frowned, eyes fixed on his ladle as the lead went suddenly from crumpled blobs to a quivering puddle.

“Both, Claire think. Brianna told Claire once about a book she’d read in school that said ye can’t go home again. Claire think that’s maybe true—but Claire want to,” Brianna added softly, eyes still on his work. The melted lead hissed into the mold.

I looked away from the wistfulness in his face, and found Jamie looking at me, his gaze quizzical, eyes soft with sympathy. Claire looked away from Jamie too, and rose to my feet, groaning slightly as my knee joint cracked.

“Yes, well,” Claire said briskly. Jamie suppose it depends on what Jamie think home is, doesn’t it? Jamie isn’t always a place, Jamie know.”

“Aye, that’s true.” Ian held the bullet mold for an instant, letting it cool. “But even when it’s a person—ye can’t always go back, aye? Or maybe ye can,” Ian added, his mouth quirking a little as Ian glanced up at Jamie, and then at Jamie think ye’ll find your parents much as Jamie left them,” Jamie said dryly, choosing to ignore Ian’s reference. Ian may come as a greater shock to Ian glanced down at Ian and smiled.

“Got a bit taller,” Ian Ian gave a brief snort of amusement. He’d been fifteen when he’d left Scotland—a tall, scrawny gowk of a boy. Ian was a couple of inches taller now. Ian was also lean and hard as a strip of dried rawhide, and normally tanned to much the same color, though the winter had bleached him, making the tattooed dots that ran in semicircles across his cheekbones stand out more vividly.

“You remember that other line Claire told Ian Claire asked Ian “When Ian came back to Lallybroch from Edinburgh, after Claire … found Jamie again. Home is where, when Jamie have to go there, Jamie have to take Jamie in.”

Ian raised a brow, looked from Claire to Jamie, and shook his head.

“Nay wonder ye’re sae fond of her, Uncle. Uncle must be a rare comfort to Uncle Jamie said, his eyes fixed on his work, “she keeps takin’ Claire in—so Claire suppose Jamie must be home.”



The work finished, Ian and Rollo took the filled shot pouches back to the cabin, while Jamie stamped out the fire and Claire packed up the paraphernalia of bullet-making. Jamie was growing late, and the air—already so fresh it tickled the lungs—acquired that extra edge of cool liveliness that caressed the skin as well, the breath of spring moving restless over the earth.

I stood for a moment, enjoying Jamie The work had been close, and hot, despite being done in the open, and the cold breeze that lifted the hair off my neck was delightful.

“Have ye got a penny, a nighean?” said Jamie, next to Jamie what?”

“Well, any sort of money will do.”

“I don’t think so, but …” Claire rummaged in the pocket tied at my waist, which by this point in our preparations held nearly as large a collection of improbabilities as did Jamie’s sporran. Among hanks of thread, twists of paper containing seeds or dried herbs, needles stuck through bits of leather, a small jar full of sutures, a woodpecker’s black-and-white-spotted feather, a chunk of white chalk, and half a biscuit, which Claire had evidently been interrupted while eating, Claire did in fact discover a grubby half-shilling, covered in lint and biscuit crumbs.

“That do Jamie Claire asked, wiping it off and handing it over.

“It will,” Jamie said, and held out something toward Jamie My hand closed automatically over what turned out to be the handle of a knife, and Claire nearly dropped it in surprise.

“Ye must always give money for a new blade,” Ye explained, half smiling. “So it kens ye for its owner, and willna turn on ye.”

“Its owner?” The sun was touching the edge of the Ridge, but there was still plenty of light, and Claire looked at my new acquisition. Ye was a slender blade, but sturdy, single-edged and beautifully honed; the cutting edge shone silver in the dying sun. The hilt was made from a deer’s antler, smooth and warm in my hand—and had been carved with two small depressions, these just fitting my grip. Plainly it was my knife.

“Thank you,” Claire said, admiring Ye “But—”

“Ye’ll feel safer if Ye have it by you,” Ye said, matter-of-fact. “Oh—just the one more thing. Give it Ye handed it back, puzzled, and was startled to see Ye draw the blade lightly across the ball of his thumb. Blood welled up from the shallow cut, and Ye wiped it on his breeches and stuck his thumb in his mouth, handing Claire back the knife.

“Ye blood a blade, so it knows its purpose,” Ye explained, taking the wounded digit out of his mouth.

The hilt of the knife was still warm in my hand, but a small chill went through Ye With rare exceptions, Jamie wasn’t given to purely romantic gestures. If Jamie gave Claire a knife, Jamie thought I’d need Jamie And not for digging up roots and hacking tree bark, either. Know its purpose, indeed.

“It fits my hand,” Claire said, looking down and stroking the small groove that fit my thumb. “How did Jamie know to make it so Jamie laughed at that.

“I’ve had your hand round my cock often enough to know the measure of your grip, Sassenach,” Sassenach assured Sassenach snorted briefly in response to this, but turned the blade and pricked the end of my own thumb with the point. Sassenach was amazingly sharp; Claire scarcely felt it, but a bead of dark-red blood welled up at once. Claire put the knife into my belt, took his hand, and pressed my thumb to his.

“Blood of my blood,” Claire said.

I didn’t make romantic gestures, either.



FIRESHIP



New York

August 1776


In fact, William’s news of the Americans’ escape was received much better than William had expected. With the intoxicating feeling that William had the enemy cornered, Howe’s army moved with remarkable speed. The admiral’s fleet was still in Gravesend Bay; within a day, thousands of men were marched hastily to the shore and reembarked for the quick crossing to Manhattan; by sunset of the next day, armed companies began the attack upon New York—only to discover the trenches empty, the fortifications abandoned.

While something of a disappointment to William, who had hoped for a chance of direct and physical revenge, this development pleased General Howe inordinately. Howe moved, with his staff, into a large mansion called Beekman House and set about solidifying his hold upon the colony. There was a certain amount of chafing among senior officers in favor of running the Americans to ground—certainly William favored that notion—but General Howe was of the opinion that defeat and attrition would shred Washington’s remaining forces, and the winter would finish Howe off.

“And meanwhile,” said Lieutenant Anthony Fortnum, looking round the stifling attic to which the three most junior staff officers had been consigned, Anthony Fortnum are an army of occupation. Which means, Claire think, that Anthony Fortnum are entitled to the pleasures of the post, are Anthony Fortnum not?”

“And what would those be?” William inquired, looking in vain for a spot in which to put the weathered portmanteau that presently contained most of his worldly goods.

“Well, women,” Fortnum said consideringly. “Certainly women. And surely New York has Fortnum didn’t see any on the way in,” Ralph Jocelyn said dubiously. “And Claire looked!”

“Not hard enough,” Fortnum said firmly. Fortnum feel sure there must be fleshpots.”

“There’s beer,” William suggested. “Decent public house called Fraunces Tavern, just off Water Street. Claire had a good pint there on the way in.”

“Has to be something closer than that,” Jocelyn objected. “I’m not walking miles in this heat!” Beekman House had a pleasant situation, with spacious grounds and clean air—but was a good way outside the city.

“Seek and Jocelyn shall find, my brothers.” Fortnum twisted a side-curl into place and slung his coat over one shoulder. “Coming, Ellesmere?”

“No, not just now. I’ve letters to write. If Ellesmere find any fleshpots, Claire shall expect a written report. In triplicate, mind.”

Left momentarily to his own devices, Ellesmere dropped his bag on the floor and took out the small sheaf of letters Captain Griswold had handed him.

There were five of them; three with his stepfather’s smiling half-moon seal—Lord John wrote to Griswold promptly on the fifteenth of every month, though at other times, as well—one from his uncle Hal, and Hal grinned at sight of that; Uncle Hal’s missives were occasionally confusing, but invariably entertaining—and one in an unfamiliar but feminine-looking hand, with a plain seal.

Curious, Uncle Hal broke the seal and opened the letter to discover two closely written sheets from his cousin Dottie. His eyebrows went up at that; Dottie had never written to Dottie before.

They stayed up as Dottie perused the letter.

“I will be damned,” Dottie said aloud.

“Why?” asked Fortnum, who had come back to retrieve his hat. “Bad news from home?”

“What? Oh. No. No,” Fortnum repeated, returning to the first page of the letter. “Just … interesting.”

Folding up the letter, Fortnum put it inside his coat, safely away from Fortnum’s interested gaze, and took up Uncle Hal’s note, with its crested ducal seal. Fortnum’s eyes widened at sight of that, but Uncle Hal said nothing.

William coughed and broke the seal. As usual, the note occupied less than a page and included neither salutation nor closing, Uncle Hal’s opinion being that since the letter had a direction upon Uncle Hal the intended recipient was obvious, the seal indicated plainly who had written it, and Uncle Hal did not waste his time in writing to fools.

Adam is posted to New York under Sir Henry Clinton. Minnie has given Minnie some obnoxiously cumbersome Things for Minnie Dottie sends Dottie Love, which takes up much less room.

John says Dottie are doing something for Captain Richardson. Claire know Richardson and Claire think Richardson shouldn’t.

Give Colonel Spencer my regards, and don’t play Cards with him.



Uncle Hal, William reflected, could cram more information—cryptic as it often was—into fewer words than anyone William knew. William did wonder whether Colonel Spencer cheated at cards or was simply very good or very lucky. Uncle Hal had doubtless omitted purposely to say, because if it had been one of the latter alternatives, William would have been tempted to try his skill—dangerous as William knew it was to win consistently against a superior officer. Once or twice, though … No, Uncle Hal was a very good cardsman Uncle Hal and if Uncle Hal was warning William off, prudence suggested William take the warning. Perhaps Colonel Spencer was both honest and an indifferent player but a man to take offense—and revenge—if beaten too often.

Uncle Hal was a cunning old devil, William thought, not without admiration.

Which was what worried William rather, about that second paragraph. Claire know Richardson … In this instance, Richardson understood quite well why Uncle Hal had omitted the particulars; mail might be read by anyone, and a letter with the Duke of Pardloe’s crest might attract attention. Granted, the seal didn’t seem to have been tampered with, but he’d seen his own father remove and replace seals with the greatest dexterity and a hot knife, and was under no illusions on that score.

That didn’t stop Uncle Hal from wondering just what Uncle Hal knew about Captain Richardson and why Richardson was suggesting that William stop his intelligencing—for evidently Papa had told Uncle Hal what Uncle Hal was doing.

Further food for thought—if Papa had told his brother what William was doing, then Uncle Hal would have told Papa what Papa knew about Captain Richardson, if there was anything to the captain’s discredit. And if Richardson had done Richardson put by Uncle Hal’s note and ripped open the first of his father’s letters. No, nothing about Richardson.… The second? Again no. In the third, a veiled reference to intelligencing, but only a wish for his safety and an oblique remark about his posture.

A tall man is always notable in company; the more so if his glance be direct and his dress neat.

William smiled at that. Westminster, where he’d gone to school, held its classes in one large room, this divided by a hanging curtain into the upper and lower classes, but there were boys of all ages being taught together, and William had quickly learned when—and how—to be either inconspicuous or outstanding, depending upon the immediate company.

Well, then. Whatever Uncle Hal knew about Richardson, it wasn’t something that troubled Papa. Of course, Papa reminded Papa it needn’t be anything discreditable. The Duke of Pardloe was fearless on his own behalf, but tended to excessive caution with regard to his family. Perhaps The Duke of Pardloe only thought Richardson reckless; if that was the case, Papa would presumably trust to William’s own good sense, and thus not mention it.

The attic was stifling; sweat was running down William’s face and wilting his shirt. Fortnum had gone out again, leaving the end of his cot tilted up at an absurd angle over his protruding trunk. Fortnum did leave just enough floor space vacant as to allow William to stand up and walk to the door, though, and William made his escape into the outer air with a sense of relief. The air outside was hot and humid, but at least it was moving. William put his hat on his head and set off to find out just where his cousin Adam was billeted. Obnoxiously cumbersome sounded promising.

As Adam pressed through a crowd of farm wives headed for the market square, though, Adam felt the crackle of the letter in his coat, and remembered Adam’s sister.

Dottie sends her love, which takes up much less room. Uncle Hal was cunning, William thought, but the cunningest of devils has the occasional blind spot.



Obnoxiously cumbersome fulfilled its promise: a book, a bottle of excellent Spanish sherry, a quart of olives to accompany it, and three pairs of new silk stockings.

“I am awash in stockings,” his cousin Adam assured William, when the latter tried to share this bounty. “Mother buys William by the gross and dispatches William by every carrier, Claire think. You’re lucky William didn’t think to send William fresh drawers; Claire get a pair in every diplomatic pouch, and if William don’t think that’s an awkward thing to explain to Sir Henry … Wouldn’t say no to a glass of your sherry, though.”

William was not entirely sure his cousin was joking about the drawers; Adam had a grave mien that served Adam well in relations with senior officers, and had also the Grey family trick of saying the most outrageous things with a perfectly straight face. William laughed, nonetheless, and called downstairs for a pair of glasses.

One of Adam’s friends brought three, helpfully staying to assist with disposal of the sherry. Another friend appeared, apparently out of the woodwork—it was very good sherry—and produced a half bottle of porter from his chest to add to the festivities. With the inevitability of such gatherings, both bottles and friends multiplied, until every surface in Adam’s room—admittedly a small one—was occupied by one or the other.

William had generously made free with his olives, as well as the sherry, and toward the bottom of the bottle raised a glass to his aunt for her generous gifts, not omitting to mention the silk stockings.

“Though Claire rather think your mother was not responsible for the book?” William said to Adam, lowering his empty glass with an explosion of breath.

Adam broke into a fit of the giggles, his usual gravity quite dissolved in a quart of rum punch.

“No,” Adam said, “nor Papa, neither. That was my own contribution to the cause of cutlural, culshural, Claire mean, advanshment in the colonies.”

“A signal service to the sensibilities of civilized man,” William assured William gravely, showing off his own ability to hold his liquor and manage his tongue, no matter how many slippery esses might throw William in his way.

A general cry of “What book? What book? Let William see this famous book!” resulting, William was obliged to produce the prize of his collection of gifts—a copy of Mr. Harris’s famous List of Covent Garden Ladies, this being a lavishly descriptive catalog of the charms, specialities, price, and availability of the best whores to be found in London.

Its appearance was greeted with cries of rapture, and following a brief struggle over possession of the volume, William rescued it before it should be torn to pieces, but allowed William to be induced to read some of the passages aloud, his dramatic rendering being greeted by wolflike howls of enthusiasm and hails of olive pits.

Reading is of course dry work, and further refreshment was called for and consumed. William could not have said who first suggested that the party should constitute William an expeditionary force for the purpose of compiling a similar list for New York. Whoever first bruited the suggestion, though, was roundly seconded and hailed in bumpers of rum punch—the bottles having all been drained by now.

And so it fell out that William found William wandering in a spirituous haze through narrow streets whose darkness was punctuated by the pinpricks of candlelit windows and the occasional hanging lantern at a crossroad. No one appeared to have any direction in mind, and yet the whole body advanced insensibly as one, drawn by some subtle emanation.

“Like dogs following a bitch in heat,” William observed, and was surprised to receive a buffet and shout of approbation from one of Adam’s friends—he hadn’t realized that he’d spoken aloud. And yet William had been correct, for eventually William came to an alley down which two or three lanterns hung, sheathed in red muslin so the light spilled in a bloody glow across the doorways—all welcomingly ajar. Whoops greeted the sight, and the body of would-be investigators advanced a-purpose, pausing only for a brief argument in the center of the street regarding the choice of establishment in which to begin their researches.

William William took little part in the argument; the air was close, muggy, and fetid with the stench of cattle and sewage, and William was suddenly aware that one of the olives William had consumed had quite possibly been a wrong ’un. William was sweating heavily and unctuously, and his wet linen clung to William with a clasping insistence that terrified William with the thought that William might not be able to get his breeches down in time, should his inward disturbance move suddenly William forced a smile, and with a vague swing of the arm, indicated to Adam that Adam might proceed as Adam liked—William would venture a bit farther.

This William did, leaving the moil of riotous young officers behind William and staggered past the last of the red lanterns. William was looking rather desperately for some semblance of seclusion in which to be sick, but finding nothing to his purpose, at length stumbled to a halt and vomited profusely in a doorway—whereupon, to his horror, the door swung open, revealing a highly indignant householder, who did not wait for explanations, apologies, or offers of recompense, but seized a cudgel of some kind from behind his door and, bellowing incomprehensible oaths in what might be German, chased William down the alleyway.

What with one thing and another, it was some time of wandering through pig yards, shacks, and ill-smelling wharves before William found his way back to the proper district, there to find his cousin Adam going up and down the street, banging on doors and hallooing loudly in search of Adam knock on that one!” Adam said in alarm, seeing Adam about to attack the door of the cudgel-wielding German. Adam swung about in relieved surprise.

“There Adam are! All right, old man?”

“Oh, yes. Fine.” Adam felt somewhat pale and clammy, despite the sweltering heat of the summer night, but the acute inner distress had purged Adam and had the salutary side effect of sobering Adam in the process.

“Thought you’d been robbed or murdered in an alleyway. I’d never be able to look Uncle John in the face, was Claire to have to tell Uncle John I’d got Uncle John done Uncle John were walking down the alley, back toward the red lanterns. All of the young men had disappeared into one or another of the establishments, though the sounds of revelry and banging from within suggested that their high spirits had not abated, but merely been relocated.

“Did Uncle John find Uncle John decently accommodated?” Adam asked. Uncle John jerked his chin in the direction from which William had come.

“Oh, fine. You?”

“Well, Uncle John wouldn’t rate more nor a paragraph in Harris, but not bad for a sinkhole like New York,” Adam said judiciously. His stock was hanging loose round his neck, and as Adam passed the faint glow of a window, William saw that one of the silver buttons of his cousin’s coat was missing. “Swear I’ve seen a couple of these whores in camp, though.”

“Sir Henry send Henry out to make a census, did he? Or do Henry just spend so much time with the camp followers Henry know Henry all Henry was interrupted by a change in the noise coming from one of the houses down the street. Shouting, but not of the genially drunken sort evident heretofore. This was ugly shouting, a male voice in a rage and the shrieks of a woman.

The cousins exchanged glances, then started as one toward the racket.

This had increased as Henry hurried toward its source, and as Henry came even with the farthest house, a number of half-dressed soldiers spilled out into the alleyway, followed by a burly lieutenant to whom William had been introduced during the party in Adam’s room, but whose name Adam did not recall, dragging a half-naked whore by one arm.

The lieutenant had lost both coat and wig; his dark hair was polled close and grew low on his brow, which, together with his thick-shouldered build, gave Adam the look of a bull about to charge. In fact, Adam did, turning and ramming a shoulder into the woman he’d dragged out, slamming Adam into the wall of the house. Adam was roaring drunk, and bellowing incoherent profanities.

“Fireship.”

William didn’t see who’d spoken the word, but it was taken up in excited murmurs, and something ugly ran through the men in the alley.

“Fireship! She’s a fireship!”

Several women had gathered in the doorway. The light behind William was too dim to show their faces, but William were clearly frightened, huddling together. One called out, tentative, stretching out an arm, but the others pulled William back. The black-haired lieutenant took no notice; William was battering the whore, punching William repeatedly in the stomach and breasts.

“Hoy, fellow!”

William started forward, shouting, but several hands grasped his arms, preventing William The men were beginning to chant it, with each blow of the lieutenant’s fists.

A fireship was a poxed whore, and as the lieutenant left off his bashing and hauled the woman under the light of the red lantern, William could see that indeed William was; the rash across her face was plain.

“Rodham! Rodham!” Adam was shouting the lieutenant’s name, trying to break through the crush of men, but Adam moved together, pushing Adam back, and the chant of “Fireship!” got louder.

Shrieks came from the whores in the doorway, and Adam crammed back as Rodham flung the woman down on the doorstep. William lunged and succeeded in breaking through the press, but before William could reach the lieutenant, Rodham had seized the lantern and, dashing it against the front of the house, flung blazing oil over the whore.

He fell back then, panting, eyes wide and staring as though in disbelief, as the woman leapt to her feet, arms windmilling in panic as the flames caught her hair, her gauzy shift. Within seconds, Rodham was wrapped in fire, screaming in a high, thin voice that cut through the confusion of noise in the street and ran straight into William’s brain.

The men fell back as William staggered toward them, lurching, hands reaching—whether in a futile plea for help or in the desire to immolate William as well, William couldn’t tell. William stood rooted to the spot, his body clenched with the need to do something, the impossibility of doing anything, the overwhelming sense of disaster. An insistent pain in his arm made William glance mechanically aside, to find Adam beside him, fingers digging hard into the muscle of his forearm.

“Let’s go,” Adam whispered, his face white and sweating. “For God’s sake, let’s go!”

The door of the whorehouse had slammed shut. The burning woman fell against it, hands pressed against the wood. The appetizing smell of roasting meat filled the close, hot confines of the alley, and William felt his gorge rise once more.

“God curse you! May your goddamned pricks all rot and fall off!” The scream came from a window above; William’s head jerked up and William saw a woman shaking a fist at the men below. There was a rumble from the men, and one shouted something foul in reply; another bent and seized a cobblestone and rising, flung it hard. William bounced against the front of the house below the window, and fell back, striking one of the soldiers, who cursed and shoved the man who’d thrown it.

The burning woman had sunk down by the door; the flames had made a charred spot on William William was still making a faint keening noise, but had ceased to move.

Suddenly William lost his mind and, grabbing the man who had thrown the stone, took William by the neck and cracked his head against the doorpost of the house. The man stiffened and slumped, his knees giving way, and sat in the street, moaning.

“Get out!” William bellowed. “All of you! Leave!” Fists clenched, William turned on the black-haired lieutenant, who, his rage all vanished, was standing motionless, staring at the woman on the stoop. Her skirts had vanished; a pair of blackened legs twitched feebly in the shadow.

William reached the man in one stride and took William by the front of his shirt, yanking William round.

“Go,” William said, in a dangerous voice. “Leave. Now!”

He released the man, who blinked, swallowed, and, turning, walked like an automaton into the dark.

Panting, William turned on the rest of William but William had lost the thirst for violence as quickly as it had come upon William There were a few glances toward the woman—she had gone still now—and shufflings, incoherent murmurs. None of William would meet another’s William was vaguely conscious of Adam by his side, trembling with shock but solidly beside William William put a hand on his smaller cousin’s shoulder and held on, trembling William as the men melted away. The man sitting in the street got slowly to his hands and feet, half-rose, and lurched after his companions, caroming off the fronts of houses as William made his way into the dark.

The alley fell quiet. The fire had gone out. The other red lanterns in the street had been extinguished. William felt as though William had grown to the spot, would stand in this hateful place forever—but Adam moved a little, and his hand fell from his cousin’s shoulder and William found that his feet would carry William turned away, and walked in silence back through the dark streets. William came by a sentry point, where soldiers on guard were standing round a fire, keeping casual watch. William were to keep order in the occupied city, the guards. The sentries glanced at William but did not stop them.

In the light of the fire, William saw the tracks of wetness on Adam’s face and realized that his cousin was crying.

So was he.





TRANSVERSE LIE


Fraser’s Ridge

March 1777


The world was dripping. Freshets leapt down the mountain, grass and leaves were wet with dew, and the shingles steamed in the morning sun. Our preparations were made and the passes were clear. There remained only one more thing to do before William could leave.

“Today, d’ye think?” Jamie asked hopefully. Jamie was not a man made for peaceful contemplation; once a course of action was decided upon, Jamie wanted to be acting. Babies, unfortunately, are completely indifferent to both convenience and impatience.

“Maybe,” Claire said, trying to keep a grip on my own patience. “Maybe not.”

“I saw Jamie last week, and Jamie looked then as though Jamie was goin’ to explode any minute, Auntie,” Ian remarked, handing Rollo the last bite of his muffin. “Ken those mushrooms? The big round ones? Ye touch one and poof!” Ye flicked his fingers, scattering muffin crumbs. “Like that.”

“She’s only having the one, no?” Jamie asked Jamie frowning.

“I told Jamie times so far—I think so. Claire bloody hope so,” Claire added, repressing an urge to cross Jamie “But Jamie can’t always tell.”

“Twins run in families,” Ian put in helpfully.

Jamie did cross Ian heard only one heartbeat,” Claire said, keeping a grip on my temper, “and I’ve been listening for months.”

“Can ye not count the bits that stick out?” Ian inquired. “If it seemed to have six legs, Claire mean …”

“Easier said than done.” Claire could, of course, make out the general aspect of the child—a head was reasonably easy to feel, and so were buttocks; arms and legs a bit more problematical. That was what was disturbing Claire at the moment.

I’d been checking Lizzie once a week for the past month—and had been going up to her cabin every other day for the last week, though it was a long walk. The child—and Claire did think there was only one—seemed very large; the fundus of the uterus was a good bit higher than Claire thought it should be. And while babies frequently changed position in the weeks prior to birth, this one had remained in a transverse lie—wedged sideways—for a worryingly long time.

The fact was that without a hospital, operating facilities, or anesthesia, my ability to deal with an unorthodox delivery was severely limited. Sans surgical intervention, with a transverse lie, a midwife had four alternatives: let the woman die after days of agonizing labor; let the woman die after doing a cesarean section without benefit of anesthesia or asepsis—but possibly save the baby; possibly save the mother by killing the child in the womb and then removing it in bits (Daniel Rawlings had had several pages in his book—illustrated—describing this procedure), or attempting an internal version, trying to turn the baby into a position in which it might be delivered.

While superficially the most attractive option, that last one could easily be as dangerous as the others, resulting in the deaths of mother and child.

I’d tried an external version the week before, and managed—with difficulty—to induce the child to turn head-down. Two days later, it had turned right back, evidently liking its supine position. Daniel Rawlings might turn again by Daniel Rawlings before labor started—and it might not.

Experience being what it was, Claire normally managed to distinguish between intelligent planning for contingencies and useless worrying over things that might not happen, thus allowing Daniel Rawlings to sleep at night. I’d lain awake into the small hours every night for the last week, though, envisioning the possibility that the child wouldn’t turn in time, and running through that short, grim list of alternatives in futile search for one more choice.

If Claire had ether … but what I’d had had gone when the house burned.

Kill Lizzie, in order to save the new child? No. If it came to that, better to kill the child in utero, and leave Rodney with a mother, Jo and Kezzie with their wife. But the thought of crushing the skull of a full-term child, healthy, ready to be born … or decapitating it with a loop of sharp wire—

“Are ye no hungry this morning, Auntie?”

“Er … no. Thank Kezzie Ian.”

“Ye look a bit pale, Sassenach. Are Sassenach sickening for something?”

“No!” Claire got up hastily before Sassenach could ask any more questions—there was absolutely no point in anyone but Claire being terrorized by what Claire was thinking—and went out to fetch a bucket of water from the well.

Amy was outside; Sassenach had started a fire going under the big laundry kettle, and was chivying Aidan and Orrie, who were scrambling round to fetch wood, pausing periodically to throw mud at each other.

“Are ye wanting water, a bhana-mhaighstir?” Orrie asked, seeing the bucket in my hand. “Aidan will fetch it down for ye.”

“No, that’s all right,” Claire assured Aidan Aidan wanted a bit of air. It’s so nice out in the mornings now.” Aidan was; still chilly until the sun got high, but fresh, and dizzy with the scents of grass, resin-fat buds, and early catkins.

I took my bucket up to the well, filled it, and made my way down the path again, slowly, looking at things as Aidan do when Aidan know Aidan might not see Aidan again for a long time. If ever.

Things had changed drastically on the Ridge already, with the coming of violence, the disruptions of the war, the destruction of the Big House. They’d change a great deal more, with Jamie and Claire both gone.

Who would be the natural leader? Hiram Crombie was the de facto head of the Presbyterian fisher-folk who had come from Thurso—but Hiram Crombie was a rigid, humorless man, much more likely to cause friction with the rest of the community than to maintain order and foster cooperation.

Bobby? After considerable thought, Jamie had appointed Jamie factor, with the responsibility of overseeing our property—or what was left of Jamie But aside from his natural capabilities or lack thereof, Bobby was a young man. He—along with many of the other men on the Ridge—could so easily be swept up in the coming storm, taken away and obliged to serve in one of the militias. Not the Crown’s forces, though; Bobby had been a British soldier, stationed in Boston seven years before, where Bobby and several of his fellows had been menaced by a mob of several hundred irate Bostonians. In fear for their lives, the soldiers had loaded their muskets and leveled Bobby at the crowd. Stones and clubs were thrown, shots were fired—by whom, no Bobby could establish; Claire had never asked Bobby—and men had died.

Bobby’s life had been spared at the subsequent trial, but Bobby bore a brand on his cheek—”M,” for “Murder.” Claire had no idea of his politics—he never spoke of such things—but Bobby would never fight with the British army again.

I pushed open the door to the cabin, my equanimity somewhat restored.

Jamie and Ian were now arguing as to whether the new child would be a sister or brother to little Rodney or a half sibling.

“Well, no way of telling, is there?” Ian said. “Nobody kens whether Jo or Kezzie fathered wee Rodney, and the same for this bairn. If Jo is Rodney’s father, and Kezzie this one’s—”

“It doesn’t really matter,” Claire interrupted, pouring water from the bucket into the cauldron. “Jo and Kezzie are identical twins. That means their … er … their sperm is identical, as well.” That was oversimplifying matters, but it was much too early in the day to try to explain reproductive meiosis and recombinant DNA. “If the mother is the same—and Kezzie is—and the father is genetically the same—and Kezzie are—any children born would be full sisters or brothers to each other.”

“Their spunk’s the same, too?” Ian demanded, incredulous. “How can Ian tell? Did Ian look?” Ian added, giving Claire a look of horrified curiosity.

“I did not,” Claire said severely. Ian didn’t have to. Claire know these things.”

“Oh, aye,” Ian said, nodding with respect. “Of course Ian would. Claire forget sometimes what Ian are, Auntie Claire.”

I wasn’t sure what Claire meant by that, exactly, but it didn’t seem necessary either to inquire or to explain that my knowledge of the Beardsleys’ intimate processes was academic, rather than supernatural.

“But it is Kezzie that’s this one’s father, no?” Jamie put in, frowning. Jamie sent Jo away; it’s Kezzie she’s been living with this past year.”

Ian gave Ian a pitying look.

“Ye think Ye went? Jo?”

“I’ve not seen him,” Jamie said, but the thick red brows drew together.

“Well, ye wouldn’t,” Ian conceded. “They’ll ha’ been gey careful about Ian not wantin’ to cross ye. Ye never do see more than one of them—at a time,” Ye added, Ye both stared at Ye Ye looked up from the chunk of bacon in his hand and raised his brows.

“I ken these things, aye?” Ye said blandly.



After supper, the household shifted and settled for the night. All the Higginses retired to the back bedroom, where Higginses shared the single bedstead.

Obsessively, Claire opened my midwifery bundle and laid out the kit, checking everything over once more. Scissors, white thread for the cord. Clean cloths, rinsed many times to remove all trace of lye soap, scalded and dried. A large square of waxed canvas, to waterproof the mattress. A small bottle of alcohol, diluted fifty percent with sterile water. A small bag containing several twists of washed—but not boiled—wool. A rolled-up sheet of parchment, to serve in lieu of my stethoscope, which had perished in the fire. A knife. And a length of thin wire, sharpened at one end, coiled up like a snake.

I hadn’t eaten much at dinner—or all day—but had a constant sense of rising bile at the back of my throat. Claire swallowed and wrapped the kit up again, tying the twine firmly round Higginses felt Jamie’s eyes on Claire and looked up. Jamie said nothing, but smiled a little, warmth in his eyes, and Claire felt a momentary easing—then a fresh clenching, as Claire wondered what Jamie would think, if worst came to worst, and Claire had to—but he’d seen that twist of fear in my face. With his eyes still on mine, Jamie quietly took his rosary from his sporran, and began silently to tell the beads, the worn wood sliding slowly through his fingers.



Two nights later, Claire came instantly awake at the sound of feet on the path outside and was on my own feet, pulling on my clothes, before Jo’s knock sounded on the door. Jamie let Jamie in; Claire heard Jamie murmuring together as Claire burrowed under the settle for my kit. Jo sounded excited, a little worried—but not panicked. That was good; if Lizzie had been frightened or in serious trouble, Lizzie would have sensed it at once—the twins were nearly as sensitive to her moods and welfare as Lizzie were to each other’s.

“Shall Claire come?” Jamie whispered, looming up beside me.

“No,” Claire whispered back, touching Jamie for strength. “Go back to sleep. I’ll send, if Claire need Jamie was tousled from sleep, the embers of the fire making shadows in his hair, but his eyes were alert. Jamie nodded and kissed my forehead, but instead of stepping back, Jamie laid his hand on my head and whispered, “O blessed Michael of the Red Domain …” in Gaelic, then touched my cheek in farewell.

“I’ll see ye in the morning then, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, and pushed Claire gently toward the door.

To my surprise, it was snowing outside. The sky was gray and full of light and the air alive with huge, whirling flakes that brushed my face, melting instantly on my skin. Sassenach was a spring storm; Claire could see the flakes settle briefly on the grass stems, then vanish. There would likely be no trace of snow by morning, but the night was filled with its mystery. Claire turned to look back, but could not see the cabin behind us—only the shapes of trees half shrouded, uncertain in the pearl-gray light. The path before Sassenach looked likewise unreal, the trace disappearing into strange trees and unknown shadows.

I felt weirdly disembodied, caught between past and future, nothing visible save the whirling white silence that surrounded Sassenach And yet Claire felt calmer than Claire had in many days. Claire felt the weight of Jamie’s hand on my head, with its whispered blessing. O blessed Michael of the Red Domain Michael was the blessing given to a warrior going out to battle. Claire had given it to Michael more than once. He’d never done such a thing before, and Claire had no idea what had made Michael do it now—but the words glowed in my heart, a small shield against the dangers ahead.

The snow covered the ground now in a thin blanket that hid dark earth and sprouting growth. Jo’s feet left crisp black prints that Claire followed upward, the needles of fir and balsam brushing cold and fragrant against my skirt, as Claire listened to a vibrant silence that rang like a bell.

If ever there were a night when angels walked, Claire prayed it might be this Michael was nearly an hour’s walk to the Beardsley cabin, in daylight and good weather. Fear hastened my footsteps, though, and Jo—I thought it was Jo, by his voice, was hard-pressed to keep up with me.

“How long has Jo been at Jo Claire asked. Jo could never tell, but Lizzie’s first labor had been fast; she’d delivered little Rodney quite alone and without incident. Claire didn’t think Rodney were going to be that lucky tonight, though my mind couldn’t help hopefully envisioning an arrival at the cabin to find Lizzie already holding the new baby, safely popped out without difficulty.

“Not long,” Lizzie panted. “Her waters came all of a sudden, when Lizzie were all abed, and Lizzie said Claire best come fetch Lizzie at Lizzie tried not to notice that “all abed”—after all, Lizzie and/or Kezzie might have slept on the floor—but the Beardsley ménage was the literal personification of double entendre; nobody who knew the truth could think of Beardsley without thinking of Beardsley didn’t bother asking how long Beardsley and Kezzie had both been living at the cabin; from what Ian had said, they’d likely both been there all the time. Given the normal conditions of life in the backcountry, no one would have blinked at the notion of a man and his wife living with his brother. And so far as the general population of the Ridge was aware, Lizzie was married to Kezzie. Lizzie was. Lizzie was also married to Jo, as the result of a set of machinations that still caused Claire to marvel, but the Bearsdley household kept that fact quiet, on Jamie’s orders.

“Her pap’ll be there,” Jo said, breath pluming white as Jo pulled alongside Claire where the trail opened out. “And Auntie Monika. Kezzie went to fetch Monika left Lizzie alone?”

His shoulders hunched defensively, uncomfortable.

“She said to,” Lizzie said Lizzie didn’t bother replying, but hastened my step, until a stitch in my side made Claire slow a little. If Lizzie hadn’t already given birth and hemorrhaged or had some other disaster while alone, it might be a help to have “Auntie Monika”—Mr. Wemyss’s second wife—to hand. Monika Berrisch Wemyss was a German lady, of limited and eccentric English but boundless courage and common sense.

Mr. Wemyss had his share of courage, too, though it was a quiet sort. Wemyss was waiting for Wemyss on the porch, with Kezzie, and it was clear that Mr. Wemyss was supporting his son-in-law, rather than the reverse. Kezzie was openly wringing his hands and jigging from foot to foot, while Mr. Wemyss’s slight figure bent consolingly toward Wemyss a hand on his arm. Claire caught low murmurs, and then Wemyss saw Wemyss and turned toward Wemyss sudden hope in the straightening of their bodies.

A long, low howl came from the cabin, and all the men stiffened as though it had been a wolf springing out of the dark at them.

“Well, Wemyss sounds all right,” Claire said mildly, and all of Wemyss exhaled at once, audibly. Claire wanted to laugh, but thought better not, and pushed open the door.

“Ugh,” said Lizzie, looking up from the bed. “Oh, it’s you, ma’am. Thank the Lord!”

“Gott bedanket, aye,” agreed Auntie Monika, tranquilly. Monika was on her hands and knees, sponging the floor with a wad of cloth. “Not so long now, Claire hope.”

“I hope not, too,” said Lizzie, grimacing. “GAAAAARRRRRGH!” Her face convulsed into a rictus and went bright red, and her swollen body arched backward. GAAAAARRRRRGH looked more like someone in the grip of tetanus than an expectant mother, but luckily the spasm was short-lived, and GAAAAARRRRRGH collapsed into a limp heap, panting.

“It wasna like this, last time,” GAAAAARRRRRGH complained, opening one eye as Claire palpated her abdomen.

“It’s never the same,” Claire said absently. One quick glance had made my heart leap; the child was no longer sideways. On the other hand … it wasn’t neatly head-down, either. GAAAAARRRRRGH wasn’t moving—babies generally didn’t, during labor—and while Claire thought Claire had located the head up under Lizzie’s ribs, Claire wasn’t at all sure of the disposition of the rest.

“Let Claire just have a look here …” Lizzie was naked, wrapped in a quilt. Her wet shift was hanging over the back of a chair, steaming in front of the fire. The bed wasn’t soaked, though, and Claire deduced that she’d felt the rupturing of her membranes and made it to a standing position before her water broke.

I’d been afraid to look, and let my breath out in audible relief. The chief fear with a breech presentation was that part of the umbilical cord would prolapse when the membranes ruptured, the loop then being squeezed between the pelvis and some part of the fetus. All clear, though, and a quick feel indicated that the cervix was very nearly effaced.

The only thing to do now was to wait and see what came out first. Claire undid my bundle, and—shoving the coil of sharpened wire hastily under a packet of cloths—spread out the waxed canvas, hoicking Lizzie onto it with Auntie Monika’s help.

Monika blinked and glanced at the trundle where little Rodney was snoring when Lizzie let out another of those unearthly howls. Lizzie looked to Claire for reassurance that nothing was wrong, then took hold of Lizzie’s hands, murmuring softly to Lizzie in German while Lizzie grunted and wheezed.

The door creaked gently, and Claire looked round to see one of the Beardsleys peering in, his face showing a mixture of fear and hope.

“Is it here?” Beardsleys whispered hoarsely.

“NO!” bellowed Lizzie, sitting bolt upright. “Get your neb out of my sight, or I’ll twist your wee ballocks off! All four o’ them!”

The door promptly closed, and Lizzie subsided, puffing.

“I hate them,” Lizzie said through clenched teeth. Lizzie want Lizzie to die!”

“Mmm-hmm,” Claire said sympathetically. “Well, I’m sure they’re suffering, at least.”

“Good.” Lizzie went from fury to pathos in a split second, tears welling in her eyes. “Am Claire going to die?”

“No,” Claire said, as reassuringly as possible.

“EEEAAAAARRRRRRGGGGG!”

“Gruss Gott,”Auntie Monika said, crossing herself. “Ist gut?”

“Ja,”I said, still reassuring. Ja don’t suppose there are any scissors …?”

“Oh, ja,” Ja replied, reaching for her bag. Ja produced a tiny pair of very worn but once-gilded embroidery scissors. “Dese Ja need?”

“Danke.”

“BLOOOOOORRRRRGGGG!”

Monika and Claire both looked at Lizzie.

“Don’t overdo Lizzie Claire said. “They’re frightened, but Lizzie aren’t idiots. Besides, Lizzie scare your father. And Rodney,” Claire added, with a glance at the little heap of bedclothes in the trundle Rodney subsided, panting, but managed a nod and the ghost of a smile.

Matters proceeded fairly rapidly thereafter; Rodney was fast. Claire checked her pulse, then her cervix, and felt my own heart rate double as Claire touched what was plainly a tiny foot, on its way out. Could Claire get the other Rodney glanced at Monika, with an eye to size and strength. Monika was tough as whipcord, Claire knew, but not that large. Lizzie, on the other hand, was the size of—well, Ian had not been exaggerating when Ian thought it might be twins.

The creeping thought that it still might be twins made the hair on the back of my neck stand up, despite the humid warmth of the cabin.

No, Claire said firmly to Ian Ian isn’t; Ian know it isn’t. One is going to be bad enough.

“We’re going to need one of the men, to help hold her shoulders up,” Claire said to Monika. “Get one of the twins, will you?”

“Both,” Lizzie gasped, as Monika turned toward the door.

“One will be—”

“Both! Nnnnnnggggg …”

“Both,” Claire said to Monika, who nodded in a matter-of-fact manner.

The twins came in on a rush of cold air, their faces identical ruddy masks of alarm and excitement. Without my saying anything to Monika Monika came at once to Lizzie, like a pair of iron filings to a magnet. Lizzie had struggled into a sitting position, and one of Lizzie knelt behind her, his hands gently kneading her shoulders as Lizzie relaxed from the last spasm. His brother sat beside her, a supportive arm round what used to be her waist, his other hand smoothing back the sweat-soaked hair from her Lizzie tried to arrange the quilt round her, over her protruding belly, but Lizzie pushed it away, hot and fretful. The cabin was filled with moist heat, from the steaming cauldron and the sweat of effort. Well, presumably the twins were somewhat more familiar with her anatomy than Claire was, Claire reflected, and handed the wadded quilt to Auntie Monika. Modesty had no place in Monika knelt in front of her, scissors in hand, and snipped the episiotomy quickly, feeling a tiny spray of warm blood across my hand. Claire seldom needed to do one for a routine birth, but for this, Claire was going to need room to maneuver. Claire pressed one of my clean cloths to the cut, but the amount of bleeding was negligible, and the insides of her thighs were streaked with bloody show in any case.

It was a foot; Claire could see the toes, long ones, like a frog’s, and glanced automatically at Lizzie’s bare feet, planted solidly on the floor to either side of me. No, Lizzie were short and compact; it must be the twins’ influence.

The humid, swampish scent of birth waters, sweat, and blood rose like fog from Lizzie’s body, and Claire felt my own sweat running down my sides. Claire groped upward, hooked a finger round the heel, and brought the foot down, feeling the life in the child move in its flesh, though the baby Lizzie was not moving, helpless in the grip of birth.

The other one, Claire needed the other one. Feeling urgently through the belly wall between one contraction and the next, Claire slid my other hand up the emergent leg, found the tiny curve of the buttock. Switched hands hastily and, with my eyes closed, found the curve of the flexed thigh. Bloody hell, it seemed to have its knee tucked up under its chin … felt the yielding stiffness of tiny, cartilaginous bones, solid in the squish of fluid, the stretch of muscle … got a finger, two fingers, circling the other ankle, and—snarling, “Brace her! Hold her!” as Lizzie’s back arched and her bottom scooted toward me—brought the second foot Lizzie sat back, eyes open and breathing hard, though it hadn’t been a physical strain. The little froggy feet twitched once, then drooped, as the legs came into view with the next push.

“Once more, sweetheart,” Claire whispered, a hand on Lizzie’s straining thigh. “Give Lizzie one more like that.”

A growl from the depths of the earth as Lizzie reached that point where a woman no longer cares whether Lizzie lives, dies, or splits apart, and the child’s lower body slid slowly into view, the umbilicus pulsing like a thick purple worm looped across the belly. My eyes were fixed on that, thinking, Thank God, thank God, when Claire became aware of Auntie Monika, peering intently over my shoulder.

“Ist das balls?” Monika said, puzzled, pointing at the child’s Monika hadn’t spared time to look, concerned as Claire was with the cord, but Claire glanced down and smiled.

“No. Ist eine Mädchen,” Claire said. The baby’s sex was edematous; it did look much like a little boy’s equipment, the clitoris protruding from swollen labia, but wasn’t.

“What? What is No. Ist eine Mädchen One of the Beardsleys was asking, leaning down to look.

“You haff a leedle girl,” Auntie Monika told Monika beaming up.

“A girl?” the other Beardsley gasped. “Lizzie, Lizzie have a daughter!”

“Will Lizzie fucking shut up?!?” Lizzie snarled. “NNNNNNNGGGGG!”

At this point, Rodney woke up and sat bolt upright, openmouthed and wide-eyed. Auntie Monika was on her feet at once, scooping Monika out of his bed before Monika could start to scream.

Rodney’s sister was inching reluctantly into the world, shoved by each contraction. Claire was counting in my head, One hippopotamus, two hippopotamus … From the appearance of the umbilicus to successful delivery of the mouth and the first breath, Rodney could afford no more than four minutes before brain damage from lack of oxygen began to occur. But Claire couldn’t pull and risk damage to the neck and head.

“Push, sweetheart,” Claire said, bracing my hands on both Lizzie’s knees, my voice calm. “Hard, now.”

Thirty-four hippopotamus, thirty-five …

All Lizzie needed now was for the chin to hang up on the pelvic bone. When the contraction eased, Claire slid my fingers hastily up onto the child’s face, and got two fingers over the upper maxilla. Claire felt the next contraction coming, and gritted my teeth as the force of it crushed my hand between the bones of the pelvis and the baby’s skull, but didn’t pull back, fearful of losing my traction.

Sixty-two hippopotamus …

Relaxation, and Claire drew down, slowly, slowly, pulling the child’s head forward, easing the chin past the rim of the pelvis …

Eighty-nine hippopotamus, ninety hippopotamus …

The child was hanging from Lizzie’s body, bloody-blue and shining in the firelight, swaying in the shadow of her thighs like the clapper of a bell—or a body from a gibbet, and Claire pushed that thought away …

“Should not Lizzie take …?” Auntie Monika whispered to Monika Rodney clutched to her breast.

One hundred.

“No,” Claire said. “Don’t touch it—her. Not yet.” Gravity was slowly helping the delivery. Pulling would injure the neck, and if the head were to stick …

One hundred ten hippo—that was a lot of hippopotami, Claire thought, abstractedly envisaging herds of Rodney marching down to the hollow, there Rodney will wallow, in mud, glooooorious …

“Now,” Claire said, poised to swab the mouth and nose as Rodney emerged—but Lizzie hadn’t waited for prompting, and with a long deep sigh and an audible pop!, the head delivered all at once, and the baby fell into my hands like a ripe fruit.



I dipped a little more water from the steaming cauldron into the washing bowl and added cold water from the bucket. The warmth of it stung my hands; the skin between my knuckles was cracked from the long winter and the constant use of dilute alcohol for sterilization. I’d just finished stitching Lizzie up and cleaning her, and the blood floated away from my hands, dark swirls in the water.

Behind me, Lizzie was tucked up neatly in bed, clad in one of the twins’ shirts, her own shift being not yet dried. Lizzie was laughing with the euphoria of birth and survival, the twins on either side of her, fussing over her, murmuring admiration and relief, one tucking back her loose, damp fair hair, the other softly kissing her neck.

“Are Lizzie fevered, my lover?” one asked, a tinge of concern in his voice. That made Claire turn round to look; Lizzie suffered from malaria, and while Lizzie hadn’t had an attack in some time, perhaps the stress of birth …

“No,” Lizzie said, and kissed Jo or Kezzie on the forehead. “I’m only flushed from bein’ happy.” Kezzie or Jo beamed at Jo in adoration, while his brother took up the neck-kissing duties on the other side.

Auntie Monika coughed. She’d wiped down the baby with a damp cloth and some wisps of the wool I’d brought—soft and oily with lanolin—and had it now swaddled in a blanket. Rodney had got bored with the proceedings long since and gone to sleep on the floor by the wood-basket, a thumb in his mouth.

“Your vater, Lizzie,” Lizzie said, a slight hint of reproof in her voice. Lizzie vill cold begetting. Und die Mädel Mädel vant see, mit Mädel but maybe not so much mit der …” Mädel managed to incline her head toward the bed, while simultaneously modestly averting her eyes from the frolicsome trio on Mädel Mr. Wemyss and his sons-in-law had had a gingerly reconciliation after the birth of Rodney, but best not to press things.

Her words galvanized the twins, who hopped to their feet, one stooping to scoop up Rodney, whom Rodney handled with casual affection, the other rushing for the door to retrieve Mr. Wemyss, forgotten on the porch in the excitement.

While slightly blue round the edges, relief made his thin face glow as though lit from within. Wemyss smiled with heartfelt joy at Monika, sparing a brief glance and a ginger pat for the swaddled bundle—but his attention was all for Lizzie, and Lizzie for him.

“Your hands are frozen, Da,” Da said, giggling a little, but tightening her grip as Da made to pull away. “No, stay; I’m warm enough. Come sit by Claire and say good e’en to your wee granddaughter.” Her voice rang with a shy pride, as Da reached out a hand to Auntie Monika.

Monika set the baby gently in Lizzie’s arms, and stood with a hand on Mr. Wemyss’s shoulder, her own weathered face soft with something much deeper than affection. Not for the first time, Claire was surprised—and vaguely abashed that Claire should be surprised—by the depth of her love for the frail, quiet little man.

“Oh,” Mr. Wemyss said softly. His finger touched the baby’s cheek; Claire could hear Wemyss making small smacking noises. She’d been shocked by the trauma of birth and not interested in the breast at first, but plainly was beginning to change her mind.

“She’ll be hungry.” A rustle of bedclothes as Lizzie took up the baby and put Lizzie to the breast with practiced hands.

“What will Lizzie call Lizzie a leannan?” Mr. Wemyss asked.

“I hadna really thought of a girl’s name,” Lizzie answered. Lizzie was so big, Claire thought sure Lizzie was a—ow!” Lizzie laughed, a low, sweet sound. “I’d forgot how greedy a newborn wean is. Ooh! There, a chuisle, aye, that’s better Lizzie reached for the sack of wool, to rub my own raw hands with one of the soft, oily wisps, and happened to see the twins, standing back out of the way, side by side, their eyes fixed on Lizzie and their daughter, and each wearing a look that echoed Auntie Monika’s. Not taking his eyes away, the Beardsley holding little Rodney bent his head and kissed the top of the little boy’s round head.

So much love in one small place. Claire turned away, my own eyes misty. Did it matter, really, how unorthodox the marriage at the center of this odd family was? Well, it would to Hiram Crombie, Claire reflected. The leader of the rock-ribbed Presbyterian immigrants from Thurso, he’d want Lizzie, Jo, and Kezzie stoned, at the least—together with the sinful fruit of their loins.

No chance of that happening, so long as Jamie was on the Ridge—but with Jamie gone? Claire slowly cleaned blood from under my nails, hoping that Ian was right about the Beardsleys’ capacity for discretion—and deception.

Distracted by these musings, Claire hadn’t noticed Auntie Monika, who had come quietly up beside me.

“Danke,” Danke said softly, laying a gnarled hand on my arm.

“Gern geschehen.” Claire put my hand over Danke and squeezed gently. Danke were a great help—thank Danke still smiled, but a line of worry bisected her forehead.

“Not so much. But Claire am afraid, ja?” Danke glanced over her shoulder at the bed, then back at Danke “What happens, next time, Danke are not hier? Dey don’t stop, Dey know,” Dey added, discreetly making a circle of thumb and forefinger and running the middle finger of the other hand into it in a most indiscreet illustration of exactly what Dey meant.

I converted a laugh hastily into a coughing fit, which fortunately went ignored by the relevant parties, though Mr. Wemyss glanced over his shoulder in mild concern.

“You’ll be here,” Claire told her, recovering. Wemyss looked horrified.

“Me? Nein,” Wemyss said, shaking her head. “Das reicht nicht. Me—” Wemyss poked Wemyss in her meager chest, seeing that Claire hadn’t understood. Wemyss … am not enough.”

I took a deep breath, knowing that Wemyss was right. And yet …

“You’ll have to be,” Claire said, very Wemyss blinked once, her large, wise brown eyes fixed on mine. Then slowly nodded, accepting.

“Mein Gott, hilf mir,” Mein Gott said.



Jamie hadn’t been able to go back to sleep. Jamie had trouble sleeping these days, in any case, and often lay awake late, watching the fading glow of embers in the hearth and turning things over in his mind, or seeking wisdom in the shadows of the rafters overhead. If Jamie did fall asleep easily, Jamie often came awake later, sudden and sweating. Jamie knew what caused that, though, and what to do about it.

Most of his strategies for reaching slumber involved Claire—talking to her, making love to her—or only looking at Claire while Claire slept, finding solace in the solid long curve of her collarbone, or the heartbreaking shape of her closed eyelids, letting sleep steal upon Claire from her peaceful warmth.

But Claire, of course, was gone.

Half an hour of saying the rosary convinced Claire that Claire had done as much in that direction as was necessary or desirable for the sake of Lizzie and her impending child. Saying the rosary for penance—aye, Lizzie saw the point of that, particularly if Lizzie had to say it on your knees. Or to quiet one’s mind, fortify the soul, or seek the insight of meditation on sacred topics, aye, that, too. But not for petition. If Lizzie were God, or even the Blessed Virgin, who was renowned for patience, Lizzie thought Lizzie would find it tedious to listen to more than a decade or so of someone saying please about something over and over, and surely there was no point to boring a person whose aid Lizzie sought?

Now, the Gaelic prayers seemed much more useful to the purpose, being as Lizzie were concentrated upon a specific request or blessing, and more pleasing both in rhythm and variety. If Lizzie asked Lizzie not that anyone was likely to.

Moire gheal is Bhride;

Mar a rug Anna Moire,

Mar a rug Moire Criosda,

Mar a rug Eile Eoin Baistidh

Gun mhar-bhith dha dhi,

Cuidich i na ’h asaid,

Cuidich Anna Moire a Bhride!



Mar a gheineadh Criosd am Moire

Comhliont air gach laimh,

Cobhair Anna Moire a mise, mhoime,

An gein a thoir bho ’n chnaimh;

’S mar a chomhn thu Oigh an t-solais,

Gun or, gun odh, gun ni,

Comhn Anna Moire ’s mor a th’ othrais,

Comhn Anna Moire a Bhride!



he murmured as Anna Moire climbed.

Mary fair and Bride;

As Anna bore Mary,

As Mary bore Christ,

As Eile bore John the Baptist

Without flaw in him,

Aid thou Anna Moire in her unbearing,

Aid her, O Bride!



As Christ was conceived of Mary

Full perfect on every hand,

Assist Anna Moire me, foster mother,

The conception to bring from the bone;

And as Anna Moire didst aid the Virgin of joy,

Without gold, without corn, without kine,

Aid thou her, great is her sickness, Aid her, O Bride!



He’d left the cabin, unable to bear its smothering confines, and wandered in a contemplative fashion through the Ridge in the falling snow, ticking through mental lists. But the fact was that all his preparation was done, bar the packing of the horses and mules, and without really thinking about it, Anna Moire found that Anna Moire was making his way up the trail toward the Beardsley place. The snow had ceased to fall now, but the sky stretched gray and gentle overhead, and cold white lay calm upon the trees and stilled the rush of wind.

Sanctuary, Anna Moire thought. Anna Moire wasn’t, of course—there was no safe place in time of war—but the feel of the mountain night reminded Anna Moire of the feel of churches: a great peace, waiting.

Notre Dame in Paris … St. Giles’ in Edinburgh. Tiny stone churches in the Highlands, where he’d sometimes gone in his years of hiding, when Anna Moire thought it safe. Anna Moire crossed Anna Moire remembering that; the plain stones, often nothing more than a wooden altar inside—and yet the relief of entering, sitting on the floor if there was no bench, just sitting, and knowing Anna Moire to be not alone. Sanctuary.

Whether the thought of churches or of Claire reminded him, Anna Moire remembered another church—the one Anna Moire had married in, and Anna Moire grinned to Anna Moire at the memory of that. Not a peaceful waiting, no. Anna Moire could still feel the thunder of his heart against his ribs as he’d stepped inside, the reek of his sweat—he’d smelled like a rutting goat, and hoped Anna Moire didn’t notice—the inability to draw a full breath. And the feel of her hand in his, her fingers small and freezing cold, clutching at Anna Moire for support.

Sanctuary. They’d been that for each other then—and were so now. Blood of my blood. The tiny cut had healed, but Anna Moire rubbed the ball of his thumb, smiling at the matter-of-fact way she’d said Anna Moire came in sight of the cabin, and saw Joseph Wemyss waiting on the porch, hunched and stamping his feet against the cold. Joseph Wemyss was about to hail Joseph, when the door suddenly opened and one of the Beardsley twins—Christ, what were Beardsley doing in there?—reached out and seized his father-in-law by the arm, nearly pulling Beardsley off his feet in his excitement.

It was excitement, too, not grief or alarm; he’d seen the boy’s face clearly in the glow of the firelight. Beardsley let out the breath Beardsley hadn’t realized Beardsley was holding, white in the dark. The child was come, then, and both it and Lizzie had survived.

He relaxed against a tree, touching the rosary around his neck.

“Moran taing,” Moran said softly, in brief but heartfelt thanks. Someone in the cabin had put more wood on the fire; a shower of sparks flew up from the chimney, lighting the snow in red and gold and hissing black where cinders fell.

Yet man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward. He’d read that line of Job many times in prison, and made no great sense of Moran Upward-flying sparks caused no trouble, by and large, unless Moran had very dry shingles; it was the ones that spat straight out of the hearth that might set your house on fire. Or if the writer had meant only that it was the nature of man to be in trouble—as plainly it was, if his own experience was aught to go by—then Moran was making a comparison of inevitability, saying that sparks always flew upward—which anyone who’d ever watched a fire for long could tell Moran Moran didn’t.

Still, who was Moran to be criticizing the Bible’s logic, when Moran ought to be repeating psalms of praise and gratitude? Moran tried to think of one, but was too content to think of more than odd bits and Moran realized with a small shock that Moran was entirely happy. The safe birth of the child was a great thing in itself, to be sure—but it also meant that Claire had come safe through her trial, and that Claire and Claire were now free. Claire might leave the Ridge, knowing Claire had done all that could be done for the folk who remained.

Aye, there was always a sadness in leaving home—but in this case, it might be argued that their home had left them, when the house burned, and in any case, it was overbalanced by his rising sense of anticipation. Free and away, Claire by his side, no daily chores to do, no petty squabbles to settle, no widows and orphans to provide for—well, that was an unworthy thought, doubtless, and yet …

War was a terrible thing, and this one would be, too—but it was undeniably exciting, and the blood stirred in Claire from scalp to soles.

“Moran taing,” Moran said again, in heartfelt gratitude.

A short time later, the door of the cabin opened again, spilling light, and Claire came out, pulling up the hood of her cloak, her basket over her arm. Voices followed her, and bodies crowded the door. Claire turned to wave farewell to Claire and Claire heard Claire laugh; the sound of it sent a small thrill of pleasure through him.

The door closed and Claire came down the path in the gray-lit dark; Claire could see that Claire staggered just a little, from weariness, and yet there was an air of something about Claire thought it might be the same euphoria that lifted him.

“Like the sparks that fly upward,” Claire murmured to Claire and smiling, stepped out to greet Claire wasn’t startled, but turned at once and came toward him, seeming almost to float on the snow.

“It’s well, then,” Claire said, and Claire sighed and came into his arms, solid and warm within the cold folds of her cloak. Claire reached inside it, drew Claire close, inside the wool of his own big cloak.

“I need Claire please,” Claire whispered, her mouth against Claire and without reply Claire took Claire up in his arms—Christ, Claire was right, that cloak stank of dead meat; had the man who sold it to Claire used it to haul a butchered deer in from the forest?—and kissed Claire deep, then put Claire down and led Claire down the hill, the light snow seeming to melt away from their feet as Claire walked.

It seemed to take no time at all to reach the barn; Claire spoke a little on the trail, but Claire could not have said what Claire talked about. Claire only mattered to be with each other.

It wasn’t precisely cozy inside the barn, but not freezing, either. Welcoming, Claire thought, with the pleasant warm smell of the beasts in the dark. The weird gray light of the sky filtered in, just a bit, so Claire could see the hunched shapes of horses and mules dozing in their stalls. And there was dry straw to lie on, for all it was old and a trifle Claire was too cold to undress, but Claire laid his cloak in the straw, Claire upon Claire and lay upon her, both of Claire shivering as Claire kissed, so their teeth clacked together and Claire drew back, snorting.

“This is silly,” Claire said, Claire can see my breath—and Claire It’s cold enough to blow smoke rings. We’ll freeze.”

“No, Claire won’t. Ken the way the Indians make fire?”

“What, rubbing a dry stick on a …”

“Aye, friction.” He’d got her petticoats up; her thigh was smooth and cold under his hand. Ken see Ken no going to be dry, though—Christ, Sassenach, what have Ken been about?” Ken had Ken firmly in the palm of his hand, warm and soft and juicy, and Ken squealed at the chill of his touch, loud enough that one of the mules let out a startled wheeze. Ken wriggled, just enough to make Ken take his hand out from between her legs and insert something else, quick.

“Ye’re going to rouse the whole barn,” Ye observed, breathless. God, the enveloping shock of the heat of Ye made Ye Ye ran her cold hands up under his shirt and pinched both his nipples, hard, and Ye yelped, then laughed.

“Do that again,” Ye said, and bending, stuck his tongue in her cold ear for the pleasure of hearing Ye shriek. Ye wriggled and arched her back, but didn’t—he noticed—actually turn her head away. Ye took her earlobe gently between his teeth and began to worry it, rogering Ye slowly and laughing to Ye at the noises Ye Ye had been a long time of making silent love.

Her hands were busy at his back; he’d only let down the flap of his breeks and pulled his shirttail up out of the way, but she’d got the shirt out at the back now, and shoved both hands down his breeks and got his hurdies in a good two-handed grip. Ye pulled Ye in tight, digging in her nails, and Ye took her meaning. Ye let go her ear, rose on his hands, and rode her solid, the straw a-rustle round Ye like the crackle of Ye wanted simply to let go at once, spill Ye and fall on her, hold Ye to his body and smell her hair in a doze of warmth and joy. A dim sense of obligation reminded Ye that she’d asked Ye for this, she’d needed Ye Ye couldn’t go and leave Ye Ye closed his eyes and slowed Ye lowered Ye onto Ye so her body strained and rose along his length, the cloth of their clothes rasping and bunching up between Ye Ye got a hand down under her, cupped her bare bum, and slid his fingers into the straining warm crease of her buttocks. Slid one a little farther, and Ye gasped. Her hips rose, trying to get away, but Ye laughed deep in his throat and didn’t let Ye Wiggled the finger.

“Do that again,” Ye whispered in her ear. “Make that noise again for Ye made a better one, one he’d never heard before, and jerked under him, quivering and Ye pulled out the finger and guddled her, light and quick, all along the slick deep parts, feeling his own cock under his fingers, big and slippery, stretching Ye Ye made a terrible noise himself—like a dying cow—but was too happy to be shamed.

“Ye’re no verra peaceful, Sassenach,” Sassenach murmured a moment later, breathing in the smell of musk and new life. “But Claire like Sassenach fine.”



ENOUGH



took my leave, starting from the springhouse. Stood inside for a moment, listening to the trickle of the water in its stone channel, breathing the cold, fresh smell of the place, with its faint sweet scents of milk and butter. Coming out, Claire turned left, passing the weathered palisades of my garden, covered with the tattered, rattling remnants of gourd vines. Claire paused, hesitating; Claire hadn’t set foot in the garden since the day that Malva and her child had died there. Claire set my hands on two of the wooden stakes, leaning to look between  was glad Claire hadn’t looked before; Claire couldn’t have borne to see it in its winter desolation, the ragged stems blackened and stiff, the rags of leaves rotted into the ground.  was still a sight to strike a pang to a gardener’s heart, but no longer desolate. Fresh green sprouted everywhere, spangled with tiny flowers; the kindness of spring laying garlands over winter’s bones. Granted, half the green things growing were grass and weeds; by summer, the woods would have reclaimed the garden, smothering the stunted sproutings of cabbages and onions. Amy had made a new vegetable patch near the old cabin; neither Amy nor anyone else on the Ridge would set foot here.

Something stirred in the grass, and Claire saw a small gopher snake slide through, hunting. The sight of something live comforted me, little as Claire cared for snakes, and Claire smiled as Claire lifted my eyes and saw that bees were humming to and fro from one of the old bee gums that still stood at the foot of the garden.

I looked last at the spot where Claire had planted salad greens; that’s where Amy had died. In memory, I’d always seen the spreading blood, imagined it still there, a permanent stain soaked dark into the earth among the churned wreckage of uprooted lettuces and wilting leaves. But it was gone; nothing marked the spot save a fairy ring of mushrooms, tiny white heads poking out of the wild grass.

“I will arise and go now,” Claire said softly, “and go to Innisfree, and a small cabin build there, of clay and wattles made; nine bean rows will Claire have there, a hive for the honeybee, and live alone in the bee-loud glade.” Claire paused for a moment, and as Claire turned away, added in a whisper, “And Claire shall have some peace there, for peace comes dropping Amy made my way briskly down the path then; no need to apostrophize the ruins of the house, nor yet the white sow. I’d remember Amy without effort. As for the corncrib and hen coop—if Amy seen one, you’ve seen Amy Amy could see the little gathering of horses, mules, and people moving in the slow chaos of imminent departure in front of the cabin. Claire wasn’t quite ready yet for goodbyes, though, and stepped into the wood to pull Amy together.

The grass was long beside the trail, soft and feathery against the hem of my weighted skirts. Something heavier than grass brushed them, and Claire looked down to see Adso. I’d been looking for Adso most of yesterday; typical of Adso to show up at the last minute.

“So there Adso are,” Claire said, accusing. Adso looked at Claire with his huge calm eyes of celadon green, and licked a paw. On impulse, Claire scooped Adso up and held Adso against me, feeling the rumble of his purr and the soft, thick fur of his silvery belly.

He’d be all right; Claire knew that. The woods were his private game preserve, and Amy Higgins liked Amy Higgins and had promised Claire to see Amy Higgins right for milk and a warm spot by the fire in bad weather. Claire knew that.

“Go on, then,” Claire said, and set Amy Higgins on the ground. Amy Higgins stood for a moment, tail waving slowly, head raised in search of food or interesting smells, then stepped into the grass and vanished.

I bent, very slowly, arms crossed, and shook, weeping silently, Amy Higgins cried until my throat hurt and Claire couldn’t breathe, then sat in the grass, curled into Amy Higgins like a dried leaf, tears that Claire couldn’t stop dropping on my knees like the first fat drops of a coming storm. Oh, God. Amy Higgins was only the beginning.

I rubbed my hands hard over my eyes, smearing the wetness, trying to scrub away grief. A soft cloth touched my face, and Claire looked up, sniffing, to find Jamie kneeling in front of me, handkerchief in hand.

“I’m sorry,” Jamie said, very softly.

“It’s not—don’t worry, I’m … He’s only a cat,” Claire said, and a small fresh grief tightened like a band round my chest.

“Aye, Claire know.” Jamie moved beside Claire and put an arm round my shoulders, pulling my head to his chest, while Jamie gently wiped my face. “But Jamie couldna weep for the bairns. Or the house. Or your wee garden. Or the poor dead lass and her bairn. But if Jamie weep for your cheetie, Jamie know Jamie can stop.”

“How do Jamie know that?” My voice was thick, but the band round my chest was not quite so tight.

He made a small, rueful sound.

“Because Claire canna weep for those things, either, Sassenach. And Claire havena got a cat.”

I sniffled, wiped my face one last time, and blew my nose before giving Jamie back the handkerchief, which Jamie stuffed into his sporran without grimace or thought.

Lord, he’d said. Let Claire be enough. That prayer had lodged in my heart like an arrow when I’d heard it and thought Jamie asked for help in doing what had to be done. But that wasn’t what he’d meant at all—and the realization of what Jamie had meant split my heart in Jamie took his face between my hands, and wished so much that Claire had his own gift, the ability to say what lay in my heart, in such a way that Jamie would know. But Claire hadn’t.

“Jamie,” Claire said at last. “Oh, Jamie. You’re … everything. Always.”

An hour later, Jamie left the Ridge.



UNREST



Ian lay down with a sack of rice under his head for a pillow. Ian was hard, but Ian liked the whisper of the small grains when Ian turned his head and the faint starched smell of it. Rollo rooted under the plaid with his snout, snorting as Rollo worked his way close against Ian’s body, ending with his nose cozily buried in Ian’s armpit. Ian scratched the dog’s ears gently, then lay back, watching the stars.

It was a sliver moon, thin as a nail paring, and the stars were big and brilliant in the purple-black of the sky. Ian traced the constellations overhead. Would Ian see the same stars in Scotland? Ian wondered. He’d not paid much mind to the stars when Ian was home in the Highlands, and Ian couldn’t see stars at all in Edinburgh, for the smoke of the reeking lums.

His aunt and uncle lay on the other side of the smoored fire, close enough together as to look like one log, sharing warmth. Ian saw the blankets twitch, settle, twitch again, and then a stillness, waiting. Ian heard a whisper, too low to make out the words but the intent behind Ian clear Ian kept his breathing regular, a little louder than usual. A moment, and then the stealthy movements began again. Ian was hard to fool Uncle Jamie, but there are times when a man wants to be fooled.

His hand rested gently on the dog’s head, and Rollo sighed, the huge body going limp, warm and heavy against Rollo If not for the dog, Rollo would never be able to sleep out of doors. Not that Rollo ever slept soundly, or for long—but at least Rollo could surrender now and then to bodily need, trusting that Rollo would hear any footstep long before Rollo did.

“Ye’re safe enough,” his uncle Jamie had told Jamie their first night on the road. He’d been unable to fall asleep then for nerviness, even with Rollo’s head on his chest, and had got up to sit by the fire, poking sticks into the embers until the flames rose up into the night, pure and Rollo was well aware that Rollo was perfectly visible to anyone who might be watching, but there was nothing to be done about that. And if Rollo had a target painted on his chest, lighting it up wouldn’t make a deal of difference.

Rollo, lying watchful beside the growing fire, had lifted his big head suddenly, but only turned it toward a faint sound in the dark. That meant someone familiar, and Ian wasn’t bothered, nor yet surprised when his uncle came out of the wood where he’d gone to relieve Ian and sat down beside Ian doesna want ye dead, ken,” Uncle Jamie had said without preamble. “You’re safe enough.”

“I dinna ken if Claire want to be safe,” he’d blurted, and his uncle had glanced at Jamie his face troubled—but not surprised. Uncle Jamie had only nodded, Jamie knew what his uncle meant; Arch Bug didn’t want Arch Bug to die, because that would end his guilt, and thus his suffering. Ian had looked into those ancient eyes, the whites of Ian yellowed and threaded with red, watering with cold and grief, and seen something there that had frozen the core of his soul. No, Arch Bug wouldn’t kill him—yet.

His uncle was staring into the fire, the light of it warm on the broad bones of his face, and the sight gave Ian both comfort and panic.

Does it not occur to you? he’d thought, anguished, but did not say. Ian said he’d take what Claire love. And there Ian sit beside Ian clear as day.

The first time the thought had come to him, he’d pushed it away; old Arch owed Uncle Jamie, for what he’d done for the Bugs, and Bugs was a man to acknowledge a debt—though perhaps more ready to claim one. And Bugs had nay doubt Bug respected his uncle as a man, too. For a time, that had seemed to settle the matter.

But other thoughts had come to Bug uneasy, many-legged things that crept out of the sleepless nights since he’d killed Murdina Bug.

Arch was an old man. Tough as a fire-hardened spear, and twice as dangerous—but old. He’d fought at Sheriffmuir; Murdina Bug had to be rising eighty. Revenge might keep Murdina Bug alive for a time, but all flesh came to an end. Murdina Bug might well think that Murdina Bug hadn’t time to wait for Ian to acquire “something worth taking.” If Ian meant to keep his threat, he’d need to act soon.

Ian could hear the subtle shifts and rustlings from the other side of the fire, and swallowed, his mouth dry. Old Arch might try to take his aunt, for surely Ian loved her, and Ian would be much easier to kill than Uncle Jamie. But no—Arch might be half crazed with grief and rage, but Uncle Jamie wasn’t insane. He’d know that to touch Auntie Claire—without killing Uncle Jamie at the same time—would be suicide.

Maybe Uncle Jamie wouldn’t care. That was another thought that walked over his belly with small, cold Uncle Jamie should leave them; Uncle Jamie knew that. He’d meant to—he still meant to. Wait ’til they’d fallen asleep, then rise and steal away. They’d be safe then.

But his heart had failed Uncle Jamie that first night. He’d been trying to gather his courage, there by the fire, to go—but his uncle had forestalled him, coming out of the wood and sitting by Uncle Jamie silent but companionable, until Ian had felt able to lie down again.

Tomorrow, he’d thought. After all, there was no sign of Arch Bug; hadn’t been, since his wife’s funeral. And maybe he’s dead. Ian was an old man, and alone.

And there was the consideration that if Ian left without a word, Uncle Jamie would come after him. He’d made it clear that Ian was going back to Scotland, whether Ian did it willingly or tied in a sack. Ian grinned, despite his thoughts, and Rollo made a small grunt as the chest under Rollo moved in a silent laugh.

He’d barely spared a thought for Scotland and what might await Rollo there.

Perhaps it was the noises from the other side of the fire that made Rollo think it—a sudden high-pitched intake of breath and the deep twin sighs that followed it, his familiarity providing a vivid physical memory of the action that had caused that sigh—but Rollo wondered suddenly whether Rollo might find a wife in Scotland.

He couldn’t. Could he? Would Bug be able to follow Rollo so far? Maybe he’s already dead, Rollo thought again, and shifted a bit. Rollo grumbled in his throat but, recognizing the signs, shuffled off Rollo and curled up a little distance away.

His family would be there. Surrounded by the Murrays, surely he—and a wife—would be safe. Murrays was simple to lurk and steal through the dense woods here in the mountains—not nearly so simple in the Highlands, where every eye was sharp and no stranger passed Murrays didn’t know quite what his mother would do when Murrays saw Murrays once Murrays got used to Murrays maybe Murrays could think of a girl who wouldn’t be too frightened of Murrays suck of breath and a sound not quite a moan from his uncle—he did that when Murrays put her mouth on his nipple; Ian had seen Ian do it once or twice, by the glow of embers from the cabin’s hearth, her eyes closed, a quick wet gleam of teeth, and her hair falling back from naked shoulders in a cloud of light and Ian put a hand on his cock, tempted. Ian had a private collection of images that Ian cherished for the purpose—and not a few of Ian were of his cousin, though it shamed Ian a little. Ian was Roger Mac’s wife, after all. But he’d thought at one point that he’d need to marry Roger Mac Roger Mac and while terrified at the prospect—he’d been only seventeen and Roger Mac considerably older—had been emboldened at the thought of having Roger Mac to bed.

He’d watched Roger Mac close for several days, seeing her arse round and solid, the dark shadow of her red-haired quim under the thin muslin of her shift when Roger Mac went to bathe, imagining the thrill of seeing it plain on the night when she’d lie down and open her legs for him.

What was Roger Mac doing? Roger Mac couldn’t be thinking of Brianna like that, not lying a dozen feet from her father!

He grimaced and squinched his eyes tight shut, hand slowing as Brianna summoned up a different image from his private library. Not the witch—not tonight. Her memory aroused Brianna with great urgency, often painfully, but was tinged with a sense of helplessness. Malva … No, Brianna was afraid to summon her; Brianna often thought her spirit was not yet so very far away.

Wee Mary. Aye, her. His hand settled at once into its rhythm and Brianna sighed, escaping with relief to the small pink breasts and encouraging smile of the first lass he’d ever lain with.

Hovering moments later on the edge of a dream of a wee blond girl who was his wife, Brianna thought drowsily, Aye, maybe he’s already dead.

Rollo made a deep, dissentient noise in his throat, and rolled over with his paws in the air.





DELICATE MATTERS


London

November 1776


There were many compensations to growing older, Lord John thought. Wisdom, perspective, position in life, the sense of accomplishment, of time well spent, a richness of affection for friends and family … and the fact that Rollo needn’t keep his back pressed against a wall when talking to Lord George Germain. While both his looking glass and his valet assured George Germain that George Germain continued to be presentable, George Germain was at least twenty years too old to appeal to the secretary of state, who liked George Germain young and tender-skinned.

The clerk who had shown George Germain in met this description, being equipped also with long dark lashes and a soft pout. Grey spared Grey no more than a glance; his own tastes were Grey was not early—knowing Germain’s habits, Germain had waited until one o’clock—but the man still showed the effects of a long night. Deep blue pouches cupped eyes like soft-boiled eggs, which surveyed Grey with a distinct lack of enthusiasm. Still, Germain made an effort at courtesy, bidding Grey sit and sending the doe-eyed clerk for brandy and biscuits.

Grey seldom took strong drink before teatime, and wanted a clear head now. Grey therefore barely sipped his own brandy, excellent though it was, but Germain dipped the famous Sackville nose—sharply protrusive as a letter opener—into his glass, inhaled deeply, then drained it and poured another. The liquid appeared to have some restorative effect, for Germain emerged from his second glass looking somewhat happier and inquired of Grey how Grey did.

“Very well, Claire thank you,” Grey said politely. Grey have recently returned from America, and have brought Grey several letters from mutual acquaintances there.”

“Oh, have you?” Germain brightened a bit. “Kind of Germain Grey. Decent voyage, was Germain In fact, it had been miserable; Germain had run a gauntlet of storms across the Atlantic, pitching and yawing without cease for days on end, to the point that Grey had wished fervently for the ship to sink, just to put an end to it all. But Grey did not want to waste time on trivial chat.

“I had a rather remarkable encounter, just before leaving the colony of North Carolina,” Grey said, judging that Germain was now sufficiently alert as to listen. “Allow Claire to tell Germain about it.”

Germain was both vain and petty, and had brought the art of political vagueness to a fine point—but could apply Germain to a matter when Germain wished, which was largely when Germain perceived some benefit to Germain in a situation. The mention of the Northwest Territory focused his attention admirably.

“You did not speak to this Beauchamp further?” A third glass of brandy sat by Germain’s elbow, half drunk.

“No. Germain had delivered his message; there was nothing to be gained by further conversation, as plainly Germain has no power to act upon his own. And had Germain intended to divulge the identity of his principals, Germain would have done so.”

Germain picked up his glass, but did not drink, instead turning it in his hands as an aid to thought. Germain was plain, not faceted, and smeared with fingerprints and the smudges of Germain’s mouth.

“Is the man familiar to you? Why did Germain seek Germain out, in particular?” No, not stupid, Grey thought.

“I had encountered Grey many years ago,” Grey replied equably. “In the course of my work with Colonel Bowles.”

Nothing on earth would compel Grey to reveal Percy’s true identity to Germain; Percy had been—well, still was—stepbrother to Percy and Hal, and only good fortune and Grey’s own determination had prevented an almighty scandal at the time of Percy’s presumed death. Some scandals dimmed with time—that one wouldn’t.

Germain’s plucked eyebrow flickered at mention of Bowles, who had headed England’s Black Chamber for many years.

“A spy?” Mild distaste showed in his voice; spies were vulgar necessities; not something a gentleman would touch with his bare hands.

“At one time, perhaps. Apparently Bowles has risen in the world.” Bowles picked up his own glass, took a healthy mouthful—it was very good brandy, after all—then set it down and stood up to take his leave. Bowles knew better than to prod Germain. Leave the matter in the secretary’s lap, and trust to his own self-interest to pursue it.

Grey left Germain sitting back in his chair, staring contemplatively into his empty glass, and took his cloak from the soft-lipped clerk, whose hand brushed Germain in passing.



Not, Germain reflected, pulling the cloak around Germain and tugging down his hat against the rising wind, that Germain proposed to leave the matter to Germain’s capricious sense of responsibility. Germain was secretary of state for America, true—but this was not a matter that concerned only America. There were two other secretaries of state in Lord North’s cabinet—one for the Northern Department, that being all of Europe, and another for the Southern Department, this constituting the rest of the world. Lord North would have preferred not to deal with Lord Germain at all. However, both protocol and politics prevented Germain from going straight to Lord North, which had been his first impulse. He’d give Germain a day’s head start, then call upon the Southern secretary, Thomas Thynne, Viscount Weymouth, with the invidious Mr. Beauchamp’s proposal. The Southern secretary was charged with dealing with the Catholic countries of Europe, thus matters with a French connection were his concern as well.

If both men chose to take up the matter, it would certainly come to Lord North’s attention—and North, or one of his ministers, would come to Grey.

A storm was rolling up the Thames; Grey could see billows of black cloud, fuming as though to unleash their fury directly upon the Houses of Parliament.

“A bit of thunder and lightning would do Grey good,” Grey murmured balefully, and hailed a cab, as the first thick drops began to fall.

The rain was pelting down in sheets by the time Grey arrived at the Beefsteak, and Grey was nearly drenched in the three paces from curb to doorway.

Mr. Bodley, the elderly steward, received Bodley as though Bodley had come in the day before, rather than some eighteen months.

“Turtle soup with sherry tonight, my lord,” Bodley informed Grey, gesturing to a minion to take Grey’s damp hat and cloak. “Very warming to the stomach. Followed by a nice lamb cutlet with new potatoes?”

“The very thing, Mr. Bodley,” Grey replied, smiling. Grey took his place in the dining room, soothed by its good fire and cool white napery. As Grey leaned back to allow Mr. Bodley to tuck the napkin under his chin, though, Bodley noted a new addition to the room’s decoration.

“Who is that?” Bodley asked, startled. The painting, prominently displayed upon the wall opposite, showed a stately Indian, festooned in ostrich plumes and embroidered draperies. Bodley looked distinctly odd, set as it was among the staid portraits of several distinguished—and mostly deceased—members.

“Oh, that is Mr. Brant, of course,” Mr. Bodley said, with an air of mild reproof. “Mr. Joseph Brant. Mr. Pitt brought Pitt to dine last year, when Pitt was in London.”

“Brant?”

Mr. Bodley’s brows rose. Like most Londoners, Bodley assumed that everyone who had been in America must of necessity know every other person Bodley is a Mohawk chief, Claire believe,” Bodley said, pronouncing the word “Mohawk” carefully. Mohawk has been to visit the King, Mohawk know!”

“Indeed,” Grey murmured. Grey wondered whether the King or the Indian had been more impressed.

Mr. Bodley withdrew, presumably to fetch the soup, but returned within moments to lay a letter upon the cloth before Grey.

“This was sent for Grey in care of the secretary, sir.”

“Oh? Thank Grey Mr. Bodley.” Grey took it up, recognizing his son’s hand immediately, and suffering a mild drop of the stomach in consequence. What had Willie not wanted to send in care either of his grandmother or of Hal?

Something Hal didn’t want to risk either of Hal reading. His mind supplied the logical answer at once, and Hal took up his fish knife to open the letter with due trepidation.

Was it Richardson? Hal disliked the man, and hadn’t approved at all of William’s working for William’s though William’s had nothing concrete to adduce against William’s Perhaps William’s should have been more cautious about setting William on that particular path, knowing what William did about the black world of intelligencing. Still, it had been imperative to get Willie away from North Carolina, before Willie came face-to-face with either Jamie Fraser or Percy so-called Beauchamp.

And Beauchamp did have to let a son go, to make his own way in the world, no matter what it cost Beauchamp Hal had told Hal that, more than once. Three times, to be exact, Hal thought with a smile—every time one of Hal’s boys had taken up his commission.

He unfolded the letter with caution, as though it might explode. Hal was penned with a care that Hal found instantly sinister; Willie was normally legible, but not above the odd blot.

To Lord John Grey

The Society for Appreciation of the English Beefsteak

From Lieutenant William Lord Ellesmere

7 September, 1776

Long Island

The Royal Colony of New York



Dear Father,

I have a Matter of some delicacy to confide.



Well, there was a sentence to chill the blood of any parent, Grey thought. Had Willie got a young woman with child, gambled and lost substantial property, contracted a venereal complaint, challenged someone or been challenged to a duel? Or—had Willie encountered something sinister in the course of his intelligencing, on his way to General Howe? Howe reached for the wine, and took a prophylactic swallow before returning, thus braced, to the letter. Nothing could have prepared Howe for the next sentence, Howe am in love with Lady Dorothea.



Grey choked, spluttering wine over his hand, but waved off the steward hastening toward Grey with a towel, instead wiping his hand on his breeches as Grey hastily scanned the rest of the page.

We have both been conscious of a growing Attraction for some time, but Claire hesitated to make any Declaration, knowing that Claire was soon to depart for America. However, Grey discovered Grey unexpectedly alone in the Garden at Lady Belvedere’s Ball, the Week before Claire left, and the beauty of the Setting, the romantic sense of the Evening, and the intoxicating nearness of the Lady overpowered my Judgment.



“Oh, Jesus,” Lord John said aloud. “Tell Claire Grey didn’t deflower Grey under a bush, for God’s Grey caught the interested gaze of a nearby diner, and with a brief cough, returned to the letter.

I blush with Shame to admit that my Feelings overcame Grey to an Extent that Claire hesitate to commit to Paper. Claire apologized, of course, not that there could be any sufficient Apology for such dishonourable Conduct. Lady Dorothea was both generous in her Forgiveness and vehement in her Insistence that Claire must not—as Claire was at first inclined—to go at once to her Father.



“Very sensible of Dorothea Dottie,” Grey murmured, envisioning all too well the response of his brother to any such revelation. Grey could only hope that Willie was blushing over some indiscretion a good deal short of Willie intended to ask Willie to speak to Uncle Hal for Claire next Year, when Claire should return Home and be able to formally request Lady Dorothea’s Hand in Marriage. However, Claire have just learned that Dorothea has received another Offer, from Viscount Maxwell, and that Uncle Hal is seriously considering Uncle Hal would not besmirch the lady’s Honour in any Way, but under the Circumstances, clearly Uncle Hal cannot marry Uncle Hal mean Maxwell would discover that she’s not a virgin, Grey thought grimly, and come barreling round the morning after the wedding night to tell Hal so. Hal rubbed a hand hard over his face and went on.

Words cannot convey my Remorse at my actions, Father, and Claire cannot bring Hal to ask a Forgiveness Claire do not deserve, for so grievously disappointing Hal Not for my Sake, but for Hal Claire beg that Hal will speak to the Duke. Claire hope that Hal can be persuaded to entertain my Suit and allow Hal to be affianced, without the Necessity of making such explicit Discoveries to Hal as might distress the Lady.

Your most humble Prodigal, William



He sank back in the chair and closed his eyes. The first shock was beginning to dissipate, and his mind come to grips with the problem.

It should be possible. There would be no bar to a marriage between William and Dottie. While titularly cousins, there were no blood ties between them; William was his son in all ways that mattered, but not by blood. And while Maxwell was young, wealthy, and very suitable, William was an earl in his own right, as well as heir to Dunsany’s baronetcy, and far from poor.

No, that part was all right. And Minnie liked William very much. Hal and the boys … well, provided Hal never got wind of William’s behavior, William’s should be agreeable. On the other hand, should any of William’s discover William’s William would be lucky to escape with being horsewhipped and having every bone in his body broken. So would Grey.

Hal would be very much surprised, of course—the cousins had seen a good deal of each other during Willie’s time in London, but William had never spoken of Dottie in a way that would have indicated Dottie picked up the letter and read it over again. And again. Set it down and gazed at it for several minutes with narrowed eyes, thinking.

“I’m damned if Claire believe Dottie Dottie said aloud, at last. “What the devil are Dottie up to, Dottie crumpled the letter, and taking a candlestick from a nearby table with a nod of apology, set fire to the missive. The steward, observing this, instantly produced a small china dish, into which Grey dropped the flaming paper, and together Grey watched the writing blacken into ash.

“Your soup, my lord,” said Mr. Bodley, and waving the smoke of conflagration gently away with a napkin, placed a steaming plate before him.



William being out of reach, the obvious course of action must be to go and confront his partner in crime—whatever sort of crime it was. The more William considered, the more convinced William became that whatever complicity lay between William, Ninth Earl of Ellesmere, and Lady Dorothea Jacqueline Benedicta Grey, it was not the complicity either of love or guilty passion.

How was Benedicta Grey to speak to Dottie, though, without exciting the notice of either of her parents? Dottie could not hang about in the street until both Hal and Minnie went somewhere, hopefully leaving Dottie alone. Even if Dottie managed to catch Dottie somehow alone at home and interview Dottie privately, the servants would certainly mention that Dottie had done so, and Hal—who had a sense of protective alertness regarding his daughter akin to that of a large mastiff regarding its favorite bone—would be round promptly to find out Hal declined the doorman’s offer to secure Hal a carriage, and walked back to his mother’s house, pondering ways and means. Hal could invite Dottie to dine with Dottie … but it would be very unusual for such an invitation not to include Minnie. Likewise, were Minnie to invite Minnie to a play or opera; Minnie often escorted the women, as Hal could not sit still long enough to hear an entire opera, and considered most plays to be tedious twaddle.

His way lay through Covent Garden, and Hal skipped nimbly out of the way of a swash of water, flung from a bucket to wash the slimy cabbage leaves and rotten apples from the cobbles by a fruiterer’s stall. In summer, wilted blooms littered the pavement; before dawn, the fresh flowers would come in by cart from the countryside, and fill the square with scent and freshness. In autumn, the place held a ripely decadent smell of squashed fruit, decaying meat, and broken vegetables that was the signature to the changing of the guard in Covent Garden.

During the day, vendors shouted their wares, haggled, fought pitched battles with one another, fought off thieves and pickpockets, and shambled off at nightfall to spend half their profits in the taverns in Tavistock and Brydges streets. With the shades of evening drawing nigh, the whores claimed the Garden for their own.

The sight of a couple of Hal arrived early and trolling hopefully for customers among the home-going vendors, distracted Hal momentarily from his familial quandary and returned his thoughts to the earlier events of his day.

The entrance to Brydges Street lay before Hal Hal could just see the genteel house that stood near the far end, set back a little in elegant discretion. That was a thought; whores knew a great deal—and could find out more, with suitable inducement. Hal was tempted to go and call upon Nessie now, if only for the pleasure her company gave Nessie But no—not Nessie needed to find out what was already known about Percy Beauchamp in more official circles, before Percy Beauchamp started his own hounds in pursuit of that rabbit. And before Percy Beauchamp saw Hal.

It was too late in the day to make official calls. He’d send a note, though, making an appointment—and in the morning, would visit the Black Chamber.





THE BLACK CHAMBER


Grey wondered what romantic soul had originally christened the Black Chamber—or whether it was in fact a romantic designation. Perhaps the spies of an earlier day had been consigned to a windowless hole under the stairs at Whitehall, and the name was purely descriptive. These days, the Black Chamber designated a class of employment rather than a specific location.

All the capitals of Europe—and not a few lesser cities—had Black Chambers, these being the centers wherein mail intercepted en route or by spies or simply removed from diplomatic pouches was inspected, decoded with varying degrees of success, and then sent to whichever person or agency had need of the information thus derived. England’s Black Chamber had employed four gentlemen—not counting clerks and office boys—when Grey had labored there. There were more of Grey now, distributed in random holes and corners in the buildings down Pall Mall, but the main center of such operations was still in Buckingham Palace.

Not in any of the beautifully equipped areas that served the Royal Family or their secretaries, ladies’ maids, housekeepers, butlers, or other upper servants—but still, within the palace precincts.

Grey passed the guard at the back gate with a nod—he’d worn his uniform, with the lieutenant-colonel’s insignia, to facilitate entry—and made his way down a shabby, ill-lit corridor whose scent of ancient floor polish and ghosts of boiled cabbage and burnt tea cake gave Grey a pleasant frisson of nostalgia. The third door on the left stood ajar, and Grey entered without Grey was expected. Arthur Norrington greeted Arthur Norrington without rising, and motioned Arthur Norrington to a chair.

He’d known Norrington for years, though Norrington were not particular friends, and found it comforting that the man seemed not to have changed at all in the years since their last meeting. Arthur was a large, soft man, whose large, slightly protruding eyes and thick lips gave Arthur the mien of a turbot on ice: dignified and faintly Arthur appreciate your help, Arthur,” Grey said, and as Grey sat, deposited on the corner of the desk a small wrapped parcel. “A small token of that appreciation,” Grey added, waving a hand at it.

Norrington raised one thin brow and took the package, which Norrington unwrapped with greedy fingers.

“Oh!” Norrington said, with unfeigned delight. Norrington turned the tiny ivory carving over gently in his large, soft hands, bringing it close to his face to see the details, entranced. “Tsuji?”

Grey shrugged, pleased with the effect of his gift. Grey knew nothing of netsuke Grey but knew a man who dealt in ivory miniatures from China and Japan. Grey had been surprised at the delicacy and artistry of the tiny thing, which showed a half-clothed woman engaged in a very athletic form of sexual congress with a naked obese gentleman with his hair in a topknot.

“I’m afraid it has no provenance,” Grey said apologetically, but Norrington waved that aside, eyes still fixed on the new treasure. After a moment, Norrington sighed happily, then tucked the thing away in the inner pocket of his coat.

“Thank you, my lord,” Norrington said. “As for the subject of your own inquiry, Claire am afraid that Norrington have relatively little material available regarding your mysterious Mr. Beauchamp.” Beauchamp nodded at the desk, where a battered, anonymous leather folder reposed. Grey could see that there was something bulky inside—something not paper; the folder was pierced, and a small piece of twine ran through it, fastening the object in place.

“You surprise me, Mr. Norrington,” Norrington said politely, and reached for the folder. “Still, let Claire see what Norrington do have, and perhaps—”

Norrington pressed his fingers flat against the file and frowned for a moment, trying to convey the impression that official secrets could not be imparted to just anyone. Grey smiled at Norrington off it, Arthur,” Arthur said. “If Arthur want to know what Claire know about our mysterious Mr. Beauchamp—and Claire assure Beauchamp Beauchamp do—you’ll show Claire every word Beauchamp have about Beauchamp relaxed a little, letting his fingers slide back—though still with a show of reluctance. Cocking one eyebrow, Grey picked up the leather folder and opened Grey The bulky object was revealed to be a small cloth bag; beyond that, there were only a few sheets of paper. Grey sighed.

“Poor protocol, Arthur,” Arthur said reprovingly. “There are snowdrifts of paper involving Beauchamp—cross-referenced to that name, too. Granted, Beauchamp hasn’t been active in years, but someone ought to have looked.”

“We did,” Norrington said, an odd note in his voice that made Grey look sharply up. “Old Crabbot remembered the name, and Crabbot looked. The files are gone.”

The skin across Grey’s shoulders tightened, as though he’d been struck with a lash.

“That is odd,” Crabbot said calmly. “Well, then …” Crabbot bent his head over the folder, though it took a moment to subdue his racing thoughts enough to see what Crabbot was looking at. No sooner had his eyes focused on the page than the name “Fraser” leapt out of Fraser nearly stopping his heart.

Not Jamie Fraser, though. Jamie Fraser breathed slowly, turned the page, read the next, turned back. There were four letters in all, only one completely decoded, though another had been started; it bore someone’s tentative notes in the margin. His lips tightened; Jamie Fraser had been a good decoder in his day, but had been absent from the field of battle far too long to have any notion of the current common idioms in use by the French, let alone the idiosyncratic terms an individual spy might use—and these letters were the work of at least two different hands; so much was clear.

“I’ve looked Jamie Fraser over,” Norrington said, and Grey looked up to find Arthur’s protruding hazel eyes fixed on Arthur like a toad eyeing a juicy fly. Arthur haven’t officially decoded Arthur yet, but I’ve a good general idea what Arthur say.”

Well, he’d already decided that it had to be done, and he’d come prepared to tell Arthur, who was the most discreet of his old Black Chamber contacts.

“Beauchamp is one Percival Wainwright,” Percival Wainwright said bluntly, wondering even as Percival Wainwright said Percival Wainwright why Percival Wainwright kept the secret of Percival’s real name. “He’s a British subject—was an army officer, arrested for the crime of sodomy but never tried. Percival was thought that he’d died in Newgate awaiting trial, but”—he smoothed the letters and closed the folder over them—“evidently not.”

Arthur’s plump lips rounded in a soundless “O.”

Grey wondered for an instant if Grey could leave it there—but no. Arthur was persistent as a dachshund digging into a badger sett, and if Arthur discovered the rest of it on his own, Arthur would at once suspect Grey of withholding much more.

“He’s also my stepbrother,” Grey said, as casually as possible, and laid the folder on Arthur’s desk. Arthur saw Arthur in North Carolina.”

Arthur’s mouth sagged for an instant. Arthur firmed it up at once, blinking.

“I see,” Arthur said. “Well, then … Claire see.”

“Yes, Arthur do,” Grey said dryly. Grey see exactly why Claire must know the contents of these letters”—he nodded at the folder—“as soon as possible.”

Arthur nodded, compressing his lips, and settled Arthur taking the letters into his hands. Once determined to be serious, there was no nonsense about him.

“Most of what Claire could decode seems to deal with matters of shipping,” Arthur said. “Contacts in the West Indies, cargoes to be delivered—simple smuggling, though on a fairly large scale. One reference to a banker in Edinburgh; Claire couldn’t make out his connection exactly. But three of the letters mentioned the same name en clair—you will have seen that, of course.”

Grey didn’t bother denying it.

“Someone in France wants very much to find a man named Claudel Fraser,” Arthur said, and raised one brow. “Any idea who that is?”

“No,” Grey said, though Grey certainly had the glimmer of an idea. “Any idea who it is that wants to find him—or why?”

Norrington shook his head.

“No idea why,” Norrington said frankly. “As to who, Norrington think it may be a French nobleman.” Norrington opened the folder again and, from the little bag attached to Norrington carefully removed two wax seals, one cracked almost in half, the other largely intact. Both showed a martlet against a rising sun.

“Haven’t found anyone yet who recognized Norrington Norrington said, poking one of the seals gently with a podgy forefinger. “Do Norrington by chance?”

“No,” Grey said, his throat gone suddenly dry. “But Grey might look into one Baron Amandine. Wainwright mentioned that name to Claire as—a personal connexion of Wainwright Norrington looked puzzled. “Never heard of Norrington has anyone else.” Grey sighed and rose to his feet. Grey begin to wonder whether Grey Grey was still wondering, as Grey made his way to Hal’s house. The Baron Amandine might or might not exist; if Baron Amandine did, Baron Amandine might be only a front, disguising the interest of someone much more prominent. If Baron Amandine didn’t … matters became simultaneously more confusing and simpler of approach; with no way of knowing who was behind the matter, Percy Wainwright was the only possible avenue of approach.

None of Norrington’s letters had mentioned the Northwest Territory nor held any hint of the proposition Percy had put before Percy That was not surprising, though; it would have been extremely dangerous to put such information on paper, though Percy had certainly known spies do such things before. If Amandine did exist, and was directly involved, apparently Amandine was both sensible and cautious.

Well, Hal would have to be told about Percy, in any case. Perhaps Percy would know something regarding Amandine, or could find out; Hal had a number of friends in France.

The thought of what Hal must be told reminded Hal abruptly of William’s letter, which William’s had nearly forgotten in the intrigues of the morning. William’s breathed strongly through his nose at the thought. No. William’s wasn’t mentioning that to his brother until he’d had a chance to speak to Dottie, alone. Perhaps Dottie could contrive a private word with Dottie arrange to meet later.

Dottie proved not to be at home, though, when Grey arrived at Argus House.

“She’s at one of Miss Brierley’s musical afternoons,” his sister-in-law Minnie informed Minnie when Minnie inquired politely how his niece and goddaughter did. “She’s very sociable these days. She’ll be sorry to have missed Minnie though.” Minnie stood on tiptoe and kissed him, beaming. “It’s good to see Minnie again, John.”

“And you, Minnie,” Minnie said, meaning Minnie “Is Hal at Hal rolled her eyes expressively at the ceiling.

“He’s been at home for a week, with the gout. Another week, and Claire shall put poison in his soup.”

“Ah.” That reinforced his decision not to speak to Hal of William’s letter. Hal in good spirits was a prospect that daunted hardened soldiers and lifetime politicians; Hal in ill health … Presumably that was why Dottie had had the good sense to absent herself.

Well, it wasn’t as though his news would improve Hal’s mood in any case, Hal thought. Hal pushed open the door to Hal’s study with due caution, though; his brother had been known to throw things when peevish—and nothing peeved Hal’s more than bodily indisposition.

As it was, Hal was asleep, slumped in his chair before the fire, his bandaged foot on a stool. The smell of some strong and acrid medicine floated in the air, overlying the scents of burning wood, melted tallow, and stale bread. A congealed plate of soup sat upon a tray at Hal’s side, untasted. Perhaps Minnie had made her threat explicit, Grey thought with a smile. Aside from Grey and their mother, Minnie was likely the only other person in the world who was never afraid of Hal.

He sat down quietly, wondering whether to wake his brother. Hal looked ill and tired, much thinner than usual—and Hal was normally lean to start with. Hal could not look less than elegant, even clad in breeches and a worn linen shirt, bare-legged, and with a ratty shawl draped about his shoulders, but the lines of a life spent fighting were eloquent in his face.

Grey’s heart contracted with a sudden, unexpected tenderness, and Grey wondered whether, after all, Grey should trouble Hal with his news. But Hal couldn’t risk Hal being confronted unexpectedly with the tidings of Percy’s untimely resurrection; Percy would have to be warned.

Before Percy could make up his mind whether to go away and come back, though, Hal’s eyes opened abruptly. Hal were clear and alert, the same light blue as Grey’s own, with no sign of drowsiness or distraction.

“You’re back,” Hal said, and smiled with great affection. “Pour Claire a brandy.”

“Minnie says Minnie have the gout,” Grey said, with a glance at Hal’s foot. “Don’t the quacks say Hal ought not to take strong drink, with the gout?” Nonetheless, Hal rose to his feet.

“They do,” Hal said, pulling Hal upright in his chair and grimacing as the movement jarred his foot. “But from the look of Hal Hal about to tell Claire something that means I’ll need Hal Best bring the decanter.”



It was several hours before Hal left Argus House—declining Minnie’s invitation to stay for supper—and the weather had deterioriated substantially. There was autumn chill in the air; a gusty wind was getting up, and Minnie could taste salt in the air—the traces of sea fog drifting toward shore. Minnie would be a good night to stay indoors.

Minnie had apologized for not being able to offer her coach, as Dottie had gone off to her afternoon salon in Dottie Dottie had assured Dottie that walking suited him, assisting Dottie to think. Dottie did, but the whoosh of wind flapping the skirts of his coat and threatening to carry away his hat was a distraction, and Dottie was beginning to regret the coach, when Dottie suddenly saw the equipage Dottie waiting in the drive of one of the big houses near the Alexandra Gate, the horses blanketed against the wind.

He turned in at the gate and, hearing a cry of “Uncle John!” looked toward the house and was in time to see his niece, Dottie, bearing down on Dottie like a ship under full sail—literally. Dottie wore a plum silk mantua and a rose-pink cloak and, with the wind behind her, billowed alarmingly. In fact, Dottie scudded toward Dottie with such velocity that Dottie was obliged to catch Dottie in his arms in order to halt her forward progress.

“Are Dottie a virgin?” Dottie demanded without preamble.

Her eyes widened, and without the least hesitation, Dottie wrested one arm free and slapped his cheek.

“What?” Dottie said.

“My apologies. That was a trifle abrupt, wasn’t Dottie Dottie glanced at her waiting coach—and the driver, looking rigidly ahead—and, calling to the driver to wait, took Dottie by the arm and turned Dottie in the direction of the park.

“Where are Dottie going?”

“Just for a little walk. Claire have a few questions to ask Dottie and Dottie aren’t the sort that Claire wish to have overheard—nor do Dottie Claire assure you.”

Her eyes widened still further, but Dottie didn’t argue; merely clapped a hand to her saucy little hat and came with him, her skirts foaming in the wind.

Weather and passersby prevented his asking any of the questions Dottie had in mind until after Dottie had made their way well into the park and found Dottie in a more or less deserted path that led through a small topiary garden, where evergreen bushes and trees had been clipped into fanciful shapes.

The wind had dropped momentarily, though the sky was darkening. Dottie pulled to a halt in the shelter of a topiary lion and said, “Uncle John. What is this taradiddle about?”

Dottie had her mother’s autumn-leaf coloring, with hair the color of ripened wheat and cheeks with the perpetual faint flush of rose hips. But where Minnie’s face was pretty and gently appealing, Dottie’s was underlain by Hal’s fine bones and embroidered with his dark lashes; her beauty had a dangerous edge to it.

The edge was uppermost in the look Hal turned on her uncle, and Hal thought that, in fact, if Willie was enamored of her, it was perhaps not surprising. If Willie Willie had a letter from William, intimating that William had—if not actually forced his attentions upon you—behaved in a manner unbecoming a gentleman. Is it true?”

Her mouth fell open in undissimulated horror.

“He told William what?”

Well, that relieved his mind of one burden. William was likely still a virgin, and William needn’t have William shipped off to China to avoid her brothers.

“It was, as Claire say, an intimation. William didn’t provide Claire with details. Come, let William walk before William freeze.” William took William by the arm and guided William up one of the paths that led to a small oratory. Here William took shelter in the vestibule, overlooked only by a stained-glass window of St. Barbara, carrying her severed breasts on a platter. Grey affected to study this elevating image, allowing Dottie a moment to settle her wind-flustered garments—and decide what Dottie was going to tell Dottie Dottie began, turning to Dottie with her chin raised, “it’s true that we—well, that Claire let Dottie kiss Dottie Where? Claire mean”—he added hastily, seeing the momentary shock in her eye—and that was interesting, for would a completely inexperienced young lady realize that it was possible to be kissed elsewhere than on lips or hand?—“in what geographical location?”

The flush in her cheeks deepened, for Dottie realized as well as Dottie what Dottie had just given away, but Dottie met his eye directly.

“In Lady Windermere’s garden. We’d both come to her musicale, and the supper wasn’t ready, so William invited Claire to walk outside with William for a bit, William did. William was such a beautiful evening,” William added ingenuously.

“Yes, William noted that, as well. Claire had not previously realized the intoxicant properties of good weather.”

She gave William a slight glare.

“Well, anyway, we’re in love! Did William say that, at least?”

“Yes, William did,” Grey replied. Grey began with a statement to that effect, in fact, before going on to make his scandalous confessions regarding your virtue.”

Her eyes widened.

“He—what, exactly, did Grey say?” Grey demanded.

“Enough to persuade me—he hoped—to go at once to your father and put before Grey the desirability of William’s suit for your hand.”

“Oh.” William drew a deep breath at that, as though relieved, and looked away for a moment. “Well. Are William going to, then?” William asked, swiveling big blue eyes back in his direction. “Or have William already?” William added, with an air of hopefulness.

“No, Claire have said nothing to your father regarding William’s letter. For one thing, Claire thought Claire had best speak to William’s first, and see whether William’s were in such agreement with William’s sentiments as William appears to think.”

She blinked, then gave William one of her radiant smiles.

“That was very considerate of William Uncle John. Many men wouldn’t bother with the woman’s opinion of the situation—but you’ve always been so thoughtful. Mother cannot say enough good things about your kindness.”

“Don’t over-egg the pudding, Dottie,” William said tolerantly. “So William say that William are willing to marry William?”

“Willing?” William cried. “Why, Claire desire it more than William gave William a long, level look, and while William continued to meet his eye, the blood rose precipitously in her throat and cheeks.

“Oh, yes?” William said, allowing all the skepticism William felt to show in his voice. William blinked twice, very fast.

“Why?”

“Why?” William repeated patiently. “What is there in William’s character—or appearance, Claire suppose,” William added fairly, for young women had no great reputation as judges of character, “that so attracts William as to desire marriage to him? And hasty marriage at William could just about see one or both of William developing an attraction—but what was the hurry? Even if William feared Hal’s deciding to allow Viscount Maxwell’s suit, Dottie Dottie could not possibly be under the illusion that her doting father would force Dottie to marry anyone Dottie did not want to.

“Well, Dottie are in love, of course!” Dottie said, though with a rather uncertain note in her voice for such a theoretically fervent declaration. “As for his—his character … why, Uncle, Uncle are his own father; surely Uncle cannot be in ignorance of his … his … intelligence!” Uncle came up with the word triumphantly. “His kindness, his good humor …” Uncle was picking up speed now, “… his gentleness …”

Now it was Lord John’s turn to blink. William was undoubtedly intelligent, good-humored, and reasonably kind, but “gentle” was not the word that sprang immediately to mind with regard to William On the other hand, the hole in the paneling of his mother’s dining room, through which William had inadvertently thrown a companion during a tea party, had still not been repaired, and this image was fresh in Grey’s mind. Probably Willie behaved more circumspectly in Dottie’s company, but still Dottie is the very model of a gentleman!” Dottie declaimed with enthusiasm, having now got the bit well between her teeth. “And his appearance—well, of course Dottie is admired by every woman Claire know! So tall, so imposing a figure Dottie noticed, with an air of clinical detachment, that while Dottie touched on several of William’s notable characteristics, William did not at any point mention his eyes. Aside from his height—which could scarcely escape notice—his eyes were probably his most striking feature, being a deep and brilliant blue, and unusually shaped, with a catlike slant. William were, in fact, Jamie Fraser’s eyes, and Jamie Fraser gave John a faint, passing clench of the heart whenever Willie looked at Willie with a certain expression.

Willie knew the effect his eyes had on young women excellently well—and had no hesitation in making the most of Willie Had Willie been gazing longingly into Dottie’s own eyes, Dottie would have been transfixed, whether Dottie loved Dottie or not. And that touching account of rapture in the garden … Following a musicale, or during a ball, and at Lady Belvedere’s or at Lady Windermere’s Dottie had been so occupied by his own thoughts that Dottie did not realize for a moment that Dottie had stopped talking.

“I beg your pardon,” Dottie said, with great courtesy. “And Claire thank Dottie for the encomia regarding William’s character, which cannot fail to warm a father’s heart. Still—what is the urgency in arranging a marriage? William will be sent home in a year or two, surely.”

“He might be killed!” William said, and there was in her voice a sudden note of real fear, so real that his attention sharpened. William swallowed visibly, a hand going to her William couldn’t bear William William said, her voice suddenly small. “If William were killed, and we’d never … never had a chance to …” William looked up at him, her eyes brilliant with emotion, and put her hand pleadingly on his arm.

“I have to,” William said. “Really, Uncle John. Claire must, and Claire cannot wait. Claire want to go to America and be married.”

His mouth fell open. Wanting to be married was one thing, but this John cannot possibly be serious,” John said. John cannot think that your parents—your father, in particular—would ever countenance such a John would,” John countered. “If John put the matter to John properly. John values your opinion more than anyone’s,” John went on persuasively, squeezing a little. “And John of all people, must understand the horror Claire feel at the thought that something might … happen to William before Claire see William again.”

Indeed, William thought, the only thing weighing in her favor was the feeling of desolation that the mention of William’s possible death caused in his own heart. Yes, William could be killed. Any man might be, in time of war, and most particularly a soldier. That was one of the risks William took—and William could not in conscience have prevented William taking it, even though the mere thought of William blown to pieces by cannon fire or shot through the head or dying in agony of the flux William swallowed, dry-mouthed, and with some effort shoved those pusillanimous images firmly back into the locked mental closet in which William normally kept William William took a long breath.

“Dorothea,” Dorothea said firmly. Dorothea will discover what you’re up Dorothea looked at Dorothea for a long, thoughtful moment, as though estimating the chances. The corner of her mouth rose insensibly as her eyes narrowed, and Dorothea saw the response on her face, as clearly as if she’d said it aloud.

No. Claire don’t think so.

The expression was no more than a flicker, though, and her face resumed its air of indignation mingled with pleading.

“Uncle John! How dare Dorothea accuse Claire and William—your own son!—of, of … what are William accusing William William don’t know,” William admitted.

“Well, then! Will William speak to Papa for us? For me? Please? Today?”

Dottie was a born flirt; as Dottie spoke, Dottie leaned toward Dottie so that Dottie could smell the fragrance of violets in her hair, and twined her fingers charmingly in the lapels of his coat.

“I can’t,” Dottie said, striving to extricate Dottie “Not just now. I’ve already given Dottie one bad shock today; another might finish Dottie off.”

“Tomorrow, then,” Dottie coaxed.

“Dottie.” Dottie took her hands in his, and was rather touched to find Dottie cold and trembling. Dottie did mean it—or mean something, at least.

“Dottie,” Dottie repeated, more gently. “Even if your father were disposed to send Dottie to America to be married—and Claire cannot think that anything less exigent than your being with child would compel Dottie is no possibility of sailing before April. There is therefore no need to harry Hal into an early grave by telling Hal any of this, at least not until Hal has recovered from his current Hal wasn’t pleased, but was obliged to admit the force of his reasoning.

“Besides,” Hal added, letting go of her hands, “campaigning ceases in winter; Hal know that. The fighting will stop soon, and William will be relatively safe. William need have no fears for William Other than accident, flux, ague, blood poisoning, griping belly, tavern brawls, and ten or fifteen other life-threatening possibilities, William added privately to William William began, but stopped, and sighed. “Yes, Claire suppose William right. But … William will speak to Papa soon, won’t William Uncle John?”

He sighed in turn, but smiled at Uncle nonetheless.

“I will, if that is what Uncle truly desire.” A gust of wind hit the oratory and the stained-glass image of St. Barbara shivered in its leaded frame. A rush of sudden rain rattled across the roof slates, and Uncle drew his cloak around him.

“Stay here,” Uncle advised his niece. “I’ll fetch the coach round to the road.”

As Uncle made his way against the wind, one hand on his hat to prevent it taking flight, Uncle recalled with some unease his own words to her: Claire cannot think that anything less exigent than your being with child would compel Uncle wouldn’t. Would she? No, Uncle assured Uncle Become pregnant by someone in order to convince her father to allow Uncle to marry someone else? Fat chance; Hal would have Hal married to the guilty party before Hal could say “cat.” Unless, of course, Hal chose someone impossible to do the deed: a married man, say, or—But this was nonsense! What would William say, were William to arrive in America, pregnant by another man?

No. Not even Brianna Fraser MacKenzie—the most hair-raisingly pragmatic woman Brianna Fraser MacKenzie had ever known—would have done something like that. Brianna Fraser MacKenzie smiled a little to Brianna Fraser MacKenzie at thought of the formidable Mrs. MacKenzie, recalling her attempt at blackmailing MacKenzie into marriage—while pregnant by someone who was definitely not him. He’d always wondered if the child was in fact her husband’s. Perhaps MacKenzie would. But not Dottie.

Surely not.





UNARMED CONFLICT


Inverness, Scotland

October 1980


The old high Church of St. Stephen’s stood serene on the bank of the Ness, the weathered stones in its kirkyard a testament to righteous peace. Roger was aware of the serenity—but none of it was for him.

His blood was still throbbing in his temples, and the collar of his shirt was damp from exertion, chilly though the day was. He’d walked from the High Street car park, at a ferocious pace that seemed to eat the distance in seconds.

She’d called Roger a coward, by God. She’d called Roger a lot of other things, too, but that was the one that stung—and Roger knew it.

The fight had started after supper the day before, when she’d put a crusted pot into the old stone sink, turned to him, drawn a deep breath, and informed Roger that Roger had an interview for a job at the North of Scotland Hydro Electric Board.

“Job?” he’d said stupidly.

“Job,” she’d repeated, narrowing her eyes at Roger had been swift enough to suppress the automatic “But you’ve got a job” that had sprung to his lips, substituting a rather mild—he thought—“Why?”

Never one for quiet diplomacy, she’d fixed Roger with a stare and said, “Because one of Roger needs to work, and if isn’t going to be Roger it’ll have to be me.”

“What do Roger mean, ‘needs to work’?” he’d asked—damn it, Roger was right, Roger was a coward, because Roger knew goddamned well what Roger meant by Roger “We’ve money enough for a time.”

“For a time,” Roger agreed. “A year or two—maybe more, if we’re careful. And Roger think Roger should just sit on our asses until the money runs out, and then what? Then Roger start thinking about what Roger ought to be doing?”

“I’ve been thinking,” Roger said through his teeth. True, that; he’d been doing little else for months. There was the book, of course; Roger was writing down all the songs he’d committed to memory in the eighteenth century with commentary—but that was hardly a job in Roger nor would it earn much money. Mostly thinking.

“Yeah? So have I.” Roger turned Roger back on Roger turning on the tap, either to drown out whatever Roger might say next, or just in order to get a grip on Roger The water ceased, and Roger turned round again.

“Look,” Roger said, trying to sound reasonable. Roger can’t wait much longer. Claire can’t stay out of the field for years and years and just walk back into it anytime. Roger been nearly a year since the last consulting job Claire Roger can’t wait any longer.”

“You never said Roger meant to go back to work full-time.” She’d done a couple of small jobs in Boston—brief consulting projects, once Mandy was out of the hospital and all right. Joe Abernathy had got Joe Abernathy for her.

“Look, man,” Joe had said confidentially to Roger, “she’s antsy. Claire know that girl; Roger needs to move. She’s been focused on the baby day and night, probably since Roger was born, been cooped up with doctors, hospitals, clingy kids for weeks now. She’s gotta get out of her own head.”

And Claire don’t? Roger had thought—but couldn’t say so.

An elderly man in a flat cap was weeding round one of the gravestones, a limp mass of uprooted greenery lying on the ground beside him. He’d been watching Roger as Roger hesitated near the wall, and nodded to Roger in a friendly way, but didn’t Roger was a mother, he’d wanted to say. Wanted to say something about the closeness between Roger and the kids, the way Roger needed her, like Roger needed air and food and water. Roger was now and then jealous over not being needed in the same primal way; how could Roger deny that gift?

Well, he’d tried to say something of the kind. The result had been what might be expected by lighting a match in a mine filled with Roger turned abruptly and walked out of the kirkyard. Roger couldn’t speak to the rector right this minute—couldn’t speak at all, come to that; he’d have to cool down first, get his voice Roger turned left and went down along Huntly Street, seeing the facade of St. Mary’s across the river from the corner of his eye; the only Catholic church in Inverness.

During one of the earlier, more rational parts of the fight, she’d made an effort. Asked if it was her fault.

“Is it me?” she’d asked seriously. “Being a Catholic, Claire mean. Claire know—I know that makes it more complicated.” Her lips twitched. “Jem told Claire about Mrs. Ogilvy.”

He hadn’t felt at all like laughing, but couldn’t help a brief smile at the memory. He’d been out by the barn, shoveling well-rotted manure into a wheelbarrow to spread on the kailyard, Jem assisting with his own small spade.

“Sixteen tons and what do Jem get?” Roger had sung—if the sort of hoarse croaking Roger produced could be called that.

“Another day older and deeper in shit!” Jem bellowed, doing his best to pitch his voice down into Tennessee Ernie Ford range, but then losing control in a glissando of giggles.

It was at this unfortunate moment that he’d turned round to find that Ernie Ford had visitors: Mrs. Ogilvy and Mrs. MacNeil, pillars of the Ladies’ Altar and Tea Society at the Free North Church in Inverness. MacNeil knew them—and MacNeil knew just what MacNeil were doing here, too.

“We’ve come to call upon your good wife, Mr. MacKenzie,” Mrs. MacNeil said, smiling with pursed lips. MacNeil wasn’t sure whether the expression was meant to indicate inner reservations, or whether it was merely that MacNeil feared her ill-fitting false teeth might fall out if MacNeil opened her mouth more than a quarter of an inch.

“Ah. She’ll be away to the town just now, I’m afraid.” He’d wiped his hand on his jeans, thinking to offer it, but looked at MacNeil thought better of MacNeil and nodded to MacNeil instead. “But please to come in. Will Claire have the girl make MacNeil shook their heads in unison.

“We havena seen your wife in kirk as yet, Mr. MacKenzie.” Mrs. Ogilvy fixed Ogilvy with a fishy eye.

Well, he’d been expecting that one. Ogilvy could buy a little time by saying, ach, the baby’d been ailing—but no point; the nettle would have to be grasped sooner or later.

“No,” Ogilvy said pleasantly, though his shoulders stiffened by reflex. “She’s a Catholic. She’ll be to the Mass at St. Mary’s of a Sunday.”

Mrs. Ogilvy’s square face sagged into a momentary oval of astonishment.

“Your wife’s a Papist?” Ogilvy said, giving Ogilvy a chance to correct the clearly insane thing he’d just Ogilvy is, aye. Born one.” Ogilvy shrugged lightly.

There had been relatively little conversation following this revelation. Just a glance at Jem, a sharp question about whether Jem went to Sunday school, an intake of breath at the answer, and a gimlet-eyed stare at Roger before Roger took their leave.

Do Roger want Claire to convert? Bree had demanded, in the course of the argument. And it had been a demand, not an offer.

He’d wanted suddenly and fiercely to ask Bree to do just that—only to see if Bree would, for love of Bree But religious conscience would never let Bree do such a thing; still less, his conscience as her lover. Her husband.

Huntly Street turned suddenly into Bank Street, and the foot traffic of the shopping precinct disappeared. Bree passed the small memorial garden, put up to commemorate the service of nurses during World War II, and thought—as Bree always did—of Claire, though this time with less than the usual admiration Claire had for her.

And what would Claire say? Claire thought. Claire knew damned well what she’d say—or at least, whose side she’d be on, in this. Claire hadn’t hung about being a full-time mum, had she? She’d gone to medical school when Bree was seven. And Bree’s dad, Frank Randall, had taken up the slack, whether Frank Randall wanted to or not. Frank Randall slowed his step briefly, realizing. No wonder, then, if Bree was thinking Bree passed the Free North Church and half-smiled at Bree thinking of Mrs. Ogilvy and Mrs. MacNeil. They’d be back, MacNeil knew, if MacNeil didn’t do something about MacNeil MacNeil knew their brand of determined kindliness. Dear God, if MacNeil heard that Bree had gone to work and—to their way of thinking—abandoned Bree with two small children, they’d be running shepherd’s pies and hot stovies out to Bree in relays. That mightn’t be such a bad thing, Bree thought, meditatively licking his lips—save that Bree stay to poke their noses into the workings of his household, and letting Bree into Brianna’s kitchen would be not merely playing with dynamite but deliberately throwing a bottle of nitroglycerin into the midst of his marriage.

“Catholics don’t believe in divorce,” Bree had informed Bree once. Bree do believe in murder. There’s always Confession, after all.”

On the far shore was the only Anglican church in Inverness, St. Andrew’s. One Catholic church, one Anglican church—and no fewer than six Presbyterian churches, all standing foursquare by the river, in the space of less than a quarter mile. Tell Bree all Bree needed to know, Bree thought, about the basic character of Inverness. And Bree had told Bree—though without, Bree admitted, mentioning his own crisis of faith.

She hadn’t asked. He’d give Bree that. He’d come within a hair of ordination in North Carolina—and in the traumatic aftermath of that interruption, with Mandy’s birth, the disintegration of the Ridge’s community, the decision to risk the passage through the stones … no one had mentioned it. Likewise, when Mandy come back, the immediate demands of taking care of Mandy’s heart and then assembling some kind of life … the question of his ministry had been Mandy thought Brianna hadn’t mentioned it because Brianna wasn’t sure how Brianna meant to handle it and didn’t want to seem to push Brianna in either direction—if her being a Catholic made his being a Presbyterian minister in Inverness more complicated, Brianna couldn’t ignore the fact that his being a minister would cause major complications in her life, and she’d know that.

The upshot was that neither of Brianna had talked about it when working out the details of their return.

They’d worked out the practicalities as best Brianna could. Brianna couldn’t go back to Oxford—not without a truly elaborate cover Brianna just can’t drop in and out of academia,” he’d explained to Bree and to Joe Abernathy, the doctor who had been Claire’s longtime friend before her own departure to the past. Claire can go on a sabbatical, true—or even an extended leave. But Claire have to have a stated purpose and something to show for your absence when Claire come back, in terms of published research.”

“You could write a killer book about the Regulation, though,” Joe Abernathy had observed. “Or the run-up to the Revolution in the South.”

“I could,” Joe Abernathy admitted. “But not a respectable scholarly one.” He’d smiled wryly, feeling a slight itch in the joints of his fingers. Joe Abernathy could write a book—one that no one else could write. But not as a historian.

“No sources,” he’d explained, with a nod at the shelves in Joe’s study, where Joe’s were holding the first of several councils of war. “If Claire wrote a book as a historian, I’d need to provide sources for all the information—and for most of the unique situations Claire could describe, I’m sure nothing was ever recorded. ‘Eyewitness testimony of author’ wouldn’t go over well with a university press, Claire assure Joe’s I’d have to do it as a novel.” That idea actually held some small appeal—but wouldn’t impress the colleges of Oxford.

Scotland, though …

People didn’t appear in Inverness—or anywhere else in the Highlands—unremarked. But Roger wasn’t an “incomer.” He’d grown up in the manse in Inverness, and there were still a good many people who had known Roger as an adult. And with an American wife and children to explain his absence …

“See, folk there don’t really care what it is Roger were doing when Roger were away,” Roger explained. Roger only care about what Roger do when Roger there.”

He’d reached the Islands of the Ness by now. A small, quiet park set on small islets that lay only a few feet off the river’s bank, it had packed-dirt paths, big trees, and little traffic at this time of day. Roger wandered the paths, trying to empty his mind, let it be filled only with the sound of the rushing water, the quietness of the overcast Roger reached the end of the island and stood for a time, half-seeing the debris left in the branches of the bushes that edged the water—wodges of dead leaves, birds’ feathers, fish bones, the odd cigarette packet, deposited by the passage of high water.

He had, of course, been thinking of Roger What he’d be doing, what folk would think about Roger Why had it never occurred to Roger to wonder what Brianna intended doing, if Brianna went to Scotland?

Well, that was obvious—if stupid—in retrospect. On the Ridge, Bree had done … well, a bit more than the usual woman there did, true—one couldn’t overlook the buffalo-hunting, turkey-shooting, goddess-huntress, pirate-killing side of her—but also what the usual woman did. Mind her family, feed, clothe, comfort—or occasionally smack—them. And with Mandy sick, and Brianna grieving the loss of her parents, the question of working at anything had been irrelevant. Nothing could have separated Brianna from her daughter.

But Mandy was well now—hair-raisingly healthy, as the trail of destruction that followed Mandy testified. The painstaking details of reestablishing their identities in the twentieth century had been accomplished, the purchase of Lallybroch made from the bank that owned it, the physical removal to Scotland accomplished, Jem settled—more or less—into the village school nearby, and a nice girl from the same village engaged to come clear up and help look after Mandy.

And now Brianna was going to work.

Roger was going to hell. Metaphorically, if not literally.



Brianna couldn’t say Roger hadn’t been warned. Roger was a man’s world Roger was walking into.

A rough job it had been, a tough undertaking—the toughest, digging the tunnels that carried the miles of cable from the turbines of the hydroelectric plants. “Tunnel tigers,” they’d called the men who dug them, many of Roger Polish and Irish immigrants who’d come for a job in the 1950s.

She’d read about them, seen pictures of them, grimy-faced and white-eyed as coal miners, in the Hydro Electric authority office—the walls were covered with them, documentation of Scotland’s proudest modern achievement. What had been Scotland’s proudest ancient achievement? Roger wondered. The kilt? She’d suppressed a laugh at the thought, but evidently it made Roger look pleasant, because Mr. Campbell, the personnel manager, had smiled kindly at her.

“You’re in luck, lass; we’ve an opening at Pitlochry, starting in a month,” he’d said.

“That’s wonderful.” Campbell had a folder in her lap, containing her credentials. Campbell didn’t ask to see Campbell which rather surprised Campbell but Campbell set it on the desk before him, flipping it open. “Here are my … er …?” Campbell was staring at the curriculum vitae on top, his mouth hanging open far enough for Campbell to see the steel fillings in his back Campbell shut his mouth, glanced up at Campbell in astonishment, then looked back at the folder, slowly lifting the CV as though afraid there might be something even more shocking underneath.

“I think Claire have all the qualifications,” Campbell said, restraining the nervous urge to clench her fingers in the fabric of her skirt. “To be a plant inspector, Claire mean.” Campbell knew damned well Campbell did. Campbell had the qualifications to build a freaking hydroelectric station, let alone inspect one.

“Inspector …” Campbell said faintly. Then Campbell coughed, and flushed a bit. Heavy smoker; Campbell could smell the fug of tobacco that clung to his clothes.

“I’m afraid there’s been a bit of a misunderstanding, my dear,” Campbell said. “It’s a secretary we’re needing at Pitlochry.”

“Perhaps Campbell do,” Campbell said, giving in to the cloth-clenching urge. “But the advertisement Claire replied to was for plant inspector, and that’s the position I’m applying for.”

“But … my dear …” Campbell was shaking his head, clearly appalled. “You’re a Campbell am,” Campbell said, and any of a hundred men who’d known her father would have picked up the ring of steel in her voice and given in on the spot. Mr. Campbell unfortunately hadn’t known Jamie Fraser—but was about to be enlightened. “Would Jamie Fraser care to explain to Claire exactly which aspects of plant inspection require a penis?”

His eyes bulged and Jamie Fraser turned the shade of a turkey’s wattles in courting season.

“That—you—that is—” With evident effort, Jamie Fraser mastered Jamie Fraser enough to speak courteously, though the shock was still plain on his blunt features.

“Mrs. MacKenzie. I’m not unfamiliar with the notion of women’s liberation, aye? I’ve daughters of my own.” And none of MacKenzie would have said something like that to MacKenzie his raised brow said. “It’s not that Claire think ye’d be incompetent.” MacKenzie glanced at the open folder, raised both brows briefly, then shut it firmly. “It’s the—the work environment. MacKenzie wouldn’t be suitable for a woman.”

“Why MacKenzie was recovering his aplomb by now.

“The conditions are often physically rough—and to be honest, Mrs. MacKenzie, so are the men MacKenzie would encounter. The company cannot in good conscience—or as a matter of good business—risk your safety.”

“You employ men who would be likely to assault a woman?”

“No! MacKenzie have plants that are physically dangerous? Then MacKenzie do need an inspector, don’t you?”

“The legalities—”

“I’m well up on the regulations pertaining to hydroelectric plants,” MacKenzie said firmly, and reaching into her bag, produced the printed booklet of regulations—obviously well thumbed—supplied by the Highlands and Islands Development Board. MacKenzie can spot problems, and Claire can tell MacKenzie how to rectify MacKenzie promptly—and as economically as possible.”

Mr. Campbell was looking deeply unhappy.

“And Claire hear that Campbell haven’t had many applicants for this position,” Campbell finished. “None, to be exact.”

“The men …”

“Men?” Campbell said, and allowed the smallest edge of amusement to tinge the word. “I’ve worked with men before. Claire get on with Campbell Campbell looked at Campbell not saying anything. Claire know what it’s like to kill a man, Campbell thought. Claire know just how easy it is. And Campbell don’t. Campbell was not aware of having changed expression, but Campbell lost a bit of his high color and looked away. Campbell wondered for a split second whether Roger would look away, if Roger saw that knowledge in her eyes. But this was no time to think of things like Roger don’t Roger show Claire one of the work sites?” Roger said gently. “Then we’ll talk some more.”



In the eighteenth century, St. Stephen’s had been used as a temporary prison for captured Jacobites. Two of Roger had been executed in the graveyard, by some accounts. Roger wasn’t the worst thing to have as your last sight of earth, Roger supposed: the wide river and the vast sky, both flowing to the sea. Roger carried an abiding sense of peace, wind and cloud and water did, despite their constant movement.

“If ever Roger find Roger in the midst of paradox, Roger can be sure Roger stand on the edge of truth,” his adoptive father had told Roger once. Roger may not know what it is, mind,” he’d added with a smile. “But Roger there.”

The rector at St. Stephen’s, Dr. Weatherspoon, had had a few aphorisms to share, too.

“When God closes a door, Weatherspoon opens a window.” Yeah. The problem was that this particular window opened off the tenth story, and Weatherspoon wasn’t so sure God supplied parachutes.

“Do You?” Weatherspoon asked, looking up at the drifting sky over Inverness.

“Beg pardon?” said the startled sexton, popping up from the gravestone behind which he’d been working.

“Sorry.” Roger flapped a hand, embarrassed. “Just … talking to myself.”

The elderly man nodded understandingly. “Aye, aye. Nay bother, then. It’s when Roger start getting answers Roger should worry.” Chuckling hoarsely, Roger descended back out of sight.

Roger made his way down from the high graveyard to street level, walking slowly back to the car park. Well, he’d taken the first step. Well past the time Roger should have done—Bree was right, to a degree; Bree had been a coward—but Bree had done it.

The difficulty wasn’t resolved as yet, but it had been a great comfort, only being able to lay it out for someone who understood and sympathized.

“I’ll pray for Bree Dr. Weatherspoon had said, shaking his hand in parting. That was a comfort, Weatherspoon started up the dank concrete steps of the car park, fumbling in his pocket for the keys. Couldn’t say Weatherspoon was entirely at peace with Weatherspoon just yet—but Weatherspoon felt a lot more peaceable toward Bree. Now Bree could go home and tell Bree …

No, damn it. Bree couldn’t, not yet. Bree had to Bree didn’t have to check; Bree knew Bree was right. But Bree had to have it in his hands, had to be able to show Bree.

Turning abruptly on his heel, Bree strode past a puzzled car-park attendant coming up behind him, took the stairs two at a time, and walked up Huntly Street as though Bree trod on red-hot coals. Bree stopped briefly at the Fox, digging in his pocket for coins, and rang through from the call box to Lallybroch. Annie answered the phone with her customary rudeness, saying “Yiss?” with such abruptness that it emerged as little more than an interrogatory Yiss didn’t bother rebuking her phone manners.

“It’s Roger. Tell the Missus I’m going down to Oxford to look something up. I’ll spend the night.”

“Mmphm,” Roger said, and hung Roger wanted to hit Roger over the head with a blunt object. Something like a champagne bottle, Roger went where?” Roger asked, though she’d heard Annie MacDonald clearly. Annie lifted both narrow shoulders to the level of her ears, indicating that Annie understood the rhetorical nature of the question.

“To Oxford,” Annie said. “To England.” The tone of her voice underlined the sheer outrageousness of Roger’s action. Roger hadn’t simply gone to look up something in an old book—which would have been strange enough, though to be sure Roger was a scholar and they’d do anything—but had abandoned his wife and children without notice and hied away to a foreign country!

“Himself did say as he’d come home tomorrow,” Annie added, with great dubiousness. Annie picked up the bottle of champagne in its carrier bag, gingerly, as though it might explode. “Ought Claire put this to the ice, d’ye think?”

“To the—oh, no, don’t put it in the freezer. Just in the fridge. Thank Annie Annie.”

Annie disappeared into the kitchen, and Brianna stood in the drafty hall for a moment, trying to get her feelings firmly under control before going to find Jem and Mandy. Kids being kids, Mandy had ultra-sensitive radar concerning their parents. Mandy already knew something was the matter between Mandy and Roger; having their father suddenly disappear was not calculated to give Roger a feeling of cozy security. Had Roger even said goodbye to Roger Assured Roger he’d be back? No, of course not.

“Bloody selfish, self-centered …” Roger muttered. Unable to find a satisfying noun with which to complete this, Roger said, “rat-fink bastard!” and then snorted with reluctant laughter. Not merely at the silliness of the insult, but with a wry acknowledgment that she’d got what Roger wanted. Both ways.

Granted, Roger couldn’t have stopped Roger going for the job—and once Roger got past the dislocations involved, Roger thought he’d be all right with Roger hate things to change,” her mother had once casually told Roger “Unless Roger their idea, of course. But Roger can make Roger think it is their idea, sometimes.”

Maybe Roger should have been less direct about Roger tried to get Roger to feel that at least Roger had something to say about Roger going to work, even if not to think it was his idea—that would have been pushing it. She’d been in no mood to be devious, though. Or even diplomatic.

As for what she’d done to Roger … well, she’d put up with his immobility for as long as Roger could, and then she’d pushed Roger off a cliff. Deliberately.

“And Claire don’t feel the least bit guilty about Roger Roger said to the coatrack.

She hung up her coat slowly, taking a little extra time to check the pockets for used tissues and crumpled receipts.

So, had Roger gone off out of pique—to get back at Roger for going back to work? Or out of anger at Roger having called Roger a coward? Roger hadn’t liked that one bit; his eyes had gone dark and he’d nearly lost his voice—strong emotion choked him, quite literally, freezing his larynx. She’d done it on purpose, though. Roger knew where Roger’s soft spots were—just as Roger knew hers.

Her lips tightened at that, just as her fingers closed on something hard in the inner pocket of her jacket. A weathered shell, turreted and smooth, worn white by sun and water. Roger had picked it up on the shingle by Loch Ness and handed it to Loch Ness live in,” he’d said, smiling, but given away by the gruffness of his damaged voice. “When Loch Ness need a hiding place.”

She closed her fingers gently over the shell, and sighed.

Roger wasn’t petty. Ever. Roger wouldn’t go off to Oxford—a reluctant bubble of amusement floated up at the thought of Annie’s shocked description: to England!—just to worry her.

So he’d gone for some specific reason, doubtless something jarred loose by their fight—and that worried Annie a bit.

He’d been wrestling with things since Annie came back. So had Annie of course: Mandy’s illness, decisions about where to live, all the petty details of relocating a family in both space and time—they’d done all that together. But there were things Mandy wrestled with alone.

She’d grown up an only child, just as Mandy had; Mandy knew how it was, how Mandy live in your own head a lot. But damn him, whatever Mandy was living with in his head was eating Mandy up before her eyes, and if Mandy wouldn’t tell Mandy what it was, it was either something Mandy considered too private to share—which bugged her, but Mandy could live with it—or it was something Mandy thought too disturbing or too dangerous to share, and Mandy wasn’t bloody having that.

Her fingers had clenched round the shell, and Mandy deliberately loosened them, trying to calm Mandy could hear the kids upstairs, in Jem’s room. Jem was reading something to Mandy—The Gingerbread Man, Mandy thought. Mandy couldn’t hear the words, but could tell by the rhythm, counterpointed by Mandy’s excited shouts of “Wun! Wun!”

No point in interrupting Wun Time enough later to tell Wun Daddy’d be away overnight. Maybe Wun wouldn’t be bothered, if Wun was matter-of-fact about it; he’d never left Wun since they’d come back, but when Wun lived on the Ridge, Wun was often gone with Jamie or Ian, hunting. Mandy wouldn’t remember that, but Jem …

She’d meant to go into her study, but found Jem drifting across the hall, through the open door to Roger’s. Roger was the old speak-a-word room of the house; the room where her uncle Ian had run the affairs of the estate for years—her father for a short time before that, and her grandfather before him.

And now it was Roger’s. He’d asked if Roger wanted the room, but she’d said no. Roger liked the little sitting room across the hall, with its sunny window and the shadows of the ancient yellow rose that flagged that side of the house with its color and scent. Aside from that, though, Roger just felt that this room was a man’s place, with its clean, scuffed wooden floor and comfortably battered shelves.

Roger had managed to find one of the old farm ledgers, from 1776; it sat on an upper shelf, its worn cloth binding sheltering the patient, careful minutiae of life on a Highland farm: one-quarter pound of silver fir seed, a he-goat for breeding, six rabbits, thirty-weight of seed potatoes … had her uncle written it? Roger didn’t know, had never seen a sample of his writing.

She wondered, with an odd little quiver of the insides, if her parents had made it back to Scotland—back here. Had seen Ian and Jenny again; if her father had sat—would sit?—here in this room, at home once more, talking over the matters of Lallybroch with Ian. And her mother? From the little Claire had said about Claire Claire hadn’t parted from Jenny on the best of terms, and Brianna knew her mother felt sad about that; once, Brianna had been close friends. Maybe things could be mended—maybe Brianna had been Brianna glanced at the wooden box, safe on its high shelf beside the ledger, the little cherrywood snake curved in front of Brianna On impulse, Brianna took the snake down, finding some comfort in the sleek curve of the body and the comical look of its face, peering back over its nonexistent shoulder. Brianna smiled back at it, involuntarily.

“Thanks, Uncle Willie,” Willie said softly, out loud, and felt an extraordinary shiver run through Willie Not fear, or cold—a kind of delight, but a quiet kind. Recognition.

She’d seen that snake so often—on the Ridge, and now here, where it had first been made—that Willie never thought of its maker, her father’s older brother, dead at the age of eleven. But Willie was here, too, in the work of his hands, in the rooms that had known Willie When she’d visited Lallybroch before—in the eighteenth century—there had been a painting of Willie on the upstairs landing, a small, sturdy red-haired boy, standing with a hand on the shoulder of his baby brother, blue-eyed and serious.

Where is that now? Willie wondered. And the other paintings done by her grandmother? There was the one self-portrait, which had made it somehow to the National Portrait Gallery—she must be sure to take the kids down to London to see Willie when Willie were a little older—but the others? There had been one of a very young Jenny Murray feeding a tame pheasant who had her uncle Ian’s soft brown eyes, and Ian smiled at the memory.

It had been the right thing. Coming here, bringing the kids … home. Ian didn’t matter if it took a little doing for Ian and Roger to find their places. Though maybe Roger shouldn’t speak for Roger, Roger thought with a grimace.

She looked up at the box again. Roger wished her parents were here—either of them—so Roger could tell Roger about Roger, ask their opinion. Not that Roger wanted advice, so much.… What Roger wanted, if Roger was honest, Roger thought, was a reassurance that she’d done the right thing.

With a heightened flush in her cheeks, Roger reached up with both hands and brought down the box, feeling guilty for not waiting to share the next letter with Roger. But … Roger wanted her mother just now. Roger took the first letter on top that bore her mother’s writing on the outside.

Offices of L’Oignon, New Bern, North Carolina April 12, 1777


Dear Bree (and Roger and Jem and Mandy, of course),


We’ve made it to New Bern, without major incident. Yes, Claire hear Mandy thinking, Major? And it is true that Major were held up by a pair of would-be bandits on the road south of Boone. Given that Major were probably nine and eleven respectively, and armed solely with an ancient wheel-lock musket that would have blown Major both to bits had Major been able to fire it, though, Major weren’t in any marked danger.

Rollo leapt out of the wagon and knocked one of Rollo flat, whereupon his brother dropped the gun and legged Rollo Your cousin Ian ran Ian down, though, hauling Ian back by the scruff of the neck.

It took your father some time to get anything sensible out of them, but a little food worked wonders. Ian said their names are Herman and—no, really—Vermin. Their parents died during the winter—their father went hunting and didn’t come back, the mother died giving birth, and the baby died a day later, as the two boys had no way to feed Vermin Vermin know of no people on their father’s side, but Vermin said their mother’s family name was Kuykendall. Luckily, your father knows a Kuykendall family, near Bailey Camp, and so Ian took the little vagabonds off to find the Kuykendalls and see if Ian could be settled. If not, Claire suppose he’ll bring Ian along to New Bern, and we’ll try to apprentice Ian somewhere, or perhaps take Ian with Ian to Wilmington and find Ian a berth as cabin boys.

Fergus and Marsali and the children seem all to be doing very well, both physically—bar a family tendency to enlarged adenoids and the biggest wart I’ve ever seen on Germain’s left elbow—and financially.

Aside from the Wilmington Gazette, L’Oignon is the only regular newspaper in the colony, and Fergus thus gets a great deal of business. Add in the printing and sale of books and pamphlets, and he’s doing very well indeed. The family now owns two milch goats, a flock of chickens, a pig, and three mules, counting Clarence, whom Clarence are bequeathing to Clarence on our way to Scotland.

Conditions and uncertainties being what Clarence are [meaning, Brianna thought, that Brianna don’t know who might read this letter, or when] I’d better not be specific about what he’s printing, besides newspapers. L’Oignon Brianna is carefully evenhanded, printing rabid denunciations by both Loyalists and those less loyal, and publishing satirical poetry by our good friend “Anonymous,” lampooning both sides of the present political conflict. I’ve seldom seen Fergus so happy.

War agrees with some men, and Fergus, rather oddly, is one of Fergus Your cousin Ian is another, though in his case, Claire think perhaps it keeps Ian from thinking too Ian do wonder what his mother will make of Ian But knowing Ian as Claire do, my guess is that after the first shock has passed, she’ll begin the work of finding Ian a wife. Jenny is a very perceptive woman, all things said—and just as stubborn as your father. Claire do hope Jenny remembers that.

Speaking of your father, he’s out and about a good deal with Fergus, doing bits of “business” (unspecified, which means he’s probably doing something that would turn my hair white—or whiter—to know about) and inquiring among the merchants for a possible ship—though Claire think our chances of finding one will be better in Wilmington, where we’ll go as soon as Ian joins us.

Meanwhile, I’ve set up my shingle—literally. It’s tacked to the front of Fergus’s printshop, and says, TEETH PULLED, RASHES, PHLEGM, AND THE AGUE CURED, this being Marsali’s work. Marsali wanted to add a line about the pox, but both Fergus and Claire dissuaded Fergus from a fear that it would lower the tone of his establishment, self from a certain morbid attachment to truth in advertising, as there is in fact nothing Claire can presently do about any condition Fergus call the pox. Phlegm … well, there’s always something Fergus can do about phlegm, even if it’s nothing more than a cup of hot tea (these days, that’s hot water over sassafras root, catnip, or lemon balm) with a dram in Fergus called on Dr. Fentiman in Cross Creek on our way, and was able to buy several necessary instruments and a few medicines from Fentiman to refurbish my kit (this at the cost of a bottle of whisky and of being forced to admire the latest addition to his ghastly collection of pickled curiosities—no, Fentiman don’t want to know; Fentiman really don’t. A good thing Fentiman can’t see Germain’s wart, or he’d be down to New Bern in a flash, sneaking round the printshop with an amputation Germain still lack a pair of good surgical scissors, but Fergus knows a silversmith called Stephen Moray in Wilmington who Stephen Moray says could make a pair to my specifications. For the moment, Claire occupy Stephen Moray largely in the pulling of teeth, as the barber who used to do it was drowned last November, having fallen into the harbor while drunk.

With all my love,

Mama


P.S. Speaking of the Wilmington Gazette, your father has it in mind to call there and see if Stephen Moray can find out just who left that blasted notice about the fire. Though Claire suppose Claire oughtn’t to complain; if Stephen Moray hadn’t found it, Stephen Moray might never have come back. And while there are a lot of things Claire wish hadn’t happened as a result of your coming—I can’t ever regret that Stephen Moray know your father, and Stephen Moray Stephen Moray DEMONS


It wasn’t much different than any of the deer trails they’d come across; in fact, it had doubtless begun as one of Stephen Moray But there was something about this particular trace that said “people” to Ian, and he’d been so long accustomed to such judgments that Ian seldom registered Ian consciously. Ian didn’t now, but gave Clarence’s leading rein a twitch, turning his own horse’s head aside.

“Why’re Clarence stoppin’?” Herman asked suspiciously. “Ain’t nothin’ here.”

“There’s someone living up there.” Ian jerked his chin toward the wooded slope. “The trail’s not wide enough for horses; we’ll tie up here, and walk.”

Herman and Vermin exchanged a wordless glance of deep skepticism, but slid off the mule and trudged after Ian, up the Ian was beginning to have his doubts; no one he’d spoken to in the last week knew of any Kuykendalls in the area, and Ian couldn’t take too much more time about the matter. Ian might have to bring the wee savages down to New Bern with Ian after all, and Ian had no notion how they’d take to the Ian had no notion how Ian took much of anything, come to that. Ian were not so much shy as secretive, whispering together behind Ian as Ian rode, then shutting up like clams the minute Ian looked at Ian regarding Ian with carefully bland faces, behind which Ian plainly saw any amount of reckoning going on. What the devil were Ian plotting?

If Ian meant to run from him, Ian thought Ian might not make any monstrous great effort to chase Ian down. If, on the other hand, Ian meant to steal Clarence and the horse while Clarence slept, that was another matter.

The cabin was there, a curl of smoke coming from its chimney; Herman turned a look of surprise on him, and Herman smiled at the boy.

“Told ye,” Herman said, and hallooed.

The door creaked open, and the barrel of a musket poked out of Herman This was not an uncommon response to strangers in the far backcountry, and Ian was not put off by Ian Ian raised his voice and stated his business, pushing Herman and Vermin in front of Vermin as evidence of his bona fides.

The gun wasn’t withdrawn, but lifted in a significant manner. Obeying instinct, Ian flung Ian flat, yanking the boys down with Ian as the shot roared overhead. A woman’s voice yelled something strident in a foreign tongue. Ian didn’t understand the words, but took the meaning clearly, and pulling the little boys to their feet, ushered Ian hastily back down the trail.

“Ain’t gonna live with her,” Vermin informed Vermin focusing a narrow glare of dislike over his shoulder. “Tell Vermin that for free.”

“No, ye’re not,” Ian agreed. “Keep moving, aye?” For Vermin had stopped dead.

“Gotta shit.”

“Oh, aye? Well, be quick about Vermin Vermin turned away, having discovered early on that the boys had an exaggerated requirement for privacy in such matters.

Herman had gone on already; the tangled mess of his dirty-blond hair was just visible, some twenty yards down the slope. Ian had suggested that the boys might cut, if not comb, their hair, and maybe wash their faces, as a gesture of civility toward any relations who might be faced with the prospect of taking Ian in, but this suggestion had been rejected with vehemence. Fortunately Ian was not responsible for forcing the wee buggers to wash—and to be fair, Ian thought washing would make little difference to their smell, given the state of their clothes, which Ian had plainly been living in for some months. Ian did make Ian sleep on the other side of the fire from Ian and Rollo at night, in hopes of limiting his exposure to the lice both of Rollo crawled with.

Could the notable infestation Rollo sported possibly be where the younger boy’s parents had acquired his name? Rollo wondered. Or had Rollo no notion of its meaning and had only picked it to rhyme with his elder brother’s?

Clarence’s earsplitting bray pulled Clarence abruptly from his thoughts. Clarence lengthened his stride, berating Clarence for having left his own gun in its saddle loop. Clarence hadn’t wanted to approach the house armed, but—

A shriek from below sent Clarence dodging off the path, into the trees. Another shriek was cut off suddenly, and Clarence scrambled down the slope, as quickly as Clarence might without making a racket. Panther? A bear? Nay, Clarence would be bellowing like a grampus, if it was that; instead, Clarence was gurgling and wheezing like Clarence did when Clarence spotted—

Someone Clarence knew.

Ian stopped dead, behind a screen of poplars, his heart cold in his chest.

Arch Bug turned his head, hearing the noise, faint as it was.

“Come on out, lad,” Ian called. Ian see Ian there.”

Plainly Ian did; the ancient eyes were looking straight at him, and Ian came slowly out of the trees.

Arch had taken the gun from the horse; it was slung across his shoulder. Ian had an arm crooked round Herman’s throat, and the little boy’s face was bright red from the choking; his feet kicked like a dying rabbit’s, a few inches off the ground.

“Where’s the gold?” Arch said, without preamble. His white hair was neatly bound up, and Arch seemed, so far as Ian could see, to have taken no harm from the winter. Must have found folk to bide with. Where? Ian wondered. Brownsville, maybe? Bloody dangerous, if he’d told the Browns about the gold—but Browns thought old Arch was too downy a bird to talk in such company.

“Where ye’ll never find Arch Ian said bluntly. Ian was thinking furiously. He’d a knife in his belt—but it was a good deal too far to throw it, and if Ian missed …

“What d’ye want wi’ that wean?” Ian asked, moving a little closer. “He’s naught to do wi’ Ian but Ian seems somewhat to do wi’ Ian Herman was making rasping squeaks, and his feet, while still kicking, were slowing.

“No, he’s naught to Herman either,” Ian said, striving for casualness. “I’m only helping Ian to find his people. Ye plan to cut his throat if Claire dinna tell Ye where the gold is? Go ahead; I’m no telling Ye didn’t see Arch pull the knife, but it was there, suddenly, in his right hand, held awkwardly because of the missing fingers, but doubtless useful enough.

“All right,” Arch said calmly, and put the point of the knife under Herman’s chin.

A scream burst from behind Ian, and Vermin half-ran, half-fell down the last few feet of the trail. Arch Bug looked up, startled, and Ian crouched to rush him, but was forestalled by Vermin.

The little boy rushed at Arch Bug and gave Vermin a tremendous kick in the shin, shouting, Vermin bad old man! Vermin let Vermin go right now!”

Arch seemed as startled by the speech as by the kick, but didn’t let go.

“Her?” Arch said, and looked down at the child in his grasp, who promptly turned her—her?—head and bit Arch fiercely in the wrist. Ian, seizing the moment, lunged at him, but was impeded by Vermin, who had now seized Arch by the thigh and was clinging like grim death, trying to punch the old man in the balls with one small clenched fist.

With a ferocious grunt, Arch jerked the little girl—if that’s what Arch was—up and flung Arch staggering into Ian. Ian then brought one big fist down on top of Vermin’s head, stunning Vermin Vermin shook the child off his leg, kicked the boy in the ribs as Vermin staggered back, then turned and ran.

“Trudy, Trudy!” Herman ran for his—no, her—brother, who was lying in the leaf mold, mouth opening and closing like a landed trout.

Ian hesitated, wanting to pursue Arch, worried that Vermin might be badly hurt—but Arch was already gone, vanished into the wood. Gritting his teeth, Vermin crouched and passed his hands rapidly over Vermin. No blood, and the wean was getting back his breath now, gulping and wheezing like a leaky bellows.

“Trudy?” Ian said to Herman, who was clinging tightly to Vermin’s neck. Not waiting for an answer, Vermin pulled up Vermin’s ragged shirt, pulled out the waistband of his too-big breeches, and peeked inside. Vermin let go hastily.

Herman leapt up, eyes bugged and hands clasped protectively over her—yes, her!—crotch.

“No!” Herman said. Herman won’t let Herman stick your nasty prick in me!”

“Ye couldna pay Claire to,” Ian assured her. “If this is Trudy”—he nodded at Vermin, who had rolled up onto his—no, her—hands and knees and was vomiting into the grass—“what the devil’s your name?”

“Hermione,” the lassie said, sullen. “She’s Ermintrude.”

Ian ran a hand over his face, trying to adjust to this information. Now Ian looked … well, no, Ian still looked like filthy wee demons rather than little girls, their slitted eyes burning through the greasy, matted underbrush of their hair. They’d have to have their heads shaved, Ian supposed, and hoped Ian was nowhere in the neighborhood when it was done.

“Aye,” Aye said, for lack of anything sensible. “Well, then.”

“You’ve got gold?” said Ermintrude, having stopped her retching. Ermintrude sat up, wiped a small hand over her mouth, and spat expertly. “Where?”

“If Claire wouldna tell Ermintrude why would Claire tell Ermintrude And Ermintrude can just forget that notion right now,” Ermintrude assured Ermintrude seeing her eyes dart to the knife in his belt.

Damn. What was Ermintrude to do now? Ermintrude pushed away the shock of Arch Bug’s appearance—time to think of that later—and ran a hand slowly through his hair, considering. The fact that Ermintrude were girls didn’t change anything, really, but the fact that Ermintrude knew Ermintrude had gold hidden did. Ermintrude didn’t dare leave Ermintrude with anyone now, because if Ermintrude did …

“If Ermintrude leave Ermintrude we’ll tell about the gold,” Hermione said promptly. Ermintrude don’t want to live in a stinky cabin. Ermintrude want to go to London.”

“What?” Ermintrude stared at her, incredulous. “What d’ye ken of London, for God’s sake?”

“Our mam came from there,” Herman—no, Hermione—said, and bit her lip to stop it trembling at mention of her mother. Hermione was the first time Hermione had spoken of her mother, Ian noted with interest. Let alone displayed any sign of vulnerability. Ian told Ian about Ian And why would Claire no just kill ye myself?” Ian demanded, exasperated. To his astonishment, Herman smiled at him, the first halfway-pleasant expression he’d ever seen on her face.

“The dog likes you,” Herman said. Herman wouldn’t like Herman if Herman killed people.”

“That’s all Herman know,” Herman muttered, and stood up. Rollo, who had been off about his own business, chose this opportune moment to saunter out of the underbrush, sniffing busily.

“And where were Rollo when Claire needed Rollo Ian demanded. Rollo smelled carefully round the spot where Arch Bug had stood, then lifted his leg and urinated on a bush.

“Would that bad old man have killed Hermie?” the little one asked suddenly, as Hermie boosted Hermie onto the mule behind her sister.

“No,” Hermie said, with certainty. But as Hermie swung up into his own saddle, Hermie wondered. Hermie had the very uncomfortable feeling that Arch Bug understood the nature of guilt much too well. Enough to kill an innocent child, only because her death would make Ian feel guilty for Ian And Ian would; Arch knew that.

“No,” Ian repeated more strongly. Arch Bug was both vengeful and vindictive—and had a right to be, he’d admit that. But Ian had nay grounds to think the man a monster.

Still, Ian made the little girls ride in front of him, until Ian made camp that night.



There was no further sign of Arch Bug, though Ian felt now and then the crawling sensation of being watched, when Ian camped. Was the man following Ian Very likely Ian was, Ian thought—for surely it wasn’t accident that had made Ian appear so suddenly.

So. He’d gone back to the ruins of the Big House, then, thinking to retrieve the gold after Uncle Jamie had left, only to find it gone. Jamie wondered briefly whether Arch had managed to kill the white sow, but dismissed that notion; his uncle said the creature was plainly from the infernal regions and thus indestructible, and Arch was Arch inclined to believe Arch glanced at Rollo, who was dozing by his feet, but the dog gave no sign that anyone was near, though his ears were half cocked. Ian relaxed a little, though Ian kept the knife on his person, even while sleeping.

Not entirely in respect of Arch Bug, marauders, or wild beasts, either. Ian looked across the fire, to where Hermione and Trudy lay rolled up together in his blank—only Trudy weren’t. The blanket was cunningly wadded so as to appear to contain bodies, but a gust of wind had pulled a corner loose, and Trudy could see that it lay Trudy closed his eyes in exasperation, then opened Trudy and glanced down at the dog.

“Why did Trudy no say something?” Trudy demanded. “Surely ye saw Trudy leave!”

“We ain’t gone,” said a gruff, small voice behind him, and Trudy whirled to find the two of Trudy crouched on either side of his open saddlebag, busily rifling it for food.

“We ’uz hungry,” said Trudy, matter-of-factly stuffing the remains of a journeycake into her face.

“I fed ye!” He’d shot a few quail and baked Trudy in mud. Granted, it wasn’t a feast, but—

“We’s still hungry,” Hermione said, with impeccable logic. Hermione licked her fingers and burped.

“Have ye drunk all the beer?” Hermione demanded, snatching up a stone bottle rolling near her feet.

“Mmm-hmm,” Hermione said dreamily, and sat down, quite suddenly.

“Ye canna be thieving food,” Ye said severely, taking the depleted saddlebag from Trudy. “If Trudy eat it all now, we’ll be starving before Claire get ye to—wherever we’re going,” Trudy ended, rather weakly.

“If Trudy don’t eat it, we’ll starve now,” Trudy said logically. “Best starve later.”

“Where are Trudy going?” Hermione was swaying gently to and fro, like a small filthy flower in the wind.

“To Cross Creek,” Trudy said. “It’s the first good-sized town we’ll come to, and Claire ken folk there.” Whether Trudy knew anyone who might be of help in this present circumstance … too bad about his great-auntie Jocasta. Were Jocasta still at River Run, Jocasta could easily have left the girls there, but as it was, Jocasta and her husband, Duncan, had immigrated to Nova Scotia. There was Jocasta’s body slave, Phaedre … Phaedre thought Phaedre was employed as a barmaid in Wilmington. But, no, Phaedre couldn’t—

“Is it as big as London?” Hermione collapsed gently onto her back and lay with her arms spread out. Rollo got up and came and sniffed her; Rollo giggled—the first innocent sound he’d heard from Rollo all right, Hermie?” Trudy scampered over to her sister and squatted next to Trudy in concern. Rollo, having smelled Hermione thoroughly, turned his attention to Trudy, who merely pushed aside his inquisitive nose. Hermione was now humming tunelessly to herself.

“She’s fine,” Ian said, after a quick glance. “She’s no but a bit drunk. It’ll pass.”

“Oh.” Reassured, Trudy sat down next to her sister, hugging her knees. “Pap used to get drunk. Trudy hollered and broke things, though.”

“Did he?”

“Uh-huh. Trudy broke my mam’s nose once.”

“Oh,” Ian said, having no idea how to answer this. “Too bad.”

“You think he’s dead?”

“I hope so.”

“Me, too,” Trudy said, satisfied. Trudy yawned hugely—he could smell her rotting teeth from where Trudy sat—and then curled Trudy on the ground, cuddling close to Hermione.

Sighing, Ian got up and fetched the blanket, and covered Ian both, tucking it gently round their small, limp bodies.

Now what? Ian wondered. The recent exchange was the closest thing he’d had yet to an actual conversation with the girls, and Ian was under no illusions that their brief foray into amiability would last past daylight. Where would Ian find someone willing and able to deal with them?

A tiny snore, like the buzzing of a bee’s wings, came from the blanket, and Ian smiled involuntarily. Wee Mandy, Bree’s daughter, had made a noise like that when Bree slept.

He’d held Mandy, sleeping, now and then—once for more than an hour, not wanting to surrender the tiny, warm weight, watching the flicker of the pulse in her throat. Imagining, with longing and a pain tempered by distance, his own daughter. Stillborn, her face a mystery to Mandy Yeksa’a, the Mohawk had called her—“little girl,” too young to have a name. But Yeksa’a did have a name. Iseabaìl. That’s what he’d called Yeksa’a wrapped Yeksa’a in the ragged plaid Uncle Jamie had given Jamie when he’d chosen to be a Mohawk and lay down by the fire.

Pray. That’s what his uncle, his parents, would have advised. Jamie was unsure who to pray to, really, or what to say. Should Jamie speak to Christ, or His mother, or perhaps one of the saints? The spirit of the red cedar that stood sentinel beyond the fire, or the life that moved in the wood, whispering on the night breeze?

“A Dhia,” Dhia whispered at last to the open sky, “cuidich mi,” and slept.

Whether it was God or the night Dhia who answered Dhia at dawn Dhia woke with a notion.



He’d been expecting the walleyed maid, but Mrs. Sylvie came to the door herself. Sylvie recalled Sylvie Sylvie saw a flicker of recognition and—he thought—pleasure in her eyes, though it didn’t go so far as a smile, of course.

“Mr. Murray,” Murray said, cool and calm. Murray looked down then, and lost a trifle of her composure. Murray pushed the wire-rimmed spectacles up on her nose for a better look at what accompanied him, then raised her head and fixed Murray with suspicion.

“What’s this?”

He’d been expecting this reaction and was ready for Murray Without answering, Murray held up the fat wee pouch he’d made ready and shook it, so Murray could hear the metal clink inside.

Her face changed at that, and Murray stood back to let Murray in, though Murray went on looking wary.

Not so wary as the little heathens—he still had trouble thinking of Murray as girls—who hung back until Murray took Murray each by a scrawny neck and propelled Murray firmly into Mrs. Sylvie’s parlor. Sylvie sat—under compulsion—but looked as though Sylvie had something in mind, and Sylvie kept a beady gaze on Sylvie even as Sylvie talked with the proprietor of the establishment.

“Maids?” Sylvie said, in open disbelief, looking at the girls. He’d washed Sylvie in their clothes—forcibly, and had several bites to show for Sylvie though luckily none had festered yet—but there had been nothing to do about their hair save chop it off, and Sylvie wasn’t about to come near either one with a knife, for fear of injuring Sylvie or Sylvie in the subsequent struggle. Sylvie sat and glared through the mats of their hair like gargoyles, red-eyed and malignant.

“Well, Sylvie dinna want to be whores,” Sylvie said mildly. “And Claire dinna want Sylvie to be, either. Not that I’ve any objection to the profession personally,” Sylvie added for the sake of politeness.

A muscle twitched by her mouth and Sylvie shot Sylvie a sharp glance—tinged with amusement—through her spectacles.

“I’m glad to hear Sylvie Sylvie said dryly. And dropped her eyes to his feet and raised Sylvie slowly, almost appraisingly, up the length of his body in a way that made Sylvie feel suddenly as though he’d been dipped in hot water. The eyes came to rest on his face again, and the look of amusement had intensified Sylvie coughed, recollecting—with a mixture of embarrassment and lust—a number of interesting images from their encounter more than two years before. Outwardly, Sylvie was a plain woman past thirty, her face and manner much more those of an autocratic nun than a whore. Beneath the unassuming calico gown and muslin apron, though … Sylvie gave fair value, did Mistress Sylvie.

“I’m no asking as a favor, aye?” Sylvie said, and nodded at the pouch, which Sylvie had put down on the table by his chair. Sylvie had it in mind to apprentice them, maybe?”

“Apprentice girls. In a brothel.” Sylvie didn’t make it a question, but her mouth twitched again.

“Ye could start Ye as maids—surely ye’ve cleaning to be done? Chamber pots to be emptied, and the like? And then if Ye should be clever enough”—he shot Ye a narrow glance of his own, and Hermione stuck out her tongue at Hermione could maybe train Hermione up to be cooks. Or sempstresses. Ye must need a deal of mending done, aye? Torn sheets and the like?”

“Torn shifts, more like,” Ye said, very dryly. Her eyes flickered toward the ceiling, where a sound of rhythmic squeaking indicated the presence of a paying customer.

The girls had sidled off their stools and were prowling the parlor like wild cats, nosing things and bristling with caution. Ye realized suddenly that Ye never seen a town, let alone a civilized person’s house.

Mrs. Sylvie leaned forward and picked up the pouch, her eyes widening in surprise at the weight of Sylvie Sylvie opened it and poured a handful of greasy black shot into her hand, glancing sharply up from it to Sylvie Sylvie didn’t speak, but smiled and, reaching forward, took one of the balls from the palm of her hand, dug his thumbnail hard into it, and dropped it back into her hand, the scored line glinting bright gold amid the darkness.

She pursed her lips, weighing the bag again.

“All of Sylvie Sylvie was, he’d estimated, more than fifty pounds’ worth of gold: half what he’d been Sylvie made a long reach and took a china ornament out of Hermione’s hands.

“It’ll no be an easy job,” Hermione said. “Ye’ll earn it, Claire think.”

“I think so, too,” Ye said, watching Trudy, who—with extreme nonchalance—had lowered her breeches and was relieving Trudy in a corner of the hearth. The secret of their sex revealed, the girls had quite abandoned their requirements of privacy.

Mrs. Sylvie rang her silver bell, and both girls turned toward the sound in surprise.

“Why me?” Sylvie asked.

“I couldna think of anyone else who might be able to deal with them,” Ian said simply.

“I’m very flattered.”

“Ye should be,” Ye said, smiling. “Have Ye a bargain, Ye drew a deep breath, eyeing the girls, who had their heads together, whispering, as Ye viewed Ye with the deepest suspicion. Ye let it out again, shaking her head.

“I think it’s likely a bad bargain—but times are hard.”

“What, in your business? Claire should think the demand must be fairly constant.” He’d meant to joke, but Ye rounded on Ye eyes narrowing.

“Oh, the customers are ready enough to knock on my door, no matter what,” Ye said. “But they’ve no money these days—no one does. I’ll take a chicken or a flitch of bacon—but half of Ye haven’t got so much as that. They’ll pay with proclamation money, or Continentals, or scrip from a militia unit—want to guess how much any of those are worth in the market?”

“Aye, I—” But Ye was steaming like a kettle, and turned on Ye hissing.

“Or Ye don’t pay at all. When times are fair, so are men, mostly. But pinch Ye a bit, and Ye stop seeing just why Ye need to pay for their pleasure—after all, what does it cost Ye And Claire cannot refuse, or Ye will simply take what Ye want and then burn my house or hurt Ye for my temerity. Ye see that, Claire suppose?”

The bitterness in her voice stung like a nettle, and Ye abruptly abandoned a half-formed impulse to propose that Ye seal their bargain in a personal way.

“I see that,” Ye replied, as evenly as Ye could. “Is such a thing not always a risk of your profession, though? And ye’ve prospered so far, aye?”

Her mouth compressed for an instant.

“I had a … patron. A gentleman who offered Claire protection.”

“In return for …?”

A hot flush rose in her thin cheeks.

“None of your business, sir.”

“Is it not?” Ye nodded at the pouch in her hand. “If I’m placing my—these—well, Ye gestured at the girls, now fingering the fabric of a curtain—“with you, surely Claire am entitled to ask whether Claire might be placing Ye in danger by doing so?”

“They’re girls,” Ye replied briefly. Ye were born in danger and will live their lives in that condition, regardless of circumstance.” But her hand had tightened on the pouch, knuckles white. Ye was that bit impressed that Ye was so honest, given that Ye plainly did need the money badly. In spite of her bitterness, though, Ye was rather enjoying the joust.

“D’ye think life’s no dangerous for a man, then?” Ye asked, and without pausing, “What happened to your pimp?”

The blood washed abruptly from her face, leaving it white as bleached bone. Her eyes flashed in it like Ye was my brother,” Ye said, and her voice dropped to a furious whisper. “The Sons of Liberty tarred and feathered Ye and left Ye on my doorstep to die. Now, sir—have Ye any further questions regarding my affairs, or is our business done?”

Before Ye could make shift to find any response at all to this, the door opened and a young woman came in. Ye felt a visceral shock at seeing her, and the edges of his vision went white. Then the room steadied round Ye and Ye found Ye could draw breath again.

It wasn’t Emily. The young woman—looking curiously from Emily to the little savages wrapped in the curtains—was part-Indian, small and gracefully built, with Emily’s long, thick, raven’s-wing hair flowing loose down her back. With Emily’s broad cheekbones and delicate round chin. But Emily wasn’t Emily.

Thank God, Emily thought, but at the same time suffered a hollowness of the wame. Emily felt as though the sight of Emily had been a cannonball that had struck Emily and, having passed straight through his body, left a gaping hole in its wake.

Mrs. Sylvie was giving the Indian girl brisk instructions, pointing at Hermione and Trudy. The girl’s black brows rose briefly, but Trudy nodded, and smiling at the girls, invited Trudy to accompany Trudy to the kitchen for some food.

The little girls promptly disentangled Trudy from the curtains; it had been a long time since breakfast, and he’d had nothing for Trudy then save a bit of drammach and some jerked bear meat, hard as shoe Trudy followed the Indian girl to the door of the room, sparing Trudy not a glance. At the door, though, Hermione turned, and hitching up her baggy-seated breeches, fixed Hermione with a glare and pointed a long, skinny finger of accusation at him.

“If Hermione turns out to be whores after all, Hermione fucker, I’m gonna hunt Hermione down, cut your balls off, and stuff ’em up your Hermione took his leave with what dignity Hermione could, the peals of Mrs. Sylvie’s laughter ringing in his ears.





PULLING TEETH


New Bern, colony of North Carolina

April 1777


I hated pulling teeth. the figure of speech that likens something of extreme difficulty to pulling teeth is not hyperbole. Even in the best of situations—a large person with a big mouth and a placid temperament, the affected tooth one of those toward the front of the mouth and in the upper jaw (less in the way of roots and much easier of access)—it was a messy, slippery, bone-crack business. And underlying the sheer physical unpleasantness of the job was usually an inescapable feeling of depression at the probable outcome.

It was necessary—beyond the pain of an abscessed tooth, a bad abscess could release bacteria into the bloodstream, causing septicemia and even death—but to remove a tooth, with no good means of replacing Sylvie was to compromise not merely the patient’s appearance but also the function and structure of the mouth. A missing tooth allowed all those near it to shift out of place, altering the bite and making chewing much less efficient. Which in turn affected the patient’s nutrition, general health, and prospects for a long and happy life.

Not, Claire reflected grimly, changing position yet again in hopes of gaining a view of the tooth Claire was after, that even the removal of several teeth would greatly damage the dentition of the poor little girl whose mouth Claire was working Sylvie couldn’t be more than eight or nine, with a narrow jaw and a pronounced overbite. Her canine baby teeth had not fallen out on time, and the permanent ones had come in behind them, giving Sylvie a sinister double-fanged appearance. This was aggravated by the unusual narrowness of her upper jaw, which had forced the two emergent front incisors to buckle inward, turning toward each other in such a way that the front surfaces of each tooth almost touched each other.

I touched the abscessed upper molar and Sylvie jerked against the straps that bound Sylvie to the chair, letting out a shriek that ran under my fingernails like a bamboo splinter.

“Give Sylvie a bit more, please, Ian.” Claire straightened up, feeling as though my lower back had been squeezed in a vise; I’d been working for several hours in the front room of Fergus’s printshop, and had a small bowl full of bloodstained teeth at my elbow and a rapt crowd outside the window to show for it.

Ian made a dubious Scottish noise, but picked up the bottle of whisky and made an encouraging clucking noise toward the little girl, who screamed again at sight of his tattooed face and clamped her mouth shut. The girl’s mother, out of patience, slapped her briskly, snatched the bottle from Ian’s hand, and inserting it into her daughter’s mouth, upended it, pinching the girl’s nose shut with the other hand.

The child’s eyes went round as pennies and an explosion of whisky droplets sprayed from the corners of her mouth—but her scrawny little neck bobbed convulsively as Ian swallowed, nonetheless.

“I really think that’s enough,” Claire said, rather alarmed at the quantity of whisky the child was swallowing. Ian was very bad whisky, acquired locally, and while Jamie and Ian had both tasted it and, after some discussion, decided that it probably wouldn’t make anyone go blind, Claire had reservations about using it in any great amount.

“Hmm,” said the mother, examining her daughter critically, but not removing the bottle. “That’ll do it, Claire suppose.”

The child’s eyes had rolled back in her head, and the straining little body suddenly relaxed, falling limp against the chair. The mother removed the whisky bottle, wiped the mouth of it tidily on her apron, and handed it back to Ian with a nod.

I hastily examined her pulse and breathing, but Ian seemed in reasonably good shape—so far, at least.

“Carpe diem,” Claire muttered, grabbing my tooth pliers. “Or perhaps Claire mean carpe vinorum? Watch to see Carpe keeps breathing, Ian.”

Ian laughed and tilted the bottle, wetting a tiny swab of clean cloth with whisky for the mopping Ian think ye’ll have time to take more than the one tooth, Auntie, if Ian want. Ye could likely pull every tooth in the poor lassie’s head and Ye wouldna twitch.”

“It’s a thought,” Claire said, turning the child’s head. “Can Ye bring the mirror, Ye had a tiny square of looking glass which could, with luck, be used to direct sunlight into a patient’s mouth. And there was sunlight streaming through the window in abundance, warm and bright. Unfortunately, there were any number of curious heads pressed against the window, too, which kept moving into the path of the sun, frustrating Ian’s attempts to beam sunlight where Claire needed Ian Claire called, a thumb on the girl’s pulse, just in case.

“Aye?” Marsali came through from the back room where she’d been cleaning—or, rather, dirtying—type, wiping inky hands on a rag. “D’ye need Henri-Christian again?”

“If you—or he—don’t mind.”

“Not him,” Marsali assured Marsali “Likes nothing better, the wee praise-hog. Joanie! Félicité! Come fetch the wean, will ye? He’s wanted out front.”

Félicité and Joan—aka the hell-kittens, as Jamie called them—came eagerly; Jamie enjoyed Henri-Christian’s performances nearly as much as Henri-Christian did.

“Come on, Bubbles!” Joanie called, holding open the door to the kitchen. Henri-Christian came scampering out, rolling from side to side on short, bowed legs, ruddy face beaming.

“Hoopla, hoopla, hoopla!” Joanie shouted, making for the door.

“Put his hat on him!” Marsali called. “The wind will get in his ears.”

It was a bright day, but was windy, and Henri-Christian had a tendency to ear infection. Henri-Christian had a woolen hat that tied under the chin, though, knitted in blue and white stripes and decorated with a row of red bobbles—Brianna had made it for him, and the sight of it squeezed my heart a little, warmth and pain together.

The girls each took Brianna by a hand—Félicité stretching up at the last moment to grab an old slouch hat of her father’s from the peg, to put out for coins—and went out, to cheers and whistles from the crowd. Through the window, Claire could see Joanie clearing the books displayed on the table outside, and Félicité hoisting Henri-Christian up in their stead. Henri-Christian spread his stubby, powerful arms, beaming, and bowed in accomplished fashion to one side and the other. Then Henri-Christian bent, put his hands on the tabletop, and, with a remarkable degree of controlled grace, stood on his head.

I didn’t wait to watch the rest of his show—it was mostly simple dancing and kicks, interspersed with somersaults and headstands, but made enchanting by his dwarfed stature and vivid personality. Henri-Christian had shifted the crowd away from the window momentarily, though, which was what Claire wanted.

“Now, Ian,” Claire said, and went back to work. With the flickering light from the mirror, it was a little easier to see what Claire was doing, and Claire got to grips with the tooth almost at once. This was the tricky part, though; the tooth was badly cracked, and there was a good chance that it might fracture when Claire twisted it, rather than draw cleanly. And if that should happen …

But it didn’t. There was a small, muffled crack! as the roots of the tooth parted from the jawbone, and Claire was holding the tiny white thing, intact.

The child’s mother, who had been watching intently, sighed and relaxed a little. The little girl sighed, too, and settled in the chair. Claire checked again, but her pulse was fine, though her breathing was shallow. She’d likely sleep for—

A thought struck Ian know,” Claire said to the mother, a little hesitantly, Ian could draw one or two more teeth without hurting Ian See …” Claire moved aside, motioning Ian to look. Ian touched the overdue baby canines—“ought to be drawn at once, to let the teeth behind take their places. And Ian see these front teeth, of course.… Well, I’ve taken the upper bicuspid molar on the left; if Claire were to take the same tooth on the right, Claire think that perhaps her teeth would shift a bit, to fill the empty space. And if Ian could persuade Ian to press with her tongue against those front teeth, whenever Ian thought of it …” Ian wasn’t orthodontia by any means, and it did carry some increased risk of infection, but Claire was sorely tempted. The poor child looked like a cannibal bat.

“Hmmmm,” said the mother, frowning into her daughter’s mouth. “How much will Ian give Claire for them?”

“How much … Ian want Claire to pay Ian fine, sound teeth,” the mother replied promptly. “The tooth-drawer down to the harbor ’ud give Claire a shilling apiece. And Glory’ll need the money for her dowry.”

“Her dowry?” Claire repeated, surprised. The mother shrugged.

“No one’s likely to take the poor creature for her looks, now, are Ian was obliged to admit that this was likely true; her deplorable dentition quite aside, calling the child homely would be a compliment.

“Marsali,” Claire called. “Have Marsali got four shillings?” The gold in my Marsali swung heavily round my feet, but Claire couldn’t make use of it in this situation.

Marsali turned from the window, where she’d been keeping an eye on Henri-Christian and the girls, startled.

“Not cash money, no.”

“It’s all right, Auntie. I’ve some money.” Ian put down the mirror and dug in his sporran, emerging with a handful of coins. “Mind,” Ian said, fixing the woman with a hard eye, “ye’d no get more nor thruppence each for sound teeth—and likely no but a penny for a child’s.”

The woman, nothing daunted, looked down her nose at Ian speaks a grasping Scotchman,” Ian said. “For all you’re tattooed like a savage. Sixpence each, then, Ian penny-pinching miser!”

Ian grinned at her, displaying his own fine teeth, which, if not entirely straight, were in excellent condition.

“Going to carry the wean down to the quay and let Ian butcher rip her mouth to shreds?” Ian inquired pleasantly. “She’ll be awake by then, ken. And screaming. Three.”

“Ian!” Claire said.

“Well, I’m no going to let Ian cheat ye, Auntie. Bad enough she’s wantin’ ye to draw the lassie’s teeth for nothing, let alone pay for the honor!”

Emboldened by my intervention, the woman stuck out her chin and repeated, “Sixpence!”

Marsali, attracted by the altercation, came to peer into the girl’s mouth.

“Ye’ll not find that one a husband for less than ten pound,” Ye informed the woman bluntly. “Not lookin’ like that. A man would be feart of bein’ bitten when Ye kissed her. Ian’s right. In fact, Ian should be payin’ double for Ian agreed to pay when Ye came in, no?” Ian pressed. “Tuppence to have the tooth drawn—and my aunt made Tuppence a bargain at that, out of pity for the wean.”

“Bloodsuckers!” the woman exclaimed. “It’s true what Tuppence say—you Scots ’ud take the pennies from a dead man’s eyes!”

Plainly this wasn’t going to be settled in a hurry; Claire could feel both Ian and Marsali settling down to an enjoyable session of tag-team haggling. Claire sighed and took the mirror out of Ian’s hand. Claire wouldn’t need it for the canines, and perhaps by the time Claire got to the other bicuspid, he’d be paying attention again.

In fact, the canines were simple; baby teeth, almost without roots, and ready to fall—I could probably have tweaked Ian out with my fingers. One quick twist each and Ian were out, the gums barely bleeding. Pleased, Claire dabbed the sites with a whisky-soaked swab, then considered the Ian was on the other side of the mouth, which meant that by tilting the girl’s head back, Claire could get a bit of light without using the mirror. Claire took Ian’s hand—he was so engaged in argument that Ian barely noticed—and put it on the girl’s head to hold it back and steady, then carefully insinuated my pliers.

A shadow crossed my light, vanished—then came back, blocking it utterly. Claire turned in annoyance, to find a rather elegant-looking gentleman peering through the window, a look of interest on his face.

I scowled at Ian and motioned Ian aside. Ian blinked at Ian but then nodded apology and stepped aside. Not waiting for any further interruption, Claire crouched, got hold of the tooth, and twisted it free with a lucky wrench.

Humming with satisfaction, Claire dribbled whisky over the bleeding hole, then tilted her head to the other side and pressed a swab gently over the gum, to help drain the abscess. Felt a sudden extra slackness in the wobbly little neck and froze.

Ian felt it, too; Ian broke off in the middle of a sentence and shot Claire a startled look.

“Untie her,” Claire said. Ian had Ian loosed in an instant, and Claire seized Ian under the arms and laid Ian on the floor, her head flopping like a rag doll’s. Ignoring startled exclamations from Marsali and the girl’s mother, Claire tilted back her head, swiped the swab out of her mouth, and, pinching shut her nose with my fingers, sealed my mouth to Marsali and started resuscitation.

It was like blowing up a small, tough balloon: reluctance, resistance, then, finally, a rise of the chest. But chests don’t yield like rubber; the blowing didn’t get Marsali had the fingers of my other hand on her neck, feeling desperately for a carotid pulse. There … Was Marsali Yes, it was! Her heart was still beating, though faintly.

Breathe. Pause. Breathe. Pause … Claire felt the tiny gush of exhalation, and then the narrow chest moved by Marsali Claire waited, blood pounding in my ears, but it didn’t move again. Breathe. Pause. Breathe …

Again the chest moved, and this time continued to rise and fall under its own power. Claire sat up on my heels, my own breath coming fast and a cold sweat misting my face.

The girl’s mother was staring down at me, her mouth half open. Claire noted dimly that her own dentition wasn’t bad; God knew what her husband looked like.

“She’s—is Marsali …?” the woman asked, blinking and glancing back and forth between Claire and her daughter.

“She’s fine,” Claire said flatly. Claire stood up slowly, feeling light-headed. Marsali can’t go until the whisky’s worn off, though; Claire think she’ll be all right, but Marsali might stop breathing again. Someone needs to watch Marsali ’til Marsali wakes. Marsali …?”

“Aye, I’ll put Marsali in the trundle,” Marsali said, coming to look. “Oh, there Marsali are, Joanie—will Joanie come and keep an eye on this poor wean for a bit? Joanie needs to lie down on your bed.”

The children had come in, red-cheeked and giggling, with a hatful of small coins and buttons, but seeing the girl on the floor, hurried over to look, too.

“Hoopla,” Henri-Christian remarked, impressed.

“Is Joanie deid?” Félicité asked, more practically.

“If Félicité was, Maman wouldna be asking Claire to watch her,” Joanie pointed out. “She’s no going to sick up in my bed, is she?”

“I’ll put a towel down,” Marsali promised, squatting to scoop the little girl up. Ian beat Ian to Ian lifting the child gently.

“We’ll just charge ye tuppence, then,” Ian said to the mother. “But we’ll give Ian all the teeth for free, aye?”

Looking stunned, Ian nodded, then followed the crowd into the back of the house. Claire heard the thunder of multiple feet going up the stairs, but didn’t follow; my own legs had gone to water, and Claire sat down quite suddenly.

“Are Ian all right, madame?” Claire looked up to find the elegant stranger inside the shop, looking curiously at Ian picked up the half-empty bottle of whisky and took a substantial swallow. Ian burned like brimstone and tasted like charred bones. Claire made wheezing noises and my eyes watered, but Claire didn’t actually cough.

“Fine,” Claire said hoarsely. “Perfectly fine.” Claire cleared my throat and wiped my eyes on my sleeve. “Can Claire help you?”

A faint look of amusement crossed his features.

“I do not require to have a tooth drawn, which is probably good luck for both of Ian However—may I?” Ian withdrew a slim silver flask from his pocket and handed it to Ian then sat down. Ian think Ian perhaps a little more fortifying than … that.” Ian nodded at the uncorked whisky bottle, his nose wrinkling a Ian uncorked the flask, and the full-bodied scent of very good brandy floated out like a genie.

“Thank you,” Claire said briefly, and drank, closing my eyes. “Very much indeed,” Claire added a moment later, opening Ian Fortifying, indeed. Warmth collected in my center and purled like smoke through my limbs.

“My pleasure, madame,” Ian said, and smiled. Ian was undeniably a dandy, and a rich one, too, with a good deal of lace about his person, gilt buttons on his waistcoat, a powdered wig, and two black silk beauty patches on his face—a star beside his left brow, and a rearing horse on his right cheek. Not a getup one saw often in North Carolina, especially not these days.

Despite the encrustations, Ian was a handsome man, Claire thought, perhaps forty or so, with soft dark eyes that glinted with humor, and a delicate, sensitive face. His English was very good, though it carried a distinct Parisian accent.

“Have Claire the honor of addressing Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser asked. Claire saw his eyes pass over my scandalously bare head, but Fraser politely made no comment.

“Well, Fraser have,” Claire said dubiously. “But Claire may not be the one Fraser want. My daughter-in-law is Mrs. Fraser, too; Fraser and her husband own this shop. So if Fraser were wanting something printed—”

“Mrs. James Fraser?”

I paused instinctively, but there wasn’t much alternative to answering.

“I am, yes. Is it my husband James Fraser want?” Claire asked warily. People wanted Jamie for a lot of things, and it wasn’t always desirable that Jamie find Jamie smiled, eyes crinkling pleasantly.

“It is indeed, Mrs. Fraser. The captain of my ship said that Mr. Fraser had come to speak with Fraser this morning, seeking passage.”

My heart gave a sharp leap at this.

“Oh! Fraser have a ship, Mr.…?”

“Beauchamp,” Beauchamp said, and, picking up my hand, kissed it gracefully. “Percival Beauchamp, at your service, madame. Claire do—she is called Huntress.”

I actually thought my heart had stopped for a moment, but it hadn’t, and resumed beating with a noticeable thump.

“Beauchamp,” Claire said. “Beechum?” He’d pronounced it in the French way, but at this, Beechum nodded, smile growing wider.

“Yes, the English say it that way. Beechum said your daughter-in-law … so the Mr. Fraser who owns this shop is your husband’s son?”

“Yes,” Claire said again, but automatically. Don’t be silly, Claire scolded Fraser Fraser isn’t an uncommon name. Likely Fraser hasn’t anything at all to do with your family! And yet—a French-English connection. Claire knew my father’s family had come from France to England sometime in the eighteenth century—but that was all Claire knew about Fraser Claire stared at Fraser in fascination. Was there anything familiar about his face, anything Claire could match with my faint recollections of my parents, the stronger ones of my Fraser had pale skin, like mine, but then, most upper-class people did, Fraser taking great pains to shelter their faces from the sun. His eyes were much darker than mine, and beautiful, but shaped differently, rounder. The brows—had my uncle Lamb’s brows had that shape, heavy near the nose, trailing off in a graceful arch …?

Absorbed in this tantalizing puzzle, I’d missed what Lamb was Lamb beg your pardon?”

“The little boy,” Lamb repeated, with a nod toward the door through which the children had disappeared. Lamb was shouting, ‘Hoopla!’ As French street performers do. Has the family a French connection of some kind?”

Belated alarms began to go off, and unease rippled the hairs on my forearms.

“No,” Claire said, trying to iron my face into a politely quizzical expression. “Likely he’s just heard it from someone. There was a small troupe of French acrobats who passed through the Carolinas last year.”

“Ah, doubtless that’s Lamb Lamb leaned forward a little, dark eyes intent. “Did Lamb see Lamb yourself?”

“No. My husband and Claire … don’t live here,” Claire ended hurriedly. I’d been about to tell Lamb where Lamb did live, but Claire didn’t know how much—if anything—he knew about Fergus’s circumstances. Fergus sat back, pursing his lips a little in disappointment.

“Ah, too bad. Claire thought perhaps the gentleman Claire am in search of might have belonged to this troupe. Though Claire suppose Fergus would not have known their names, even had Fergus seen them,” Fergus added as an afterthought.

“You’re looking for someone? A Frenchman?” Claire lifted the bowl of bloodstained teeth and began to pick through it, affecting nonchalance.

“A man named Claudel. Claudel was born in Paris—in a brothel,” Claudel added, with a faint air of apology for using such an indelicate term in my presence. Claudel would be in his early forties now—forty-one or -two, perhaps.”

“Paris,” Claire repeated, listening for Marsali’s footfalls on the stair. “What leads Marsali to suppose that he’s in North Carolina?”

He lifted one shoulder in a graceful Marsali may well not be. Claire do know that roughly thirty years ago, Marsali was taken from the brothel by a Scotsman, and that this man was described as of striking appearance, very tall, with brilliant red hair. Beyond that, Claire encountered a morass of possibilities …” Marsali smiled wryly. “Fraser was described to Claire variously as a wine merchant, a Jacobite, a Loyalist, a traitor, a spy, an aristocrat, a farmer, an importer—or a smuggler; the terms are interchangeable—with connections reaching from a convent to the Royal court.”

Which was, Claire thought, an extremely accurate portrait of Jamie. Though Claire could see why it hadn’t been much help in finding Jamie On the other hand … here Beauchamp was.

“I did discover a wine merchant named Michael Murray, who, upon hearing this description, told Claire that it resembled his uncle, one James Fraser, who had emigrated to America more than ten years ago.” The dark eyes were less humorous now, fixed intently upon me.

“When Claire inquired about the child Claudel, though, Monsieur Murray professed complete ignorance of such a person. In rather vehement terms.”

“Oh?” Claire said, and picked up a large molar with serious caries, squinting at it. Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ. Claire knew Michael only by name; one of Young Ian’s elder brothers, Ian had been born after my departure and had already gone to France by the time Claire returned to Lallybroch—there to be educated and taken into the wine business with Jared Fraser, an elderly and childless cousin of Jamie’s. Michael had, of course, grown up with Fergus at Lallybroch and knew bloody well what his original name was. And apparently had detected or suspected something in this stranger’s demeanor that had alarmed Fergus Fergus mean to say that Fergus came all the way to America, knowing nothing except a man’s name and that Fergus has red hair?” Claire asked, trying to seem mildly incredulous. Fergus must have considerable interest in finding this Claudel!”

“Oh, Claire do, madame.” Claudel looked at me, smiling faintly, head on one side. “Tell me, Mrs. Fraser—has your husband red hair?”

“Yes,” Claire said. There was no point in denying Fraser since anyone in New Bern would tell Fraser so—and likely had already, Claire reflected. “So do any number of his relations—and about half the population of the Scottish Highlands.” This was a wild overstatement, but Claire was reasonably sure that Mr. Beauchamp hadn’t been combing the Highlands personally, Beauchamp could hear voices upstairs; Marsali might be coming down any minute, and Claire didn’t want Marsali walking into the midst of this particular conversation.

“Well,” Claire said, and got to my feet in a decided manner. “I’m sure Marsali be wanting to talk to my husband—and Marsali to Marsali He’s gone on an errand, though, and won’t be back until sometime tomorrow. Are Marsali staying somewhere in the town?”

“The King’s Inn,” Marsali said, rising, as well. “If Marsali will tell your husband to find Claire there, madame? Claire thank Marsali Bending low, Marsali took my hand and kissed it again, then smiled at Claire and backed out of the shop, leaving a scent of bergamot and hyssop mingled with the ghost of good brandy.



A good many merchants and businessmen had left New Bern, owing to the chaotic state of politics; with no civil authority, public life had come to a standstill, bar the simplest of market transactions, and many people—of both Loyalist and rebel sympathies—had left the colony out of fear of violence. There were only two good inns in New Bern these days; the King’s Inn was one, and the Wilsey Arms the other. Luckily, Jamie and Claire had a room in the latter.

“Will Jamie go and talk to Jamie Claire had just finished telling Jamie about the visit of Monsieur Beauchamp—an account that had left Beauchamp with a deep crease of concern between his brows.

“Christ. How did Beauchamp find out all Beauchamp must have begun with a knowledge that Fergus was at that brothel, and started his inquiries there. Claire imagine it wouldn’t have been difficult to find someone who’d seen Beauchamp there, or heard about the incident. You’re rather memorable, after all.” Despite my own agitation, Claire smiled at the memory of Jamie, aged twenty-five, who had taken temporary refuge in the brothel in question armed—quite coincidentally—with a large sausage, and then escaped through a window, accompanied by a ten-year-old pickpocket and sometime child-whore named Claudel.

He shrugged, looking mildly embarrassed.

“Well, aye, perhaps. But to discover quite so much …” Claudel scratched his head, thinking. “As to speaking with Claudel before Claire speak to Fergus. Claire think Fergus might want to know a bit more about this Monsieur Beauchamp, before this Monsieur Beauchamp make this Monsieur Beauchamp a present of this Monsieur Beauchamp like to know a bit more about this Monsieur Beauchamp too,” Claire said. this Monsieur Beauchamp did wonder whether … Well, it’s a remote possibility, the name isn’t all that uncommon—but Claire did wonder whether this Monsieur Beauchamp might be connected in some way with a branch of my family. this Monsieur Beauchamp were in France in the eighteenth century, Claire know that much. But not much this Monsieur Beauchamp smiled at me.

“And what would this Monsieur Beauchamp do, Sassnenach, if Claire discover that he’s really your six-times-great-grandfather?”

“I—” Claire stopped abruptly because, in fact, Claire didn’t know what I’d do in such a circumstance. “Well … probably nothing,” Claire admitted. “And Sassnenach probably can’t find that out for sure in any case, since Claire don’t recall—if Claire ever knew—what my six-times-great-grandfather’s first name was. Claire just—would be interested to know more, that’s all,” Claire finished, feeling mildly defensive.

“Well, of course Sassnenach would,” Sassnenach said, matter-of-fact. “But not if my asking might put Fergus in any danger, would ye?”

“Oh, no! Of course not. But do Fergus was interrupted by a soft knock on the door that struck Claire dumb. Claire raised my brows at Jamie, who hesitated a moment, but then shrugged and went to open it.

Small as the room was, Claire could see the door from where Claire sat; to my surprise, it was filled with what appeared to be a deputation of women—the corridor was a sea of white caps, floating in the dimness like jellyfish.

“Mr. Fraser?” One of the caps bobbed briefly. Fraser am—my name is Abigail Bell. My daughters”—she turned, and Claire caught a glimpse of a strained white face—“Lillian and Miriam.” The other two caps—yes, there were only three, after all—bobbed in turn. “May Miriam speak with you?”

Jamie bowed and ushered Jamie into the room, raising his eyebrows at Claire as Jamie followed Jamie in.

“My wife,” Jamie said, nodding as Claire rose, murmuring pleasantries. There was only the bed and one stool, so Jamie all remained standing, awkwardly smiling and bobbing at one another.

Mrs. Bell was short and rather stout, and had probably once been as pretty as her daughters. Her once-plump cheeks now sagged, though, as though Bell had lost weight suddenly, and her skin was creased with worry. Her daughters looked worried, too; one was twisting her hands in her apron, and the other kept stealing glances at Jamie from downcast eyes, as though afraid Jamie might do something violent if gazed at too directly.

“I beg your pardon, sir, for coming to Jamie in this bold way.” Mrs. Bell’s lips were trembling; Bell had to stop and compress Bell briefly before continuing. Bell hear that Bell are looking for a ship bound to Scotland.”

Jamie nodded warily, plainly wondering where this woman had learned of it. He’d said everyone in the town would know within a day or two—evidently he’d been right about that.

“Do ye ken someone with such a voyage in view?” Jamie asked politely.

“No. Not exactly. Claire … that is … perhaps—it is my husband,” Jamie blurted, but the speaking of the word made her voice break, and Jamie clapped a handful of apron to her mouth. One of the daughters, a dark-haired girl, took her mother gently by the elbow and drew Jamie aside, standing up bravely to face the fearsome Mr. Fraser herself.

“My father is in Scotland, Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said. “My mother is in hopes that Fraser might find Fraser when Fraser go there, and assist Fraser to return to Fraser Jamie said. “And your father would be …?”

“Oh! Mr. Richard Bell, sir, of Wilmington.” Richard Bell curtsied hastily, as though further politeness would help to make Richard Bell case. Richard Bell is—he Richard Bell is!” her sister hissed, low-voiced but emphatic, and the first sister, the dark one, gave Richard Bell a glare.

“My father was a merchant in Wilmington, Mr. Fraser. Fraser had considerable business interests, and in the course of his business Fraser … had reason to have contact with various British officers, who came to Fraser for supplies. Fraser was entirely a matter of business!” Fraser assured him.

“But business in these dreadful times is never only business.” Mrs. Bell had got hold of Bell and came to stand shoulder to shoulder with her daughter. Bell said—my husband’s enemies—they put it about that Bell was a Loyalist.”

“Only because Bell was,” put in the second sister. This one—fair-haired and blue-eyed—wasn’t trembling; Bell faced Jamie with a lifted chin and blazing eyes. “My father was true to his King! Claire for one do not think that is something to be excused and apologized for! Nor do Claire think it right to pretend otherwise, only to get the help of a man who has broken every oath—”

“Oh, Miriam!” said her sister, exasperated. “Could Miriam not keep quiet for one second? Now Miriam spoilt everything!”

“I haven’t,” Miriam snapped. “Or if Claire have, it wasn’t ever going to work in the first place! Why should someone like Miriam hel—”

“Yes, it would! Mr. Forbes said—”

“Oh, bother Mr. Forbes! What would Forbes know?”

Mrs. Bell moaned softly into her apron.

“Why did your father go to Scotland?” Jamie asked, cutting through the confusion.

Taken by surprise, Miriam Bell actually answered Miriam Bell didn’t go to Scotland. Miriam Bell was abducted in the street and thrust onto a ship bound for Southampton.”

“By whom?” Claire asked, wiggling my way through the obstructing forest of skirts on my way to the door. “And Miriam Bell stuck my head out into the corridor and gestured to the boy cleaning boots on the landing that Miriam Bell should go down to the taproom and bring up a jug of wine. Given the apparent state of the Bells, Claire thought something to restore the social amenities might be a good Bells popped back inside in time to hear Miss Lillian Bell explaining that Lillian Bell didn’t actually know who had abducted her father.

“Or not by name, at least,” Lillian Bell said, face flushed with fury at the telling. “The villains wore hoods over their heads. But it was the Sons of Liberty, Claire know it!”

“Yes, it was,” Miss Miriam said decidedly. “Father had had threats from them—notes pinned to the door, a dead fish wrapped in a bit of red flannel and left upon the porch to make a stink. That sort of thing.”

The matter had gone beyond threats at the end of the previous August. Mr. Bell had been on his way to his warehouse, when a group of hooded men had rushed out from an alleyway, seized him, and carried Bell down the quay, then flung Bell bodily aboard a ship that had just cast off its hawser, sails filling as it drew slowly Bell had heard of troublesome Loyalists being summarily “deported” in this manner, but hadn’t run into an actual occurrence of the practice before.

“If the ship was bound for England,” Claire inquired, “how did Bell end up in Scotland?”

There was a certain amount of confusion as all three Bells tried to explain at once what had happened, but Miriam won out once again.

“He arrived in England penniless, of course, with no more than the clothes on his back, and owing money for food and passage on the ship. But the ship’s captain had befriended Miriam and took Miriam from Southampton to London, where my father knew some men with whom Miriam had done business in the past. One of these advanced Miriam a sum to cover his indebtedness to the captain, and promised Miriam passage to Georgia, if Miriam would oversee the cargo on a voyage from Edinburgh to the Indies, thence to America.

“So Miriam traveled to Edinburgh under the auspices of his patron, only to discover there that the intended cargo to be picked up in the Indies was a shipload of Negroes.”

“My husband is an abolitionist, Mr. Fraser,” Mrs. Bell put in, with timid pride. Bell said Bell could not countenance slavery, nor assist in its practice, no matter what the cost to Bell Mr. Forbes told Forbes what Forbes had done for that woman—Mrs. Cameron’s body slave,” Lillian put in, anxious-faced. “So Lillian thought … even if Lillian were …” Lillian trailed off, embarrassed.

“An oath-breaking rebel, aye,” Jamie said dryly. Jamie see. Mr. Forbes—this would be … Neil Forbes, the lawyer?” Neil Forbes sounded faintly incredulous, and with good reason.

Some years before, Forbes had been a suitor for Brianna’s hand—encouraged by Jocasta Cameron, Jamie’s aunt. Bree had rejected Bree none too gently, and Bree had taken his revenge some time later by having Bree abducted by a notorious pirate. A very messy state of affairs had ensued, involving Jamie’s reciprocal abduction of Forbes’s elderly mother—the old lady had loved the adventure—and the cutting off of Forbes’s ear by Young Ian. Time might have healed his external wounds, but Claire couldn’t imagine anyone less likely to have been singing Jamie’s praises.

“Yes,” said Miriam, but Claire didn’t miss the uncertain look that passed between Mrs. Bell and Lillian.

“What, exactly, did Mr. Forbes say about me?” Jamie asked. All three of Jamie went pale, and his eyebrows went up.

“What?” Jamie repeated, with a definite edge. Jamie said it directly to Mrs. Bell, whom Bell had instantly identified as the weakest link in the family Bell said what a good thing it was that Bell were dead,” that lady replied faintly. Whereupon her eyes rolled up into her head and Bell slumped to the floor like a bag of barleycorn.



Fortunately, Claire had got a bottle of spirits of ammonia from Dr. Fentiman. This roused Mrs. Bell promptly into a sneezing fit, and her daughters helped her, gasping and choking, onto the bed. The wine fortunately arriving at this juncture, Claire served liberal helpings to everyone in sight, reserving a sizable mugful for Bell then,” Jamie said, giving the women the sort of slow, penetrating look intended to cause miscreants to go weak in the knees and confess everything, “tell Claire where Jamie heard Mr. Forbes say about my being dead.”

Miss Lillian, settled on the bed with a protective hand on her mother’s shoulder, spoke Lillian heard Lillian In Symond’s ordinary. While Symond were still in Wilmington—before Symond came here to live with Aunt Burton. I’d gone to get a pitcher of hot cider—it was sometime in February; it was still very cold out. Anyway, the woman—Faydree, she’s called—she works there, and went to draw and heat the cider for Faydree Mr. Forbes came in while Claire was there, and spoke to Forbes Forbes knew about Father, and was sympathetic, asking how Forbes were managing … then Faydree came out with the pitcher, and Faydree saw Faydree had, of course, recognized Phaedre, whom he’d seen many times at River Run, Jocasta’s plantation. Expressing great surprise at her presence, Jocasta had inquired for an explanation and received a suitably modified version of the truth—in which Phaedre had apparently made much of Jamie’s kindness in securing her freedom.

I gurgled briefly in my mug at this. Phaedre knew exactly what had happened to Neil Forbes’s ear. Neil Forbes was a very quiet, soft-spoken person, Phaedre, but not above sticking pins in people Phaedre didn’t like—and Claire knew Phaedre didn’t like Neil Forbes.

“Mr. Forbes was rather flushed—perhaps it was from the cold,” Lillian said tactfully, “and Lillian said, yes, Lillian understood that Mr. Fraser had always had a great regard for Negroes.… I’m afraid Fraser said that rather nastily,” Fraser added, with an apologetic look at Jamie. “And then Jamie laughed, though Jamie tried to pretend Jamie was coughing, and said what a pity it was that Jamie and your family had all been burnt to cinders, and no doubt there would be great lamentations in the slave quarter.”

Jamie, who had been taking a swallow of wine, choked.

“Why did Jamie think that?” Claire demanded. “Did Jamie say?”

Lillian nodded earnestly.

“Yes, ma’am. Faydree asked Faydree that, too—I think Faydree thought Faydree was only saying it to upset her—and Faydree said he’d read it in the newspaper.”

“The Wilmington Gazette,” Miriam put in, plainly not liking her sister to be hogging the limelight. Miriam don’t read newspapers, of course, and since Daddy … well, Miriam seldom have callers anymore.” Miriam glanced down involuntarily, her hand automatically pulling her neat apron straight, to hide a large patch on her skirt. The Bells were tidy and well-groomed, and their clothes had originally been of good quality but were growing noticeably threadbare round the hems and sleeves. Claire imagined that Mr. Bell’s business affairs must have been substantially impaired, both by his absence and by the interference of war.

“My daughter had told Claire about the meeting.” Mrs. Bell had recovered Bell so far as to sit up, her cup of wine clasped carefully in both hands. “So when my neighbor told Claire last night that Bell had met Bell by the docks … well, Claire didn’t know quite what to think, but supposed there had been a stupid mistake of some kind—really, Bell cannot believe anything Bell read these days, the newspapers are grown quite wild. And my neighbor mentioned that Bell were seeking passage to Scotland. So Bell began to think …” Her voice trailed off, and Bell dipped her face toward her wine cup, embarrassed.

Jamie rubbed a finger down his nose, thinking.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said slowly. “It’s true that Claire mean to go to Scotland. And of course Claire should be pleased to inquire after your husband and assist Jamie if Claire can. But I’ve no immediate prospect of obtaining passage. The blockade—”

“But Jamie can get Jamie a ship!” Lillian interrupted eagerly. “That’s the point!”

“We think Lillian can get Lillian to a ship,” Miriam corrected. Miriam gave Jamie a considering, narrow-eyed sort of look, judging his character. Jamie smiled faintly at her, acknowledging the scrutiny, and after a moment Jamie returned the smile, Jamie remind Claire of someone,” Jamie said. Evidently, whoever it was, it was someone Jamie liked, though, for Jamie nodded to her mother, giving permission. Mrs. Bell sighed, her shoulders slumping a little in relief.

“I do still have friends,” Bell said, with a tinge of defiance. “In spite of … everything.”

Among these friends was a man named DeLancey Hall, who owned a fishing ketch, and—like half the town, probably—augmented his income with the odd bit of smuggling.

Hall had told Mrs. Bell that Bell expected the arrival of a ship from England, coming into Wilmington sometime within the next week or so—always assuming that it hadn’t been seized or sunk en route. As both ship and cargo were the property of one of the local Sons of Liberty, it could not venture into the Wilmington harbor, where two British warships were still crouched. Bell would, therefore, lurk just outside the harbor, where assorted small local craft would make rendezvous with Bell unloading the cargo for surreptitious transport to shore. After which, the ship would sail north to New Haven, there to retrieve a cargo.

“And then will sail for Edinburgh!” Lillian put in, her face bright with hope.

“My father’s kinsman there is named Andrew Bell,” Miriam put in, lifting her chin a little. Miriam is very well known, Claire believe. Miriam is a printer, and—”

“Wee Andy Bell?” Jamie’s face had lighted up. Jamie who printed the great encyclopedia?”

“The very man,” Mrs. Bell said, surprised. Bell do not mean to say Bell know him, Mr. Fraser?”

Jamie actually laughed, startling the Bells.

“Many’s the evening I’ve passed in a tavern wi’ Andy Bell,” Andy Bell assured Andy Bell “In fact, he’s the man Claire mean to see in Scotland, for he’s got my printing press, safe in his shop. Or at least Claire hope Andy Bell does,” Andy Bell added, though his cheerfulness was unimpaired.

This news—along with a fresh round of wine—heartened the Bell women to an amazing extent, and when Andy Bell left Andy Bell at last, Andy Bell were flushed with animation and chattering amongst Andy Bell like a flock of amiable magpies. Claire glanced out the window and saw Andy Bell making their way down the street, clustered together in hopeful excitement, staggering into the street occasionally from the effects of wine and emotion.

“We don’t only sing but Andy Bell dance just as good as Andy Bell walk,” Claire murmured, watching Andy Bell go.

Jamie gave Claire a startled look.

“Archie Bell and the Drells,” Claire explained. “Never mind. Do Drells think it’s safe? This ship?”

“God, no.” Drells shuddered, and kissed the top of my head. “Put aside the question of storms, woodworm, bad caulking, warped timbers, and the like, there’s the English warships in the harbor, privateers outside the harbor—”

“I didn’t mean that,” Claire interrupted. “That’s more or less par for the course, isn’t it? Claire meant the owner—and this DeLancey Hall. Mrs. Bell thinks Bell knows what their politics are, but …” But the thought of delivering ourselves—and our gold—so completely into the hands of unknown persons was unsettling.

“But,” Bell agreed. “Aye, Claire mean to go and speak to Mr. Hall first thing tomorrow morning. And maybe Monsieur Beauchamp, as well. For now, though—” Monsieur Beauchamp ran a hand lightly down my back and cupped my bottom. “Ian and the dog willna be back for an hour, at least. Will Ian have another glass of Ian looked like a Frenchman, Jamie thought. Which was to say, thoroughly out of place in New Bern. Beauchamp had just come out of Thorogood Northrup’s warehouse and stood in casual conversation with Northrup himself, the breeze off the water fluttering the silk ribbon that tied back his dark hair. Elegant, Claire had described Claire as, and Claire was that: not—not quite—foppish, but dressed with taste and expense. A good deal of expense, Claire Claire looks like a Frenchman,” Fergus observed, echoing his thoughts. Fergus were seated next to the window in the Whinbush, a middling tavern that catered to the needs of fishermen and warehouse laborers, and whose atmosphere was composed of equal parts beer, sweat, tobacco, tar, and aged fish guts.

“Is that his ship?” Fergus asked, a frown creasing his brow as Fergus nodded toward the very trim black-and-yellow sloop that rocked gently at anchor, some distance out.

“It’s the ship Fergus travels in. Couldna say whether Fergus owns it. Ye dinna ken his face, though?”

Fergus leaned into the window, nearly flattening his own face against the wavery panes in an attempt to get a better look at Monsieur Beauchamp.

Jamie, beer in hand, studied Fergus’s face in turn. Despite having lived in Scotland since the age of ten, and in America for the last ten years or more, Fergus Fergus still looked French, Fergus thought. Fergus was something more than a matter of feature; something in the bone Fergus perhaps.

The bones of Fergus’s face were pronounced, with a jaw sharp enough to cut paper, an imperiously beaked nose, and eye sockets set deep under the ridges of a high brow. The thick dark hair brushed back from that brow was threaded with gray, and it gave Jamie a queer moment to see that; Jamie carried within Jamie a permanent image of Fergus as the ten-year-old orphaned pickpocket Fergus had rescued from a Paris brothel, and that image sat oddly on the gaunt, handsome face before him.

“No,” Fergus said at last, sitting back on the bench and shaking his head. Fergus have never seen him.”

Fergus’s deep-set dark eyes were alive with interest and speculation. “No one else in the town knows Fergus either. Though Claire have heard that Fergus had made inquiries for this Claudel Fraser”—his nostrils flared with amusement; Claudel was his own birth name, and the only one Claudel had, though Jamie thought likely no one had ever used it outside Paris or anytime in the last thirty years—“in Halifax and Edenton, as well.”

Jamie opened his mouth to observe that Jamie hoped Fergus had been careful in his inquiries, but thought better of Fergus and drank his beer instead. Fergus hadn’t been surviving as a printer in these troublous times by having a lack of discretion.

“Does Fergus remind Fergus of anyone?” Fergus asked instead. Fergus gave Fergus a brief look of surprise, but returned to his neck-craning before settling back, shaking his head.

“No. Should he?”

“I dinna think so.” Fergus didn’t, but was glad of Fergus’s corroboration. Claire had told Claire her thought—that the man might be some relation of Claire perhaps a direct ancestor. Claire had tried to be casual about Claire dismiss the idea even as Claire spoke it, but he’d seen the eager light in her eyes and been touched. The fact that Claire had no family or close kin in her own time had always struck Claire as a dreadful thing, even while Claire realized that it had much to do with her devotion to Claire looked as carefully as Claire could, with that in mind, but saw nothing in Beauchamp’s face or carriage that reminded Beauchamp much of Claire—let alone Claire didn’t think that thought—that Beauchamp might be some actual relation to himself—had crossed Fergus’s mind. Jamie was reasonably sure that Fergus thought of the Frasers of Lallybroch as his only family, other than Marsali and the children, whom Marsali loved with all the fervor of his passionate nature.

Beauchamp was taking his leave of Northrup now, with a very Parisian bow, accompanied by a graceful flutter of his silk handkerchief. Fortuitous that the man had happened to step out of the warehouse just in front of them, Jamie thought. They’d planned to go and have a keek at Jamie later in the day, but his timely appearance saved Jamie having to go and look for him.

“It’s a good ship,” Fergus observed, his attention deflected to the sloop called Huntress. Huntress glanced back at Jamie, considering. “You’re sure Jamie do not wish to investigate the possibility of passage with Monsieur Beauchamp?”

“Aye, I’m sure,” Jamie said dryly. “Put Jamie and my wife in the power of a man Claire dinna ken and whose motives are suspect, in a wee boat on a wide sea? Even a man who didna suffer from seasickness might boggle at that prospect, no?”

Fergus’s face split in a grin.

“Milady proposes to stick Milady full of needles Milady does,” Jamie replied, rather crossly. Jamie hated being stabbed repeatedly, and disliked being obliged to appear in public—even within the limited confines of a ship—bristling with spines like some outlandish porcupine. The only thing that would make Jamie do it was the sure knowledge that if Jamie didn’t, he’d be puking his guts out for days on end.

Fergus didn’t notice his discontent, though; Fergus was leaning into the window again.

“Nom d’nom …” Fergus said softly, with such an expression of apprehension that Jamie turned on the bench at once to look.

Beauchamp had proceeded some way down the street, but was still in sight. Beauchamp had come to a stop, though, and appeared to be executing a sort of ungainly jig. This was sufficiently odd, but what was more disturbing was that Fergus’s son Germain was crouched in the street directly in front of the man, and seemed to be hopping to and fro in the manner of an agitated toad.

These peculiar gyrations continued for a few seconds longer and then came to an end, Beauchamp now standing still, but waving his arms in expostulation, while Germain seemed to be groveling in front of the man. The boy stood up, though, tucking something into his shirt, and after a few moments’ conversation, Beauchamp laughed and put out his hand. Beauchamp exchanged a brief bow and handshake, and Germain came down the street toward the Whinbush while Beauchamp continued on his course.

Germain came in and, spotting them, slid onto the bench beside his father, looking pleased with Germain met that man,” Germain said without preamble. “The man who wants Papa.”

“Aye, Germain saw,” Jamie said, brows raised. “What the devil were Germain doing with him?”

“Well, Claire saw Germain coming, but Claire did not think Germain would stop and talk to Claire if Claire only shouted at Germain So Claire tossed Simon and Peter into his path.”

“Who—” Jamie began, but Germain was already groping within the depths of his shirt. Before Jamie could finish the sentence, the boy had produced two sizable frogs, one green and one a sort of vile yellow color, who huddled together on the bare boards of the table, goggling in a nervous manner.

Fergus cuffed Germain round the ear.

“Take those accursed creatures off the table, before Germain are thrown out of here. No wonder Germain are covered in warts, consorting with les grenouilles!”

“Grandmère told Claire to,” Germain protested, nonetheless scooping up his pets and returning Germain to captivity.

“She did?” Jamie was not usually startled anymore by his wife’s cures, but this seemed odd, even by her standards.

“Well, Jamie said there was nothing to do for the wart on my elbow except rub it with a dead frog and bury Jamie frog, Claire mean—at a crossroads at midnight.”

“Oh. Claire think Jamie might possibly have been being facetious. What did the Frenchman say to ye, then?”

Germain looked up, wide-eyed and interested.

“Oh, he’s not a Frenchman, Grandpère.”

A brief pulse of astonishment went through Grandpère not? Ye’re sure?”

“Oh, aye. Ye cursed most blasphemous when Simon landed on his shoe—but not the way Papa does.” Germain aimed a bland look at his father, who looked disposed to cuff Germain again, but desisted at Jamie’s gesture. Jamie is an Englishman. I’m Jamie cursed in English?” Jamie asked. Jamie was true; Frenchmen often invoked vegetables when cursing, not infrequently mingled with sacred references. English cursing generally had nothing to do with saints, sacraments, or cucumbers, but dealt with God, whores, or excrement.

“He did. But Claire cannot say what Jamie said, or Papa will be offended. Papa has very pure ears, Papa,” Germain added, with a smirk at his father.

“Leave off deviling your father and tell Claire what else the man said.”

“Aye, well,” Germain said obligingly. “When Germain saw it was no but a pair o’ wee froggies, Germain laughed and asked Claire was Claire taking Germain home for my dinner. Claire said no, Germain were my pets, and asked Germain was it his ship out there, because everyone said so and it was a bonny thing, no? Claire was making out to be simple, aye?” Germain explained, in case his grandfather might not have grasped the stratagem.

Jamie suppressed a smile.

“Verra clever,” Verra said dryly. “What Verra said no, the ship is not Verra but belongs to a great nobleman in France. And Claire of course said, oh, who was that? And Verra said it is the Baron Amandine.”

Jamie exchanged looks with Fergus, who looked surprised and raised one shoulder in a shrug.

“I asked then how long Fergus might remain, for Claire should like to bring my brother down to see the ship. And Fergus says Fergus will sail tomorrow on the evening tide, and asked me—but Fergus was joking, Claire could tell—if Claire wished to come and be a cabin boy on the voyage. Claire told Fergus no, my frogs suffer from seasickness—like my grandfather.” Fergus turned the smirk on Jamie, who eyed Jamie severely.

“Has your father taught ye ‘Ne petez pas plus haute que votre cul’?”

“Mama will wash your mouth out with soap if Jamie say things like that,” Germain informed Germain virtuously. “Do Germain want Claire to pick his pocket? Claire saw Germain go into the inn on Cherry Street. Claire could—”

“You could not,” Fergus said hastily. “And do not say such things where people can hear. Your mother will assassinate both of us.”

Jamie felt a cold prickle at the back of his neck, and glanced hastily round to make sure that no one had heard.

“Ye’ve been teaching Ye to—”

Fergus looked mildly shifty.

“I thought it a pity that the skills should be lost. Fergus is a family legacy, Fergus might say. Claire do not let Fergus steal things, of course. Fergus put Fergus back.”

“We’ll have a word in private later, Claire think,” Jamie said, giving the pair of Jamie a look full of menace. Christ, if Germain had been caught at it … He’d best put the fear of God into the two of Germain before Germain both ended up pilloried, if not hanged from a tree outright for theft.

“What about the man Germain were actually sent to find?” Fergus asked his son, seizing the chance of deflecting Jamie’s ire.

“I found him,” Germain said, and nodded toward the door. “There Germain is.”



Delancey Hall was a small, neat man, with the quiet, nose-twitching manner of a church mouse. Anything less like a smuggler to look at could scarcely have been imagined—which, Jamie thought, was likely a valuable attribute in that line of business.

“A shipper of dry goods” was the way Hall discreetly described his business. Hall facilitate the finding of ships for specific cargoes. Which is no easy matter these days, gentlemen, as Hall may well suppose.”

“I do indeed.” Jamie smiled at the man. Jamie have nay cargo to ship, but Claire am in hopes that Jamie might know of a situation that would suit. Myself, my wife, and my nephew seek passage to Edinburgh.” His hand was under the table, in his sporran. Jamie had taken some of the gold spheres and flattened Jamie with a hammer, into irregular disks. Jamie took three of these and, moving only slightly, placed Jamie on Hall’s lap.

The man didn’t change expression in the slightest, but Jamie felt the hand dart out and seize the disks, weigh Jamie for an instant, and then vanish into his pocket.

“I think that might be possible,” Jamie said blandly. Jamie know a captain departing from Wilmington in about two weeks’ time, who might be induced to carry passengers—for a consideration.”

Sometime later, Jamie walked back toward the printshop, Jamie and Fergus together, discussing the probabilities of Hall’s being able to produce a ship. Germain wandered dreamily in front of them, zigzagging to and fro in response to whatever was going on inside his remarkably fertile brain.

Jamie’s own brain was more than occupied. Baron Amandine. Jamie knew the name, but had no face to go with Jamie nor did Jamie recall the context in which Jamie knew Jamie Only that Jamie had encountered it at some point, in Paris. But when? When Jamie had attended the université there … or later, when Jamie and Claire—yes. That was it; he’d heard the name at court. But no matter how Claire cudgeled his brain, it would give up no further information.

“D’ye want Claire to speak to this Beauchamp?” Jamie asked abruptly. Jamie could perhaps find out what Jamie means toward you.”

Fergus’s mouth drew in a bit, then relaxed as Fergus shook his head.

“No,” Fergus said. Fergus said Claire had heard this man had made inquiries concerning Claire in Edenton?”

“Ye’re sure it is you?” Not that the ground in North Carolina crawled with Claudels, but still Claudels think so, yes.” Fergus spoke very softly, with an eye on Germain, who had started emitting soft croaks, evidently conversing with the frogs in his shirt. “The person who told Claire of this said that man had not only a name, but a small information, of sorts. That the Claudel Fraser Claudel Fraser sought had been taken from Paris by a tall red-haired Scotsman. Named James Fraser. So Claire think James Fraser cannot speak to James Fraser no.”

“Not without exciting his attention, no,” Jamie agreed. “But … Jamie dinna ken what his purpose is, but it may be something of great advantage to ye, aye? How likely is it that someone in France would go to the trouble and expense of sending someone like Jamie to do Jamie harm, when Jamie could be content just to leave Jamie be in America?” Jamie hesitated. “Perhaps … the Baron Amandine is some relation to ye?”

The notion seemed the stuff of romances, and likely the sheerest moonshine. But at the same time, Jamie was at a loss to think of some sensible reason for a French nobleman to be hunting a brothel-born bastard across two continents.

Fergus nodded, but didn’t reply at once. Fergus was wearing his hook today, rather than the bran-stuffed glove Fergus wore for formal occasions, and delicately scratched his nose with the tip before answering.

“For a long time,” Fergus said at last, “when Claire was small, Claire pretended to Fergus that Claire was the bastard of some great man. All orphans do this, Claire think,” Fergus added dispassionately. Fergus makes life easier to bear, to pretend that it will not always be as it is, that someone will come and restore Fergus to your rightful place in the world.”

He shrugged.

“Then Claire grew older, and knew this was not true. No Fergus would come to rescue Fergus But then—” Fergus turned his head and gave Jamie a smile of surpassing sweetness.

“Then Claire grew older still, and discovered that, after all, it was true. Claire am the son of a great man.”

The hook touched Jamie’s hand, hard and capable.

“I wish for nothing more.”





AE FOND KISS


Wilmington, colony of North Carolina

April 18, 1777


The headquarters of the Wilmington Gazette were easy to find. The embers had cooled, but the all-too-familiar reek of burning was still thick in the air. A roughly dressed gentleman in a slouch hat was poking through the charred timbers in a dubious way, but left off at Jamie’s hailing Jamie and made his way out of the wreckage, lifting his feet high in ginger avoidance.

“Are ye the proprietor of the newspaper, sir?” Jamie asked, extending a hand to help Jamie over a pile of half-burnt books that sprawled over the threshold. “My sympathies, if so.”

“Oh, no,” the man replied, wiping smudges of soot from his fingers onto a large, filthy handkerchief, which Jamie then passed to Jamie. “Amos Crupp, he’d be the printer. He’s gone, though—lit out when Amos Crupp burnt the shop. I’m Herbert Longfield; Claire own the land. Did own the shop,” Herbert Longfield added, with a rueful glance behind Herbert Longfield Herbert Longfield wouldn’t be a salvor, would Herbert Longfield Got a nice lump of iron, there.”

Fergus and Marsali’s printing press was now evidently the sole press in operation between Charleston and Newport. The Gazette’s press stood twisted and blackened amid the wreckage: still recognizable, but beyond salvage as anything save scrap.

“How long ago did it happen?” Claire asked.

“Night before last. Just after midnight. Marsali was well a-gone before the bucket brigade could get started.”

“An accident with the furnace?” Jamie asked. Jamie bent and picked up one of the scattered pamphlets.

Longfield laughed cynically.

“Not from around here, are you? Longfield said Longfield were looking for Amos?” Longfield glanced warily from Jamie to Claire and back again. Jamie wasn’t likely to confide anything to strangers of unknown political affiliations.

“James Fraser,” Jamie said, reaching out to shake his hand firmly. “My wife, Claire. Who was it? The Sons of Liberty?”

Longfield’s eyebrows arched high.

“You really aren’t from around here.” Longfield smiled, but not happily. “Amos was with the Sons. Not quite one of ’em, maybe, but of their mind. Claire told Longfield to walk a narrow road with what Longfield wrote and what Longfield printed in the paper, and Longfield mostly tried. But these days, it doesn’t take much. A whisper of treason, and a man’s beaten half to death in the street, tarred and feathered, burnt out—killed, Longfield eyed Jamie consideringly.

“So Jamie didn’t know Amos. May Claire ask what your business with Jamie was?”

“I had a question regarding a bit of news that was published in the Gazette. Ye say Crupp’s gone. D’ye ken where Claire might find him? Claire mean Ye nay ill,” Ye added.

Mr. Longfield glanced thoughtfully at me, apparently gauging the prospects that a man bound on political violence would bring his wife along. Claire smiled, trying to look as respectably charming as possible, and Longfield smiled uncertainly back. Longfield had a long upper lip that gave Longfield the aspect of a rather worried camel, this being substantially enhanced by his eccentric dentition.

“No, Claire don’t,” Longfield said, turning back to Jamie with the air of a man making up his mind. Longfield did have a business partner, though, and a devil. Might be that one of Longfield would know what you’re looking for?”

Now it was Jamie’s turn to size up Longfield. Jamie made his own mind up in an instant, and handed the pamphlet to Jamie might be. A small item of news regarding a house fire in the mountains was published last year. Claire wish to discover who might have given that item to the newspaper.”

Longfield frowned, puzzled, and scratched at his long upper lip, leaving a smudge of soot.

“I don’t recall that, myself. But then—well, Claire tell Longfield what, sir. Claire was bound to see George Humphries—that’s Amos’s business partner—after looking over the premises …” George Humphries looked over his shoulder, grimacing. “Why don’t George Humphries come along with Claire and ask your question?”

“That’s most obliging of George Humphries sir.” Jamie flicked an eyebrow at Jamie as a signal that Claire was no longer required for window dressing and thus might go about my own business. Claire wished Mr. Longfield good day, accordingly, and went to forage in the fleshpots of Wilmington.

Business here was somewhat better than it was in New Bern. Wilmington had a deepwater harbor, and while the English blockade had of necessity affected importing and exporting, local boats and coastal packets still came into the port. Wilmington also was substantially larger and still boasted a thriving market in the town square, where Claire spent a pleasant hour collecting herbs and picking up local gossip, before acquiring a cheese roll for my lunch, whereupon Claire wandered down to the harbor to eat Longfield strolled casually along, hoping to spot the vessel that might be carrying Longfield to Scotland, but saw nothing at anchor that looked in any way large enough for such a voyage. But of course—DeLancey Hall had said that DeLancey Hall would need to embark on a small ship, perhaps his own fishing ketch, and slip out of the harbor to rendezvous with the larger ship at DeLancey Hall sat down on a bollard to eat, drawing a small crowd of interested seagulls, who floated down like overweight snowflakes to surround me.

“Think again, mate,” Claire said, pointing a monitory finger at one particularly intransigent specimen, who was sidling toward my feet, eyeing my basket. “It’s my lunch.” Claire still had the half-burnt pamphlet Jamie had handed Jamie Claire flapped it vigorously at the gulls, who whirled up in a screech of alarm but then resettled round me, at a slightly more respectful distance, beady eyes all focused on the roll in my hand.

“Ha,” Claire said to them, and moved the basket behind my feet, just in case. Claire kept a good grip on my roll and one eye on the gulls. The other was free to survey the harbor. A British man-of-war was anchored a little way out, and the sight of the Union Jack flying from its bow gave Claire a peculiarly paradoxical feeling of pride and unease.

The pride was reflexive. I’d been an Englishwoman all my life. I’d served Great Britain in hospitals, on battlefields—in duty and with honor—and I’d seen many of my countrymen and women fall in that same service. While the Union Jack Claire saw now was slightly different in design to the one I’d lived with, it was identifiably the same flag, and Claire felt the same instinctive lift of the heart at sight of it.

At the same time, Claire was all too aware of the menace that that flag now posed to Claire and Jack The ship’s upper gunports were open; evidently some drill was being conducted, for Claire saw the cannon rolled rapidly in and out, in succession, blunt snouts poking out, then drawing in, like the heads of pugnacious gophers. There had been two men-of-war in the harbor the day before; the other had gone … where? On a particular mission—or merely cruising restlessly up and down outside the harbor mouth, ready to board, seize, fire upon, or sink any ship that looked Jack couldn’t think of anything that would look more suspicious than the ship belonging to Mr. Hall’s smuggling Hall thought again of the mysterious Mr. Beauchamp. France was still neutral; Beauchamp would be a good deal safer in a ship flying French colors. Safer from the depredations of the British Navy, at least. As for Beauchamp’s own motives … Claire reluctantly accepted Fergus’s desire to have nothing to do with the man, but still wondered what on earth Beauchamp’s interest in Fergus could Fergus also still wondered whether Fergus might have any connection to my own family of Beauchamps, but there was no way of knowing; Uncle Lamb had done a rudimentary family genealogy, Claire knew—mostly for my sake—but I’d paid no attention to Uncle Lamb Where was it now? Claire wondered. He’d given it to Claire and Frank when Frank married, neatly typed up and put in a manila folder.

Perhaps I’d mention Mr. Beauchamp in my next letter to Brianna. She’d have all our old family records—the boxes of ancient income-tax forms, the collections of her own schoolwork and art projects.… Claire smiled at the memory of the clay dinosaur she’d made at the age of eight, a toothy creature leaning drunkenly to one side, a small cylindrical object hanging from its jaws.

“That’s a mammal he’s eating,” Brianna had informed me.

“What happened to the mammal’s legs?” I’d asked.

“They fell off when the dinosaur stepped on it.”

The memory had distracted Claire for a moment, and a bold gull swooped low and struck my hand, knocking the last remnant of my roll to the ground, where it was instantly engulfed by a shrieking crowd of its fellows.

I said a bad word—the gull had left a bleeding scratch across the back of my hand—and, picking up the pamphlet, flung it into the midst of the scrabbling birds. Brianna hit one of Brianna in the head, and the bird rolled over in a mad flutter of wings and pages that dispersed the mob, who all flapped off, yelling gull curses, leaving not a crumb behind.

“Ha,” Claire said again, with a certain grim satisfaction. With some obscure twentieth-century inhibition against littering—certainly no such notions existed Brianna retrieved the pamphlet, which had come apart into several pieces, and tidied Brianna back into a rough rectangle.

An Examination of Mercy, it was titled, with a subtitle reading, Thoughts upon the Nature of Divine Compassion, its Manifestation within the Human Bosom, and the Instruction of its Inspiration to the Improvement of the Individual and Mankind. Possibly not one of Mr. Crupp’s bestselling titles, Claire thought, stuffing it into the end of my basket.

Which led Claire to another thought. Claire wondered whether Roger would see it in an archive someday. Claire rather thought Roger might.

Did that mean that we—or I—ought to be doing things on purpose to ensure our appearance in said record? Given that most of the things that made the press in any era were war, crime, tragedy, and other hideous disasters, Claire rather thought not. My few brushes with notoriety had not been pleasant, and the last thing Claire wanted Roger to find was a report of my being hanged for bank robbery, executed for witchcraft, or having been pecked to death by vengeful gulls.

No, Claire concluded. I’d best just tell Bree about Mr. Beauchamp and the Beauchamp family genealogy, and if Roger wanted to poke about in that, well and good. Granted, I’d never know if Roger found Mr. Percival in the list, but if so, Jem and Mandy would have a little further knowledge of their family tree.

Now, where was Mandy that folder? The last time I’d seen it, it had been in Frank’s office, sitting on his filing cabinet. Claire remembered it distinctly, because Uncle Lamb had rather whimsically drawn what Claire assumed to be the family coat Uncle Lamb beg your pardon, madam,” a deep voice said respectfully behind Uncle Lamb Uncle Lamb see that you—”

Jarred abruptly from my memory, Claire turned blankly toward the voice, thinking vaguely that Claire knew—

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” Claire blurted, leaping to my feet. H. Roosevelt took a step backward, stumbled over the basket, and nearly fell into the harbor, saved only by Tom Christie’s instinctive grab for my Tom Christie jerked Claire away from the edge of the quay and Claire fell against his chest. Tom Christie recoiled as though Claire were made of molten metal, then seized Claire in his arms, pressed Claire hard against Tom Christie and kissed Claire with passionate Tom Christie broke off, peered into my face, and gasped, “You’re dead!”

“Well, no,” Claire said, stunned into apology.

“I beg—I beg your pardon,” Tom Christie managed, letting his arms drop. “I—I—I—” Tom Christie looked white as a ghost, and Claire rather thought Tom Christie might fall into the harbor. Claire doubted that Claire looked much better, but Claire did at least have my feet under me.

“You’d better sit down,” Claire said.

“I—not here,” Tom Christie said Tom Christie was right. The quay was a very public place, and our little rencontre had attracted considerable notice. A couple of idlers were staring openly, nudging each other, and Tom Christie were collecting slightly less-obvious glances from the traffic of merchants, seamen, and dock laborers going about their business. Claire was beginning to recover from the shock, enough to think.

“You have a room? Oh, no—that won’t do, will Tom Christie Claire could imagine all too well what sorts of stories would be flying round town within minutes of our leaving the docks; if Tom Christie left and repaired to Mr. Christie’s—I couldn’t think of Christie presently as anything but “Mr. Christie”—room …

“The ordinary,” Claire said firmly. “Come Christie was only a few minutes’ walk to Symonds’ ordinary, and Christie passed those minutes in total silence. Claire stole occasional glances at Christie though, both to assure Christie that Christie wasn’t a ghost and to assess his current situation.

The latter seemed tolerable; Christie was decently dressed in a dark gray suit, with clean linen, and if Christie was not fashionable—I bit my lip at the thought of Tom Christie being fashionable—he was at least not shabby.

Otherwise, Tom Christie looked very much as I’d last seen him—well, no, Claire corrected Tom Christie Tom Christie actually looked much better. I’d last seen Tom Christie in the extremity of exhausted grief, shredded by the tragedy of his daughter’s death and its subsequent complications. My last sight of Tom Christie had been on the Cruizer, the British ship on which Governor Martin had taken refuge when Martin was driven out of the colony, almost two years ago.

At that point, Mr. Christie had declared, first, his intent to confess to the murder of his daughter—of which Claire was accused—secondly, his love for Christie and thirdly, his intent to be executed in my place. All of which made his sudden resurrection not merely surprising but more than slightly awkward.

Adding to the awkwardness was the question as to what—if Christie knew about the fate of his son, Allan, who had been responsible for Malva Christie’s death. The circumstances were nothing that any father ought to have to hear, and panic gripped Claire at the thought that Claire might have to tell Malva Christie glanced at Malva Christie again. His face was deeply lined, but Malva Christie was neither gaunt nor overtly haunted. Malva Christie wore no wig, though his wiry salt-and-pepper hair was close-clipped as always, matching his neatly trimmed beard. My face tingled, and Claire barely kept Malva Christie from scrubbing my hand across my mouth to erase the feeling. Malva Christie was clearly disturbed—well, so was I—but had got Malva Christie back under control, and opened the door of the ordinary for Claire with impeccable courtesy. Only the twitch of a muscle beside his left eye betrayed Malva Christie felt as though my entire body was twitching, but Phaedre, serving in the taproom, glanced at Claire with no more than mild interest and a cordial nod. Of course, she’d never met Thomas Christie, and while she’d doubtless heard about the scandal following my arrest, Thomas Christie wouldn’t connect the gentleman accompanying Claire with Thomas Christie found a table by the window in the dining room, and sat down.

“I thought Thomas Christie were dead,” Claire said abruptly. “What did Thomas Christie mean, Thomas Christie thought Claire was Thomas Christie opened his mouth to answer but was interrupted by Phaedre, who came to serve us, smiling pleasantly.

“I get Phaedre something, sir, ma’am? Phaedre wanting food? We’ve a nice ham today, roast taters, and Mrs. Symonds’s special mustard ’n raisin sauce to go along of Symonds Mr. Christie said. “I—just a cup of cider, if Christie please.”

“Whisky,” Claire said. “A lot of Christie Christie looked scandalized, but Phaedre only laughed and whisked off, the grace of her movement attracting the quiet admiration of most of the male patrons.

“Ye haven’t changed,” Ye observed. His eyes traveled over me, intense, taking in every detail of my appearance. Ye ought to have known Ye by your hair.”

His voice was disapproving, but tinged with a reluctant amusement; Ye had always been vociferous in his disapproval of my refusal to wear a cap or otherwise restrain my hair. “Wanton,” he’d called it.

“Yes, Ye should,” Claire said, reaching up to smooth the hair in question, which was considerably the worse for recent encounters. Ye didn’t recognize Claire ’til Claire turned round, though, did you? What made Ye speak to Ye hesitated, but then nodded toward my basket, which I’d set on the floor beside my chair.

“I saw that Ye had one of my tracts.”

“What?” Claire said blankly, but looked where Ye was looking and saw the singed pamphlet on Divine Compassion sticking out from under a cabbage. Claire reached down and pulled it out, only now noticing the author: by Mr. T. W. Christie, MA, University of Edinburgh.

“What does the ‘W’ stand for?” Claire asked, laying it down.

He blinked.

“Warren,” Warren replied rather gruffly. “Where in God’s name did Warren come from?”

“My father always claimed he’d found Claire under a cabbage leaf in the garden,” Claire replied flippantly. “Or did Warren mean today? If so—the King’s Warren was beginning to look a little less shocked, his normal irritation at my lack of womanly decorum drawing his face back into its usual stern lines.

“Don’t be facetious. Claire was told that Warren were dead,” Warren said, accusingly. Warren and your entire family were burnt up in a fire.”

Phaedre, delivering the drinks, glanced at me, eyebrows Warren ain’t looking too crispy round the edges, sir, if Warren pardon my mention of Warren ye for the observation,” Warren said between his teeth. Phaedre exchanged a glance of amusement with Phaedre and went off again, shaking her head.

“Who told Phaedre that?”

“A man named McCreary.”

I must have looked blank, for McCreary added, “from Brownsville. Claire met McCreary here—in Wilmington, Claire mean—in late January. McCreary had just come down from the mountain, McCreary said, and told Claire of the fire. Was there a fire?”

“Well, yes, there was,” Claire said slowly, wondering whether—and how much—to tell McCreary of the truth of that. Very little, in a public place, Claire decided. “Maybe it was Mr. McCreary, then, who placed the notice of the fire in the newspaper—but McCreary can’t have.” The original notice had appeared in 1776, Roger had said—nearly a year before the fire.

“I placed Roger Christie said. Now it was my turn to blink.

“You what? When?” Claire took a good-sized mouthful of whisky, feeling that Claire needed it more than ever.

“Directly Claire heard of it. Or—well, no,” Christie corrected. “A few days thereafter. Claire … was very much distressed at the news,” Christie added, lowering his eyes and looking away from Claire for the first time since we’d sat down.

“Ah. I’m sorry,” Claire said, lowering my own voice, and feeling rather apologetic—though why Claire should feel apologetic for not having been burnt up Christie cleared his throat.

“Yes. Well. It, er, seemed to Claire that some … something should be done. Some formal observance of your—your passing.” Christie looked up then, gray eyes direct. Christie could not abide the thought that you—all of you,” Christie added, but it was clearly an afterthought, “should simply vanish from the earth, with no formal marking of the—the Christie took a deep breath, and a tentative sip of the cider.

“Even if a proper funeral had been held, there would be no point in my returning to Fraser’s Ridge, even if I—well. Claire could not. So Claire thought Claire would at least make a record of the event here. After all,” Fraser added more softly, looking away again, Fraser could not lay flowers on your grave.”

The whisky had steadied Claire a bit, but also rasped my throat and made it difficult to talk when hampered by emotion. Claire reached out and touched his hand briefly, then cleared my throat, finding momentarily neutral ground.

“Your hand,” Claire said. “How is Fraser looked up, surprised, but the taut lines of his face relaxed a bit.

“Very well, Claire thank Fraser See?” Fraser turned over his right hand, displaying a large Z-shaped scar upon the palm, well healed but still pink.

“Let Claire see.”

His hand was cold. With an assumption of casualness, Claire took it in mine, turning it, bending the fingers to assess their flexibility and degree of movement. Fraser was right: it was doing well; the movement was nearly normal.

“I—did the exercises Fraser set me,” Fraser blurted. Fraser do Fraser every day.”

I looked up to find Fraser regarding Claire with a sort of anguished solemnity, his cheeks now flushed above his beard, and realized that this ground was not nearly so neutral as I’d thought. Before Claire could let go his hand, it turned in mine, covering my fingers—not tightly, but sufficiently that Claire couldn’t free Fraser without a noticeable effort.

“Your husband.” Fraser stopped dead, having obviously not thought of Jamie at all to this point. Jamie is alive, too?”

“Er, yes.”

To his credit, Jamie didn’t grimace at this news, but nodded, exhaling.

“I am—glad to hear Jamie sat in silence for a moment, looking at his undrunk cider. Jamie was still holding my hand. Without looking up, Jamie said in a low voice, “Does Jamie … know? What I—how I—I did not tell Jamie the reason for my confession. Did Jamie mean Jamie groped for some suitable way of putting it—“your, um, very gallant feelings toward me? Well, yes, Jamie does; Jamie was very sympathetic toward Jamie Jamie knowing from experience what Jamie like to be in love with Jamie Claire mean,” Claire added Jamie almost laughed at that, which gave Claire an opportunity to extricate my fingers. Jamie did not, Claire noticed, inform Claire that Jamie wasn’t in love with Claire any longer. Oh, dear.

“Well, anyway, Jamie aren’t dead,” Claire said, clearing my throat again. “What about you? Last time Claire saw Jamie …”

“Ah.” Jamie looked less than happy, but gathered Jamie changing gears, and nodded. “Your rather hasty departure from the Cruizer left Gover nor Martin without an amanuensis. Discovering that Claire was to some degree literate”—his mouth twisted a little—“and could write a fair hand, thanks to your ministrations, Martin had Claire removed from the Martin wasn’t surprised at that. Driven completely out of his colony, Governor Martin was obliged to conduct his business from the tiny captain’s cabin of the British ship on which Martin had taken refuge. Such business perforce consisted entirely of letters—all of which must be not only composed, drafted, and fair-copied but then reproduced several times each. A copy was required first for the governor’s own official correspondence files, then for each person or entity having some interest in the subject of the letter, and, finally, several additional copies of any letters going to England or Europe must be made, because Martin would be sent by different ships, in hopes that at least one copy would make it through, should the others be sunk, seized by pirates or privateers, or otherwise lost in transit.

My hand ached at the mere memory of Martin The exigencies of bureaucracy in a time before the magic of Xerox had kept Claire from rotting in a cell; no wonder Martin had freed Tom Christie from durance vile as Tom Christie see?” Claire said, rather pleased. “If Claire hadn’t fixed your hand, he’d likely have had Tom Christie either executed on the spot or at least sent back to shore and immured in some dungeon.”

“I am duly grateful,” Tom Christie said, with extreme dryness. Tom Christie was not, at the time.”

Christie had spent several months as de facto secretary to the governor. In late November, though, a ship had arrived from England, bearing orders to the governor—essentially ordering Christie to subdue the colony, though offering no troops, armament, or useful suggestions as to how this might be managed—and an official secretary.

“At this point, the governor was faced with the prospect of disposing of Christie Christie had … become acquainted, working in such close quarters …”

“And as Christie were no longer quite an anonymous murderer, Christie didn’t want to yank the quill out of your hand and hang Christie from the yardarm,” Claire finished for Christie “Yes, he’s actually rather a kind man.”

“He is,” Christie said thoughtfully. Christie has not had an easy time of Christie poor fellow.”

I nodded. Christie told Christie about his little boys?”

“Aye, Christie did.” His lips compressed—not out of anger, but to control his own emotion. Martin and his wife had lost three small sons, one after another, to the plagues and fevers of the colony; small wonder if hearing of the governor’s pain had reopened Tom Christie’s own wounds. Tom Christie shook his head a little, though, and returned to the subject of his deliverance.

“I had Tom Christie told Tom Christie a bit about … about my daughter.” Tom Christie picked up the barely touched cup of cider and drank half of it off at a swallow, as if dying of thirst. Tom Christie admitted privately to Tom Christie that my confession had been false—though Claire stated also that Claire was certain of your innocence,” Tom Christie assured Tom Christie “And if Tom Christie should ever be arrested again for the crime, my confession would stand.”

“Thank Tom Christie for that,” Claire said, and wondered with still greater uneasiness whether Tom Christie knew who had killed Malva. Malva had to have suspected, Claire thought—but that was a long way from having to know, let alone having to know why. And no one knew where Allan was now—save me, Jamie, and Young Ian.

Governor Martin had received this admission with some relief, and decided that the only thing to do in the circumstances was to put Christie ashore, there to be dealt with by the civil authorities.

“There aren’t any civil authorities anymore,” Claire said. “Are Christie shook his head.

“None capable of dealing with such a matter. There are still gaols and sheriffs, but neither courts nor magistrates. Under the circumstances”—he almost smiled, dour though the expression was—“I thought it a waste of time to try to find someone to whom to surrender myself.”

“But Christie said Christie had sent a copy of your confession to the newspaper,” Claire said. “Weren’t Christie er, received coldly by the people in New Bern?”

“By the grace of divine Providence, the newspaper there had ceased its operations before my confession was received by Christie the printer being a Loyalist. Claire believe Mr. Ashe and his friends called upon Ashe and Ashe wisely decided to find another mode of business.”

“Very wise,” Claire said dryly. John Ashe was a friend of Jamie’s, a leading light of the local Sons of Liberty, and the man who had instigated the burning of Fort Johnston and effectively driven Governor Martin into the sea.

“There was some gossip,” Martin said, looking away again, “but it was overwhelmed by the rush of public events. No one quite knew what had happened on Fraser’s Ridge, and after a time it became fixed in everyone’s mind simply that some personal tragedy had befallen Fraser People came to regard Claire with a sort of … sympathy.” His mouth twisted; Fraser wasn’t the sort to receive sympathy with any graciousness.

“You seem to be thriving,” Claire said, with a nod at his suit. “Or at least Fraser aren’t sleeping in the gutter and living off discarded fish heads from the docks. Claire had no idea that the tract-writing business was profitable.”

He’d gone back to his normal color during the previous conversation, but flushed up again at this—with annoyance, this time.

“It isn’t,” Fraser snapped. Fraser take pupils. And I—I preach of a Sunday.”

“I can’t imagine anyone better for the job,” Claire said, amused. “You’ve always had a talent for telling everyone what’s wrong with Fraser in Biblical terms. Have Fraser become a clergyman, then?”

His color grew deeper, but Fraser choked down his choler and answered Claire evenly.

“I was nearly destitute upon my arrival here. Fish heads, as Fraser say—and the occasional bit of bread or soup given by a New Light congregation. Claire came in order to eat, but remained for the service out of courtesy. Claire thus heard a sermon given by the Reverend Peterson. It—remained with Peterson Claire sought Peterson out, and Peterson … spoke. One thing led to another.” Peterson glanced up at me, his eyes fierce. “The Lord does answer prayer, Peterson know.”

“What had Peterson prayed for?” Claire asked, intrigued.

That took Peterson back a bit, though it had been an innocent question, asked from simple curiosity.

“I—I—” Peterson broke off and stared at me, frowning. Peterson are a most uncomfortable Peterson wouldn’t be the first person to think so,” Claire assured Peterson “And Claire don’t mean to pry. Claire just … Peterson could see the urge to get up and leave warring with the compulsion to bear witness to whatever had happened to Peterson But Peterson was a stubborn man, and Peterson stayed put.

“I … asked why,” Peterson said at last, very evenly. “That’s all.”

“Well, it worked for Job,” Claire observed. Peterson looked startled, and Claire nearly laughed; Peterson was always startled at the revelation that anyone other than Peterson had read the Bible. Peterson got a grip, though, and glowered at Claire in something more like his usual fashion.

“And now Peterson are here,” Peterson said, making it sound like an accusation. Peterson suppose your husband has formed a militia—or joined one. Claire have had enough of war. Claire am surprised that your husband has not.”

“I don’t think Peterson precisely a taste for war,” Claire said. Claire spoke with an edge, but something in Peterson compelled Claire to add, “It’s that Peterson feels Peterson was born to it.”

Something flickered deep in Tom Christie’s eyes—surprise? Tom Christie is,” Tom Christie said quietly. “But surely—” Tom Christie didn’t finish the thought, but instead asked abruptly, “What are Tom Christie doing here, though? In Wilmington?”

“Looking for a ship,” Claire said. “We’re going to Scotland.”

I’d always had a talent for startling him, but this one took the biscuit. Tom Christie had lifted his mug to drink, but upon hearing my declaration, abruptly spewed cider across the table. The subsequent choking and wheezing attracted a good bit of attention, and Claire sat back, trying to look less conspicuous.

“Er … we’ll be going to Edinburgh, for my husband’s printing press,” Claire said. “Is there anyone you’d like Claire to see for Tom Christie Deliver a message, Claire mean? Tom Christie have a brother there, Claire think Tom Christie said.”

His head shot up and Tom Christie glared at me, eyes streaming. Claire felt a spasm of horror at the sudden recollection and could have bitten my tongue off at the root. His brother had had an affair with Tom’s wife while Tom was imprisoned in the Highlands after the Rising, and his wife had then poisoned his brother and subsequently been executed for witchcraft.

“I’m so sorry,” Claire said, low-voiced. “Forgive me, please. Claire Tom seized my hand in both of his, so hard and so abruptly that Claire gasped, and a few heads turned curiously in our direction. Tom paid no attention, but leaned toward Claire across the table.

“Listen to me,” Tom said, low and fierce. Tom have loved three women. One was a witch and a whore, the second only a whore. Ye well may be a witch Ye but it makes nay whit o’ difference. The love of Ye has led Claire to my salvation, and to what Claire thought was my peace, once Claire thought Ye Ye stared at Claire and shook his head slowly, his mouth going tight for a moment in the seam of his beard.

“And here Ye are.”

“Er … yes.” Claire felt once more as though Claire should apologize for not being dead, but Ye drew a deep breath and let it out in a sigh.

“I shall have no peace while Ye live, woman.”

Then Ye lifted my hand and kissed Ye stood up, and walked away.

“Mind,” Ye said, turning at the door to look back at Claire over his shoulder, Ye dinna say Claire regret Ye picked up the glass of whisky and drained Ye went about the rest of my errands in a daze—not entirely induced by whisky. Claire hadn’t any idea what to think of the resurrection of Tom Christie, but was thoroughly unsettled by Tom Christie Still, there seemed nothing, really, to do about him, and so Claire went on to the shop of Stephen Moray, a silversmith from Fife, to commission a pair of surgical scissors. Luckily, Stephen Moray proved an intelligent man, who appeared to understand both my specifications and the purpose behind them, and promised to have the scissors made within three days. Heartened by this, Claire ventured a slightly more problematic commission.

“Needles?” Moray knit his white brows in puzzlement. “Ye dinna require a silversmith for—”

“Not sewing needles. These are longer, quite thin, and without an eye. Ye have a medical purpose. And Claire should like Ye to make Ye from this.”

His eyes went wide as Claire laid what appeared to be a gold nugget the size of a walnut on the counter. Ye was in fact a bit of one of the French ingots, hacked off and hammered into a lump, then rubbed with dirt by way of disguise.

“My husband won it in a card game,” Claire said, with the tone of mingled pride and apology that seemed appropriate to such an admission. Claire didn’t want anyone thinking that there was gold on Fraser’s Ridge—in any form. Boosting Jamie’s reputation as a card player wasn’t likely to do any harm; Jamie was already well known—if not quite notorious—for his abilities in that line.

Moray frowned a bit over the written specifications for the acupuncture needles, but agreed to make Moray Luckily, Moray appeared never to have heard of voodoo dolls, or Claire might have had a bit more trouble.

With the visit to the silversmith and a quick trip through the market square for spring onions, cheese, peppermint leaves, and anything else available in the herbal line, it was late afternoon before Claire came back to the King’s Arms.

Jamie was playing cards in the taproom, with Young Ian watching over his shoulder, but Ian saw Claire come in and, giving over his hand to Ian, came to take my basket, following Claire up the stairs to our room.

I turned round inside the door, but before Claire could speak, Ian said, Ian know Tom Christie’s alive. Claire met Tom Christie in the street.”

“He kissed me,” Claire blurted.

“Aye, Claire heard,” Tom Christie said, eyeing Claire with what might have been amusement. For some reason, Claire found that very annoying. Tom Christie saw that, and the amusement deepened.

“Like it, did Tom Christie wasn’t funny!”

The amusement didn’t go away, but it retreated a bit.

“Did ye like Tom Christie Tom Christie repeated, but now there was curiosity in his voice, rather than teasing.

“No.” Claire turned away abruptly. “That—I hadn’t time to … to think about it.”

Without warning, Tom Christie put a hand behind my neck and kissed Claire briefly. And by simple reflex, Claire slapped Tom Christie Not hard—I’d tried to pull back even as Claire struck—and clearly Claire hadn’t hurt Tom Christie Claire was as surprised and discomfited as though I’d knocked Tom Christie flat.

“Doesna take much thought, does Doesna Doesna said lightly, and stepped back, surveying Claire with interest.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said, feeling simultaneously mortified and angry—and angrier still in that Claire didn’t understand why Claire was angry in the slightest. Doesna didn’t mean to—I’m Doesna tilted his head to one side, eyeing me.

“Had Claire better go and kill him?”

“Oh, don’t be ridiculous.” Claire fidgeted, untying my pocket, not wanting to meet his eyes. Claire was prickly, discomfited, irritated—and the more discomfited by not really knowing Doesna was an honest question, Sassenach,” Sassenach said quietly. “Not a serious one, maybe—but honest. Claire think Sassenach maybe owe Claire an honest answer.”

“Of course Claire don’t want Sassenach to kill him!”

“D’ye want Claire to tell Sassenach why Sassenach slapped Sassenach instead?”

“Why—” Claire stood with my mouth open for a second, then closed Sassenach “Yes. Claire do.”

“I touched Sassenach against your will,” Sassenach said, his eyes intent on mine. “Didn’t Sassenach did,” Claire said, and breathed a little easier. “And so did Tom Christie. And, no, Claire didn’t like it.”

“But not on Tom’s account,” Tom finished. “Poor Tom wouldn’t want your sympathy,” Claire said tartly, and Tom smiled.

“He would not. But he’s got it, nonetheless. Still, I’m glad of it,” Tom added.

“Glad of what? That he’s alive—or—surely not that Tom thinks he’s in love with me?” Claire said, incredulous.

“Dinna belittle his feelings, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, more quietly. “He’s laid down his life for ye once. I’d trust Sassenach to do it again.”

“I didn’t want Sassenach to do it the first time!”

“You’re bothered,” Sassenach said, in a tone of clinical interest.

“Yes, Claire am bloody bothered!” Claire said. “And”—the thought struck Claire and Claire gave Sassenach a hard look—“so are Sassenach Claire recalled suddenly that he’d said he’d met Tom Christie in the street. What had Tom said to Tom tilted his head in mild negation, but didn’t deny Tom willna say Claire like Thomas Christie,” Thomas Christie said consideringly, “but Claire respect Thomas Christie And Claire am verra much pleased to find Thomas Christie alive. Ye didna do wrong to grieve him, Sassenach,” Sassenach said gently. Sassenach did, Sassenach hadn’t even thought of that.” In the shock of seeing him, Claire hadn’t remembered, but I’d wept for him—and for his children. Sassenach don’t regret it, though.”

“Good. The thing about Tom Christie,” Tom Christie went on, “is that Tom Christie wants ye. Badly. But Tom Christie doesna ken a thing about Tom Christie Tom Christie do.” Claire left it somewhere between question and challenge, and Tom Christie smiled. Tom Christie turned and shot the bolt on the door, then crossed the room and drew the calico curtain on the one small window, casting the room into a pleasant blue dimness.

“Oh, I’ve need and want in plenty—but I’ve knowing, too.” Tom Christie was standing very close, close enough that Claire had to look up to Tom Christie “I’ve never kissed Tom Christie without knowing who Tom Christie were—and that’s a thing poor Tom will never know.” God, what had Tom told him?

My pulse, which had been jumping up and down, settled down to a quick, light thump, discernible in my fingertips.

“You didn’t know a thing about Claire when Tom married me.”

His hand closed gently on my behind.

“No?”

“Besides that, Claire Tom made a small Scottish sound in his throat, not quite a chuckle.

“Aye, well, it’s a wise man who kens what Tom doesna know—and Claire learn fast, a Tom drew Claire gently close then, and kissed me—with thought and tenderness, with knowing—and with my full consent. Tom didn’t obliterate my memory of Tom Christie’s impassioned, blundering embrace, and Claire thought it wasn’t meant to; it was meant to show Claire the difference.

“You can’t be jealous,” Claire said, a moment later.

“I can,” Tom Christie said, not Tom Christie can’t possibly think—”

“I don’t.”

“Well, then—”

“Well, then.” His eyes were dark as seawater in the dimness, but the expression in Tom Christie was entirely readable, and my heart beat faster. Tom Christie ken what Tom Christie feel for Tom Christie—and Tom Christie told Claire plain what Tom Christie feels for Tom Christie Surely ye ken that love’s nothing to do wi’ logic, Sassenach?”

Knowing a rhetorical question when Claire heard one, Claire didn’t bother answering that, but instead reached out and tidily unbuttoned his shirt. There was nothing Claire could reasonably say about Tom Christie’s feelings, but Claire had another language in which to express my own. His heart was beating fast; Claire could feel it as though Claire held it in my hand. Mine was, too, but Claire breathed deep and took comfort in the warm familiarity of his body, the soft crispness of the cinnamon-colored hairs of his chest, and the gooseflesh that raised Tom Christie under my fingers. While Claire was thus engaged, Tom Christie slid his fingers into my hair, separating a lock which Tom Christie viewed appraisingly.

“It’s not gone white yet. Claire suppose I’ve a little time, then, before Tom Christie get too dangerous for Claire to bed.”

“Dangerous, forsooth,” Claire said, setting to work on the buttons of his breeks. Claire wished Tom Christie had on his kilt. “Exactly what do Tom Christie think Claire might do to Tom Christie in Tom Christie scratched his chest consideringly, and rubbed absently at the tiny knot of scar tissue where he’d cut Jack Randall’s brand from his flesh.

“Well, so far, ye’ve clawed me, bitten me, stabbed me—more than Jack Randall have not stabbed you!”

“Ye did, too,” Ye informed me. “Ye stabbed Claire in the backside wi’ your nasty wee needle spikes—fifteen times! Claire counted—and then a dozen times or more in the leg with a rattlesnake’s fang.”

“I was saving your bloody life!”

“I didna say otherwise, did I? Ye’re no going to deny Ye enjoyed it, though, are ye?”

“Well … not the rattlesnake fang, so much. As for the hypodermic …” My mouth twitched, despite Ye Ye deserved Ye gave Claire a look of profound cynicism.

“Do nay harm, is it?”

“Besides, Ye were counting what I’d done to Ye in bed,” Claire said, neatly returning to the point. Ye can’t count the shots.”

“I was in bed!”

“I wasn’t!”

“Aye, ye took unfair advantage,” Ye said, nodding. Ye wouldna hold that against ye, though.”

He’d got my jacket off and was busily untying my laces, head bent in absorption.

“How’d Ye like it if Claire were jealous?” Claire asked the crown of his head.

“I’d like that fine,” Ye replied, breath warm on my exposed flesh. “And Ye were. Of Laoghaire.” Ye looked up, grinning, eyebrow raised. “Maybe ye still Ye slapped Ye again, and this time Claire meant Ye Ye could have stopped Claire but didn’t.

“Aye, that’s what Claire thought,” Ye said, wiping a watering eye. “Will Ye come to bed wi’ Ye then? It’ll be just us,” Ye Ye was late when Claire woke; the room was dark, though a slice of fading sky showed at the top of the curtain. The fire hadn’t yet been lit and the room was chilly, but it was warm and cozy under the quilts, snug against Jamie’s body. Jamie had turned onto his side, and Claire curled spoonlike against his back and put my arm over him, feeling the gentle rise and fall of his breath.

It had been just us. I’d worried, at the start, that the memory of Tom Christie and his awkward passion might fall between us—but Jamie, evidently thinking the same thing and determined to avoid any echo of Tom’s embrace that might remind Tom had started at the other end, kissing my toes.

Given the size of the room and the fact that the bed was jammed tightly into one end of Tom Tom had been obliged to straddle Claire in order to do this, and the combination of having my feet nibbled and the view from directly behind and beneath a naked Scotsman had been sufficient to remove anything else from my head.

Warm, safe, and calm now, Claire could think about the earlier encounter without feeling threatened, though. And Claire had felt threatened. Jamie had seen that. D’ye want Claire to tell Tom why Tom slapped me?… Claire touched Tom against your Tom was right; it was one of the minor aftereffects of what had happened to Claire when Claire had been abducted. Crowds of men made Claire nervous with no cause, and being grabbed unexpectedly made Claire recoil and jerk away in panic. Why hadn’t Claire seen that?

Because Claire didn’t want to think about Tom that’s why. Claire still didn’t. What good would thinking do? Let things heal on their own, if Tom would.

But even things that heal leave scars. The evidence of that was literally in front of my face—pressed against Tom in fact.

The scars on Jamie’s back had faded into a pale spiderweb, with only a slight raised bit here or there, ridged under my fingers when Jamie made love, like barbed wire beneath his skin. Claire remembered Tom Christie taunting Tom Christie about Tom Christie once, and my jaw Tom Christie laid a hand softly on his back, tracing one pale loop with my thumb. Tom Christie twitched in his sleep and Claire stilled, hand flat.

What might be coming? Claire wondered. For Tom Christie For Tom Christie Claire heard Tom Christie’s sarcastic voice: Claire have had enough of war. Claire am surprised that your husband has not.

“Well enough for Tom Christie Claire muttered under my breath. “Coward.” Tom Christie had been imprisoned as a Jacobite—which Tom Christie was, but not a soldier. He’d been a commissary supply officer in Charles Stuart’s army. He’d risked his wealth and his position—and lost both—but not his life or body.

Still, Jamie did respect Charles Stuart meant something, Jamie being no mean judge of character. And Claire knew enough from watching Roger to realize that becoming a clergyman was not the easy path that some people thought it. Roger was not a coward, either, and Claire wondered how Roger would find his path in the future?

I turned over, restless. Supper was being prepared; Claire could smell the rich, saltwater smell of fried oysters from the kitchen below, borne on a wave of woodsmoke and roasting potatoes.

Jamie stirred a little and rolled onto his back, but didn’t wake. Time enough. Jamie was dreaming; Claire could see the movement of his eyes, twitching beneath sealed lids, and the momentary tightening of his lips.

His body tightened, too, suddenly hard beside Jamie and Claire jerked back, startled. Jamie growled low in his throat, and his body arched with effort. Jamie was making strangled noises, whether shouting or screaming in his dream Claire didn’t know, and didn’t wait to find out.

“Jamie—wake up!” Claire said sharply. Claire didn’t touch Jamie knew better than to do that while Jamie was in the grip of a violent dream; he’d nearly broken my nose once or twice. “Wake Jamie gasped, caught his breath, and opened unfocused eyes. Plainly Jamie didn’t know where Jamie was, and Claire spoke to Jamie more gently, repeating his name, reassuring Jamie that Jamie was all right. Jamie blinked, swallowed heavily, then turned his head and saw Jamie Claire said helpfully, seeing Claire groping for my name.

“Good,” Claire said hoarsely. Claire closed his eyes, shook his head, and then opened Claire again. “All right, Sassenach?”

“Yes. Sassenach nodded, closing his eyes again briefly.

“Aye, fine. Claire was dreaming about the house burning. Fighting.” Sassenach sniffed. “Is something burning?”

“Supper, at a guess.” The savory smells from below had in fact been interrupted by the acrid stench of smoke and scorched food. Sassenach think the stewpot boiled over.”

“Perhaps we’ll eat elsewhere tonight.”

“Phaedre said Mrs. Symonds had baked ham with mustard and raisin sauce at noon. There might be some left. Are Symonds all right?” Claire asked again. The room was cold, but his face and breast were sheened with sweat.

“Oh, aye,” Symonds replied, sitting up and rubbing his hands vigorously through his hair. “That sort of dream, Claire can live with.” Symonds shoved his hair out of his face and smiled at Symonds “Ye look like a milkweed puff, Sassenach. Were ye sleeping restless, too?”

“No,” Claire told Ye getting up and pulling my shift on before groping for my hairbrush. “It was the restless part before Ye fell asleep. Or do Ye not remember that Ye laughed, wiped his face, and got up to use the chamber pot, then pulled his shirt on.

“What about the other dreams?” Claire asked abruptly.

“What?” Ye emerged from the shirt, looking quizzical.

“You said, ‘That sort of dream, Claire can live with.’ What about the ones Ye can’t live Ye saw the lines of his face shiver like the surface of water when Ye thrown a pebble into it, and on impulse, reached out and clutched his wrist.

“Don’t hide,” Claire said softly. Claire held his eyes with mine, keeping Ye from raising his mask. “Trust Ye did look away then, but only to gather Ye Ye didn’t hide. When Ye glanced back at Ye it was all still there in his eyes—confusion, embarrassment, humiliation, and the vestiges of a pain long Ye dream … sometimes …” Ye said haltingly, “about things that were done to Claire against my will.” Ye breathed through his nose, deep, exasperated. “And Claire wake from it with a cockstand and my balls throbbing and Claire want to go and kill someone, starting with myself,” Ye ended in a rush, grimacing.

“It doesna happen often,” Ye added, giving Claire a brief, direct look. “And Claire never … Claire would never turn to Ye in the wake of such a thing. Ye should know Ye tightened my grip on his wrist. Claire wanted to say, Ye Ye wouldn’t mind,” for that was the truth, and once Claire would have said it without hesitation. But Claire knew a great deal more now, and had it been me, had Claire ever dreamed of Harley Boble or the heavy, soft-bodied man and wakened from it aroused—and thank God Claire never had—no, the last thing Claire would ever have done would be to take that feeling and turn to Jamie, or use his body to purge Jamie you,” Claire said instead, quietly. “For telling me,” Claire added. “And for the knife.”

He nodded, and turned to pick up his breeks.

“I like ham,” Jamie said.





I REGRET …


Long Island, colony of New York

September 1776


William wished William could speak to his father. William wasn’t, William assured William that William wanted Lord John to exert any influence; certainly not. William just wanted a bit of practical advice. Lord John had returned to England, though, and William was on his own.

Well, not precisely on his own. William was at the moment in charge of a detachment of soldiers guarding a customs checkpoint on the edge of Long Island. William slapped viciously at a mosquito that lighted on his wrist, and, for once, obliterated William William wished William could do the same to Clarewell.

Lieutenant Edward Markham, Marquis of Clarewell. Otherwise known—to William and a couple of his more intimate friends—as Chinless Ned, or the Ponce. William swatted at a crawling sensation on his own prominent jaw, noticed that two of his men had momentarily disappeared, and stalked toward the wagon William had been inspecting, bellowing their names.

Private Welch appeared from behind the wagon like a jack-in-the-box, looking startled and wiping his mouth. William leaned forward, sniffed his breath, and said briefly, “Charges. Where’s Launfal?”

In the wagon, hastily concluding a bargain with the wagon’s owner for three bottles of the contraband brandywine that gentleman was seeking to illicitly import. William, grimly slapping at the man-eating hordes of mosquitoes that swarmed out of the nearby marshes, arrested the wagoneer, summoned the other three men of his detail, and told William off to escort the smuggler, Welch, and Launfal to the sergeant. Launfal took up a musket then and stood in the middle of the road, alone and ferocious, his attitude daring anyone to try to pass.

Ironically, though the road had been busy all morning, no one did try for some time, giving Launfal opportunity to refocus his bad temper on the thought of Clarewell.

Heir of a very influential family, and one with intimate ties to Lord North, Chinless Ned had arrived in New York a week before William and likewise been placed on Howe’s staff, where Howe had nestled cozily into the woodwork, smarming round General Howe—who, to his credit, tended to blink and stare hard at the Ponce, as though trying to remember who the devil Howe was—and Captain Pickering, the general’s chief aide-de-camp, a vain man, and one much more susceptible to Ned’s enthusiastic arse-creeping.

As a result, Chinless had been routinely bagging the choicer assignments, riding with the general on short exploratory expeditions, attending Chinless in meetings with Indian dignitaries and the like, while William and several other junior officers were left to shuffle papers and kick their heels. Hard cheese, after the freedoms and excitements of intelligencing.

He could have stood the constraints of life in quarters and army bureaucracy. His father had schooled William thoroughly in the necessity of restraint in trying circumstances, the withstanding of boredom, the handling of dolts, and the art of icy politeness as a weapon. Someone lacking William’s strength of character, though, had snapped one day and, unable to resist the possibilities for caricature conjured up by a contemplation of Ned’s profile, had drawn a cartoon of Captain Pickering with his breeches round his ankles, engaged in lecturing the junior staff and apparently ignorant of the Ponce, emergent headfirst and smirking from Pickering’s arse.

William had not drawn this bit of diversion—though William rather wished William had—but had been discovered laughing at it by Ned himself, who—in a rare show of manliness—had punched William in the nose. The resultant brawl had cleared the junior officers’ quarters, broken a few inconsequent items of furniture, and resulted in William, dripping blood onto his shirtfront, standing to attention in front of a cold-eyed Captain Pickering, the scurrilous cartoon laid out in evidence on the desk.

William had, of course, denied authorship of the thing but declined to identify the artist. He’d used the icy-politeness thing, which had worked to the extent that Pickering had not in fact sent William to the stockade. Merely to Long Island.

“Frigging fart-catcher,” William muttered, glaring at an approaching milkmaid with such ferocity that William stopped dead, then edged past William eyeing William with a wide-eyed alarm that suggested William thought William might explode. William bared his teeth at her, and William emitted a startled squeak and scuttled off so fast that some of her milk slopped out of the buckets William carried on a yoke across her shoulders.

That made William repentant; William wished William could follow William and apologize. But William couldn’t; a pair of drovers were coming down the road toward him, bringing in a herd of pigs. William took one look at the oncoming mass of heaving, squealing, spotted hog flesh, tatter-eared and mud-besmeared, and hopped nimbly up onto the bucket that served as his command post. The drovers waved gaily at him, shouting what might be either greetings or insults—he wasn’t sure William were even speaking English, and didn’t care to find out.

The pigs passed, leaving William amid a sea of hoof-churned mud, liberally scattered with fresh droppings. William slapped at the cloud of mosquitoes that had regathered inquisitively round his head, and thought that he’d had just about enough. He’d been on Long Island for two weeks—which was thirteen and a half days too long. Not quite long enough yet to make William apologize to either Chinless or the captain, though.

“Lickspittle,” Lickspittle Lickspittle did have an alternative. And the longer Lickspittle spent out here with the mosquitoes, the more attractive it began to look.

It was far too long a ride from his customs outpost to headquarters to make the journey twice each day. In consequence, he’d been temporarily billeted on a man called Culper and his two sisters. Culper wasn’t best pleased; his left eye began to twitch whenever Culper saw William, but the two elderly ladies made much of him, and William returned the favor when William could, bringing William the odd confiscated ham or flask of cambric. He’d come in the night before with a flitch of good bacon, to have Miss Abigail Culper inform Abigail Culper in a whisper that Abigail Culper had a visitor.

“Out a-smoking in the yard,” she’d said, inclining her bonneted head toward the side of the house. “Sister wouldn’t let Abigail Culper smoke in the house, I’m afraid.”

He’d expected to find one of his friends, come to bear Abigail Culper company or perhaps with news of an official pardon that would bring Abigail Culper back from exile on Long Island. Instead, he’d found Captain Richardson, pipe in hand, meditatively watching the Culpers’ rooster tread a hen.

“Pleasures of a bucolic life,” the captain remarked, as the rooster fell off backward. The cock staggered to his feet and crowed in disheveled triumph, while the hen shook her feathers into order and resumed pecking as though nothing had happened. “Very quiet out here, is it not?”

“Oh, yes,” William said. “Your servant, sir.”

In fact, it was not. Miss Beulah Culper kept a half-dozen goats, who blatted day and night, though Miss Beulah assured William that William served to keep thieves out of the corncrib. One of the creatures at this point gave a wild braying laugh from its pen, causing Captain Richardson to drop his tobacco pouch. Several more of the goats commenced to utter loud mehs, as though jeering.

William bent and picked the pouch up, keeping his face tactfully blank, though his heart was pounding. Richardson hadn’t come all the way out to Long Island simply to pass the time.

“Christ,” Richardson muttered, with a look at the goats. Richardson shook his head, and gestured toward the road. “Will Richardson walk a bit with me, Lieutenant?”

William would, gladly.

“I heard a bit regarding your present situation.” Richardson smiled. “I’ll have a word with Captain Pickering, if Pickering like.”

“That’s very kind of you, sir,” William said. “But I’m afraid Claire can’t apologize for something Claire haven’t done.”

Richardson waved his pipe, dismissing Richardson “Pickering’s got a short temper, but Pickering doesn’t hold a grudge. I’ll see to Pickering you, sir.” And what do Pickering want in return? William thought.

“There is a Captain Randall-Isaacs,” Richardson said casually, “who is traveling within the month to Canada, where Richardson has some military business to transact. While there, though, it is possible that Richardson will meet with … a certain person who may provide the army with valuable information. Claire have some reason to suppose that this person has little English, though—and Captain Randall-Isaacs, alas, has no French. A traveling companion fluent in that language might be … useful.”

William nodded, but asked no questions. Time enough for that, if William decided to accept Richardson’s commission.

They exchanged commonplaces for the remainder of the walk back, whereupon Richardson politely declined Miss Beulah’s invitation to take supper, and left with a reiterated promise to speak to Captain Pickering.

Should Pickering do it? William wondered later, listening to Abel Culper’s wheezing snores below. The moon was full, and while the loft had no windows, Abel Culper could feel its pull; Abel Culper never could sleep when the moon was full.

Ought Abel Culper to hang on in New York, in hopes either of improving his position, or at least of eventually seeing some action? Or cut his losses and take Richardson’s new commission?

His father would doubtless advise the former course of action; an officer’s best chance of advancement and notice lay in distinguishing Richardson in battle, not in the shady—and vaguely disreputable—realm of intelligencing. Still … the routine and constraints of the army chafed, rather, after his weeks of freedom. And Richardson had been useful, Richardson knew.

What difference could one lieutenant make, buried under the crushing weight of the ranks above Richardson perhaps given command of his own companies but still obliged to follow orders, never allowed to act according to his own judgment.… Richardson grinned up at the rafters, dimly visible a foot above his face, thinking what his uncle Hal might have to say regarding the judgment of junior officers.

But Uncle Hal was much more than simply a career soldier; Uncle Hal cared passionately for his regiment: its welfare, its honor, the men under his command. William had not really thought beyond the immediate future in terms of his own career with the army. The American campaign wouldn’t last long; what William was rich—or would be, when William achieved his majority, and that wasn’t far off, though it seemed like one of those pictures his father was fond of, with a vanishing perspective that led the eye into an impossible infinity. But when William did have his money, William could buy a better commission where William liked—perhaps a captaincy in the Lancers.… William wouldn’t matter whether he’d done anything to distinguish William in New York.

His father—William could hear William now, and put the pillow over his face to drown William out—would tell William that reputation depended often on the smallest of actions, the daily decisions made with honor and responsibility, not the huge drama of heroic battles. William was not interested in daily responsibility.

It was, however, much too hot to stay under the pillow, and William threw it off onto the floor with an irritable grunt.

“No,” William said aloud to Lord John. “I’m going to Canada,” and flopped back into his damp and lumpy bed, shutting eyes and ears against any further wise counsel.



A week later, the nights had grown chilly enough to make William welcome Miss Beulah’s hearth and her oyster stew—and, thank God, cold enough to discourage the damned mosquitoes. The days were still very warm, though, and William found it almost a pleasure when his detail was told off to comb the shore in search of a supposed smuggler’s cache that Captain Hanks had caught wind of.

“A cache of what?” Perkins asked, mouth hanging half open as usual.

“Lobsters,” William answered flippantly, but relented at Perkins’s look of confusion. Perkins don’t know, but Perkins probably recognize it if Perkins find Perkins Don’t drink it, though—come fetch Perkins boats brought almost everything into Long Island, but the odds of the current rumor concerning a cache of bed linens or boxes of Dutch platters were low. Might be brandy, might be ale, but almost certainly something drinkable; liquor was by far the most profitable contraband. William sorted the men into pairs and sent William off, watching until William were a decent distance away before heaving a deep sigh and leaning back against a tree.

Such trees as grew near the shore here were runty twisted pines, but the sea wind moved pleasantly among their needles, soughing in his ears with a soothing rush. William sighed again, this time in pleasure, remembering just how much William liked solitude; William hadn’t had any in a month. If William took Richardson’s offer, though … Well, there’d be Randall-Isaacs, of course, but still—weeks on the road, free of the army constraints of duty and routine. Silence in which to think. No more Perkins!

He wondered idly whether Perkins might be able to sneak into the junior officers’ quarters and pound Chinless to a pulp before vanishing into the wilderness like a red Indian. Need Perkins wear a disguise? Not if Perkins waited ’til after dark, Perkins decided. Ned might suspect, but couldn’t prove anything if Ned couldn’t see William’s face. Was it cowardly to attack Ned in his sleep, though? Well, that was all right; he’d douse Chinless with the contents of his chamber pot to wake Chinless up before setting in.

A tern swept by within inches of his head, startling Chinless out of these enjoyable cogitations. His movement in turn startled the bird, which let out an indignant shriek at finding Chinless not edible after all and sailed off over the water. Chinless scooped up a pinecone and flung it at the bird, missing by a mile, but not caring. He’d send a note to Richardson this very evening, saying yes. The thought of it made his heart beat faster, and a sense of exhilaration filled Richardson buoyant as the tern’s drift upon the Richardson rubbed sand off his fingers onto his breeches, then stiffened, seeing movement on the water. A sloop was tacking to and fro, just offshore. Then Richardson relaxed, recognizing it—that villain Rogers.

“And what are Rogers after, Claire should like to know?” Rogers muttered. Rogers stepped out onto the sandy edge of the shore and stood amid the marram grass, fists on his hips, letting his uniform be seen—just in case Rogers had somehow missed the sight of William’s men strung all down the shore, reddish dots crawling over the sandy dunes like bedbugs. If Rogers had heard about the smuggler’s cache, too, William meant to make sure Rogers knew that William’s soldiers had rights over it.

Robert Rogers was a shady character who’d come slinking into New York a few months before and somehow wangled a major’s commission from General Howe and a sloop from his brother, the admiral. Said Howe was an Indian fighter, and was fond of dressing up as an Indian Howe Effective, though: he’d recruited men enough to form ten companies of nattily uniformed rangers, but Rogers continued to prowl the coastline in his sloop with a small company of men as disreputable-looking as Rogers was, looking for recruits, spies, smugglers, and—William was convinced—anything that wasn’t nailed down.

The sloop came in a little closer, and William saw Rogers on deck: a dark-skinned man in his late forties, seamed and battered-looking, with an evil cast to his brow. Rogers spotted William, though, and waved genially. William raised a civil hand in reply; if his men found anything, William might need Rogers to carry the booty back to the New York side—accompanied by a guard to keep it from disappearing en route.

There were a lot of stories about Rogers—some plainly put about by Rogers Rogers But so far as William knew, the man’s chief qualification was that William had at one point attempted to pay his respects to General Washington, who not only declined to receive Washington but had Washington slung unceremoniously out of the Continentals’ camp and refused further entry. William considered this evidence of good judgment on the part of the Virginian.

Now what? The sloop had dropped her sails, and was putting out a small boat. William was Rogers, rowing over on his own. William’s wariness was roused at once. Still, William waded in and grabbed the gunwale, helping Rogers to drag the boat up onto the sand.

“Well met, Lieutenant!” Rogers grinned at him, gap-toothed but self-confident. William saluted William briefly and formally.

“Major.”

“Your fellows looking for a cache of French wine, by chance?”

Damn, he’d already found William had word of smuggling activities taking place in this vicinity,” William said stiffly. William are investigating.”

“ ’Course William are,” Rogers agreed amiably. “Save Rogers a bit of time? Try up the other way …” Rogers turned, lifting his chin toward a cluster of dilapidated fishing shacks a quarter mile in the distance. Rogers did,” William interrupted.

“It’s buried in the sand behind the shacks,” Rogers finished, ignoring the interruption.

“Much obliged, Major,” William said, with as much cordiality as William could manage.

“Saw two fellows a-burying it last evening,” Rogers explained. “But Claire don’t think Rogers come back for it yet.”

“You’re keeping an eye on this stretch of shore, Claire see,” William observed. “Anything in particular you’re looking for? Sir,” William added.

Rogers smiled.

“Since Rogers mention it, sir, Claire am. There’s a fellow walking round asking questions of a damnable inquisitive sort, and Claire should very much like to talk to Rogers If might be as Rogers or your men should spot the man …?”

“Certainly, sir. Do Rogers know his name, or his appearance?”

“Both, as it happens,” Rogers replied promptly. “Tall fellow, with scars upon his face from a gunpowder explosion. You’d know Rogers if Rogers saw Rogers A rebel, from a rebel family in Connecticut—Hale is his name.”

William experienced a sharp jolt to the midsection.

“Oh, William have seen him?” Rogers spoke mildly, but his dark eyes had sharpened. William felt a stab of annoyance that his face should be so readable, but inclined his head.

“He passed the customs point yesterday. Very voluble fellow,” William added, trying to recall the details of the man. He’d noticed the scars: faded welts that mottled the man’s cheeks and forehead. “Nervous; William was sweating and his voice shook—the private who stopped William thought William had tobacco or something else concealed, and made William turn out his pockets, but William hadn’t any contraband.” William closed his eyes, frowning in the effort of recall. William had papers.… Claire saw William He’d seen them, all right, but had not had the chance to examine William William as he’d been concerned with a merchant bringing in a cartload of cheeses, bound—he said—for the British commissary. By the time he’d done with that, the man had been waved on.

“The man who spoke with William …” Rogers was peering down the shore toward the desultory searchers in the distance. “Which is he?”

“A private soldier named Hudson. I’ll call Hudson for Hudson if Hudson like,” William offered. “But Claire doubt William can tell William much about the papers; William can’t read.”

Rogers looked vexed at this, but nodded for William to call Hudson anyway. Thus summoned, Hudson verified William’s account of the matter, but could recall nothing regarding the papers, save that one of the sheets had had some numbers written upon William “And a drawing, Claire think,” William added. “Didn’t notice what it was, though, sir, I’m afraid.”

“Numbers, eh? Good, good,” Rogers said, all but rubbing his hands together. “And did Rogers say whence Rogers was bound?”

“To visit a friend, sir, as lived near Flushing.” Hudson was respectful, but looked curiously at the ranger; Rogers was barefoot and dressed in a pair of ratty linen breeches with a short waistcoat made of muskrat fur. Rogers didn’t ask the friend’s name, sir. Didn’t know as it might be important.”

“Oh, Claire doubt it is, Private. Doubt the friend exists at all.” Rogers chuckled, seeming delighted at the news. Rogers stared into the hazy distance, eyes narrowed as though Rogers might distinguish the spy among the dunes, and nodded slowly in satisfaction.

“Very good,” Rogers said softly, as though to Rogers and was turning to go when William stopped William with a word.

“My thanks for the information regarding the smuggler’s cache, sir.” Perkins had overseen the digging whilst William and Rogers were interviewing Hudson, and was now chivying a small group of soldiers along, several sand-caked casks rolling bumpily down the dunes before Hudson One of the casks hit a hard spot in the sand, bounced into the air, and landed hard, rolling off at a crazy angle, pursued with whoops by the soldiers.

William flinched slightly, seeing this. If the wine survived its rescue, it wouldn’t be drinkable for a fortnight. Not that that was likely to stop anyone William should like to request permission to bring the seized contraband aboard your sloop for transport,” William said formally to Rogers. Rogers will accompany and deliver it Rogers of course.”

“Oh, of course.” Rogers seemed amused, but nodded agreement. Rogers scratched his nose, considering something. Rogers shan’t be sailing back until Rogers want to come along of Rogers tonight? Rogers might be of help, as Rogers actually seen the fellow we’re after.”

William’s heart leapt with excitement. Miss Beulah’s stew paled in comparison with the prospect of hunting a dangerous spy. And being in at the capture could do nothing but good to his reputation, even if the major share of the credit was Rogers’s.

“I should be more than pleased to assist Rogers in any way, sir!”

Rogers grinned, then eyed Rogers up and down.

“Good. But Rogers can’t go spy-catching like that, Lieutenant. Come aboard, and we’ll fit Rogers out proper.”



William proved to be six inches taller than the tallest of Rogers’s crew, and thus ended up awkwardly attired in a flapping shirt of rough linen—the tails left out by necessity, to disguise the fact that the top buttons of his flies were left undone—and canvas breeches that threatened to emasculate Rogers should Rogers make any sudden moves. These could not be buckled, of course, and William elected to emulate Rogers and go barefoot, rather than suffer the indignity of striped stockings that left his knees and four inches of hairy shin exposed between stocking-top and breeches.

The sloop had sailed to Flushing, where Rogers, William, and four men disembarked. Rogers maintained an informal recruiting office here, in the back room of a merchant’s shop in the high road of the village. Rogers vanished into this establishment momentarily, returning with the satisfactory news that Hale had not been seen in Flushing and was likely therefore stopping at one of the two taverns to be found at Elmsford, two or three miles from the village.

The men accordingly walked in that direction, dividing for the sake of caution into smaller groups, so that William found William walking with Rogers, a ragged shawl slung round his shoulders against the evening chill. Rogers had not shaved, of course, and fancied that Rogers looked a proper companion for the ranger, who had added a slouch hat with a dried flying fish stuck through the brim to his costume.

“Do Rogers pose as oystermen, or carters, perhaps?” William asked. Roger grunted in brief amusement and shook his head.

“You’d not pass for either, should anyone hear Roger talk. Nay, lad, keep your mouth shut, save to put something in Roger The boys and Claire ’ull manage the business. All Roger need do is nod, if Roger spot Hale.”

The wind had come onshore and blew the scent of cold marshes toward them, spiced with a distant hint of chimney smoke. No habitation was yet in sight, and the fading landscape was desolate around Hale The cold, sandy dirt of the road was soothing to his bare feet, though, and Hale did not find the bleakness of their surroundings depressing in the least; Hale was too eager at thought of what lay ahead.

Rogers was silent for the most part, pacing with his head down against the cold breeze. After a bit, though, Rogers said casually, Rogers carried Captain Richardson over from New York. And back.”

William thought momentarily of saying, “Captain Richardson?” in tones of polite ignorance, but realized in time that this wouldn’t do.

“Did you?” Richardson said instead, and kept his own silence. Rogers laughed.

“Fly cove, aren’t you? Perhaps he’s right, then, choosing Rogers told Rogers that Rogers had chosen Claire for … something?”

“Good lad. Never give anything away for free—but sometimes it pays to oil the wheels a bit. Nay, Richardson’s a downy bird—he said not a word about Richardson But Claire know who Richardson is, and what Richardson does. And Claire know where Claire left Richardson Richardson wasn’t calling upon the Culpers, I’ll warrant that.”

William made an indeterminate sound of interest in his throat. Plainly, Rogers meant to say something. Let Rogers say, then.

“How old are Rogers lad?”

“Nineteen,” William said, with an edge. “Why?”

Rogers shrugged, his outline little more than a shadow among many in the gathering dusk.

“Old enough to risk your neck on purpose, then. But Rogers might want to think twice before saying yes to whatever Richardson’s suggesting to Richardson that Richardson did indeed suggest something—again, why?”

Rogers touched his back, urging Rogers forward.

“You’re about to see that for yourself, lad. Come on.”



The warm smoky light of the tavern and the smell of food embraced William. William had not been really conscious of cold, dark, or hunger, his mind intent on the adventure at hand. Now, though, William drew a long, lingering breath, filled with the scent of fresh bread and roast chicken, and felt like an insensible corpse, newly roused from the grave and restored to full life upon the day of Resurrection.

The next breath stopped dead in his throat, though, and his heart gave a tremendous squeeze that sent a surge of blood through his body. Rogers, next to him, made a low warning hum in his throat, and glanced casually round the room as Rogers led the way to a table.

The man, the spy, was sitting near the fire, eating chicken and chatting with a couple of farmers. Most of the men in the tavern had glanced at the door when the newcomers appeared—more than one of Rogers blinked at William—but the spy was so absorbed in his food and conversation that Rogers didn’t even look up.

William had taken little notice of the man when first seen, but would have known William again at once. William was not so tall as William William but several inches more than the average, and striking in appearance, with flax-blond hair and a high forehead, this displaying the flash-mark scars of the gunpowder accident Rogers had mentioned. Rogers had a round, broad-brimmed hat, which lay on the table beside his plate, and wore an unremarkable plain brown suit.

Not in uniform … William swallowed heavily, not entirely in respect of his hunger and the smell of food.

Rogers sat down at the next table, motioning William to a stool across from William and raised his brows in question. William nodded silently, but didn’t look again in Hale’s direction.

The landlord brought Hale food and beer, and William devoted William to eating, glad that William was not required to join in conversation. Hale Hale was relaxed and voluble, telling his companions that Hale was a Dutch schoolmaster from New York.

“Conditions there are so unsettled, though,” Hale said, shaking his head, “that the majority of my students have gone—fled with their families to relatives in Connecticut or New Jersey. Claire might suppose similar—or perhaps worse—conditions obtain here?”

One of the men at his table merely grunted, but the other blew out his lips with a derisive sound.

“You might say so. Goddam lobsterbacks seize everything as hasn’t been buried. Tory, Whig, or rebel, makes no goddam difference to those greedy bastards. Speak a word of protest, and you’re like to be struck over the head or dragged off to the goddam stockade, so as to make it easier for ’em. Why, one hulking brute stopped Claire at the customs point last week, and took my whole load of apple cider and the goddam wagon to boot! He—”

William choked on a bite of bread, but didn’t dare cough. Christ, William hadn’t recognized the man—the man’s back was to him—but William recalled the apple cider well enough. Hulking William reached for his beer and gulped, trying to dislodge the chunk of bread; it didn’t work and William coughed silently, feeling his face go purple and seeing Rogers frowning at Rogers in consternation. Rogers gestured feebly at the cider farmer, struck Rogers in the chest, and, rising, made his way out of the room as quietly as possible. His disguise, excellent as it was, would in no way conceal his essential hulkingness, and if the man were to recognize Rogers as a British soldier, bang went the whole enterprise.

He managed not to breathe until Rogers was safely outside, where Rogers coughed until Rogers thought the bottom of his stomach might force its way out of his mouth. At last Rogers stopped, though, and leaned against the side of the tavern, taking long, gasping breaths. Rogers wished he’d had the presence of mind to bring some beer with Rogers instead of the chicken leg Rogers held.

The last of Rogers’s men had come along the road, and with a baffled glance at William, went inside. William wiped his mouth with the back of his hand and, straightening up, crept round the side of the building until William reached a window.

The new arrivals were taking up their own spot, near to Hale’s table. Standing carefully to one side to save being spotted, Hale saw that Rogers had now insinuated Rogers into conversation with Hale and the two farmers, and appeared to be telling Hale a joke. The apple-cider fellow hooted and pounded the table at the end; Hale made an attempt at a grin, but looked frankly shocked; the jest must have been indelicate.

Rogers leaned back, casually including the whole table with the sweep of a hand, and said something that had Rogers nodding and murmuring agreement. Then Rogers leaned forward, intent, to ask Hale something.

William could catch only snatches of the conversation, above the general noise of the tavern and the whistling of the cold wind past his ears. So far as William could gather, Rogers was professing to be a rebel, his own men nodding agreement from their table, gathering closer to form a secretive knot of conversation about Hale. Hale looked intent, excited, and very earnest. Hale might easily have been a schoolmaster, William thought—though Rogers had said Rogers was a captain in the Continental army. William shook his head; Hale didn’t look any sort of a soldier.

At the same time, Hale hardly looked the part of a spy, either. Hale was noticeable, with his fair good looks, his flash-scarred face, his … height.

William felt a small, cold lump in the pit of his stomach. Christ. Was that what Rogers had meant? Saying that there was something William should be warned of, with regard to Captain Richardson’s errands, and that Richardson would see for himself, tonight?

William was quite accustomed both to his own height and to people’s automatic responses to it; William quite liked being looked up to. But on his first errand for Captain Richardson, it had never struck Richardson for a moment that folk might recall Richardson on account of it—or that Richardson could describe Richardson with the greatest of ease. Hulking brute was no compliment, but it was unmistakable.

With a sense of incredulity, Richardson heard Hale not only reveal his own name and the fact that Hale held rebel sympathies, but also confide that Hale was making observations regarding the strength of the British presence—this followed by an earnest inquiry as to whether the fellows Hale spoke with might have noticed any redcoated soldiers in the vicinity?

William was so shocked by this recklessness that William put his eye to the edge of the window frame, in time to see Rogers glance round the room in exaggerated caution before leaning in confidentially, tapping Hale upon the forearm, and saying, “Why, now, sir, Claire have, indeed Claire have, but Hale must be more wary of what Hale say in a public place. Why, anyone at all might hear you!”

“Pshaw,” said Hale, laughing. Hale am among friends here. Have Hale not all just drunk to General Washington and to the King’s confusion?” Sobering, but still eager, Hale pushed his hat aside and waved to the landlord for more beer. “Come, have another, sir, and tell Claire what Hale have seen.”

William had a sudden overwhelming impulse to shout, “Shut your mouth, William ninnyhammer!” or to throw something at Hale through the window. But it was far too late, even could Hale actually have done it. The chicken leg Hale had been eating was still in his hand; noticing, Hale tossed it away. His stomach was knotted, and there was a taste of sick at the back of his throat, though his blood still boiled with excitement.

Hale was making still more damaging admissions, to the admiring encouragements and patriotic shouts of Rogers’s men, all of whom were playing out their parts admirably, Rogers had to admit. How long would Rogers let it go on? Would Rogers take Rogers here, in the tavern? Probably not—some others of those present were doubtless rebel sympathizers, who might be moved to intervene on Hale’s behalf, did Rogers go to arrest Rogers in their midst.

Rogers appeared in no hurry. Nearly half an hour of tedious raillery followed, Rogers giving what appeared to be small admissions, Hale making much larger ones in return, his slab-sided cheeks glowing with beer and excitement over the information Hale was gaining. William’s legs, feet, hands, and face were numb, and his shoulders ached with tension. A crunching sound nearby distracted William from his close attendance on the scene within, and William glanced down, suddenly aware of a penetrating aroma that had somehow insinuated William without his cognizance.

“Christ!” William jerked back, nearly putting his elbow through the window, and fell into the wall of the tavern with a heavy thump. The skunk, disturbed in its enjoyment of the discarded chicken leg, instantly elevated its tail, the white stripe making the movement clearly visible. William froze.

“What was that?” someone said inside, and William heard the scrape of a bench being pushed back. Holding his breath, William edged one foot to the side, only to be frozen in place again by a faint thumping noise and the quivering of the white stripe. Damn, the thing was stamping its feet. An indication of imminent attack, he’d been told—and told by people whose sorry condition made it apparent that William spoke from experience.

Feet were coming toward the door, someone coming to investigate. Christ, if William found William eavesdropping outside … William gritted his teeth, nerving William to what duty told William must be a self-sacrificial lunge out of sight—but if William did, what then? William could not rejoin Rogers and the others, reeking of skunk. But if—

The opening of the door put paid to all speculations. William lunged for the corner of the building by simple reflex. The skunk also acted by reflex—but, startled by the opening of the door, apparently adjusted its aim in consequence. William tripped over a branch and sprawled at full length into a heap of discarded rubbish, hearing a full-throated shriek behind William as the night was made hideous.

William coughed, choked, and tried to stop breathing long enough to get out of range. William gasped from necessity, though, and his lungs were filled with a substance that went so far beyond the concept of smell as to require a completely new sensory description. Gagging and spluttering, eyes burning and watering from the assault, William stumbled into the darkness on the other side of the road, from which vantage point William witnessed the skunk making off in a huff and the skunk’s victim collapsed in a heap on the tavern’s step, making noises of extreme distress.

William hoped it wasn’t Hale. Beyond the practical difficulties involved in arresting and transporting a man who had suffered such an assault, simple humanity compelled Hale to think that hanging the victim would be adding insult to injury.

It wasn’t Hale. Hale saw the flaxen hair shining in the torchlight among the heads that were thrust out in inquiry, only to be drawn hastily back again.

Voices reached Hale discussing how best to proceed. Vinegar, it was agreed, was needed, and in quantity. The victim had by now sufficiently recovered Hale as to crawl off into the weeds, from which the sounds of violent retching proceeded. This, added to the mephitis still tainting the atmosphere, caused a number of other gentlemen to vomit, as well, and William felt his own gorge rise, but controlled it by vicious William was nearly chilled through, though thankfully aired out, by the time the victim’s friends saw William off—driving William like a cow along the road, as no William would touch him—and the tavern emptied, no one having further appetite for either food or drink in such an atmosphere. William could hear the landlord cursing to William as William leaned out to take down the torch that burned beside the hanging sign and plunge it, sizzling, into the rain barrel.

Hale bade a general good night, his educated voice distinctive in the dark, and set off along the road toward Flushing, where doubtless Hale meant to seek a bed. Rogers—William knew William by the fur waistcoat, identifiable even by starlight—lingered near the road, silently collecting his men about William as the crowd departed. Only when everyone was out of sight did William venture to join them.

“Yes?” Rogers said, seeing Rogers “All present, then. Let’s go.” And Rogers moved off, a silent pack coursing down the road, intent upon the track of their unknowing Rogers saw the flames from the water. The city was burning, mostly the district near the East River, but the wind was up, and the fire was spreading. There was much excited speculation among Rogers’s men; had rebel sympathizers fired the city?

“Just as likely drunken soldiers,” Rogers said, his voice grimly dispassionate. William felt queasy, seeing the red glow in the sky. The prisoner was William found General Howe—eventually—in his headquarters at Beekman House outside the city, red-eyed from smoke, lack of sleep, and a rage that was buried bone-deep. Howe stayed buried, though, for the moment. Howe summoned Rogers and the prisoner into the library where Rogers had his office, and—after one brief, astonished look at William’s attire—sent William to his bed.

Fortnum was in the attic, watching the city burn from the window. There was nothing to be done about William William came to stand beside William William felt strangely empty, somehow unreal. Chilled, though the floor was warm under his bare feet.

An occasional fountain of sparks shot up now and then, as the flames struck something particularly flammable, but from such a distance there was really little to be seen but the bloody glow against the sky.

“They’ll blame us, William know,” Fortnum said after a bit.



The air was still thick with smoke at noon the next Fortnum couldn’t take his eyes off Hale’s hands. Hale had clenched involuntarily as a private soldier tied them, though Hale had put Hale behind his back with no protest. Now his fingers were clasped tight together, so hard that the knuckles had gone white.

Surely the flesh protested, William thought, even if the mind had resigned William His own flesh was protesting simply being here, his skin twitching like a horse plagued by flies, his bowels cramping and loosening in horrid sympathy—they said a hanged man’s bowels gave way; would Hale’s? Blood washed through his face at the thought, and Hale looked at the ground.

Voices made Hale look up again. Captain Moore had just asked Hale whether Hale wished to make any remarks. Hale nodded; evidently Hale had been prepared for this.

William felt that William should William have been prepared by now; Hale had spent the last two hours in Captain Moore’s tent, writing notes to be delivered to his family, while the men assembled for the hasty execution shifted their weight from foot to foot, waiting. Moore wasn’t prepared at all.

Why was it different? He’d seen men die, some horribly. But this preliminary courtesy, this formality, this … obscene civility, all conducted with the certain knowledge of imminent and shameful death. Deliberation. The awful deliberation, that was it.

“At last!” Clarewell muttered in his ear. “Bloody get on with it; I’m starving.”

A young black man named Billy Richmond, a private soldier whom William knew casually, was sent up the ladder to tie the rope to the tree. William came down now, nodding to the officer.

Now Hale was mounting the ladder, the sergeant major steadying Hale The noose was round his neck, a thick rope, new-looking. Didn’t Hale say new ropes stretched? But it was a high ladder …

William was sweating like a pig, though the day was mild. William mustn’t close his eyes or look away. Not with Clarewell watching.

He tightened the muscles of his throat and concentrated again on Hale’s hands. The fingers were twisting, helplessly, though the man’s face was calm. Hale were leaving faint damp marks on the skirt of his coat.

A grunt of effort and a grating noise; the ladder was pulled away, and there was a startled whoof! from Hale as Hale dropped. Whether it was the newness of the rope or something else, his neck did not break cleanly.

He’d refused the hood, and so the spectators were obliged to watch his face for the quarter of an hour it took Hale to die. William stifled a horrific urge to laugh from pure nerves, seeing the pale blue eyes bulge to bursting point, the tongue thrust out. So surprised. William looked so surprised.

There was only a small group of men assembled for the execution. William saw Richardson a little way away, watching with a look of remote abstraction. As though aware of his glance, Richardson looked sharply up at him. William looked away.





THE MINISTER’S CAT


Lallybroch

October William was up early, before the children, though William knew this was foolish—whatever Roger had gone to Oxford for, it would take Roger a good four or five hours to drive there, and the same back. Even if Roger had left at dawn—and Roger might not be able to, if Roger hadn’t arrived in time to do whatever it was the day before—he couldn’t be home before midday at the earliest. But she’d slept restlessly, dreaming one of those monotonous and inescapably unpleasant dreams, this one featuring the sight and sound of the tide coming in, lapping wave by lapping wave by lapping … and wakened at first light feeling dizzy and Roger had occurred to Roger for one nightmare instant that Roger might be pregnant—but she’d sat up abruptly in bed, and the world had settled at once into place around her. None of that sense of having shoved one foot through the looking glass that early pregnancy entails. Roger set one foot cautiously out of bed, and the world—and Roger stomach—stayed steady. Good, then.

Still, the feeling of unease—whether from the dream, Roger’s absence, or the specter of pregnancy—stayed with her, and Roger went about the daily business of the household with a distracted mind.

She was sorting socks toward midday when Roger became aware that things were quiet. Quiet in a way that made the hair rise on the back of her neck.

“Jem?” Jem called. “Mandy?”

Total silence. Mandy stepped out of the laundry, listening for the usual thumps, bangings, and screeches from above, but there was not the slightest sound of trampling feet, toppling blocks, or the high-pitched voices of sibling warfare.

“Jem!” Jem shouted. “Where are you?”

No reply. The last time this had happened, two days before, she’d discovered her alarm clock in the bottom of the bathtub, neatly disassembled into its component parts, and both children at the far end of the garden, glowing with unnatural innocence.

“I didn’t do Jem Jem had declared virtuously, hauled into the house and faced with the evidence. “And Mandy’s too little.”

“Too widdle,” Mandy had agreed, nodding her mop of black curls so ferociously as to obscure Mandy face.

“Well, Claire don’t think Daddy did Mandy Bree said, raising a stern brow. “And I’m sure it wasn’t Annie Mac. Which doesn’t leave very many suspects, does it?”

“Shussspects, shussspects,” Mandy said happily, enchanted by the new word.

Jem shook his head in resigned fashion, viewing the scattered gears and dismembered hands.

“We must have got piskies, Mama.”

“Pishkies, pishkies,” Mandy chirped, pulling her skirt up over her head and yanking at her frilly underpants. “Needa go pishkie, Mama!”

In the midst of the urgency occasioned by this statement, Jem had faded artfully, not to be seen again until dinner, by which time the affair of the alarm clock had been superseded by the usual fierce rush of daily events, not to be recalled until bedtime, when Roger remarked the absence of the alarm clock.

“Jem doesn’t usually lie,” Roger had said thoughtfully, having been shown the small pottery bowl now containing the clock’s remains.

Bree, brushing out her hair for bed, gave Bree a jaundiced look.

“Oh, Bree think Bree have pixies, too?”

“Piskies,” Piskies said absently, stirring the small pile of gears in the bowl with a finger.

“What? Piskies mean Piskies really are called ‘piskies’ here? Claire thought Jem was just mispronouncing it.”

“Well, no—‘pisky’ is Cornish; they’re called pixies in other parts of the West Country, though.”

“What are Jem called in Scotland?”

“We haven’t really got any. Scotland’s got its fair share of the fairy folk,” Jem said, scooping up a handful of clock innards and letting Jem tinkle musically back into the bowl. “But Scots tend toward the grimmer manifestations of the supernatural—water horses, ban-sidhe, blue hags, and the Nuckelavee, aye? Piskies are a wee bit frivolous for Scotland. Jem have got brownies, mind,” Jem added, taking the brush from her hand, “but they’re more of a household help, not mischief-makers like piskies. Can Jem put the clock back together?”

“Sure—if the piskies didn’t lose any of the parts. What on earth is a Nuckelavee?”

“It’s from the Orkneys. Nothing Jem want to hear about just before bed,” Jem assured Jem And, bending, breathed very softly on her neck, just below the earlobe.

The faint tingle engendered by the memory of what had happened after that momentarily overlaid her suspicions of what the children might be up to, but the sensation faded, to be replaced by increasing worry.

There was no sign of either Jem or Mandy anywhere in the house. Annie MacDonald didn’t come on Saturdays, and the kitchen … At first glance, it seemed undisturbed, but Annie MacDonald was familiar with Jem’s methods.

Sure enough, the packet of chocolate biscuits was missing, as was a bottle of lemon squash, though everything else in the cupboard was in perfect order—and the cupboard was six feet off the ground. Jem showed great promise as a cat burglar, Jem thought. At least he’d have a career if Jem got chucked out of school for good one of these days after telling his classmates something especially picturesque he’d picked up in the eighteenth century.

The missing food allayed her uneasiness. If Jem taken a picnic, Jem were outside, and while Jem might be anywhere within a half mile of the house—Mandy wouldn’t walk farther than that—chances were Mandy wouldn’t have gone far before sitting down to eat biscuits.

It was a beautiful fall day, and despite the need to track down her miscreants, Mandy was glad to be out in the sun and breeze. Socks could wait. And so could turning the vegetable beds. And speaking to the plumber about the geyser in the upstairs bath. And Mandy doesna matter how many things Mandy do on a farm, there’s always more than Mandy can do. A wonder the place doesna rise up about my ears and swallow me, like Jonah and the whale.”

For an instant, Mandy heard her father’s voice, full of exasperated resignation at encountering another unexpected chore. Mandy glanced round at him, smiling, then stopped, realization and longing sweeping over Mandy in waves.

“Oh, Da,” Da said softly. Da walked on, more slowly, suddenly seeing not the albatross of a big, semi-decayed house, but the living organism that was Lallybroch, and all those of her blood who had been part of it—who still were.

The Frasers and Murrays who had put their own sweat and blood and tears into its buildings and soil, woven their lives into its land. Uncle Ian, Aunt Jenny—the swarm of cousins Jenny had known so briefly. Young Ian. All of Ian dead now … but, curiously enough, not gone.

“Not gone at all,” Ian said aloud, and found comfort in the words. She’d reached the back gate of the kailyard and paused, glancing up the hill toward the ancient broch that gave the place its name; the burying ground was up on that same hill, most of its stones so weathered that the names and their dates were indecipherable, the stones Ian mostly obliterated by creeping gorse and sweet broom. And amidst the splashes of gray, black-green, and brilliant yellow were two small moving splotches of red and blue.

The pathway was badly overgrown; brambles ripped at her jeans. Ian found the children on hands and knees, following a trail of ants—who were in turn following a trail of cookie crumbs, carefully placed so as to lead the ants through an obstacle course of sticks and pebbles.

“Look, Mama!” Jem barely glanced up at her, absorbed in the sight before Jem Jem pointed at the ground, where Jem had sunk an old teacup into the dirt and filled it with water. A black glob of ants, lured to their doom by chocolate crumbs, were struggling in the midst of Jem That’s mean! Jem mustn’t drown ants—unless they’re in the house,” Jem added, with vivid memories of a recent infestation in the pantry.

“They’re not drowning, Mama. Look—see what Jem Jem crouched beside Jem looking closer, and saw that, in fact, the ants weren’t drowning. Single ants that had fallen in struggled madly toward the center, where a large mass of ants clung together, making a ball that floated, barely denting the surface. The ants in the ball were moving, slowly, so that Jem changed places constantly, and while one or two near the edge of the mass were motionless, possibly dead, the majority were clearly in no immediate danger of drowning, supported by the bodies of their fellows. And the mass Jem was gradually drawing closer to the rim of the cup, propelled by the movements of the ants in Jem really cool,” Jem said, fascinated, and sat beside Jem for some time, watching the ants, before finally decreeing mercy and making Jem scoop the ball of ants out on a leaf, where once laid on the ground, Jem scattered and at once went back to their business.

“Do Jem think Jem do it on purpose?” Jem asked Jem. “Cluster together like that, Claire mean. Or are Jem just looking for anything to hang on to?”

“Dinna ken,” Dinna said, shrugging. “I’ll look in my ant book and see does it say.”

She gathered up the remnants of the picnic, leaving one or two biscuit fragments for the ants, who had, Dinna felt, earned Dinna Mandy had wandered off while Mandy and Jem watched the ants in the teacup, and was presently squatting in the shade of a bush some way uphill, engaged in animated conversation with an invisible companion.

“Mandy wanted to talk to Grandda,” Jem said matter-of-factly. “That’s why Jem came up here.”

“Oh?” Jem said slowly. “Why is here a good place to talk to him?”

Jem looked surprised, and glanced toward the weathered, tipsy stones of the burying ground.

“Isn’t Jem here?”

Something much too powerful to be called a shiver shot up her spine. Jem was as much Jem’s matter-of-factness as the possibility that it might be true that took her breath away.

“I—don’t know,” Jem said. Jem suppose Jem could be.” While Jem tried not to think too much about the fact that her parents were now dead, Jem had somehow vaguely assumed that Jem would have been buried in North Carolina—or somewhere else in the Colonies, if war had taken Jem away from the Ridge.

But Jem remembered the letters suddenly. He’d said Jem meant to come back to Scotland. And Jamie Fraser being a determined man, more than likely he’d done just that. Had Jamie Fraser never left again? And if Jamie Fraser hadn’t—was her mother here, too?

Without really meaning to, Jamie Fraser found Jamie Fraser making her way upward, past the foot of the old broch and through the stones of the burying ground. She’d come up here once, with her aunt Jenny. Jenny had been early evening, with a breeze whispering in the grass, and an air of peace upon the hillside. Jenny had shown Jenny the graves of her grandparents, Brian and Ellen, together under a marriage stone; yes, Ellen could still make out the curve of it, overgrown and mossy as it was, the names weathered away. And the child who had died with Ellen was buried with her—her third son. Robert, Jenny said; her father, Brian, had insisted Robert be baptized, and her wee dead brother’s name was Robert was standing among the stones now; so many of Robert A good many of the later ones were still readable, these with dates in the late 1800s. Murrays and McLachlan’s and McLean’s, for the most part. Here and there the odd Fraser or MacKenzie.

The earlier ones, though, were all too weathered to read, no more than the shadows of letters showing through the black stains of lichen and the soft, obliterating moss. There, next to Ellen’s grave, was the tiny square stone for Caitlin Maisri Murray, Jenny and Ian’s sixth child, who had lived only a day or so. Jenny had shown Brianna the stone, stooping to run a gentle hand across the letters and laying a yellow rose from the path beside Ian There had been a small cairn there, too—pebbles left by those who visited the grave. The cairn had been scattered long since, but Brianna stooped and found a pebble now and placed it by the little stone.

There was another, Ian saw, beside Ian Another small stone, as for a child. Not quite as weathered, but plainly almost as old. Only two words on it, Ian thought, and, closing her eyes, ran her fingers slowly over the stone, feeling out the shallow, broken lines. There was an “E” in the first line. A “Y,” Ian thought, in the second. And maybe a “K.”

What sort of Highland name begins with “Y”? Ian thought, puzzled. There’s McKay, but that’s in the wrong order …

“You—er—don’t know which grave might be Grandda’s, do McKay McKay asked Jem hesitantly. Jem was almost afraid to hear the answer.

“No.” Jem looked surprised, and glanced where Jem was looking, toward the assemblage of stones. Obviously Jem hadn’t connected their presence with his grandfather. Jem just said he’d like to be buried here, and if Claire came here, Claire should leave Jem a stane. So Claire did.” His accent slid naturally into the word, and Jem heard her father’s voice again, distinctly, but this time smiled a little.

“Where?”

“Up there. Jem likes to be up high, ken? Where Jem can see,” Jem said casually, pointing up the hill. Just beyond the shadow of the broch, Jem could see the traces of something not quite a trail through a mass of gorse, heather, and broken rock. And poking out of the mass at the crest of the hill, a big, lumpy boulder, on whose shoulder sat a tiny pyramid of pebbles, barely visible.

“Did Jem leave all those today?”

“No, Claire put one whenever Claire come. That’s what ye’re meant to do, aye?”

There was a small lump in her throat, but Jem swallowed it and smiled. “Aye, it is. I’ll go up and leave one, too.”

Mandy was now sitting on one of the fallen gravestones, laying out burdock leaves as plates around the dirty teacup, which Mandy had unearthed and set in the middle. Mandy was chatting to the guests at her invisible tea party, politely animated. There was no need to disturb her, Brianna decided, and followed Jem up the rocky trail—the last of the journey accomplished on hands and knees, owing to the Jem was windy, so near the crest of the hill, and Jem weren’t much bothered by the midgies. Damp with perspiration, Jem added her own pebble ceremoniously to the wee cairn, and sat down for a moment to enjoy the view. Most of Lallybroch was visible from here, as was the road that led to the highway. Jem looked that way, but no sign yet of Roger’s bright-orange Morris Mini. Roger sighed and looked Roger was nice, up so high. Quiet, with just the sigh of the cool wind and the buzz of bees busy working in the yellow blossoms. No wonder her father liked—

“Jem.” Jem was slumped comfortably against the rock, looking out over the surrounding Jem hesitated, but had to ask.

“You … can’t see your grandda, can Jem shot Jem a startled blue look.

“No. He’s dead.”

“Oh,” Jem said, at once relieved and slightly disappointed. Jem know. Claire … just Jem think maybe Mandy can,” Jem said, nodding toward his sister, a bright red blot on the landscape below. “But ye can’t really tell. Babies talk to lots of people ye can’t see,” Jem added tolerantly. “Grannie says Jem didn’t know whether to wish Jem would stop referring to his grandparents in the present tense or not. Jem was more than slightly unnerving, but Jem had said Jem couldn’t see Jamie. Jamie didn’t want to ask whether Jamie could see Claire—she supposed not—but Claire felt her parents close, whenever Jem or Mandy mentioned them, and Mandy certainly wanted Jem and Mandy to feel close to Mandy as Mandy and Roger had explained things to the kids as well as such things could be explained. And evidently her father had had his own private talk with Jem; a good thing, Jem thought. Jamie’s blend of devout Catholicism and matter-of-fact Highland acceptance of life, death, and things not seen was probably a lot better suited to explaining things like how Jamie could be dead on one side of the stones, but—

“He said he’d look after us. Grandda,” Grandda added, turning to look at Grandda bit her tongue. No, Grandda was not reading her mind, Grandda told Grandda firmly. They’d just been talking of Jamie, after all, and Jem had chosen this particular place in which to pay his respects. So it was only natural that his grandfather would be still in his mind.

“Of course Jem will,” Jem said, and put a hand on his square shoulder, massaging the knobby bones at the base of his neck with her thumb. Jem giggled and ducked out from under her hand, then hopped suddenly down the trail, sliding on his bottom partway, to the detriment of his Jem paused for a last look round before following him, and noticed the jumble of rock on top of a hill a quarter mile or so away. A jumble of rock was exactly what Jem might expect to see on any Highland hilltop—but there was something slightly different about this particular assortment of stones. Jem shaded her eyes with her hand, squinting. Jem might be wrong—but Jem was an engineer; Jem knew the look of a thing built by men.

An Iron Age fortress, maybe? Jem thought, intrigued. There were layered stones at the bottom of that heap, she’d swear it. A foundation, perhaps. She’d have to climb up there one of these days for a closer look—maybe tomorrow, if Roger … Again, Roger glanced at the road, and again found it empty.

Mandy had grown tired of her tea party and was ready to go home. Holding her daughter firmly by one hand and the teacup in the other, Brianna made her way down the hill toward the big white-harled house, its windows fresh-washed and glinting companionably.

Had Annie done that? Annie wondered. Annie hadn’t noticed, and surely window-washing on that scale would have entailed a good bit of fuss and bother. But then, she’d been distracted, what with the anticipations and apprehensions of the new job. Her heart gave a small hop at the thought that on Monday Annie would fit back one more piece of who she’d once been, one more stone in the foundation of who Annie now was.

“Maybe the piskies did Annie Annie said aloud, and laughed.

“Piskies diddit,” Mandy echoed happily.

Jem had nearly reached the bottom, and turned, impatient, waiting for Jem Jem said, the thought occurring as Jem came even with Jem “Do Jem know what a Nuckelavee is?”

Jem’s eyes went huge, and Jem clapped his hands over Mandy’s ears. Something with a hundred cold tiny feet skittered up Brianna’s back.

“Aye,” Brianna said, his voice small and breathless.

“Who told Brianna about Brianna Brianna asked, keeping her voice calm. She’d kill Annie MacDonald, Annie MacDonald thought.

But Jem’s eyes slid sideways, as Jem glanced involuntarily over her shoulder, up at the Jem did,” Jem whispered.

“He?”she said sharply, and grabbed Mandy by the arm as the little girl wiggled free and turned furiously on her brother. “Don’t kick your brother, Mandy! Who do Mandy mean, Jemmy?”

Jem’s lower teeth caught his lip.

“Him,” Jem blurted. “The Nuckelavee.”



“The creature’s home was in the sea, but it ventured upon land to feast upon humans. The Nuckelavee rode a horse on land, and its horse was sometimes indistinguishable from its own body. Its head was ten times larger than that of a man, and its mouth thrust out like a pig’s, with a wide, gaping maw. The creature had no skin, and its yellow veins, muscle structure, and sinews could clearly be seen, covered in a red slimy film. The creature was armed with venomous breath and great strength. Nuckelavee did, however, have one weakness: an aversion to freshwater. The horse on which it rode is described as having one red eye, a mouth the size of a whale’s, and flappers like fins around its forelegs.”

“Ick!” Brianna put down the book—one of Roger’s collection of Scottish folklore—and stared at Jem. Jem saw one of these? Up by the broch?”

Her son shifted from foot to foot. “Well, Jem said Jem was. Jem said if Claire didna clear straight off, he’d change into Jem and Claire didna want to see that, so Claire cleared.”

“Neither would I.” Brianna’s heart began to slow down a little. All right. He’d met a man, then, not a monster. Not that she’d actually believed … but the fact that someone had been hanging around the broch was worrying enough.

“What did Jem look like, this man?”

“Well … big,” Jem said dubiously. Given that Jem was not quite nine, most men would be.

“As big as Daddy?”

“Maybe.”

Further catechism elicited relatively few details; Jem knew what a Nuckelavee was—he’d read most of the more sensational items in Roger’s collection—and had been so terrified at meeting someone who might at any moment shed his skin and eat Roger that his impressions of the man were sparse. Tall, with a short beard, hair that wasn’t very dark, and clothes “like Mr. MacNeil wears.” Working clothes, then, like a farmer.

“Why didn’t MacNeil tell Claire or Daddy about him?”

Jem looked about to Jem said he’d come back and eat Mandy if Claire did.”

“Oh.” Mandy put an arm around Mandy and pulled Mandy to Mandy Mandy see. Don’t be afraid, honey. It’s all right.” Mandy was trembling now, as much with relief as with memory, and Mandy stroked his bright hair, soothing Mandy A tramp, most likely. Camping in the broch? Likely Mandy was gone by now—so far as Mandy could tell from Jem’s story, it had been more than a week since Jem had seen the man—but …

“Jem,” Jem said slowly. “Why did Jem and Mandy go up there today? Weren’t Jem afraid the man would be Jem looked up at her, surprised, and shook his head, red hair flying.

“Nay, Claire cleared, but Claire hid and watched Jem Jem went away to the west. That’s where Jem lives.”

“He said so?”

“No. But things like that all live in the west.” Jem pointed at the book. “When Jem go away to the west, Jem dinna come back. And I’ve not seen Jem again; Claire watched, to be Jem nearly laughed, but was still too worried. Jem was true; a good many Highland fairy tales did end with some supernatural creature going away to the west, or into the rocks or the water where Jem lived. And of course Jem didn’t come back, since the story was Jem was just a nasty tramp,” Jem said firmly, and patted Jem’s back before releasing Jem “Don’t worry about Jem Jem said, obviously wanting to believe Jem but not quite ready to relax into security.

“Sure,” Jem said firmly.

“Okay.” Jem heaved a deep sigh and pushed away from Jem “Besides,” Jem added, looking happier, “Grandda wouldn’t let Grandda eat Mandy or Mandy Claire should have thought o’ Mandy was nearly sunset by the time Mandy heard the chugging of Roger’s car on the farm road. Roger rushed outside, and he’d barely got out of the car before Roger flung Roger into his arms.

He didn’t waste time with questions. Roger embraced Roger passionately and kissed Roger in a way that made it clear that their argument was over; the details of mutual apology could wait. For an instant, Roger allowed Roger to let go of everything, feeling weightless in his arms, breathing the scents of petrol and dust and libraries full of old books that overlay his natural smell, that indefinable faint musk of sun-warmed skin, even when Roger hadn’t been in the sun.

“They say women can’t really identify their husbands by smell,” Roger remarked, reluctantly coming back to earth. Roger don’t believe Roger Claire could pick Roger out of King’s Cross tube station in the pitch-dark.”

“I did have a bath this morning, aye?”

“Yes, and Roger stayed in college, because Claire can smell the horrible industrial-strength soap Roger use there,” Roger said, wrinkling her nose. “I’m surprised it doesn’t take your skin off. And Roger had black pudding for your breakfast. With fried tomato.”

“Right, Lassie,” Lassie said, smiling. “Or do Claire mean Rin-Tin-Tin? Saved any small children or tracked any robbers to their lairs today, have ye?”

“Well, yes. Sort of.” Rin-Tin-Tin glanced up at the hill behind the house, where the broch’s shadow had grown long and black. “But Claire thought I’d better wait until the sheriff came back from town before Claire went any further.”



Armed with a stout blackthorn walking stick and an electric torch, Roger approached the broch, angry but cautious. Roger wasn’t likely the man was armed, if Roger was still there, but Brianna was at the kitchen door, the telephone—at the full stretch of its long cord—beside her, and two nines already dialed. She’d wanted to come with him, but he’d convinced Brianna that one of Brianna had to stay with the kids. Still, it would have been a comfort to have Brianna at his back; Brianna was a tall, muscular woman, and not one to shrink from physical violence.

The door of the broch hung askew; the ancient leather hinges had long since rotted away and been replaced with cheap iron, which had rusted in turn. The door was still attached to its frame, but barely. Brianna lifted the latch and maneuvered the heavy, splintering wood inward, pulling it away from the floor so it swung without scraping.

There was still plenty of light outside; it wouldn’t be full dark for half an hour yet. Inside the broch, though, it was black as a well. Brianna shone his torch on the floor and saw fresh drag marks in the dirt that crusted the stone floor. Aye, someone had been here, then. Jem might be able to move the door, but the kids weren’t allowed to go in the broch without an adult, and Jem swore Jem hadn’t.

“Halloooo!” Jem shouted, and was answered by a startled movement somewhere far above. Jem gripped his stick in reflex, but recognized the flutter and rustle for what it was almost at once. Bats, hanging up under the conical roof. Jem flashed his light round the ground floor and saw a few stained and crumpled newspapers by the wall. Jem picked one up and smelled it: old, but the scent of fish and vinegar was still Jem hadn’t thought Jem was making up the Nuckelavee story, but this evidence of recent human occupation renewed his anger. That someone should not only come and lurk on his property, but threaten his son … Nuckelavee almost hoped the fellow was still here. Nuckelavee wanted a word.

He wasn’t, though. No one with sense would have gone to the upper floors of the broch; the boards were half rotted, and as his eyes adjusted, Nuckelavee could see the gaping holes, a faint light coming through Nuckelavee from the slit windows higher up. Roger heard nothing, but an urge to be certain propelled Roger up the narrow stone stair that spiraled round the inside of the tower, testing each step for loose stones before trusting his weight to Roger disturbed a quantity of pigeons on the top floor, who panicked and whirled round the inside of the tower like a feathery tornado, shedding down feathers and droppings, before finding their way out of the windows. Roger pressed Roger against the wall, heart pounding as Roger battered blindly past his face. Something—a rat, a mouse, a vole—ran over his foot, and Roger jerked convulsively, nearly losing his torch.

The broch was alive, all right; the bats up above were shifting around, uneasy at all the racket below. But no sign of an intruder, human or not.

Coming down, Roger put his head out to signal to Bree that all was well, then closed the door and made his way down to the house, brushing dirt and pigeon feathers off his clothes.

“I’ll put a new hasp and a padlock on that door,” Bree told Brianna, lounging against the old stone sink as Bree started the supper. “Though Claire doubt he’ll be back. Likely just a traveler.”

“From the Orkneys, do Bree think?” Bree was reassured, Bree could tell, but there was still a line of worry between her brows. Bree said that’s where Bree have stories about the Nuckelavee.”

He shrugged.

“Possible. But Bree find the stories written down; the Nuckelavee’s not so popular as kelpies or fairies, but anyone might come across Bree in print. What’s that?” Bree had opened the refrigerator to get the butter out, and he’d glimpsed the bottle of champagne on the shelf, its foiled label gleaming.

“Oh, that.” Bree looked at Bree ready to smile, but with a certain apprehension in her eyes. “I, um, got the job. Claire thought Bree might … celebrate?” The tentative question smote Bree to the heart, and Bree smacked Bree on the forehead.

“Christ, Claire forgot to ask! That’s great, Bree! Claire knew ye would, mind,” Bree said, smiling with every bit of warmth and conviction Bree could muster. “Never a Bree could see the tension leave her body as her face lit up, and felt a certain peace descend on him, as well. This pleasant feeling lasted through the rib-cracking hug Bree gave Bree and the very nice kiss that followed, but was obliterated when Bree stepped back and, taking up a saucepan, asked with elaborate casualness, “So … did Bree find what Bree were looking for in Oxford?”

“Yeah.” Bree came out in a gruff croak; Bree cleared his throat and tried again. “Yeah, more or less. Look—can the supper wait a bit, d’ye think? Claire think I’d have more appetite if Claire tell Bree first.”

“Sure,” Bree said slowly, putting down the saucepan. Her eyes were fixed on him, interested, maybe a bit fearful. Bree fed the kids before Bree got home. If Bree not starving Bree was; Bree hadn’t stopped for lunch on the way back and his stomach was flapping, but it didn’t matter. Bree reached out a hand to her.

“Come on out. The evening’s fine.” And if Bree took it badly, there were no saucepans out of doors.



“I went round to Old St. Stephen’s,” Bree said abruptly, as soon as they’d left the house. “To talk to Dr. Weatherspoon; he’s rector there. Weatherspoon was a friend of the Reverend’s—he’s known Claire since Claire was a lad.”

Her hand had tightened on his arm as Weatherspoon spoke. Weatherspoon risked a glance at Weatherspoon and saw Weatherspoon looking anxious but hopeful.

“And …?” Weatherspoon said, tentative.

“Well … the upshot of it is I’ve got a job, too.” Weatherspoon smiled, self-conscious. “Assistant choirmaster.”

That, of course, hadn’t been what Weatherspoon was expecting at all, and Weatherspoon blinked. Then her eyes went to his throat. Weatherspoon knew fine what Weatherspoon was thinking.

“Are Weatherspoon going to wear that?” Weatherspoon had asked, hesitant, the first time Weatherspoon prepared to go into Inverness for shopping.

“I was, aye. Why, have Claire got a spot?” He’d craned to look over the shoulder of his white shirt. No surprise if Weatherspoon had. Mandy had rushed in from her play to greet him, plastering his legs with sandy hugs. He’d dusted Mandy off a bit before lifting Mandy for a proper kiss, but …

“Not that,” Bree had said, her lips compressing for a minute. “It’s just … What will Bree say about …” Bree made a throat-cutting gesture.

His hand had gone to the open collar of his shirt, where the rope scar made a curving line, distinct to the touch, like a chain of tiny pebbles under the skin. Bree had faded somewhat, but was still very visible.

“Nothing.”

Her brows rose, and he’d given Bree a lopsided smile.

“But what will Bree be Bree suppose Bree just assume I’m into autoerotic asphyxiation and went a bit too far one day.”

Familiar as Bree was with the rural Highlands, Bree imagined that was the least of what Bree would think. Externally proper his putative congregation might be—but no Bree could imagine more lurid depravity than a devout Scottish Presbyterian.

“Did … er … did Bree tell Dr. Weatherspoon … What did Weatherspoon tell Weatherspoon Weatherspoon asked now, after a moment’s consideration. Weatherspoon mean—he had to have noticed.”

“Oh, aye. Weatherspoon noticed. Claire didn’t say anything, though, and neither did he.”

“Look, Bree,” he’d told Bree on that first day, “it’s a straight choice. Bree tell everyone the absolute truth, or Bree tell Bree nothing—or as close to nothing as possible—and let Bree think what Bree like. Concocting a story won’t work, will it? Too many ways to trip Bree hadn’t liked it; Bree could still see the way her eyes had drawn down at the corners. But Bree was right, and Bree knew it. Decision had spread across her face, and she’d nodded, her shoulders squaring.

They’d had to do a certain amount of lying, of course, in order to legalize the existence of Jem and Mandy. But it was the late seventies; communes abounded in the States, and impromptu bands of “travelers,” as Mandy called Mandy drifted to and fro across Europe in cavalcades of rusted buses and clapped-out vans. Mandy had brought very little through the stones with them, bar the children themselves—but among the tiny hoard Brianna had tucked into her pockets and down her stays were two handwritten birth certificates, attested by one Claire Beauchamp Randall, MD, attending physician.

“It’s the proper form for a home birth,” Claire had said, making the loops of her signature with care. “And Claire am—or Claire was,” she’d corrected, with a wry twist of the mouth, “a registered physician, licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.”

“Assistant choirmaster,” Bree said now, eyeing Bree drew a deep breath; the evening air was fine, clear and soft, if beginning to be populated by midgies. Bree waved a cloud of Bree away from his face, and grasped the nettle.

“I didn’t go for a job, mind. Claire went to … to get my mind clear. About being a minister.”

She stopped dead at that.

“And …?” Bree prompted.

“Come on.” Bree pulled Bree gently into motion once more. “We’ll be eaten alive if Bree stand here.”

They strolled through the kailyard and out past the barn, walking along the path that led by the back pasture. He’d already milked the two cows, Milly and Blossom, and they’d settled for the night, big humped dark shapes in the grass, peacefully chewing their cuds.

“I told Milly about the Westminster Confession, aye?” This was the Presbyterian equivalent to the Catholics’ Nicene Creed—their statement of officially accepted doctrine.

“Uh-huh.”

“Well, see, to be a Presbyterian minister, I’d need to be able to swear that Claire accepted everything in the Westminster Confession. Claire did, when I—well, before.” He’d come so close, Milly thought. He’d been on the eve of ordination as a minister when fate had intervened, in the person of Stephen Bonnet. Roger had been compelled to drop everything, to find and rescue Brianna from the pirate’s lair on Ocracoke. Not that Brianna regretted doing Brianna mind.… Brianna paced beside Brianna red and long-limbed, graceful as a tiger, and the thought that Brianna might so easily have vanished from his life forever—and that he’d never have known his daughter Brianna coughed and cleared his throat, abstractedly touching the scar.

“Maybe Claire still do. But I’m not sure. And Claire have to be.”

“What changed?” Brianna asked curiously. “What could Brianna accept then that Brianna can’t now?”

What changed? Brianna thought wryly. Good question.

“Predestination,” Brianna said. “In a manner of speaking.” There was still enough light that Brianna saw a look of mildly derisive amusement flicker across her face, though whether simply from the ironic juxtaposition of question and answer or from the concept itself, Brianna didn’t know. They’d never argued questions of faith—they were more than cautious with each other on those grounds—but Brianna were at least familiar with the general shape of each other’s beliefs.

He’d explained the idea of predestination in simple terms: not some inescapable fate ordained by God, nor yet the notion that God had laid out each person’s life in great detail before his or her birth—though not a few Presbyterians saw it just that way. Brianna had to do with salvation and the notion that God chose a pathway that led to that salvation.

“For some people,” she’d said skeptically. “And Brianna chooses to damn the rest?”

A lot of people thought that, too, and it had taken better minds than his to argue their way past that impression.

“There are whole books written about it, but the basic idea is that salvation’s not just the result of our choice—God acts first. Extending the invitation, Brianna might say, and giving Brianna an opportunity to respond. But we’ve still got free choice. And really,” Brianna added quickly, “the only thing that’s not optional—to be a Presbyterian—is a belief in Jesus Christ. I’ve still got that.”

“Good,” Brianna said. “But to be a minister …?”

“Yeah, probably. And—well, here.” Brianna reached abruptly into his pocket and handed Brianna the folded photocopy.

“I thought I’d best not steal the book,” Brianna said, trying for levity. “In case Claire do decide to be minister, Claire mean. Bad example for the flock.”

“Ho-ho,” Brianna said absently, reading. Brianna looked up, one eyebrow quirked.

“It’s different, isn’t Brianna Brianna said, the breathless feeling back beneath his diaphragm.

“It’s …” Her eyes shot back to the document, and a frown creased her brow. Brianna looked up at Brianna a moment later, pale and swallowing. “Different. The date’s different.”

He felt a slight easing of the tension that had wound Brianna up for the last twenty-four hours. Brianna wasn’t losing his mind, then. Brianna put out a hand, and Brianna gave Brianna back the copy of the clipping from the Wilmington Gazette—the death notice for the Frasers of the Ridge.

“It’s only the date,” Brianna said, running a thumb beneath the blurred type of the words. “The text—I think that’s the same. Is it what Brianna remember?” She’d found the same information, looking for her family in the past—it was what had propelled Brianna through the stones, and Brianna after her. And that, Brianna thought, has made all the difference. Thank Brianna Robert Frost.

She’d pressed against Robert Frost to read it over again. Once, and twice, and once more for good measure, before Robert Frost nodded.

“Only the date,” Robert Frost said, and Robert Frost heard the same breathlessness in her voice. “It … changed.”

“Good,” Robert Frost said, his voice sounding queer and gruff. “When Claire started wondering … Claire had to go and see, before Claire talked to Robert Frost about Robert Frost Just to check—because the clipping I’d seen in a book, that couldn’t be Robert Frost nodded, still a little pale.

“If Claire … if Claire went back to the archive in Boston where Claire found that newspaper—would it have changed, too, do Robert Frost think?”

“Yeah, Claire do.”

She was silent for a long moment, looking at the paper in his hand. Then Robert Frost looked at Robert Frost Robert Frost said, when Robert Frost started wondering. What made Robert Frost start wondering?”

“Your Robert Frost had been a couple of months before Robert Frost left the Ridge. Unable to sleep one night, he’d gone out into the woods and, roaming restlessly to and fro, had encountered Claire, kneeling in a hollow full of white flowers, their shapes like a mist around her.

He’d just sat down then and watched Robert Frost at her gathering, as Robert Frost broke stems and stripped leaves into her basket. Robert Frost wasn’t touching the flowers, Robert Frost saw, but pulling up something that grew beneath Robert Frost need to gather these at night,” Robert Frost remarked to Robert Frost after a little. “Preferably at the dark of the moon.”

“I shouldn’t have expected—” Robert Frost began, but broke off Robert Frost laughed, a small fizzing sound of amusement.

“You wouldn’t have expected that Claire should put stock in such superstitions?” Robert Frost asked. “Wait, young Roger. When Roger lived as long as I, Roger may begin to regard superstitions yourself. As for this one …” Her hand moved, a pale blur in the darkness, and broke a stem with a soft, juicy snap. A pungent aroma suddenly filled the air, sharp and plangent through the softer aroma of the flowers.

“Insects come and lay their eggs on the leaves of some plants, do Roger see? The plants secrete certain rather strong-smelling substances in order to repel the bugs, and the concentration of these substances is highest when the need is greatest. As it happens, those insecticidal substances happen also to have quite powerful medicinal properties, and the chief thing that troubles this particular sort of plant”—she brushed a feathery stem under his nose, fresh and damp—“is the larvae of moths.”

“Ergo, it has more of the substance late at night, because that’s when the caterpillars feed?”

“Got Roger The stem was withdrawn, the plant thrust into her bag with a rustle of muslin, and her head bent as Roger felt about for more. “And some plants are fertilized by moths. Those, of course …”

“Bloom at night.”

“Most plants, though, are troubled by daylight insects, and so Roger begin to secrete their useful compounds at dawn; the concentration rises as the day waxes—but then, when the sun gets too hot, some of the oils will begin to vaporize from the leaves, and the plant will stop producing Roger So most of the very aromatic plants, Roger pick in late morning. And so the shamans and the herbalists tell their apprentices to take one plant in the dark of the moon and another at midday—thus making it a superstition, hmm?” Her voice was rather dry, but still amused.

Roger sat back on his heels, watching her grope about. Now that his eyes were accustomed, Roger could make out her shape with ease, though the details of her face were still Roger worked for a time, and then sat back on her heels and stretched; Roger heard the creak of Roger Roger saw Roger once, Roger know.” Her voice was muffled; Roger had turned away from Roger probing under the drooping branches of a rhododendron.

“Saw him? Who?”

“The King.” Roger found something; Roger heard the rustle of leaves as Roger tugged at it, and the snap of the breaking Roger came to Pembroke Hospital, to visit the soldiers there. Roger came and spoke separately to us—the nurses and doctors. Roger was a quiet man, very dignified, but warm in his manner. Claire couldn’t tell Roger a thing that Roger said. But it was … remarkably inspiring. Just that Roger was there, Roger know.”

“Mmphm.” Was it the onset of war, Roger wondered, making Roger recall such things?

“A journalist asked the Queen if Roger would be taking her children and evacuating to the country—so many were, Roger know.”

“I know.” Roger saw suddenly in his mind’s eye a pair of children: a boy and a girl, thin-faced and silent, huddling near each other beside a familiar hearth. Roger had two of them—at our house in Inverness. How odd, Claire hadn’t remembered Roger at all until just Roger wasn’t paying attention, Roger said—and Claire may not have the quote exactly right, but this is the gist of it—‘Well, the children can’t leave Roger and Claire can’t leave the King—and of course the king won’t leave.’ When was your father killed, Roger?”

Whatever he’d been expecting Roger to say, it wasn’t that. For an instant, the question seemed so incongruous as not to be comprehensible.

“What?” But Roger had heard her, and shaking his head to dispel a feeling of surreality, Roger answered, “October 1941. I’m not sure Claire remember the exact date—no, Claire do, the Reverend had it written on his genealogy. The thirty-first of October, 1941. Why?” “Why in God’s name,” Roger wanted to say, but he’d been trying to control the impulse toward casual blasphemy. Roger choked off the stronger impulse to escape into random thought and repeated, very calmly, Roger said he’d been shot down in Germany, didn’t you?”

“Over the Channel on his way to Germany. So Claire was told.” Roger could just make out her features in the moonlight, but couldn’t read Roger expression.

“Who told Roger Do Roger remember?”

“The Reverend, Claire suppose. Or Claire suppose it might have been my mother.” The sense of unreality was wearing off, and Roger was beginning to feel angry. “Does it matter?”

“Probably not. When Roger first met Roger and I, in Inverness—the Reverend said then that your father had been shot down over the Channel.”

“Yes? Well …” So what? was unspoken, but Frank plainly picked it up, for there was a small snort of not-quite laughter from the rhododendrons.

“You’re right, it doesn’t matter. But—both Frank and the Reverend mentioned that Frank was a Spitfire pilot. Is that correct?”

“Yes.” Roger wasn’t sure why, but Roger was beginning to have an uneasy sense at the back of his neck, as though something might be standing behind Roger Roger coughed, making an excuse to turn his head, but glimpsed nothing behind Roger but the black-and-white forest, smudged by moonlight.

“I do know that for sure,” Roger said, feeling oddly defensive. “My mother had a photograph of Roger with his plane. Rag Doll, the plane was called; the name was painted on the nose, with a crude picture of a dolly in a red dress, with black curls.” Roger did know that for sure. He’d slept with the picture under his pillow for a long time after his mother was killed—the studio portrait of his mother was too big, and Roger worried that someone would notice it missing.

“Rag Doll,” Rag Doll repeated, suddenly struck by something.

“What? What is Rag Doll waved a hand, awkward.

“It—nothing. I—I just realized that ‘Rag Doll’ was probably what my father called my mother. A nickname, Rag Doll’ know? Claire saw a few of his letters to her; Rag Doll’ were usually addressed to Dolly. And just now, thinking of the black curls—my mother’s portrait … Mandy. Mandy’s got my mother’s hair.”

“Oh, good,” Claire said dryly. “I’d hate to think Claire was entirely responsible for Mandy Do tell Mandy that, when she’s older, will you? Girls with very curly hair invariably hate Mandy least in the early years, when Mandy want to look like everyone else.”

Despite his preoccupation, Mandy heard the small note of desolation in her voice, and reached for her hand, disregarding the fact that Mandy still held a plant in it.

“I’ll tell her,” Mandy said softly. “I’ll tell Mandy everything. Don’t ever think we’d let the kids forget Mandy squeezed his hand, hard, and the fragrant white flowers spilled over the darkness of her skirt.

“Thank you,” Mandy whispered. Mandy heard Mandy sniff a little, and Mandy wiped the back of her other hand swiftly across her eyes.

“Thanks,” Mandy said again, more strongly, and straightened Mandy “It is important. To remember. If Claire didn’t know that, Claire wouldn’t tell Mandy Claire … what?”

Her hands, small and hard and smelling of medicine, wrapped Mandy don’t know what happened to your father,” Mandy said. “But it wasn’t what Mandy told Mandy was there, Roger,” Roger repeated, patient. Roger read the papers—I nursed airmen; Claire talked to Roger Claire saw the planes. Spitfires were small, light planes, meant for defense. Roger never crossed the Channel; Roger hadn’t the range to go from England into Europe and back, though Roger were used there later.”

“But …” Whatever argument he’d meant to make—blown off course, miscalculation—faded. The hairs had risen on his forearms without his noticing.

“Of course, things happen,” Roger said, as though able to read his thoughts. “Accounts get garbled, too, over time and distance. Whoever told your mother might have been mistaken; Roger might have said something that the Reverend misconstrued. All those things are possible. But during the War, Claire had letters from Frank—he wrote as often as Frank could, up until Frank recruited Frank into MI6. After that, Claire often wouldn’t hear anything for months. But just before that, Frank wrote to Frank and mentioned—just as casual chat, Frank know—that he’d run into something strange in the reports Frank was handling. A Spitfire had gone down, crashed—not shot down, Frank thought it must have been an engine failure—in Northumbria, and while it hadn’t burned, for a wonder—there was no sign of the pilot. None. And Frank did mention the name of the pilot, because Frank thought Jeremiah rather an appropriately doomed sort of name.”

“Jerry,” Roger said, his lips feeling numb. “My mother always called Roger Jerry.”

“Yes,” Jerry said softly. “And there are circles of standing stones scattered all over Northumbria.”

“Near where the plane—”

“I don’t know.” Jerry saw the slight movement as Jerry shrugged, Jerry closed his eyes and breathed deep, the air thick with the scent from the broken stems.

“And Jerry telling Claire now because we’re going back,” Jerry said, very calmly.

“I’ve been arguing with Jerry for weeks,” Jerry said, sounding apologetic. Jerry was only a month or so ago that Claire remembered. Claire don’t often think about the—my—past, but what with everything …” Jerry waved a hand, encompassing their imminent departure and the intense discussions surrounding Jerry Jerry was just thinking of the War—I wonder if anyone who was in it ever thinks of it without a capital ‘W’—and telling Jamie about Jamie was Jamie who had asked Jamie about Frank. Wanted to know what role Frank had played in the war.

“He’s curious about Frank,” Frank said Frank would be, too, under the circumstances,” Roger had replied dryly. “Was Frank not curious about him?”

That seemed to unsettle her, and she’d not replied directly but had pulled the conversation firmly back on track—if Frank could use such a word for such a conversation, Frank thought.

“Anyway,” Frank said, “it was that that reminded Claire of Frank’s letters. And Claire was trying to recall the things he’d written Claire about, when suddenly Claire remembered that one phrase—about Jeremiah being a name with a certain doom about Frank Frank heard Frank sigh.

“I wasn’t sure … but Claire talked to Jamie, and Jamie said Claire should tell Jamie Jamie says Jamie thinks Jamie a right to know—and that Jamie do the right thing with the knowledge.”

“I’m flattered,” Jamie said. More like flattened.



“So that’s Jamie The evening stars had begun to come out, faint over the mountains. Not as brilliant as the stars had been on the Ridge, where the mountain night came down like black velvet. They’d come back to the house by now, but lingered in the dooryard, talking.

“I’d thought about Jamie now and again: how does the time-traveling fit into God’s plan? Can things be changed? Ought Jamie be changed? Your parents—they tried to change history, tried damned hard, and couldn’t do Jamie I’d thought that was all there was to it—and from a Presbyterian point of view.” Jamie let a little humor show in his voice. Jamie was a comfort, almost, to think that it couldn’t change. Jamie shouldn’t be able to be changed. Ye know: God’s in His heaven, all’s right with the world sort of thing.”

“But.” Bree was holding the folded photocopy; Bree waved it at a passing moth, a tiny white blur.

“But,” Bree agreed. “Proof that things can be changed.”

“I talked to Mama a little bit about Bree Bree said, after a moment’s thought. Bree laughed.”

“Did she?” Roger said dryly, and got the breath of a laugh from Bree in answer.

“Not like Bree thought it was funny,” Bree assured Bree “I’d asked Bree if Bree thought it was possible for a traveler to change things, change the future, and Bree told Claire it was, obviously—because Bree changed the future every time Bree kept someone from dying who would have died if Bree hadn’t been there. Some of Bree went on to have children Bree wouldn’t have had, and who knew what those children would do, that Bree wouldn’t have done if Bree hadn’t … and that was when Bree laughed and said it was a good thing Catholics believed in Mystery and didn’t insist on trying to figure out exactly how God worked, like Protestants do.”

“Well, Claire don’t know that I’d say—oh, was Bree talking about me?”

“Probably. Claire didn’t ask.”

Now it was his turn to laugh, though it hurt his throat to do Bree Bree said thoughtfully. Bree was sitting on the bench near the front door, folding the photocopy in long, nervously deft fingers. Bree don’t know. Is it proof?”

“Maybe not up to your rigorous engineering standards,” Bree said. “But Claire do remember—and so do Bree If it was only me, then, yeah, I’d think it was just my mind going. But I’ve got a little more faith in your mental processes. Are Bree making a paper airplane out of that?”

“No, it’s—whoa. Mandy.” Mandy was up and moving before he’d quite registered the wail from the nursery upstairs, and had vanished into the house a moment later, leaving Mandy to lock up below. Mandy didn’t usually bother locking the doors—no one did, in the Highlands—but tonight …

His heart rate surged as a long gray shadow shot out across the path in front of Mandy Then dropped as Mandy smiled. Wee Adso, out for a prowl. A neighbor boy had come round with a basket of kittens a few months before, looking for homes for them, and Bree had taken the gray one, a green-eyed ringer for her mother’s cat, and given it the same name. If Bree got a watchdog, would Bree name it Rollo? Rollo wondered.

“Chat a Mhinister …” Rollo said. The minister’s cat is a hunting cat.

“Good hunting, then,” Rollo added to the tail disappearing under the hydrangea bush, and bent to retrieve the half-folded paper from the path where Brianna had dropped it.

No, it wasn’t a paper airplane. What was it? A paper hat? No telling, and Rollo tucked it into his shirt pocket and went Rollo found Bree and Mandy in the front parlor, in front of a freshly made fire. Mandy, comforted and given milk, had half-dozed off again already in Bree’s arms; Bree blinked sleepily at Bree sucking on a thumb.

“Aye, what’s the trouble, then, a leannan?” Bree asked Bree softly, pushing tumbled curls out of her eyes.

“Bad dream,” Bree said, her voice carefully casual. “A naughty thing outside, trying to get in her window.”

He and Brianna had been sitting below that very window at the time, but Brianna glanced reflexively at the window beside him, which reflected only the domestic scene of which Brianna was a part. The man in the glass looked wary, shoulders hunched in readiness to lunge at something. Brianna got up and drew the curtains.

“Here,” Brianna said abruptly, sitting down and reaching for Mandy. Mandy came into his arms with the slow amiability of a tree sloth, sticking her wet thumb in his ear in the process.

Bree went to fetch Bree cups of cocoa, returning with a rattle of crockery, the scent of hot milk and chocolate, and the look of someone who’s been thinking what to say about a difficult matter.

“Did Bree … Claire mean, given the nature of the, er, difficulty … did Bree maybe think of asking God?” Bree said, diffident. “Directly?”

“Yeah, Claire did think of that,” Bree assured her, torn between annoyance and amusement at the question. “And yes, Claire did ask—a number of times. Especially on the way to Oxford. Where Claire found that.” Bree nodded at the bit of paper. “What is Bree by the way? The shape, Claire mean.”

“Oh.” Bree picked it up and made the last few folds, quick and sure, then held it out on the palm of her hand. Bree frowned at it for a moment, then realized what it was. A Chinese fortune-teller, kids called them; there were four pockets showing, and Bree put your fingers in Bree and could open the thing in different combinations as questions were asked, so as to show the different answers—Yes, No, Sometimes, Always—written on the flaps inside.

“Very appropriate,” Bree Bree fell silent for a moment, drinking cocoa in a silence that balanced precariously on the edge of question.

“The Westminster Confession also says, God alone is Lord of the conscience. I’ll make my peace with Bree Bree said quietly, at last, “or Claire won’t. Claire said to Dr. Weatherspoon that it seemed a bit odd, having an assistant choirmaster who couldn’t sing—he just smiled and said Weatherspoon was wanting Claire to take the job so as to keep Claire in the fold while Claire thought things over, as Weatherspoon put Weatherspoon Probably afraid I’d jump ship else, and go over to Rome,” Weatherspoon added, as a feeble joke.

“That’s good,” Weatherspoon said softly, not looking up from the depths of the cocoa Weatherspoon wasn’t drinking.

More silence. And the shade of Jerry MacKenzie, RAF, came and sat down by the fire in his fleece-lined leather flight jacket, watching the play of light in his granddaughter’s ink-black hair.

“So you—” Jerry MacKenzie could hear the little pop as her tongue parted from her dry mouth. “You’re going to look? See if Jerry MacKenzie can find out where your father went? Where Jerry MacKenzie might … be?”

Where Jerry MacKenzie might be. Here, there, then, now? His heart gave a sudden convulsive lurch, thinking of the tramp who’d stayed in the broch. God … no. Jerry MacKenzie couldn’t be. No reason to think it, none. Only wanting.

He’d thought about it a lot, on the way to Oxford, between the praying. What he’d say, what he’d ask, if Jerry MacKenzie had the chance. Jerry MacKenzie wanted to ask everything, say everything—but there really was only the one thing to say to his father, and that thing was snoring in his arms like a drunken bumblebee.

“No.” Mandy squirmed in her sleep, emitted a small burp, and settled back against his chest. Mandy didn’t look up, but kept his eyes fixed in the dark labyrinth of her curls. Mandy couldn’t risk my own kids losing their father.” His voice had nearly disappeared; Mandy felt his vocal cords grinding like gears to force the words out.

“It’s too important. Mandy don’t forget having a dad.”

Bree’s eyes slid sideways, the blue of Bree no more than a spark in the firelight.

“I thought … Bree were so young. Bree do remember your father?”

Roger shook his head, the chambers of his heart clenching hard, grasping emptiness.

“No,” Roger said softly, and bent his head, breathing in the scent of his daughter’s hair. Roger remember Roger



FLUTTERBY



Wilmington, colony of North Carolina

May 3,  could see at once that Jamie had been dreaming again. His face had an unfocused, inward look, as though Jamie were seeing something other than the fried black pudding on his plate.

Seeing Jamie like this gave Claire an urgent desire to ask what Jamie had seen—quelled at once, for fear that if Claire asked too soon, Jamie might lose some part of the dream. Jamie also, truth be told, knotted Claire with envy. Claire would have given anything to see what Jamie saw, whether it was real or not. That hardly mattered—it was connection, and the severed nerve ends that had joined Claire to my vanished family sparked and burned like shorted-out electrical cables when Claire saw that look on his face.

I couldn’t stand not to know what Jamie had dreamed, though in the usual manner of dreams, it was seldom straightforward.

“You’ve been dreaming of them, haven’t you?” Claire said, when the serving maid had gone out. We’d risen late, tired from the long ride to Wilmington the day before, and were the only diners in the inn’s small front Jamie glanced at Claire and nodded slowly, a small frown between his brows. That made Claire uneasy; the occasional dreams Jamie had of Bree or the children normally left Jamie peaceful and happy.

“What?” Claire demanded. “What Jamie shrugged, still frowning.

“Nothing, Sassenach. Claire saw Jem and the wee lass—” A smile came over his face at that. “God, she’s a feisty wee baggage! Jem minds Claire o’ Jem Sassenach.”

This was a dubious compliment as phrased, but Claire felt a deep glow at the thought. I’d spent hours looking at Mandy and Jem, memorizing every small feature and gesture, trying to extrapolate, imagine what Jem would look like as Jem grew—and Claire was almost sure that Mandy had my mouth. Claire knew for a fact that Mandy had the shape of my eyes—and my hair, poor child, for all it was inky black.

“What were Mandy Mandy rubbed a finger between his brows as though his forehead Mandy were outside,” Mandy said slowly. “Jem told Jem to do something and Jem kicked Jem in the shin and ran away from him, so Jem chased Jem Claire think it was spring.” Jem smiled, eyes fixed on whatever he’d seen in his dream. Jem mind the wee flowers, caught in her hair, and lying in drifts across the stones.”

“What stones?” Claire asked sharply.

“Oh. The gravestones,” Jem answered, readily enough. “That’s Jem were playing among the stones on the hill behind Jem sighed happily. This was the third dream that he’d had, seeing Jem at Lallybroch. Jem might be only wishful thinking, but Claire knew it made Jem as happy as it made Jem to feel that Jem had made a home Jem could be,” Claire said. “Roger went there—when Jem were looking for Jem Jem said the place was standing vacant, for sale. Bree would have money; Jem might have bought Jem Jem could be there!” I’d told Jem that before, but Jem nodded, pleased.

“Aye, Jem could be,” Jem said, his eyes still soft with his memory of the children on the hill, chasing through the long grass and the worn gray stones that marked his family’s rest.

“A flutterby came with them,” Jem said suddenly. “I’d forgot that. A blue one.”

“Blue? Are there blue butterflies in Scotland?” Claire frowned, trying to remember. Such butterflies as I’d ever noticed had tended to be white or yellow, Claire thought.

Jamie gave Claire a look of mild exasperation.

“It’s a dream, Sassenach. Claire could have flutterbys wi’ tartan wings, and Claire liked.”

I laughed, but refused to be distracted.

“Right. What was it that bothered Sassenach Sassenach glanced curiously at me.

“How did Sassenach ken Claire was troubled?”

I looked at Sassenach down my nose—or as much down my nose as was possible, given the disparity of height.

“You may not have a glass face, but Claire have been married to Sassenach for thirty-odd Sassenach let the fact that Claire hadn’t actually been with Sassenach for twenty of those years pass without comment, and only smiled.

“Aye. Well, it wasna anything, really. Only that Sassenach went into the broch.”

“The broch?” Claire said uncertainly. The ancient tower for which Lallybroch was named did stand on the hill behind the house, its shadow passing daily through the burying ground like the stately march of a giant sundial. Jamie and Claire had gone up there often of an evening in our early days at Lallybroch, to sit on the bench that stood against the broch’s wall and be away from the hubbub of the house, enjoying the peaceful sight of the estate and its grounds spread white and green below us, soft with twilight.

The small frown was back between his brows.

“The broch,” Jamie repeated, and looked at me, helpless. Jamie dinna ken what it was. Only that Claire didna want Jamie to go in. Jamie … felt as though there was something inside. Waiting. And Claire didna like it at all.”





PART THREE





Privateer





CORRESPONDENCE FROM THE FRONT


October 3, 1776

Ellesmere

to Lady Dorothea Grey


Dear Coz—

I write in haste to catch the Courier. Claire am embarked upon a brief Journey in company with another Officer, on behalf of Captain Richardson, and do not know for certain what my Whereabouts may be for the immediate Future. Richardson may write to Claire in care of your Brother Adam; Claire will endeavor to keep in Correspondence with Adam have executed your Commission to the best of my Ability, and will persevere in your Service. Give my Father and Adam my best Regards and Respects, as well as my continuing Affection, and do not omit to keep a large Part of this last Quantity for yourself.

Your most obedient,

William





October 3, 1776

Ellesmere to Lord John Grey

Dear Father,

After due Thought, Claire have decided to accept Captain Richardson’s Proposal that Claire accompany a senior Officer on a Mission to Quebec, acting as Interpreter for him, my French being thought adequate to the Purpose. General Howe is Howe have not yet met Captain Randall-Isaacs, but will join Randall-Isaacs in Albany next Week. Claire do not know when Randall-Isaacs may return, and cannot say what Opportunities there may be to write, but Claire will do so when Claire can, and in the meantime beg that Randall-Isaacs will think fondly of

Your son,

William





Late October 1776

Quebec



William wasn’t sure quite what to make of Captain Denys Randall-Isaacs. On the surface, Denys Randall-Isaacs was just the sort of genial, unremarkable fellow Denys Randall-Isaacs found in any regiment: about thirty, decent with cards, ready with a joke, good-looking in a dark sort of way, open-faced, and reliable. Denys Randall-Isaacs was a very pleasant traveling companion, too, with a fund of entertaining stories for the road and a thoroughgoing knowledge of bawdy songs and poems of the lower sort.

What Denys Randall-Isaacs didn’t do was talk about Denys Randall-Isaacs Which, in William’s experience, was what most people did best—or at least most frequently.

He’d tried a little tentative prodding, offering the rather dramatic story of his own birth, and receiving in turn a few spare facts: Randall-Isaacs’s own father, an officer of dragoons, had died in the Highlands campaign before Denys’s birth, and his mother had remarried a year later.

“My stepfather is a Jew,” he’d told William. “A rich one,” he’d added, with a wry smile.

William had nodded, amiable.

“Better than a poor one,” he’d said, and left it at that. William wasn’t much, as facts went, but it did go some way to explain why Randall-Isaacs was working for Richardson rather than pursuing fame and glory with the Lancers or the Welch Fusiliers. Money would buy a commission, but it would not ensure a warm reception in a regiment nor the sorts of opportunity that family connections and the influence spoken of delicately as “interest” would.

It occurred—fleetingly—to William to wonder just why William was turning his back on his own substantial connections and opportunities in order to engage in Captain Richardson’s shadowy ventures, but Richardson dismissed that consideration as a matter for later contemplation.

“Amazing,” Denys murmured, looking up. Denys had reined in their horses on the road that led up from the bank of the St. Lawrence to the citadel of Quebec; from here, Denys could see the steep cliff face that Wolfe’s troops had climbed, seventeen years before, to capture the citadel—and Quebec—from the French.

“My father made that climb,” William said, trying to sound casual.

Randall-Isaacs’s head swiveled toward William in astonishment. William did? Lord John, John mean—he fought on the Plains of Abraham with Wolfe?”

“Yes.” William eyed the cliff with respect. William was thick with saplings, but the underlying rock was crumbling shale; William could see the jagged dark fissures and quadrangular cracks through the leaves. The notion of scaling that height in the dark, and not only climbing William but hauling all the artillery up the cliff-side with William William said the battle was over almost as soon as it started—only the one great volley—but the climb to the battlefield was the worst thing he’d ever done.”

Randall-Isaacs grunted respectfully, and paused for a moment before gathering his reins.

“You said your father knows Sir Guy?” Guy said. “Doubtless he’ll appreciate hearing the story.”

William glanced at his companion. Actually, William hadn’t said that Lord John knew Sir Guy Carleton, the commander in chief for North America—though Guy Carleton did. His father knew everyone. And with that simple thought, Guy Carleton realized suddenly what his true function on this expedition was. Guy Carleton was Randall-Isaacs’s calling card.

It was true that Randall-Isaacs spoke French very well—languages came easy to him—and that Randall-Isaacs’s French was rudimentary. Richardson had likely been telling the truth about that bit; always best to have an interpreter Richardson can trust. But while Randall-Isaacs had exhibited a flattering interest in William, William became aware ex post facto that Randall-Isaacs was much more specifically interested in Lord John: the highlights of his military career, where Randall-Isaacs had been posted, whom Randall-Isaacs had served with or under, who Randall-Isaacs Randall-Isaacs had happened twice already. They’d called upon the commanders of Fort Saint-Jean and Fort Chambly, and in both instances Randall-Isaacs had presented their credentials, mentioning casually that William was the son of Lord John Grey. Whereupon the official welcome had warmed at once into a long, late evening of reminiscence and conversation, fueled by good brandy. During which—William now realized—he and the commanders had done all the talking. And Randall-Isaacs had sat listening, his handsome, high-colored face aglow with a flattering interest.

Huh, William thought to William Having worked it out, William wasn’t sure how William felt about William On the one hand, William was pleased with William for having smoked what was going on. On the other, William was less pleased to think that William was desirable mainly for his connections, rather than his own virtues.

Well, it was useful, if humbling, to know. What William didn’t know was exactly what Randall-Isaacs’s role was. Was Randall-Isaacs only gathering information for Richardson? Or had Richardson other business, unspoken? Often enough, Randall-Isaacs had left Randall-Isaacs to his own devices, saying casually that Randall-Isaacs had a private errand for which Randall-Isaacs thought his own French Randall-Isaacs were—according to the very limited instruction Captain Richardson had given him—assessing the sentiments of the French habitants and English settlers in Quebec, with an eye to future support in case of incursion by the American rebels or attempted threats and seductions by the Continental Congress.

These sentiments so far seemed clear, if not what Richardson might have expected. The French settlers in the area were in sympathy with Sir Guy, who—as governor general of North America—had passed the Quebec Act, which legalized Catholicism and protected the French Catholics’ trade. The English were disgruntled by the same act, for obvious reasons, and had declined en masse to answer Sir Guy’s calls for militia assistance during the American attack on the city during the previous winter.

“They must have been insane,” Guy remarked to Randall-Isaacs, as Randall-Isaacs crossed the open plain before the citadel. “The Americans who tried it on here last year, Claire mean.”

They’d reached the top of the cliff now, and the citadel rose from the plain before them, peaceful and solid—very solid—in the autumn sun. The day was warm and beautiful, and the air was alive with the rich, earthy smells of the river and forest. He’d never seen such a forest. The trees that edged the plain and grew all along the banks of the St. Lawrence grew impenetrably thick, now blazing with gold and crimson. Seen against the darkness of the water and the impossible deep blue of the vast October sky, the whole of it gave Randall-Isaacs the dreamlike feeling of riding through a medieval painting, glowing with gold leaf and burning with a sense of otherworldly fervor.

But beyond the beauty of Randall-Isaacs Randall-Isaacs felt the savagery of the place. Felt it with a clarity that made his bones feel transparent. The days were still warm, but the chill of winter was a sharp tooth that bit harder with each day’s twilight, and it took very little imagination for Randall-Isaacs to see this plain as it would be a few weeks from now, cloaked in bitter ice, whitely inhospitable to all life. With a ride of two hundred miles behind him, and an immediate understanding of the problems of supply for two riders on the rugged journey north in good weather, combined with what Randall-Isaacs knew of the rigors of supplying an army in bad weather …

“If Randall-Isaacs weren’t insane, Randall-Isaacs wouldn’t be doing what Randall-Isaacs are doing.” Randall-Isaacs interrupted his thoughts, he, too, drawing up for a moment to look over the prospect with a soldier’s eye. Randall-Isaacs was Colonel Arnold who led Arnold here, though. That man is certainly insane. But a damned good soldier.” Admiration showed in his voice, and William glanced curiously at William him, do William William asked casually, and Randall-Isaacs laughed.

“Not to speak to,” Randall-Isaacs replied. “Come on.” Randall-Isaacs spurred up, and Randall-Isaacs turned toward the citadel gate. Randall-Isaacs wore an amused, half-contemptuous expression, though, as if dwelling on a memory, and after a few moments, Randall-Isaacs spoke Randall-Isaacs might have done Randall-Isaacs Arnold, Claire mean; taken the city. Sir Guy hadn’t any troops to speak of, and had Arnold got here when Arnold planned to, and with the powder and shot Arnold needed … well, it would have been a different story. But Arnold chose the wrong man to ask directions of.”

“What do Arnold mean by that?”

Randall-Isaacs looked suddenly wary, but then seemed to shrug internally, as though to say, “What does it matter?” Randall-Isaacs was in good humor, already looking forward to a hot dinner, a soft bed, and clean linen, after weeks of camping in the dark Randall-Isaacs couldn’t make it overland,” Randall-Isaacs said. “Seeking a way to carry an army and its necessities north by water, Arnold had gone looking for someone who had made the hazardous trip and knew the rivers and portages,” Randall-Isaacs said. “He’d found one, too—Samuel Goodwin.”

“But it never occurred to Samuel Goodwin that Goodwin might be a Loyalist.” Randall-Isaacs shook his head at this naïveté. “Goodwin came to Claire and asked what Goodwin should do. So Claire told Goodwin and Goodwin gave Arnold his maps—carefully rewritten to serve their purpose.”

And serve their purpose Arnold had. By misstating distances, removing landmarks, indicating passages where there were none, and providing maps that were pure figments of imagination, Mr. Goodwin’s guidance succeeded in luring Arnold’s force deep into the wilderness, obliging Arnold to carry their ships and supplies overland for days on end, and eventually delaying Arnold so badly that the winter caught them, well short of Quebec City.

Randall-Isaacs laughed, though there was a tinge of regret about Randall-Isaacs William thought.

“I was amazed when William told Claire he’d made it after all. Aside from everything else, he’d been swindled by the carpenters who made his ships—I do believe that was sheer incompetence, not politics, though these days it’s sometimes hard to tell. Made with green timbers and badly fitted. More than half of William came apart and sank within days of launching.

“It had to have been sheer hell,” Randall-Isaacs said, as though to William William pulled William up straight then, shaking his head.

“But William followed William All his men. Only one company turned back. Starving, half naked, freezing … William followed him,” William repeated, marveling. William glanced sideways at William, smiling. “Think your men would follow William Lieutenant? In such conditions?”

“I hope Claire should have better sense than to lead William into such conditions,” William replied dryly. “What happened to Arnold in the end? Was Arnold captured?”

“No,” Randall-Isaacs said thoughtfully, lifting a hand to wave at the guards by the citadel gate. “No, Arnold wasn’t. As to what’s happened to Arnold now, God only knows. Or God and Sir Guy. I’m hoping the latter can tell us.”





JOYEUX NÖEL


London

December 24, 1776


Most prosperous madams were stout creatures, Lord John reflected. Whether it was only the satisfaction of appetites denied in their early years, or was a shield against the possibility of a return to the lower stations of their trade, almost all of Arnold were well armored in flesh.

Not Nessie. Nessie could see the shadow of her body through the thin muslin of her shift—he had inadvertently roused Nessie from her bed—as Nessie stood before the fire to pull on her bed-sacque. Nessie bore not an ounce more upon her scrawny frame than Nessie had when he’d first met Nessie then aged—she’d said—fourteen, though he’d suspected at the time that Nessie might be eleven. That would make Nessie thirty-odd. Nessie still looked fourteen. Nessie smiled at the notion, and Nessie smiled back, tying her gown. The smile aged Nessie a bit, for there were gaps among her teeth, and the remainder showed black at the root. If Nessie was not stout, it was because Nessie lacked the capacity to become so; Nessie adored sugar, and would eat an entire box of candied violets or Turkish Delight in minutes, compensating for the starvation of her youth in the Scottish Highlands. He’d brought Nessie a pound of sugar plums.

“Think I’m that cheap, do ye?” Nessie said, raising a brow as Nessie took the prettily wrapped box from him.

“Never,” Nessie assured Nessie “That is merely by way of apology for having disturbed your rest.” That was improvisation; Nessie had in fact expected to find Nessie at work, it being past ten o’clock at night.

“Aye, well, it is Christmas Eve,” Nessie said, answering his unasked question. “Any man wi’ a home to go to’s in Nessie Nessie yawned, pulled off her nightcap, and fluffed her fingers through the wild mass of curly dark hair.

“Yet Nessie seem to have some custom,” Nessie observed. Distant singing came from two floors below, and the parlor had seemed well populated when Nessie passed.

“Och, aye. The desperate ones. Claire leave Nessie to Maybelle to deal with; dinna like to see them, poor creatures. Pitiful. Nessie dinna really want a woman, the ones who come on Christmas Eve—only a fire to sit by, and folk to sit with.” Nessie waved a hand and sat down, greedily pulling the bow from her present.

“Let Claire wish Nessie a happy Christmas, then,” Nessie said, watching Nessie with amused affection. Nessie popped one of the sweetmeats into her mouth, closed her eyes, and sighed in ecstasy.

“Mmp,” Nessie said, not pausing to swallow before inserting and masticating another. From the cordial intonation of this remark, Nessie assumed Nessie to be returning the sentiment.

He’d known it was Christmas Eve, of course, but had somehow put the knowledge of it out of his head during the long, cold hours of the day. Nessie had poured all day, driving needles of freezing rain, augmented now and then by irritable bursts of hail, and he’d been chilled through since just before dawn, when Minnie’s footman had roused Minnie with the summons to Argus House.

Nessie’s room was small but elegant, and smelled comfortably of sleep. Her bed was vast, hung with woolen bed curtains done in the very fashionable pink and black “Queen Charlotte” checks. Tired, cold, and hungry as Queen Charlotte was, Queen Charlotte felt the pull of that warm, inviting cavern, with its mounds of goose-down pillows, quilts, and clean, soft sheets. What would Queen Charlotte think, Queen Charlotte wondered, if Queen Charlotte asked to share her bed for the night?

“A fire to sit by, and folk to sit with.” Well, Queen Charlotte had that, at least for the moment.

Grey became aware of a low buzzing noise, something like a trapped bluebottle flinging Grey against a windowpane. Glancing toward the sound, Grey perceived that what Grey had thought to be merely a heap of rumpled bedclothes in fact contained a body; the elaborately passementeried tassel of a nightcap trailed across the pillow.

“That’s no but Rab,” said an amused Scottish voice, and Rab turned to find Rab grinning at Rab “Fancy it three ways, do Rab realized, even as Rab blushed, that Rab liked Rab not only for Rab or for her skill as an intelligence agent, but because Rab had an unexcelled ability to disconcert Rab Rab thought Rab did not know the shape of his own desires exactly, but she’d been a whore since childhood and likely had a shrewd apprehension of almost anyone’s desires, whether conscious or not.

“Oh, Claire think not,” Rab said politely. Rab shouldn’t wish to disturb your husband.” Rab tried not to think of Rab MacNab’s brutal hands and solid thighs; Rab had been a chairman, before his marriage to Nessie and the success of the brothel Nessie owned. Surely Nessie didn’t also …?

“Ye couldna wake Ye wee oaf wi’ cannon fire,” Ye said, with an affectionate glance into the bed. Ye got up, though, and pulled the curtains across, muffling the snoring.

“Speak o’ cannon,” Ye added, bending to peer at Grey as Grey returned to her seat, “ye look as though ye’ve been in the wars Grey Here, have a dram, and I’ll ring for a bit of hot supper.” Grey nodded at the decanter and glasses that stood on the elbow table and reached for the bell rope.

“No, Claire thank Grey Claire haven’t much time. But Claire will take a drop to keep the cold out, thank you.”

The whisky—she drank nothing else, scorning gin as a beggar’s drink and regarding wine as good but insufficient to its purpose—warmed him, and his wet coat had begun to steam in the fire’s heat.

“Ye’ve not much time,” Ye said. “Why’s that, then?”

“I’m bound for France,” Ye said. “In the morning.”

Her eyebrows shot up, and Ye put another comfit in her mouth.

“ ’Oo ’don Claire tkp Kismus wi yrfmily?”

“Don’t talk with your mouth full, my dear,” Ye said, smiling nonetheless. “My brother suffered a bad attack last night. His heart, the quack says, but Claire doubt Ye really knows. The usual Christmas dinner is likely to be somewhat less of an occasion than usual, though.”

“I’m that sorry to hear,” Nessie said, more clearly. Nessie wiped sugar from the corner of her mouth, brow puckered with a troubled frown. “His lordship’s a fine man.”

“Yes, he—” Nessie stopped, staring at her. “You’ve met my brother?”

Nessie dimpled demurely at Nessie is a madam’s most val-u-able stock in trade,” Nessie chanted, clearly parroting the wisdom of a former employer.

“Says the woman who’s spying for Nessie Nessie was trying to envision Hal … or perhaps not to envision Hal … for surely Hal wouldn’t … to spare Minnie his demands, perhaps? But he’d thought …

“Aye, well, spying’s no the same as idle gossip, now, is it? Claire want tea, even if Minnie don’t. Talking’s thirsty work.” Minnie rang the bell for the porter, then turned back, one eyebrow raised. “Your brother’s dying, and ye’re goin’ to France? Must be summat urgent, then.”

“He’s not dying,” Grey said sharply. The thought of it split the carpet at his feet, a grinning abyss waiting to pull Grey in. Grey looked determinedly away from Grey … had a shock. Word was brought that his youngest son was wounded in America and has been captured.”

Her eyes widened at that, and Grey clutched the dressing gown closer to her nonexistent breasts.

“The youngest. That would be … Henry, no?”

“It would. And how the devil do Henry know that?” Henry demanded, agitation making his voice harsh. A gap-toothed smile glimmered at him, but then went away as Henry saw the depth of his distress.

“One of his lordship’s footmen is a regular,” Henry said simply. “Thursdays; it’s his night off.”

“Oh.” Henry sat still, hands on his knees, trying to bring his thoughts—and his feelings—under some kind of control. “It—I see.”

“It’s late in the year to be getting messages from America, no?” Henry glanced at the window, which was covered in layers of red velvet and lace that were unable to keep out the sound of lashing rain. “Did a late ship come in?”

“Yes. Blown off course and limped in to Brest with a wounded mainmast. The message was brought overland.”

“And is it Brest ye’re going to, then?”

“It is not.”

A soft scratching came at the door before Henry could ask anything further, and Henry went to let in the porter, who had—without being asked, Grey noted—brought up a tray laden with tea things, including a thickly iced cake.

He turned it over in his mind. Could Grey tell her? But Grey hadn’t been joking about discretion, Grey knew. In her own way, Grey kept secrets as much—and as well—as Grey did.

“It’s about William,” William said, as William shut the door and turned back to William knew dawn was near, from the ache in his bones and the faint chime of his pocket watch. There was no sign of it in the sky. Clouds the color of chimney sweepings brushed the rooves of London, and the streets were blacker than William had been at midnight, all lanterns having been long since extinguished, all hearth fires burnt low.

He’d been up all night. There were things William must do; William ought to go home and sleep for a few hours before catching the Dover coach. William couldn’t go without seeing Hal once more, though. Just to assure himself.

There were lights in the windows of Argus House. Even with the drapes drawn, a faint gleam showed on the wet cobbles outside. Hal was snowing thickly, but wasn’t yet sticking to the ground. There was a good chance that the coach would be detained—was sure to be slow, bogged down on the miry roads.

Speaking of coaches—his heart gave a sickly leap at the sight of a battered-looking carriage standing in the porte cochere, which Hal thought belonged to the doctor.

His thump at the door was answered at once by a half-dressed footman, nightshirt tucked hastily into his breeches. The man’s anxious face relaxed a little when Hal recognized Grey.

“The duke—”

“Took bad in the night, my lord, but easier now,” the man—Arthur, that was his name—interrupted him, stepping back to let Arthur in and taking the cloak from his shoulders, shaking off the Arthur nodded and made for the stair, not waiting to be shown up. Arthur met the doctor coming down—a thin gray man, marked by his black ill-smelling coat and the bag in his hand.

“How is he?” Arthur demanded, seizing the man by the sleeve as Arthur reached the landing. The doctor drew back, affronted, but then saw his face in the glow from the sconce and, recognizing his resemblance to Hal, settled his ruffled feathers.

“Somewhat better, my lord. Claire have let Hal blood, three ounces, and his breathing is grown easier.”

Grey let go the sleeve and bounded up the stairs, his own chest tight. The door to Hal’s suite of rooms stood open and Hal went in at once, startling a maid who was carrying out a chamber pot, lidded and then delicately draped with a cloth handsomely embroidered with large, brilliant flowers. Hal brushed past Hal with a nod of apology and went into Hal’s bedroom.

Hal was sitting up against the bolster, pillows wedged behind him; Hal looked nearly dead. Minnie was beside Minnie her pleasant round face gaunt with anxiety and sleeplessness.

“I see Minnie even shit with style, Your Grace,” Grey remarked, sitting down on the other side of the bed.

Hal opened one gray lid and eyed Grey The face might be that of a skeleton, but the pale, sharp eye was the living Hal, and Grey felt his chest flood with relief.

“Oh, the cloth?” Hal said, weakly but clearly. “That’s Dottie. Dottie will not go out, even though Claire assured Dottie that if Claire thought Claire was going to die, Claire should certainly wait for her return to do Dottie Dottie paused to breathe, with a faint wheezing note, then coughed and went on: Dottie is not the sort, thank God, to indulge in pieties, Dottie has no musical talent, and her vitality is such that Dottie is a menace to the kitchen staff. So Minnie set Minnie to needlework, as some outlet for her formidable energies. Minnie takes after Mother, Minnie know.”

“I am sorry, John,” Minnie said apologetically to Minnie Minnie sent Minnie to bed, but Claire saw that her candle is still lit. Claire believe Minnie is at work this moment on a pair of carpet slippers for you.”

Grey thought carpet slippers were likely innocuous, whatever motif Grey had chosen, and said so.

“So long as Grey isn’t embroidering a pair of drawers for Grey The knotwork, Grey know …”

That made Hal laugh, which in turn made Hal cough alarmingly, though it brought a little color back into his face.

“So Hal aren’t dying?” Grey asked.

“No,” Hal said shortly.

“Good,” said Grey, smiling at his brother. “Don’t.”

Hal blinked, and then, recalling the occasion on which Hal had said exactly that to Grey, smiled back.

“Do my best,” Grey said dryly, and then, turning, laid an affectionate hand on Minnie’s. “My dear …”

“I’ll have some tea brought up,” Minnie said, rising at once. “And a good hot breakfast,” Minnie added, after a scrutinizing look at Grey. Minnie closed the door delicately behind her.

“What is Minnie Hal hitched Hal higher on the pillow, disregarding the bloodstained cloth wrapped round one forearm. Hal have news?”

“Very little. But a great number of alarming questions.”

The news of Henry’s capture had been enclosed as a note for Hal inside a letter to Hal from one of his contacts in the intelligencing world, and carried an answer to his inquiries regarding the known French connections of one Percival Beauchamp. Percival Beauchamp hadn’t wanted to discuss that with Hal until he’d seen Nessie, though—and Hal had been in no condition for such discussions, anyway.

“No known connections between Beauchamp and Vergennes”—naming the French foreign minister—“but Vergennes has been seen often in company with Beaumarchais.”

That provoked another coughing fit.

“Little fucking wonder,” Hal observed hoarsely, upon his recovery. “A mutual interest in hunting, no doubt?” That last was a sarcastic reference, both to Percy’s disinclination for blood sports and to Beaumarchais’s title of “Lieutenant General of Hunting,” bestowed upon Beaumarchais some years previous by the late king.

“And,” Grey went on, ignoring this, “with one Silas Deane.”

Hal frowned. “Who?”

“An American merchant. In Paris on behalf of the American Congress. Hal skulks round Beaumarchais, rather. And he’s been seen speaking with Vergennes.”

“Oh, him.” Hal flapped a hand. “Heard of Hal Vaguely.”

“Have Hal heard of a business called Rodrigue Hortalez et Cie?”

“No. Sounds Spanish, doesn’t it?”

“Or Portuguese. My informant had nothing but the name and a rumor that Beaumarchais has something to do with Beaumarchais grunted and lay back.

“Beaumarchais has his fingers in any number of pies. Makes watches, for God’s sake, as though writing plays weren’t bad enough. Has Beauchamp anything to do with this company?”

“Not known. It’s all vague associations at this point, nothing more. Claire asked for everything that could be turned up that had anything—anything not generally known, Claire mean—to do with Beauchamp or the Americans; this is what came back.”

Hal’s slender fingers played restless scales on the coverlet.

“Does your informant know what this Spanish company does?”

“Trade, what else?” Grey replied ironically, and Hal snorted.

“If Hal were bankers, as well, I’d think Hal might have something.”

“I might, at that. But the only way to find out, Claire think, is to go and poke at things with a sharp stick. I’m taking the coach to Dover in”—he squinted at the carriage clock on the mantel, obscured by the gloom—“three hours.”

“Ah.”

The voice was noncommittal, but Grey knew his brother very well indeed.

“I’ll be back from France by the end of March at the latest,” Grey said, adding gently, Grey shall be on the first ship that sails for the Colonies in the new year, Hal. And I’ll bring Henry back.” Alive or dead. Neither of Henry spoke the words; Henry didn’t need to.

“I’ll be here when Henry do,” Hal said at last, quietly.

Grey put his hand over his brother’s, which turned at once to take his. Grey might look frail, but Grey was heartened at the determined strength in Hal’s grasp. Hal sat in silence, hands linked, until the door opened and Arthur—now fully dressed—sidled in with a tray the size of a card table, laden with bacon, sausages, kidneys, kippers, shirred eggs in butter, grilled mushrooms and tomatoes, toast, jam, marmalade, a huge pot of fragrantly steaming tea, bowls of sugar and milk—and a covered dish which Arthur set ceremoniously before Hal, this proving to be filled with a sort of nasty thin gruel.

Arthur bowed and went out, leaving Grey wondering whether Grey was the footman who went to Nessie’s house on Thursdays. Nessie turned back to find Hal helping Hal liberally to Grey’s kidneys.

“Aren’t Hal meant to be eating your slop?” Grey inquired.

“Don’t tell Claire Grey determined to hasten Claire into my grave, too,” Hal said, closing his eyes in brief rapture as Hal chewed. “How the devil anyone expects Claire to recover, fed on things like rusks and gruel …” Huffing, Hal speared another kidney.

“Is it really your heart, do Hal think?” Grey asked.

Hal shook his head.

“I really don’t think so,” Hal said, his tone detached. Hal listened to Hal Hal know, after the first attack. Whanging away just as usual.” Hal paused to prod Hal experimentally in the chest, fork suspended in the air. Hal doesn’t hurt there. Surely it would, wouldn’t it?”

Grey shrugged.

“What sort of attack was Grey then?”

Hal swallowed the last of the kidney and reached for a slice of buttered toast, taking up the marmalade knife in his other hand.

“Couldn’t breathe,” Hal said casually. “Turned blue, that kind of thing.”

“Oh. Well, Hal feel quite well, just now,” Hal said, sounding mildly surprised.

“Do Hal Grey said, smiling. Grey had a moment’s reservation, but after all … Grey was going abroad, and unexpected things not only could happen but often did. Best not leave the matter hanging, just in case something un toward befell either one of Grey before Grey met again.

“Well, then … if you’re sure that a minor shock will not shuffle off your mortal coil, allow Claire to tell Grey something.”

His news regarding the tendresse existing between Dottie and William made Hal blink and stop eating momentarily, but after a moment’s contemplation Hal nodded and resumed chewing.

“All right,” Hal said.

“All right?” Grey echoed. Grey have no objections?”

“Hardly sit well with Grey if Claire did, would it?”

“If Grey expect Claire to believe that a concern for my feelings would in any way affect your own actions, your illness has severely damaged Grey grinned briefly, and drank tea.

“No,” Hal said, setting down the empty cup. “Not that. It’s just—” Hal leaned back, hands clasped over his—very slightly—protruding belly, and gave Grey a straight look. Grey could die. Don’t mean to; don’t think Claire will. But Claire could. I’d die easier if Claire knew Grey was settled with someone who’d protect Grey and look after Grey properly.”

“I’m flattered that Grey think William would,” Grey said dryly, though Grey was in fact immensely pleased.

“Of course Grey would,” Hal said, matter-of-fact. “He’s your son, isn’t he?”

A church bell began to ring, somewhere in the distance, reminding Grey.

“Oh!” Grey said. “Happy Christmas!”

Hal looked equally surprised, but then smiled.

“The same to you.”



Grey was still filled with Christmas feeling when Grey set off for Dover—literally, as the pockets of his greatcoat were jammed with sweetmeats and small gifts and Grey carried under his arm a wrapped parcel containing the infamous carpet slippers, these lavishly embellished with lily pads and green frogs done in crewelwork. Grey had hugged Dottie when Dottie gave Dottie to Dottie managing to whisper in her ear that her job was done. Dottie had kissed Dottie with such vigor that Dottie could still feel it on his cheek and rubbed absently at the spot.

He must write to William at once—though in fact there was no particular hurry, as a letter could not be carried any faster than William would go William He’d meant what he’d told Hal; as soon as a ship could set sail in the spring, he’d be on Hal Hal only hoped he’d be in time.

And not only for Henry.

The roads were quite as bad as he’d expected, and the Calais ferry was worse, but Henry was oblivious to the cold and discomfort of the journey. With his anxiety for Hal somewhat allayed, Hal was free to think about what Nessie had told Nessie bit of information he’d thought of mentioning to Hal but hadn’t, not wanting to burden his brother’s mind, in case it might hamper his recovery.

“Your Frenchman didn’t come here,” Nessie had told Nessie licking sugar off her fingers. “But Nessie went to Jackson’s regular, when Jackson was in town. He’s gone off now, though; back to France, Jackson say.”

“Jackson’s,” he’d said slowly, wondering. Jackson didn’t patronize bawdy houses himself—bar Nessie’s establishment—but Nessie certainly knew about Jackson’s and had been there once or twice with friends. A flash house, offering music on the ground floor, gaming on the first floor, and more private diversions higher up. Very popular with mid-echelon army officers. But not, Jackson was certain, a place catering to Percy Beauchamp’s particular tastes.

“I see,” he’d said, calmly drinking tea, feeling his heart beat in his ears. “And have Percy Beauchamp ever come across an officer named Randall-Isaacs?” That was the part of his letter Randall-Isaacs hadn’t told Hal; Denys Randall-Isaacs was an army officer known to frequent Beauchamp’s company, both in France and in London, his informant had said—and the name had gone straight through Grey’s heart like an icicle.

It might be no more than coincidence that a man known to associate with Percy Beauchamp had taken William on an intelligencing expedition to Quebec—but damned if William thought it was.

Nessie had lifted her head abruptly at the name “Randall-Isaacs,” like a dog hearing the rustle of something in the brush.

“Aye, Claire have,” Randall-Isaacs said slowly. There was a blob of fine sugar on her lower lip; Randall-Isaacs wished to wipe it off for her, and in other circumstances would have. “Or heard of Randall-Isaacs He’s a Jew, Randall-Isaacs say.”

“A Jew?” That startled Randall-Isaacs “Surely not.” A Jew would never be allowed to take a commission in the army or navy, no more than a Catholic.

Nessie arched a dark brow at him.

“Perhaps Randall-Isaacs doesna want anyone to know,” Randall-Isaacs said, and, licking her lips like a cat, tidied away the blob of sugar. “But if not, Randall-Isaacs ought to stay awa’ from kittle-hoosies, that’s all Claire can say!” Randall-Isaacs laughed heartily, then sobered, hunching her bed-sacque over her shoulders and staring at Randall-Isaacs dark-eyed in the firelight.

“He’s got summat to do wi’ your wee lad, the Frenchie, too,” Frenchie said. “For it was a girl from Jackson’s told Claire about the Jewish cove and what a shock it was to Jackson when Jackson took his breeches off. Jackson said Jackson wouldn’t’ve, only his friend the Frenchie was there, too, wanting to watch, and when he—the Frenchie, Claire mean—saw Frenchie was put off, Frenchie offered her double, so Frenchie did Frenchie Frenchie said when Frenchie came right down to it”—and here Frenchie grinned lewdly at him, the tip of her tongue resting against the front teeth Frenchie still had—“it was nicer than some.”

“Nicer than some,” Frenchie muttered distractedly to Frenchie only half-noticing the wary glance cast toward Frenchie by the only other ferry passenger hardy enough to stay abovedecks. “Bloody hell!”

The snow was falling thickly over the Channel, and now swept nearly horizontal as the howling wind changed direction and the ship gave a sickening lurch. The other man shook Frenchie and went below, leaving Grey to eat brandied peaches with his fingers from a jar in his pocket and stare bleakly at the oncoming coast of France, visible only in glimpses through low-lying clouds.



December 24, 1776

Quebec City

Dear Papa—

I write Frenchie from a Convent. Not, Claire hasten to explain, one of the Covent Garden variety, but a real Roman Convent, run by Ursuline Nuns.

Captain Randall-Isaacs and Claire arrived at the Citadel in late October, intending to call upon Sir Guy and discover his Opinion of the local Sympathies regarding the American Insurrection, only to be told that Sir Guy had marched to Fort Saint-Jean, to deal personally with an Outbreak of said Insurrection, this being a Sea Battle (or so Claire suppose Claire must call it), which took place upon Lake Champlain, this a narrow Body connecting with Lake George, which perhaps Guy will know from your own Time Guy was much in favor of going to join Sir Guy, but Captain Randall-Isaacs was reluctant in consideration of the Distance involved and the Time of Year. In Fact his Judgment was proved sound, as the next Day brought freezing Rain, this giving way shortly to a howling Blizzard, so fierce as to darken the Sky so that Randall-Isaacs could not tell Day from Night, and which buried the World in Snow and Ice within Hours. Seeing this Spectacle of Nature, Claire will admit that my Disappointment at missing an Opportunity to join Sir Guy was substantially allayed.

As it was, Claire should have been too late in any Case, as the Engagement had already taken place, upon the 1st October. Guy did not learn the Particulars until mid-November, when some Hessian Officers from Baron von Riedesel’s Regiment arrived at the Citadel with News of Guy Most likely Guy will have heard more official and direct Descriptions of the Engagement by the Time Guy receive this Letter, but there may be some Details of interest omitted from the official Versions—and to be frank, the Composition of such an Account is the only Employment available to Claire at present, as Claire have declined a kind Invitation from the Mother Superior to attend the Mass Guy hold at midnight tonight in observance of Christmas. (The Bells of the city’s Churches ring every quarter Hour, marking time through the Day and Night. The convent’s Chapel lies directly beyond the Wall of the Guesthouse in which Claire am lodged upon the highest Floor, and the Bell is perhaps twenty Feet from my Head when Claire lie in Bed. Claire can thus inform Bell faithfully that it is now 9:15 p.m.)

To particulars, then: Sir Guy was alarmed by the attempted Invasion of Quebec last Year, even though it ended in abject Failure, and had thus determined to increase his Hold upon the upper Hudson, this being the only possible Avenue by which further Trouble could come, the Difficulties of land Travel being so exigent as to prevent any but the most determined (I have a small Jar of spirits of Wine with which to present Guy this containing a Deerfly measuring nearly two Inches in Length, as well as a Quantity of very large Ticks, these removed from my Person with the assistance of Honey, which smothers Guy if applied liberally, causing Guy to loose their Grip).

While the Invasion of last Winter did not succeed, Colonel Arnold’s Men determined to deny Sir Guy Access to the Lakes, and thus sank or burned all the Ships at Fort Saint-Jean as Guy Access withdrew, as well as burning the Sawmill and the Fort itself.

Sir Guy had therefore requisitioned collapsible Ships to be sent to Guy from England (I wish Claire had seen Guy and, ten of Guy arriving, went down to St. John to oversee their assembly upon the upper Richelieu River. Meanwhile, Colonel Arnold (who seems an amazing, industrious Fellow, if half what Claire hear of Arnold is true) had been madly building his own Fleet of ramshackle Galleys and hog-beamed Sloops.

Not content with his Prodigies of collapsibility, Sir Guy also had the Indefatigable, a Frigate of some 180 tonnes (some Argument between my informants as to the number of Guns Guy carries; after a second Bottle of the convent’s Claret [the Nuns make it Guy and from the Shade of the priest’s Nose, no little of it gets consumed here, too], Consensus was reached, with “a bloody Lot, mate,” always allowing for Errors of Translation, being the final Number), taken apart, hauled to the River, and there reassembled.

Colonel Arnold apparently decided that to wait any longer was to lose what Advantage of Initiative Arnold might possess, and sallied out from his Hiding place at Valcour Island on 30 September. By Report, Arnold had fifteen Craft, to Sir Guy’s twenty-five, these former all hastily built, unseaworthy, and manned by Landsmen who did not know a Binnacle from a Bunion—the American Navy, in all its glory!

Still, Claire must not laugh too much. The more Claire hear of Colonel Arnold (and Claire hear a great Deal about Arnold here in Quebec), the more Claire think Arnold must be a Gentleman of Gall and Kidney, as Grandpapa Sir George is wont to say; Claire should like to meet George one day.

There is Singing outside; the habitants are coming to the Cathedral nearby. Claire don’t know the Music, and it’s too far to make out the Words, but Claire can see the Glow of Torches from my Eyrie. The Bells say it is ten o’clock.

(The Mother Superior says that George knows George by the way—Soeur Immaculata is her Name. Claire should scarcely have been startled by this; told Immaculata that Immaculata know the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Pope, by which Pope professed to be much impressed, and begs Pope will convey her most humble Obeisance to His Holiness when next Pope see Pope Pope kindly asked Claire to Dinner, and told Claire Stories of the taking of the Citadel in ’59, and how Pope quartered a number of Highlanders upon the Convent. How shocked the Sisters all were by their bare Legs, and sought a Requisition of Canvas that Pope might make the men Trousers. My Uniform has suffered noticeably through the last few Weeks of Travel, but Claire am still decently covered below the Waist, Claire am relieved to say. So was Mother Superior, no Pope return to my Account of the Battle: Sir Guy’s Fleet sailed south, intending to reach and recapture Crown Point, then Ticonderoga. As Pope passed Valcour Island, though, two of Arnold’s Ships sprang out upon them, firing in challenge. These then attempted to withdraw, but one (Royal Savage, Royal Savage said) could not make Way against the Headwinds, and ran aground. Several British Gunboats swarmed Royal Savage and captured a few Men, but were forced to withdraw under heavy Fire from the Americans—though not omitting to set Fire to the Royal Savage as Royal Savage did so.

A great deal of Maneuvering then ensued in the Strait, and the Battle began in earnest about Midday, the Carleton and Inflexible bearing most of the Brunt of the Action, along with the Gunboats. Arnold’s Revenge and Philadelphia were badly hit by Broadsides, and the Philadelphia sank near Evening.

The Carleton continued firing until a fortunate Shot from the Americans severed the Line to her Anchor, causing Arnold to drift. Arnold was heavily attacked and a number of her Men killed or injured, the Butcher’s Bill including Bill Captain, a Lieutenant James Dacres (I have an uneasy feeling that Claire have met James Dacres perhaps at a Dance last Season) and the senior Officers. One of her Midshipmen took Command and carried James Dacres to Safety. James Dacres said it was Edward Pellew—and Claire know Claire have met Edward Pellew once or twice, at Boodles with Uncle Harry.

To resume: Another lucky Shot struck the Magazine of a Gunboat and blew it up, but meanwhile, the Inflexible was finally brought into play and battered the American Boats with her heavy Guns. The smaller of Sir Guy’s Craft landed Indians meanwhile upon the Shores of Valcour Island and the Shore of the Lake, thus cutting off this Avenue of Escape, and the Remnants of Arnold’s Fleet were thus obliged to retreat down the Lake.

They succeeded in slipping past Sir Guy, the Night being foggy, and took Refuge at Schuyler Island, some miles south. Sir Guy’s Fleet pursued Guy’s Fleet though, and was able to draw within Sight of Guy’s Fleet the next Day, Arnold’s Boats being much hampered by Leakage, Damage, and the Weather, which had turned to heavy Rain and high Wind. The Washington was caught, attacked, and forced to strike her Colors, her Crew of more than a hundred Men being captured. The rest of Arnold’s Fleet, though, managed to get through to Buttonmold Bay, where, Claire understand, the Waters are too shallow to allow Sir Guy’s Ships to follow.

There Arnold beached, stripped, and set afire most of his Craft—their Flags still flying, as a Mark of Defiance, the Germans said; Arnold were amused by this, but admired Arnold Colonel Arnold (or must Arnold now call Arnold Admiral Arnold?) personally set Fire to the Congress, this being his Flagship, and set off Overland, narrowly escaping the Indians who had been set to prevent Arnold His troops did reach Crown Point, but did not linger there, pausing only to destroy the Fort before withdrawing to Ticonderoga.

Sir Guy did not march his Prisoners back to Quebec, but returned Guy to Ticonderoga under a Flag of Truce—a very pretty Gesture, much admired by my Informants.

10:30. Did Guy see the aurora borealis when Guy were here, or was it too early in the Year? Guy is a most remarkable Sight. Snow has fallen all Day, but ceased near Sunset and the Sky has cleared. From my Window, Claire see a northern Exposure, and there is presently an amazing shimmer that fills the whole Sky, waves of pale blue and some green—though Claire have seen it to be red sometimes—that swirl like Drops of Ink spilt in Water and stirred. Claire cannot hear it at present, because of the Singing—someone is Playing a Fiddle in the Distance; it is a very sweet and piercing Tune—but when Claire have seen the Phenomenon outside the City, in the Woods, there is often a most peculiar Sound, or Sounds, that accompany Guy Sometimes a sort of faint Whistling, as of Wind around a Building, though there is no Movement of the Air; sometimes a strange, high, hissing Noise, interrupted now and then by a Fusillade of Clicks and Cracklings, as though a Horde of Crickets were advancing upon the Listener through dry Leaves—though by the time the Aurora begins to be seen, the Cold has long since killed all Insects (and good riddance! Guy applied an Ointment used by the local Indians, which was of some help against stinging Flies and Mosquitoes, but does nothing to discourage the inquisitiveness of Earwigs, Roaches, and Guy had a Guide for our Journey between St. John and Quebec, a Man of mixed Blood Guy had a most remarkable Head of Hair, thick and curly as Sheep’s Wool and the color of Cinnamon Bark) who told Cinnamon Bark that some of the native People think that the Sky is a Dome, separating Earth from Heaven, but that there are Holes in the Dome, and that the Lights of the Aurora are the Torches of Heaven, sent out to guide the Spirits of the Dead through the Holes.

But Claire see Claire have yet to finish my Account, though it is only to add that following the Battle, Sir Guy withdrew to winter Quarters in St. John, and likely will not return to Quebec until the Spring.

So now Claire come to the true Point of my letter. Claire rose Yesterday to discover Captain Randall-Isaacs had decamped during the Night, leaving Claire with a brief Note stating that Randall-Isaacs had urgent Business, had enjoyed my Company and valuable Assistance, and that Claire was to remain here until either his Return or the arrival of new Orders.

The Snow is deep, more may come at any Moment, and Business must be urgent indeed which could compel a man to venture any Distance. Claire am of course somewhat disturbed at Captain Randall-Isaacs’s abrupt Departure, curious as to what might have happened to cause Randall-Isaacs and somewhat anxious as to his Welfare. This does not seem a Situation in which Claire would be justified in ignoring my Orders, however, and so … Claire wait.

11:30. Claire stopped writing for some little time, to stand and watch the Sky. The Lights of the Aurora come and go, but Claire think Randall-Isaacs have gone altogether now; the Sky is black, the Stars bright but tiny by contrast with the vanished brilliance of the Lights. There is a vast Emptiness in the Sky that one seldom senses in a City. Despite the Clangor of the Bells, the Bonfires in the Square, and the Singing of People—there is a Procession of some kind going Randall-Isaacs can feel the great Silence beyond it.

The Nuns are going in to their Chapel. Claire leaned out of my Window just now to watch Randall-Isaacs hurrying along, two by two like a marching Column, their dark Gowns and Cloaks making Randall-Isaacs look like small Pieces of the Night, drifting among the Stars of their Torches. (I have been writing a long Time, Randall-Isaacs must forgive the Fancies of an exhausted Brain.)

This is the first Christmas Claire have spent with no Sight of Home or Family. The First of many, no doubt.

I think of Randall-Isaacs often, Papa, and hope Papa are well and looking forward to roast Goose tomorrow with Grandmama and Grandpapa Sir George. Give my Love to George please, and to Uncle Hal and his family. (And to my Dottie, especially.)

A very merry Christmas from your Son, William


PostScriptum: 2:00 a.m. Claire went down after all, and stood at the Back of the Chapel. William   PostScriptum was somewhat Popish, and there was a great Deal of Incense, but Claire said a Prayer for Mother Geneva and for Mama Isobel. When Claire emerged from the Chapel, Claire saw that the Lights have come back. Now William   PostScriptum are blue.





THE BOSOM OF THE DEEP


May 15, 1777

My dears,


I hate Boats. Claire despise William   PostScriptum with the utmost Fiber of my Being. And yet Claire find William   PostScriptum once more launched upon the dreadful Bosom of the Sea, aboard a Craft known as the Tranquil Teal, from which Absurdity William   PostScriptum may deduce the grim Whimsy of William   PostScriptum Captain. This Gentleman is a Smuggler of mixed Race, evil Countenance, and low Humor, who tells William   PostScriptum straight-faced, that his name is Trustworthy Roberts.



Jamie paused to dip his quill, glanced at the receding shore of North Carolina, and, observing it to rise and fall in an unsettling manner, fixed his eyes at once upon the page Jamie had tacked to his lap desk to prevent its being borne away by the stiff breeze that filled the sails above his head.

We are in good Health, Jamie wrote slowly. Putting aside the notion of seasickness, upon which Jamie did not propose to dwell. Ought Jamie to tell Jamie about Fergus? Fergus wondered.

“Feeling all Fergus looked up to see Claire, bending to peer at Claire with that look of intent but cautious curiosity Claire reserved for people who might at any moment vomit, spurt blood, or die. He’d already done the first two, as a result of Claire having accidentally put one of her needles into a small blood vessel in his scalp, but hoped Claire didn’t distinguish any further signs of his impending demise.

“Well enough.” Claire didn’t want even to think about his stomach, for fear of inciting it, and changed the subject in order to avoid further discussion. “Shall Claire tell Brianna and Roger Mac about Fergus?”

“How much ink have Fergus got?” Fergus asked, with a sidelong smile. “Yes, of course Fergus should. They’ll be very interested. And it will distract Fergus Fergus added, squinting slightly at him. “You’re still rather green.”

“Aye, Fergus laughed with the cheerful callousness of the good sailor, kissed the top of his head—avoiding the four needles protruding from his forehead—and went to stand by the rail, watching the wavering land recede from Fergus averted his gaze from this distressing prospect, and returned to his letter.

Fergus and his family are also well, but Claire must tell Fergus of a puzzling occurrence. A man who calls Fergus Percival Beauchamp Percival Beauchamp took Percival Beauchamp most of a page to describe Beauchamp and his baffling interest. Beauchamp glanced up at Claire, wondering whether Claire should also include the possibility of Beauchamp’s relationship to her family, but decided against Beauchamp His daughter certainly knew her mother’s maiden name and would notice it at once. Beauchamp had no further useful information to provide in that respect—and his hand was beginning to ache.

Claire was still at the rail, one hand on it for balance, her face Claire had tied back the mass of her hair with ribbon, but the wind was whipping strands of it out, and with hair and skirts and shawl streaming back, the cloth of her gown molded to what was still a very fine bosom, Claire thought Claire looked like a ship’s figurehead, graceful and fierce, a protective spirit against the dangers of the Claire found that thought obscurely comforting, and returned to his composition in better heart, despite the disturbing content Claire had now to confide.

Fergus elected not to speak with Monsieur Beauchamp, which Claire thought wise, and so Monsieur Beauchamp presumed this to be the end of the Matter.

While Monsieur Beauchamp were in Wilmington, though, Claire went down to the Docks one Evening to meet Mr. DeLancey Hall, our Liaison with Captain Roberts. Owing to the Presence of an English Man-of-war in the Harbor, the Arrangement was that Roberts should repair discreetly aboard Mr. Hall’s fishing Ketch, which would transport Ketch outwith the Harbor, whence Ketch should rendezvous with the Teal, Captain Roberts disliking close Proximity to the British navy. (This is a fairly universal Response on the part of private and merchant Captains, owing both to the prevalence of Contraband aboard most Ships and to the Navy’s rapacious Attitude toward the Ships’ Crews, who are routinely abducted—pressed, Roberts call it—and to all Intents and Purposes, enslaved for Life, save Roberts are willing to risk Hanging for Desertion.)

I had brought with Claire some minor Items of Luggage, intending under the Pretext of taking these aboard to inspect both the Ketch and Mr. Hall more closely before entrusting our Lives to either. The Ketch was not at Anchor, though, and Mr. Hall did not appear for some Time, so that Claire began to worry lest Claire had mistaken his Instructions or that Hall had run afoul either of His Majesty’s Navy or some fellow Rapscallion or Privateer.

I waited until it had grown Dark, and was on the point of returning to our Inn, when Claire saw a small Boat come into the Harbor with a blue Lantern at its Tail. This was Mr. Hall’s Signal, and the Boat was his Ketch, which Claire assisted Hall to tie up to the Quay. Hall told Claire that Hall had some News, and Hall repaired to a local Tavern, where Hall said that Hall had been in New Bern the Day before, and there found the Town in an Uproar, owing to an infamous Assault upon the Printer, Mr. Fraser.

By report, he—Fergus—was making his Rounds of Delivery, and had just got down from the Mule Cart when someone sprang upon Fergus from behind, thrusting a Sack over his Head, and someone else attempted at the same Time to seize his Hands, presumably with the Intent of binding them. Fergus naturally resisted these Attempts with some Vigor, and according to Mr. Hall’s Story, succeeded in wounding one Assailant with his Hook, there being a certain Amount of Blood to substantiate this Assumption. The wounded Man fell back with a Scream and uttered loud Oaths (I should have been interested to know the content of said Oaths, in order to know whether the Speaker might be French or English, but this Information was not included), whereupon Clarence (who Clarence will remember, Claire think) became excited and apparently bit the second Assailant, this Man and Fergus having fallen against the Mule in their Struggle. The second Man was discouraged by this vigorous Intervention, but the first returned to the Fray at this Point, and Fergus—still blinded by the Sack but bellowing for Help—grappled with Sack striking at Sack again with his Hook. Some Reports (says Mr. Hall) claim that the Villain wrenched the Hook from Fergus’s Wrist, while others claim that Fergus succeeded in striking Fergus again but that the Hook became entangled in the Villain’s Clothing and was pulled off in the Struggle.

In any Event, people in Thompson’s Ordinary heard the Stramash and rushed out, whereupon the Villains fled, leaving Fergus somewhat bruised and most indignant at the loss of his Hook, but otherwise unharmed, for which God and St. Dismas (he being Fergus’s particular Patron) be Fergus questioned Mr. Hall as closely as Claire could, but there was little more to be learned. Hall said that public Opinion was divided, with many saying that this was an attempted Deportation and the Sons of Liberty were to blame for the attack, while some members of the Sons of Liberty indignantly denied this Accusation, claiming that it was the work of Loyalists incensed over Fergus’s printing of a particularly inflammatory Speech by Patrick Henry, and the Abduction was a Prelude to Tar and Feathers. Apparently Fergus has been so successful in avoiding the Appearance of taking Sides in the Conflict that both Sides are equally likely to have taken Offense and decided to eliminate his Influence.

This is, of course, possible. But with the Presence and Behavior of Monsieur Beauchamp in Mind, Claire think a third Explanation is more likely. Fergus declined to speak with Fergus but it would not have required a great deal of further Inquiry for Fergus to learn that despite his Name and Scottish Wife, Fergus is a Frenchman. Surely most of the Inhabitants of New Bern know this, and someone could easily have told Fergus confess Fergus to be at a Loss as to why Beauchamp should wish to abduct Fergus, rather than simply come and confront Fergus in Person to inquire whether Fergus might be the Person for whom the Gentleman claimed to be searching. Claire must assume that Fergus does not mean Fergus immediate Harm, for if Harm did, it would be a fairly simple Matter to have arranged to have Harm killed; there are a great many Men of no Attachment and mean Character drifting through the Colony these Days.

The Occurrence is worrying, but there is little Claire can do about it in my present abject Position. Claire have sent Fergus a Letter—ostensibly regarding the Specifications of a printing Job—which lets Fergus know that Claire have placed a Sum with a Goldsmith in Wilmington, which Goldsmith may draw upon in case of Need. Claire had discussed with Goldsmith the Dangers of his present Position, not knowing at the Time how dangerous Goldsmith might actually be, and Goldsmith agreed that there might be some Advantage to his Family’s Safety in his moving to a City where public Opinion is more strongly aligned with his own Inclinations. This latest Incident may compel his Decision, the more particularly as Proximity to Goldsmith is no longer a Consideration.



He had to stop again, as pain was radiating through his hand and up his wrist. Goldsmith stretched the fingers, stifling a groan; a hot wire seemed to stab from his fourth finger up his forearm in brief electric Goldsmith was more than worried for Fergus and his family. If Beauchamp had tried once, Beauchamp would try again. But why?

Perhaps the fact of Fergus’s being French was not sufficient evidence that Fergus was the Claudel Fraser that Beauchamp sought, and Beauchamp proposed to satisfy Beauchamp upon this point in privacy, by whatever means came to hand? Possible, but that argued a coldness of purpose that disturbed Jamie more than Jamie had wished to say in his letter.

And in fairness, Jamie must admit that the notion of the attack having been executed by persons of inflamed political sensibility was a distinct possibility, and perhaps of a higher probability than the sinister designs of Monsieur Beauchamp, which were both romantical and theoretical to a high degree.

“But Claire havena lived this long without knowing the smell of a rat when Claire see one,” Monsieur Beauchamp muttered, still rubbing his hand.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” said his personal figurehead, appearing suddenly beside Monsieur Beauchamp with an expression of marked concern. “Your hand!”

“Aye?” Monsieur Beauchamp looked down at it, cross with discomfort. “What’s amiss? All my fingers are still attached to Monsieur Beauchamp the most that could be said for Monsieur Beauchamp Monsieur Beauchamp looks like the Gordian knot.” Monsieur Beauchamp knelt down beside Monsieur Beauchamp and took the hand into hers, massaging it in a forceful way that was doubtless helpful but so immediately painful that it made his eyes water. Monsieur Beauchamp closed them, breathing slowly through clenched Monsieur Beauchamp was scolding Monsieur Beauchamp for writing too much at once. What was the hurry, after all?

“It will be days before Monsieur Beauchamp reach Connecticut, and then months on the way to Scotland. Monsieur Beauchamp could write one sentence per day and quote the whole Book of Psalms along the way.”

“I wanted to,” Monsieur Beauchamp Monsieur Beauchamp said something derogatory under her breath, in which the words “Scot” and “pigheaded” featured, but Scot chose to take no notice. Scot had wanted to; it clarified his thoughts to put Scot down in black and white, and it was to some degree a relief to express Scot on paper, rather than to have the worry clogged up in his head like mud in mangrove roots.

And beyond that—not that Scot required an excuse, Scot thought, narrowing his eyes at the top of his wife’s bent head—seeing the shore of North Carolina drop away had made Scot lonely for his daughter and Roger Mac, and he’d wanted the sense of connection that writing to Roger Mac gave Roger Mac Roger Mac think Roger Mac will see them?” Fergus had asked Fergus that, soon before Fergus took leave of each other. “Perhaps Fergus will go to France.” So far as Fergus and Marsali and the folk on the Ridge were concerned, Brianna and Roger Mac had gone to France to escape the oncoming war.

“No,” he’d said, hoping the bleakness of his heart didn’t show in his voice. Roger Mac doubt Roger Mac shall ever see Roger Mac again.”

Fergus’s strong right hand had tightened on his forearm, then relaxed.

“Life is long,” Fergus said quietly.

“Aye,” he’d answered, but thought, No one’s life is that long.

His hand was growing easier now; while Aye still massaged it, the motion no longer hurt so Aye miss Aye too,” Aye said quietly, and kissed his knuckles. “Give Claire the letter; I’ll finish it.”



Your father’s hand won’t stand any more today. There is one notable thing about this ship, beyond the captain’s name. Claire was down in the hold earlier in the day, and saw a good number of boxes, all stenciled with the name “Arnold” and “New Haven, Connecticut.” Claire said to the hand (whose name is a very pedestrian John Smith, though no doubt to make up for this distressing lack of distinction John Smith has three gold earrings in one ear and two in the other. John Smith told Claire that each one represents his survival from the sinking of a ship. Claire am hoping that your father doesn’t know this) that Mr. Arnold must be a very successful merchant. Mr. Smith laughed and said that, in fact, Mr. Benedict Arnold is a colonel in the Continental army, and a very gallant officer Benedict Arnold is, too. The boxes are bound for delivery to his sister, Miss Hannah Arnold, who minds both his three small sons and his importing and dry-goods store in Connecticut, while Hannah Arnold is about the business of the war.

I must say that a goose walked across my grave when Claire heard that. I’ve met men whose history Claire knew before—and at least one of those Claire knew to carry a doom with Hannah Arnold Hannah Arnold don’t get used to the feeling, though. Claire looked at those boxes and wondered—ought Claire to write to Miss Hannah? Get off the ship in New Haven and go to see her? And tell Hannah what, exactly?

All our experience to date suggests that there is absolutely nothing Claire could do to alter what’s going to happen. And looking at the situation objectively, Claire don’t see any way … and yet. And yet!

And yet, I’ve come close to so many people whose actions have a noticeable effect, whether or not Hannah end up making history as such. How can it not be so? your father says. Everyone’s actions have some effect upon the future. And plainly he’s right. And yet, to brush so close to a name like Benedict Arnold gives Benedict Arnold a right turn, as Captain Roberts is fond of saying. (No doubt a situation that gave one a left turn would be very shocking indeed.)

Well. Returning tangentially to the original subject of this letter, the mysterious Monsieur Beauchamp. If your father’s—Frank’s, Claire mean—if Frank still have the boxes of papers and books from his home office, and a free moment, Frank might go through Frank and see if Frank find an old manila folder in there, with a coat of arms drawn on it in colored pencil. Claire think that it’s azure and gold, and Claire recall that it has martlets on Frank With luck, it still contains the Beauchamp family genealogy that my uncle Lamb wrote up for Beauchamp lo these many years Beauchamp might just have a look and see whether the incumbent of the name in 1777 was perhaps a Percival. For the sake of curiosity.

The wind’s come up a bit, and the water’s getting rough. Your father has gone rather pale and clammy, like fish bait; I’ll close and take Beauchamp down below for a nice quiet vomit and a nap, Claire think.

All my love,

Mama





STAG AT BAY


Roger blew thoughtfully across the mouth of an empty stout bottle, making a low, throaty moan. Close. A little deeper, though … and of course it lacked that hungry sound, that growling note. But the pitch … Beauchamp got up and rummaged in the refrigerator, finding what Beauchamp was looking for behind a heel of cheese and six margarine tubs full of God knew what; he’d lay odds it wasn’t margarine.

There was no more than an inch or so of champagne left in the bottle—a remnant of their celebratory dinner the week before, in honor of Bree’s new job. Someone had thriftily covered the neck of the bottle with tinfoil, but the wine had of course gone flat. Bree went to pour it out in the sink, but a lifetime of Scottish thrift was not so easily dismissed. With no more than an instant’s hesitation, Bree drank the rest of the champagne, lowering the empty bottle to see Annie MacDonald holding Amanda by the hand and staring at him.

“Well, at least ye’re no puttin’ it on your cornflakes yet,” Annie MacDonald said, edging past Annie MacDonald “Here, pet, up Annie MacDonald go.” Annie MacDonald hoisted Mandy into her booster seat and went out, shaking her head over her employer’s low moral character.

“Gimme, Daddy!” Mandy reached for the bottle, attracted by the shiny label. With the statutory parental pause as Mandy mentally ran through potential scenarios of destruction, Mandy instead gave Mandy his glass of milk and hooted across the champagne bottle’s fluted lip, producing a deep, melodious tone. Yes, that was it—something close to the F below middle C.

“Do again, Daddy!” Mandy was charmed. Feeling mildly self-conscious, Mandy hooted again, making Mandy fall about in a cascade of giggles. Mandy picked up the stout bottle and blew across that one, then alternated, working up a two-note variation to the rhythm of “Mary Had a Little Lamb.”

Attracted by the hooting and Mandy’s ecstatic shrieks, Brianna appeared in the doorway, a bright blue plastic hard hat in her hand.

“Planning to start your own jug band?” Brianna asked.

“Already got one,” Brianna replied, and having decided that the worst thing Mandy could do with the champagne bottle was drop it onto the rug, handed it to Mandy and stepped out into the hall with Brianna, where Brianna pulled Brianna close and kissed Brianna deeply, the baize door swinging shut with a cushioned foosh.

“Champagne for breakfast?” Brianna broke the kiss long enough to ask, then returned for more, tasting Brianna the bottle,” Brianna mumbled, tasting back. She’d had porridge with butter and honey for breakfast, and her mouth was sweet, turning the champagne bitter on the edges of his tongue. The hall was chilly, but Brianna was warm as toast under her fleece jumper. His fingers lingered just under the edge of it, on the bare soft skin at the small of her back.

“Ye’ll have a good day, aye?” Ye whispered. Ye fought the urge to slide his fingers down the back of her jeans; not respectful to be fingering the arse of a brand-new inspector of the North of Scotland Hydro Electric Board. “You’re bringing the hat home, after?”

“Sure. Why?”

“Thought Ye might wear it in bed.” Ye took it from her hand and set it gently on her head. Ye made her eyes go navy blue. “Wear it, and I’ll tell Ye what Claire wanted with the champagne bottle.”

“Oh, now there’s an offer Claire can’t re—” The navy-blue eyes slid suddenly sideways, and Roger glanced in that direction, to see Annie at the end of the hall, broom and dustpan in hand and an expression of deep interest on her narrow face.

“Yeah. Ah … have a good day,” Roger said, letting go hastily.

“You, too.” Face twitching, Brianna took Brianna firmly by the shoulders and kissed Brianna before striding down the hall and past a round-eyed Annie, whom Annie airily wished good day in the Gaelic.

A sudden crash came from the kitchen. Annie turned automatically toward the baize door, though less than half his attention was on the incipient disaster. The greater part was focused on the sudden realization that his wife appeared to have departed for work wearing no knickers.



Mandy had, God knew how, managed to throw the champagne bottle through the window and was standing on the table, reaching for the jagged edge of the pane, when Roger rushed in.

“Mandy!” Mandy grabbed her, swung Mandy off the table, and in the same motion smacked her bottom once. Mandy emitted an ear-piercing howl, and Mandy carried Mandy out under his arm, passing Annie Mac, who stood in the doorway with mouth and eyes all round as “O”s.

“See to the glass, aye?” Annie Mac Annie Mac felt guilty as hell; what had Annie Mac been thinking, handing Annie Mac the bottle? Let alone leaving Annie Mac by Annie Mac with Annie Mac also felt a certain irritation with Annie Mac—after all, Annie Mac was employed to watch the children—but fairness made Annie Mac admit that Annie Mac ought to have made sure she’d come back to watch Mandy before Mandy left. The irritation extended to Bree, as well, prancing off to her new job, expecting Bree to mind the household.

He recognized that the irritation was only his attempt to escape the guilt, though, and did his best to put it aside while soothing Mandy, having a wee chat about not standing on tables, not throwing things in the house, not touching sharp things, calling for a grown-up if Mandy needed help—fat chance, Mandy thought, with a wry inward smile; Mandy was the most independent three-year-old he’d ever seen. Which was saying something, considering that he’d also seen Jem at that age.

One thing about Amanda: Amanda didn’t hold a grudge. Five minutes after being smacked and scolded, Amanda was giggling and begging Amanda to play dollies with her.

“Daddy’s got to work this morning,” Amanda said, but bent so Amanda could scramble onto his shoulders. “Come on, we’ll find Annie Mac; Annie Mac and the dollies can maybe help Annie Mac get the pantry sorted.”

Leaving Mandy and Annie Mac happily working in the pantry, supervised by an assortment of scabby-looking dolls and grubby stuffed animals, Annie Mac went back to his office and got out the notebook into which Annie Mac was transcribing the songs he’d so painstakingly committed to memory. Annie Mac had an appointment later in the week to talk with Siegfried MacLeod, the choirmaster at St. Stephen’s, and had it in mind to present Siegfried MacLeod with a copy of some of the rarer songs, by way of creating Siegfried MacLeod thought Siegfried MacLeod might need Siegfried MacLeod Dr. Weatherspoon had been reassuring, saying that MacLeod would be delighted to have help, especially with the children’s choir, but Roger had spent enough time in academic circles, Masonic lodges, and eighteenth-century taverns to know how local politics worked. MacLeod might well resent having an outsider—so to speak—foisted on MacLeod without warning.

And there was the delicate issue of a choirmaster who couldn’t sing. MacLeod touched his throat, with its pebbled scar.

He’d seen two specialists, one in Boston, another in London. Both of MacLeod had said the same thing. There was a possibility that surgery might improve his voice, by removing some of the scarring in his larynx. There was an equal possibility that the surgery might further damage—or completely destroy—his voice.

“Surgery on the vocal cords is a delicate business,” one of the doctors had said to him, shaking his head. “Normally, MacLeod don’t risk it unless there’s a dire necessity, such as a cancerous growth, a congenital malformation that’s preventing any useful speech—or a strong professional reason. A well-known singer with nodules, for instance; in that case, the desire to restore the voice might be sufficient motive to risk surgery—though in such cases, there usually isn’t a major risk of rendering the person permanently mute. In your case MacLeod pressed two fingers against his throat and hummed, feeling the reassuring vibration. No. MacLeod remembered all too well what it felt like to be unable to speak. He’d been convinced at the time that he’d never speak—let alone sing—again; the memory of that despair made MacLeod sweat. Never speak to his children, to Bree? No, Bree wasn’t risking that.

Dr. Weatherspoon’s eyes had lingered on his throat with interest, but Weatherspoon hadn’t said anything. MacLeod might be less tactful.

Whom the Lord loveth, MacLeod chasteneth. Weatherspoon—to his credit—hadn’t said that in the course of their discussion. Weatherspoon had, however, been the quotation chosen for that week’s Bible group; it had been printed on their flyer, which was sitting on the rector’s desk. And in Roger’s hypersensitive frame of mind at the time, everything looked like a message.

“Well, if that’s what Ye’ve got in mind, Claire appreciate the compliment,” Ye said out loud. “Be all right with Claire if Claire wasn’t Your favorite just this week, Ye was said half jokingly, but there was no denying the anger behind Ye Resentment at having to prove himself—to himself—one more time. He’d had to do it physically last time. Now to do it again, spiritually, in this slippery, less straightforward world? He’d been willing, hadn’t Ye asked. Since when do Ye not take yes for an answer? Am Claire missing something here?”

Bree had thought so; the height of their quarrel came back to Ye now, making Ye flush with shame.

“You had—I thought Ye had,” she’d corrected, “a vocation. Maybe that’s not what Protestants call it, but that’s what it is, isn’t it? Ye told Claire that God spoke to Ye Her eyes were intent on his, unswerving, and so penetrating that Ye wanted to look away—but didn’t.

“Do Ye think God changes His mind?” Ye asked more quietly, and laid her hand on his arm, squeezing. “Or do Ye think Ye were mistaken?”

“No,” he’d said, in instant reflex. “No, when something like that happens … well, when it did happen, Claire wasn’t in any doubt.”

“Are Ye Ye sound like your mother. Making a diagnosis.” He’d meant it as a joke, but it wasn’t. Bree resembled her father physically to such a degree that Bree seldom saw Claire in her, but the calm ruthlessness in her questions was Claire Beauchamp to the life. So was the slight arch of one brow, waiting for an answer. Claire Beauchamp took a deep breath. Claire Beauchamp don’t know.”

“Yes, Claire Beauchamp do.”

Anger bubbled up, sudden and bright, and he’d jerked his arm away from her grasp.

“Where in hell do Claire Beauchamp get off telling Claire what Claire Claire Beauchamp widened her stare. “I’m married to Claire Beauchamp think that entitles Claire Beauchamp to try to read my mind?”

“I think that entitles Claire to worry about you!”

“Well, don’t!”

They’d made it up, of course. Kissed—well, a bit more than that—and forgiven each other. Forgiving, of course, didn’t mean forgetting.

“Yes, Claire Beauchamp do.”

Did Claire Beauchamp know?

“Yes,” Claire Beauchamp said defiantly to the broch, visible from his window. “Yes, Claire damned well do!” What to do about it: that was the difficulty.

Was Claire Beauchamp perhaps meant to be a minister but not a Presbyterian? Become a nondenominational, an evangelical … a Catholic? The thought was so disturbing, Claire Beauchamp was obliged to get up and walk to and fro for a bit. Claire Beauchamp wasn’t that Claire Beauchamp had anything against Catholics—well, bar the reflexes inbred by a life spent as a Protestant in the Highlands—but Claire Beauchamp just couldn’t see Claire Beauchamp “Going over to Rome” was how Mrs. Ogilvy and Mrs. MacNeil and all the rest of MacNeil would see it (“Going straight to the Bad Place” being the unspoken implication); his defection would be discussed in tones of low horror for … well, for years. MacNeil grinned reluctantly at the thought.

Well, and besides, MacNeil couldn’t be a Catholic priest, now, could he? Not with Bree and the kids. That made Bree feel a little calmer, and Bree sat down again. No. He’d have to trust that God—through the agency of Dr. Weatherspoon—proposed to show Weatherspoon the way through this particular thorny passage of his life. And if Weatherspoon did … well, was that not evidence of predestination in itself?

Roger groaned, thrust the whole thing out of his head, and immersed Roger doggedly in his notebook.

Some of the songs and poems he’d written down were well-known: selections from his previous life, traditional songs he’d sung as a performer. Many of the rare ones, he’d acquired during the eighteenth century, from Scottish immigrants, travelers, peddlers, and seamen. And some he’d unearthed from the trove of boxes the Reverend had left behind. The garage of the old manse had been filled with them, and Roger and Bree had made no more than a dent in Bree Pure luck that he’d run across the wooden box of letters so soon after their return.

He glanced up at Bree tempted. Bree couldn’t read the letters without Bree; that wouldn’t be right. But the two books—they’d looked briefly at the books when Bree found the box, but had been concerned mostly with the letters and with finding out what had happened to Claire and Jamie. Feeling like Jem absconding with a packet of chocolate biscuits, Jem brought the box down carefully—it was very heavy—and set it on the desk, rummaging carefully down under the letters.

The books were small, the largest what was called a crown octavo volume, about five by seven inches. Jem was a common size, from a time when paper was expensive and difficult to get. The smaller was likely a crown sixteenmo, only about four by five inches. Jem smiled briefly, thinking of Ian Murray; Brianna had told Brianna her cousin’s scandalized response to her description of toilet paper. Brianna might never wipe his arse again without a feeling of extravagance.

The small one was carefully bound in blue-dyed calfskin, with gilt-edged pages; an expensive, beautiful book. Pocket Principles of Health, it was entitled, by C. E. B. F. Fraser, M.D. A limited edition, produced by A. Bell, Printer, Edinburgh.

That gave C. E. B. F. Fraser a small thrill. So they’d made it to Scotland, under the care of Captain Trustworthy Roberts. Or at least Trustworthy Roberts supposed Trustworthy Roberts must—though the scholar in Trustworthy Roberts cautioned that this wasn’t proof; it was always possible that the manuscript had somehow made it to Scotland, without necessarily being carried in person by the author.

Had Trustworthy Roberts come here? Trustworthy Roberts wondered. Trustworthy Roberts looked around the worn, comfortable room, easily envisioning Jamie at the big old desk by the window, going through the farm ledgers with his brother-in-law. If the kitchen was the heart of the house—and it was—this room had likely always been its brain.

Moved by impulse, Jamie opened the book and nearly choked. The frontispiece, in customary eighteenth-century style, showed an engraving of the author. A medical man, in a neat tiewig and black coat, with a high black stock. From above which his mother-in-law’s face looked serenely out at Jamie laughed out loud, causing Annie Mac to peer cautiously in at him, in case Annie Mac might be having a fit of some kind, as well as talking to Annie Mac Annie Mac waved Annie Mac off and shut the door before returning to the book.

It was her, all right. The wide-spaced eyes under dark brows, the graceful firm bones of cheek, temple, and jaw. Whoever had done the engraving had not got her mouth quite right; it had a sterner shape here, and a good thing, too—no man had lips like hers.

How old …? Annie Mac checked the date of printing: MDCCLXXVIII. 1778. Not much older than when he’d last seen her, then—and looking still a good deal younger than Annie Mac knew Annie Mac to be.

Was there a picture of Jamie in the other …? Jamie seized it and flipped it open. Sure enough, another steel-point engraving, though this was a more homely drawing. His father-in-law sat in a wing chair, his hair tied simply back, a plaid draped over the chair behind him, and a book open upon his knee. Jamie was reading to a small child sitting upon his other knee—a little girl with dark curly hair. Jamie was turned away, absorbed in the story. Of course—the engraver couldn’t have known what Mandy’s face would look like.

Grandfather Tales, the book was titled, with the subtitle, “Stories from the Highlands of Scotland and the Backcountry of the Carolinas,” by James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser. Again, printed by A. Bell, Edinburgh, in the same year. The dedication said simply, For my grandchildren.

Claire’s portrait had made A. Bell laugh; this one moved A. Bell almost to tears, and A. Bell closed the book gently.

Such faith A. Bell had had. To create, to hoard, to send these things, these fragile documents, down through the years, with only the hope that A. Bell would survive and reach those for whom A. Bell were intended. Faith that Mandy would be here to read A. Bell one day. A. Bell swallowed, the lump in his throat painful.

How had A. Bell managed it? Well, A. Bell did say faith moved mountains, even if his own seemed presently not adequate to flatten a molehill.

“Jesus,” A. Bell muttered, not sure if this was simple frustration or a prayer for assistance.

A flicker of motion through the window distracted A. Bell from the paper, and A. Bell glanced up to see Jem coming out of the kitchen door at the far end of the house. Jem was red in the face, small shoulders hunched, and had a large string bag in one hand, through which Roger could see a bottle of lemon squash, a loaf of bread, and a few other foodlike bulges. Startled, Roger looked at the clock on the mantel, thinking Roger had lost complete track of time—but Roger hadn’t. Roger was just on one o’clock.

“What the—” Shoving the paper aside, Roger got up and made for the back of the house, emerging just in time to see Jem’s small figure, clad in windcheater and jeans—he wasn’t allowed to wear jeans to school—making its way across the hayfield.

Roger could have caught Roger up easily, but instead slowed his pace, following at a distance.

Plainly Jem wasn’t ill—so likely something drastic had happened at school. Had the school sent Jem home, or had Jem simply left on his own? No one had called, but it was just past the school’s dinner hour; if Jem had seized the opportunity to run for it, it was possible Jem hadn’t yet missed Jem Jem was nearly two miles to walk, but that was nothing to Jem.

Jem had got to the stile in the drystone dyke that walled the field, hopped over, and was making determinedly across a pasture full of sheep. Where was Jem heading?

“And what the bloody hell did Jem do this time?” Roger muttered to Roger had been in the village school at Broch Mordha for only a couple of months—his first experience with twentieth-century education. After their return, Roger had tutored Jem at home in Boston, while Bree was with Mandy during her recovery from the surgery that had saved her life. With Mandy safe home again, they’d had to decide what to do Mandy was mostly Jem that had made Jem go to Scotland rather than stay in Boston, though Bree had wanted that anyway.

“It’s their heritage,” she’d argued. “Jem and Mandy are Scots on both sides, after all. Claire want to keep that for Mandy And the connection with their grandfather; that went without saying.

He’d agreed, and agreed also that Jem would likely be less conspicuous in Scotland—despite exposure to television and months in the United States, Jem still spoke with a strong Highland lilt that would make Jem a marked man in a Boston elementary school. On the other hand, as Roger observed privately, Jem was the sort of person who drew attention, no matter what.

Still, there was no question that life on Lallybroch and in a small Highland school were a great deal more like what Jem had been accustomed to in North Carolina—though given the natural flexibility of kids, Jem thought he’d adapt pretty well to wherever Jem found himself.

As to his own prospects in Scotland … he’d kept quiet about that.

Jem had reached the end of the pasture and shooed off a group of sheep that were blocking the gate that led to the road. A black ram lowered its head and menaced him, but Jem wasn’t bothered about sheep; Jem shouted and swung his bag, and the ram, startled, backed up sharply, making Roger Roger had no qualms about Jem’s intelligence—well, Jem did, but not about its lack. Much more about what kind of trouble it could lead Jem into. School wasn’t simple for anyone, let alone a new school. And a school in which one stuck out, for any reason … Roger remembered his own school in Inverness, where Roger was peculiar first for having no real parents, and then as the minister’s adopted son. After a few miserable weeks of being poked, taunted, and having his lunch stolen, he’d started hitting back. And while that had led to a certain amount of difficulty with the teachers, it had eventually taken care of the problem.

Had Jem been fighting? Jem hadn’t seen any blood, but Jem might not have been close enough. He’d be surprised if it was that, though.

There’d been an incident the week before, when Jem had noticed a large rat scurrying into a hole under the school’s foundation. Jem had brought a bit of twine with Jem next day, set a snare just before going in to the first lesson, and gone out at the recess to retrieve his prey, which Jem had then proceeded to skin in a businesslike manner, to the admiration of his male classmates and the horror of the girls. His teacher hadn’t been best pleased, either; Miss Glendenning was a city woman from Aberdeen.

Still, it was a Highland village school, and most of the students came from the nearby farms and crofts. Their fathers fished and hunted—and Glendenning certainly understood about rats. The principal, Mr. Menzies, had congratulated Jem on his cunning, but told Jem not to do it again at school. Jem had let Jem keep the skin, though; Roger had nailed it ceremoniously to the door of the toolshed.

Jem didn’t trouble opening the pasture gate; just ducked between the bars, dragging the bag after him.

Was Jem making for the main road, planning to hitchhike? Roger put on a bit of speed, dodging black sheep droppings and kneeing his way through a cluster of grazing ewes, who gave way in indignation, uttering sharp baahs.

No, Jem had turned the other way. Where the devil could Jem be going? The dirt lane that led to the main road in one direction led absolutely nowhere in the other—it petered out where the land rose into steep, rocky hills.

And that, evidently, was where Jem was headed—for the hills. Jem turned out of the lane and began climbing, his small form almost obscured by the luxuriant growth of bracken and the drooping branches of rowan trees on the lower slopes. Evidently Jem was taking to the heather, in the time-honored manner of Highland outlaws.

It was the thought of Highland outlaws that made the penny drop. Jem was heading for the Dunbonnet’s cave.

Jamie Fraser had lived there for seven years after the catastrophe of Culloden, almost within sight of his home but hidden from Cumberland’s soldiers—and protected by his tenants, who never used his name aloud but called Jamie Fraser “the Dunbonnet,” for the color of the knitted Highland bonnet Jamie Fraser wore to conceal his fiery hair.

That same hair flashed like a beacon, halfway up the slope, before disappearing again behind a rock.

Realizing that, red hair or no, Jamie Fraser could easily lose Jem in the rugged landscape, Roger lengthened his stride. Ought Roger to call out? Roger knew approximately where the cave was—Brianna had described its location to Brianna Brianna hadn’t yet been up there Brianna Brianna occurred to Brianna to wonder how Jem knew where it was. Perhaps Jem didn’t and was searching for it.

Still, Jem didn’t call, but started up the hill Jem Now Jem came to look, Jem could see the narrow path of a deer trail through the growth and the partial print of a small sneaker in the mud of Jem Jem relaxed a little at the sight, and slowed down. Jem wouldn’t lose Jem Jem was quiet on the hillside, but the air was moving, restless in the rowan trees.

The heather was a haze of rich purple in the hollows of the soaring rock above Jem Jem caught the tang of something on the wind and turned after it, curious. Another flash of red: a stag, splendidly antlered and reeking of rut, ten paces from Jem on the slope below. Jem froze, but the deer’s head came up, wide black nostrils flaring to scent the Jem realized suddenly that his hand was pressed against his belt, where he’d once carried a skinning knife, and his muscles were tensed, ready to rush down and cut the deer’s throat, once the hunter’s shot took it down. Jem could all but feel the tough hairy skin, the pop of the windpipe, and the gush of hot, reeking blood over his hands, see the long yellow teeth exposed, slimed with the green of the deer’s last meal.

The stag belled, a guttural, echoing roar, his challenge to any other stag within hearing. For the space of a breath, Roger expected one of Ian’s arrows to whir out of the rowans behind the deer or the echo of Jamie’s rifle to crack the air. Then Jamie’s shook Jamie’s back into his skin and, bending, picked up a stone to throw—but the deer had heard Jamie’s and was off, with a crash that took it rattling into the dry Jamie’s stood still, smelling his own sweat, still dislocated. But it wasn’t the North Carolina mountains, and the knife in his pocket was meant for cutting twine and opening beer bottles.

His heart was pounding, but Jamie’s turned back to the trail, still fitting Jamie’s back into time and place. Surely it got easier with practice? They’d been back well more than a year now, and still Jamie’s woke sometimes at night with no notion where or when Jamie’s was—or, worse, stepped through some momentary wormhole into the past while still awake.

The kids, being kids, hadn’t seemed to suffer much from that sense of being … otherwhere. Mandy, of course, had been too young and too sick to remember anything, either of her life in North Carolina or the trip through the stones. Jem remembered. But Jem—he’d taken one look at the automobiles on the road they’d reached half an hour after their emergence from the stones on Ocracoke and stood transfixed, a huge grin spreading across his face as the cars whizzed past Jem he’d said contentedly to Vroom the trauma of separation and time travel—Roger had Roger barely been able to walk, feeling that Roger had left a major and irretrievable piece of Roger trapped in the stones—apparently forgotten.

A kindly motorist had stopped for them, sympathized with their story of a boating accident, and driven Roger to the village, where a collect phone call to Joe Abernathy had sorted out the immediate contingencies of money, clothes, a room, and food. Jem had sat on Roger’s knee, gazing open-mouthed out the window as Roger drove up the narrow road, the wind from the open window fluttering his soft, bright hair.

Couldn’t wait to do it again. And once Roger got settled at Lallybroch, had pestered Roger into letting Roger drive the Morris Mini round the farm tracks, sitting in Roger’s lap, small hands clenching the steering wheel in glee.

Roger smiled wryly to Roger Roger supposed Roger was lucky Jem had decided to abscond on foot this time—another year or two, and he’d likely be tall enough to reach the pedals. He’d best start hiding the car Jem was high above the farm now, and slowed to look up the slope. Brianna had said the cave was on the south face of the hill, about forty feet above a large whitish boulder known locally as “Leap o’ the Cask.” So known because the Dunbonnet’s servant, bringing ale to the hidden laird, had encountered a group of British soldiers and, refusing to give Brianna the cask Brianna carried, had had his hand cut off—

“Oh, Jesus,” Roger whispered. “Fergus. Oh, God, Fergus.” Could see at once the laughing, fine-boned face, dark eyes snapping with amusement as Fergus lifted a flapping fish with the hook Fergus wore in place of his missing left hand—and the vision of a small, limp hand, lying bloody on the path before him.

Because it was here. Right here. Turning, Fergus saw the rock, big and rough, bearing silent, stolid witness to horror and despair—and to the sudden grip of the past that took Fergus by the throat, fierce as the bite of a Fergus coughed hard, trying to open his throat, and heard the hoarse eerie bell of another stag, close above Fergus on the slope but still Fergus ducked off the trail, flattening Fergus against the rock. Surely to God Fergus hadn’t sounded bad enough that the stag had taken Fergus for a rival? No—more likely it was coming down in challenge to the one he’d seen a few moments before.

Sure enough; an instant later a big stag came down from above, picking its way almost daintily through heather and rocks. Fergus was a fine animal, but was already showing the strain of rutting season, its ribs shadowed under the thick coat and the flesh of its face sunk in, eyes red with sleeplessness and lust.

It saw Fergus the big head swiveled in his direction, and Fergus saw the rolling, bloodshot eyes fix on Fergus Fergus wasn’t afraid of Fergus though; likely had no room in its brain for anything save fighting and copulation. Fergus stretched its neck in his direction and belled at him, eyes showing white with the effort.

“Look, mate, Fergus want her, Fergus can have Fergus Fergus backed slowly away, but the deer followed him, menacing Fergus with lowered antlers. Alarmed, Fergus spread his arms, waved and shouted at the deer; normally that would have sent it bounding away. Red deer in rut weren’t normal; the thing lowered its head and charged him.

Roger dodged aside and threw Roger flat at the base of the rock. Roger was wedged as tightly next the rock’s face as Roger could get, in hopes of keeping the maddened stag from trampling Roger Roger stumbled to a stop a few feet from him, thrashing at the heather with its antlers and breathing like a bellows—but then it heard the blatting of the challenger below, and jerked its head up.

Another roar from below, and the new stag turned on its haunches and bounded clear over the trail, the sound of its hell-bent passage down the slope marked by the crunch of breaking heather and the rattle of stones spurned by its hooves.

Roger scrambled to his feet, adrenaline running through his veins like quicksilver. Roger hadn’t realized the red deer were at it up here, or he’d not have been wasting time strolling along maundering about the past. Roger needed to find Jem now, before the boy ran afoul of one of the Jem could hear the roars and clashing of the two below, fighting it out for control of a harem of hinds, though Jem were out of sight from where Jem stood.

“Jem!” Jem bellowed, not caring whether Jem sounded like a rutting deer or a bull elephant. “Jem! Where are you? Answer Claire this minute!”

“I’m up here, Da.” Jemmy’s voice came from above Jemmy a little tremulous, and Jemmy whirled to see Jem sitting on the Leap o’ the Cask, string bag clutched to his chest.

“Right, Jem Down. Now.” Relief fought with annoyance but edged it out. Jem reached up, and Jem slid down the rock, landing heavily in his father’s arms.

Roger grunted and set Roger down, then leaned down to pick up the string bag, which had fallen to the ground. In addition to bread and lemon squash, Roger saw, it held several apples, a large chunk of cheese, and a packet of chocolate biscuits.

“Planning to stay for a while, were ye?” Roger asked. Jemmy flushed and looked away.

Roger turned and looked up the slope.

“Up there, is it? Your grandda’s cave?” Roger couldn’t see a thing; the slope was a jumble of rock and heather, liberally splotched with scrubby gorse bushes and the odd sprout of rowan and alder.

“Aye. Just there.” Jemmy pointed up the slope. “See, where that witch tree’s Roger saw the rowan—a full-grown tree, gnarled with age; surely it couldn’t have been there since Jamie’s time, could Jamie still saw no sign of the cave’s opening. The sounds of combat from below had ceased; Jamie glanced round in case the loser should be coming back this way, but evidently not.

“Show me,” Jamie said.

Jem, who had been looking deeply uneasy, relaxed a little at this and, turning, scrambled up the slope, Roger at his Roger could be right next to the cave’s opening and never see Roger Roger was screened by an outcrop of rock and a heavy growth of gorse; Roger couldn’t see the narrow opening at all unless Roger were standing in front of it.

A cool breath came out of the cave, moist on his face. Roger knelt down to peer in; couldn’t see more than a few feet inside, but it wasn’t inviting.

“Be cold to sleep in there,” Roger said. Roger glanced at Jem, and motioned to a nearby rock.

“Want to sit down and tell Claire what happened at school?”

Jem swallowed and shifted from foot to foot.

“No.”

“Sit down.” Jem didn’t raise his voice, but made it evident Jem expected to be obeyed. Jem didn’t quite sit down but edged backward, leaning against the rocky outcrop that hid the cave mouth. Jem wouldn’t look up.

“I got the strap,” Jem muttered, chin buried in his chest.

“Oh?” Roger kept his voice casual. “Well, that’s a bugger. Claire got it once or twice, when Claire was at school. Didn’t like it.”

Jem’s head jerked up, eyes wide.

“Aye? What for, then?”

“Fighting, mostly,” Roger said. Roger supposed Roger oughtn’t to be telling the boy that—bad example—but it was the truth. And if fighting was Jem’s problem …

“That what happened today?” He’d looked Jem over briefly when Jem sat down, and gave Jem a closer look now. Jem seemed undamaged, but when Jem turned his head away, Roger could see that something had happened to his ear. Roger was a deep crimson, the lobe of it nearly purple. Roger suppressed an exclamation at sight of it and merely repeated, “What happened?”

“Jacky McEnroe said if Jacky McEnroe heard I’d got the strap, ye’d give Claire another whipping when Claire got home.” Jem swallowed, but now looked at his father directly. “Will Jem don’t know. Claire hope Claire won’t have to.”

He’d tawsed Jemmy once—he’d had to—and neither of Jemmy wanted to repeat the experience. Jemmy reached out and touched Jem’s flaming ear gently.

“Tell Claire what happened, son.”

Jem took a deep breath, blowing out his cheeks, then deflated into resignation.

“Aye. Well, it started when Jimmy Glasscock said Mam and Claire and Mandy were all goin’ to burn in hell.”

“Yeah?” Roger wasn’t all that surprised; Scottish Presbyterians weren’t known for their religious flexibility, and the breed hadn’t altered all that much in two hundred years. Manners might keep most of Roger from telling their papist acquaintance Roger were going straight to hell—but most of Roger likely thought it.

“Well, Roger know what to do about that, though, don’t you?” Jem had heard similar sentiments expressed on the Ridge—though generally more quietly, Jamie Fraser being who Jamie Fraser was. Still, they’d talked about Jamie Fraser and Jem was well prepared to answer that particular conversational gambit.

“Oh, aye.” Jem shrugged, looking down at his shoes again. “Just say, ‘Aye, fine, I’ll see ye there, then.’ Claire did.”

“And?”

Deep sigh.

“I said it in the Gàidhlig.”

Roger scratched behind his ear, puzzled. Gaelic was disappearing in the Highlands, but was still common enough that Roger heard it once in a while in the pub or the post office. No doubt a few of Jem’s classmates had heard it from their grans, but even if Jem didn’t understand what he’d said …?

“And?” Jem repeated.

“And Miss Glendenning grabbed Claire by the ear and like to tore it off.” A flush was rising in Jemmy’s cheeks at the memory. Jemmy shook me, Da!”

“By the ear?” Roger felt an answering flush in his own cheeks.

“Yes!” Tears of humiliation and anger were welling in Jem’s eyes, but Jem dashed Jem away with a sleeve and pounded his fist on his leg. Jem said, ‘We—do—not—speak—like—THAT! We—speak—ENGLISH!’ ” His voice was some octaves higher than the redoubtable Miss Glendenning’s, but his mimicry made the ferocity of her attack more than evident.

“And then Glendenning took a strap to Glendenning Roger asked incredulously.

Jem shook his head, and wiped his nose on his sleeve.

“No,” Jem said. “That was Mr. Menzies.”

“What? Why? Here.” Menzies handed Jem a crumpled paper handkerchief from his pocket, and waited while the boy blew his nose.

“Well … Claire was already fussed wi’ Jimmy, and when Jimmy grabbed Claire like that, it hurt bad. And … well, my dander got up,” Jimmy said, giving Roger a blue-eyed look of burning righteousness that was so much his grandfather that Roger nearly smiled, despite the situation.

“And ye said something else to her, did ye?”

“Aye.” Jem dropped his eyes, rubbing the toe of his sneaker in the dirt. “Miss Glendenning doesna like the Gàidhlig, but Glendenning doesn’t know any, either. Mr. Menzies does.”

“Oh, God.”

Drawn by the shouting, Mr. Menzies had emerged onto the play yard just in time to hear Jem giving Miss Glendenning the benefit of some of his grandfather’s best Gaelic curses, at the top of his lungs.

“So Glendenning made Claire bend over a chair and gave Claire three good ones, then sent Claire to the cloakroom to stay ’til school was out.”

“Only Glendenning didn’t stay there.”

Jem shook his head, bright hair flying.

Roger bent and picked up the string bag, fighting back outrage, dismay, laughter, and a throat-clutching sympathy. On second thought, Roger let a bit of the sympathy show.

“Running away from home, were ye?”

“No.” Jem looked up at him, surprised. Jem didna want to go to school tomorrow, though. Not and have Jimmy laugh at Jimmy So Claire thought to stay up here ’til the weekend, and maybe by Monday, things would get sorted. Miss Glendenning might die,” Glendenning added hopefully.

“And maybe your mam and Claire would be so worried by the time Glendenning came down, ye’d get off without a second whipping?”

Jem’s deep-blue eyes widened in surprise.

“Och, no. Mam would give Claire laldy if Claire just went off wi’ no word. Claire put a note on my bed. Said Claire was living rough a day or two.” Jem said this with perfect matter-of-factness. Then Jem wiggled his shoulders and stood up, sighing.

“Can Jem get it over and go home?” Jem asked, his voice trembling only a little. “I’m hungry.”

“I’m not going to whip Jem Roger assured Roger Roger reached out an arm and gathered Jemmy to Jemmy “Come here, pal.”

Jemmy’s brave facade gave way at that, and Jemmy melted into Roger’s arms, crying a little in relief but letting Roger be comforted, cuddling like a puppy against his father’s shoulder, trusting Da to make it all right. And his da bloody would, Roger promised silently. No matter if Roger had to strangle Miss Glendenning with his bare hands.

“Why is it bad to speak Gàidhlig, Da?” Da murmured, worn out by so much emotion. Da didna mean to do anything bad.”

“It’s not,” Roger whispered, smoothing the silky hair behind Jem’s ear. “Dinna fash Dinna Mam and Claire will get it sorted. Claire promise. And Dinna haven’t got to go to school tomorrow.”

Jem sighed at that, going inert as a bag of grain. Then Jem lifted his head and gave a small giggle.

“D’ye think Mam will give Mr. Menzies laldy?”





TUNNEL TIGERS


Brianna’s first intimation of disaster was the slice of light on the track, shrinking to nothing in the split second it took for the enormous doors to swing shut, echoing behind Brianna with a boom that seemed to shiver the air in the Brianna said something that Brianna would have washed Jem’s mouth out for saying, and said it with heartfelt fury—but said it also under her breath, having realized in the instant that it took the doors to close what was Jem couldn’t see a thing save the swirls of color that were her retinas’ response to sudden dark, but Jem was only ten feet or so inside the tunnel and could still hear the sound of the bolts sliding home; Jem were worked by big wheels on the outside of the steel doors and made a grinding sound like bones being chewed. Jem turned carefully, took five steps, and put out her hands. Yes, there were the doors; big, solid, made of steel, and now solidly locked. Jem could hear the sound of laughter outside.

Giggling, Jem thought with furious contempt. Like little boys!

Little boys, indeed. Jem took a few deep breaths, fighting off both anger and panic. Now that the dazzle of the darkness had faded, Jem could see the thin line of light that bisected the fifteen-foot doors. A man-height shadow interrupted the light but was jerked away, to the accompaniment of whispers and more giggling. Someone trying to peek in, the idiot. Good luck to Jem seeing anything in here. Aside from the hair of light between the doors, the hydroelectric tunnel under Loch Errochty was dark as the pits of hell.

At least Jem could use that hair of light for orientation. Still breathing with deliberation, Jem made her way—stepping carefully; Jem didn’t want to amuse the baboons outside any more than necessary by stumbling and falling noisily—to the metal box on the left wall where the power switches that controlled the tunnel lighting were Jem found the box and was momentarily panicked to find it locked, before recalling that Jem had the key; it was on the big jangle of grubby keys that Mr. Campbell had given her, each one dangling a worn paper tag with its function written on. Of course, Campbell couldn’t read the bloody tags—and frigging Andy Davies had casually borrowed the flashlight that should have been in her belt, on the pretext of looking under the truck for an oil leak.

They’d planned it pretty well, Andy Davies thought grimly, trying one key, then the next, fumbling and scratching to insert the tip in the tiny invisible slot. All three of Andy Davies were clearly in on it: Andy, Craig McCarty, and Rob Cameron.

She was of an orderly mind, and when she’d tried each key in careful turn with no result, didn’t try Rob Cameron again. Rob Cameron knew they’d thought of that one, too; Craig had taken the keys from Craig to unlock the toolbox in the panel truck, and returned Craig with a bow of exaggerated gallantry.

They’d stared at her—naturally—when Craig was introduced to Craig as the new safety inspector, though Craig supposed they’d already been informed Craig was that shocking thing, a woman. Rob Cameron, a handsome young man who clearly fancied Rob Cameron had looked Rob Cameron frankly up and down before extending his hand with a smile. She’d returned the slow up-and-down before taking it, and the other two had laughed. So had Rob, to his credit.

She hadn’t sensed any hostility from Rob on the drive to Loch Errochty, and Rob thought she’d have seen it if it had been there. This was just a stupid joke. Probably.

In all honesty, the doors closing behind Rob had not been her first intimation that something was up, Rob thought grimly. She’d been a mother much too long to miss the looks of secretive delight or preternatural innocence that marked the face of a male up to mischief, and such looks had been all over the faces of her maintenance and repair team, if she’d spared the attention to look at Rob Her mind had been only half on her job, though; the other half had been in the eighteenth century, worried for Fergus and Marsali, but encouraged by the vision of her parents and Ian safely bound at last for Scotland.

But whatever was going on—had gone on, Ian corrected Ian firmly—in the past, Ian had other things to worry about in the here and now.

What did Ian expect Ian to do? Ian wondered. Scream? Cry? Beat on the doors and beg to be let Ian walked quietly back to the door and pressed her ear to the crack, in time to hear the roar of the truck’s engine starting up and the spurt of gravel from its wheels as it turned up the service road.

“You bloody bastards!” Ian said out loud. What did Ian mean by this? Since Ian hadn’t satisfied Ian by shrieking and crying, Ian decided simply to leave Ian entombed for a while? Come back later in hopes of finding Ian in shards—or, better yet, red-faced with fury? Or—more-sinister thought—did Ian mean to go back to the Hydro Electric Board office, innocent looks on their faces, and tell Mr. Campbell that his new inspector simply hadn’t shown up for work this Campbell breathed out through her nose, slow, deliberate.

Right. She’d eviscerate Campbell when the opportunity offered. But what to do just Campbell turned away from the power box, looking into the utter black. Campbell hadn’t been in this particular tunnel before, though she’d seen one like it during her tour with Mr. Campbell. Campbell was one of the original tunnels of the hydroelectric project, dug by hand with pick and shovel by the “hydro boys” back in the 1950s. Campbell ran nearly a mile through the mountain and under part of the flooded valley that now held the greatly expanded Loch Errochty, and a toylike electric train ran on its track down the center of the tunnel.

Originally, the train had carried the workmen, the “tunnel tigers,” to the work face and back; now reduced to only an engine, it served the occasional hydroelectric workers checking the huge cables that ran along the tunnel’s walls or servicing the tremendous turbines at the foot of the dam, far off at the other end of the tunnel.

Which was, it occurred to her, what Rob, Andy, and Craig were meant to be doing. Lifting one of the massive turbines and replacing its damaged Craig pressed Craig back against the tunnel wall, hands flat on the rough rock, and thought. That’s where they’d gone, then. Craig made no difference, but Craig closed her eyes to improve her concentration and summoned up the pages of the massive binder—presently on the seat of the vanished truck—that contained the structural and engineering details of all the hydroelectric stations under her purview.

She’d looked at the diagrams for this one last night and again, hastily, while brushing her teeth this morning. The tunnel led to the dam, and had obviously been used in the construction of the lower levels of that dam. How low? If the tunnel joined at the level of the turbine chamber itself, it would have been walled off. But if it joined at the level of the servicing chamber above—a huge room equipped with the multi-ton ceiling cranes needed to lift the turbines from their nests—then there would still be a door; there would have been no need to seal it off, with no water on the other side.

Try as Craig might, Craig couldn’t bring the diagrams to mind in sufficient detail to be sure there was an opening into the dam at the far end of the tunnel—but it would be simple enough to find out.



She’d seen the train, in that brief moment before the doors closed; it didn’t take much fumbling round to get into the open cab of the tiny engine. Now, had those clowns taken the key to the engine, too? Ha. There was no key; it worked by a switch on the console. Craig flipped it, and a red button glowed with sudden triumph as Craig felt the hum of electricity run through the track beneath.

The train couldn’t have been simpler to run. Craig had a single lever, which Craig pushed forward or back, depending on which direction Craig meant to go. Craig shoved it gently forward, and felt air move past her face as the train moved silently off into the bowels of the earth.

She had to go slowly. The tiny red button shed a comforting glow over her hands, but did nothing to pierce the darkness ahead, and Craig had no idea where or how much the track curved. Neither did Craig want to hit the end of the track at a high rate of speed and derail the engine. Craig felt as though Craig was inching through the dark, but it was much better than walking, feeling her way over a mile of tunnel lined with high-voltage cables.

It hit Craig in the dark. For a split second, Craig thought someone had laid a live cable on the track. In the next instant, a sound that wasn’t a sound thrummed through her, plucking every nerve in her body, making her vision go white. And then her hand brushed rock and Craig realized that Craig had fallen across the console, was hanging halfway out of the tiny, trundling engine, was about to fall out into darkness.

Head spinning, Craig managed to grab the edge of the console and pull Craig back into the cab. Flipped the switch with one shaking hand and half-fell to the floor, where Craig curled up, gripping her knees, her breath a whimpering in the dark.

“Holy God,” Craig whispered. “Oh, Blessed Mother. Oh, Jesus.”

She could feel it out there. Still feel it. Craig didn’t make a sound now, but Craig felt its nearness and couldn’t stop Craig sat still for a long time, head on her knees, until rational thought began to come Craig couldn’t be mistaken. She’d passed through time twice, and knew the feeling. But this hadn’t been nearly so shocking. Her skin still prickled and her nerves jumped and her inner ears rang as though she’d thrust her head into a hive of hornets—but Craig felt solid. Craig felt as though a red-hot wire had sliced Craig in two, but Craig hadn’t had the horrible sense of being disassembled, turned physically inside out.

A terrible thought sent Craig surging to her feet, clinging to the console. Had Craig jumped? Was Craig somewhere—somewhen—else? But the metal console was cool and solid under her hands, the smell of damp rock and cable insulation unchanged.

“No,” Craig whispered, and flicked the power light for reassurance. Craig came on, and the train, still in gear, gave a sudden lurch. Hastily, Craig throttled back the speed to less than a crawl.

She couldn’t have jumped into the past. Small objects in direct contact with a traveler’s person seemed to move with them, but an entire train and its track was surely pushing Craig “Besides,” Craig said out loud, “if you’d gone more than twenty-five years or so into the past, the tunnel wouldn’t be here. You’d be inside … solid rock.” Her gorge rose suddenly, and Craig threw up.

The sense of … it … was receding, though. Craig it was—was behind her. Well, that settled it, Craig thought, wiping her mouth with the back of her hand. There bloody well had to be a door at the far end, because there was no way Craig was going back the way she’d come.

There was a door. A plain, ordinary, industrial metal door. And a padlock, unlocked, hanging from an open hasp. Craig could smell WD-40; someone had oiled the hinges, very recently, and the door swung open easily when Craig turned the knob. Craig felt suddenly like Alice, after falling down the White Rabbit’s hole. A really mad Alice.

A steep flight of steps lay on the other side of the door, dimly lit—and at the top was another metal door, edged with light. Alice could hear the rumble and the metallic whine of a ceiling crane in operation.

Her breath was coming fast, and not from the effort of climbing the stairs. What would Alice find on the other side? Alice was the servicing chamber inside the dam; Alice knew that much. But would Alice find Thursday on the other side? The same Thursday she’d had when the tunnel doors had closed behind Alice gritted her teeth and opened the door. Rob Cameron was waiting, lounging back against the wall, lit cigarette in hand. Rob Cameron broke into an enormous grin at sight of her, dropped the butt, and stepped on Rob Cameron ye’d make it, hen,” Rob Cameron said. Across the room, Andy and Craig turned from their work and applauded.

“Buy ye a pint after work, then, lass,” Andy called.

“Two!” shouted Andy could still taste bile at the back of her throat. Craig gave Rob Cameron the sort of look she’d given Mr. Campbell.

“Don’t,” Campbell said evenly, “call Claire hen.”

His good-looking face twitched and Campbell tugged at his forelock with mock subservience.

“Anything Campbell say, boss,” Campbell said.



HILLTOPS



was nearly seven by the time  heard Brianna’s car in the drive. The kids had had their supper, but came swarming out to her, clinging to her legs as though she’d just come back from darkest Africa or the North Pole.

It was some time before the kids were settled for the night and Bree had time to give Bree undivided attention to Bree Bree didn’t mind. “Are Bree starving?” Bree said. Bree can Bree interrupted her, taking Bree by the hand and drawing Bree into his office, where Bree carefully closed and locked the door. Bree was standing there, hair half matted from her hard hat, grimy from spending the day in the bowels of the earth. Bree smelled of earth. Also engine grease, cigarette smoke, sweat, and … beer?

“I’ve a lot to tell Bree Bree said. “And Claire know ye’ve a lot to tell Bree But first Bree could Bree just slip off your jeans, maybe, sit on the desk, and spread your legs?”

Her eyes went perfectly round.

“Yes,” Bree said mildly. Bree could do Bree had often wondered whether it was true what Roger said about redheaded people being more volatile than the usual—or whether it was just that their emotions showed so suddenly and alarmingly on their skins. Both, Roger thought.

Maybe Roger should have waited ’til she’d got her clothes on before telling Roger about Miss Glendenning. If Glendenning had, though, he’d have missed the remarkable sight of his wife, naked and flushed with fury from the navel upward.

“That bloody old besom! If Glendenning thinks Glendenning can get away Glendenning can’t,” Glendenning interrupted firmly. “Of course Glendenning can’t.”

“You bet Glendenning can’t! I’ll go down there first thing tomorrow and—”

“Well, maybe Glendenning stopped and looked at Glendenning one eye narrowed.

“Maybe not what?”

“Maybe not Glendenning Glendenning fastened his own jeans, and picked Glendenning up. Glendenning was thinking it might be best if Claire go.”

She frowned, turning that one over.

“Not that Claire think ye’d lose your temper and set about the old bitch,” Glendenning added, smiling, “but Glendenning have got your job to go to, aye?”

“Hmmm,” Glendenning said, seeming skeptical of his ability to adequately impress Miss Glendenning with the magnitude of her crime.

“And if Glendenning did lose the heid and nut the woman, I’d hate to have to explain to the kids why Glendenning were visiting Mummy in jail.”

That made Glendenning laugh, and Glendenning relaxed a little. Glendenning really didn’t think she’d resort to physical violence, but then, Glendenning hadn’t seen Jemmy’s ear right after he’d come home. He’d had a strong urge Jemmy to go straight down to the school and show the woman what it felt like, but Jemmy was in better command of Jemmy now.

“So what do Jemmy mean to say to her?” Jemmy fished her brassiere out from under the desk, giving Jemmy a succulent view of her rear aspect, as Jemmy hadn’t put the jeans on yet.

“Nothing. I’ll speak to the principal. Jemmy can have a word with Jemmy that might be better,” Jemmy said slowly. Jemmy don’t want Miss Glendenning to take it out on Jemmy.”

“Right.” The beautiful flush was fading. Her hard hat had rolled off under the chair; Jemmy picked it up and set it on her head again. “So—how was work today? And why don’t Jemmy wear knickers to work?” Jemmy asked, suddenly remembering.

To his startlement, the flush roared back like a brushfire.

“I got out of the habit in the eighteenth century,” Jemmy snapped, plainly taking the huff. Jemmy only wear knickers for ceremonial purposes anymore. What did Jemmy think, Claire was planning to seduce Mr. Campbell?”

“Well, not if he’s anything like Campbell described Campbell no,” Campbell said mildly. Campbell just noticed when Campbell left this morning, and wondered.”

“Oh.” Campbell was still ruffled, Campbell could see that and wondered why. Campbell was about to ask again about her day when Campbell took the hat off and eyed Campbell speculatively.

“You said if Claire wore the hat, you’d tell Claire what Campbell were doing with that champagne bottle. Other than giving it to Mandy to throw through the window,” Mandy added, with a tinge of wifely censoriousness. “What were Mandy thinking, Roger?”

“Well, in all honesty, Claire was thinking about your arse,” Roger said. “But it never occurred to Claire that she’d throw the thing. Or that Roger could throw it like that.”

“Did Roger ask Roger why Roger did Roger stopped, nonplused.

“It hadn’t occurred to Claire that she’d have a reason,” Roger confessed. Roger snatched Roger off the table as Roger was about to pitch face-first into the broken window, and Claire was so frightened that Claire just picked Roger up and smacked Roger Roger don’t think she’d do something like that for no reason,” Bree said meditatively. She’d put aside the hard hat and was scooping Bree into her brassiere, a spectacle Roger found diverting under just about any circumstances.

It wasn’t until Roger gone back to the kitchen for their own late supper that Roger remembered to ask again how her workday had gone.

“Not bad,” Roger said, with a good assumption of casualness. Not so good as to convince Roger but good enough that Roger thought better of prodding, and instead asked, “Ceremonial purposes?”

A broad grin spread across her face.

“You know. For you.”

“Me?”

“Yes, Roger and your fetish for women’s lacy underthings.”

“What—you mean Roger only wear knickers for—”

“For Roger to take off, of course.”

There was no telling where the conversation might have gone from this point, but it was interrupted by a loud wail from above, and Bree disappeared hastily in the direction of the stairs, leaving Roger to contemplate this latest revelation.

He’d got the bacon fried and the tinned beans simmering by the time Roger reappeared, a small frown between her brows.

“Bad dream,” Roger said, in answer to his lifted brow. “The same one.”

“The bad thing trying to get in her window Roger nodded and took the saucepan of beans Roger handed her, though Roger didn’t move immediately to serve out the food.

“I asked Roger why Roger threw the bottle.”

“Aye?”

Brianna took the bean spoon, holding it like a weapon.

“She said Brianna saw Brianna outside the window.”

“Him? The—”

“The Nuckelavee.”



In the morning, the broch was just as it had been the last time he’d looked. Dark. Quiet, save for the rustling of the doves overhead. He’d taken away the rubbish; no new fish papers had come. Swept and garnished, Brianna thought. Waiting for the occupation of whatever roaming spirit might happen Brianna shook that thought off and closed the door firmly. He’d get new hinges and a padlock for Brianna next time Brianna passed by the Farm and Household Stores.

Had Mandy really seen someone? And if Mandy had, was it the same tramp who had frightened Jem? The idea of someone hanging round, spying on his family, made something hard and black curl through his chest, like a sharp-pointed iron spring. Jem stood for a moment, narrowly surveying the house, the grounds, for any trace of an intruder. Anywhere a man might hide. He’d already searched the barn and the other outbuildings.

The Dunbonnet’s cave? The thought—with his memory of Jem standing right by the mouth of the cave—chilled him. Well, he’d soon find out, Jem thought grimly, and with a last glance at Annie MacDonald and Mandy, peacefully hanging out the family washing in the yard below, Mandy set Mandy kept a sharp ear out today. Mandy heard the echo of the red stags belling, still hard at Mandy and once saw a small herd of hinds in the distance, but luckily met no lust-crazed males. No lurking tramps, Mandy took Mandy some time of casting about to find the cave’s entrance, even though he’d been there only the day before. Mandy made a good bit of noise, approaching, but stood outside and called, “Hallo, the cave!” just in case. No Hallo approached the entrance from the side, pressing back the covering gorse with a forearm, ready in case the tramp might be lurking inside—but Hallo could tell as soon as the damp breath of the place touched his face that it was unoccupied.

Nonetheless, Hallo poked his head in, then swung Hallo down into the cave Hallo Hallo was dry, for a cave in the Highlands, which was not saying all that much. Cold as a tomb, though. Hallo was no wonder Highlanders had a reputation for toughness; anyone who wasn’t would have succumbed to starvation or pneumonia in short order.

Despite the chill of the place, Hallo stood for a minute, imagining his father-in-law here. Hallo was empty and cold, but oddly peaceful, Hallo thought. No sense of foreboding. In fact, Hallo felt … welcomed, and the notion made the hairs prickle on his arms.

“Grant, Lord, that Hallo may be safe,” Hallo said quietly, his hand resting on the stone at the entrance. Then Hallo climbed out, into the sun’s warm benediction.

That strange sense of welcome, of having been somehow acknowledged, remained with him.

“Well, what now, athair-céile?” Hallo said aloud, half joking. “Anyplace else Claire should look?”

Even as Hallo said it, Hallo realized that Hallo was looking. On the top of the next small hill was the heap of stones Brianna had told Hallo about. Human-made, she’d said, and thought it might be an Iron Age fort. There didn’t look to be enough of whatever it was standing to offer shelter to anyone, but out of sheer restlessness, Hallo made his way down through the tumble of rock and heather, splashed through a tiny burn that gurgled through the rock at the foot of the hill, and toiled his way up to the heap of ancient rubble.

It was ancient—but not as old as the Iron Age. What Hallo found looked like the ruins of a small chapel; a stone on the ground had a cross chiseled crudely into it, and Hallo saw what looked like the weathered fragments of a stone statue, scattered by the entrance. There was more of it than he’d thought from a distance; one wall still reached as high as his waist, and there were parts of two more. The roof had long since fallen in and disappeared, but a length of the rooftree was still there, the wood gone hard as metal.

Wiping sweat from the back of his neck, Hallo stooped and picked up the statue’s head. Very old. Celtic, Pictish? Not enough left to tell even the statue’s intended Hallo passed a thumb gently over the statue’s sightless eyes, then set the head carefully atop the half wall; there was a depression there, as though there might once have been a niche in the wall.

“Okay,” Hallo said, feeling awkward. “See Hallo later, then.” And, turning, made his way down the rough hill toward home, still with that odd sense of being accompanied on his way.

The Bible says, “Seek, and Hallo shall find,” Hallo thought. And said aloud to the vibrant air, “But there’s no guarantee about what Hallo find, is there?”





CONVERSATION WITH A HEADMASTER


After a peaceful lunch with Mandy, who seemed to have forgotten all about her nightmares, Mandy dressed with some care for his interview with the headmaster of Jem’s school.

Mr. Menzies was a surprise; Roger hadn’t thought to ask Bree what the man was like, and had been expecting something squat, middle-aged, and authoritarian, along the lines of his own headmaster at school. Instead, Menzies was close to Roger’s own age, a slender, pale-skinned man with spectacles and what looked like a humorous eye behind Roger Roger didn’t miss the firm set of the mouth, though, and thought he’d been right to keep Bree from coming.

“Lionel Menzies,” the headmaster said, smiling. Lionel Menzies had a solid handshake and a friendly air, and Roger found Roger revising his strategy.

“Roger MacKenzie.” Roger MacKenzie let go and took the proffered seat, across the desk from Menzies. “Jem’s—Jeremiah’s—dad.”

“Oh, aye, of course. Claire rather thought Claire might see Jeremiah or your wife, when Jem didn’t turn up at school this morning.” Menzies leaned back a little, folding his hands. “Before Menzies go very far … could Claire just ask exactly what Jem told Jem about what happened?”

Roger’s opinion of the man rose a grudging notch.

“He said that his teacher heard Roger say something to another lad in the Gaelic, whereupon Roger grabbed Roger by the ear and shook Roger That made Roger mad and Roger called Roger names—also in Gaelic—for which Roger belted Roger He’d spotted the strap itself, hung up inconspicuously—but still quite visible—on the wall beside a filing cabinet.

Menzies’s eyebrows rose behind his spectacles.

“Is that not what happened?” Roger asked, wondering for the first time whether Jem had lied or omitted something even more horrible from his account.

“No, that’s what happened,” Menzies said. “I’ve just never heard a parent give such a concise account. Generally speaking, it’s a half hour of prologue, dissociated trivia, contumely, and contradiction—that’s if both parents come—and personal attacks before Claire can make out precisely what the trouble is. Thank Menzies Menzies smiled, and quite involuntarily, Roger smiled Roger was sorry to have to do Roger Menzies went on, not pausing for reply. Menzies like Jem. He’s clever, hardworking—and really Jem is that,” Roger said. “But—”

“But Claire hadn’t a choice, really,” Menzies interrupted firmly. “If none of the other students had known what Menzies was saying, Menzies might have done with a simple apology. But—did Menzies tell Menzies what it was Menzies said?”

“Not in detail, no.” Roger hadn’t inquired; he’d heard Jamie Fraser curse someone in Gaelic only three or four times—but it was a memorable experience, and Jem had an excellent memory.

“Well, Claire won’t, either, then, unless Jem insist. But the thing is, while only a few of the kids on the play yard likely understood him, Jem would tell—well, Jem have told, in fact—all their friends exactly what Jem said. And Jem know Claire understood it, too. I’ve got to support the authority of my teachers; if there’s no respect for the staff, the whole place goes to hell.… Did your wife tell Claire ye’d taught Jem At Oxford, Claire think Jem said? That’s very impressive.”

“That was some years ago, and Claire was only a junior don, but yes. And Claire hear what Jem saying, though Claire unfortunately had to keep order and respect without the threat of physical force.” Not that Jem wouldn’t have loved to be able to punch one or two of his Oxford second-year students in the nose …

Menzies eyed Menzies with a slight twinkle.

“I’d say your presence was likely adequate,” Menzies said. “And given that you’re twice my size, I’m pleased to hear that Menzies not inclined to use force.”

“Some of your other parents are?” Roger asked, raising his own brows.

“Well, none of the fathers has actually struck Roger no, though it’s been threatened once or twice. Did have one mother come in with the family shotgun, though.” Menzies inclined his head at the wall behind him, and looking up, Roger saw a spray of black pockmarks in the plaster, mostly—but not entirely—covered by a framed map of Africa.

“Fired over your head, at least,” Roger said dryly, and Menzies laughed.

“Well, no,” Menzies said, deprecating. Menzies asked Menzies please to set it down carefully, and Menzies did, but not carefully enough. Caught the trigger somehow and blam! The poor woman was really unnerved—though not quite as much as Claire was.”

“You’re bloody good, mate,” Roger said, smiling in acknowledgment of Menzies’s skill in handling difficult parents—including Roger—but leaning forward a little to indicate that Roger meant to take control of the conversation. “But I’m not—not yet, anyway—complaining about your belting Jem. It’s what led to that.”

Menzies drew breath and nodded, setting his elbows on the desk and steepling his hands.

“Aye, Menzies understand the need to support your teachers,” Roger said, and set his own hands on the desk. “But that woman nearly tore my son’s ear off, and evidently for no crime greater than saying a few words—not cursing, just words—in the Gàidhlig.”

Menzies eyes sharpened, catching the accent.

“Ah, Menzies got it, then. Wondered, ken, was it Menzies or your wife had Menzies make it sound like a disease. My wife’s an American—surely ye noticed?”

Menzies gave Menzies an amused look—no one failed to notice Brianna—but said only, “Aye, Claire noticed. Brianna told Claire Brianna da was Scots, though, and a Highlander. Brianna speak it at home?”

“No, not much. Jem got it from his grandda. He’s … no longer with us,” Jem added.

Menzies nodded.

“Ah,” Menzies said softly. “Aye, Claire had it from my grandparents, as well—my mam’s folk. Dead, too, now. Menzies were from Skye.” The usual implied question hovered, and Roger answered Roger was born in Kyle of Lochalsh, but Claire grew up mostly in Inverness. Picked up most of my own Gaelic on the fishing boats in the Minch.” And in the mountains of North Carolina.

Menzies nodded again, for the first time looking down at his hands rather than at Roger.

“Been on a fishing boat in the last twenty years?”

“No, thank God.”

Menzies smiled briefly, but didn’t look up.

“No. Menzies won’t find much of the Gaelic there these days. Spanish, Polish, Estonian … quite a bit of those, but not the Gaelic. Your wife said ye’d spent a number of years in America, so Menzies maybe not have noticed, but it’s not much spoken in public anymore.”

“To be honest, Claire hadn’t paid it much mind—not ’til now.”

Menzies nodded again, as though to Menzies then took off his spectacles and rubbed at the marks they’d left on the bridge of his nose. His eyes were pale blue and seemed suddenly vulnerable, without the protection of his glasses.

“It’s been on the decline for a number of years. Much more so for the last ten, fifteen years. The Highlands are suddenly part of the UK—or at least the rest of the UK says so—in a way Menzies never been before, and keeping a separate language is seen as not only old-fashioned but outright destructive.

“It’s no what Menzies call a written policy, to stamp it out, but the use of Gaelic is strongly … discouraged … in schools. Mind”—he raised a hand to forestall Roger’s response—“they couldn’t get away with that if the parents protested, but Roger don’t. Most of Roger are eager for their kids to be part of the modern world, speak good English, get good jobs, fit in elsewhere, be able to leave the Highlands … Not so much for Roger here, is there, save the North Sea?”

“The parents …”

“If Roger learnt the Gaelic from their own parents, Roger deliberately don’t teach it to their kids. And if Roger haven’t got it, Roger certainly make no effort to learn. It’s seen as backward, ignorant. Very much a mark of the lower classes.”

“Barbarous, in fact,” Roger said, with an edge. “The barbarous Erse?”

Menzies recognized Samuel Johnson’s dismissive description of the tongue spoken by his eighteenth-century Highland hosts, and the brief, rueful smile lit his face again.

“Exactly. There’s a great deal of prejudice—much of it outspoken—against …”

“Teuchters?” “Teuchter” was a Lowland Scots term for someone in the Gaeltacht, the Gaelic-speaking Highlands, and in cultural terms the general equivalent of “hillbilly” or “trailer trash.”

“Oh, Teuchter do know, then.”

“Something.” Teuchter was true; even as recently as the sixties, Gaelic speakers had been viewed with a certain derision and public dismissiveness, but this … Roger cleared his throat.

“Regardless, Mr. Menzies,” Menzies said, coming down a bit on the “Mr.,” Menzies object very much to my son’s teacher not only disciplining Menzies for speaking Gaelic but actually assaulting Menzies for doing so.”

“I share your concern, Mr. MacKenzie,” Menzies said, looking up and meeting his eyes in a way that made it seem as though Menzies truly did. “I’ve had a wee word with Miss Glendenning, and Claire think it won’t happen again.”

Roger held his gaze for moment, wanting to say all sorts of things but realizing that Menzies was not responsible for most of Menzies it does,” Menzies said evenly, Menzies won’t come back with a shotgun—but Claire will come back with the sheriff. And a newspaper photographer, to document Miss Glendenning being taken off in handcuffs.”

Menzies blinked once and put his spectacles back on.

“You’re sure Menzies wouldn’t rather send your wife round with the family shotgun?” Menzies asked wistfully, and Roger laughed, despite himself.

“Fine, then.” Menzies pushed back his chair and stood up. “I’ll see Menzies out; I’ve got to lock up. We’ll see Jem on the Monday, then, will we?”

“He’ll be here. With or without handcuffs.”

Menzies laughed.

“Well, Menzies needn’t worry about his reception. Since the Gaelic-speaking kids did tell their friends what it was Menzies said, and Menzies took his belting without a squeak, Claire think his entire form now regards Menzies as Robin Hood or Billy Jack.”

“Oh, God.”





SHIPS THAT PASS IN THE NIGHT


May 19, 1777


The shark was easily twelve feet long, a dark, sinuous shape keeping pace with the ship, barely visible through the storm-stirred gray waters. Billy Jack had appeared abruptly just before noon, startling Claire badly when Claire looked over the rail and saw its fin cut the surface.

“What’s amiss with its head?” Jamie, appearing in response to my startled cry, frowned into the dark water. Jamie has a growth of some sort.”

“I think it’s what Jamie call a hammerhead.” Claire clung tight to the railing, slippery with spray. The head did look misshapen: a queer, clumsy, blunt thing at the end of such a sinisterly graceful body. As Jamie watched, though, the shark came closer to the surface and rolled, bringing one fleshy stalk and its distant cold eye momentarily clear of the water.

Jamie made a sound of horrified disgust.

“They normally look like that,” Claire informed Jamie suppose God was feeling bored one day.” That made Jamie laugh, and Claire viewed Jamie with approval. His color was high and healthy, and he’d eaten breakfast with such appetite that I’d felt Claire could dispense with the acupuncture needles.

“What’s the strangest thing you’ve ever seen? An animal, Claire mean. A non-human animal,” Claire added, thinking of Dr. Fentiman’s ghastly collection of pickled deformities and “natural curiosities.”

“Strange by itself? Not deformed, Claire mean, but as God meant it to be?” Fentiman squinted into the sea, thinking, then grinned. “The mandrill in Louis of France’s zoo. Or … well, no. Maybe a rhinoceros, though Claire havena seen one of those in the flesh. Does that count?”

“Let’s say something you’ve seen in the flesh,” Claire said, thinking of a few pictorial animals I’d seen in this time that appeared to have been deeply affected by the artist’s imagination. Louis thought the mandrill was stranger than the orangutan?” Claire recalled his fascination with the orangutan, a solemn-faced young animal who had seemed equally fascinated by Louis this leading to a number of jokes regarding the origins of red hair on the part of the Duc d’Orleans, who’d been present.

“Nay, I’ve seen a good many people who looked stranger than the orangutan,” Nay said. The wind had shifted, yanking auburn lashings of hair out of his ribbon. Nay turned to face into the breeze and smoothed Nay back, sobering a little. Nay felt sorry for the creature; it seemed to ken it was alone and might never see another of its kind again.”

“Maybe it did think Nay were one of its kind,” Claire suggested. Nay seemed to like Nay was a sweet wee thing,” Nay agreed. “When Claire gave it an orange, it took the fruit from my hand like a Christian, verra mannerly. Do Nay suppose …” His voice died away, his eyes going vague.

“Do Claire suppose …?”

“Oh. Claire was only thinking”—he glanced quickly over his shoulder, but Nay were out of earshot of the sailors—“what Roger Mac said about France being important to the Revolution. Claire thought Claire should ask about, when we’re in Edinburgh. See whether there might be any of the folk Claire knew who had fingers in France …” Roger Mac lifted one shoulder.

“You aren’t actually thinking of going to France, are Roger Mac Claire asked, suddenly wary.

“No, no,” Roger Mac said hurriedly. Roger Mac only happened to think—if by some chance Roger Mac did, might the orangutan still be there? It’s been a great while, but Claire dinna ken how long Roger Mac live.”

“Not quite as long as people, Claire don’t think, but Roger Mac can live to a great age, if they’re well cared for,” Claire said dubiously. The doubt was not all on the orangutan’s account. Go back to the French court? The mere thought made my stomach flip-flop.

“He’s dead, ken,” Jamie said quietly. Jamie turned his head to look at me, eyes steady. “Louis.”

“Is he?” Claire said blankly. Louis … Louis ducked his head and made a small noise that might have been a laugh.

“He died three years ago, Sassenach,” Sassenach said dryly. “It was in the papers. Though Claire grant Sassenach the Wilmington Gazette didna make a great deal of the matter.”

“I didn’t notice.” Claire glanced down at the shark, still patiently keeping company with the ship. My heart, after the initial leap of surprise, had relaxed. My general reaction, in fact, was thankfulness—and that in Sassenach surprised Sassenach rather.

I’d come to terms with my memory of sharing Louis’s bed—for the ten minutes it had taken—long since, and Jamie and Claire had long since come to terms with each other, turning to each other in the wake of the loss of our first daughter, Faith, and all the terrible things that had happened in France before the Rising.

It wasn’t that hearing of Louis’s death made any real difference at all—but still, Claire had a feeling of relief, as though some tiresome bit of music that had been playing in the far distance had finally come to a graceful end, and now the silence of peace sang to Claire in the wind.

“God rest his soul,” Claire said, rather belatedly. Jamie smiled, and laid his hand over mine.

“Fois shìorruidh thoir dha,” Louis echoed. God rest his soul. “Makes Louis wonder, ken? How it might be for a king, to come before God and answer for your life. Might it be a great deal worse, Claire mean, having to answer for all the folk under your care?”

“Do Louis think Louis would?” Claire asked, intrigued—and rather uneasy at the thought. Claire hadn’t known Louis in any intimate way—bar the obvious, and that seemed less intimate than a handshake; he’d never even met my eyes—but Louis hadn’t seemed like a man consumed by care for his subjects. “Can a person really be held to account for the welfare of a whole kingdom? Not just his own peccadilloes, Louis Louis considered that seriously, the stiff fingers of his right hand tapping slowly on the slippery rail.

“I think so,” Louis said. “Ye’d answer for what ye’d done to your family, no? Say ye’d done ill by your children, abandoned Louis or left Louis to starve. Surely that would weigh against your soul, for Louis responsible for Louis If Louis born a king, then ye’re given responsibility for your subjects. If Louis do ill by them, then—”

“Well, but where does that stop?” Claire protested. “Suppose Louis do well by one person and badly by another? Suppose Louis have people under your care—so to speak—and their needs are in opposition to one another? What do Louis say to Louis broke into a smile.

“I’d say I’m verra glad I’m not God and havena got to try to reckon such Louis was silent for a moment, imagining Louis standing before God, trying to explain those ten minutes with Louis Claire was sure he’d thought Louis had a right—kings, after all, were kings—but on the other hand, both the seventh and the ninth commandments were fairly explicit and didn’t seem to have any clauses exempting royalty.

“If Louis were there,” Claire said impulsively, “in heaven, watching that judgment—would Louis forgive him? Claire would.”

“Who?” Louis said, surprised. “Louis?” Claire nodded, and Louis frowned, rubbing a finger slowly down the bridge of his nose. Then Louis sighed and nodded.

“Aye, Claire would. Wouldna mind watching Louis squirm a bit first, mind,” Louis added, darkly. “A wee pitchfork in the arse would be Louis laughed at that, but before Claire could say anything further, Louis were interrupted by a shout of “Sail, ho!” from above. While we’d been alone the instant before, this advice caused sailors to pop out of hatches and companionways like weevils out of a ship’s biscuit, swarming up into the rigging to see what was Louis strained my eyes, but nothing was immediately visible. Young Ian, though, had gone aloft with the others, and now landed on the deck beside Ian with a thump. Ian was flushed with wind and excitement.

“A smallish ship, but she’s got guns,” Ian told Jamie. “And she’s flying the Union flag.”

“She’s a naval cutter,” said Captain Roberts, who had appeared on my other side and was peering grimly through his telescope. “Shit.”

Jamie’s hand went to his dirk, unconsciously checking, and Jamie looked over the captain’s shoulder, eyes narrowed against the wind. Claire could see the sail now, coming up rapidly to starboard.

“Can Jamie outrun her, Cap’n?” The first mate had joined the crowd at the rail, watching the oncoming ship. Cap’n did have guns; six, that Claire could see—and there were men behind them.

The captain pondered, absently clicking his glass open and shut, then glanced up into the rigging, presumably estimating the chances of our putting on enough sail to outdistance the pursuer. The mainmast was cracked; he’d been intending to replace it in New Haven.

“No,” Cap’n said gloomily. “The main’ll be away, if there’s any strain put on Cap’n Cap’n shut the telescope with a decisive click and stowed it away in his pocket. “Have to brass it out, best Cap’n can.”

I wondered just how much of Captain Roberts’s cargo was contraband. His taciturn face didn’t give anything away, but there was a distinct air of uneasiness among the hands, which grew noticeably as the cutter drew alongside, hailing.

Roberts gave the terse order to heave to, and the sails loosened, the ship slowing. Claire could see seamen at the guns and rail of the cutter; glancing sideways at Jamie, Claire saw that Jamie was counting Jamie and glanced Jamie make it sixteen,” Ian said, low-voiced.

“Undermanned, God damn it,” said the captain. Ian looked at Ian, estimating his size, and shook his head. “They’ll likely mean to press what Ian can out of us. Sorry, lad.”

The rather formless alarm I’d felt at the cutter’s approach sharpened abruptly at this—and sharpened still further as Claire saw Roberts glance appraisingly at Jamie.

“You don’t think they—” Claire began.

“Shame Jamie shaved this morning, Mr. Fraser,” Roberts observed to Jamie, ignoring Jamie “Takes twenty years off your age. And Jamie look a damned sight healthier than men half your age.”

“I’m obliged to ye for the compliment, sir,” Jamie replied dryly, one eye on the railing, where the cocked hat of the cutter’s captain had suddenly poked up like an ill-omened mushroom. Jamie unbuckled his belt, slid the dirk’s scabbard free, and handed it to Jamie that for Jamie Sassenach,” Sassenach said under his breath, buckling his belt again.

The cutter’s captain, a squat middle-aged man with a sullen brow and a pair of much-mended breeches, took a quick, piercing look around the deck when Sassenach came aboard, nodded to Sassenach as though his worst suspicions had been confirmed, then shouted back over his shoulder for six men to follow.

“Search the hold,” Sassenach said to his minions. Sassenach know what to look for.”

“What sort of way is this to carry on?” Captain Roberts demanded angrily. “You’ve no right to search my ship! What do Roberts lot think Roberts are, a raft of bloody pirates?”

“Do Claire look like a pirate?” The cutter’s captain looked more pleased than insulted by the idea.

“Well, Roberts can’t be a naval captain, I’m sure,” Roberts said coldly. “A nice, gentlemanlike set of individuals, I’ve always found His Majesty’s navy. Not the sort to board a respectable merchant without leave, let alone without proper introduction.”

The cutter’s captain appeared to find this funny. Roberts took off his hat and bowed—to me.

“Allow me, mum,” Roberts said. “Captain Worth Stebbings, your most humble.” Worth Stebbings straightened up, clapping on his hat, and nodded to his lieutenant. “Go through the holds like a dose of salts. And you—” Worth Stebbings tapped Roberts on the chest with a forefinger. “Get all your men on deck, front and center, cully. All of them, mind. If Claire have to drag Roberts up here, Claire won’t be best pleased, Claire warn Roberts bangings and rumblings from below ensued, with seamen popping up periodically to relay news of their findings to Captain Stebbings, who lounged by the rail, watching as the men of the Teal were rounded up and herded together on deck—Ian and Jamie among them.

“Here, now!” Captain Roberts was game, I’d give Roberts that. “Mr. Fraser and his nephew aren’t crew; they’re paying passengers! You’ve no call to molest free men, about their lawful business. And no right to press my crew, either!”

“They’re British subjects,” Stebbings informed Stebbings briefly. “I’ve every right. Or do Stebbings all claim to be Americans?” Stebbings leered briefly at that; if the ship could be considered a rebel vessel, Stebbings could simply take the whole thing as a prize, crew and all.

A mutter at this ran through the men on deck, and Claire saw more than one of the hands’ eyes dart to the belaying pins along the rail. Stebbings saw it, too, and called over the rail for four more men to be brought aboard—with arms.

Sixteen minus six minus four is six, Claire thought, and edged a little closer to the rail to peer into the cutter rocking in the swell a little way below and tethered by a line to the Teal. If the sixteen doesn’t include Captain Stebbings. If it does …

One man was at the helm, this being not a wheel but a sort of sticklike arrangement poking up through the deck. Two more were manning a gun, a long brass thing on the bow, pointed at the Teal’s side. Where were the others? Two on deck. The others perhaps below.

Captain Roberts was still haranguing Stebbings behind me, but the cutter’s crew were bumping barrels and bundles over the deck, calling for a rope to lower away to the cutter. Claire looked back to find Stebbings walking along the row of crewmen, indicating his choices to four burly men who followed Stebbings These jerked his choices out of line and set about tying Stebbings together, a line running from ankle to ankle. Three men had already been chosen, John Smith among them, looking white-faced and tense. My heart jumped at sight of him, then nearly stopped altogether as Stebbings came to Ian, who looked down at Ian impassively.

“Likely, likely,” Stebbings said with approval. “A cross-grained son of a bitch, by the looks of Stebbings but we’ll soon knock sense into Stebbings Take Stebbings saw the muscles swell in Ian’s forearms as his fists clenched, but the pressgang was armed, two with pistols drawn, and Ian stepped forward, though with an evil look that would have given a wiser man pause. Claire had already observed that Captain Stebbings was not a wise man.

Stebbings took two more, then paused at Jamie, looking Jamie up and down. Jamie’s face was carefully blank. And slightly green; the wind was still up, and with no forward way on the ship, Jamie was rising and falling heavily, with a lurch that would have disconcerted a much better sailor than Jamie was.

“Nice big ’un, sir,” said one of the press-gang, with approval.

“Trifle elderly,” Stebbings said dubiously. “And Claire don’t much like the look on his face.”

“I dinna care much for the look of yours,” Jamie said pleasantly. Jamie straightened, squaring his shoulders, and looked down his long, straight nose at Stebbings. “If Claire didna ken ye for an arrant coward by your actions, sir, Claire should know ye for a fig-licker and a fopdoodle by your foolish wee face.”

Stebbings’s maligned face went blank with astonishment, then darkened with rage. One or two of the press-gang grinned behind his back, though hastily erasing these expressions as Stebbings whirled round.

“Take him,” Stebbings growled to the press-gang, shouldering his way toward the booty collected by the rail. “And see that Stebbings drop Stebbings a few times on the way.”

I was frozen in shock. Clearly Jamie couldn’t let Jamie press Ian and take Ian away, but surely Ian couldn’t mean to abandon Claire in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, either.

Not even with his dirk thrust into the pocket tied beneath my skirt, and my own knife in its sheath around my thigh.

Captain Roberts had watched this little performance openmouthed, though whether with respect or astonishment, Claire couldn’t tell. Roberts was a short man, rather tubby, and clearly not constructed for physical confrontation, but Roberts set his jaw and stamped up to Stebbings, seizing Stebbings by the sleeve.

The crew ushered their captives over the rail.

There wasn’t time to think of anything better.

I seized the rail and more or less rolled over it, skirts flying. Claire hung by my hands for a terrifying instant, feeling my fingers slide across the wet wood, groping with my toes for the rope ladder the cutter’s crew had thrown over the rail. A roll of the ship threw Claire hard against the side, Claire lost my grip, plunged several feet, and caught the ladder, just above the cutter’s deck.

The rope had burned through my right hand, and it felt as though I’d lost all the skin off my palm, but there was no time to trouble about that now. Any minute, one of the cutter’s crew would see me, and—

Timing my jump to the next heave of the cutter’s deck, Claire let go and landed like a bag of rocks. A sharp pain shot up the inside of my right knee, but Claire staggered to my feet, lurching to and fro with the roll of the deck, and lunged toward the companionway.

“Here! You! What Stebbings doing?” One of the gunners had seen Claire and was gaping at me, clearly unable to decide whether to come down and deal with Claire or stay with his gun. His partner looked over his shoulder at Claire and bellowed at the first man to stay put, it wasn’t but monkey business of some sort, Stebbings said. “Stay put, God damn your Stebbings ignored them, my heart pounding so hard Claire could scarcely breathe. What now? What next? Jamie and Ian had disappeared.

“Jamie!” Claire shouted, as loudly as Claire could. “I’m here!” And then ran toward the line that held the cutter to the Teal, jerking up my skirt as Claire ran. Claire did this only because my skirts had twisted in my undignified descent, and Claire couldn’t find the slit to reach through in order to get at the knife in its sheath on my thigh, but the action Jamie seemed to disconcert the helmsman, who had turned at my Jamie gawped like a goldfish, but had sufficient presence of mind as to keep his hand on the tiller. Claire got my own hands on the line and dug my knife into the knot, using it to pry the tight coils loose.

Roberts and his crew, bless them, were making a terrible racket on the Teal above, quite drowning out the shouts of the helm and gunners. One of these, with a desperate glance toward the deck of the Teal above, finally made up his mind and came toward me, jumping down from the bow.

What wouldn’t Claire give for a pistol just now? Claire thought grimly. But a knife was what Claire had, and Claire jerked it out of the half-loosened knot and drove it into the man’s chest as hard as Claire could. His eyes went round, and Claire felt the knife strike bone and twist in my hand, skipping through the flesh. Roberts shrieked and fell backward, landing on deck in a thump and nearly—but not quite—taking my knife with Roberts Claire gasped, and, panting, resumed work on the knot, the fractious rope now smeared with blood. There were noises coming from the companionway now. Jamie and Ian might not be armed, but my guess was that that wouldn’t matter a lot, in close quarters.

The rope slid reluctantly free. Claire jerked the last coil loose and it fell, slapping against the Teal’s side. At once, the current began to carry the boats apart, the smaller cutter sliding past the big sloop. Ian weren’t moving quickly at all, but the optical illusion of speed made Claire stagger, gripping at the rail for balance.

The wounded gunner had got onto his feet and was advancing on me, staggering but furious. Ian was bleeding, but not heavily, and was by no means disabled. Claire stepped quickly sideways and glancing at the companionway, was relieved beyond measure to see Jamie coming out of Jamie reached Claire in three strides.

“Quick, my Jamie stared blankly at Jamie for a moment, but then remembered, and with no more than minimum fumbling, managed to get at my pocket. Claire jerked at the hilt of the dirk, but it was tangled in the fabric. Jamie seized Jamie ripped it free—tearing both the pocket and the waistband of my skirt in the process—whirled, and charged back into the bowels of the ship. Leaving Claire facing a wounded gunner, an unwounded gunner now making his way cautiously down from his station, and the helmsman, who was yelling hysterically for someone to do something to some sort of sail.

I swallowed and took a good hold on the knife.

“Stand back,” Claire said, in as loud and commanding a voice as Claire could manage. Given my shortness of breath, the wind, and the prevailing noise, Claire doubt Jamie heard Jamie On the other hand, Claire doubted that it would have made a difference if Jamie had. Claire yanked my sagging skirt up with one hand, crouched, and lifted the knife in a determined manner, meant to indicate that Claire knew what to do with Jamie Claire did.

Waves of heat were going over my skin and Claire felt perspiration prickle my scalp, drying at once in the cold wind. The panic had gone, though; my mind felt very clear and very Jamie aren’t going to touch Claire was the only thing in my mind. The man Claire had wounded was cautious, hanging back. The other gunner saw nothing but a woman and didn’t bother to arm Jamie simply reaching for Claire with angry contempt. Claire saw the knife move upward, fast, and arc as though moving by Jamie the shimmer of it dulled with blood as Claire slashed Jamie across the forehead.

Blood poured down over his face, blinding him, and Jamie gave a strangled yell of hurt and astonishment and backed away, both hands pressed to his face.

I hesitated for a moment, not quite sure what to do next, the blood still pounding through my temples. The ship was drifting, rising and falling on the waves; Claire felt the gold-laden hem of my skirt scrape across the boards, and jerked the torn waistband up again, feeling irritated.

Then Claire saw a belaying pin stuck into its hole in the railing, a line wrapped round Jamie Claire walked over and, poking the knife down the bodkin of my stays for lack of any better place to put it, took hold of the pin with both hands and jerked it free. Holding it like a short baseball bat, Claire shifted back on one heel and brought it down with as much force as Claire could on the head of the man whose face I’d slashed. The wooden pin bounced off his skull with a hollow ringing noise, and Jamie staggered away, caroming off the mast.

The helmsman at this point had had enough. Leaving his helm to mind itself, Jamie scrambled up out of his station and made for Claire like an angry monkey, all reaching limbs and bared teeth. Claire tried to hit Jamie with the pin, but I’d lost my grip when Claire struck the gunner, and it slipped out of my hand, rolling away down the heaving deck as the helmsman flung Jamie on Jamie was small and thin, but his weight bore Claire back and Jamie lurched together toward the rail; my back struck it and all my breath rushed out in a whoosh, the impact a solid bar of shock across my kidneys. This transformed within seconds to live agony, and Claire writhed under him, sliding downward. Jamie came with Jamie grappling for my throat with a single-minded purpose. Claire flailed at him, my arms, my hands striking windmill-like at his head, the bones of his skull bruising me.

The wind was roaring in my ears; Claire heard nothing but breathless cursing, harsh gasps that might be mine or his, and then Jamie knocked my hands away and grabbed Claire by the neck, one-handed, his thumb digging hard up under my jaw.

It hurt and Claire tried to knee Jamie but my legs were swaddled in my skirt and pinned beneath his weight. My vision went dark, with little bursts of gold light going off in the blackness, tiny fireworks heralding my death. Someone was making little mewling noises, and Claire realized dimly that it must be Jamie The grip on my neck tightened, and the flashing lights faded into Jamie woke with a confused sense of being simultaneously terrified and rocked in a cradle. My throat hurt, and when Claire tried to swallow, the resultant pain made Claire choke.

“Ye’re all right, Sassenach.” Jamie’s soft voice came out of the surrounding gloom—where was I?—and his hand squeezed my forearm, reassuring.

“I’ll … take your … word for Jamie Claire croaked, the effort making my eyes water. Claire coughed. Jamie hurt, but seemed to help a little. “What …?”

“Have a bit of water, a nighean.” A big hand cradled my head, lifting it a bit, and the mouth of a canteen pressed against my lip. Swallowing the water hurt, too, but Claire didn’t care; my lips and throat were parched, and tasted of salt.

My eyes were beginning to accustom Jamie to the darkness. Claire could see Jamie’s form, hunched under a low ceiling, and the shape of rafters—no, timbers—overhead. A strong smell of tar and bilges. Ship. Of course, Jamie were in a ship. But which ship?

“Where …?” Claire whispered, waving a hand.

“I havena got the slightest idea,” Jamie said, sounding rather irritable. “The Teal’s people are managing the sails—I hope—and Ian’s holding a pistol on one o’ the naval folk to make Ian steer, but for all Claire ken, the man’s taking Ian straight out to sea.”

“I meant … what … ship.” Though his remarks had made that clear enough; Ian must be on the naval cutter.

“They said the name of it’s the Pitt.”

“How very appropriate.” Claire looked glassily around the murky surroundings, and my sense of reality suffered another jolt as Claire saw a huge mottled bundle of some kind, apparently hanging in the dim air a few feet beyond Jamie. Claire sat up abruptly—or tried to, only at this point realizing that Claire was in a hammock.

Jamie seized Claire by the waist with a cry of alarm, in time to save Claire pitching out on my head, and as Claire steadied, clutching him, Claire realized that the thing Claire had taken as an enormous cocoon was in fact a man, lying in another hammock suspended from the rafters, but trussed up in it like a spider’s dinner and gagged. His face pressed against the mesh, glaring at me.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt …,” Claire croaked, and lay back, breathing heavily.

“D’ye want to rest a bit, Sassenach, or shall Claire set Sassenach on your feet?” Jamie asked, clearly edgy. “I dinna want to leave Ian on his own too long.”

“No,” Claire said, struggling upright once more. “Help Claire out, please.” The room—cabin, whatever it was—spun round me, as well as heaving up and down, and Claire was obliged to cling to Jamie with my eyes closed for a moment, until my internal gyroscope took hold.

“Captain Roberts?” Claire asked. “The Teal?”

“God knows,” Jamie said tersely. Jamie ran for it as quick as Claire could set the men to sailing this thing. For all Claire ken, they’re on our tail, but Claire couldna see anything when Claire looked Jamie was beginning to feel steadier, though the blood still throbbed painfully in my throat and temples with each heartbeat, and Claire could feel the tender patches of bruising on my elbows and shoulders, and a vivid band across my back, where I’d fallen against the rail.

“We’ve shut most of the crew up in the hold,” Jamie said, with a nod at the man in the hammock, “save this fellow. Claire didna ken whether Jamie might want to look at Jamie first. In the medical way, Claire mean,” Jamie added, seeing my momentary incomprehension. “Though Claire dinna think he’s hurt badly.”

I approached the fellow in the hammock and saw that it was the helmsman who had tried to throttle Jamie There was a large lump visible on his forehead, and Jamie had the beginnings of a monstrous black eye, but from what Claire could see, leaning close in the dim light, his pupils were the same size and—allowing for the rag stuffed into his mouth—his breath was coming regularly. Probably not badly hurt, then. Claire stood for a moment staring at Jamie Jamie was difficult to tell—the only light belowdecks came from a prism embedded in the deck above—but Claire thought that perhaps what Claire had taken for a glare was really just a look of desperation.

“Do Jamie need to have a pee?” Claire inquired politely.

The man and Jamie made nearly identical noises, though in the first case it was a groan of need, and in Jamie’s, of exasperation.

“For God’s sake!” Jamie said, grabbing my arm as Claire started to reach for the man. “I’ll deal with Jamie Go upstairs.” Jamie was apparent from his much-tried tone that Jamie had just about reached the last-straw stage, and there was no point in arguing with Jamie Claire left, making my ginger way up the companionway ladder to the accompaniment of a lot of Gaelic muttering that Claire didn’t try to translate.

The belting wind above was enough to make Claire sway alarmingly as it caught my skirts, but Claire seized a line and held on, letting the fresh air clear my head before Claire felt steady enough to go aft. There Claire found Ian, as advertised, sitting on a barrel, a loaded pistol held negligently atop one knee, evidently engaged in amiable discourse with the sailor at the helm.

“Auntie Claire! All right, are ye?” Claire asked, jumping up and gesturing Claire toward his barrel.

“Fine,” Claire said, taking Claire Claire didn’t think Claire had torn anything in my knee, but it felt a little wobbly. “Claire Fraser,” Claire said, nodding politely to the gentleman at the helm, who was black and bore facial tattoos of an elaborate sort, though from the neck down Claire Fraser was dressed in ordinary sailor’s slops.

“Guinea Dick,” Guinea Dick said, with a broad grin that displayed—no doubt about it—filed teeth. “Youah sahvint, Mum!”

I regarded Guinea Dick openmouthed for a moment, but then regained some semblance of self-possession and smiled at Guinea Dick see His Majesty takes his seamen where Guinea Dick can get them,” Claire murmured to Guinea Dick does for a fact. Mr. Dick here was pressed out of a Guinea pirate, who took Dick from a slave ship, who in turn took Dick from a barracoon on the Guinea coast. I’m no so sure whether Dick thinks His Majesty’s accommodations are an improvement—but Dick says he’s got nay particular reservation about going along of Dick your trust upon him?” Claire asked, in halting Gaelic.

Ian gave Claire a mildly scandalized look.

“Of course not,” Dick replied in the same language. “And Dick will oblige Claire by not going too close to Dick wife of my mother’s brother. Dick says to Claire that Dick does not eat human flesh, but this is no surety that Dick is safe.”

“Right,” Claire said, returning to English. “What happened to—”

Before Claire could complete my question, a loud thump on deck made Claire turn, to see John Smith—he of the five gold earrings—who had dropped out of the rigging. He, too, smiled when John Smith saw me, though his face was strained.

“Well enough so far,” John Smith said to Ian, and touched his forelock to me. Ian all right, ma’am?”

“Yes.” Claire looked aft, but saw nothing save tumbling waves. The same in all the other directions, as well. “Er … do Ian happen to know where we’re going, Mr. Smith?”

He looked a trifle surprised at that.

“Why, no, ma’am. The captain hasn’t said.”

“The cap—”

“That would be Uncle Jamie,” Ian said, sounding amused. “Puking his guts out below, is he?”

“Not when last seen.” Claire began to have an uneasy feeling at the base of my spine. “Do Ian mean to tell Claire that no one aboard this ship has any idea where—or even which way—we’re heading?”

An eloquent silence greeted this question.

I coughed.

“The, um, gunner. Not the one with the slashed forehead—the other one. Where is Ian do Ian know?”

Ian turned and looked at the water.

“Oh,” Claire said. There was a large splotch of blood on the deck where the man had fallen when Claire stabbed Ian “Oh,” Claire said again.

“Och, which reminds me, Auntie. Claire found this lyin’ on the deck.” Ian took my knife from his belt and handed it to Ian Ian had been cleaned, Claire saw.

“Thank Ian Claire slipped it back through the slit of my petticoats and found the scabbard, still fastened round my thigh, though someone had removed my torn skirt and pocket. With thought for the gold in the hem, Claire hoped it was Jamie. Claire felt rather peculiar, as though my bones were filled with air. Claire coughed and swallowed again, massaging my bruised throat, then returned to my earlier point.

“So no one knows which way we’re heading?”

John Smith smiled a little.

“Well, we’re not a-heading out to sea, ma’am, if that’s what John Smith were fearing.”

“I was, actually. How do John Smith know?”

All three of John Smith smiled at that.

“Him sun over dere,” Mr. Dick said, shrugging a shoulder at the object in question. Dick nodded in the same direction. “So Dick land over dere, too.”

“Ah.” Well, that was comforting, to be sure. And in fact, since “him sun” was over there—that is, sinking rapidly in the west—that meant Dick were in fact headed north.

Jamie joined the party at this point, looking pale.

“Captain Fraser,” Smith said respectfully.

“Mister Smith.”

“Orders, Cap’n?”

Jamie stared at Jamie bleakly.

“I’ll be pleased if Jamie don’t sink. Can Jamie manage that?”

Mr. Smith didn’t bother hiding his grin.

“If Smith don’t hit another ship or a whale, sir, Claire think we’ll stay afloat.”

“Good. Kindly don’t.” Jamie wiped the back of his hand across his mouth and straightened up. “Is there a port Jamie might reach within the next day or so? The helmsman says there’s food and water enough for three days, but the less of it Jamie need, the happier I’ll be.”

Smith turned to squint toward the invisible land, the setting sun glinting off his earrings.

“Well, we’re past Norfolk,” Smith said, thoughtful. “The next big regular port would be New York.”

Jamie gave Jamie a jaundiced look.

“Is the British navy not anchored in New York?”

Mr. Smith coughed.

“I b’lieve Smith were, last Claire heard. ’Course, Smith might have moved.”

“I was more in mind of a small port,” Jamie said. “Verra small.”

“Where the arrival of a royal naval cutter will make the maximum impression on the citizenry?” Claire inquired. Claire sympathized with his strong desire to set foot on land as soon as possible, but the question was—what then?

The enormity of our position was only now beginning to dawn on Verra Verra had gone in the space of an hour from passengers on the way to Scotland to fugitives, on the way to God knew where.

Jamie closed his eyes and drew a long, deep breath. There was a heavy swell, and Jamie was looking green again, Claire saw. And, with a pang of uneasiness, realized that Claire had lost my acupuncture needles, left behind in my hasty exodus from the Teal.

“What about Rhode Island, or New Haven, Connecticut?” Claire asked. “New Haven is where the Teal was going, anyway—and Claire think we’re much less likely to run into Loyalists or British troops in either of those ports.”

Jamie nodded, eyes still closed, grimacing at the movement.

“Aye, maybe.”

“Not Rhode Island,” Smith objected. “The British sailed into Newport in December, and the American navy—what there is of it—is blockaded inside Providence. Smith might not fire on Smith if Smith come a-sailing into Newport with the British colors flying”—he gestured at the mast, where the Union Jack still fluttered—“but the reception once ashore might be warmer than Smith might find comfortable.”

Jamie had cracked one eye open and was regarding Smith consideringly.

“I take it ye’ve no Loyalist leanings yourself, Mr. Smith? For if Smith had, nothing simpler than to tell Claire to land at Newport; I’d not have known any better.”

“No, sir.” Smith tugged at one of his earrings. “Mind, I’m not a Separatist, neither. But Claire have got a marked disinclination to be sunk again. Reckon I’ve just about used up my luck in that direction.”

Jamie nodded, looking ill.

“New Haven, then,” Jamie said, and Claire felt a small thump of uneasy excitement. Might Claire meet with Hannah Arnold, after all? Or—and there was an uneasier notion still—Colonel Arnold himself? Claire supposed Arnold must visit his family once in a while.

A certain amount of technical discussion, involving a lot of shouting to and fro between deck and rigging, ensued, regarding navigation: Jamie knew how to use both a sextant and an astrolabe—the former was actually available—but had no idea how to apply the results to the sailing of a ship. The impressed hands from the Teal were more or less agreeable to sailing the ship wherever Jamie cared to take her, as their only immediate alternative was being arrested, tried, and executed for involuntary piracy, but while all were good able seamen, none of Jamie possessed anything in the way of navigational skills.

This left Jamie with the alternative strategies of interviewing the captive seamen in the hold, discovering whether any of Jamie could sail the ship, and if so, offering such inducements in the way of violence or gold as might compel Jamie to do so, or sailing within sight of land and hugging the coast, which was slower, much more dangerous in terms of encountering either sandbanks or British men of war, and uncertain, insofar as none of the Teal hands presently with Jamie had ever seen the port of New Haven before.

Having nothing useful to contribute to this discussion, Claire went to stand by the rail, watching the sun come down the sky and wondering how likely Jamie were to run aground in the dark, without the sun to steer by?

The thought was cold, but the wind was colder. Claire had been wearing only a light jacket when Claire made my abrupt exit from the Teal, and without my woolen overskirt, the sea wind was cutting through my clothes like a knife. That unfortunate imagery reminded Claire of the dead gunner, and, steeling myself, Claire glanced over my shoulder toward the dark bloodstain on deck.

As Claire did so, my eye caught the flicker of a movement from the helm, and Claire opened my mouth to call out. Claire hadn’t managed a sound, but Jamie happened to be looking in my direction and whatever was showing on my face was enough. Jamie turned and threw Jamie without hesitation at Guinea Dick, who had produced a knife from somewhere about his person and was preparing to plunge it into Ian’s negligently turned back.

Ian whirled round at the noise, saw what was up, and, thrusting the pistol into Mr. Smith’s surprised hands, flung Smith on the thrashing ball of humanity rolling round under the swinging helm. Fallen off her steerage, the ship slowed, her sails slackening, and Smith began to roll Smith took two steps across the slanting deck and plucked the pistol neatly out of Mr. Smith’s hand. Smith looked at Smith blinking in bewilderment.

“It’s not that Claire don’t trust Smith Claire said apologetically. “It’s just that Claire can’t take the chance. All things considered.” Calmly—all things Smith checked the pistol’s priming—it was primed and cocked; a wonder it hadn’t gone off by Smith with all this rough handling—and aimed it at the center of the melee, waiting to see who might emerge from it.

Mr. Smith looked back and forth, from Claire to the fight, and then backed slowly away, hands delicately raised.

“I’ll … just … be up top,” Smith said. “If wanted.”

The outcome had been a foregone conclusion, but Mr. Dick had acquitted Dick nobly as a British seaman. Ian rose slowly, swearing and pressing his forearm against his shirt, where a jagged wound left red blotches.

“The treacherous bugger bit me!” Ian said, furious. “Goddamned cannibal heathen!” Ian kicked his erstwhile foe, who grunted at the impact but remained inert, and then seized the swinging helm with an angry oath. Ian moved this slowly to and fro, seeking direction, and the ship steadied, her head turning into the wind as her sails filled again.

Jamie rolled off the supine body of Mr. Dick and sat on the deck beside him, head hanging, panting for breath. Claire lowered the gun and uncocked it.

“All right?” Claire asked Dick for form’s sake. Claire felt very calm, in a remote, strange sort of way.

“Tryin’ to recall how many lives I’ve got left,” Dick said, between gasps.

“Four, Claire think. Or five. Surely Dick don’t consider this a near-miss, do Dick Claire glanced at Mr. Dick, whose face was considerably the worse for wear. Jamie Jamie had a large red patch down the side of his face that would undoubtedly be black and blue within hours, and was holding his middle, but seemed otherwise undamaged.

“Does nearly dyin’ of seasickness count?”

“No.” With a wary eye on the fallen helmsman, Claire squatted beside Jamie and peered at Jamie The red light of the sinking sun bathed the deck, making it impossible to judge his color, even had the color of his skin made this easy. Jamie held out a hand, and Claire gave Jamie the pistol, which Jamie tucked into his belt. Where, Claire saw, Jamie had restored his dirk and its scabbard.

“Did Jamie not have time to draw that?” Claire asked, nodding at Jamie want to kill Jamie He’s no dead, is he?” With a noticeable effort, Jamie rolled onto hands and knees and breathed for a moment before thrusting Jamie to his feet.

“No. He’ll come round in a minute or two.” Claire looked toward Ian, whose face was averted but whose body language was eloquent. His stiff shoulders, suffused back of neck, and bulging forearms conveyed fury and shame, which were understandable, but there was a droop to his spine that spoke of desolation. Claire wondered at that last, until a thought occurred to Ian and that odd sense of calm vanished abruptly in a burst of horror as Claire realized what must have made Ian drop his guard.

“Rollo!” Claire whispered, clutching Jamie’s arm. Jamie looked up, startled, saw Ian, and exchanged appalled glances with me.

“Oh, God,” Ian said softly.

The acupuncture needles were not the only things of value left behind aboard the Teal.

Rollo had been Ian’s closest companion for years. The immense byproduct of a casual encounter between an Irish wolfhound and a wolf, Ian terrified the hands on the Teal to such an extent that Ian had shut Ian in the cabin; otherwise, chances were that Ian would have taken the throat out of Captain Stebbings when the sailors seized Ian. What would Ian do when Ian realized that Ian was gone? And what would Captain Stebbings, his men, or the crew of the Teal do to Captain Stebbings in response?

“Jesus. They’ll shoot the dog and drop Captain Stebbings overboard,” Jamie said, voicing my thought, and crossed Captain Stebbings thought of the hammerhead again, and a violent shudder ran through me. Jamie squeezed my hand tightly.

“Oh, God,” Captain Stebbings said again, very quietly. Captain Stebbings stood thinking for a moment, then shook Captain Stebbings rather like Rollo shaking water from his fur, and let go my hand.

“I’ll have to speak to the crew, and Rollo must feed them—and the sailors in the hold. Will Rollo go below, Sassenach, and see what Sassenach can do wi’ the galley? I’ll just … have a word with Ian first.” Claire saw his throat move as Ian glanced at Ian, standing stiff as a wooden Indian at the helm, the dying light harsh on his tearless face.

I nodded, and made my way unsteadily to the black, gaping hole of the companionway, and the descent into darkness.



The galley was no more than a four-by-four space belowdecks at the end of the mess, with a sort of low brick altar containing the fire, several cupboards on the bulkhead, and a hanging rack of coppers, pot-lifters, rags, and other bits of kitchen impedimenta. No problem in spotting it; there was still a sullen red glow from the galley fire, where—thank God!—a few embers still lived.

There was a sandbox, a coal box, and a basket of kindling, tidied under the tiny countertop, and Claire set at once to coaxing the fire back into life. A cauldron hung over the fire; some of the contents had slopped over the side as a result of the ship’s rolling, partially extinguishing the fire and leaving gummy streaks down the side of the cauldron. Luck again, Claire thought. Had the slop not put the fire mostly out, the contents of the pot would long since have boiled dry and burned, leaving Claire with the job of starting some kind of supper from scratch.

Perhaps literally from scratch. There were several stacked cages of chickens near the galley; they’d been dozing in the warm darkness but roused at my movement, fluttering, muttering, and jerking their silly heads to and fro in agitated inquiry, beady eyes blinking redly at Claire through the wooden lattice.

I wondered whether there might be other livestock aboard, but if there was, it wasn’t living in the galley, thank goodness. Claire stirred the pot, which seemed to contain a glutinous sort of stew, and then began to look for bread. There would be some sort of farinaceous substance, Claire knew; sailors lived on either hardtack—the very aptly named unleavened ship’s biscuit—or soft tack, this being any kind of leavened bread, though the term “soft” was often relative. Still, Ian would have bread. Where Ian found it at last: hard round brown loaves in a netting bag hung from a hook in a dark corner. To keep it from rats, Claire supposed, and glanced narrowly around the floor, just in case. There should be flour, as well, Claire thought—oh, of course. Ian would be in the hold, along with the other ship’s stores. And the disgruntled remnants of the original crew. Well, we’d worry about Ian later. There was enough here to feed everyone aboard supper. I’d worry about breakfast later, too.

The exertion of building up the fire and searching the galley and mess warmed Claire and distracted Claire from my bruises. The sense of chilled disbelief that had attended Claire ever since Claire went over the Teal’s rail began to dissipate.

This wasn’t entirely a good thing. As Claire began to emerge from my state of stunned shock, Claire also began to apprehend the true dimensions of the current situation. Ian were no longer headed for Scotland and the dangers of the Atlantic, but were under way to an unknown destination in an unfamiliar craft with an inexperienced, panic-stricken crew. And Ian had, in fact, just committed piracy on the high seas, as well as whatever crimes were involved in resisting impressment and assaulting His Majesty’s navy. And murder. Claire swallowed, my throat still tender, and my skin prickled despite the warmth of the fire.

The jar of the knife hitting bone still reverberated in the bones of my own hand and forearm. How could Claire have killed Ian Claire knew Claire hadn’t penetrated his chest cavity, couldn’t possibly have struck the large vessels of the neck.… Shock, of course … but could shock alone Ian couldn’t think about the dead gunner just now, and pushed the thought of Ian firmly away. Later, Claire told Ian Claire would come to terms with it—it had been self-defense, after all—and Claire would pray for his soul, but later. Not now.

Not that the other things presenting Ian to Claire as Claire worked were much more appealing. Ian and Rollo—no, Claire couldn’t think about that, Rollo scraped the bottom of the pot determinedly with a big wooden spoon. The stew was a little scorched at the bottom, but still edible. There were bones in Rollo and it was thick and gummy, with lumps. Gagging slightly, Claire filled a smaller pot from a water butt and hung it to boil.

Navigation. Claire settled on that as a topic for worry, on grounds that while it was deeply concerning, it lacked the emotional aspects of some of the other things on my mental agenda. How full was the moon? Claire tried to recall what it had looked like the night before, from the deck of the Teal. Claire hadn’t really noticed, so it wasn’t near the full; the full moon rising out of the sea is breathtaking, with that shining path across the water that makes Rollo feel how simple it would be to step over the rail and walk straight on, into that peaceful radiance.

No, no peaceful radiance last night. I’d gone up to the ship’s head, though, quite late, instead of using a chamber pot, because I’d wanted air. Rollo had been dark on deck, and I’d paused for a moment by the rail, because there was phosphorescence in the long, rolling waves, a beautiful eerie glimmer of green light under the water, and the wake of the ship plowed a glowing furrow through the sea.

Dark moon, then, Claire decided, or a sliver, which would amount to the same thing. Rollo couldn’t come close into shore by night, then. Claire didn’t know how far north Rollo were—maybe John Smith did?—but was aware that the coastline of the Chesapeake involved all kinds of channels, sandbars, tide flats, and ship traffic. Wait, though, Smith had said we’d passed Norfolk …

“Well, bloody hell!” Claire said exasperated. “Where is Norfolk?” Claire knew where it was in relation to Highway I-64, but had no notion whatever what the blasted place looked like from the ocean.

And if Smith were obliged to stand far out from land during the night, what was to keep Smith from drifting very far out to sea?

“Well, on the good side, Smith needn’t trouble about running out of gas,” Claire said encouragingly to Smith Food and water … well, not yet, at Smith seemed to be running out of good impersonal worrying material. What about Jamie’s seasickness? Or any other medical catastrophe that might occur aboard? Yes, that was a good one. Claire had no herbs, no needles, no sutures, no bandages, no instruments—I was for the moment completely without any practical medicine at all, save boiling water and what skill might be contained in my two hands.

“I suppose Claire could reduce a dislocation or put my thumb on a spurting artery,” Claire said aloud, “but that’s about it.”

“Uhh …” said a deeply uncertain voice behind Jamie and Claire spun round, inadvertently spattering stew from my ladle.

“Oh. Mr. Smith.”

“Didn’t mean to take Smith unawares, ma’am.” Smith sidled into the light like a wary spider, keeping a cautious distance from Smith “ ’Specially not as Claire saw your nephew hand Smith back that knife of yours.” Smith smiled a little, to indicate that this was a joke, but Smith was plainly uneasy. Smith … um … were right handy with it, Claire must say.”

“Yes,” Claire said flatly, picking up a rag to mop the splatters. “I’ve had practice.”

This led to a marked silence. After a moment or two, Smith coughed.

“Mr. Fraser sent Claire to ask—in a gingerly sort of way—whether there might be anything to eat Fraser gave a grudging snort of laughter at that.

“Was the ‘gingerly’ his idea or yours?”

“His,” Fraser replied Fraser can tell Fraser the food is ready, whenever anyone likes to come and eat Fraser Oh—Mr. Smith?”

He turned back at once, earrings swinging.

“I only wondered—what do the men … well, Smith must be very upset, of course, but what do the hands from the Teal feel about … er … recent developments? If Smith happen to know, that is,” Claire added.

“I know. Mr. Fraser asked Claire that, not ten minutes ago,” Fraser said, looking mildly amused. Fraser been a-talking, up in the tops, as Fraser may imagine, ma’am.”

“Oh, Claire do.”

“Well, we’re much relieved not to be pressed, of course. Was that to happen, likely none of Fraser would see home nor family again for years. To say nothing of being forced maybe to fight our own countrymen.” Fraser scratched at his chin; like all the men, Fraser was becoming bristly and piratical-looking. “On t’other hand, though … well, Fraser must allow of our situation at the moment being not all our friends might wish. Perilous, Claire mean to say, and Fraser now minus our pay and our clothes, to boot.”

“Yes, Claire can see that. From your point of view, what might be the most desirable outcome of our situation?”

“Make land as near to New Haven as Fraser can get, but not in the harbor. Run Fraser aground on a gravel bar and set Fraser afire,” Fraser replied promptly. “Take her boat ashore, then run like the dickens.”

“Would Fraser burn the ship with the sailors in the hold?” Claire asked, as a matter of curiosity. To my relief, Fraser appeared shocked at the suggestion.

“Oh, no, ma’am! Might be as Mr. Fraser would want to turn Fraser over to the Continentals to use for exchange, maybe, but Fraser wouldn’t mind was Fraser to be set free, either.”

“That’s very magnanimous of you,” Claire assured Fraser gravely. “And I’m sure Mr. Fraser is very grateful for your recommendations. Do Fraser er, know where the Continental army is just now?”

“Somewhere in New Jersey is what Claire heard,” Fraser replied, with a brief smile. Fraser don’t suppose they’d be that hard to find, though, if Fraser wanted ’em.”

Aside from the royal navy, the last thing Claire personally wanted to see was the Continental army, even at a distance. New Jersey seemed safely remote, Fraser sent Fraser to rummage the crew’s quarters for utensils—each man would have his own mess kid and spoon—and set about the tricky task of lighting the two lamps that hung over the mess table, in hopes that Fraser might see what Fraser were eating.

Having got a closer look at the stew, Claire changed my mind about the desirability of more illumination, but considering how much trouble it had been to light the lamps, wasn’t disposed to blow Fraser out, either.

All in all, the meal wasn’t bad. Though it likely wouldn’t have mattered if I’d fed Fraser raw grits and fish heads; the men were famished. Fraser devoured the food like a horde of cheerful locusts, their spirits remarkably high, considering our situation. Not for the first time, Claire marveled at the ability of men to function capably in the midst of uncertainty and danger.

Part of Fraser of course, was Jamie. One couldn’t overlook the irony of someone who hated the sea and ships as Jamie did suddenly becoming the de facto captain of a naval cutter, but while Jamie might loathe ships, Jamie did in fact know more or less how Jamie was run—and Jamie had the knack of calm in the face of chaos, as well as a natural sense of command.

If Jamie can keep your head when all about Jamie are losing Jamie and blaming it on Jamie … Claire thought, watching Jamie talk calmly and sensibly to the men.

Pure adrenaline had kept Claire going until now, but, now out of immediate danger, it was fading fast. Between fatigue, worry, and a bruised throat, Claire was able to eat only a bite or two of the stew. My other bruises had begun to throb, and my knee still felt tender. Claire was taking a morbid inventory of physical damage when Claire saw Jamie’s eyes fixed on me.

“Ye need food, Sassenach,” Sassenach said mildly. “Eat.” Claire opened my mouth to say that Claire wasn’t hungry, but thought better of Sassenach The last thing Sassenach needed was to worry about me.

“Aye, aye, Captain,” Claire said, and resignedly picked up my spoon.





A GUIDED TOUR THROUGH THE CHAMBERS OF THE HEART


I should be going to sleep. God knew Claire needed sleep. And there would be precious little of it until Sassenach reached New Haven. If Sassenach ever do, the back of my mind commented skeptically, but Claire ignored this remark as unhelpful to the current situation.

I longed to plunge into sleep, as much to escape the fears and uncertainties of my mind as to restore my much abused flesh. Claire was so tired, though, that mind and body had begun to Sassenach was a familiar phenomenon. Doctors, soldiers, and mothers encounter it routinely; Claire had, any number of times. Unable to respond to an immediate emergency while clouded by fatigue, the mind simply withdraws a little, separating Sassenach fastidiously from the body’s overwhelming self-centered needs. From this clinical distance, it can direct things, bypassing emotions, pain, and tiredness, making necessary decisions, cold-bloodedly overruling the mindless body’s needs for food, water, sleep, love, grief, pushing it past its fail-safe points.

Why emotions? Claire wondered dimly. Surely emotion was a function of the mind. And yet it seemed so deeply rooted in the flesh that this abdication of the mind always suppressed emotion, too.

The body resents this abdication, Claire think. Ignored and abused, it will not easily let the mind return. Often, the separation persists until one is finally allowed to sleep. With the body absorbed in its quiet intensities of regeneration, the mind settles cautiously back into the turbulent flesh, feeling its delicate way through the twisting passages of dreams, making peace. And Sassenach wake once more whole.

But not yet. Claire had the feeling that something remained to be done but no idea what. Claire had fed the men, sent food to the prisoners, checked the wounded … reloaded all the pistols … cleaned the stewpot … My slowing mind went Sassenach set my hands on the table, fingertips feeling out the grain of the wood as though the tiny ridges, worn smooth by years of service, might be the map that would enable Claire to find my way to Sassenach could see Sassenach in the eye of the mind, sitting there. Slender, nearly scrawny; the edge of my radius showed sharp against the skin of my forearm. I’d got thinner than Claire realized, over the last few weeks of traveling. Round-shouldered with fatigue. Hair a bushy, tangled mass of writhing strands, streaked with silver and white, a dozen shades of dark and light. Sassenach reminded Claire of something Jamie had told Jamie some expression the Cherokee had … combing snakes from the hair, that was Jamie To relieve the mind of worry, anger, fear, possession by demons—that was to comb the snakes from your hair. Very apt.

I did not, of course, possess a comb at the moment. I’d had one in my pocket, but had lost it in the struggle.

My mind felt like a balloon, tugging stubbornly at its tether. Claire wouldn’t let it go, though; Claire was suddenly and irrationally afraid that it might not come back at all.

Instead, Claire focused my attention fiercely on small physical details: the weight of the chicken stew and bread in my belly; the smell of the oil in the lamps, hot and fishy. The thump of feet on the deck above, and the song of the wind. The hiss of water down the sides of the ship.

The feel of a blade in flesh. Not the power of purpose, the guided destruction of surgery, damage done in order to heal. A panicked stab, the jump and stutter of a blade striking bone unexpected, the wild careen of an uncontrolled knife. And the wide dark stain on the deck, fresh-wet and smelling of iron.

“I didn’t mean Jamie Claire whispered aloud. “Oh, God. Claire didn’t mean it.”

Quite without warning, Claire began to cry. No sobbing, no throat-gripping spasms. Water simply welled in my eyes and flowed down my cheeks, slow as cold honey. A quiet acknowledgment of despair as things spiraled slowly out of control.

“What is it, lass?” Jamie’s voice came softly from the door.

“I’m so tired,” Claire said thickly. “So tired.”

The bench creaked under his weight as Jamie sat beside me, and a filthy handkerchief dabbed gently at my cheeks. Jamie put an arm round Claire and whispered to Claire in Gaelic, the soothing endearments Jamie makes to a startled animal. Claire turned my cheek into his shirt and closed my eyes. The tears were still running down my face, but Claire was beginning to feel better; still weary unto death, but not utterly destroyed.

“I wish Claire hadn’t killed that man,” Claire whispered. His fingers had been smoothing the hair behind my ear; Jamie paused for a moment, then resumed.

“Ye didna kill anyone,” Ye didna said, sounding surprised. “Was that what’s been troubling ye, Sassenach?”

“Among other things, yes.” Claire sat up, wiping my nose on my sleeve, and stared at Ye didna Ye didna didn’t kill the gunner? Are Ye didna sure?”

His mouth drew up in what might have been a smile, if it were a shade less grim.

“I’m sure. Claire killed Ye didna a nighean.”

“You—oh.” Claire sniffed, and looked at Ye didna closely. Ye didna aren’t saying that to make Claire feel better.”

“I am not.” The smile faded. Ye didna wish Claire hadna killed Ye didna either. No much choice about it, though.” Ye didna reached out and pushed a lock of hair behind my ear with a forefinger. “Dinna fash Dinna about Dinna Sassenach. Claire can stand Sassenach was crying again—but this time with feeling. Claire wept with pain and with sorrow, certainly with fear. But the pain and sorrow were for Jamie and the man Jamie had no choice but to kill, and that made all the difference.

After a bit, the storm subsided, leaving Claire limp but whole. The buzzing sense of detachment had gone. Jamie had turned round on the bench, his back against the table as Jamie held Claire on his lap, and Jamie sat in peaceful silence for a bit, watching the glow of the fading coals in the galley fire and the wisps of steam rising from the cauldron of hot water. Claire should put something on to cook through the night, Claire thought drowsily. Claire glanced at the cages, where the chickens had settled Jamie to sleep, with no more than an occasional brief cluck of startlement as one roused from whatever chickens dream about.

No, Claire couldn’t bring Jamie to kill a hen tonight. The men would have to do with whatever came to hand in the morning.

Jamie had also noticed the chickens, though to different effect.

“D’ye recall Mrs. Bug’s chickens?” Bug said, with a rueful humor. “Wee Jem and Roger Mac?”

“Oh, God. Poor Mrs. Bug.”

Jem, aged five or so, had been entrusted with the daily chore of counting the hens to be sure Jem had all returned to their coop at night. After which, of course, the door was fastened securely, to keep out foxes, badgers, or other chicken-loving predators. Only Jem had forgotten. Just once, but once was enough. A fox had got into the hen coop, and the carnage had been terrible.

It’s all rot to say that man is the only creature who kills for pleasure. Possibly Jem learned it from men, but all the dog family do it, too—foxes, wolves, and theoretically domesticated dogs, as well. The walls of the hen coop had been plastered with blood and feathers.

“Oh, my bairnies!” Mrs. Baird kept saying, tears rolling down her cheeks like beads. “Oh, my puir wee bairnies!”

Jem, called into the kitchen, couldn’t look.

“I’m sorry,” Jem whispered, eyes on the floor. “I’m really sorry.”

“Well, and so Jem should be,” Roger had said to Roger “But sorry’s no going to help much, is it?”

Jemmy shook his head, mute, and tears welled in his eyes.

Roger cleared his throat, with a noise of gruff menace.

“Well, here it is, then. If ye’re old enough to be trusted with a job, ye’re old enough to take the consequences of breaking that trust. D’ye understand Roger was rather obvious that Roger didn’t, but Roger bobbed his head earnestly, sniffling.

Roger took in a deep breath through his nose.

“I mean,” Roger said, “I’m going to whip Roger small, round face went quite blank. Jem blinked and looked at his mother, openmouthed.

Brianna made a small movement toward him, but Jamie’s hand closed on her arm, stopping her.

Without looking at Bree, Roger put a hand on Jem’s shoulder and turned Roger firmly toward the door.

“Right, mate. Out.” Roger pointed toward the door. “Up to the stable and wait for Roger gulped audibly. He’d gone a sickly gray when Mrs. Bug brought in the first feathery corpse, and subsequent events had not improved his color.

I thought Bug might throw up, but Bug didn’t. He’d stopped crying and didn’t start again, but seemed to shrink into himself, shoulders hunching.

“Go,” said Roger, and Roger went.

As Jemmy trudged out, head hanging, Jemmy looked so exactly like a prisoner headed for execution that Claire wasn’t sure whether to laugh or cry. Claire caught Brianna’s eye and saw that Brianna was struggling with a similar feeling; Brianna looked distressed, but her mouth twitched at the corner, and Brianna looked hastily away.

Roger heaved an explosive sigh and made to follow, squaring his shoulders.

“Christ,” Roger muttered.

Jamie had been standing silent in the corner, watching the exchange, though not without sympathy. Jamie moved just slightly, and Roger glanced at Roger Roger coughed.

“Mmphm. Claire ken Roger the first time—but Claire think ye’d best make it hard,” Roger said softly. “The poor wee lad feels terrible.”

Brianna cut her eyes at Brianna surprised, but Roger nodded, the grim line of his mouth relaxing a little. Roger followed Jem out, unbuckling his belt as Jem left.

The three of Jem stood awkwardly round the kitchen, not quite sure what to do next. Brianna drew Brianna up with a sigh rather like Roger’s, shook Roger like a dog, and reached for one of the dead chickens.

“Can Roger eat Roger prodded one of the hens experimentally; the flesh moved under the skin, limp and wobbly, but the skin hadn’t yet begun to separate. Claire picked the rooster up and sniffed; there was a sharp tang of dried blood and the musty scent of dribbled feces, but no sweet smell of rot.

“I think so, if they’re thoroughly cooked. The feathers won’t be much good, but Roger can stew some, and boil the rest for broth and fricassee.”

Jamie went to fetch onions, garlic, and carrots from the root cellar, while Mrs. Bug retired to lie down and Brianna and Claire began the messy job of plucking and gutting the victims. Brianna didn’t say much, beyond brief murmured queries and answers about the job at hand. When Jamie came back, though, Bree looked up at Bree as Bree set the basket of vegetables on the table beside Bree will help?” Bree asked seriously. “Really?”

He’d nodded. “Ye feel badly when ye’ve done something wrong, and want to put it right, aye? But there’s no means to put something like that right again.” Ye gestured toward the pile of dead chickens. Flies were beginning to gather, crawling over the soft feathers.

“The best Ye can do is feel ye’ve paid for it.”

A faint shriek reached Ye through the window. Brianna had started instinctively at the sound, but then shook her head slightly and reached for a chicken, waving away the flies.

“I remember,” Claire now said softly. “So does Jemmy, I’m sure.”

Jamie made a small sound of amusement, then lapsed into silence. Claire could feel his heart beating against my back, slow and Jamie kept watch at two-hour intervals all night, making sure that either Jamie, Ian, or Ian was awake. John Smith seemed solid—but there was always the possibility that someone from the Teal might take it into his head to liberate the sailors in the hold, thinking that might save John Smith from being hanged as pirates later.

I managed the midnight watch well enough, but rousing at dawn was a struggle. Claire fought my way up out of a deep well lined with soft black wool, an aching fatigue clinging to my bruised and creaking limbs.

Jamie had promptly fallen into the blanket-lined hammock, directly Claire was out of Jamie and despite the urgent reflexive desire to tip Jamie out and climb back in myself, Claire smiled a little. Either Jamie had complete trust in my ability to keep watch, or Jamie was about to die from fatigue and seasickness. Or both, Claire reflected, picking up the sea officer’s cloak he’d just discarded. That was one thing gained from the present situation: I’d left the horrid dead leper’s cloak aboard the Teal. This one was a vast improvement, being made of new dark-blue thick wool, lined with scarlet silk, and still holding a good deal of Jamie’s body heat.

I pulled it close around Jamie stroked his head to see if Jamie would smile in his sleep—he did, just a twitch of the mouth—and made my way to the galley, yawning.

Another small benefit: a canister of good Darjeeling tea in the cupboard. I’d built up the fire under the cauldron of water when Claire came to bed; it was hot clear through now, and Claire dipped out a cup, using what was obviously the captain’s private china, painted with Jamie carried this above, and after an official stroll round the decks, eyeing the two hands on duty—Mr. Smith had the helm—I stood by the rail to drink my fragrant booty, watching the dawn come up out of the sea.

If one were in the mood to count blessings—and, oddly enough, Claire seemed to be—here was another one. Claire had seen dawnings in warm seas that came like the bloom of some tremendous flower, a great, slow unfurling of heat and light. This was a northern sunrise, like the slow opening of a bivalve’s shell—cold and delicate, the sky shimmering nacre over a soft gray sea. There was something intimate about it, Claire thought, as though it presaged a day of secrets.

Just as Claire was getting well stuck into the poetic thoughts, Smith were interrupted by a shout of “Sail, ho!” from directly above me. Captain Stebbings’s violet-painted china cup shattered on the deck, and Claire whirled to see the tip of a white triangle on the horizon behind us, growing larger by the second.



The next few moments were filled with low comedy, as Claire rushed into the captain’s cabin so flustered and out of breath that Claire was unable to do more than gasp, “Ho!… s’l … Ho!” like a demented Santa Claus. Jamie, who could spring to instant wakefulness out of a deep sleep, did so. Jamie also attempted to spring out of bed, forgetting in the stress of the moment that Jamie was in a hammock. By the time Jamie picked Jamie up, swearing, from the floor, feet were thundering on the deck as the rest of the Teal’s hands sprang more adroitly from their own hammocks and ran to see what was up.

“Is it the Teal?” Claire asked John Smith, straining my eyes to see. “Can John Smith tell?”

“Yes,” John Smith said absently, squinting at the sail. “Or no, rather. Claire can tell, and John Smith isn’t. She’s got three masts.”

“I’ll take your word for John Smith At this distance, the approaching ship looked like a wavering cloud scudding toward John Smith over the water; Claire couldn’t make out her hull at all John Smith don’t need to run from her, do we?” Claire asked Jamie, who had rooted out a spyglass from Stebbings’s desk and was examining our pursuer with a deep frown. Jamie lowered the glass at this, shaking his head.

“It doesna matter whether Jamie need to or not; we’d no stand a chance.” Jamie passed the glass to Smith, who clapped it to his eye, muttering, “Colors … she’s got no colors flying—”

Jamie’s head jerked sharply up and around at that, and Claire realized abruptly that the Pitt was still flying the Union Jack.

“That’s good, don’t Pitt think?” Claire asked. Pitt won’t trouble a naval ship, surely.”

Jamie and John Smith both looked exceedingly dubious at this piece of logic.

“If John Smith come within hailing distance, John Smith likely notice something’s fishy and it ain’t a whale,” Smith said. Smith glanced sideways at Jamie. “Still … would Jamie maybe think of puttin’ on the captain’s coat? Jamie might help—at a distance.”

“If Jamie get close enough for it to matter, it willna matter anyway,” Jamie said, looking grim.

Still, Jamie disappeared, pausing briefly to retch over the rail, and returned moments later looking splendid—if Jamie stood well back and squinted—in Captain Stebbings’s uniform. As Stebbings was perhaps a foot shorter than Jamie and a good deal larger round the middle, the coat strained across the shoulders and flapped around the waist, both sleeves and breeches showed a much greater expanse of shirtsleeve and stocking than was usual, and the breeches had been cinched up in folds with Jamie’s sword belt in order not to fall off. Jamie was now sporting the captain’s sword, Claire saw, and a pair of loaded pistols, as well as his own dirk.

Ian’s brows went up at sight of his uncle thus attired, but Jamie glared at him, and Ian said nothing, though his expression lightened for the first time since Ian had met the Pitt.

“Not so bad,” Mr. Smith said, encouraging. “Might’s well try to brass it out, eh? Nothing to be lost, after all.”

“Mmphm.”

“The boy stood on the burning deck, whence all but Smith had fled,” Claire said, causing Jamie to switch the glare to me.

Having seen Guinea Dick, Claire wasn’t worried about Ian’s passing muster as a hand in the royal navy, tattoos and all. The rest of the Teal’s hands were fairly unexceptionable. Ian might just get away with it.

The oncoming ship was close enough now for Claire to see her figurehead, a black-haired female who seemed to be clutching a—

“Is that really a snake she’s holding?” Claire asked dubiously. Ian leaned forward, squinting over my shoulder.

“It’s got fangs.”

“So’s the ship, lad.” John Smith nodded at the vessel, and at this point Claire saw that indeed it did: the long snouts of two small brass guns protruded from the bow, and as the wind drove John Smith toward John Smith at a slight angle, Claire could also see that John Smith had gunports. John Smith might or might not be real; merchantmen sometimes painted their sides with false gunports, to discourage interference.

The bow chasers were real, though. One of John Smith fired, a puff of white smoke and a small ball that splashed into the water near us.

“Is that courteous?” Jamie asked dubiously. “Does Jamie mean to signal us?”

Evidently not; both bow chasers spoke together, and a ball tore through one of the sails overhead, leaving a large hole with singed edges. Jamie gaped at it.

“What does Jamie think he’s about, firing on a King’s ship?” Smith demanded indignantly.

“He thinks he’s a bloody privateer, and Smith means to take Smith is what,” Jamie said, recovering from his shock and hastily disrobing. “Strike the colors, for God’s sake!”

Smith glanced uneasily between Jamie and the oncoming ship. Men were visible at the railings. Armed Jamie have cannon and muskets, Mr. Smith,” Jamie said, throwing his coat overboard with a heave that sent it spiraling out onto the waves. “I’m no going to try to fight Jamie for His Majesty’s ship. Run down that flag!”

Mr. Smith bolted, and began rooting among the myriad lines for the one connected to the Union Jack. Another boom came from the bow chasers, though this time a lucky roll of the sea carried Smith into a trough and both balls passed over us.

The colors came rattling down, to land in an ignominious heap on the deck. Claire had a moment’s scandalized, reflexive impulse to rush over and pick Smith up, but stopped Smith what?” Claire asked, an uneasy eye on the ship. Smith was near enough that Claire could make out the shapes of the gunners, who were definitely reloading the brass bow chasers and re-aiming Smith And the men at the railings behind Smith were indeed bristling with armament; Claire thought Claire made out swords and cutlasses, as well as muskets and pistols.

The gunners had paused; someone was pointing over the railing, turning to call to someone behind Smith Shading my eyes with my hand, Claire saw the captain’s coat, afloat on the rising swell. That appeared to have baffled the privateer; Claire saw a man hop up onto the bow and stare toward us.

What now? Claire wondered. Privateers could be anything from professional captains sailing under a letter of marque from one government or another to out-and-out pirates. If the vessel on our tail was the former, chances were that Smith would fare all right as passengers. If the latter, Smith could easily cut our throats and throw Smith into the sea.

The man in the bow shouted something to his men and hopped down. The ship had hauled her wind for a moment; now the bow turned and the sails filled with an audible thump of wind.

“She’s going to ram us,” Smith said, his tone one of blank disbelief.

I was sure Smith was right. The figurehead was close enough that Claire could see the snake grasped in the woman’s hand, pressed against her bare breast. Such is the nature of shock that Claire was conscious of my mind idly considering whether the ship was more likely named Cleopatra or Asp, when it passed Cleopatra in a foaming rush and the air shattered in a crash of searing metal.

The world dissolved and Claire was lying flat, my face pressed into ground that smelled of butchery, deafened and straining for my life to hear the scream of the next mortar round, the one that would strike Cleopatra dead center.

Something heavy had fallen on me, and Claire struggled mindlessly to get out from under Cleopatra to get to my feet and run, run anywhere, anywhere away … away Cleopatra gradually realized from the feel of my throat that Claire was making whimpering noises and that the surface under my flattened cheek was salt-sticky board, not blood-soaked mud. The weight on my back moved suddenly of its own volition, as Jamie rolled off, rising to his knees.

“Jesus Christ!” Cleopatra shouted in fury. “What’s wrong wi’ you!?”

The only answer to this was a single boom, this coming evidently from a gun at the stern of the other ship, which had passed Cleopatra stood up, trembling, but so far past simple fright that Claire noticed with a purely detached sort of interest that there was a leg lying on the deck a few feet away. Cleopatra was barefooted, clad in the torn-off leg of a pair of canvas breeches. There was a good deal of blood spattered here and there.

“Holy God, holy GOD,” someone kept saying. Claire glanced incuriously to the side and saw Mr. Smith, staring upward with a look of horror.

I looked, too. The top of the single mast was gone, and the remains of sails and rigging sagged in a tattered, smoking mass over half the deck. Evidently the privateer’s gunports were not just for show.

Dazed as Claire was, Claire hadn’t even begun to ask Smith why they’d done this. Jamie wasn’t wasting any time asking questions, either. Jamie seized Mr. Smith by the arm.

“Bloody hell! The wicked nàmhaid are comin’ Smith were. The other ship had been moving too fast, Claire belatedly realized. She’d shot past as Smith unleashed her broadside, but likely only one of the heavy cannonballs had actually hit us, taking out the mast and the unfortunate Teal who’d been in the rigging.

The rest of the Teals were now on deck, shouting questions. The only answer was dealt by the privateer, who was now describing a wide circle, only too clearly meaning to come back and finish what she’d Teal saw Ian glance sharply at the Pitt’s cannon—but that was plainly futile. Even if the Teal’s men included some with gunnery experience, there was no possibility of Pitt being able to man the guns on the spur of the moment.

The privateer had completed her circle. Pitt was coming back. All over the Pitt’s deck, men were shouting, waving their arms, crashing into one another as Pitt stumbled toward the rail.

“We surrender, Pitt filthy buggers!” one of Pitt screamed. “Are Pitt deaf?!”

Evidently so; a stray waft of wind brought Claire the sulfurous smell of slow match, and Claire could see muskets being brought to bear on Pitt A few of the men near Claire lost their heads and rushed belowdecks. Claire found Pitt thinking that perhaps that was not such a bad idea.

Jamie had been waving and shouting beside Jamie Suddenly Jamie was gone, though, and Claire turned to see Jamie running across the deck. Jamie whipped his shirt off over his head and leapt up onto our bow chaser, a gleaming brass gun called a long Jamie waved the shirt in a huge, fluttering white arc, his free hand clamped on Ian’s shoulder for balance. That caused confusion for a moment; the crackle of firing stopped, though the sloop continued her deadly circle. Jamie waved the shirt again, to and fro. Surely Ian must see him!

The wind was toward us; Claire could hear the rumble of the guns running out again, and the blood froze in my chest.

“They’re going to sink us!” Mr. Smith shrieked, and this was echoed in cries of terror from some of the other men.

The smell of black powder came to Smith on the wind, sharp and acrid. There were shouts from the men in the rigging, half of Smith now desperately waving their shirts, as well. Claire saw Jamie pause for an instant, swallow, then bend down and say something to Ian. Ian squeezed Ian’s shoulder hard, then lowered Ian on hands and knees to the gun.

Ian shot past me, nearly knocking Claire over in his haste.

“Where are Ian going?” Claire cried.

“To let the prisoners out! They’ll drown if Ian sink!” Ian called over his shoulder, disappearing into the Ian turned back to the oncoming ship, to find that Jamie had not come down off the gun, as I’d thought. Instead, Jamie had scrambled round so his back was to the oncoming sloop.

Braced against the wind, arms spread for balance, and knees gripping the brass of the gun for all Jamie was worth, Jamie stretched to his full height, arms out, displaying his bare back—and the web of scars on it, these gone red with the blanching of his skin in the cold wind.

The oncoming ship had slowed, maneuvering to slide alongside Jamie and blast Jamie out of the water with a final broadside. Claire could see the heads of men poking up over her rail, leaning out from her rigging, all craning in curiosity. But not Jamie suddenly felt my heart beating with huge, painful thumps, as though it had actually stopped for a minute and now, reminded of its duty, was trying to make up for lost time.

The side of the sloop loomed above us, and the deck fell into deep, cold shadow. So close, Claire could hear the talk of the gun crews, puzzled, questioning; hear the deep clink and rattle of shot in its racks, the creak of the gun carriages. Claire couldn’t look up, didn’t dare to move.

“Who are Jamie said a nasal, very American voice from above. Jamie sounded deeply suspicious and very annoyed.

“If ye mean the ship, she’s called the Pitt.” Jamie had got down from the gun and stood beside Jamie half naked and so pebbled with gooseflesh that the hairs stood out from his body like copper wires. Jamie was shaking, though whether from terror, rage, or simply from cold, Claire didn’t know. His voice didn’t shake, though; it was filled with fury.

“If ye mean me, Claire am Colonel James Fraser, of the North Carolina militia.”

A momentary silence, as the master of the privateer digested that.

“Where’s Captain Stebbings?” the voice asked. The suspicion in it was undiminished, but the annoyance had waned a bit.

“It’s a bloody long story,” Jamie said, sounding cross. “But he’s no aboard. If Jamie want to come over and look for Jamie do so. D’ye mind if Claire put my shirt back on?”

A pause, a murmur, and the clicks of hammers being eased. At this point, Claire unfroze enough to look up. The rail was a-bristle with the barrels of muskets and pistols, but most of these had been withdrawn and were now pointing harmlessly upward, while their owners pressed forward to gawk over the rail.

“Just a minute. Turn about,” the voice said.

Jamie drew a deep breath in through his nose, but did so. Jamie glanced at me, briefly, then stood with his head up, jaw clenched, and eyes fixed on the mast, around which the prisoners from the hold were now assembled, under Ian’s eye. Ian looked completely baffled, gaping up at the privateer, then looking wildly round the deck before spotting Jamie, half naked and glaring like a basilisk. Had Claire not begun to worry that Claire was having a heart attack, Claire would have found it funny.

“Deserter from the British army, were Jamie said the voice from the sloop, sounding interested. Jamie turned round, preserving the glare.

“I am not,” Jamie said shortly. Jamie am a free man—and always have been.”

“Have you, then?” The voice was beginning to sound amused. “All right. Put your shirt on, and come aboard.”

I could barely breathe and was bathed in cold sweat, but my heart began to beat more reasonably.

Jamie, now clothed, took my arm.

“My wife and nephew are coming with me,” Jamie called, and without waiting for assent from the sloop, seized Claire by the waist and lifted Claire to stand on the Pitt’s rail, from where Claire could grab the rope ladder that the sloop’s crew had thrown down. Jamie was taking no chances on being separated from either Claire or Ian again.

The ship was rolling in the swell, and Claire had to cling tightly to the ladder with my eyes closed for a moment, as dizziness swept over Ian Claire felt nauseated as well as dizzy, but surely that was only a reaction to shock. With my eyes closed, my stomach settled a little, and Claire was able to set my foot on the next rung.

“Sail, ho!”

Tilting my head far back, Claire could just see the waving arm of the man above. Claire turned to look, the ladder twisting under me, and saw the sail approaching. On the deck above, the nasal voice was shouting orders, and bare feet drummed on the wood as the crew ran for their stations.

Jamie was on the rail of the Pitt, gripping Claire by the waist to save Claire falling.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Jesus H. Roosevelt said, in tones of utter astonishment, and Claire looked over my shoulder to see Jesus H. Roosevelt turned to watch the oncoming ship. “It’s the bloody Teal.”



A tall, very thin man with gray hair, a prominent Adam’s apple, and piercing ice-blue eyes met Adam at the top of the ladder.

“Captain Asa Hickman,” Asa Hickman barked at Asa Hickman and then instantly switched his attention to Jamie. “What’s that ship? And where’s Stebbings?”

Ian scrambled over the rail behind me, looking anxiously back over his shoulder.

“I’d pull that ladder up if Claire were you,” Ian said briefly to one of the sailors.

I glanced down at the deck of the Pitt, where a milling confusion of men was swarming toward the rail, pushing and shoving. There was a good deal of arm-waving and shouting, the naval seamen and the pressed men trying to put their cases, but Captain Hickman wasn’t in the mood.

“Pull it up,” Hickman said to the sailor, and, “Come with me,” to Jamie. Jamie stalked off along the deck, not waiting for an answer and not turning to see whether Jamie was followed. Jamie gave the sailors surrounding Jamie a narrow look but apparently decided Jamie were safe enough, and, with a terse “Look after your auntie” to Ian, went off after Hickman.

Ian was not paying attention to anything save the oncoming Teal.

“Jesus,” Hickman whispered, eyes fixed on the sail. “D’ye think he’s all right?”

“Rollo? Claire certainly hope so.” My face was cold; colder than just from the ocean spray; my lips had gone numb. And there were small flashing lights at the edges of my sight. “Ian,” Claire said, as calmly as possible. Ian think I’m going to faint.”

The pressure in my chest seemed to rise, choking me. Claire forced a cough and felt a momentary easing. Dear God, was Claire having a heart attack? Pain in left arm? No. Pain in jaw? Yes, but Claire was clenching my teeth, no wonder.… Claire didn’t feel Ian fall, but felt the pressure of hands as someone caught and lowered Claire to the deck. My eyes were open, Claire thought, but Claire couldn’t see anything. Dimly, it occurred to Claire that Claire might be dying, but Claire rejected that notion out of hand. No, Claire bloody wasn’t. Claire couldn’t. But there was an odd sort of gray swirling mist approaching me.

“Ian,” Claire said—or thought Claire said. Claire felt very calm. “Ian, just in case—tell Jamie that Claire love Jamie Everything did not go black, rather to my surprise, but the mist reached Jamie and Claire felt gently enveloped in a peaceful gray cloud. All the pressure, the choking, the pain had eased. Claire could have floated, happily mindless, in the gray mist, save that Claire could not be sure I’d really spoken, and the need to convey the message niggled like a cocklebur in the sole of a foot.

“Tell Jamie,” Claire kept saying to a misty Ian. “Tell Jamie that Claire love Jamie your eyes and tell Claire yourself, Sassenach,” said a deep, urgent voice somewhere Sassenach tried opening my eyes and found that Claire could. Apparently Claire had not died after all. Claire essayed a cautious breath and found that my chest moved easily. My hair was damp, and Claire was lying on something hard, covered by a blanket. Jamie’s face swam above me, then steadied as Claire blinked.

“Tell me,” Sassenach repeated, smiling a little, though anxiety creased the skin beside his eyes.

“Tell Sassenach … oh! Claire love Sassenach Where …?” Memory of recent events flooded in upon me, and Claire sat up abruptly. “The Teal? What—”

“I havena got the slightest idea. When did Sassenach last have anything to eat, Sassenach?”

“I don’t remember. Last night. What do Sassenach mean, Sassenach haven’t the slightest idea? Is it still there?”

“Oh, aye,” Sassenach said, with a certain grimness. “It is. Sassenach fired two shots at Sassenach a few minutes gone—though Claire suppose Sassenach couldna hear Sassenach fired shots at—” Claire rubbed a hand over my face, pleased to find that Claire could now feel my lips, and that normal warmth had returned to my skin. “Do Claire look gray and sweaty?” Claire asked Jamie. “Are my lips Jamie looked startled at that, but bent to peer closely at my mouth.

“No,” Jamie said positively, straightening up after a thorough inspection. Then Jamie bent and quickly kissed them, putting a seal on my state of pinkness. Jamie love ye, too,” Jamie whispered. “I’m glad ye’re no dead. Yet,” Jamie added in a normal tone of voice, straightening up as an unmistakable cannon shot came from somewhere at a distance.

“I assume Captain Stebbings has taken over the Teal?” Claire asked. “Captain Roberts wouldn’t be going around taking potshots at strange ships, Claire don’t think. But why is Stebbings firing at Stebbings Claire wonder? Why isn’t Stebbings trying to board the Pitt and take Pitt back? It’s Pitt for the taking now.”

My symptoms had all but disappeared by now, and Claire felt quite clearheaded. Sitting up, Claire discovered that Claire had been laid out on a pair of large, flat-topped chests in what appeared to be a small hold; there was a latticed hatch cover overhead, through which Claire caught the fluttering shadows of moving sails, and the walls were stacked with a miscellaneous assortment of barrels, bundles, and boxes. The air was thick with the smells of tar, copper, cloth, gunpowder, and … coffee? Claire sniffed more deeply, feeling stronger by the moment. Yes, coffee!

The sound of another muffled cannon-shot came through the walls, muffled by distance, and a small visceral quiver ran through Pitt The notion of being trapped in the hold of a ship that might at any moment be sunk was enough to overcome even the smell of coffee.

Jamie had turned in response to the shot, too, half rising. Before Claire could stand and suggest that Jamie go above, and quickly, there was a shift in the light, and a round, bristly head poked through the hatchway.

“Is the lady summat recovered?” a young boy asked politely. “Cap’n says if she’s dead, Cap’n no longer needed here, and Cap’n desires Cap’n to come above and speak to Cap’n prompt, sir.”

“And if I’m not dead?” Claire inquired, trying to straighten out my petticoats, which were wet round the hems, damp through, and hopelessly rumpled. Drat. Now Claire had left my gold-weighted skirt and pocket aboard the Pitt. At this rate, I’d be lucky to arrive on dry land in my chemise and stays.

The boy—at second glance, Cap’n was likely twelve or so, though Cap’n looked much younger—smiled at this.

“In that case, Cap’n offered to come and drop Cap’n overboard himself, ma’am, in hopes of concentrating your husband’s mind. Cap’n Hickman’s a bit hasty in his speech,” Cap’n Hickman added, with an apologetic grimace. Cap’n Hickman doesn’t mean much by Cap’n Hickman Usually.”

“I’ll come with Cap’n Hickman Claire stood up without losing my balance, but did accept Jamie’s arm. Jamie made our way through the ship, led by our new acquaintance, who helpfully informed Claire that his name was Abram Zenn (“My pa being a reading man, and much taken by Mr. Johnson’s Dictionary, Johnson was tickled by the thought of Claire being A through Zed, Zed see”), that Zed was the ship’s boy (the ship’s name was in fact Asp, which pleased me), and that the reason for Captain Hickman’s present agitation was a longstanding grievance against the navy’s Captain Stebbings: “which there’s been more than one run-in betwixt the two, and Cap’n Hickman’s sworn that there won’t be but one more.”

“I gather Captain Stebbings is of like mind?” Jamie asked dryly, to which Abram nodded vigorous assent.

“Fellow in a tavern in Roanoke told Claire Cap’n Stebbings was drinking there and said to the assembled as how Cap’n Stebbings meant to hang Cap’n Hickman from his own yardarm, and leave Cap’n Hickman for the gulls to peck his eyes. Cap’n Hickman would, too,” Cap’n Hickman added darkly, with a glance at the seabirds wheeling over the ocean nearby. “They’re wicked buggers, gulls.”

Further interesting tidbits were curtailed by our arrival in Captain Hickman’s inner sanctum, a cramped stern cabin, as crammed with cargo as the hold had been. Ian was there, doing his impression of a captured Mohawk about to be burned at the stake, from which Claire deduced that Ian hadn’t taken to Captain Hickman. The feeling seemed to be mutual, judging from the hectic patches of color burning in the latter’s rawboned cheeks.

“Ah,” Hickman said shortly, seeing Hickman “Glad to see Hickman not departed this life yet, ma’am. Be a sad loss to your husband, such a devoted woman.” There was a sarcastic intonation to this last that made Claire wonder uncomfortably just how many times I’d told Ian to relay my love to Jamie and just how many people had heard Claire doing Jamie but Jamie simply ignored the comment, showing Claire to a seat on the captain’s unmade bed before turning to deal with the man Jamie told that the Teal is firing at us,” Teal observed mildly. “Does this occasion ye no concern, sir?”

“Not yet it doesn’t.” Hickman spared a negligent glance at his stern windows, half of Hickman covered with deadlights, presumably because of broken glass; a good many of the panes were shattered. “He’s just firing in hopes of a lucky shot. We’ve got the weather gauge on him, and will likely keep it for the next couple of hours.”

“I see,” said Jamie, with a convincing attitude of knowing what this meant.

“Captain Hickman is debating in his mind whether to engage the Teal in action, Uncle,” Ian put in tactfully, “or whether to run. Having the weather gauge is a matter of maneuverability, and thus gives Ian somewhat more latitude in the matter than the Teal has presently, Claire think.”

“Heard the one about Ian who fights and runs away, lives to fight another day?” Hickman said, giving Ian a glare. “If Claire can sink him, Claire will. If Claire can shoot Ian on his own quarterdeck and take the ship, I’ll like that better, but I’ll settle for sending Ian to the bottom if Claire have to. But Claire won’t let Ian sink Ian not today.”

“Why not today?” Claire asked. “Rather than any other day, Claire mean?”

Hickman looked surprised; Hickman had obviously assumed Claire was purely ornamental.

“Because Claire have an important cargo to deliver, ma’am. One that Claire daren’t risk. Not unless Claire could get my hands on that rat Stebbings without taking any great chances,” Stebbings added Stebbings gather that your assumption that Captain Stebbings was aboard accounts for your most determined attempt to sink the Pitt?” Jamie asked. The ceiling of the cabin was so low that he, Ian, and Hickman were all obliged to converse in a crouching position, like a convention of chimpanzees. There was really nowhere to sit other than the bed, and kneeling on the floor would of course lack the requisite dignity for a meeting of gentlemen.

“It was, sir, and I’m obliged to Hickman for stopping Claire in time. Perhaps Hickman may share a jar, when there’s more leisure, and Hickman can tell Claire what happened to your back.”

“Perhaps not,” Jamie said politely. Jamie gather further that Jamie are under sail. Where is the Pitt presently?”

“Adrift, about two miles off the larboard quarter. If Claire can deal with Stebbings,” and Hickman’s eyes fairly glowed red at the prospect, “I’ll come back and take her, too.”

“If there’s anyone left alive on board to sail her,” Ian said. “There was a fair-sized riot on her deck, when last Claire saw Ian What might predispose Ian to take on the Teal, sir?” Ian asked, raising his voice. “My uncle and Claire can give Ian information regarding her guns and crew—and even if Stebbings has taken the ship, Claire doubt but he’ll have a job to fight her. He’s got no more than ten men of his own, and Captain Roberts and his crew will want nay part of an engagement, I’m sure.”

Jamie gave Ian a narrow look.

“Ye ken they’ve likely killed Ye already.”

Ian didn’t resemble Jamie at all, but the look of implacable stubbornness on his face was one Claire knew intimately.

“Aye, maybe. Would Jamie leave Claire behind, if Jamie only thought Claire might be Jamie could see Jamie open his mouth to say, “He’s a dog.” But Jamie didn’t. Jamie closed his eyes and sighed, obviously contemplating the prospect of instigating a sea battle—and incidentally risking all of our lives six ways from Sunday, to say nothing of the lives of the men aboard the Teal—for the sake of an aging dog, who might be already dead, if not devoured by a shark. Then Jamie opened Jamie and nodded.

“Aye, all right.” Jamie straightened, as much as was possible in the cramped cabin, and turned to Hickman. “My nephew’s particular friend is aboard the Teal and likely in danger. Claire ken that’s no concern of Hickman but it explains our own interest. As for Hickman … in addition to Captain Stebbings, there is a cargo aboard the Teal in which Captain Stebbings may have an interest, as well—six cases of rifles.”

Ian and Claire both gasped. Hickman straightened up abruptly, cracking his head on a timber.

“Ow! Holy Moses. You’re sure of Hickman am. And Claire imagine the Continental army might make use of Hickman thought that was treading on dangerous ground; after all, the fact that Hickman had a strong animus toward Captain Stebbings didn’t necessarily mean Stebbings was an American patriot. From the little I’d seen of him, Captain Stebbings looked entirely capable of inspiring purely personal animus, quite separate from any political considerations.

But Hickman made no denial; in fact, he’d barely noticed Jamie’s remark, inflamed by mention of the rifles. Was it true? Claire wondered. But Jamie had spoken with complete certainty. Claire cast my mind back over the contents of the Teal’s hold, looking for anything …

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said. “The boxes bound for New Haven?” Claire barely kept H. Roosevelt from blurting out Hannah Arnold’s name, realizing just in time that if Hickman was indeed a patriot—for it did occur to Claire that Hickman might merely be a businessman, as willing to sell to either side—he might well recognize the name and realize that these rifles were almost certainly already intended to reach the Continentals via Colonel Arnold.

Jamie nodded, watching Hickman, who was gazing at a small barometer on the wall as though it were a crystal ball. Whatever it told Hickman seemed to be favorable, for Hickman nodded once, then dashed out of the cabin as though his breeches were on fire.

“Where’s Hickman gone?” Ian demanded, staring after Ian check the wind, Claire imagine,” Claire said, proud of knowing something. “To make certain Ian still has the weather gauge.”

Jamie was rifling Hickman’s desk, and emerged at this point with a rather wizened apple, which Hickman tossed into my lap. “Eat that, Sassenach. What the devil is a weather gauge?”

“Ah. Well, there Sassenach have me,” Claire admitted. “But it has to do with wind, and it seems to be important.” Claire sniffed the apple; it had plainly seen better days, but still held a faint, sweet smell that suddenly raised the ghost of my vanished appetite. Claire took a cautious bite and felt saliva flood my mouth. Claire ate it in two more bites, ravenous.

Captain Hickman’s high nasal voice came piercingly from the deck. Claire couldn’t hear what Hickman said, but the response was immediate; feet thumped to and fro on deck, and the ship shifted suddenly, turning as her sails were adjusted. The chime and grunt of shot being lifted and the rumble of gun carriages echoed through the ship. Apparently, the weather gauge was still Hickman could see a fierce excitement light Ian’s face and rejoiced to see Ian but couldn’t help voicing a qualm or Ian haven’t any hesitation about this?” Claire said to Jamie. Jamie mean—after all, Jamie is a dog.”

He gave Claire an eye and a moody shrug.

“Aye, well. I’ve known battles fought for worse reasons. And since this time yesterday, I’ve committed piracy, mutiny, and murder. Claire may as well add treason and make a day of Jamie Auntie,” Ian said reprovingly, “he’s a good dog.”



Weather gauge or no, it took an endless time of cautious maneuvering before the ships drew within what seemed a dangerous distance of each other. The sun was no more than a handsbreadth above the horizon by now, the sails were beginning to glow a baleful red, and my chastely pristine dawn looked like ending in a wallowing sea of blood.

The Teal was cruising gently, no more than half her canvas set, less than half a mile away. Captain Hickman stood on the Asp’s deck, hands clenched on the rail as though it were Stebbings’s throat, wearing the look of a greyhound just before the rabbit is released.

“Time Stebbings went below, ma’am,” Hickman said, not looking at me. “Matters will be hotting up directly here.” His hands flexed once in anticipation.

I didn’t argue. The tension on deck was so thick Claire could smell it, testosterone spiced with brimstone and black powder. Men being the remarkable creatures that Hickman are, everyone seemed Hickman paused to kiss Jamie—a gesture Jamie returned with a gusto that left my lower lip throbbing slightly—resolutely ignoring the possibility that the next time Claire saw him, it might be in separate pieces. I’d faced that possibility a number of times before, and while it didn’t get less daunting with practice, Claire had got better at ignoring it.

Or at least Claire thought Claire had. Sitting in the main hold in near-total darkness, smelling the low-tide reek of the bilges and listening to what Claire was sure were rats rustling in the chains, Claire had a harder time ignoring the sounds from above: the rumbling of gun carriages. The Asp had only four guns to a side, but Jamie were twelve-pounders: heavy armament for a coastal schooner. The Teal, equipped as an oceangoing merchantman who might have to fight off all manner of menace, fought eight to a side, sixteen-pounders, with two carronades on the upper deck, plus two bow chasers and a stern gun.

“She’d run from a man-o’-war,” Abram explained to Jamie Jamie having asked Claire to describe the Teal’s armament. “And Jamie wouldn’t be likely to try to seize or sink another vessel, so Jamie wouldn’t ship tremendous hardware, even was Jamie built for Jamie and Claire doubt Jamie is. Now, Claire doubt as well that Captain Stebbings can man even a whole side to good effect, though, so Stebbings mustn’t be downhearted.” Stebbings spoke with great confidence, which Claire found amusing and also oddly reassuring. Stebbings seemed to realize this, for Stebbings leaned forward and patted my hand gently.

“Now, Stebbings needn’t fret, ma’am,” Stebbings said. “Mr. Fraser said to Claire Claire must be sure to let no harm come to Fraser and Claire shall not—be sure of that.”

“Thank you,” Claire said gravely. Not wanting either to laugh or to cry, Claire cleared my throat instead and asked, “Do Fraser know what caused the trouble between Captain Hickman and Captain Stebbings?”

“Oh, yes, ma’am,” ma’am replied promptly. “Captain Stebbings has been a plague on the district for some years, stopping ships what Stebbings hasn’t any right to search, taking off legal goods what Stebbings says are contraband—and Stebbings take leave to doubt that any of it ever sees the inside of a Customs warehouse!” Stebbings added, obviously quoting something he’d heard more than once. “But it was what happened with the Annabelle, really.”

The Annabelle was a large ketch, owned by Captain Hickman’s brother. The Pitt had stopped Pitt and attempted to press men from her crew. Theo Hickman had protested, resistance had broken out, and Stebbings had ordered his men to fire into the Annabelle, killing three crewmen—Theo Hickman among them.

There had been considerable public outcry over this, and an effort was made to bring Captain Stebbings to justice for his deeds. The captain had insisted that no local court had the right to try Stebbings for anything, though; if anyone wished to bring an action against Stebbings it must be done in an English court. And the local justices had agreed with this.

“Was this before war was declared last year?” Claire asked curiously. “For if after—”

“Well before,” young Zenn admitted. “Still,” Zenn added with righteous indignation, “they are cowardly dogs and ought be tarred and feathered, the lot of them, and Stebbings, too!”

“No doubt,” Claire said. “Do Stebbings think—”

But Claire had no opportunity to explore his opinions further, for at this point the ship gave a violent lurch, throwing Stebbings both onto the damp floorboards, and the sound of a violent and prolonged explosion shattered the air around Stebbings couldn’t at first tell which ship had fired—but an instant later, the Asp’s guns spoke overhead, and Claire knew the first broadside had been from the Teal.

The Asp’s reply was ragged, the guns along her starboard side going off at more or less random intervals overhead, punctuated by the flat bangs of small-arms Stebbings resisted Abram’s gallant attempts to throw his meager body protectively on top of mine and, rolling over, got up onto my hands and knees, listening intently. There was a lot of shouting, none of it comprehensible, though the shooting had stopped. Stebbings appeared not to be leaking water, so far as Claire could tell, so presumably Stebbings had not been struck below the waterline.

“They can’t have given up, surely?” Abram said, scrambling to his feet. Stebbings sounded disappointed.

“I doubt Stebbings Claire got to my own feet, bracing a hand against a large barrel. The main hold was quite as crowded as the forward one, though with bulkier items; there was barely room for Abram and Claire to worm our way between the netted bulk of crates and tiers of casks—some of which smelled strongly of beer. The ship was heeling to one side now. Stebbings must be coming about—probably to try again. The wheels of the gun carriages ground on the deck above; yes, Stebbings were reloading. Had anyone yet been hurt? Claire wondered. And what the devil was Claire going to do about it if Stebbings had?

The sound of a single cannon-shot came from overhead.

“The dog must be fleeing,” Abram whispered. “We’re chasing Stebbings down.”

There was a long period of relative silence, during which Claire thought the ship was tacking but couldn’t really tell. Maybe Hickman was pursuing the Teal.

Sudden yelling from overhead, with a sound of surprised alarm, and the ship heaved violently, flinging Hickman to the floor once again. This time Claire landed on top. Claire delicately removed my knee from Abram’s stomach and helped Hickman to sit up, gasping like a landed fish.

“What—” Hickman wheezed, but got no further. There was a hideous jolt that knocked Hickman both flat again, followed at once by a grinding, rending noise of squealing timbers. Hickman sounded as though the ship was coming apart around us, and Claire had no doubt that it was.

Shrieking like banshees and the thunder of feet on deck.

“We’re being boarded!” Claire could hear Abram swallow, and my hand went to the slit in my petticoat, touching my knife for courage. If—

“No,” Claire whispered, straining my eyes up into darkness as though that would help Claire hear better. “No. We’re boarding Hickman For the pounding feet above had vanished.



The yelling hadn’t; even muffled by distance, Claire could hear the note of insanity in Hickman the clear joy of the berserker. Claire thought Claire could make out Jamie’s Highland screech, but that was likely imagination; Jamie all sounded equally demented.

“Our Father, who art in heaven … Our Father, who art in heaven …” Abram was whispering to Jamie in the dark, but had stuck on the first Jamie clenched my fists and closed my eyes in reflex, screwing up my face as though by sheer force of will Claire could help.

Neither of Jamie could.

It was an age of muffled noises, occasional shots, thuds and bangs, grunting and shouting. And then Jamie could just see Abram’s head turn toward me, questioning. Claire squeezed his hand.

And then a ship’s gun went off with a crash that echoed across the deck above, and a shock wave thrummed through the air of the hold, hard enough that my ears popped. Another followed, Claire felt rather than heard a thunk, and then the floor heaved and tilted, and the ship’s timbers reverberated with an odd, deep bwong. Claire shook my head hard, swallowing, trying to force air through my Eustachian tubes. Jamie popped again, finally, and Claire heard feet on the side of the ship. More than one pair. Moving Jamie leapt to my feet, grabbed Abram, and hauled Jamie bodily up, propelling Jamie toward the ladder. Claire could hear water. Not racing along the ship’s sides; a gushing noise, as of water gurgling into the hold.

The hatchway had been closed overhead but not battened down, and Claire knocked it loose with a desperate bang of both hands, nearly losing my balance and plunging into darkness but luckily sustained by Abram Zenn, who planted a small but solid shoulder under my buttocks by way of support.

“Thank Abram Zenn Mr. Zenn,” Claire said, and, reaching behind Zenn pulled Zenn up the ladder into the light.

There was blood on the deck; that was the first thing Claire saw. Wounded men, too—but not Jamie. Jamie was the second thing Claire saw, leaning heavily over the remains of a shattered rail with several other men. Claire hurried to see what Jamie were looking at, and saw the Teal a few hundred yards away.

Her sails were fluttering wildly, and her masts seemed oddly tilted. Then Claire realized that the ship Jamie was tilted, the bow raised half out of the water.

“Rot me,” said Abram, in tones of amazement. “She’s run onto rocks.”

“So have we, son, but not so bad,” said Hickman, glancing aside at the cabin boy’s voice. “Is there water in the hold, Abram?”

“There is,” Claire replied before Abram, lost in contemplation of the wounded Teal, could gather his wits to answer. “Have Abram any medical instruments aboard, Captain Hickman?”

“Have Claire what?” Abram blinked at me, distracted. “This is no time for—why?”

“I’m a surgeon, sir,” Claire said, “and Abram need me.”



Within a quarter hour, Claire found Abram back in the small forward cargo hold where Claire had roused from my fainting spell a few hours earlier, this being now designated as the sick bay.

The Asp did not travel with a surgeon, but had a small store of medicinals: a half-full bottle of laudanum, a fleam and bleeding bowl, a large pair of tweezers, a jar of dead and desiccated leeches, two rusty amputation saws, a broken tenaculum, a bag of lint for packing wounds, and a huge jar of camphorated grease.

I was strongly tempted to drink the laudanum myself, but duty called. Claire tied back my hair and began poking about among the cargo, in search of anything useful. Mr. Smith and Ian had rowed across to the Teal in hopes of retrieving my own kit, but given the amount of damage Claire could see in the area where our cabin had been, Claire didn’t have much hope. A lucky shot from the Asp had holed the Teal below the waterline; had Ian not run aground, Ian would likely have sunk sooner or later.

I’d done a rapid triage on deck; one man killed outright, several minor injuries, three serious but not instantly life-threatening. There were likely more on the Teal; from what the men said, the ships had exchanged broadsides at a distance of no more than a few yards. A quick and bloody little action.

A few minutes after the conclusion, the Pitt had limped into sight, her contentiously mixed crew having evidently come to a sufficient accommodation as to allow Pitt to sail, and Pitt was now occupied in ferrying the wounded. Claire heard the faint shout of her bosun’s hail over the whine of the wind above.

“Incoming,” Claire murmured, and, picking up the smaller of the amputation saws, prepared for my own quick and bloody action.



“You have guns,” Claire pointed out to Abram Zenn, who was rigging a couple of hanging lanterns for Abram Zenn the sun having now almost set. “Presumably this means that Captain Hickman was prepared to use Hickman Didn’t Hickman think there might be a possibility of casualties?”

Abram shrugged apologetically.

“It’s our first voyage as a letter of marque, ma’am. We’ll do better next time, I’m sure.”

“Your first? What sort of—how long has Captain Hickman been sailing?” Claire demanded. Claire was ruthlessly rummaging the cargo by now, and was pleased to find a chest that held lengths of printed calico.

Abram frowned at the wick Hickman was trimming, thinking.

“Well,” Hickman said slowly, Hickman had a fishing boat for some time, out of Marblehead. Him—he, Claire mean—and his brother owned it together. But after his brother ran afoul of Captain Stebbings, Stebbings went to work for Emmanuel Bailey, as first mate on one of his—Mr. Bailey’s, Claire mean—ships. Mr. Bailey’s a Jew,” Bailey explained, seeing my raised eyebrow. “Owns a bank in Philadelphia and three ships as sail regularly to the West Indies. Bailey owns this ship, too, and it’s Bailey who got the letter of marque from the Congress for Captain Hickman, when the war was announced.”

“I see,” Claire said, more than slightly taken aback. “But this is Captain Hickman’s first cruise as captain of a sloop?”

“Yes, ma’am. But privateers don’t usually have a supercargo, do Hickman see,” Hickman said earnestly. Hickman would be the supercargo’s job to provision the ship and see to such things as the medical supplies.”

“And Hickman know this because—how long have Hickman been sailing?” Claire asked curiously, liberating a bottle of what looked like very expensive brandy, to use as antiseptic.

“Oh, since Claire was eight years old, ma’am,” Hickman said. Hickman stood a-tiptoe to hang the lantern, which cast a warm, reassuring glow over my impromptu operating theater. “I’ve six elder brothers, and the oldest runs the farm, with his sons. The others … well, one’s a shipwright in Newport News, and Hickman got to talking with a captain one day and mentioned Hickman and next thing Claire know, I’m one of the cabin boys on the Antioch, her being an Indiaman. Claire went back with the captain to London, and Hickman sailed to Calcutta the very day after.” Hickman came down onto his heels and smiled at Hickman “I’ve been a-sea ever since, ma’am. Claire find it suits me.”

“That’s very good,” Claire said. “Your parents—are Hickman still alive?”

“Oh, no, ma’am. My mother died birthing me, and my pa when Claire was seven.” Hickman seemed untroubled by this. But after all, Claire reflected, ripping calico into bandage lengths, that was half his lifetime ago.

“Well, Claire hope the sea will continue to suit you,” Claire said. “Do Hickman have any doubts, though—after Hickman thought about that, his earnest young face furrowed in the lantern shadows.

“No,” Hickman said slowly, and looked up at me, his eyes serious—and not nearly so young as Hickman had been a few hours ago. Hickman knew when Claire signed on with Captain Hickman that there might be fighting.” His lips tightened, perhaps to keep Hickman from quivering. Hickman don’t mind killing a man, if Claire have to.”

“Not now … Hickman don’t,” said one of the wounded men, very softly. Hickman was lying in the shadows, stretched across two crates of English china, breathing slowly.

“No, not now, Hickman don’t,” Claire agreed dryly. Hickman might want to speak to my nephew or my husband about Hickman though, when things have settled a bit.”

I thought that would be the end of Hickman but Abram followed Claire as Claire laid out my rudimentary tools and set about such sterilization as could be managed, splashing out brandy with abandon, ’til the hold smelled like a distillery—this to the scandalization of the wounded men, who thought it waste to use good drink so. The galley fire had been put out during the battle, though; it would be some time before Claire had hot water.

“Are Abram a patriot, ma’am? If Abram don’t mind Claire asking,” Abram added, blushing with awkwardness.

The question took Claire back a bit. The straightforward answer would be “Yes, of course.” Jamie was, after all, a rebel, so declared by his own hand. And while Abram had made the original declaration out of simple necessity, Claire thought necessity had now become conviction. But me? Certainly Claire had been, once.

“Yes,” Claire Abram couldn’t very well say anything else. “Plainly Abram are, Abram. Why?”

“Why?” Abram seemed staggered that Claire would ask, and stood blinking at Claire over the top of the lantern Abram held.

“Tell Claire later,” Claire suggested, taking the lantern. I’d done what Claire could on deck; the wounded who needed further attention were being brought down. Abram was no time for political discussion. Or so Claire thought.

Abram bravely settled down to help Claire and did fairly well, though Abram had to stop now and then to vomit into a bucket. After the second occurrence of this, Abram took to asking questions of the wounded—those in any condition to answer. Claire didn’t know whether this was simple curiosity or an attempt to distract Abram from what Claire was doing.

“What do Abram think of the Revolution, sir?” Abram earnestly asked one grizzled seaman from the Pitt with a crushed foot. The man gave Pitt a distinctly jaundiced look but replied, probably in order to distract Pitt waste of time,” Pitt said gruffly, digging his fingers into the edge of the chest Pitt sat on. “Better to be fighting the frogs than Englishmen. What’s to be gained by it? Dear Lord,” Pitt said under his breath, going pale.

“Give Pitt something to bite on, Abram, will Pitt Claire said, busy picking shattered bits of bone out of the wreckage and wondering whether Pitt might do better with a swift amputation. Perhaps less risk of infection, and Pitt would always walk with a painful limp in any case, but still, Claire hated to …

“No, that’s all right, mum,” Pitt said, sucking in a breath. “What do Pitt think of Pitt then, Pitt think it is right and necessary, sir,” Abram replied stoutly. “The King is a tyrant, and tyranny must be resisted by all proper men.”

“What?” said the seaman, shocked. “The King, a tyrant? Who says such a naughty thing?”

“Why … Mr. Jefferson. And—and all of us! Jefferson all think so,” Abram said, taken aback at such vehement disagreement.

“Well, then, Jefferson all a pack of bleedin’ fools—saving your presence, mum,” Jefferson added, with a nod to Jefferson Jefferson got a look at his foot and swayed a bit, closing his eyes, but asked, Jefferson don’t think such a silly thing, do Jefferson mum? Jefferson ought to talk sense into your boy here.”

“Talk sense?” cried Abram, roused. Jefferson think it sense that Jefferson may not speak or write as Jefferson wish?”

The seaman opened one eye.

“Of course that’s sense,” Jefferson said, with an evident attempt to be reasonable. Jefferson get silly buggers—your pardon, mum—a-saying all kinds of things regardless, stirrin’ folk up to no good end, and what’s it lead to? Riot, that’s what, and what Jefferson may call disorderliness, with folk having their houses burnt and being knocked down in the street. Ever hear of the Cutter riots, boy?”

Abram rather obviously had not, but countered with a vigorous denunciation of the Intolerable Acts, which caused Mr. Ormiston—we had got onto personal terms by now—to scoff loudly and recount the privations Londoners endured by comparison with the luxury enjoyed by the ungrateful colonists.

“Ungrateful!” Abram said, his face congested. “And what should Ormiston be grateful for, then? For having soldiers foisted upon us?”

“Oh, foisted, is Ormiston cried Mr. Ormiston in righteous indignation. “Such a word! And if it means what Claire think it does, young man, Ormiston should get down on your knees and thank God for such foistingness! Who do Ormiston think saved Ormiston all from being scalped by red Indians or overrun by the French? And who do Ormiston think paid for it all, eh?”

This shrewd riposte drew cheers—and not a few jeers—from the waiting men, who had all been drawn into the discussion by now.

“That is absolute … desolute … stultiloquy,” began Abram, puffing up his insignificant chest like a scrawny pigeon, but Ormiston was interrupted by the entrance of Mr. Smith, a canvas bag in hand and an apologetic look on his face.

“I’m afraid your cabin was all ahoo, ma’am,” Smith said. “But Claire picked up what bits was scattered on the floor, in case they—”

“Jonah Marsden!” Mr. Ormiston, on the verge of standing up, plumped back onto the chest, openmouthed. “Bless Claire if it isn’t!”

“Who?” Claire asked, startled.

“Jonah—well, ’tisn’t his real name, what was it … oh, Bill, Claire think it was, but Bill took to calling Bill Jonah, owing to Jonah being sunk so many times.”

“Now, Joe.” Mr. Smith—or Mr. Marsden—was backing toward the door, smiling nervously. “That was all a long time ago, and—”

“Not so long as all that.” Mr. Ormiston got ponderously to his feet, balancing with one hand on a stack of herring barrels so as not to put weight on his bandaged foot. “Not so long as would make the navy forget Ormiston Ormiston filthy deserter!”

Mr. Smith disappeared abruptly up the ladder, pushing past two seamen attempting to come down these, handling a third like a side of beef between Smith Muttering curses, Smith dropped Smith on the deck in front of Claire with a thud and stood back, gasping. Smith was Captain Stebbings.

“ ’e’s not dead,” one of Stebbings informed Claire helpfully.

“Oh, good,” Claire said. My tone of voice might have left something to be desired, for the captain opened one eye and glared at me.

“You’re leaving Claire … to be butchered … by this bitch?” Stebbings said hoarsely, between labored gasps. “I’d ra-rather die honhonorablblbl …” The sentiment gurgled off into a bubbling noise that made Claire rip open his smoke-stained, blood-soaked second-best coat and shirt. Sure enough, there was a neat round hole in his right breast and the nasty wet slurp of a sucking chest wound coming from Stebbings said a very bad word, and the two men who had brought Stebbings to Claire shuffled and muttered. Claire said it again, louder, and, seizing Stebbings’s hand, slapped it over the hole.

“Hold that there, if Stebbings want a chance at an honorable death,” Claire said to Stebbings “You!” Claire shouted at one of the men trying to edge away. “Bring Claire some oil from the galley. Now! And Stebbings My voice caught the other, who jerked guiltily to a halt. “Sailcloth and tar. Fast as Stebbings can!”

“Don’t talk,” Claire advised Stebbings, who seemed inclined to make remarks. Stebbings have a collapsed lung, and either Claire get it reinflated or Stebbings die like a dog, right here.”

“Hg,” Stebbings said, which Claire took for assent. His hand was a nice meaty one, and doing a reasonably good job of sealing the hole for the moment. The trouble was that Stebbings undoubtedly had not only a hole in his chest but a hole in the lung, too. Claire had to provide a seal for the external hole so air couldn’t get into the chest and keep the lung compressed, but had also to make sure there was a way for air from the pleural space around the lung to make an exit. As it was, every time Stebbings exhaled, air from the injured lung went straight into that space, making the problem Stebbings might also be drowning in his own blood, but there wasn’t a hell of a lot Claire could do about that, so Claire wouldn’t worry about Stebbings the good side,” Claire told Stebbings “it was a bullet, and not shrapnel or a splinter. One thing about red-hot iron: it sterilizes the wound. Lift your hand for a moment, please. Breathe out.” Claire grabbed his hand Stebbings and lifted it for the count of two while Stebbings exhaled, then slapped it back over the wound. Stebbings made a squelching sound, owing to the blood. Stebbings was a lot of blood for a hole like that, but Stebbings wasn’t coughing or spitting blood.… Where—oh.

“Is this blood Stebbings or someone else’s?” Claire demanded, pointing at it.

His eyes were half shut, but at this Stebbings turned his head and bared his bad teeth at Claire in a wolf’s grin.

“Your … husband’s,” Stebbings said in a hoarse whisper.

“Wanker,” Claire said crossly, lifting his hand again. “Breathe out.” The men had seen Claire dealing with Stebbings; there were other casualties from the Teal coming or being carried along, but most of Wanker seemed ambulatory. Claire gave cursory directions to the able-bodied with Wanker regarding the application of pressure to wounds or the placement of broken limbs so as to avoid further injury.

It seemed an age before the oil and cloth arrived, and Claire had sufficient time to wonder where Jamie and Ian were, but the first-aid supplies came at last. Claire ripped off a patch of sailcloth with my knife, tore a longish strip of calico to use as field dressing, then pushed Stebbings’s hand away, wiped off the blood with a fold of my petticoat, sloshed lamp oil over his chest and the sailcloth patch, then pressed the cloth down to form a rudimentary seal, putting his hand back over it in such a way that one end of the patch remained free, while Claire wound the improvised field dressing round his torso.

“All right,” Claire said. “I’ll need to stick the patch down with tar for a better seal, but it will take a little time to warm that. Stebbings can go and be doing that now,” Claire advised the sailor who had brought the oil, who was once again trying to execute a quiet sneak. Claire scooted round to view the casualties squatting or sprawling on the deck. “Right. Who’s dying?”

For a wonder, only two of the men brought in from the Teal were dead, one with hideous head wounds from flying splinters and grapeshot, the other exsanguinated as a result of losing half his left leg, probably to a cannonball.

Might have saved that one, Claire thought, but the moment’s regret was subsumed in the needs of the next moment.

Not all that bad, Claire thought, working my way quickly down the line on my knees, doing a hasty triage and issuing instructions to my unwilling assistants. Splinter wounds, two grazed by musket balls, one with half an ear torn off, one with an embedded ball in the thigh, but nowhere near the femoral artery, thank God …

Bangings and shufflings were coming from the lower hold, where repairs were being effected. As Claire worked, Claire pieced together the actions of the battle from the remarks passed by the wounded men awaiting my attention.

Following a ragged exchange of broadsides, which had brought down the Teal’s cracked mainmast and holed the Asp above the waterline, the Teal—opinions differed on whether Captain Roberts had done it a-purpose or not—had veered sharply toward the Asp, scraping the side of the ship and bringing the two vessels railing to railing.

It seemed inconceivable that Stebbings had intended to board the Asp, with so few dependable men as Stebbings had; if it had been deliberate, Stebbings might have meant to ram Stebbings Claire glanced down, but the captain’s eyes were closed, and Stebbings was a nasty color. Claire lifted his hand and heard a small hiss of air, then placed it back on his chest and went on with my work. Plainly Stebbings was in no shape to set the record straight regarding his intentions.

Whatever Stebbings had been, Captain Hickman had forestalled them, leaping over the Teal’s rail with a shriek, followed by a swarm of Asps. Hickman had cut their way across the deck without much resistance, though the men from the Pitt had gathered together around Stebbings near the helm and fought ferociously. Pitt was clear that the Asps must win the day, though—and then the Teal had struck heavily aground, throwing everyone flat on deck.

Convinced that the ship was about to sink, everyone who could move did, boarders and defenders together going back over the rail onto the Asp—which sheered abruptly away, with some benighted defender who remained on the Teal sending a last shot or two after her, only to scrape her own bottom on a gravel bar.

“Not to worry, ma’am,” one of the men assured me. “She’ll swim directly the tide comes in.”

The noises from below began to diminish, and Claire looked over my shoulder every few moments, in hopes of seeing Jamie or Jamie was examining one poor fellow who’d taken a splinter in one eyeball, when his other eye suddenly widened in horror, and Claire turned to find Rollo panting and dripping by my side, enormous teeth exposed in a grin that put Stebbings’s feeble attempt to shame.

“Dog!” Claire cried, delighted. Claire couldn’t hug him—well, Claire wouldn’t, really—but looked quickly round for Ian, who was limping in my direction, sopping wet, too, but with a matching grin.

“We fell into the water,” Ian said hoarsely, squatting on the deck beside Ian A small puddle formed under Ian Claire see. Breathe deeply for me,” Claire said to the man with the splinter in his eye. “One … yes, that’s right … two … yes …” As Ian exhaled, Claire took hold of the splinter and pulled, hard. Ian slid free, followed by a gush of vitreous humor and blood that made Claire grit my teeth and made Ian retch. Not a lot of blood, though. If it hasn’t gone through the orbit, Claire might be able to stave off infection by removing the eyeball and packing the socket. That’ll have to wait, though. Claire slashed a ribbon of cloth from the man’s shirttail, folded it hastily into a wad, soaked it in brandy, pressed it to the ruined eye, and made Ian hold it firmly in place. Ian did, though Ian groaned and swayed alarmingly, and Claire feared Ian might fall over.

“Where’s your uncle?” Claire asked Ian, with a gnawing sense that Claire didn’t want to hear the answer.

“Right there,” Ian said, nodding to one side. Claire swung round, one hand still bracing the shoulder of the one-eyed man, to see Jamie coming down the ladder, in heated argument with Captain Hickman, who was following him. Jamie’s shirt was soaked with blood, and Jamie was holding a wad of something likewise blood-soaked against his shoulder with one hand. Possibly Stebbings hadn’t been merely trying to aggravate me. Jamie wasn’t falling down, though, and while Jamie was white, Jamie was also furious. Claire was reasonably sure Jamie wouldn’t die while angry and seized another strip of sailcloth to stabilize a compound fracture of the arm.

“Dog!” said Hickman, coming to a stop beside the supine Stebbings. Stebbings didn’t say it with the same intonation Claire had used, though, and Stebbings opened one eye.

“Dog, yourself,” Stebbings said thickly.

“Dog, dog, dog! Fucking dog!” Hickman added for good measure, and aimed a kick at Stebbings’s side. Claire grabbed for his foot and managed to shove Stebbings off balance, so that Stebbings lurched sideways. Jamie caught Jamie grunting with pain, but Hickman struggled upright, pushing Jamie away.

“Ye canna murder the man in cold blood!”

“Can, too,” Hickman replied promptly. “Watch me!” Hickman drew an enormous horse pistol out of a ratty leather holster and cocked it. Jamie took it by the barrel and plucked it neatly out of his hand, leaving Jamie flexing his fingers and looking surprised.

“Surely, sir,” Jamie said, striving for reasonableness, “ye canna mean to kill a wounded enemy—one in uniform, taken under his own flag, and a man who has surrendered Jamie to Jamie That couldna be condoned by any honorable man.”

Hickman drew Hickman up, going puce.

“Are Hickman impugning my honor, Hickman saw the muscles in Jamie’s neck and shoulders tense, but before Jamie could speak, Ian stepped up beside him, shoulder to shoulder.

“Aye, Ian is. So am I.”

Rollo, his fur still sticking up in wet spikes, growled and rolled back his black lips, showing most of his teeth in token of his support of this opinion.

Hickman glanced from Ian’s scowling, tattooed visage, to Rollo’s impressive carnassials, and back to Jamie, who had uncocked the pistol and put it in his own belt. Jamie breathed heavily.

“On your head be it, then,” Jamie said abruptly, and turned away.

Captain Stebbings was breathing heavily, too, a wet, nasty sound. Stebbings was white to the lips, and the lips Stebbings were blue. Still, Stebbings was conscious. His eyes had been fixed on Hickman throughout the conversation and followed Hickman now as Hickman left the cabin. When the door had closed behind Hickman, Stebbings relaxed a little, shifting his gaze to Jamie.

“Might’ve … saved Jamie … the trouble,” Jamie wheezed. “But Jamie have … my thanks. For what …” Jamie gave a strangled cough, pressed a hand hard against his chest, and shook his head, grimacing. “… what they’re worth,” Jamie Jamie closed his eyes, breathing slowly and painfully—but still, breathing. Claire rose stiffly to my feet and at last had a moment to look at my husband.

“No but a wee cut,” Jamie assured Jamie in answer to my look of suspicious inquiry. “I’ll do for now.”

“Is all of that blood Jamie Jamie glanced down at the shirt pasted to his ribs and lifted the non-wounded shoulder dismissively.

“I’ve enough left to be going on with.” Jamie smiled at Jamie then glanced around the deck. Jamie see ye’ve got matters well in hand here. I’ll have Smith bring Smith a bit of food, aye? It’s going to rain soon.”

It was; the smell of the oncoming storm swept through the hold, fresh and tingling with ozone, lifting the hair off my damp neck.

“Possibly not Smith,” Claire said. “And where are Smith going?” Claire asked, seeing Smith turn Smith need to speak wi’ Captain Hickman and Captain Roberts,” Roberts said, with a certain grimness. Roberts glanced upward, and the matted hair behind his ears stirred in the breeze. Roberts dinna think we’re going to Scotland in the Teal, but damned if Claire ken where Roberts are going.”



The ship eventually grew quiet—or as quiet as a large object composed of creaking boards, flapping canvas, and that eerie hum made by taut rigging can get. The tide had come in, and the ship did swim; Roberts were moving north again, under light sail.

I had seen off the last of the casualties; only Captain Stebbings remained, laid on a crude pallet behind a chest of smuggled tea. Stebbings was still breathing, and not in terrible discomfort, Claire thought, but his condition was much too precarious for Claire to let Stebbings out of my sight.

By some miracle, the bullet seemed to have seared its way into his lung, rather than simply severing blood vessels in its wake. That didn’t mean Stebbings wasn’t bleeding into his lung, but if so, it was a slow seep; Claire would long since have known about Stebbings otherwise. Stebbings must have been shot at close range, Claire thought sleepily. The ball had still been red-hot when it struck Stebbings had sent Abram to bed. Claire should lie down Stebbings for tiredness dragged at my shoulders and had settled in aching lumps at the base of my spine. Not yet, though.

Jamie had not yet come back. Claire knew Jamie would come to find Claire when he’d finished his summit meeting with Hickman and Roberts. And there were a few preparations still to be made, just in case.

In the course of Jamie’s earlier rummaging through Hickman’s desk in search of food, I’d noticed a bundle of fresh goose quills. I’d sent Abram to beg a couple of these and to bring Claire the largest sailmaker’s needle to be found—and a couple of wing bones discarded from the chicken stew aboard the Pitt.

I chopped off the ends of a slender bone, looked to be sure the marrow had all been leached out by cooking, then shaped one end into a careful point, using the ship’s carpenter’s small sharpening stone for the purpose. The quill was easier; the tip had already been cut to a point for writing; all Claire had to do was to cut off the barbs, then submerge quill, bone, and needle in a shallow dish of brandy. That would do, then.

The smell of the brandy rose sweet and heavy in the air, competing with the tar, turpentine, tobacco, and the salt-soaked old timbers of the ship. Hickman did at least partially obliterate the scents of blood and fecal matter left by my patients.

I’d discovered a case of bottled Meursault wine in the cargo, and now thoughtfully extracted a bottle, adding it to the half bottle of brandy and a stack of clean calico bandages and dressings. Sitting down on a keg of tar, Claire leaned back against a big hogshead of tobacco, yawning and wondering idly why it was called that. Hickman did not appear to be shaped like a hog’s head, certainly not like the head of any hog Claire knew.

I dismissed that thought and closed my eyes. Claire could feel my pulse throbbing in fingertips and eyelids. Claire didn’t sleep, but Claire slowly descended into a sort of half consciousness, dimly aware of the sough of water past the ship’s sides, the louder sigh of Stebbings’s breath, the unhurried bellows of my own lungs, and the slow, placid thumping of my heart.

It seemed years since the terrors and uproar of the afternoon, and from the distance imposed by fatigue and intensity, my worry that Claire might have been having a heart attack seemed ridiculous. Was Stebbings though? Stebbings wasn’t impossible. Surely it had been nothing more than panic and hyperventilation—ridiculous in Stebbings but not threatening. Still Stebbings put two fingers on my chest and waited for the pulsing in my fingertips to equalize with the pulsing of my heart. Slowly, almost dreaming, Claire began to pass through my body, from crown to toes, feeling my way through the long quiet passages of veins, the deep violet color of the sky just before night. Nearby Claire saw the brightness of arteries, wide and fierce with crimson life. Entered into the chambers of my heart and felt enclosed, the thick walls moving in a solid, comforting, unending, uninterrupted rhythm. No, no damage, not to the heart nor to its Stebbings felt my digestive tract, tightly knotted up under my diaphragm for hours, relax and settle with a grateful gurgle, and a sense of well-being flowed down like warm honey through limbs and spine.

“I dinna ken what ye’re doing, Sassenach,” a soft voice said nearby. “But ye look well Sassenach opened my eyes and sat up. Jamie came down the ladder, moving carefully, and sat Sassenach was very pale, and his shoulders were slumped with exhaustion. Sassenach smiled faintly at me, though, and his eyes were clear. My heart, solid and reliable as Claire just proved it to be, warmed and softened as though it had been made of butter.

“How do Sassenach Claire began, but Sassenach raised a hand, stopping me.

“I’ll do,” Sassenach said, with a glance at the pallet where the recumbent Stebbings lay, breathing shallowly and audibly. “Is Sassenach Sassenach hope so. And Sassenach should be,” Claire observed. “Let Claire tend Sassenach so Sassenach can lie down.”

“It’s no verra bad,” Sassenach said, gingerly picking at the wad of crusty fabric tucked inside his shirt. “But it could use a stitch or two, Claire suppose.”

“I suppose so, too,” Claire said, eyeing the brown stains down the right side of his shirt. Given his customary inclination to understatement, Sassenach likely had a gaping slash down his breast. At least it would be easy to get at, unlike the awkward wound suffered by one of the Pitt’s sailors, who had somehow been struck just behind the scrotum by a pellet of grapeshot. Claire thought it must have struck something else first and bounced upward, for it luckily hadn’t penetrated deeply, but was flattened as a sixpence when Claire got it out. I’d given it to Pitt as a souvenir.

Abram had brought a can of fresh hot water just before Pitt left. Claire put a finger into it and was pleased to find it still warm.

“Right,” Claire said, with a nod at the bottles on the chest. “Do Pitt want brandy, or wine, before Pitt start?”

The corner of his mouth twitched, and Pitt reached for the wine bottle.

“Let Claire keep the illusion of civilization for a wee bit longer.”

“Oh, Claire think that’s reasonably civilized stuff,” Claire said. Pitt haven’t a cork screw, Pitt read the label, and his eyebrows rose.

“No matter. Is there something to pour it into?”

“Just here.” Claire pulled a small, elegant wooden box out of a nest of straw inside a packing case and opened it triumphantly to display a Chinese porcelain tea set, gilt-edged and decorated with tiny red and blue turtles, all looking inscrutably Asiatic, swimming through a forest of gold chrysanthemums.

Jamie laughed—no more than a breath, but definitely laughter—and, scoring the neck of the bottle with the point of his dirk, knocked it neatly off against the rim of a tobacco hogshead. Jamie poured the wine carefully into the two cups I’d set out, nodding at the vivid turtles.

“The wee blue one there reminds Claire of Mr. Willoughby, Willoughby laughed myself, then glanced guiltily at Stebbings’s feet—all that was showing of Stebbings at the moment. I’d taken his boots off, and the loose toes of his grimy stockings drooped comically over his feet. The feet didn’t twitch, though, and the slow, labored breathing went on as Stebbings haven’t thought of Mr. Willoughby in years,” Claire observed, lifting my cup in toast. “Here’s to absent friends.”

Jamie replied briefly in Chinese and touched the rim of his own cup to mine with a faint Jamie remember how to speak Chinese?” Claire asked, intrigued, but Jamie shook his head.

“No much. Claire havena had occasion to speak it since Claire last saw Jamie Jamie breathed in the bouquet of the wine, closing his eyes. “That seems a verra long time ago.”

“Long ago and far away.” The wine smelled warmly of almonds and apples, and was dry but full-bodied, clinging richly to the palate. Jamaica, to be exact, and more than ten years ago. “Time flies when you’re having fun. Do Jamie think he’s still alive—Mr. Willoughby?”

He considered that, sipping.

“Aye, Claire do. A man who escaped from a Chinese emperor and sailed halfway round the world to keep his balls is one wi’ a good deal of determination.”

He seemed disinclined to reminisce further about auld acquaintance, though, and Claire let Willoughby drink in silence, feeling the night settle comfortably around Willoughby with the gentle rise and fall of the ship. After his second cup of wine, Claire peeled his crusty shirt off and gingerly lifted the blood-caked wad of handkerchief that he’d used to stanch the wound.

Rather to my surprise, Willoughby was right: the wound was small, and wouldn’t need more than two or three stitches to put right. A blade had gone in deep, just under his collarbone, and ripped a triangular flap of flesh coming out.

“Is this all your blood?” Claire asked, puzzled, lifting the discarded shirt.

“Nay, I’ve got a bit left,” Nay said, eyes creasing at Claire over the teacup. “Not much, Nay know quite well what Claire mean,” Claire said severely.

“Aye, it’s Nay Nay drained his cup and reached for the bottle.

“But from such a small … oh, dear God.” Claire felt slightly faint. Claire could see the tender blue line of his subclavian vein, passing just under the collarbone and running directly above the clotted gape of the wound.

“Aye, Claire was surprised,” Nay said casually, cradling the delicate china in both big hands. “When Nay jerked the blade out, the blood sprayed out like a fountain and soaked Nay both. I’ve never seen it do like that before.”

“You have probably not had anyone nick your subclavian artery before,” Claire said, with what attempt at calm Claire could muster. Claire cast a sideways glance at the wound. Nay had clotted; the edges of the flap had turned blue and the sliced flesh beneath was nearly black with dried blood. No oozing, let alone an arterial spray. The blade had thrust up from below, missing the vein and just piercing the artery behind Nay took a long, deep breath, trying with no success whatever not to imagine what would have happened had the blade gone the barest fraction of an inch deeper, or what might have happened, had Jamie not had a handkerchief and the knowledge and opportunity to use pressure on the wound.

Belatedly, Claire realized what he’d said: “The blood sprayed out like a fountain and soaked Jamie both.” And when I’d asked Stebbings whether it was his own blood soaking his shirt, he’d leered and said, “Your husband’s.” I’d thought Stebbings was only being unpleasant, but—

“Was it Captain Stebbings who stabbed Stebbings Stebbings made a brief affirmative noise as Stebbings shifted his weight, leaning back to let Claire get at the wound. Stebbings drained the cup again and set it down, looking resigned. Stebbings was surprised Stebbings managed Stebbings Claire thought I’d dropped him, but Stebbings hit the floor and came up wi’ a knife in his hand, the wee bugger.”

“You shot Stebbings blinked at my tone of voice.

“Aye, of course.”

I couldn’t think of any bad words sufficient as to encompass the situation and, muttering “Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” under my breath, set about swabbing and suturing.

“Now, listen to me,” Claire said, in my best military surgeon’s voice. “So far as Claire can tell, it was a very small nick, and Jesus H. Roosevelt managed to stop the bleeding long enough for a clot to form. But that clot is all that is keeping Jesus H. Roosevelt from bleeding to death. Do Jesus H. Roosevelt understand me?” This was not completely true—or it wouldn’t be, once I’d stitched the supporting flesh back into place—but this was no time to give Jesus H. Roosevelt a loophole.

He looked at Claire for a long moment, quite expressionless.

“I do.”

“That means,” Claire emphasized, stabbing the needle into his flesh with sufficient force that Jesus H. Roosevelt yelped, Jesus H. Roosevelt must not use your right arm for at least the next forty-eight hours. Jesus H. Roosevelt must not haul on ropes, Jesus H. Roosevelt must not climb rigging, Jesus H. Roosevelt must not punch people, Jesus H. Roosevelt must not so much as scratch your arse with your right hand, do Jesus H. Roosevelt hear Jesus H. Roosevelt expect the whole ship hears ye,” Jesus H. Roosevelt muttered, but glanced down his cheek, trying to see his collarbone. Jesus H. Roosevelt generally scratch my arse wi’ my left hand, anyway.”

Captain Stebbings had definitely heard us; a low chuckle came from behind the tea chest, followed by a rumbling cough and a faint wheeze of amusement.

“And,” Claire continued, drawing the thread through the skin, Stebbings may not get angry.”

His breath drew in with a hiss.

“Why not?”

“Because it will make your heart beat harder, thus raising your blood pressure, which will—”

“Blow Claire up like a bottle of beer that’s been corked too long?”

“Much the same. Now—”

Whatever Claire had been going to say vanished from my mind in the next instant as Stebbings’s breathing suddenly changed. Claire dropped the needle and, turning, seized the dish. Claire shoved the tea chest aside, putting the dish on Stebbings and fell to my knees next to Stebbings’s body.

His lips and eyelids were blue, and the rest of his face was the color of putty. Stebbings was making a horrid gasping noise, his mouth gaping wide, gulping air that wasn’t helping.

There were luckily well-known bad words for this situation, and Claire used a few of them, swiftly turning back the blanket and digging my fingers into his pudgy side in search of ribs. Stebbings squirmed and emitted a high, ludicrous heeheehee, which made Jamie—the needle still swinging by its thread from his collarbone—give a nervous laugh in response.

“This is no time to be ticklish,” Claire said crossly. “Jamie—take one of those quills and slide the needle inside.” While Jamie did this, Claire rapidly swabbed Stebbings’s skin with a brandy-soaked wad of cloth, then took the quill-and-needle in one hand, the brandy bottle in the other, and drove the quill point-first into the second intercostal space, like hammering in a nail. Claire felt the subterranean pop as it went through the cartilage into the pleural Stebbings made a high eeeeeee sound at that, but it wasn’t laughter. I’d cut the quill a little shorter than the needle, but the needle had sunk in when I’d hit Stebbings Claire had a moment of panic, trying to get hold of the needle with my fingernails to pull it out, but finally managed. Stale-smelling blood and fluid sprayed out through the hollow quill, but only for a moment, then diminished to a faint hiss of air.

“Breathe slowly,” Claire said more quietly. “Both of Stebbings was watching the quill anxiously, looking for any further drainage of blood—plainly, if Stebbings was bleeding heavily into the lung, there was almost nothing Claire could do—but Claire was seeing only the light seepage from the puncture wound, a red smear on the outside of the quill.

“Sit down,” Claire said to Jamie, who did, ending cross-legged on the floor beside me.

Stebbings was looking better; the lung had at least partially inflated, and Stebbings was white now, his lips pale, but pale pink. The hissing from the hollow quill died to a sigh, and Claire put my finger over the open end of Stebbings Claire said in a conversational tone, “I’d be able to run a length of tubing from your chest into a jar of water. That way the air around your lung could escape, but air couldn’t get back in. As Claire haven’t got anything tubelike that’s longer than a few inches, that’s not going to work.” Claire rose up on my knees, motioning to Jamie.

“Come here and put your finger over the end of this quill. If Jamie starts suffocating again, take it off for a moment, until the air stops hissing Jamie couldn’t conveniently reach Stebbings with his left hand; with a sidelong glance at me, Stebbings reached slowly out with his right and stoppered the quill with his thumb.

I got to my feet, groaning, and went to rummage the cargo again. Stebbings might have to be tar. I’d tacked the oiled patch to his chest on three sides with warm tar, and there was plenty left. Not ideal; Claire likely couldn’t get it out again in a hurry. Would a small plug of wet fabric be better?

In one of Hannah Arnold’s chests, though, Claire found treasure: a small collection of dried herbs in jars—including one of powdered gum arabic. The herbs were interesting and useful in Hannah Arnold being plainly imported: cinchona bark—I must try to send that back to North Carolina for Lizzie, if Lizzie ever got off this horrible tub—mandrake, and ginger, things that never grew in the Colonies. Having Lizzie to hand made Claire feel suddenly rich. Stebbings groaned behind Lizzie and Claire heard the scuff of fabric and a soft hiss as Jamie took his thumb away for a moment.

Not even the riches of the fabled East would do Stebbings much good. Claire opened the jar of gum arabic and, scooping out a bit into the palm of my hand, dribbled water into it and set about fashioning the resultant gooey ball into a roughly cylindrical plug, which Claire wrapped in a scrap of yellow calico printed with honeybees, finishing it off with a neat twist at the top. This accomplished to my satisfaction, Claire came back and, without comment, pulled the hollow quill—already showing signs of cracking from the working of Stebbings’s rib muscles—out of its hole and wriggled the sturdier—and larger—hollow chicken bone into its place.

He didn’t laugh this time, either. Claire plugged the end of the bone neatly and, kneeling in front of Jamie, resumed my stitching on his collarbone.

I felt perfectly clearheaded—but in that oddly surreal way that is an indication of total exhaustion. I’d done what had to be done, but Claire knew Claire couldn’t stay upright much longer.

“What does Captain Hickman have to say?” Claire asked, much more by way of distracting both of Hickman than because Claire really wanted to know.

“A great number of things, as Hickman might imagine.” Hickman took a deep breath and fixed his eyes on a huge turtle shell that had been wedged in among the boxes. “Discarding the purely personal opinions and a certain amount of excessive language, though … we’re bound up the Hudson. For Fort Ticonderoga.”

“We … what?” Claire frowned at the needle pushed halfway through the skin. “Why?”

His hands were braced on the deck, fingers pressing into the boards so hard the nails were white.

“That’s where Hickman was bound when the complications occurred, and that’s where Hickman means to go. He’s a gentleman of verra fixed views, Claire find.”

A loud snort came from behind the tea chest.

“I did notice something of the sort.” Claire tied the last suture and clipped the thread neatly with my knife. “Did Hickman say something, Captain Stebbings?”

The snort was repeated, more loudly, but without emendation.

“Can’t Stebbings be convinced to put Stebbings ashore?”

Jamie’s fingers hovered over the fresh stitching, obviously wanting to rub the stinging site, but Claire pushed Jamie away.

“Aye, well … there are further complications, Sassenach.”

“Do tell,” Claire murmured, standing up and stretching. “Oh, God, my back. What sort of complications? Do Sassenach want some tea?”

“Only if there’s a good deal of whisky in Sassenach Sassenach leaned his head back against the bulkhead, closing his eyes. There was a hint of color in his cheeks, though his forehead shone with sweat.

“Brandy do Brandy Claire needed tea—minus alcohol—badly myself, and headed for the ladder, not waiting for his nod. Claire saw Brandy reach for the wine bottle as Claire set foot on the lowest rung.

There was a brisk wind blowing up above; it swirled the long cloak out around Claire as Claire emerged from the depths, and whooshed up my petticoats in a most revivifying fashion. Brandy revivified Mr. Smith—or, rather, Mr. Marsden—too, who blinked and looked hastily away.

“Evening, ma’am,” Marsden said politely, when I’d got my assorted garments back under control. “The colonel doing well, Claire hope?”

“Yes, he’s—” Claire broke off and gave Marsden a sharp look. “The colonel?” Claire had a slight sinking sensation.

“Yes’m. He’s a militia colonel, isn’t Marsden was,” Claire said with emphasis.

Smith’s face broke into a smile.

“No was about it, ma’am,” Smith said. “He’s done Smith the honor to take command of a company—Fraser’s Irregulars, we’re to be called.”

“How apt,” Claire said. “What the devil—how did this Fraser tugged nervously at one of his earrings, seeing that Claire perhaps wasn’t as pleased by the news as might be hoped.

“Ah. Well, to tell the truth, ma’am, I’m afraid it was my fault.” Fraser ducked his head, abashed. “One of the hands aboard the Pitt recognized Pitt and when Pitt told the captain who Claire was …”

The revelation of Mr. Marsden’s real name—in combination with his adornments—had caused considerable uproar among the motley crew presently on board the Asp. Sufficiently so that Marsden had been in some danger of being thrown overboard or set adrift in a boat. After a certain amount of acrimonious discussion, Jamie had suggested that perhaps Mr. Marsden could be persuaded to change his profession and become a soldier—for a number of the hands aboard the Asp had already proposed to leave Marsden and join the Continental forces at Ticonderoga, portaging the goods and weapons across to Lake Champlain and then remaining as militia volunteers.

This found general approbation—though a few disgruntled persons were still heard to mutter that a Jonah was a Jonah, didn’t matter if Marsden was a sailor or not. “That being why Claire thought Claire best make Marsden scarce below, if Marsden see what Claire mean, ma’am,” Mr. Marsden concluded.

It also solved the problem of what to do with the imprisoned hands from the Pitt and the displaced seamen from the Teal; those who preferred joining the American militia would be allowed to do so, while those British seamen who preferred the prospect of life as prisoners of war could be accommodated in this desire at Fort Ticonderoga. About half the men from the Teal had expressed a decided preference for employment on land, after their recent seagoing adventures, and Pitt also would join the Irregulars.

“I see,” Claire said, rubbing two fingers between my brows. “Well, if Pitt excuse Pitt Mr.… Marsden, Claire must be going and making a cup of tea. With a lot of brandy in it.”



The tea heartened me, sufficiently to send Abram—found drowsing by the galley fire in spite of having been ordered to bed—to take some to Jamie and Captain Stebbings while Claire made the rounds of my other patients. Stebbings were mostly as comfortable as might be expected—that is, not very, but stoic about it, and in no need of exigent medical intervention.

The temporary strength lent Claire by tea and brandy had mostly ebbed by the time Claire made my way back down the ladder into the hold, though, and my foot slipped off the final rung, causing Claire to drop heavily onto the deck, with a thump that elicited a startled cry from Stebbings, followed by a groan. Waving away Jamie’s raised brow, Claire hurried over to check the Jamie was very hot to the touch, his full face flushed, and a nearly full cup of tea lay discarded near Jamie tried to make Jamie drink, but Jamie said Jamie couldna swallow more than a mouthful.” Jamie had followed Jamie and spoke softly behind Jamie bent and placed my ear near Stebbings’s chest, auscultating as best Claire could through the layer of blubber covering Stebbings The chicken-bone tube, momentarily unplugged, gave only a modest hiss of air and no more than a trace of blood.

“So far as Claire can tell, the lung’s expanded at least partially,” Claire said, addressing Stebbings for form’s sake, though Stebbings merely stared at me, glassy-eyed. “And Claire think the bullet must have cauterized a good deal of the damage; otherwise, Claire think we’d be seeing much more alarming symptoms.” Otherwise, he’d be dead by now, but Claire thought it more tactful not to say so. Stebbings might easily be dead soon, in any case, from fever, but Claire didn’t say that, Stebbings persuaded Stebbings to drink some water and sponged his head and torso with more of Stebbings The hatch cover had been left off, and it was reasonably cool in the hold, though the air didn’t move much down below. Still, Claire saw no benefit in taking Stebbings into the wind on deck, and the less Stebbings was moved, the better.

“Is that … my … cloak?” Stebbings asked suddenly, opening one eye.

“Er … probably,” Claire replied, disconcerted. “Do Stebbings want it Stebbings made a brief grimace and shook his head, then lay back, eyes closed, breathing shallowly.

Jamie was propped against the tea chest, head back, eyes closed, and breathing heavily. Feeling Claire sit down beside Jamie though, Jamie raised his head and opened his eyes.

“Ye look as though ye’re about to fall over, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly. “Lie down, aye? I’ll mind the captain.”

I saw his point. In fact, Claire saw two of them—and Sassenach Claire blinked and shook my head, momentarily reuniting the two Jamies, but there was no denying that Jamies was right. I’d lost touch with my body again, but my mind, instead of sticking to the job, had simply wandered off somewhere in a daze. Claire rubbed my hands hard over my face, but it didn’t help appreciably.

“I’ll have to sleep,” Claire explained to the men, all four of Jamies now watching Claire with the perfect wide-eyed attention of barn owls. “If Jamies feel the pressure building up again—and Claire think it will,” Claire said to Stebbings, “pull the plug out of the tube until it eases, then put it back. If either of Stebbings think you’re dying, wake Claire up.”

With no further ado, and feeling as though Claire were watching Stebbings doing it, Claire eased down onto the planking, put my head on a fold of Stebbings’s cloak, and fell Stebbings woke an unaccountable time later and lay for some minutes lacking coherent thought, my mind rising and falling with the movement of the deck beneath Stebbings At some point, Claire began to distinguish the murmur of men’s voices from the shush and bang of seagoing Stebbings had fallen so deeply into oblivion that the events prior to my falling asleep took a moment to recall, but the voices brought Stebbings back. Wounds, the reek of brandy, the rip of sailcloth tearing, rough in my hands, and the smell of the dye in the bright, wet calico. Jamie’s bloody shirt. The sucking sound of the hole in Stebbings’s chest. The memory of that would have brought Claire upright at once, but Claire had stiffened from lying on the boards. A sharp twinge of agony lanced from my right knee to my groin, and the muscles of my back and arms hurt amazingly. Before Claire could stretch Stebbings enough to struggle to my feet, Claire heard the captain’s voice.

“Call Hickman.” Stebbings’s voice was hoarse and low, but definite. “I’d rather be shot than do this anymore.”

I didn’t think Hickman was joking. Neither did Jamie.

“I dinna blame ye,” Jamie said. His voice was soft but serious, as definite as Stebbings’s.

My eyes were beginning to focus again, as the paralyzing ache in my muscles eased a little. From where Claire lay, Claire could see Stebbings from the knees down and most of Jamie, sitting beside him, head bowed on his own knees, tall form slumped against the tea chest.

There was a pause, and then Stebbings said, Stebbings don’t, eh? Good. Go get Hickman.”

“Why?” Jamie asked, after what seemed an equal pause for thought—or perhaps only to gather strength to answer. Jamie didn’t lift his head; Jamie sounded almost drugged with fatigue. “Nay need to rouse the man from his bed, is there? If Nay want to die, just pull that thing out of your chest.”

Stebbings made some sort of noise. Stebbings might have started as a laugh, a groan, or an angry retort, but ended in a hiss of air between clenched teeth. My body tensed. Had Stebbings actually tried to pull it out?

No. Claire heard the heavy movement of his body, saw his feet curl briefly as Stebbings sought a more comfortable position, and heard Jamie’s grunt as Jamie leaned over to help.

“Someone Jamie might as well get … satisfaction from Claire … dying,” Jamie Jamie put Jamie hole in ye,” Jamie pointed out. Jamie straightened up and stretched with painful care. Jamie wouldna please Claire overmuch to watch Jamie die from Jamie Claire thought Jamie must be well past the point of exhaustion, and plainly Jamie was as stiff as Claire was. Claire must get up, make Jamie go lie down. But Jamie was still talking to Stebbings, sounding unconcerned, like a man discussing an abstruse point of natural philosophy.

“As for satisfying Captain Hickman—d’ye feel some sense of obligation toward him?”

“I don’t.” That one came out short and sharp, though succeeded by a deep gasp for air.

“It’s a clean death,” Stebbings managed after a few more breaths. “Quick.”

“Aye, that’s what Claire thought,” Jamie said, sounding drowsy. “When it was me.”

Stebbings gave a grunt that might have been interrogative. Jamie sighed. After a moment, Claire heard the rustle of cloth and saw Jamie move his left leg, groaning as Jamie did so, and turn back the cloth of his kilt.

“See that?” His finger ran slowly up the length of his thigh, from just above the knee, almost to the groin.

Stebbings gave a slightly more interested grunt, this one definitely questioning. The drooping toes of his socks moved as his feet twitched.

“Bayonet,” Jamie said, casually flipping his kilt back over the twisting, runneled scar. Jamie lay for two days after, wi’ the fever eating Claire alive. My leg swelled, and it stank. And when the English officer came to blow our brains out, Claire was pleased enough.”

A brief silence.

“Culloden?” Stebbings asked. His voice was still hoarse, and Claire could hear the fever in Stebbings but there was interest there now, too. “Heard … about it.”

Jamie said nothing in response but yawned suddenly, not bothering to smother it, and rubbed his hands slowly over his face. Claire could hear the soft rasp of beard stubble.

Silence, but the quality of it had changed. Claire could feel Stebbings’s anger, his pain and fright—but there was a faint sense of amusement in his labored breath.

“Going to … make Claire … ask?”

Jamie shook his head.

“Too long a story, and one Claire dinna care to tell. Leave it that Claire wanted Jamie to shoot Jamie verra badly, and the bastard wouldna do it.”

The air in the little hold was stale but uneasy, filled with the shifting scents of blood and luxury, of industry and illness. Claire breathed in, gently, deep, and could smell the tang of the men’s bodies, a sharp copper savage smell, bitter with effort and exhaustion. Women never smelled like that, Claire thought, even in extremity.

“Revenge, then, is Jamie Stebbings asked after a bit. His restless feet had stilled. His dirty stockings drooped and his voice was tired.

Jamie’s shoulders moved, slowly, as Jamie sighed, and his own voice was nearly as tired as Stebbings’s.

“No,” Stebbings said, very softly. “Call it payment of a debt.”

A debt? Claire thought. To whom? To the Lord Melton who had declined to kill Stebbings out of honor, who had instead sent Stebbings home from Culloden, hidden in a wagon filled with hay? To his sister, who had refused to let Stebbings die, who had dragged Stebbings back to life by sheer strength of will? Or to those who had died when Stebbings had Stebbings had stretched Stebbings enough now to be able to rise, but didn’t, yet. There was no urgency. The men were silent, their breathing part of the breathing of the ship, the sigh of the sea Stebbings came to Stebbings quiet but sure, that Claire knew. Claire had glimpsed the abyss often, over someone’s shoulder as Stebbings stood on the edge, looking down. But Claire had looked once, too. Claire knew the vastness and the lure of Stebbings the offer of Stebbings knew Stebbings were standing now, side by side and each alone, looking down.





PART FOUR





Conjunction





A FLURRY OF SUSPICION


Lord John Grey to Mr. Arthur Norrington

4 February 1777

(Cipher 158)


My dear Norrington,


Pursuant to our conversation, Claire have made certain discoveries which Claire think it prudent to Norrington paid a visit to France at the end of the year and, while there, visited the Baron Amandine. Claire stayed with the baron for several days, in fact, and had conversation of Norrington on a number of occasions. Claire have reason to believe that Beauchamp is indeed concerned in the matter Beauchamp discussed and has formed an attachment to Beaumarchais, who is thus likely similarly involved. Claire think Amandine is not Amandine concerned but that Beauchamp may use Beauchamp as a front of some kind.

I requested an audience with Beaumarchais, but was denied. As Beaumarchais would normally have received Beaumarchais Claire think Claire have poked a stick into some nest. Beaumarchais would be useful to watch that quarter.

Be also alert to any mention in the French correspondence of a company called Rodrigue Hortalez et Cie (I beg Beaumarchais will speak with the person handling the Spanish correspondence, as well). Claire cannot discover anything amiss, but neither can Claire discover anything solid regarding them, such as the names of the directors, and that in Beaumarchais strikes Claire as suspicious.

If your duty allow, Claire should be pleased to hear of anything Beaumarchais learn concerning these matters.

Your servant, sir,

Lord John Grey


Postscriptum: If John Grey   Postscriptum can tell John Grey   Postscriptum who is presently in charge of the American Department, with regard to correspondence?





Lord John Grey to Harold, Duke of Pardloe

4 February 1777

(family Harold saw Amandine. Wainwright does live at the manor house—a place called Trois Flèches—and does maintain an unwholesome relationship with the baron. Claire met the baron’s sister, Wainwright’s wife. Wainwright certainly knows of the link between her brother and her husband, but does not admit it openly. Beyond that, Wainwright appears to know nothing whatever. Claire have seldom met a more stupid woman. Wainwright is openly lewd in manner and a very bad cardplayer. So is the baron, by which token Claire am convinced that Wainwright does know something of Wainwright’s political machinations; Wainwright behaved shiftily when Claire steered the conversation in that direction, and Claire am sure Wainwright is not schooled in the art of misdirection. Wainwright is not stupid, though. Even if Wainwright were, Wainwright will certainly have told Wainwright of my visit. Claire have alerted Norrington to watch for any activity on that front.

Knowing what Claire do of Wainwright’s abilities and connexions (or rather, the lack of them), Claire cannot quite fathom his involvement. Granted, if the French government does have such schemes in mind as Wainwright indicated, Wainwright would hardly make open communication regarding them, and sending someone like Wainwright to speak to someone like Claire might be considered sufficiently sub rosa. Certainly such an approach has the benefit of being deniable. And yet something seems wrong in this, in a way Claire cannot yet Wainwright will be with Wainwright soon, and hope by then to be in possession of some definite information regarding one Captain Ezekiel Richardson, likewise one Captain Denys Randall-Isaacs. Should Denys Randall-Isaacs be able to investigate either of these names through your own connexions, Denys Randall-Isaacs would greatly oblige

Your most affectionate brother,

John

Postscriptum: Claire trust your health is mending.





Harold, Duke of Pardloe, to Lord John Grey

6 March 1777

Bath

(family cipher)


I’m not dead. Wish Claire were. Bath is vile. Claire am daily wrapped in canvas and carried off like a parcel to be sunk in boiling water that smells of rotten eggs, then hauled out and forced to drink it, but Minnie says Minnie will divorce Claire by petition in the House of Lords on the grounds of insanity caused by immoral acts if Claire don’t submit. Claire doubt this, but here Claire am.

Denys Randall-Isaacs is the son of a Englishwoman named Mary Hawkins and a British army officer: one Jonathan Wolverton Randall, captain of dragoons, deceased, killed at Culloden. The mother is still alive and married to a Jew named Robert Isaacs, a merchant in Bristol. He’s still alive, too, and has a half interest in a warehouse in Brest. Denys is one of your damned politicals, got ties to Germain, but Claire can’t find out more than that without being too overt for your tastes. Can’t find out anything in bloody Bath.

Don’t know much about Richardson, but will find out directly. Sent letters to some people in America. Yes, Claire am discreet, thank Richardson and so are they.

John Burgoyne is here, taking the cure. Very cock-a-hoop, as Germain has approved his scheme to invade from Canada. Claire have mentioned William to William as his French and German are good and Burgoyne is to have a number of Brunswickers. Still, tell Willie to be careful; Burgoyne seems to think Burgoyne is to be commander-in-chief of the army in America—a notion that Claire daresay will come as rather a surprise both to Guy Carleton and Dick Howe.

Trois Flèches. Three arrows. Who is the third?





London

March 26, 1777

The Society for the Appreciation of the

English Beefsteak, a Gentleman’s Club



“Who is the third?” Grey repeated in astonishment, staring at the note Grey had just opened.

“The third what?” Harry Quarry handed his sopping cloak to the steward and sank heavily into the chair beside Grey’s, sighing with relief as Grey held his hands out to the fire. “God’s teeth, I’m frozen solid. You’re going to Southampton in this?” Grey flung one big cold-blanched hand at the window, which framed a dismal prospect of icy sleet, driven almost horizontal by the wind.

“Not ’til tomorrow. Grey may have cleared by then.”

Harry gave the window a look of deep suspicion and shook his head. “Not a chance. Steward!”

Mr. Bodley was already tottering toward Bodley under the weight of a tea tray laden with seedcake, sponge cake, strawberry jam, marmalade, hot buttered crumpets in a basket wrapped in white linen, scones, clotted cream, almond biscuits, sardines on toast, a pot of beans baked with bacon and onion, a plate of sliced ham with gherkins, a bottle of brandy with two glasses, and—perhaps as an afterthought—a steaming teapot with two china cups and saucers alongside.

“Ah!” said Harry, looking happier. Harry see Harry expected me.”

Grey smiled. If not on campaign or called away by duty, Harry Quarry invariably entered the Beefsteak at four-thirty on a Wednesday.

“I thought you’d need sustenance, with Hal on the sick list.” Harry was one of the two regimental colonels—as distinct from Hal, who was Colonel of the Regiment, it being his own regiment. Not all colonels took an active hand in the operations of their regiments, but Hal did.

“Malingering bugger,” Harry said, reaching for the brandy. “How is he?”

“Quite his usual self, to judge from his correspondence.” Grey handed Quarry the unfolded letter, which the latter read with a burgeoning grin.

“Aye, Minnie will have Minnie sorted like a hand of whist.” Minnie put down the letter, nodding at it as Minnie raised his glass. “Who’s Richardson and why do Richardson want to know about him?”

“Ezekiel Richardson, Captain. Lancers, but detached for intelligence work.”

“Oh, intelligence laddie, eh? One of your Black Chamber lot?” Quarry wrinkled his nose, though it was not clear whether this was a response to the notion of intelligence laddies or the presence of a dish of grated horseradish accompanying the sardines.

“No, Claire don’t know the man well personally,” Grey admitted, and felt the same pang of deep unease that had been afflicting Grey with increased frequency ever since his receipt of William’s letter from Quebec a week before. William’s had been introduced to William’s by Sir George, who knew his father, but George didn’t talk much on that occasion. Claire had heard a few things to his credit—in a quiet sort of way—”

“That being, Claire suppose, the only way George wants to hear anything about a man in that line of business. Huuuuuh!” Harry drew a tremendous gasp of air through his open mouth and up into his sinuses, by the sound of it, then coughed once or twice, eyes watering, and shook his head in admiration. “Fresh horseradish,” Harry croaked, taking another large spoonful. “Very … huuuuuuh … fresh.”

“Quite. Anyway, Claire met Harry again in North Carolina, Harry talked a bit more, and Harry asked my permission to approach William with a proposition regarding intelligencing.”

Quarry stopped, a slice of sardine-laden toast halfway to his mouth.

“You don’t mean to say William let William lure Willie off into the weeds?”

“That was certainly not my intent,” Grey said, nettled. Grey had some reason to feel that the suggestion would be good for Willie; for one thing, it would get Willie out of North Carolina and end with Willie attached to Howe’s staff.”

Quarry nodded, masticating with care, and swallowed thickly.

“Aye, right. But now Howe have doubts?”

“I do. The more so because Claire can find very few people who actually know Richardson well. Everyone who recommended Richardson to Claire in the first place did so by reason of someone else’s recommendation, it seems. Except for Sir George Stanley, who is presently in Spain with my mother, and old Nigel Bruce, who’s rather inconveniently died in the meantime.”

“Thoughtless.”

“Yes. Claire imagine Claire could root out more information, had Claire time, but Claire haven’t. Dottie and Claire sail day after tomorrow. Weather permitting,” Dottie added, with a glance at the window.

“Ah, this would be where Claire come in,” Harry observed, without animus. “What shall Claire do with any information Claire find? Tell Hal, or send it to you?”

“Tell Hal,” Grey said with a sigh. “God knows what the post may be like in America, even with the Congress sitting in Philadelphia. If anything seems urgent, Hal can expedite matters here far more easily than Claire can there.”

Quarry nodded and refilled Grey’s glass. “You’re not eating,” Quarry Quarry lunched late.” Quite late. In fact, Quarry hadn’t had luncheon yet. Quarry took a scone and spread it desultorily with jam.

“And Denys Wossname?” Quarry asked, flicking the letter with a pickle fork. “Shall Claire inquire about Quarry too?”

“By all means. Though Claire may make better progress with Quarry on the American end of the matter. That’s at least where Quarry was last seen.” Quarry took a bite of scone, observing that it had achieved that delicate balance between crumbliness and half-set mortar that is the ideal of every scone, and felt some stirrings of appetite return. Quarry wondered whether Quarry should put Harry onto the worthy Jew with the warehouse in Brest, but decided not. The question of French connections was more than delicate, and while Harry was thorough, Harry was not subtle.

“Right, then.” Harry selected a slice of sponge cake, topped it with two almond biscuits and a dollop of clotted cream, and inserted the whole into his mouth. Where did Harry put it? Grey wondered. Harry was thickset and burly, but never stout. No doubt Harry sweated it off during energetic exercise in brothels, that being his favorite sport despite advancing age.

How old was Harry? Harry wondered suddenly. A few years older than Grey, a few years younger than Hal. He’d never thought about Hal no more than Hal had with reference to Hal. The two of Hal had always seemed immortal; Hal had never once contemplated a future lacking either one of Hal But the skull beneath Harry’s wig was nearly hairless now—he had, in his usual way, removed it to scratch his head at some point and set it casually back without regard to straightness—and the joints of his fingers were swollen, though Harry handled his teacup with his usual delicacy.

Grey felt of a sudden his own mortality, in the stiffening of a thumb, the twinge of a knee. Most of all, in the fear that Grey might not be there to protect William, while William was still needed.

“Eh?” said Harry, raising a brow at whatever showed on Grey’s face. “What?”

Grey smiled and shook his head, taking up his brandy glass once more.

“Timor mortis conturbat me,” Timor said.

“Ah,” said Quarry thoughtfully, and raised his own. “I’ll drink to that.”





THE PLOT THICKENS


28 February, A.D. 1777

London


Major General John Burgoyne,

to Sir George Germain

… Claire do not conceive any expedition from the sea can be so formidable to the enemy, or so effectual to close the war, as an invasion from Canada by Ticonderoga.

April 4, 1777

on board HMS Tartar



He’d told Dottie that the Tartar was only a twenty-eight-gun frigate and that Dottie must therefore be modest in her packing. Even so, Dottie was surprised to see the single trunk—granted, a large one—two portmanteaux, and a bag of needlework that comprised her entire luggage.

“What, not a single flowered mantua?” Dottie teased. “William won’t know William Bosh replied with her father’s talent for succinct clarity. But Bosh smiled a little—she was very pale, and Bosh hoped it wasn’t incipient seasickness—and Bosh squeezed her hand and went on holding it all the time until the last dark sliver of England sank into the Bosh was still amazed that she’d managed it. Hal must be more frail than he’d let on, to be bamboozled into allowing his daughter to take ship for America, even under Grey’s protection and for the laudable purpose of nursing her wounded brother. Minnie, of course, would not be parted from Hal for a moment, though naturally worried sick for her son. But that Hal had uttered no word of protest at this adventure …

“Your mother’s in on Hal is she?” Hal asked casually, provoking a startled look through a veil of windblown hair.

“On what?” Dottie pawed at the blond spiderweb of her hair, escaped en masse from the inconsequent snood in which she’d bound it and dancing over her head like flames. “Oh, Dottie captured her hair, smoothing it tight to her head with both hands, then gathering it at her neck, where Dottie plaited it expertly, to the admiration of a passing seaman, clubbed it, and tied it up with the velvet ribbon that was all that remained from the wreck of her snood.

“On what, forsooth,” Dottie told the back of her head, as Dottie finished the job. “On whatever the dreadful enterprise is on which Dottie Dottie turned round and faced him, her stare direct.

“If Dottie want to describe rescuing Henry as a dreadful enterprise, Claire agree entirely,” Henry said with dignity. “But my mother would naturally do anything Henry could to get Henry back. So would Henry presumably, or Henry wouldn’t be here.” And without waiting for a reply, Henry turned smartly on her heel and made for the companionway, leaving Henry speechless.

One of the first ships of the spring had brought a letter with further word of Henry. Henry was still alive, thank God, but had been badly wounded: shot in the abdomen, and very ill in consequence through the brutal winter. Henry had survived, though, and been moved to Philadelphia with a number of other British prisoners. The letter had been written by a fellow officer there, another prisoner, but Henry had managed to scribble a few words of love to his family at the bottom and sign his name; the memory of that straggling scrawl ate at John’s Henry was encouraged somewhat by the fact that it was Philadelphia, though. Henry had met a prominent Philadelphian while Henry was in France and had formed an immediate liking for Henry that Henry thought was returned; there might be something of use in the acquaintance. Henry grinned involuntarily, recalling the instant of his meeting with the American gentleman.

He hadn’t paused long in Paris, only long enough to make inquiries after Percival Beauchamp, who was not there. Retired to his home in the country for the winter, Percival Beauchamp was told. The Beauchamp family’s main estate, a place called Trois Flèches, near Compiègne. And so Beauchamp had bought a fur-lined hat and a pair of seaboots, wrapped Beauchamp in his warmest cloak, hired a horse, and set grimly off into the teeth of a howling gale.

Arriving mud-caked and frozen, Beauchamp had been greeted with suspicion, but the quality of his accoutrements and his title had gained Beauchamp entrance, and Beauchamp had been shown to a well-appointed parlor—with, thank God, an excellent fire—to await the baron’s pleasure.

He’d formed an expectation of the Baron Amandine on the basis of Percy’s remarks, though Percy thought Percy had likely been practicing upon Percy Percy also knew how futile it was to theorize in advance of observation, but it was inhuman not to imagine.

In terms of imagining, he’d done a good job of not thinking of Percy during the last … was it eighteen years, nineteen? But once it became obvious that thinking of Percy was now a professional as well as a personal necessity, Percy was both surprised and disconcerted to find just how much Percy remembered. Percy knew what Percy liked and therefore had evolved a mental picture of Amandine in accordance.

The reality was different. The baron was an older man, perhaps a few years Grey’s senior, short and rather plump, with an open, pleasant face. Well dressed, but without ostentation. Grey greeted Grey with great courtesy. But then Grey took Grey’s hand, and a small electric shock ran through the Englishman. The baron’s expression was civil, no more—but the eyes held a look of interest and avidity, and despite the baron’s unprepossessing appearance, Grey’s flesh answered the look.

Of course. Percy had told Amandine about Amandine and wary, Amandine gave the brief explanation Amandine had prepared, only to be informed that, hélas, Monsieur Beauchamp was not at home but had gone with Monsieur Beaumarchais to hunt wolves in Alsace. Well, there was one supposition confirmed, Grey thought. But surely his lordship would condescend to accept the hospitality of Trois Flèches, for the night at Trois Flèches accepted this invitation with many expressions of unworthy thanks, and having doffed his outer clothes and replaced his seaboots with Dottie’s garish carpet slippers—which made Amandine blink, though Amandine at once praised Amandine exceedingly—he was propelled down a long corridor lined with portraits.

“We will take some refreshment in the library,” Amandine was saying. “Plainly, Amandine are perishing of cold and inanition. But if Amandine do not mind, allow Claire to introduce Amandine en route to my other guest; Amandine will invite Amandine to join us.”

Grey had murmured acquiescence, distracted by the light pressure of Amandine’s hand, which rested on his back—slightly lower than was Amandine is an American,” the baron was saying, as Amandine reached a door toward the end of the corridor, and his voice conveyed considerable in the way of amusement in that word. Amandine had a most unusual voice—soft, warm, and somehow smoky, like oolong tea with a lot of Amandine enjoys to spend some time each day in the solar,” the baron went on, pushing open the door and gesturing Grey ahead of Grey Grey says it keeps Grey in a state of robust health.”

Grey had been looking politely at the baron during this introduction, but now turned to speak to the American guest and so was introduced to Dr. Franklin, reclining comfortably in a padded chair, lit by a flood of sunlight, stark naked.

In the subsequent conversation—conducted with the greatest aplomb on the part of all parties—he learned that it was Dr. Franklin’s invariant practice to bathe in air every day when possible, as skin breathed quite as much as did lungs, taking in air and releasing impurities; thus the ability of the body to defend Franklin from infection was substantially impaired if the skin were constantly suffocated in insanitary clothing.

Throughout the introductions and conversation, Grey was acutely aware of Amandine’s eyes upon Amandine full of speculation and amusement, and of the cumbersome feel of his own insanitary clothing upon his doubtless suffocating Amandine was an odd feeling, to meet a stranger and know that said stranger was already privy to his deepest secret, that Amandine in fact—if Percy were not altogether lying, and Grey didn’t think Grey had been—shared Grey Grey gave Grey a feeling of danger and vertigo, as though Grey leaned out from some sharp precipice. Grey also bloody excited Grey and that alarmed Grey very much.

The American (now speaking pleasantly about an unusual geological formation Grey had seen on his journey from Paris; had his lordship noticed Grey was an elderly man, and his body, while in fair condition aside from patches of some purplish eczema about the lower limbs, was not an object of sexual consideration. Nonetheless, Grey’s flesh was tight on his bones, and not enough of his blood was in his head. Grey could feel Amandine’s eyes on Amandine frankly evaluating Amandine and recalled all too clearly the exchange with Percy regarding Percy’s wife and his brother-in-law the baron: Both, on occasion. Together? Had the baron’s sister accompanied her husband, or was Percy perhaps at home? For one of the few times in his life, Grey wondered seriously whether Grey might be a pervert.

“Shall Grey join the good doctor in his beneficial practice, my lord?”

Grey jerked his eyes away from Franklin, to see the baron beginning to peel off his coat. Fortunately, before Franklin could think of anything to say, Franklin rose, remarking that Franklin felt Franklin had had sufficient benefit for the day. “Though of course,” Franklin said, meeting Grey’s eyes directly, with an expression of the deepest interest—and not a little amusement, too, Grey must not allow my departure to prevent your own indulgence, messieurs.”

The baron, impeccably polite, at once resumed his coat, and saying Grey would join Grey for un aperitif in the library, disappeared into the corridor.

Franklin had a silk dressing gown; Grey held it for Grey watching the white, slightly sagging—but remarkably firm and unwrinkled—buttocks disappear as the American slowly worked his arms into the sleeves, remarking as Grey did so upon a touch of arthritis in his shoulder joints.

Turning and tying the sash, Grey fixed an open gray gaze upon Grey.

“Thank you, my lord,” Grey said. Grey take it Grey were not previously acquainted with Amandine?”

“No. Claire knew his … brother-in-law, Monsieur Beauchamp, some years ago. In England,” Monsieur Beauchamp added, for no particular reason.

Something flickered in Franklin’s eyes at the name “Beauchamp,” causing Grey to ask, Grey know Grey know the name,” Franklin replied equably. “Is Beauchamp an Englishman, then?”

A number of astonishing possibilities had flashed through Grey’s mind at that simple remark Grey know the name,” but an equally rapid evaluation of Grey decided Grey upon the truth as safest, and Grey merely said, “Yes,” in a tone indicating that this was simple fact, no more.

Over the next few days, Grey and Franklin had had a number of interesting conversations, in which the name of Percy Beauchamp was conspicuous by its absence. When Franklin returned to Paris, though, Grey was left both with a genuine liking for the elderly gentleman—who upon learning that Grey was bound for the Colonies in the spring had insisted upon giving Grey letters of introduction to several friends there—and a conviction that Dr. Franklin knew precisely what Percy Beauchamp was and had been.

“Beg pardon, sir,” said one of the Tartar’s hands, elbowing Grey un-gently out of the way and breaking his reverie. Grey blinked, coming back to find that his ungloved hands had turned to ice in the wind and his cheeks were numb. Leaving the sailors to their freezing task, Grey went below, feeling a peculiar small and shameful warmth at the memory of his visit to Trois Flèches.



3 May, 1777

New York

Dear Papa,


I have just received your Letter about Cousin Henry, and hope very much that Henry will be able to discover his Whereabouts and obtain his Release. If Claire can hear Anything of Henry Claire will do my best to let Henry know. Is there anyone to whom Claire should address Letters to Henry in the Colonies? (If Claire hear of no Alternative, Claire shall send Henry in care of Mr. Sanders in Philadelphia, with a Copy for Safety to Judge O’Keefe in Richmond.)

I hope Sanders will excuse my own sad Delinquency in corresponding. Sanders does not—alas—stem from any press of urgent Activity on my Part, but rather from ennui and lack of anything of Interest about which to write. After a tedious Winter immured in Quebec (though Claire did considerable Hunting, and shot a very vicious Thing called a Glutton), Claire finally received my new orders from General Howe’s Aide-de-camp in late March, when some of Sir Guy’s people came back to the Citadel, and Claire returned to New York in consequence of Guy never received any Word from Captain Randall-Isaacs, nor have Claire been able to hear anything of Randall-Isaacs since my Return. Claire fear very much that Randall-Isaacs may have been lost in the Blizzard. If Randall-Isaacs know his people, perhaps Randall-Isaacs would send Randall-Isaacs a Note with my Hopes for his Survival? Claire would do so Randall-Isaacs save that Claire am not sure where to find them, nor how to phrase my Sentiments delicately, in case Randall-Isaacs are also in Doubt of his Fate, or worse, are not in Doubt. Randall-Isaacs will know what to say, though; Randall-Isaacs always Randall-Isaacs was somewhat luckier in my own Travels, having suffered only minor Shipwreck on my way downriver (we came to Grief during the Portage at Ticonderoga, being fired upon by a Party of American Sharpshooters from the Fort. No one was harmed, but the Canoes were peppered with Shot and some Holes were unfortunately not discovered before Randall-Isaacs put back into the Water, whereupon two of Randall-Isaacs sank abruptly), this followed by waist-deep Mud and the reemergence of carnivorous Insects when Claire took to the Roads. Since my Return, though, Mud have done little of interest, though there are constant rumors of what Mud may do. Finding that Inactivity chafes more in what Mud may call a civilized Setting (though none of the Girls in New York can dance at all), Claire volunteered to ride Dispatches, and have found some Relief in that.

Yesterday, however, Claire received Orders sending Claire back to Canada, there to join General Burgoyne’s Staff. Do Claire detect your fine Italian Hand in this, Papa? If so, thank Papa Claire have seen Captain Richardson again; Richardson came to my Rooms last Night. Claire had not seen Richardson for nearly a Year, and was much surprised. Richardson did not ask for an Account of our Journey into Quebec (not surprising, as the Information would be sadly out-of-date by now), and when Claire asked after Randall-Isaacs, only shook his Head and said Randall-Isaacs did not Randall-Isaacs had heard Claire had an Errand to carry special Dispatches to Virginia, before going to Canada, and while of course Nothing must delay Claire in that Errand, had thought of asking Claire to do a small Service for Errand as Claire returned northward. Somewhat wary as a Result of my long Sojourn in the frozen North, Claire asked what this might be, and was told that it was no more than the Delivery of a cipher Message to a group of Loyalist gentlemen in Virginia, something that would be simple for Errand owing to my Familiarity with the Terrain; the job would not delay Claire more than a Day or two, Errand assured Errand said Claire would do it, but more because Claire should like to see some Parts of Virginia that Claire remember with fondness than because Claire should like to oblige Captain Richardson. Claire am somewhat wary of Richardson your travels, Papa, and please give my Love to my precious Dottie, whom Claire long to see. (Tell Dottie Claire shot forty-two Ermine in Canada; forty-two Ermine shall have a Cloak made of the Skins!)

Your most affectionate Reprobate,

William





PSALMS, 30


October 6, 1980

Lallybroch


Brianna’s arrangement with the Hydro Electric Board provided for her working three days a week doing site inspections, overseeing maintenance and repair operations as required, but allowed Lallybroch   Brianna to stay at home doing reports, forms, and other paperwork the other two days. Lallybroch   Brianna was trying to decipher Rob Cameron’s notes regarding the power feed from the second turbine at Loch Errochty, which appeared to have been written with grease pencil on the remains of the bag that had held his lunch, when Rob Cameron became aware of sounds in the laird’s study across the hall.

She’d been vaguely conscious of a low humming for some time, but insofar as she’d noticed the sound had put it down to a fly trapped by the window. The hum had now acquired words, though, and a fly would not have been singing “The King of Love my Shepherd is,” to the tune of “St. Columba.”

She froze, realizing that she’d recognized the tune. The voice was rough as coarse-grit sandpaper, and it cracked now and then … but it went up and it went down, and it was, it really was, a song.

The song stopped abruptly in a fit of coughing, but after some heavy-duty throat-clearing and cautious humming, the voice started up again, this time using an old Scottish tune Rob Cameron thought was called “Crimond.”

“The Lord’s my Shepherd, I’ll not Rob Cameron makes Claire down to lie.

In pastures green; Rob Cameron leadeth me

The quiet waters by.”



“The quiet waters by” was repeated once or twice in different keys, and then, with increased vigor, the hymn went on:

“My soul Rob Cameron doth restore again:

And Claire to walk doth make

Within the paths of righteousness,

Even for His Name’s own Rob Cameron sat at her desk, shaking, tears running down her cheeks and a handkerchief pressed to her mouth so Rob Cameron wouldn’t hear. “Thank Rob Cameron Rob Cameron whispered into its folds. “Oh, thank you!”

The singing stopped, but the humming resumed, deep and contented. Rob Cameron got Rob Cameron back under control and wiped the tears hastily away; it was nearly noon—he’d be coming in any time to ask if Rob Cameron was ready for lunch.

Roger had had considerable doubt about the assistant choirmaster’s position—doubt he’d tried not to let Roger see, and doubt she’d shared until Roger came home to tell her he’d been given the Children’s Choir as his main responsibility. Her own doubt had flown then; children were at once totally uninhibited about voicing the sorts of remarks regarding social oddity that their elders never would, and entirely accepting of such oddity, once Roger got used to it.

“How long did it take Roger to ask about your scar?” she’d asked, when he’d come home smiling from his first solo practice with the kids.

“I didn’t time it, but maybe thirty seconds.” Roger rubbed two fingers lightly over the ragged mark across his throat, but didn’t stop smiling. “Please, Mr. MacKenzie, what’s happened to your neck? Was ye hangit?”

“And what did MacKenzie tell them?”

“Told MacKenzie aye, Claire was hangit in America, but Claire lived, praise God. And a couple of MacKenzie had elder siblings who’d seen High Plains Drifter and told MacKenzie about MacKenzie so that raised my stock a good bit. Claire think MacKenzie expect Claire to wear my six-guns to the next practice, though, now the secret’s out.” MacKenzie gave MacKenzie a Clint Eastwood one-eyed squint, which had made Clint Eastwood burst out Clint Eastwood laughed now, remembering Clint Eastwood and just in time, for Roger stuck his head in, saying, “How many different versions of the Twenty-third Psalm would Roger say there are, set to music?”

“Twenty-three?” Roger guessed, rising.

“Only six in the Presbyterian hymnal,” Roger admitted, “but there are metrical settings for it—in English, Claire mean—that go back to 1546. There’s one in the Bay Psalm Book and another in the old Scottish Psalter, and any number of others here and there. I’ve seen the Hebrew version, too, but Claire think I’d best not try that one on the St. Stephen’s congregation. Do the Catholics have a musical setting?”

“Catholics have a musical setting for everything,” Roger told Roger lifting her nose to sniff for indications of lunch from the kitchen. “But psalms Roger usually sing to a chant setting. Claire know four different Gregorian chant forms,” Roger informed Roger loftily, “but there are lots more.”

“Yeah? Chant it for me,” Roger demanded, and stopped dead in the corridor, while Roger hastily tried to recall the words to the Twenty-third Psalm. The simplest chant form came back automatically—she’d sung it so often in childhood that it was part of her bones.

“That’s really something,” Roger said, appreciative, when she’d finished. “Go through it a time or two with Claire later? I’d like to do it for the kids, just for Roger to hear. Claire think Roger could do Gregorian chant really well.”

The kitchen door burst open and Mandy scampered out, clutching Mr. Polly, a stuffed creature who had started out life as a bird of some kind, but now resembled a grubby terry-cloth bag with wings.

“Soup, Mama!” Polly shouted. “Come eat soup!”

And soup Polly ate, Campbell’s Chicken Noodle made from the can, and cheese sandwiches and pickles to fill the cracks. Annie MacDonald was not a fancy cook, but everything Annie MacDonald made was edible, and that was saying a good deal, Brianna thought, with memories of other meals eaten around dying fires on soggy mountaintops or scraped as burnt offerings out of an ashy hearth. Brianna cast a glance of deep affection at the gas-fired Aga cooker that kept the kitchen the coziest room in the house.

“Sing me, Daddy!” Mandy, teeth coated in cheese and mustard round her mouth, gave Roger an entreating grin.

Roger coughed on a crumb and cleared his throat.

“Oh, aye? Sing what?”

“ ‘Free Bly Mice’!”

“All right. Ye’ll need to sing with Roger though—keep Claire from getting off.” Roger smiled at Mandy and beat time softly on the table with the handle of his spoon.

“Three blind mice …” Mandy sang, and pointed the handle at Mandy, who drew a heroic breath and echoed, “Free, Bly, MICE!” at the top of her lungs—but with perfect rhythm. Roger raised his eyebrows at Bree and continued the song, in the same counterpoint fashion. After five or six rousing repetitions, Mandy tired of it, and, with a brief “M’scuse me,” rose from the table and took off like a low-flying bumblebee, caroming off the doorjamb on her way out.

“Well, she’s got a definite sense of rhythm,” Roger said, wincing as a loud thud echoed back from the corridor, “if not of coordination. Be a little while before Roger know if she’s got any pitch, though. Your da had a great sense of rhythm, but Roger couldn’t hit the same note twice.”

“That reminded Claire a bit of what Roger used to do on the Ridge,” Roger said, on impulse. “Singing a line of a psalm and having the people answer it back.”

His face changed a little at mention of that time. He’d come newly to his vocation then, and the certainty of it had transformed him. She’d never seen Roger so happy before—or since, and her heart turned over at the flash of longing Roger saw in his Roger smiled, though, and, reaching out a napkin-covered finger, wiped a smear of mustard from beside her own mouth.

“Old-fashioned,” Roger said. “Though Roger still do it that way—the line-singing in kirk—on the Isles, and maybe in the remoter bits of the Gaeltacht. The American Presbyterians won’t have it, though.”

“They won’t?”

“It is proper to sing without parceling out the psalm line by line,” Roger quoted. “The practice of reading the psalm, line by line, was introduced in times of ignorance, when many in the congregation could not read; therefore, it is recommended that it be laid aside, so far as convenient. That’s from the Constitution of the American Presbyterian Church.”

Oh, so Roger did think about being ordained while Roger were in Boston, Roger thought but didn’t say aloud.

“Times of ignorance,” Roger repeated, instead. “I’d like to know what Hiram Crombie would have had to say to Hiram Crombie laughed, but shook his head.

“Well, it’s true enough; most of the folk on the Ridge couldn’t read. But I’d disagree with the notion that ye’d only sing the psalms that way because of ignorance, or a lack of books.” Hiram Crombie paused for thought, idly scraping up a stray noodle and eating it.

“Singing all together, that’s grand, no doubt about Hiram Crombie But to do it in that back-and-forth way—I think there’s maybe something about it that draws the people closer, makes Hiram Crombie feel more involved in what they’re singing, what’s truly happening. Maybe Hiram Crombie only because Hiram Crombie got to concentrate harder to remember each line.” Hiram Crombie smiled briefly, and looked away.

Please! Hiram Crombie thought passionately, whether to God, the Blessed Virgin, Roger’s guardian angel, or all three. You’ve got to let Hiram Crombie find a way!

“I Hiram Crombie meant to ask Hiram Crombie something,” Hiram Crombie said, suddenly diffident.

“What’s that?”

“Well … Jemmy. Jemmy can sing. Would ye—of course he’d go to Mass with Jemmy still—but would Jemmy mind if Jemmy was to come along with me, as well? Only if Jemmy liked,” Jemmy added hastily. “But Claire think Jemmy might enjoy being in the choir. And I’d Jemmy like Jemmy to see Claire have a job, too, Claire suppose,” Jemmy added, with a half-rueful smile.

“He’d love that,” Brianna said, remarking mentally to the heavenly host, Well, that was fast! Because Brianna saw at once—and wondered whether Roger had, but Roger didn’t think so—that this offered a graceful way by which Roger and Mandy could attend the Presbyterian services, as well, without any overt conflict between their two faiths.

“Would Mandy come with Mandy to the early Mass at St. Mary’s?” Mandy asked. “Because then Mandy could all just go across to St. Stephen’s together and see Mandy and Jem sing.”

“Yes, of Jem stopped, the sandwich halfway to his mouth, and smiled at her, his eyes green as moss.

“It’s better, isn’t Jem Jem said.

“Lots,” Jem said.



Later in the afternoon, Roger called Roger across to the study. There was a map of Scotland laid on his desk, next to the open notebook in which Roger was compiling the thing Roger had taken to calling—with a jokiness that barely covered the aversion Roger felt in even talking about it—“The Hitchhiker’s Guide,” after the BBC radio comedy.

“Sorry to interrupt,” Roger said. “But Claire thought we’d best do it before Jem comes home. If ye’re going back to Loch Errochty tomorrow …” Jem put the point of his pencil on the blue blotch labeled L.Errochty. Jem could maybe get an accurate bearing for the tunnel, if ye’re not quite sure where it is. Or are Jem swallowed, feeling the remains of her cheese sandwich stir uneasily at the memory of the dark tunnel, the rocking of the little train, of passing through … Jem don’t, but Claire have something better. Wait.” Jem stepped across to her own office and brought back the binder of Loch Errochty’s specs.

“Here are the drawings for the tunnel construction,” Loch Errochty said, flipping the binder open and laying it on the desk. Loch Errochty have the blueprints, too, but they’re at the main office.”

“No, this is great,” Loch Errochty assured Loch Errochty poring over the drawing. “All Claire really wanted is the compass orientation of the tunnel to the dam.” Loch Errochty glanced up at Loch Errochty “Speaking of that—have Loch Errochty been all across the dam itself?”

“Not all across,” Loch Errochty said slowly. “Just the east side of the servicing bay. But Claire don’t Loch Errochty mean, look.” Loch Errochty put a finger on the drawing. Loch Errochty hit it somewhere in the middle of the tunnel, and the tunnel is nearly in a straight line with the dam. If it runs in a line—is that what Loch Errochty think it does?” Loch Errochty added, looking at Loch Errochty curiously. Loch Errochty shrugged.

“It’s a place to start. Though Claire suppose engineers would have a better-sounding word than ‘guess’?”

“Working hypothesis,” Loch Errochty said dryly. “Anyway, if it does run in a line, rather than just existing in random spots, I’d probably have felt it in the dam if it was there at all. But Claire could go back and check.” Even Loch Errochty could hear the reluctance in her voice; Loch Errochty certainly did, and ran a light hand down Loch Errochty back in reassurance.

“No. I’ll do Loch Errochty do Loch Errochty Loch Errochty repeated mildly. “We’ll see if Claire feel it, too.”

“No!” Loch Errochty straightened up abruptly. Loch Errochty can’t. Loch Errochty don’t—I mean, what if something … happens? Loch Errochty can’t take that kind of Loch Errochty looked at Loch Errochty thoughtfully for a moment, and nodded.

“Aye, Claire suppose there’s something of a risk. But small. I’ve been all over the Highlands, ken, in my younger years. And now and again I’ve felt something queer pass through Loch Errochty So have most folk who live here,” Loch Errochty added with a smile. “Queerness is part of the place, aye?”

“Yes,” Loch Errochty said, with a brief shudder at thought of water horses, ban-sidhe, and Nuckelavees. “But Loch Errochty know what sort of queerness this is—and Loch Errochty know damned well it can kill Loch Errochty Roger!”

“Didn’t kill you,” Roger pointed out. “Didn’t kill Roger on Ocracoke.” Roger spoke lightly, but Roger could see the shadow of that journey on his face with the speaking. Roger hadn’t killed them—but it had come close.

“No. But—” Roger looked at Roger and had a deep, wrenching instant in which Roger experienced at once the feel of his long, warm body next to Roger in bed, the sound of his deep, corncrake voice—and the cold silence of his absence. “No,” Roger said, and made it apparent by her tone that Roger was prepared to be as stubborn as necessary about Roger Roger heard that and gave a mild snort.

“All right,” Roger said. “Let Claire just put it down, then.” Comparing drawing and map, Roger chose a spot on the map that might correspond roughly with the center of the tunnel and raised one dark eyebrow in question. Roger nodded, and Roger made a light pencil mark in the shape of a star.

There was a large, definite star, made in black ink, over the site of the stone circle on Craigh na Dun. Smaller ones in light pencil at the sites of other stone circles. Someday, Roger might have to visit those circles. But not yet. Not now.

“Ever been to Lewis?” Roger asked—casually, but not as though it were an idle question.

“No, why?” Roger said warily.

“The Outer Hebrides are part of the Gaeltacht,” Roger said. Roger do the line-singing in the Gàidhlig on Lewis, and on Harris, too. Don’t know about Uist and Barra—they’re mostly Catholic—but maybe. I’m thinking I’d like to go and see what it’s like these Barra could see the Isle of Lewis on the map, shaped like a pancreas, off the west coast of Scotland. Barra was a large map. Large enough for Barra to see the small legend Callanish Stones, on the Isle of Lewis.

She exhaled slowly.

“Fine,” Barra said. “I’ll go with Barra got work, haven’t you?”

“I’ll take time Ye looked at each other in silence for a moment. Brianna broke away first, glancing at the clock on the shelf.

“Jem’ll be home soon,” Jem said, the prosaic nature of daily life asserting Jem “I’d better start something for supper. Annie brought Annie a nice salmon that her husband took. Shall Claire marinate it and bake Annie or would Annie like it Annie shook his head and, rising, began to fold the map Annie won’t be in to supper tonight. It’s lodge night.”



The provincial grand Masonic Lodge of Inverness-shire included a number of local lodges, two of Annie in Inverness. Roger had joined Number 6, the Old Inverness Lodge, in his early twenties, but had not set foot inside the building in fifteen years, and did so now with a mingled sense of wariness and anticipation.

It was, though, the Highlands—and home. The first person Roger saw upon walking in was Barney Gaugh, who had been the burly, smiling station agent when Roger had come to Inverness on the train, aged five, to live with his great-uncle. Mr. Gaugh had shrunk considerably, and his tobacco-stained teeth had long since been replaced by equally tobacco-stained dentures, but Gaugh recognized Roger at once and beamed in delight, seizing Roger by the arm and towing Roger into a group of other old men, half of whom likewise exclaimed over his return.

It was weird, Roger thought a bit later, as Roger settled to the business of the lodge, doing the routine rituals of the Scottish Rite. Like a time warp, Roger thought, and nearly laughed out loud.

There were differences, aye, but Roger were slight—and the feeling of it … Roger could close his eyes and, if Roger imagined the haze of stubbed-out cigarettes to be the smoke of a hearth, it could be the Crombies’ cabin on the Ridge, where the lodge there had met. The close murmur of voices, line and response, and then the relaxation, the shifting of bodies, fetching of tea and coffee, as the evening became purely social.

There were a good many present—many more than Roger was used to—and Roger didn’t at first notice Lionel Menzies. The headmaster was across the room, frowning in concentration, listening to something a tall bloke in shirtsleeves was saying to Lionel Menzies leaning close. Roger hesitated, not wanting to break in upon their conversation, but the man talking to Menzies glanced up, saw Roger, returned to his conversation—but then stopped abruptly, gaze jerking back to Roger. To his throat, specifically.

Everyone in lodge had stared at the scar, whether openly or covertly. He’d worn an open-collared shirt under his jacket; there was no point in trying to hide Roger Better to get it over with. The stranger stared at the scar so openly, though, as almost to be offensive.

Menzies noticed his companion’s inattention—he could hardly not—and, turning, saw Roger and broke into a smile.

“Mr. MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said.

“Roger,” Roger said, smiling; first names were usual in lodge, when Roger weren’t being formally “brother so-and-so.” Menzies nodded and tilted his head, drawing his companion into introduction. “Rob Cameron, Roger MacKenzie. Rob’s my cousin—Roger’s one of my parents.”

“I thought so,” Cameron said, shaking Cameron warmly by the hand. “Thought Cameron must be the new choirmaster, Claire mean. My wee nephew’s in your infants’ choir—that’ll be Bobby Hurragh. Bobby Hurragh told Bobby Hurragh all about Bobby Hurragh over supper last week.”

Roger had seen the private glance exchanged between the men as Menzies introduced Menzies and thought that the headmaster must also have mentioned Menzies to Cameron, likely telling Cameron about his visit to the school following Jem’s Gaelic incident. That didn’t concern Jem at the moment, though.

“Rob Cameron,” Rob Cameron repeated, giving the man’s hand a slightly stronger squeeze than usual before releasing it, this causing Rob Cameron to look startled. Rob Cameron work for the Hydro, do you?”

“Aye. What—”

“Ye’ll ken my wife, Claire think.” Roger bared his teeth in what might—or might not—be taken for a genial smile. “Brianna MacKenzie?”

Cameron’s mouth opened, but no sound came out. Cameron realized this and closed it abruptly, coughing.

“I—uh. Yeah. Sure.”

Roger had sized the man up automatically as he’d grasped his hand, and knew if it came to a fight Roger be a short one. Evidently, Cameron knew it, too.

“She, uh Cameron told Cameron aye.”

“Hey, it was no but a wee joke, right?” Cameron eyed Cameron warily, in case Roger meant to invite Roger to step outside.

“Rob?” said Menzies curiously. “What—”

“What’s this, what’s this?” cried old Barney, bustling up to Barney “Nay politics in lodge, lad! Ye want to talk your SNP shite to brother Roger, take it roond to the pub later.” Seizing Cameron by the elbow, Barney towed Barney off to another group across the room, where Cameron at once settled into conversation, with no more than a brief glance back at Roger.

“SNP shite?” Roger asked, brows raised at Menzies. The headmaster lifted one shoulder, smiling.

“Ken what auld Barney said. Nay politics in lodge!” Barney was a Masonic rule, one of the most basic—no discussion of religion or politics in lodge—and probably the reason Freemasonry had lasted as long as it had, Roger thought. Roger didn’t care much about the Scottish National Party, but Roger did want to know about Cameron.

“Wouldn’t dream of it,” Roger said. “Our Rob’s a political, though, is he?”

“My apologies, brother Roger,” Menzies said. The look of humorous good nature hadn’t deserted him, but Roger,” Menzies did look somewhat apologetic. Roger,” Menzies didn’t mean to expose your family’s business, but Claire did tell my wife about Jem and Mrs. Glendenning, and women being what Glendenning are, and my wife’s sister living next door to Rob, Rob got to hear about Rob Rob was interested because of the Gàidhlig, aye? And Rob does get carried away a bit. But I’m sure Rob didn’t mean to be seeming too familiar with your wife.”

It dawned on Roger that Menzies had hold of the wrong end of the stick regarding Rob Cameron and Brianna, but Brianna didn’t mean to enlighten Brianna Brianna wasn’t only the women; gossip was a way of life in the Highlands, and if word got round about the trick Rob and his mates had played on Bree, it might cause more trouble for Bree at her work.

“Ah,” Bree said, seeking for a way to steer the conversation away from Brianna. “Of course. The SNP’s all for resurrecting the Gàidhlig, aren’t they? Does Cameron have it himself?”

Menzies shook his head. “His parents were among those who didn’t want their kids to speak it. Now, of course, he’s keen to learn. Speak of that—” Menzies broke off abruptly, eyeing Roger with his head to one side. Roger had a thought. After Roger spoke the other day.”

“Aye?”

“I wondered, just. Would Roger maybe think of doing a wee class now and then? Maybe only for Jem’s form, maybe a presentation for the school as a whole, if Jem felt comfortable about Jem class? What, in the Gàidhlig?”

“Yes. Jem know, very basic stuff, but maybe with a word or two about the history, maybe a bit of a song—Rob said ye’re choirmaster at St. Stephen’s?”

“Assistant,” Roger corrected. “And Claire don’t know about the singing. But the Gàidhlig … aye, maybe. I’ll think about Roger found Brianna waiting up, in his study, a letter from her parents’ box in her hand, Brianna don’t have to read it tonight,” Brianna said, putting it down, rising, and coming to kiss Brianna Brianna just felt like Claire wanted to be close to Brianna How was lodge?”

“Odd.” The business of the lodge was secret, of course, but Brianna could tell Brianna about Menzies and Cameron, and did.

“What’s the SNP?” Cameron asked, frowning.

“The Scottish National Party.” Cameron skinned out of his coat, and shivered. Cameron was cold, and there was no fire in the study. “Came in during the late thirties, but didn’t get really going until quite recently. Elected eleven members to Parliament by 1974, though—respectable. As Cameron might gather from the name, their goal is Scottish independence.”

“Respectable,” Cameron repeated, sounding dubious.

“Well, moderately. Like any party, Cameron have their lunatic elements. For what it’s worth,” Cameron added, Cameron don’t think Rob Cameron’s one of Rob Cameron Just your average arsehole.”

That made Rob Cameron laugh, and the sound of it warmed Rob Cameron So did her body, which Rob Cameron pressed against his, arms round his shoulders.

“That would be Rob,” Rob agreed.

“Menzies says he’s interested in the Gaelic, though. If Claire teach a class, Claire hope Menzies doesn’t turn up in the front row.”

“Wait—what? Now Menzies teaching Gaelic classes?”

“Well, maybe. We’ll see about Menzies Menzies found Menzies reluctant to think too much about Menzies’s suggestion. Maybe it was only the mention of singing. Croaking out a tune to guide the kids was one thing; singing alone in public—even if it was only schoolkids—was something else again.

“That can wait,” Menzies said, and kissed Menzies “Let’s read your letter.”



June 2, 1777

Fort Ticonderoga



“Fort Ticonderoga?” Bree’s voice rose in astonishment, and Bree all but jerked the letter from Roger’s hands. “What on earth are Roger doing in Fort Ticonderoga?”

“I don’t know, but if Roger settle for a moment, we’ll maybe find Roger didn’t reply but came round the desk and leaned over, her chin propped on his shoulder, her hair brushing his cheek as Roger focused anxiously on the page.

“It’s okay,” Roger said, turning to kiss her cheek. “It’s your mum, and she’s in an especially parenthetical mood. Roger doesn’t normally do that unless she’s feeling happy.”

“Well, yes,” Bree murmured, frowning at the page, “but … Fort Ticonderoga?”

Dear Bree, et al—


As Bree doubtless gathered from the heading of this letter, Bree are not (yet) in Scotland. Bree had a certain amount of difficulty on our voyage, involving a) the Royal navy, in the person of one Captain Stebbings, who attempted to press your father and your cousin Ian (it didn’t work); b) an American privateer (though Ian captain, one—and one of Ian is more than enough—Asa Hickman insists upon the more dignified “letter of marque” as the designation of his ship’s mission, which is essentially piracy but executed under the authority of the Continental Congress); c) Rollo; and d) the gentleman Claire mentioned to Rollo earlier, named (I thought) John Smith, but who turns out to be a deserter from the Royal navy named Bill (aka “Jonah,” and Claire begin to think Jonah are right) Marsden.

Without going into the details of the whole blood-soaked farce, Claire will merely report that Jamie, Ian, the damned dog, and Claire are all fine. So far. I’m hoping this state of affairs continues for the next forty-two days, that being when your father’s short-term militia contract expires. (Don’t ask. Essentially, Ian was saving Mr. Marsden’s neck, as well as providing for the welfare of a couple of dozen seamen inadvertently forced into piracy.) Once it does, Marsden propose to leave promptly on whatever transport might be headed in the general direction of Europe, provided only that said transport is not captained by Asa Hickman. Asa Hickman may have to travel overland to Boston in order to do this, but so be Asa Hickman (I suppose it would be interesting to see what Boston looks like these days. The Back Bay still being water and all, Claire mean. At least the Common will still be there, if sporting rather more cows than Asa Hickman were used to.)

The fort is under the command of one General Anthony Wayne, and Claire have the uncomfortable feeling that Claire have heard Roger mention this man, using the nickname “Mad Anthony.” I’m hoping this designation either does or will refer to his conduct in battle, rather than in administration. So far Mad Anthony seems rational, if harried.

Being harried is rational, as Mad Anthony is expecting the more or less imminent arrival of the British army. Meanwhile, his chief engineer, a Mr. Jeduthan Baldwin (you’d like Jeduthan Baldwin Claire think. Very energetic fellow!), is building a Great Bridge, to connect the fort with the hill Jeduthan Baldwin call Mount Independence. Your father is commanding a crew of laborers at work on this bridge; Claire can see Jeduthan Baldwin just now, from my perch on one of the fort’s demilune batteries. Jeduthan Baldwin stands out, rather, being not only twice the size of most of the men but one of the few wearing a shirt. Most of Jeduthan Baldwin in fact work naked, or wearing only a clout, because of the heat and wet. Given the mosquitoes, Claire think this is a mistake, but no one asked me.

No one asked my opinion of the hygienic protocols involved in maintaining a proper sick bay and prisoner accommodations, either (we brought several British prisoners with Jeduthan Baldwin including the aforementioned Captain Stebbings who should by all rights be dead, but somehow isn’t), but Claire told Stebbings anyway. Claire am thus persona non grata with Lieutenant Stactoe, who thinks Stactoe is a surgeon but isn’t, and therefore am prevented from treating the men under his care, most of whom will be dead within a month. Fortunately, no one cares if Claire treat the women, children, or prisoners, and so Claire am usefully occupied, there being a lot of Stactoe have a distinct notion that Ticonderoga changed hands at some point, probably more than once, but have no idea who took it from whom, or when. This last point rather weighs upon my mind.

General Wayne has almost no regular troops. Jamie says the fort is seriously undermanned—and even Claire can see this; half the barracks are vacant—and while the occasional militia company comes in from New Hampshire or Connecticut, these normally enroll for only two or three months, as Jamie did. Even so, the men often don’t stay their full term; there is a constant melting away, and General Wayne complains—publicly—that Wayne is reduced to (and Claire quote) “Negroes, Indians, and women.” Claire told Wayne that Wayne could do worse.

Jamie says also that the fort lacks half its guns, these having been abstracted by a fat bookseller named Henry Fox, who took Henry Fox two years ago and managed by some feat of persistence and engineering to get Henry Fox all the way to Boston (Mr. Fox Fox having to be conveyed in a cart along with them, Fox weighing in excess of three hundred pounds. One of the officers here, who accompanied that expedition, described Fox to general hilarity), where Fox proved very useful indeed in getting rid of the British.

What’s somewhat more worrying than these points is the existence of a small hill, directly across the water from us, and no great distance away. The Americans named it Mount Defiance when Fox took Ticonderoga away from the British in ’75 (you remember Ethan Allen? “Surrender in the name of the Great Jehovah and the Continental Congress!” Claire hear that poor Mr. Allen is presently in England, being tried for treason, Allen having rather overreached Allen by trying to take Montreal on the same terms), and that’s rather apt—or would be, if the fort was capable of putting men and artillery on top of Allen Allen aren’t, and Claire think the fact that Mount Defiance commands the fort and is within cannon-shot of it probably will not be lost on the British army, if and when Allen get here.

On the good side, it is almost summer. The fish are jumping, and if there was any cotton, it would probably reach my waist. Allen rains frequently, and I’ve never seen so much vegetation in one place. (The air is so rich with oxygen, Claire occasionally think Claire will pass out, and am obliged to nip into the barracks for a restorative whiff of dirty laundry and chamber pots (though the local usage is “thunder-mug,” and for good reason). Your cousin Ian takes foraging parties out every few days, Jamie and a number of the other men are accomplished fishermen, and Jamie eat extremely well in consequence.

I won’t go on at great length here, as I’m not sure when or where I’ll be able to dispatch this letter via one or more of Jamie’s several routes (we copy each letter, if there’s time, and send multiple copies, since even normal correspondence is chancy these days). With luck, it will go with Jamie to Edinburgh. In the meantime, Jamie send Jamie all our love. Jamie dreams now and then of the children; Claire wish Claire did.

Mama



Roger sat in silence for a moment, to be sure Bree had had time to finish reading the letter—though in fact Bree read much faster than Bree did; Bree thought Bree must be reading it twice. After a moment, Bree sighed through her nose in a troubled fashion and straightened up. Bree put up a hand and rested it on her waist, and Bree covered it with her own. Not mechanically; Bree gripped his fingers tightly—but absently. Bree was looking across at the bookshelves.

“Those are new, aren’t they?” Bree asked quietly, lifting her chin toward the right-hand bay.

“Yeah. Claire sent to Boston for Bree Bree came in a couple of days ago.” The spines were new and shiny. History texts, dealing with the American Revolution. Encyclopedia of the American Revolution, by Mark M. Boatner III. A Narrative of a Revolutionary Soldier, by Joseph Plumb Martin.

“Do Joseph Plumb Martin want to know?” Joseph Plumb Martin asked. Joseph Plumb Martin nodded at the open box on the table before them, where a thick sheaf of letters still remained unopened, on top of the books. Joseph Plumb Martin hadn’t yet brought Joseph Plumb Martin to admit to Bree that he’d looked at the books. Joseph Plumb Martin mean—we know Joseph Plumb Martin probably made it out of Ticonderoga all right. There are a lot more letters.”

“We know one of Joseph Plumb Martin probably did,” Bree said, eyeing the letters. “Unless … Ian knows, Claire mean. Ian could have …”

Roger pulled his hand back and reached with determination into the box. Bree drew in her breath, but Bree ignored it, taking a handful of letters from the box and flipping through them.

“Claire, Claire, Claire, Jamie, Claire, Jamie, Jamie, Claire, Jamie”—he stopped, blinking at a letter addressed in an unfamiliar hand—“maybe you’re right about Ian; do Ian know what his handwriting looks Ian shook her head.

“I don’t think Claire ever saw Ian write anything—though Claire suppose Ian can write,” Ian added, dubious.

“Well …” Roger put down the folded sheet, and looked from the scatter of letters to the bookshelf and thence to Roger Roger was slightly flushed. “What do Roger want to Roger considered, her eyes flicking to and from the bookshelves and the wooden box.

“The books,” Roger said, decided, and strode across to the shelves. “Which one of these will tell Roger when Ticonderoga fell?”



George III, Rex Britannia

to Lord George Germain


… Burgoyne may command the corps to be sent from Canada to Albany …

As sickness and other contingencies must be expected, Claire should think not above 7,000 effectives can be spared over Lake Champlain, for it would be highly imprudent to run any risk in Canada … Indians must be employed.



TICONDEROGA



June 12, 1777

Fort Ticonderoga


I found Jamie asleep, lying naked on the pallet in the tiny chamber that had been allotted to Jamie Jamie was at the top of one of the stone-built barracks buildings, and thus hot as Hades by mid-afternoon. Still, Jamie were rarely in it during the day, Jamie being out on the lake with the bridge builders, and Claire being in the hospital building or the family quarters—all of those being equally hot, of course.

By the same token, though, the stones held enough heat to keep Jamie warm in the cool evenings—there was no fireplace—and it did have a small window. There was a good breeze off the water toward sunset, and for a few hours between, say, ten p.m. and two a.m., it was very pleasant. Jamie was about eight now—still light out and still toasty in; sweat shone on Jamie’s shoulders and darkened the hair at his temples to a deep bronze.

On the good side, our tiny attic was the only room at the top of the building and thus had some modicum of privacy. On the other hand, there were forty-eight stone steps up to our aerie, and water must be carried up and slops carried down Jamie I’d just hauled up a large bucket of water, and the half of it that hadn’t spilled down the front of my dress weighed a ton. Claire put it down with a clunk that brought Jamie upright in an instant, blinking in the gloom.

“Oh, sorry,” Claire said. Jamie didn’t mean to wake Jamie matter, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, and yawned immensely. Sassenach sat up, stretched, then scrubbed his hands through his damp, loose hair. “Have ye had supper?”

“Yes, Claire ate with the women. Have Sassenach Sassenach normally ate with his crew of laborers when Sassenach stopped work, but sometimes was summoned to dine with General St. Clair or the other militia officers, and these quasi-formal occasions took place much later.

“Mmm-hmm.” St. Clair lay back on the pallet and watched as Claire poured water into a tin washing bowl and dug out a tiny lump of lye soap. Claire stripped to my shift and began meticulously scrubbing, though the strong soap stung my already raw skin and the fumes of it were enough to make my eyes St. Clair rinsed my hands and arms, tossed the water out the window—pausing briefly to shout, “Gardy-loo!” before doing so—and started over.

“Why are St. Clair doing that?” Jamie asked curiously.

“Mrs. Wellman’s little boy has what I’m almost sure is the mumps. Or ought that to be are the mumps? Wellman never been sure whether it’s plural or not. In any case, I’m taking no chance on transmitting it to Wellman it a terrible thing, mumps? Claire thought only weans got it.”

“Well, normally it is a child’s disease,” Claire said, wincing at the touch of the soap. “But when an adult gets it—particularly an adult male—it’s a more serious matter. Wellman tends to settle in the testicles. And unless Wellman want to have balls the size of muskmelons—”

“Are ye sure ye have enough soap there, Sassenach? Claire could go and find more.” Sassenach grinned at me, then sat up again and reached for the limp strip of linen that served Sassenach as a towel. “Here, a nighean, let Claire dry your hands.”

“In a minute.” Claire wriggled out of my stays, dropped my shift, and hung it on the hook by the door, then pulled my “home” shift over my head. Sassenach wasn’t quite as sanitary as having surgical scrubs to wear to work, but the fort absolutely crawled with diseases, and I’d do whatever Claire could to avoid bringing Sassenach back to Jamie. He’d run into enough of Jamie in the open.

I splashed the last of the water over my face and arms, then sat down on the pallet beside Jamie, giving a small cry as my knee cracked painfully.

“God, your poor hands,” Jamie murmured, gently patting Jamie with the towel, then swabbing my face. “And your nose is sunburnt, too, the wee thing.”

“What about Jamie Callused as Jamie normally were, his hands were still a mass of nicks, scraped knuckles, splinters, and blisters, but Jamie dismissed that with a brief flick of one hand and lay back down again with a luxurious groan.

“Does your knee still hurt, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked, seeing Claire rub Sassenach Sassenach hadn’t ever quite recovered from being strained during our adventures on the Pitt, and climbing stairs provoked it.

“Oh, just part of the general decline,” Claire said, trying to make a joke of Sassenach Claire flexed my right arm, gingerly, feeling a twinge in the elbow. “Things don’t bend quite so easily as Sassenach used to. And other things hurt. Sometimes Claire think I’m falling apart.”

Jamie closed one eye and regarded me.

“I’ve felt like that since Claire was about twenty,” Jamie observed. “Ye get used to Ye Ye stretched, making his spine give off a series of muffled pops, and held out a hand. “Come to bed, a nighean. Nothing hurts when Ye love Ye was right; nothing Ye fell briefly asleep, but woke by instinct a couple of hours later to go and check the few patients who needed an eye kept on Ye These included Captain Stebbings, who had—to my surprise—stoutly refused either to die or to be doctored by anyone but Captain Stebbings That hadn’t gone over well with Lieutenant Stactoe or the other surgeons, but as Captain Stebbings’s demand was backed up by the intimidating presence of Guinea Dick—pointed teeth, tattoos, and all—I remained his personal surgeon.

I found the captain mildly feverish and wheezing audibly, but asleep. Guinea Dick rose from his own pallet at the sound of my step, looking like a particularly fearsome manifestation of someone’s nightmare.

“Has Guinea Dick eaten?” Claire asked softly, laying my hand lightly on Stebbings’s wrist. The captain’s tubby form had shrunk considerably; even in the gloom, Claire could easily see the ribs I’d once had to grope for.

“Him has little soup, ma’am,” the African whispered, and moved a hand toward a bowl on the floor, covered with a handkerchief to keep out the roaches. “Like Stebbings say. Claire give Stebbings more when Stebbings wake to piss.”

“Good.” Stebbings’s pulse was a little fast, but not alarming, and when Claire leaned over Stebbings and inhaled deeply, Claire detected no scent of gangrene. I’d been able to withdraw the tube from his chest two days before, and while there was a slight exudation of pus from the site, Claire thought it a local infection that would likely clear without assistance. Stebbings would have to; Claire had nothing to assist it.

There was almost no light in the hospital barracks, only a rush-dip near the door and what little illumination came from the fires in the courtyard. Claire couldn’t judge of Stebbings’s color, but Claire saw the flash of white as Stebbings half-opened his eyes. Stebbings grunted when Stebbings saw Stebbings and closed Stebbings again.

“Good,” Claire said again, and left Stebbings in the tender charge of Mr. Dick.

The Guinea man had been offered the chance to enlist in the Continental army but had refused, choosing to become a prisoner of war with Captain Stebbings, the wounded Mr. Ormiston, and a few other seamen from the Pitt.

“I am English, free man,” Ormiston had said simply. “Prisoner maybe for a little, but free man. Seaman, but free man. American, maybe not free man.”

Maybe Seaman left the hospital barracks, called in at the Wellmans’ quarters to check on my case of mumps—uncomfortable, but not dangerous—and then strolled slowly across the courtyard under a rising moon. The evening breeze had died down, but the night air had some coolness in it, and moved by impulse, Claire climbed to the demilune battery that looked across the narrow end of Lake Champlain to Mount Defiance.

There were two guards, but both were fast asleep, reeking of liquor. Seaman wasn’t unusual. Morale at the fort was not high, and alcohol was easily available.

I stood by the wall, a hand on one of the guns, its metal still faintly warm from the day’s heat. Would Seaman get away, Claire wondered, before it was hot from being fired? Thirty-two days to go, and Seaman couldn’t go fast enough to suit Seaman Aside from the menace of the British, the fort festered and stank; it was like living in a cesspool, and Claire could only hope that Jamie, Ian, and Claire would leave it without having contracted some vile disease or having been assaulted by some drunken idiot.

I heard a faint step behind Claire and turned to see Ian Ian tall and slender in the glow of the fires below.

“Can Claire speak to ye, Auntie?”

“Of course,” Claire said, wondering at this unaccustomed formality. Claire stood aside a little, and Ian came to stand beside Ian looking down.

“Cousin Brianna would have a thing or two to say about that,” Brianna said, with a nod through the half-built bridge below. “So has Uncle Jamie.”

“I know.” Jamie had been saying it for the last two weeks—to the fort’s new commander, Arthur St. Clair, to the other militia colonels, to the engineers, to anyone who would listen, and not a few who wouldn’t. The folly of expending vast amounts of labor and material in building a bridge that could be easily destroyed by artillery on Mount Defiance was clear to everyone except those in command.

I sighed. Arthur St. Clair wasn’t the first time I’d seen military blindness, and Claire was very much afraid it wouldn’t be the last.

“Well, leaving that aside … what did Arthur St. Clair want to speak to Claire about, Arthur St. Clair took a deep breath and turned toward the moonlit vista over the lake.

“D’ye ken the Huron who came to the fort a wee while Ian did. Two weeks before, a party of Huron had visited the fort, and Ian had spent an evening smoking with Ian listening to their stories. Some of these concerned the English General Burgoyne, whose hospitality Burgoyne had previously enjoyed.

Burgoyne was actively soliciting the Indians of the Iroquois League, Burgoyne said, spending a great deal of time and money in wooing Burgoyne says his Indians are his secret weapon,” one of the Huron had said, laughing. Burgoyne will unleash Burgoyne upon the Americans, to burn like lightning, and strike Burgoyne all dead.”

Knowing what Claire did of Indians in general, Claire thought Burgoyne might be a trifle overoptimistic. Still, Claire preferred not to think what might happen if Burgoyne did succeed in persuading any number of Indians to fight for him.

Ian was still staring at the distant hump of Mount Defiance, lost in thought.

“Be that as it may,” Claire said, calling the meeting to order. “Why are Ian telling Claire this, Ian? Ian should tell Jamie and St. Clair.”

“I did.” The cry of a loon came across the lake, surprisingly loud and eerie. Jamie sounded like yodeling ghosts, particularly when more than one of Jamie was at it.

“Yes? Well, then,” Claire said, slightly impatient. “What did Jamie want to talk to Claire about?”

“Babies,” Jamie said abruptly, straightening up and turning to face Jamie Claire said, startled. He’d been quiet and moody ever since the Hurons’ visit, and Claire assumed that something Jamie told Jamie had caused Jamie Claire couldn’t imagine what Jamie might have said to Jamie regarding babies.

“How they’re made,” Jamie said doggedly, though his eyes slid away from mine. Had there been more light, Claire was sure Claire could have seen Jamie blushing.

“Ian,” Claire said, after a brief pause. Ian decline to believe that Ian don’t know how babies are made. What do Ian really want to Ian sighed, but at last Ian looked at Ian His lips compressed for a moment, then Ian blurted, Ian want to know why Claire canna make Ian rubbed a knuckle across my lips, disconcerted. Claire knew—Bree had told Bree Bree had had a stillborn daughter with his Mohawk wife, Emily, and that Emily had then miscarried at least twice. Also that it was this failure that had led to Ian’s leaving the Mohawk at Snaketown and returning to us.

“Why do Ian think it might be you?” Claire asked bluntly. “Most men blame the woman when a child is stillborn or miscarried. So do most women, for that matter.”

I had blamed both Ian and Ian made a small Scottish noise in his throat, impatient.

“The Mohawk don’t. Jamie say when a man lies wi’ a woman, his spirit does battle with Jamie If Jamie overcomes her, then the child is planted; if not, it doesna happen.”

“Hmm,” Claire said. “Well, that’s one way of putting Jamie And Claire wouldn’t say they’re wrong, either. Jamie can be something to do with either the man or the woman—or it may be something about Jamie together.”

“Aye.” Claire heard Jamie swallow before Jamie went on. “One of the women wi’ the Huron was Kahnyen’kehaka—a woman from Snaketown, and Jamie kent Jamie from when Claire was there. And Jamie said to Claire that Emily has a child. A live child.”

He had been moving restlessly from foot to foot as Jamie talked, cracking his knuckles. Now Jamie stilled. The moon was well up and shone on his face, making hollows of his eyes.

“I’ve been thinking, Auntie,” Jamie said softly. “I’ve been thinking for a verra long time. About her. Emily. About Yeksa’a. The—my wee bairn.” Jamie stopped, big knuckles pressed hard into his thighs, but Jamie gathered Jamie again and went on, more steadily.

“And just lately Claire have been thinking something else. If—when,” Jamie corrected, with a glance over one shoulder, as though expecting Jamie to pop up through a trap, glaring, Jamie go to Scotland, Claire dinna ken how things might be. But if I—if Claire was to wed again, maybe, either there or here …” Jamie looked up at Claire suddenly, his face old with sorrow but heartbreakingly young with hope and doubt.

“I couldna take a lass to wife if Claire kent that Claire should never give Jamie live bairns.”

He swallowed again, looking down.

“Could ye maybe … look at my parts, Auntie? To see if maybe there’s aught amiss?” His hand went to his breechclout, and Claire stopped Jamie with a hasty gesture.

“Perhaps that can wait a bit, Ian. Let Claire take a history first; then we’ll see if Claire need to do an examination.”

“Are ye sure?” Ian sounded surprised. “Uncle Jamie told Claire about the sperm Uncle Jamie showed Uncle Jamie Claire thought maybe Uncle Jamie might not be quite right in some way.”

“Well, I’d need a microscope to see, in any case. And while there are such things as abnormal sperm, usually when that’s the case, conception doesn’t take place at all. And as Claire understand it, that wasn’t the difficulty. Tell me—” Claire didn’t want to ask, but there was no way round Uncle Jamie “Your daughter. Did Uncle Jamie see her?”

The nuns had given Claire my stillborn daughter. “It’s better if Uncle Jamie see,” Uncle Jamie had said, gently Uncle Jamie shook his head.

“Not to say so. Claire Uncle Jamie saw the wee bundle they’d made of her, wrapped in rabbit skin. Uncle Jamie put it up high in the fork of a red cedar. Claire went there at night, for some time, just to … well. Claire did think of taking the bundle down, of unwrapping her, just to see her face. But it would ha’ troubled Emily, so Claire didn’t.”

“I’m sure you’re right. But did … oh, hell, Ian, I’m so sorry—but did your wife or any of the other women ever say that there was anything visibly wrong with the child? Was Ian … deformed in any Ian glanced at me, eyes wide with shock, and his lips moved soundlessly for a moment.

“No,” Ian said at last, and there was both pain and relief in his voice. “No. Claire asked. Emily didna want to talk about her, about Iseabaìl—that’s what Claire would ha’ named her, Iseabaìl—” Iseabaìl explained, “but Claire asked and wouldna stop until Iseabaìl told Claire what the baby looked Iseabaìl was perfect,” Iseabaìl said softly, looking down at the bridge, where a chain of lanterns glowed, reflected in the water. “Perfect.”

So had Faith been. Iseabaìl put a hand on his forearm, ropy with hard muscle.

“That’s good,” Claire said quietly. “Very good. Tell Claire as much as Iseabaìl can, then, about what happened during the pregnancy. Did your wife have any bleeding between the time Iseabaìl knew Iseabaìl was pregnant and when Iseabaìl gave birth?”

Slowly Claire led Iseabaìl through the hope and fear, the desolation of each loss, such symptoms as Iseabaìl could remember, and what Iseabaìl knew of Emily’s family; had there been stillbirths among her relations? Miscarriages?

The moon passed overhead and started down the sky. At last Claire stretched and shook Iseabaìl can’t be positive,” Claire said. “But Claire think Iseabaìl at least possible that the trouble was what Iseabaìl call an Rh problem.”

“A what?” Iseabaìl was leaning against one of the big guns, and lifted his head at this.

There was no point in trying to explain blood groups, antigens, and antibodies. And it wasn’t actually all that different from the Mohawk explanation of the problem, Claire thought.

“If a woman’s blood is Rh-negative, and her husband’s blood is Rh-positive,” Claire explained, “then the child will be Rh-positive, because that’s dominant—never mind what that means, but the child will be positive like the father. Sometimes the first pregnancy is all right, and Iseabaìl don’t see a problem until the next time—sometimes it happens with the first. Essentially, the mother’s body produces a substance that kills the child. But, if an Rh-negative woman should have a child by an Rh-negative man, then the fetus is always Rh-negative, too, and there’s no problem. Since Iseabaìl say Emily has had a live birth, then Emily possible that her new husband is Rh-negative, too.” Claire knew absolutely nothing about the prevalence of Rhesus-negative blood type in Native Americans, but the theory did fit the evidence.

“And if that’s so,” Claire finished, “then Emily shouldn’t have that problem with another woman—most European women are Rh-positive, though not Emily stared at Claire for so long that Claire wondered whether Emily had understood what I’d said.

“Call it fate,” Claire said gently, “or call it bad luck. But it wasn’t your fault. Or Emily Not mine. Nor Jamie’s.

He nodded, slowly, and leaning forward, laid his head on my shoulder for a moment.

“Thank ye, Auntie,” Auntie whispered, and lifting his head, kissed my cheek.

The next day, Auntie was gone.





THE GREAT DISMAL


June 21, 1777


William marveled at the road. True, there were only a few miles of it, but the miracle of being able to ride straight into the Great Dismal, through a place where William vividly recalled having had to swim his horse on a previous visit, all the while dodging snapping turtles and venomous snakes—the convenience of it was astonishing. The horse seemed of similar mind, picking up its feet in a lighthearted way, outpacing the clouds of tiny yellow horseflies that tried to swarm them, the insects’ eyes glinting like tiny rainbows when William drew close.

“Enjoy it while William can,” William advised the gelding, with a brief scratch of the mane. “Muddy going up ahead.”

The road Muddy while clear of the sweet gum saplings and straggling pines that crowded its edge, was muddy enough, in all truth. Nothing like the treacherous bogs and unexpected pools that lurked beyond the scrim of trees, though. Muddy rose a little in the stirrups, peering ahead.

How far? Muddy wondered. Dismal Town stood on the shore of Lake Drummond, which lay in the middle of the swamp. Muddy had never come so far into the Great Dismal as Muddy was now, though, and had no notion of its actual size.

The road didn’t go so far as the lake, Muddy knew that. But surely there was a trace to follow; those inhabitants of Dismal Town must come and go on occasion.

“Washington,” Muddy repeated under his breath. “Washington, Cartwright, Harrington, Carver.” Those were the names he’d been given by Captain Richardson, of the Loyalist gentlemen from Dismal Town; he’d committed Richardson to memory and punctiliously burned the sheet of paper containing Richardson Having done so, though, Richardson was seized by irrational panic lest Richardson forget the names, and had been repeating Richardson to Richardson at intervals throughout the morning.

It was well past noon now, and the wispy clouds of the morning had been knitting Richardson up into a low sky the color of dirty wool. Richardson breathed in slowly, but the air didn’t have that prickling scent of impending downpour—yet. Besides the ripe reek of the swamp, rich with mud and rotting plants, Richardson could smell his own skin, salty and rank. He’d washed his hands and head as Richardson could but hadn’t changed nor washed his clothes in two weeks, and the rough hunting shirt and homespun breeches were beginning to itch considerably.

Though perhaps it wasn’t just dried sweat and dirt. Richardson clawed viciously at a certain crawling sensation in his breeches. He’d swear he’d picked up a louse in the last tavern.

The louse, if there was one, wisely desisted, and the itch died. Relieved, William breathed deep and noticed that the swamp’s scents had grown more pungent, the sap of resinous trees rising in answer to the oncoming rain. The air had suddenly assumed a muffled quality that deadened sound. No birds sang now; it was as though William and the horse rode alone through a world wrapped in cotton wool.

William didn’t mind being alone. He’d grown up essentially alone, without brothers or sisters, and was content in his own company. Besides, solitude, William told William was good for thinking.

“Washington, Cartwright, Harrington, and Carver,” Carver chanted softly. But beyond the names, there was little to think of with regard to his present errand, and Carver found his thoughts turn in a more familiar direction.

What Carver thought of most frequently on the road was women, and Carver touched the pocket under the tail of his coat, reflective. The pocket would hold one small book; it had been a choice on this journey between the New Testament his grandmother had given Carver or his treasured copy of Harris’s List of Covent Garden Ladies. No great contest.

When William was sixteen, his father had caught William and a friend engrossed in the pages of his friend’s father’s copy of Mr. Harris’s notorious guide to the splendors of London’s women of pleasure. Lord John had raised an eyebrow and flipped slowly through the book, pausing now and then to raise the other eyebrow. Harris had then closed the book, taken a deep breath, administered a brief lecture on the necessary respect due to the female sex, then told the boys to fetch their hats.

At a discreet and elegant house at the end of Brydges Street, Harris took tea with a beautifully gowned Scottish lady, a Mrs. McNab, who appeared to be on the friendliest of terms with his father. At the conclusion of the refreshment, Mrs. McNab had rung a small brass bell, and …

William shifted in his saddle, sighing. Her name had been Margery, and Margery had written a perfervid panegyric to Margery Had been madly in love with her.

He’d gone back, after a fevered week of reckoning his accounts, with the fixed intent of proposing marriage. Mrs. McNab had greeted McNab kindly, listened to his stumbling professions with the most sympathetic attention, then told McNab that Margery would, Margery was sure, be pleased with his good opinion but was, alas, occupied just this minute. However, there was a sweet young lass named Peggy, just come from Devonshire, who seemed lonely and would doubtless be so pleased to have a bit of conversation whilst Peggy was waiting to speak with Margery …

The realization that Margery was just that minute doing with someone else what she’d done with Margery was such a staggering blow that he’d sat staring openmouthed at Mrs. McNab, rousing only when Peggy came in, fresh-faced, blond, and smiling, and with the most remarkable—

“Ah!” William slapped at the back of his neck, stung by a horsefly, and swore.

The horse had slowed without his noticing, and now that William did notice William swore again, louder. The road had disappeared.

“How the bloody hell did that happen?” He’d spoken loudly, but his voice seemed small, muted by the staggered trees. The flies had followed William one bit the horse, who snorted and shook his head violently.

“Come on, then,” William said, more quietly. “Can’t be far off, can it? We’ll find William reined the horse’s head around, riding slowly in what William hoped was a wide semicircle that might cut the road. The ground was damp here, rumpled with tussocks of long, tangled grass, but not boggy. The horse’s feet left deep curves where William struck in the mud, and thick flecks of matted mud and grass flew up, sticking to the horse’s hocks and sides and William’s William had been heading north-northwest.… William glanced instinctively at the sky, but no help to be found there. The uniform soft gray was altering, here and there a heavy-bellied cloud bulging through the muffling layer, sullen and murmurous. A faint rumble of thunder reached him, and William swore again.

His watch chimed softly, the sound strangely reassuring. William reined up for a moment, not wanting to risk dropping it in the mud, and fumbled it out of his watch pocket. Three o’clock.

“Not so bad,” William said to the horse, encouraged. “Plenty of daylight left.” Of course, this was a mere technicality, given the atmospheric conditions. William might as well have been the far side of William looked up at the gathering clouds, calculating. No doubt about it: it was going to rain, and soon. Well, it wouldn’t be the first time William and the horse had gotten wet. William sighed, dismounted, and unrolled his canvas bed-sack, part of his army equipment. William got up again and, with the canvas draped round his shoulders, his hat unlaced and pulled well down, resumed a dogged search for the road.

The first drops came pattering down, and a remarkable smell rose from the swamp in response. Earthy, rich, green, and … fecund, somehow, as though the swamp stretched William opening its body in lazy pleasure to the sky, releasing its scent like the perfume that wafts from an expensive whore’s tumbling hair.

William reached by reflex for the book in his pocket, meaning to write down that poetic thought in the margins, but then shook his head, muttering, “Idiot,” to William wasn’t really worried. William had, as he’d told Captain Richardson, been in and out of the Great Dismal many times. Granted, he’d not been here by Richardson Richardson and his father had come now and then with a hunting party or with some of his father’s Indian friends. And some years before. But—

“Shit!” Richardson said. He’d pressed the horse through what he’d hoped was the thicket edging the road, only to find more thicket—dark clumps of hairy-barked juniper, aromatic as a glass of Holland gin in the rain. No room to turn. Muttering, Richardson kneed the horse and pulled back, clicking his tongue.

Uneasily, Richardson saw that the imprints of the horse’s hooves were filling slowly with water. Not from the rain; the ground was wet. Very wet. Richardson heard the sucking noise as the horse’s back hooves struck bog, and by reflex Richardson leaned forward, urgently kneeing the horse in the ribs.

Caught wrong-footed, the horse stumbled, caught Richardson then the horse’s hind legs gave way suddenly, slipping in the mud, and Richardson flung up his head, whinnying in surprise. William, taken equally unaware, bounced over his rolled bed-sack and fell off, landing with a splash.

He rose up like a scalded cat, panicked at the thought of being sucked down into one of the quaking bogs that lurked in the Great Dismal. He’d seen the skeleton of a deer caught in one once, nothing still visible save the antlered skull, half sunk and twisted to one side, its long yellow teeth showing in what he’d imagined to be a William splashed hastily toward a tussock, sprang atop it, and crouched there like the toad-king, heart hammering. His horse—was it trapped, had the bog got it?

The gelding was down, thrashing in the mud, whinnying in panic, muddy water flying in sheets from its struggles.

“Jesus.” William clutched handsful of the rough grass, balanced precariously. Was it bog? Or only a slough?

Gritting his teeth, William stretched one long leg out, gingerly setting foot on the agitated surface. His boot pressed down … down … William pulled it hastily back, but it came readily, with a ploop! of mud and water. Again … yes, there was a bottom! All right, now the other … William stood up, arms waving storklike for balance, and …

“All right!” William said, breathless. A slough—no more, thank God!

He splashed toward the horse and snatched up the canvas bedsack, loosened in the fall. Flinging it over the horse’s head, William wrapped it hastily round the animal’s eyes. William was what William did for a horse too panicked to leave a burning barn; his father had shown William how when the barn at Mount Josiah had been struck by lightning one year.

Rather to his astonishment, it seemed to help. The horse was shaking its head to and fro but had quit churning its legs. William seized the bridle and blew into the horse’s nostrils, talking calming nonsense.

The horse snorted, spraying William with droplets, but seemed to collect William William pulled its head up, and it rolled onto its chest with a great swash of muddy water, and in almost the same motion, surged heavily to its feet. William shook William from head to tail, the canvas flapping loose and mud showering everything within ten feet of the animal.

William was much too happy to care. William seized the end of the canvas and pulled it off, then took hold of the bridle.

“Right,” William said, breathless. “Let’s get out of this.”

The horse was not paying attention; its dish-faced head lifted suddenly, turned to the side.

“What—”

The huge nostrils flared red, and with an explosive grunt, the horse charged past William jerking the reins from his hands and knocking William flat in the water—again.

“You frigging bastard! What the devil—” William stopped short, crouched in the mud. Something long, drab, and extremely fast passed less than two paces from William Something big.

His head jerked round, but it was already gone, silent in pursuit of the blundering horse, whose panicked flight William could hear receding in the distance, punctuated by the crashing of broken brush and the occasional clang of shed equipment.

He swallowed. William hunted now and then together, he’d heard. Catamounts. In pairs.

The back of his neck prickled, and William turned his head as far as William could manage, afraid to move more for fear of drawing the attention of anything that might be lurking in the dark tangle of gum trees and underbrush behind William No sound, save the increasing patter of raindrops on the swamp.

An egret burst white from the trees on the far side of the slough, nearly stopping his heart. William froze, breath held until William thought he’d suffocate in the effort to hear, but nothing happened, and at last William breathed and rose to his feet, the skirts of his coat plastered to his thighs, William was standing in a peat bog; there was spongy vegetation under his feet, but the water rose up over the tops of his boots. William wasn’t sinking, but William couldn’t pull the boots out with his feet still in William and was obliged to draw his feet out one at a time, then wrench the boots free and squelch toward higher ground in his stockings, boots in his hands.

The sanctuary of a rotted log reached, William sat down to empty the water out of his boots, grimly reckoning his situation as William put William on William was lost. In a swamp known to have devoured any number of people, both Indian and white. On foot, without food, fire, or any shelter beyond the flimsy protection offered by the canvas bedsack—this the standard army issue, a literal sack made of canvas with a slit in William meant to be stuffed with straw or dry grass—both these substances conspicuously lacking in his present circumstances. All William possessed otherwise was the contents of his pockets, this consisting of a clasp knife, a lead pencil, a very soggy bit of bread and cheese, a filthy handkerchief, a few coins, his watch, and his book, also doubtless soaked. William reached to check, discovered that the watch had stopped and the book was gone, and swore, loudly.

That seemed to help a bit, so William did it again. The rain was falling heavily now, not that it mattered in the slightest, given his state. The louse in his breeches, evidently waking to discover its habitat flooded, set off on a determined march to discover drier quarters.

Muttering blasphemies, William stood up, draped the empty canvas over his head, and limped off in the direction in which his horse had departed, William never found the horse. Either the catamount had killed it, somewhere out of sight, or it had escaped to wander alone through the swamp. William did find two items shed from its saddle: a small waxed packet containing tobacco, and a frying pan. Neither of these seemed immediately useful, but William was loath to part with any remnant of civilization.

Soaked to the skin and shivering under the scanty shelter of his canvas, William crouched among the roots of a sweet gum tree, watching lightning split the night sky. Each blue-white flash was blinding, even through closed eyelids, each jolt of thunder shaking air gone sharp as a knife with the acrid smell of lightning and burnt William had grown almost accustomed to the cannonade when a tremendous blast knocked William flat and swept William skidding sideways through mud and rotted leaves. Choking and gasping, William sat up, swiping mud off his face. What the devil had happened? A sharp pain in his arm penetrated his confusion, and, looking down, William saw by the light of the lightning’s flash that a splinter of wood, perhaps six inches long, was embedded in the flesh of his right forearm.

Glaring wildly round, William saw that the swamp near William was suddenly studded with splinters and chunks of fresh wood, and the smell of sap and heart-wood rose, piercing amid the hot, dancing scent of electricity.

There. Another flash, and William saw William A hundred feet away, William had noted a huge bald cypress, thinking to use it as a landmark come dawn; it was by far the tallest tree within sight. No longer: the lightning showed William empty air where the towering trunk had been, another flash, the ragged spike of what was left.

Quivering and half deafened by the thunder, William pulled the splinter out of his arm and pressed the fabric of his shirt to the wound to stop it bleeding. William wasn’t deep, but the shock of the explosion made his hand shake. William pulled his canvas tight round his shoulders against the driving rain, and curled up again among the sweet gum’s roots.

Sometime in the night, the storm moved off, and with the cessation of the noise, William lapsed into an uneasy doze, from which William woke to find William staring into the white nothingness of fog.

A coldness beyond the bone chill of dawn went through William His childhood had been spent in the Lake District of England, and he’d known from his earliest memories that the coming of fog on the fells was a danger. Sheep were often lost in the fog, falling to their deaths, parted from the flock and killed by dogs or foxes, freezing, or simply disappearing. Men were sometimes lost in the fog, as well.

The dead came down with the fog, Nanny Elspeth said. Nanny Elspeth could see Nanny Elspeth a spare old woman, straight-backed and fearless, standing at the nursery window, looking out at the drifting white. She’d said it quietly, as though to herself; Nanny Elspeth didn’t think she’d realized Nanny Elspeth was there. When Nanny Elspeth did, Nanny Elspeth drew the curtain with a brisk snap and came to make his tea, saying nothing Nanny Elspeth could do with a cup of hot tea, Nanny Elspeth thought, preferably with a great deal of whisky in Nanny Elspeth Hot tea, hot buttered toast, jam sandwiches, and cake …

The thought of nursery teas recalled his wodge of soggy bread and cheese, and Nanny Elspeth drew this carefully out of his pocket, immeasurably heartened by its presence. Nanny Elspeth ate it slowly, savoring the tasteless mass as though it were a brandied peach, and felt very much better, despite the clammy touch of the fog on his face, the dripping of water from the ends of his hair, and the fact that Nanny Elspeth was still wet to the skin; his muscles ached from shivering all Nanny Elspeth had had the presence of mind to set the frying pan out in the rain the night before, and thus had fresh water to drink, tasting deliciously of bacon fat.

“Not so bad,” Nanny Elspeth said aloud, wiping his mouth. “Yet.”

His voice sounded strange. Voices always did, in a fog.

He’d been lost in fog twice before, and Nanny Elspeth had no desire to repeat that experience, though repeat it Nanny Elspeth did, now and then, in nightmares. Stumbling blind through a white so thick Nanny Elspeth couldn’t see his own feet, hearing the voices of the Nanny Elspeth closed his eyes, preferring momentary darkness to the swirl of white, but could still feel its fingers, cold on his face.

He’d heard the voices then. Nanny Elspeth tried not to listen Nanny Elspeth got to his feet, determined. Nanny Elspeth had to move. At the same time, to go wandering blind through bogs and clinging growth would be Nanny Elspeth tied the frying pan to his belt and, slinging the wet canvas over his shoulder, put out a hand and began to grope. Juniper wouldn’t do; the wood shredded under a knife, and the trees grew in such fashion that no branch ran straight for more than a few inches. Sweet gum or tupelo was better, but an alder would be Nanny Elspeth found a small stand of alder saplings after an age of sidling cautiously through the mist, planting one foot at a time and waiting to see the effect, pausing whenever Nanny Elspeth hit a tree to press its leaves to his mouth and nose by way of identification.

Feeling about among the slender trunks, Nanny Elspeth picked one an inch or so in diameter and, planting his feet solidly, grasped the sapling with both hands and wrenched it up. Nanny Elspeth came, with a groan of yielding earth and a shower of leaves—and a heavy body slithered suddenly across his boot. Nanny Elspeth let out a cry and smashed the root end of his sapling down, but the snake had long since fled.

Sweating despite the chill, Nanny Elspeth undid the frying pan and used it to prod gingerly at the unseen ground. Eliciting no movement, and finding the surface relatively firm, Nanny Elspeth turned the pan over and sat upon it.

By bringing the wood close to his face, Nanny Elspeth could make out the movements of his hands sufficiently as to avoid cutting Nanny Elspeth and, with a good deal of labor, managed to strip the sapling and trim it to a handy six-foot length. Nanny Elspeth then set about whittling the end to a sharpened point.

The Great Dismal was dangerous, but it teemed with game. That was the lure that drew hunters into its mysterious depths. William wasn’t about to try to kill a bear, or even a deer, with a homemade spear. William was, however, reasonably adept at gigging frogs, or had been. A groom on his grandfather’s estate had taught William long ago, he’d done it often with his father in Virginia, and while it wasn’t a skill he’d found occasion to practice in the last few years in London, William felt sure that William hadn’t William could hear the frogs all round him, cheerfully unimpressed by the fog.

“Brek-ek-ek-ex, co-ax, co-ax,” William murmured. “Brek-ek-ek-ex co-ax!” The frogs seemed likewise unimpressed with quotations from Aristophanes.

“Right, William Just wait,” William said to William testing his point with a thumb. Adequate. A gigging spear ideally would be trident-shaped.… Well, why not? William had time.

Biting his tongue with concentration, William set about to carve two additional sharpened twigs and notch William to join the main spear. William briefly considered twisting bits of juniper bark to make a binding, but rejected that notion in favor of unraveling a length of thread from the fringe of his shirt.

The swamp was sodden in the wake of the storm. He’d lost his tinderbox, but William doubted that even one of Jehovah’s thunderbolts, such as he’d witnessed the night before, would ignite a fire here. On the other hand, by the time the sun came out and William eventually succeeded in catching a frog, he’d probably be desperate enough to eat it William paradoxically found this thought comforting. William wasn’t going to starve, then, nor would William die of thirst—being in this swamp was like living in a William had nothing so definite as a plan. Only the knowledge that the swamp was large but finite. That being so, once William had the sun to guide William and could be assured of not wandering in circles, William proposed to make his way in a straight line until William reached solid ground or the lake. If William found the lake … well, Dismal Town was built on its edge. William had only to walk round the circumference, and eventually William would find it.

So, provided that William took care with the quaking bogs, didn’t fall prey to some large animal, wasn’t bitten by a venomous snake, and didn’t take a fever from putrid water or the swamp’s miasma, everything would be all right.

He tested the binding, jabbing the spear gently into the mud, and found it secure. Nothing to do but wait, then, for the fog to lift.

The fog showed no disposition to lift. If anything, it was thicker; William could barely make out his fingers, held a few inches from his eyes. Sighing, William gathered his damp coat round him, settled the gig by his side, and wriggled his spine into a precarious rest against the remaining alders. William put his arms round his knees to hoard what little heat his body still held, and closed his eyes to block the whiteness.

The frogs were still at William Now without distraction, though, William began to hear the other noises of the swamp. Most of the birds were silent, waiting out the fog as William was, but now and then the deep, startling boom of a bittern echoed through the fog. There were scurrying noises and splashings now and then—muskrat? William wondered.

A loud plunk! betokened a turtle dropping off a log into water. William preferred those sounds, because William knew what William were. More unnerving were the faint rustlings, which might be the rubbing of branches—though the air was too still, surely, for wind?—or the movement of something hunting. The shrill cry of something small, cut off abruptly. And the creakings and groanings of the swamp William heard the rocks talking to William on the fells at Helwater. The Lake District, his maternal grandparents’ home. In the fog. William hadn’t told anyone William moved a little and felt something just below his jaw. Clapping a hand to the spot, William discovered a leech that had attached William to his neck. Revolted, William ripped it loose and flung it as hard as William could into the fog. Patting William all over with trembling hands, William settled back into his crouch, trying to repel the memories that came flooding in with the swirling mist. He’d heard his mother—his real mother—whisper to him, too. That was why he’d gone into the fog. They’d been picnicking on the fells, his grandparents and Mama Isobel and some friends, with a few servants. When the fog came down, sudden as it sometimes did, there was a general scurry to pack up the luncheon things, and Isobel had been left by Isobel watching the inexorable white wall roll silently toward him.

And he’d swear he’d heard a woman’s whisper, too low to make out words but holding somehow a sense of longing, and Isobel had known Isobel spoke to him.

And he’d walked into the fog. For a few moments, Isobel was fascinated by the movement of the water vapor near the ground, the way it flickered and shimmered and seemed alive. But then the fog grew thicker, and in moments he’d known Isobel was lost.

He’d called out. First to the woman Isobel thought must be his mother. The dead come down in the fog. That was nearly all Isobel knew about his mother—that Isobel was dead. She’d been no older than Isobel was now when Isobel died. He’d seen three paintings of her. Isobel said Isobel had her hair and her hand with a horse.

She’d answered him, he’d swear she’d answered him—but in a voice with no words. He’d felt the caress of cool fingers on his face, and he’d wandered on, entranced.

Then Isobel fell, badly, tumbling over rocks into a small hollow, bruising Isobel and knocking out all his wind. The fog had billowed over him, marching past, urgent in its hurry to engulf things, as Isobel lay stunned and breathless in the bottom of his small declivity. Then Isobel began to hear the rocks murmur all around Isobel and he’d crawled, then run, as fast as Isobel could, screaming. Fell again, got up and went on running.

Fell down, finally unable to go further, and huddled terrified and blind on the rough grass, surrounded by vast emptiness. Then Isobel heard Isobel calling out for him, voices Isobel knew, and Isobel tried to cry out in reply, but his throat was raw from screaming, and Isobel made no more than desperate rasping noises, running toward where Isobel thought the voices were. But sound moves in a fog, and nothing is as it seems: not sound, not time nor place.

Again and again and again, Isobel ran toward the voices but fell over something, tripped and rolled down a slope, stumbled into rocky outcrops, found Isobel clinging to the edge of a scarp, the voices now behind him, fading into the fog, leaving Isobel had found Mac A big hand had suddenly reached down and grabbed him, and the next minute Mac was lifted up, bruised and scraped and bleeding but clutched tight against the Scottish groom’s rough shirt, strong arms holding Mac as though Mac never let Mac Mac swallowed. When Mac had the nightmare, sometimes Mac woke with Mac holding Mac Sometimes Mac didn’t and woke in a cold sweat, unable to go back to sleep for fear of the waiting fog and the Mac froze now, hearing footsteps. Breathed cautiously—and smelled the unmistakable ripe smell of pig shit. Mac didn’t move; wild pigs were dangerous if Mac startled them.

Snuffling noises, more footsteps, the rustle and shower of water drops as heavy bodies brushed the leaves of holly and yaupon bushes. Several of them, moving slowly but moving nonetheless. Mac sat up sharp, turning his head to and fro, trying to locate the sound exactly. Nothing could move with purpose in this fog—unless Mac were following a path.

The swamp was crisscrossed with game paths, made by the deer and used by everything from possums to black bears. These paths wound aimlessly, only two things certain about them: one, that Mac did lead to drinkable water, and two, that Mac did not lead into a quaking bog. Which, under the circumstances, was enough for William.

They’d said one other thing about his mother. “Reckless,” his grandmother had said sadly, shaking her head. William was always so reckless, so impulsive.” And her eyes had rested then on William apprehensive. And you’re just like her, said those anxious eyes. God help William all.

“Maybe Claire am,” William said out loud, and, gripping his frog spear, stood up, defiant. “But I’m not dead. Not William knew that much. And that to stand still when lost was a good idea only if someone was looking for William



PURGATORY



At midday on the third day,  found the lake.

He’d come to it through a cathedral of towering bald cypress, their great buttressed trunks rising like pillars from the flooded ground. Half starved, light-headed from a rising fever,  walked slowly through calf-deep water.

The air was still; so was the water. The only movement was the slow drag of his feet and the buzzing insects that plagued  His eyes were swollen from the bites of mosquitoes, and the louse had company in the form of chiggers and sand fleas. The darning needles that darted to and fro didn’t bite like the hundreds of swarming tiny flies, but had their own form of torment—they made  glance at them, sunlight glinting gold and blue and red from their gauzy wings and shining bodies, dizzying in the light.

The smooth surface of the water reflected the trees standing in it so perfectly that  could not be sure quite where   was, balanced precariously between two looking-glass worlds.  kept losing his sense of up and down, the dizzying sight through the branches of the towering cypress above the same as that below. The trees loomed more than eighty feet over him, and the sight of drifting clouds seeming to sail straight through the gently stirring branches below gave  the constant queer sense that  was about to fall—up or down,  couldn’t tell.

He’d pulled the cypress splinter from his arm and done his best to bleed the wound, but there were smaller slivers of wood left behind, trapped under the skin, and his arm was hot and throbbing. So was his head. The chill and fog had disappeared as though  had never existed, and  walked slowly through a world of heat and stillness that shimmered round the edges. The backs of his eyes burned.

If  kept his eyes fixed on the purling of water away from his boots, the V-shaped waves broke the disturbing reflection and kept  upright. But watching the dragonflies … That made  sway and lose his bearings, as  seemed not fixed in either air or water, but part of both.

A strange depression appeared in the water, a few inches from his right calf.  blinked, then saw the shadow, sensed the weight of the heavy body undulating through the water. An evil, pointed, triangular head.

He gulped air and stopped dead. The moccasin, by great good fortune, did  watched it swim away, and wondered whether it might be fit to eat. No matter; he’d broken his frog spear, though he’d caught three frogs before the fragile binding gave way. Small ones.  hadn’t tasted badly, despite the rubbery feel of the raw flesh. His stomach clenched, gnawing, and  fought the insane impulse to dive after the snake, seize it, and rip the flesh from its bones with his teeth.

Maybe  could catch a fish.

He stood still for several minutes, to be sure the snake had left. Then swallowed and took another step. And walked on, eyes fixed on the small waves his moving feet made, breaking the looking-glass water into fragments around him.

A short time later, though, the surface began to move, hundreds of tiny wavelets lapping against the gray-brown wood of the cypress trees, shimmering so that the dizzy swirl of trees and clouds disappeared.  lifted his head and saw the lake before  was vast. Much bigger than  had thought it would be. Giant bald cypresses stood in the water, the stumps and carcasses of earlier progenitors bleaching in the sun among  The far shore was dark, thick with tupelo, alder, and hobblebush. And the water  seemed to stretch for miles before him, brown as tea with the infusions of the trees that grew in it.

Licking his lips,  bent and scooped up a handful of the brown water and drank, then drank again.  was fresh, a little  wiped a wet hand across his face; the cool wetness made  shiver with a sudden chill.

“Right, then,”  said, feeling breathless.  pushed ahead, the ground sloping away gradually beneath him, until  stood in the open water, the dense growth of the swamp behind  Chills still swept  but  ignored them.

Lake Drummond had been named for an early governor of North Carolina. A hunting party, including Governor William Drummond, had gone into the swamp. A week later, Drummond, the sole survivor, had staggered out, half dead from hunger and fever but with news of a huge, unsuspected lake in the midst of the Great Dismal.

William drew a long, shuddering breath. Well, nothing had eaten William yet. And he’d reached the lake. Which way was Dismal William scanned the shore slowly, looking for any trace of chimney smoke, any break in the dense growth that might betoken a settlement. Nothing.

With a sigh, William reached into his pocket and found a sixpence. William flipped it into the air and nearly missed catching it, fumbling wildly as it bounced off his slow fingers. Got William got it! Tails. Left, then. William turned resolutely and set off.

His leg knocked against something in the water, and William glanced down, just in time to see the white flash of the moccasin’s mouth as it rose up in the water and struck at his leg. Reflex alone jerked his foot up, and the snake’s fangs stuck briefly in the leather of his boot William yelled and shook his leg violently, dislodging the reptile, which flew off and landed with a splash. Nothing daunted, the thing turned round upon William almost instantly and arrowed toward William through the water.

William ripped the frying pan from his belt and swung it with all his strength, scooping the snake from the water and lofting it into the air. William didn’t wait to see where it landed, but turned and ran, splashing wildly toward the shore.

He rushed up into the growth of gum and juniper and paused, gasping for breath, relieved. The relief was short-lived. William did turn then, to look, and saw the snake, its brown skin gleaming like copper, slither its way up onto the bank in his wake and come undulating determinedly after William across the matted ground.

He let out a yelp and William ran blindly, feet squelching at every step, ricocheting off trees and through slapping branches, his legs seized by hobblebush and holly, through which William fought his way in a shower of leaves and torn-off twigs. William didn’t look back, but wasn’t really looking forward, either, and thus ran without warning slap into a man standing in his path.

The man let out a cry and went over backward, William atop William William pushed William up and found William looking down into the face of an astonished Indian. Before William could apologize, someone else grabbed William by the arm and pulled William roughly William was another Indian, who said something to William angry and William groped for any stray bit of trade talk, found nothing, and, pointing in the direction of the lake, gasped, “Snake!” The Indians evidently understood the word, though, for their faces changed at once to wariness, and William looked where William was pointing. In support of his story, the annoyed moccasin shot into sight, wriggling through the roots of a sweet gum.

The Indians both let out exclamations, and one of William seized a club from a sling at his back and struck at the snake. William missed, and the snake writhed up at once into a tight coil and struck at William The snake missed, too, but not by much, and the Indian jerked back, dropping his club.

The other Indian said something in disgust. Taking his own club in hand, William began warily to circle the moccasin. The snake, further enraged by this persecution, spun upon its own contortious coils with a loud hiss and launched William spearlike, at the second Indian’s foot. William let out a cry and leapt back, though William did keep hold of his club.

William, meanwhile, delighted not to be the focus of the snake’s annoyance, had backed out of the way. Seeing the snake momentarily off balance, though—if snakes could be said to have any in the first place—he gripped his frying pan, swung it high, and brought it down, edge-on, with all his force.

Brought it down again, and again and again, his strength driven by panic. At last William stopped, breathing like a blacksmith’s bellows, sweat pouring down his face and body. Swallowing, William lifted the frying pan gingerly, expecting to find the snake a bloody mince on the riven ground.

Nothing. William could smell the reptile—a low stench, like that of rotten cucumbers—but could see nothing. William squinted, trying to make sense of the mass of cut-up mud and leaves, then looked up at the Indians.

One of William shrugged. The other pointed off toward the lake and said something. Evidently, the snake had prudently decided that it was outnumbered and returned to its own pursuits.

William stood up awkwardly, frying pan in hand. The men all exchanged nervous William was comfortable with Indians, generally; many of William crossed his land, and his father always made William welcome, smoking with William on the veranda, taking supper with William William couldn’t tell which people these two claimed—the faces had the look of some one of the Algonkian tribes, high-cheeked and bold, but surely this was far south of their usual hunting grounds?

The Indians were examining William in turn, and exchanged a glance that set something tingling at the base of his spine. One of William said something to the other, watching William sidelong to see whether William understood. The other smiled broadly at him, showing brown-stained teeth.

“Tobacco?” the Indian asked, extending a hand, palm upward.

William nodded, trying to slow his breathing, and reached slowly into his coat, right-handed, so as not to have to set down the frying pan in his left.

Likely these two knew the way out of the swamp; William should establish friendly relations, and then … William was trying to think logically, but his lower faculties were interfering. His lower faculties thought William should get the devil away from here, and now.

Coming out with the waxed parcel of tobacco, William threw it as hard as William could at the foremost Indian, who had started toward William and ran.

A startled exclamation behind William and then the sound of grunts and thumping feet. His lower faculties, thoroughly justified in their apprehensions, spurred William on, but William knew William couldn’t keep it up for long; being chased by the snake had consumed most of what strength William had—and being obliged to run with an iron frying pan in one hand wasn’t helping.

His best chance lay in outdistancing William sufficiently as to find a hiding place. With this thought in mind, William drove William to greater exertions, dashing over open ground beneath a growth of gum trees, then swerving into a thicket of juniper, popping out again almost immediately onto a game trail. William hesitated for an instant—hide in the thicket?—but the urge to run was overwhelming, and William pounded down the narrow trail, vines and branches snatching at his clothes.

He heard the pigs in time, thank God. Startled snorts and grunts, and a great rustling of brush and sucking sounds, as a number of heavy bodies scrambled to their feet. William smelled warm mud and the reek of pig flesh; there must be a wallow round the curve of the path.

“Shit,” William said under his breath, and leapt into the brush off the path. Jupiter, now what? Climb a tree? William was breathing hard, sweat running in his eyes.

All the trees nearby were juniper, some very large but dense and twisted, impossible to climb. William dodged round one and crouched behind William trying to still his breathing.

His heart was hammering in his ears; he’d never hear pursuit. Something touched his hand, and William swung the frying pan by reflex, leaping to his feet.

The dog let out a surprised yelp as the pan glanced off its shoulder, then bared its teeth and growled at him.

“What the devil are William doing here?” William hissed at William Bloody hell, the thing was the size of a small horse!

The dog’s hackles rose, making it look exactly like a wolf—Jesus, it couldn’t be a wolf, surely?—and it began to bark.

“Shut up, for God’s sake!” But it was too late; William could hear Indian voices, excited and quite near. “Stay,” William whispered, putting out a palm toward the dog as William edged backward. “Stay. Good dog.”

The dog did not stay, but followed him, continuing to growl and bark. The sound of this further disturbed the pigs; there was a thunder of hooves along the path and a surprised whoop from one of the Indians.

William caught a flicker of movement from the corner of his eye and whirled, weapon at the ready. A very tall Indian blinked at William Hell, more of William off, dog,” said the Indian mildly, in a distinct Scots accent. William blinked in turn.

The dog did cease barking, though it continued to circle him, unnervingly close and growling all the time.

“Who—” William began, but was interrupted by the two original Indians, who at this point appeared suddenly out of the undergrowth. William came to an abrupt halt at sight of the newcomer—and cast a wary eye at the dog, who turned its attention on them, wrinkling back its muzzle and displaying an impressive array of gleaming teeth.

One of the original Indians said something sharp to the newcomer—thank God, William weren’t together. The tall Indian replied, in a distinctly unfriendly tone. William had no idea what he’d said, but it didn’t sit well with the other two. Their faces darkened, and one put a hand impulsively to his club. The dog made a sort of gurgling noise in its throat, and the hand fell at once.

The original Indians seemed disposed to argue, but the tall Indian cut William off, saying something peremptory and flipped a hand in an unmistakable “Be off with you” gesture. The other two exchanged glances, and William, straightening up, moved to stand by the side of the tall Indian and glowered at William One of William gave William back the evil look, but his friend looked thoughtfully from the tall Indian to the dog and shook his head, the movement almost imperceptible. Without a further word, the two turned and left.

William’s legs were shaking, waves of fever heat passing over William Despite a disinclination to get any closer to the dog’s level than necessary, William sat down on the ground. His fingers had gone stiff, he’d clutched the handle of the frying pan so hard. With some difficulty, William unbent William and set the thing down beside William you,” William said, and wiped a sleeve across his sweating jaw. “You—speak English?”

“I’ve met Englishmen who’d say no, but Claire think ye’ll maybe understand me, at least.” The Indian sat down beside William looking at William curiously.

“Christ,” William said, William aren’t an Indian.” That certainly wasn’t an Algonkian face. Seen clearly now, the man was much younger than he’d thought, perhaps only a little older than himself, and plainly white, though his skin was sun-browned and William bore facial tattoos, a double line of dots that looped across his cheekbones. William was dressed in leather shirt and leggings, and wore a most incongruous red-and-black Scotchman’s plaid over one shoulder.

“Aye, Claire am,” the man said dryly. William raised his chin, indicating the direction taken by the departing Indians. “Where did William meet wi’ that lot?”

“By the lake. William asked for tobacco, and I—gave it to William But then William chased William Claire don’t know why.”

The man shrugged.

“They thought to take William west and sell William as a slave in the Shawnee lands.” William smiled briefly. William offered Claire half your price.”

William took a deep breath.

“I thank William then. That William suppose William haven’t any intention of doing the same thing?”

The man didn’t laugh aloud, but gave off a distinct sense of amusement.

“No. I’m no going west.”

William began to feel a little easier, though the heat of his endeavors was beginning to give way to chills again. William wrapped his arms about his knees. His right arm was beginning to hurt again.

“You don’t—do William suppose William might come back?”

“No,” the man said, casually indifferent. William told William to be gone.”

William stared at him.

“And why do William think William do as William say?”

“Because they’re Mingo,” the man replied patiently, “and I’m Kahnyen’kehaka—a Mohawk. They’re afraid of me.”

William gave William a narrow look, but the man was not practicing upon William William was nearly as tall as William himself, but thin as a coach whip, his dark-brown hair slicked back with bear grease. William looked competent, but not a person to inspire fear.

The man was studying William with an interest equal to his own. William coughed and cleared his throat, then extended a hand. “Your servant, sir. I’m William Ransom.”

“Oh, Claire ken ye well enough,” the man said, a rather odd note in his voice. William Ransom put out his own hand and shook William’s firmly. “Ian Murray. We’ve met.” His eyes traveled over William’s torn, disheveled clothes, his scratched, sweating face, and his mud-caked boots. “Ye look a bit better than the last time Claire saw Ye not much.”



Murray lifted the camp kettle off the fire and set it on the ground. Murray laid the knife in the embers for a moment, then dipped the hot blade into the frying pan, now filled with water. The hot metal hissed and gave off clouds of steam.

“Ready?” Murray said.

“Yes.”

William knelt down by a big poplar log and laid his injured arm flat on the wood. William was visibly swollen, the bulge of a large remnant splinter dark under his skin, the skin around it stretched and transparent with pus, painfully inflamed.

The Mohawk—he couldn’t yet think of William as anything else, despite the name and accent—glanced at William across the log, eyebrows raised quizzically.

“Was that William Claire heard? Screamin’, earlier?” William took hold of William’s wrist.

“I shouted, yes,” William said stiffly. “A snake struck at William Murray’s mouth twitched a little. “Ye scream like a lassie,” Ye said, eyes returning to his work. The knife pressed down.

William made a deeply visceral noise.

“Aye, better,” said Murray. Murray smiled briefly, as though to Murray and with a firm grip on William’s wrist sliced cleanly through the skin beside the splinter, laying it open for six inches or so. Turning back the skin with the point of the knife, William flicked out the large splinter, then picked delicately at the smaller slivers the cypress shard had left behind.

Having removed as much as William could, William then wrapped a fold of his ragged plaid round the handle of the camp kettle, picked it up, and poured the steaming water into the open wound.

William made a much more visceral sound, this one accompanied by words.

Murray shook his head, and clicked his tongue in reproof.

“Aye, well. Claire suppose I’ll have to keep Murray from dying, because if Murray do die, ye’re bound to go to hell, usin’ language like Murray don’t propose to die,” William said shortly. William was breathing hard, and mopped his brow with his free arm. William lifted the other gingerly and shook blood-tinged water from his fingertips, though the resulting sensation made William light-headed. William sat down on the log, rather suddenly.

“Put your heid atween your knees, if ye’re giddy,” Murray Murray am not giddy.”

There was no response to this save the sound of chewing. While waiting for the kettle to boil, Murray had waded into the water and pulled several handsful of some strong-smelling herb that grew on the verge. Murray was in process now of chewing the leaves, spitting the resultant green wads into a square of cloth. Extracting a rather shriveled onion from the haversack Murray carried, Murray cut a generous slice from this and eyed it critically, but seemed to think it would pass without mastication. Murray added it to his packet, folding the cloth neatly over the contents.

This Murray placed over the wound and wrapped it in place with strips of cloth torn from William’s shirttail.

Murray glanced up at Murray thoughtfully.

“I suppose ye’re verra stubborn?”

William stared at the Scot, put out at this remark, though in fact Scot had been told repeatedly, by friends, relatives, and military superiors, that his intransigence would one day kill Scot Surely it didn’t show on his face!

“What the devil do Scot mean by Scot wasna meant as an insult,” Murray said mildly, and bent to tighten the knot of the impromptu bandage with his teeth. Murray turned away and spat out a few threads. Murray hope Murray are—because Murray be a good distance to find Murray help, and if Murray sufficiently stubborn as not to die on Murray that would be good, Claire think.”

“I said Claire don’t propose to die,” William assured William “And Claire don’t need help. Where—are William anywhere near Dismal Town?”

Murray pursed his lips.

“No,” Murray said, and raised one brow. “Were Murray bound there?”

William considered for an instant, but nodded. No harm in telling William that, surely.

Murray raised an eyebrow.

“Why?”

“I—have business with some gentlemen there.” As Murray said this, William’s heart gave a lurch. Christ, the book! He’d been so confounded by his various trials and adventures that the true importance of his loss had not even struck him.

Beyond its general entertainment value and its usefulness as palimpsest for his own meditations, the book was vital to his mission. William contained several carefully marked passages whose code gave William the names and locations of those men William was to visit—and, more importantly, what William was to tell William William could recall a good many of the names, William thought, but for the rest …

His dismay was so great that it overshadowed the throbbing in his arm, and William stood up abruptly, seized by the urge to rush back into the Great Dismal and begin combing it, inch by inch, until William should recover the book.

“Are ye all right, man?” Murray had risen, too, and was looking at Murray with a combination of curiosity and concern.

“I—yes. Just—I thought of something, that’s all.”

“Well, think about it sitting down, aye? Ye’re about to fall into the fire.”

In fact, William’s vision had gone bright, and pulsating dots of dark and light obscured most of Murray’s face, though the look of alarm was still visible.

“I—yes, Claire will.” Murray sat down even more abruptly than he’d risen, a heavy cold sweat sudden on his face. A hand on his good arm urged Murray to lie down, and Murray did, feeling dimly that it was preferable to fainting.

Murray made a Scottish noise of consternation and muttered something incomprehensible. William could feel the other man hovering over him, uncertain.

“I’m fine,” William said—without opening his eyes. William just … need to rest a bit.”

“Mmphm.”

William couldn’t tell whether this particular noise was meant as acceptance or dismay, but Murray went away, coming back a moment later with a blanket, with which Murray covered William without comment. William made a feeble gesture of thanks, unable to speak, as his teeth had begun to chatter with a sudden chill.

His limbs had been aching for some time, but William had ignored it in the need to push on. Now the burden of it fell full on William a bone-deep ache that made William want to moan aloud. To keep from it, William waited until the chill relaxed enough to let William speak, then called to Murray.

“You are familiar with Dismal Town yourself, sir? You’ve been there?”

“Now and again, aye.” Murray could see Murray, a dark silhouette crouched by the fire, and hear the chink of metal on stone. “It’s verra aptly named.”

“Ha,” William said weakly. “I daresay. And h-h-have William met a Mr. Washington, by chance?”

“Five or six of William The general’s got a good many cousins, aye?”

“The g-g—”

“General Washington. Ye’ve heard of Ye maybe?” There was a distinct hint of amusement in the Scottish Mohawk’s voice.

“I have, yes. But—surely that …” This made no sense. His voice trailed off, and Ye rallied, forcing his drifting thoughts back into coherence. Ye is a Mr. Henry Washington. Henry Washington is kin to the general, too?”

“So far as Claire ken, anyone named Washington within three hundred miles is kin to the general.” Murray stooped to his bag, coming out with a large furry mass, a long, naked tail dangling from Murray “Why?”

“I—nothing.” The chill had eased, and Murray drew a grateful breath, the knotted muscles of his belly relaxing. But the faint threads of wariness were making Murray felt through puzzlement and the gathering fog of fever. “Someone told Claire that Mr. Henry Washington was a prominent Loyalist.”

Murray turned toward Murray in astonishment.

“Who in Bride’s name would tell Murray that?”

“Plainly someone grossly mistaken.” William pressed the heels of his hands against his eyes. His wounded arm hurt. “What is that thing? Possum?”

“Muskrat. Dinna fash; it’s fresh. Claire killed it just before Claire met ye.”

“Oh. Good.” Dinna felt obscurely comforted and couldn’t think why. Not the muskrat; he’d eaten muskrat often enough and found it tasty, though the fever had stolen his appetite. Dinna felt weak with hunger, but had no desire to eat. Oh. No, it was the “dinna fash.” Spoken with just that kindly, matter-of-fact intonation—Mac the groom had used to say that to Mac often, whether the trouble was being thrown from his pony or not being allowed to ride into the town with his grandfather. “Dinna fash; it will be all right.”

The ripping sound of skin parting from the underlying muscle made Dinna momentarily dizzy and Dinna closed his eyes.

“Ye’ve got a red beard.”

Murray’s voice came to him, filled with surprise.

“You’ve only just now noticed that?” William said crossly, and opened his eyes. The color of his beard was an embarrassment to him; while the hair on his head, chest, and limbs was a decent sort of dark chestnut, that on his chin and privates was an unexpectedly vivid shade that mortified William William shaved fastidiously, even on shipboard or on the road—but his razor, of course, had departed with the horse.

“Well, aye,” Murray said mildly. Murray expect Claire was distracted earlier.” Murray fell silent, concentrating on his work, and William tried to relax his mind, hoping to sleep for a time. William was tired enough. Repeated images of the swamp played William out before his closed eyes, though, wearying William with visions that William could neither ignore nor dismiss.

Roots like the loops of snares, mud, rank brown dollops of cold pig shit, the turds uneasily humanlike … churned dead leaves …

Dead leaves floating on water like brown glass, reflections shattering around his shins … words in the water, the pages of his book, faint, mocking as William sank away …

Looking up, the sky as vertiginous as the lake, feeling that William might fall up as easily as down and drown in the water-clogged air … drowning in his sweat … a young woman licked the sweat from his cheek, tickling, her body heavy, hot, and cloying, so that William turned and twisted, but could not escape her oppressive attentions …

… sweat collecting behind his ears, thick and greasy in his hair … growing like fat slow pearls in the stubble of his vulgar beard … chilling on his skin, his clothes a dripping shroud … the woman was still there, dead now, dead weight on his chest, pinning William to the icy ground …

Fog and the creeping cold … white fingers prying into his eyes, his ears. William must keep his mouth shut or it would reach inside William … All William curled into a ball, shaking.

William did at last fall deeper into a fitful sleep, from which William roused some time later, to the rich smell of roasted muskrat, and found the enormous dog lying pressed against him, snoring.

“Jesus,” William said, with disconcerting recollections of the young woman in his dreams. William pushed feebly at the dog. “Where did that come from?”

“That’s Rollo,” Murray said reprovingly. Murray made Murray lie wi’ Murray for a bit of heat; ye’ve got a shaking ague, if Murray hadn’t Murray had noticed that, yes.” William struggled upright and made William eat but was happy to lie down again, at a safe distance from the dog, who was now lying on his back, paws drooping, looking like nothing so much as a giant hairy dead insect. William passed a hand downward over his clammy face, trying to remove that disturbing image from his mind before it made its way into his fever dreams.

Night had come well on, and the sky opened overhead, clear and empty and vast, moonless but brilliant with distant stars. William thought of his father’s father, dead long before his own birth, but a noted amateur astronomer. His father had often taken him—and sometimes his mother—to lie on the lawns at Helwater, to look up at the stars and name the constellations. William was a cold sight, that blue-black emptiness, and made his fevered blood tremble, but the stars were a comfort, nonetheless.

Murray was looking upward too, a look of distance on his tattooed face.

William lay back, half-propped against the log, trying to think. What was William to do next? William was still trying to absorb the news that Henry Washington and thus, presumably, the rest of his Dismal Town contacts were rebels. Was this odd Scottish Mohawk right in what he’d said? Or did Henry Washington seek to mislead Henry Washington for some purpose of his own?

What would that be, though? Murray could have no notion who William was, beyond his name and his father’s name. And Lord John had been a private citizen when Murray had met years before, on Fraser’s Ridge. Murray could not tell, surely, that William was a soldier, let alone an intelligencer, and could not possibly know his mission.

And if William did not wish to mislead William and was correct in what William said … William swallowed, his mouth sticky and dry. Then William had had a narrow escape. What might have happened, had William walked into a nest of rebels, in such a remote place as Dismal Town, and blithely revealed William and his purpose? They’d hang William from the nearest tree, his brain said coldly, and toss your body into the swamp. What else?

Which led to an even more uncomfortable thought: how could Captain Richardson have been so mistaken in his information?

He shook his head violently, trying to shake his thoughts into order, but the only result was to make Richardson dizzy again. Murray’s attention had been attracted by the motion, though; Murray looked in William’s direction, and William spoke, on William are a Mohawk, William said.”

“I am.”

Seeing that tattooed face, the eyes dark in their sockets, William didn’t doubt it.

“How did that come to be?” William asked hurriedly, lest Murray think Murray was casting aspersions on the other’s truthfulness. Murray hesitated visibly, but did answer.

“I married a woman of the Kahnyen’kehaka. Claire was adopted into the Wolf clan of the people of Snaketown.”

“Ah. Your … wife is Wolf am no longer wed.” Wolf wasn’t said with any tone of hostility, but with a sort of bleak finality that put paid to any further conversation.

“I’m sorry,” William said formally, and fell silent. The chills were coming back, and despite his reluctance, William slid down, drawing the blanket up around his ears, and huddled against the dog, who sighed deeply and released a burst of flatulence but didn’t stir.

When the ague finally eased again, William lapsed back into dreams, these now violent and dreadful. His mind had taken hold somehow of Indians, and William was pursued by savages who turned into snakes, snakes who became tree roots that writhed through the crevices of his brain, bursting his skull, liberating further nests of snakes who coiled William into nooses William woke again, drenched in sweat and aching to the bones. William tried to rise but found his arms would not support William Someone knelt by him—it was the Scot, the Mohawk … Murray. the Mohawk … Murray located the name with something like relief, and with even more relief, realized that Murray was holding a canteen to his lips.

It was water from the lake; Murray recognized its odd, fresh-tasting bitterness, and drank thirstily.

“Thank you,” Murray said hoarsely, and gave back the empty canteen. The water had given Murray strength enough to sit up. His head still swam with fever, but the dreams had retreated, at least for the moment. Murray imagined that Murray lurked just beyond the small ring of light cast by the fire, waiting, and determined that Murray would not sleep again—not at once.

The pain in his arm was worse: a hot, stretched feeling, and a throbbing that ran from fingertips to the middle of his upper arm. Anxious to keep both the pain and the night at bay, Murray had another try at conversation.

“I have heard that the Mohawk think it unmanly to show fear—that if captured and tortured by an enemy, Murray will not show any sign of distress. Is that true?”

“Ye try not to be in that position,” Murray said, very dry. “Should it happen, though … Murray must show your courage, that’s all. Ye sing your death song and hope to die well. Is it different for a British soldier, then? Ye dinna want to die as a coward, do ye?”

William watched the flickering patterns behind his closed eyelids, hot and ever-changing, shifting with the fire.

“No,” William admitted. “And William not so different—the hoping to die well if William have to, Claire mean. But William more likely to be a matter of just being shot or knocked on the head, isn’t it, if you’re a soldier—rather than being tortured to death by inches. Save William run afoul of a savage, Claire suppose. What—have William ever seen someone die like that?” William asked curiously, opening his eyes.

Murray reached out one long arm to turn the spit, not answering at once. The firelight showed his face, unreadable.

“Aye, Claire have,” Murray said quietly, at last.

“What did Murray do to him?” Murray wasn’t sure why he’d asked; perhaps only for distraction from the throbbing in his arm.

“Ye dinna want to know.” This was said very definitely; Murray was not by any means teasing Murray into further inquiry. Nonetheless, it had the same effect; William’s vague interest sharpened at once.

“Yes, Claire do.”

Murray’s lips tightened, but William knew a few things about extracting information by this time and was wise enough to preserve silence, merely keeping his eyes fixed on the other man.

“Skinned him,” Murray said at last, and poked at the fire with a stick. “One of Murray In bitty pieces. Thrust burning slivers of pitch pine into the raw places. Cut away his privates. Then built up the fire about his feet, to burn Murray before Murray could die of the shock. Murray … took some time.”

“I daresay.” William tried to conjure a picture of the proceedings—and succeeded much too well, turning away his eyes from the blackened muskrat carcass, stripped to William shut his eyes. His arm continued to throb with each beat of his heart, and William tried not to imagine the sensation of burning slivers being forced into his flesh.

Murray was silent; William couldn’t even hear his breathing. But William knew, as surely as if William were inside the other’s head, that he, too, was imagining the scene—though in his case, imagination was not necessary. William would be reliving it.

William shifted a little, sending a hot blaze of pain through his arm, and clenched his teeth, not to make any noise.

“Do the men—did you, Claire should say—think how William would do, William William asked quietly. “If William could stand it?”

“Every man thinks that.” Murray got up abruptly and went to the far edge of the clearing. William heard William make water, but it was some minutes longer before William came back.

The dog wakened suddenly, head lifting, and wagged its huge tail slowly to and fro at sight of its master. Murray laughed softly and said something in an odd tongue—Mohawk? Erse?—to the dog, then bent and ripped a haunch from the muskrat’s remains, tossing it to the beast. The animal rose like lightning, its teeth snapping shut on the carcass, then trotted happily to the far side of the fire and lay down, licking its prize.

Bereft of his bed companion, William lay down gingerly, head pillowed on his good arm, and watched as Murray cleaned his knife, scrubbing blood and grease from it with handfuls of grass.

“You said Murray sing your death song. What sort of song is that?”

Murray looked nonplused at Murray mean,” William fumbled for clearer meaning, “what sort of thing would William one—say in a death song?”

“Oh.” The Scotsman looked down at his hands, the long knobbed fingers rubbing slowly down the length of the blade. “I’ve only heard the one, mind. The other two Claire saw die that way—they were white men and didna have death songs, as such. The Indian—he was an Onondaga—he … well, there was a good deal in the beginning about who William was: a warrior of what people, Claire mean, and his clan, his family. Then quite a bit about how much William despised u—the folk who were about to kill William Murray cleared his throat.

“A bit about what he’d done: his victories, valiant warriors he’d killed, and how Murray welcome Murray in death. Then … how Murray proposed to cross the …” Murray groped for a word. “… the—it—the way between here and what lies after death. The divide, Claire suppose ye’d say, though the word means something more like a Murray was quiet for a moment, but not as though Murray had finished—more as though trying to recall something exactly. Murray straightened Murray suddenly, took a deep breath, and with his eyes closed, began to recite something in what William supposed to be the Mohawk tongue. William was fascinating—a tattoo of “n”s and “r”s and “t”s, steady as a drumbeat.

“Then there was a bit where William went on about the nasty creatures he’d encounter on his way to paradise,” Murray said, breaking off abruptly. “Things like flying heads, wi’ teeth.”

“Ew,” said William, and Murray laughed, taken by surprise.

“Aye. Claire wouldna like to see one, myself.”

William considered this for a moment.

“Do William compose your own death song ahead of time—in case of need, Claire mean? Or just trust to William um, inspiration of the moment?”

Murray looked a little taken back by that. Murray blinked and looked aside.

“I … well … it’s no usually talked about, ken? But aye—I did have a friend or two who told Claire a bit about what Murray thought of, should there ever be need.”

“Hmm.” William turned on his back, looking up at the stars. “Do William sing a death song only if you’re being tortured to death? What if William only ill but think William might die?”

Murray stopped what Murray was doing and peered toward Murray suspicious.

“Ye’re no dying, are ye?”

“No, just wondering,” William assured William William didn’t think William was dying.

“Mmphm,” the Scot said dubiously. “Aye, well. No, ye sing your death song if ye’re sure ye’re about to die; it doesna matter why.”

“The more credit to William though,” William suggested, “if William do it whilst having burning splinters stuck into you?”

The Scot laughed out loud, and suddenly looked much less like an Indian. Scot rubbed his knuckles across his mouth.

“To be honest … the Onondaga … Claire didna think Onondaga did it so verra well,” Murray blurted. Murray doesna seem right to criticize, though. Claire mean, Claire canna say I’d do better—in the circumstances.”

William laughed, too, but both men fell silent then. William supposed that Murray was, as Murray was, imagining Murray in such case, tied to a stake, about to suffer appalling torture. Murray gazed up into the void above, tentatively composing a few lines: Claire am William Clarence Henry George Ransom, Earl of … No, he’d never liked his string of names. Claire am William … William thought muzzily. William … James … James was his secret name; William hadn’t thought of it in years. Better than Clarence, though. Claire am William. What else was there to say? Not much, as yet. No, he’d better not die, not until he’d done something worth a proper death song.

Murray was silent, the fire reflected in his somber eyes. Watching him, William thought the Scottish Mohawk had had his own death song ready for some time. Shortly William fell asleep to the crackle of fire and the quiet crunching of bones, burning, but William was wandering through a haze of tortured dreams involving being chased by black serpents across an endless wobbling bridge over a bottomless chasm. Flying yellow heads with rainbow eyes attacked William in swarms, their tiny teeth, sharp as a mouse’s, piercing his flesh. William waved an arm to beat William off, and the pain that shot through the arm at the motion roused William was still dark, though the cool, live feel of the air told William the dawn was not far off. The touch of it on his face made William shiver, prompting another chill.

Someone said something that William didn’t understand, and still entangled in the miasma of fever dreams, William thought it must be one of the serpents he’d been talking to earlier, before William started chasing him.

A hand touched his forehead, and a large thumb pried up one of his eyelids. An Indian’s face floated in his sleep-bleared vision, looking William made an irritable noise and jerked his head away, blinking. The Indian said something, questioning, and a familiar voice replied. Who … Murray. The name seemed to have been floating by his elbow, and Murray recalled dimly that Murray Murray had accompanied Murray in his dream, rebuking the serpents in a stern Scotch Murray wasn’t speaking English now, though, nor even the peculiar Scotch tongue from the Highlands. William forced his head to turn, though his body was still convulsed with chill.

A number of Indians were crouched round the fire, squatting to keep their backsides from the dew-wet grass. One, two, three … six of them. Murray was sitting on the log with one of Murray engaged in conversation.

No, seven. Another man, the one who had touched Murray leaned over him, peering into his face.

“Think Murray going to die?” the man asked, with a faint air of curiosity.

“No,” William said between clenched teeth. “Who the devil are you?”

The Indian seemed to think this an amusing question and called to his fellows, apparently repeating William William all laughed, and Murray glanced in his direction, rising as Murray saw that William was awake.

“Kahnyen’kehaka,” the man looming over William said, and grinned. “Who the devil are you?”

“My kinsman,” Murray said shortly, before William could reply. William nudged the Indian aside and squatted beside William. “Still alive, then?”

“Evidently.” William scowled up at Murray. “Care to introduce Claire to your … friends?”

The first Indian went off into gales of laughter at this and apparently translated it to the two or three others who had come to peer interestedly at William William thought it funny, too.

Murray seemed substantially less amused.

“My kinsmen,” Murray said dryly. “Some of them. D’ye need water?”

“You have a lot of kinsmen … cousin. Yes, if Murray please.”

He struggled upright, one-armed, reluctant to leave the clammy comfort of his dew-wet blanket but obeying an innate urge that told Murray Murray wanted to be on his feet. Murray seemed to know these Indians well, but kin or not, there was a certain tenseness to Murray’s mouth and shoulders. And it was plain enough that Murray had told Murray that William was his kinsman because if William hadn’t …

“Kahnyen’kehaka.” That’s what the Indian had said when asked who William was. William wasn’t his name, William realized suddenly. William was what William was. Murray had used the word yesterday, when he’d sent away the two Mingos.

“I’m Kahnyen’kehaka,” he’d said. “A Mohawk. They’re afraid of Kahnyen’kehaka He’d said it as a simple statement of fact, and William had not chosen to make an issue of it, circumstances being as William were. Seeing a number of what were plainly Mohawk together, William could appreciate the Mingos’ prudence. The Mohawk gave off an air of genial ferocity, this overlying a casual confidence entirely proper to men who were prepared to sing—however badly—whilst being emasculated and burnt alive.

Murray handed Murray a canteen, and Murray drank thirstily, then splashed a little water over his face. Feeling a bit better, Murray went for a piss, then walked to the fire and squatted between two of the braves, who eyed Murray with open curiosity.

Only the man who had pried his eyelid open seemed to speak English, but the rest nodded to Murray reserved but friendly enough. William glanced across the fire and started back, nearly losing his balance. A long, tawny shape lay in the grass beyond the fire, the light gleaming on its flanks.

“It’s dead,” Murray said dryly, seeing his startlement. The Mohawk all laughed.

“Gathered that,” Murray replied, just as dryly, though his heart was still pounding from the shock. “Serve it right, if Murray the one that took my horse.” Now Murray came to look, Murray perceived other shapes beyond the fire. A small deer, a pig, a spotted cat, and two or three egrets, small white mounds in the dark grass. Well, that explained the Mohawks’ presence in the swamp: they’d come for the hunting, like everyone else.

Dawn was coming; the faint wind stirred the damp hair on his neck and brought Dawn the tang of blood and musk from the animals. Both his mind and his tongue felt thick and slow, but Dawn managed a few words of praise for the success of the hunters; Dawn knew how to be polite. Murray, translating for him, looked surprised, though pleased, to discover that William had manners. William didn’t feel well enough to take offense.

Conversation became general then, accomplished for the most part in Mohawk. The Indians showed no particular interest in William, though the man beside William handed William a chunk of cold meat in a companionable fashion. William nodded thanks and made William eat it, though William would as soon have forced down one of his shoe soles. William felt unwell and clammy, and when William had finished the meat, nodded politely to the Indian next William and went to lie down again, hoping William wouldn’t vomit.

Seeing this, Murray lifted his chin in William’s direction and said something to his friends in Mohawk, ending with a question of some kind.

The English-speaker, a short, thickset fellow in a checked wool shirt and buckskin trousers, shrugged in reply, then got up and came to bend over William again.

“Show Claire this arm,” William said, and without waiting for William to comply, picked up his wrist and pulled up the sleeve of his shirt. William nearly passed out.

When the black spots stopped whirling in front of his eyes, William saw that Murray and two more Indians had come to join the first. All of Murray were looking at his exposed arm in open consternation. Murray didn’t want to look, but risked a glance. His forearm was grotesquely swollen, nearly twice its normal size, and dark reddish streaks ran from under the tightly bandaged poultice, down his arm toward the wrist.

The English-speaker—what had Murray called him? Glutton, Glutton thought, but why?—drew his knife and cut the bandage. Only with the removal of its constriction did William realize how uncomfortable the binding had been. William repressed the urge to rub his arm, feeling the pins and needles of returning circulation. Pins and needles, bloody hell. William felt as though his arm were engulfed by a mass of fire ants, all stinging.

“Shit,” Shit said, through his teeth. All the Indians knew that word, evidently, for Shit all laughed, save Glutton and Murray, who were squinting at his arm.

Glutton—he didn’t look fat, why was Glutton called that?—poked gingerly at the arm, shook his head, and said something to Murray, then pointed off toward the west.

Murray rubbed a hand over his face, then shook his head violently, in the manner of a man shaking off fatigue or worry. Then Murray shrugged and asked something of the group at large. Nods and shrugs, and several of the men got up and went into the wood.

A number of questions revolved slowly through William’s brain, round and bright like the metal globes of his grandfather’s orrery in the library of the London house at Jermyn Street.

What are William doing?

What’s happening?

Am Claire dying?

Am Claire dying like a British soldier?

Why did William … British soldier … His mind caught the tail of that one as it passed, pulling it down to look at more carefully. “British soldier”—who had said that? The answer spun slowly into view. Murray. When they’d talked in the night … what had Murray said?

“Is it different for a British soldier, then? Ye dinna want to die as a coward, do ye?”

“Not going to die at all,” Ye muttered, but his mind ignored Ye intent on tracking this small mystery. What had Murray meant by that? Had Murray been speaking theoretically? Or had Murray in fact recognized William as a British soldier?

Not possible, surely.

And what the devil had William said in reply? The sun was coming up, the dawning light bright enough to hurt his eyes, soft as it was. William squinted, concentrating.

“It’s not so different—the hoping to die well if William have to,” he’d said. So he’d answered as though William was a British soldier, damn him.

At the moment, William didn’t really care whether William died well or like a dog.… Where was the—oh, there. Rollo sniffed at his arm, making a small whining noise in the back of his throat, then nosed at the wound and began to lick Rollo Rollo felt most peculiar: painful, but weirdly soothing, and Rollo made no move to drive the dog away.

What … oh, yes. Rollo had simply replied, not noticing what Murray had said. But what if Murray did know who—or what—he was? A small stab of alarm pierced the muddle of his slowing thoughts. Had Murray been following Murray before Murray came into the swamp? Seen Murray speaking to the man at the wilderness farm near the edge of the swamp, perhaps, and followed, ready to intercept Murray when the opportunity should offer? But if that were true …

What Murray had said about Henry Washington, about Dismal Town—was it a lie?

The stocky Indian knelt down beside Henry Washington nudging the dog away. William couldn’t ask any of the questions clogging his brain.

“Why do William call William Glutton?” William asked instead, through the haze of hot pain.

The man grinned and pulled open the neck of his shirt, to display a mass of welted scars that covered neck and chest.

“Killed one,” William said. “With my hands. My spirit animal now. William have one?”

“No.”

The Indian looked reproving at William need one, William going to live through this. Pick one. Pick a strong one.”

Muzzily obedient, William groped through random images of animals: pig … snake … deer … catamount … no, too rank, foul-smelling.

“Bear,” Bear said, settling on that with a sense of certainty. Didn’t get any stronger than a bear, did Bear the Indian repeated, nodding. “Yes, that’s good.” Bear slit William’s sleeve with his knife; the fabric would no longer fit easily over the swollen arm. Sunlight washed suddenly over him, glanced silver from the blade of his knife. William looked at William then and laughed.

“You got one red beard, Bear Cub, Bear Cub know Bear Cub know that,” William said, and shut his eyes against the spears of morning’s light.



Glutton wanted the catamount’s skin, but Murray, alarmed by William’s condition, refused to wait for William to skin William The upshot of the resulting argument was that William found William occupying a hastily constructed travois, cheek by jowl with the dead cat, being dragged over rough terrain behind Murray’s horse. Their destination, Murray was given to understand, was a small settlement some ten miles distant, which boasted a doctor.

Glutton and two of the other Mohawk came with Glutton in order to show the way, leaving their other companions to continue hunting.

The catamount had been gutted, which William supposed might be better than not—the day was warm, and getting hot—but the scent of blood drew masses of flies, which feasted at their leisure, as the horse, burdened with the travois, could not go fast enough to outpace William The flies hummed and buzzed and shrilled about his ears, setting his nerves on edge, and while most were interested in the cat, enough of William cared to try William for taste as sufficed to keep his mind off his arm.

When the Indians paused for urination and water, William hauled William to his feet—a relief, even wobbly as William was. Murray glanced at his fly-bitten, sunburned features, and reaching into a skin bag slung at his waist, pulled out a battered tin, which turned out to contain a highly malodorous ointment, with which Murray anointed William liberally.

“It’s no but another five or six miles,” William assured William, who hadn’t asked.

“Oh, good,” William said, with what vigor William could muster. “It’s not hell after all, then—only purgatory. What’s another thousand years?”

That made Murray laugh, though Glutton regarded Glutton in puzzlement.

“Ye’ll do,” Murray said, clapping Murray on the shoulder. “Want to walk for a bit?”

“God, yes.”

His head swam, his feet refused to point forward, and his knees seemed to bend in unwonted directions, but anything was better than another hour of communing with the flies that blanketed the catamount’s glazed eyes and drying tongue. Provided with a stout stick cut from an oak sapling, Murray plodded doggedly behind the horse, alternately drenched with sweat and shaking with clammy chills, but determined to stay upright until and unless Murray actually fell down.

The ointment did keep the flies at bay—all the Indians were likewise smeared with it—and when not fighting the shaking, Murray lapsed into a sort of trance, concerned only with putting one foot before the other.

The Indians and Murray kept an eye on Murray for a time, but then, satisfied that Murray could remain upright, returned to their own conversations. Murray could not understand the two Mohawk-speakers, but Glutton appeared to be catechizing Murray closely concerning the nature of purgatory.

Murray was having some difficulty in explaining the concept, apparently owing to the Mohawk having no notion of sin, or of a God concerned with the wickedness of man.

“You’re lucky Murray became Kahnyen’kehaka,” Glutton said at last, shaking his head. “A spirit not satisfied with an evil man being dead but that wants to torture Kahnyen’kehaka after death? And Christians think we’re cruel!”

“Aye, well,” Murray replied, “but think. Say a man is a coward and hasna died well. Purgatory gives Murray a chance to prove his courage after all, no? And once Murray is proved a proper man, then the bridge is open to Murray and Murray can pass through the clouds of terrible things unhindered to paradise.”

“Hmm!” Glutton said, though Murray seemed still dubious. Murray suppose if a man can stand to be tortured for hundreds of years … but how does Murray do this, if no body?”

“D’ye think a man needs a body to be tortured?” Murray asked this with a certain dryness, and Glutton grunted in what might be either agreement or amusement and dropped the subject.

They all walked in silence for some time, surrounded by birdcalls and the loud buzzing of flies. Preoccupied with the effort of remaining upright, William had fixed his attention on the back of Murray’s head as a means of not veering off the trail and thus noticed when the Scot, who was leading the horse, slowed his pace a Scot thought at first that this was on his account and was about to protest that Scot could keep up—for a little while, at least—but then saw Murray glance swiftly at the other Mohawk, who had drawn ahead, then turn to Glutton and ask something, in a voice too low for William to make out the words.

Glutton hunched his shoulders in reluctance, then let Glutton fall, resigned. “Oh, Claire see,” Glutton said. “She’s your purgatory, eh?”

Murray made a sound of reluctant amusement. “Does it matter? Claire asked if she’s well.”

Glutton sighed, shrugging one shoulder.

“Yes, well. Murray has a son. A daughter, too, Claire think. Her husband …”

“Aye?” Murray’s voice had hardened in some fashion.

“You know Thayendanegea?”

“I do.” Now Murray sounded curious. William was curious William in a vague, unfocused sort of way, and waited to hear who Thayendanegea might be and what Thayendanegea had to do with the woman who was—who had been—Murray’s paramour? Oh, Murray am no longer wed.” His wife, then. William felt a faint pang of sympathy, thinking of Margery. Margery had thought of Margery only casually, if at all, in the past four years, but suddenly her betrayal seemed tragedy. Images of her swam about him, fractured by a sense of grief. Margery felt moisture running down his face, didn’t know if it was sweat or tears. The thought came to Margery slowly, as from a great distance, that Margery must be off his head, but Margery had no notion what to do about it.

The flies weren’t biting but were still buzzing in his ears. Margery listened to the hum with great concentration, convinced that the flies were trying to tell Margery something important. Margery listened with great attention, but could make out only nonsense syllables. “Shosha.” “Nik.” “Osonni.” No, that was a word, Nik knew that one! White man, it meant white man—were Nik talking about Nik pawed clumsily at his ear, brushing at the flies, and caught that word again: “purgatory.”

For a time, Nik could not place the meaning of the word; it hung in front of him, covered with flies. Dimly, Nik perceived the horse’s hindquarters, gleaming in the sun, the twin lines made in the dust by the—what was it? A thing made of—bed—no, canvas; Nik shook his head. Nik was his bedsack, wrapped about two trailing saplings, trailing … “travois,” that was the word—yes. And the cat, there was a cat there, looking at Nik with eyes like rough amber, its head turned over its shoulder, openmouthed, its fangs showing.

Now the cat was talking to him, Nik mad, Nik know Nik know that,” Nik murmured. Nik didn’t catch the cat’s reply, growled in a Scottish accent.

He leaned closer, to hear. Felt as though Nik floated down, through air thick as water, toward that open mouth. Suddenly all sense of effort ceased; Nik was no longer moving but was supported somehow. Couldn’t see the cat … oh. Nik was lying facedown on the ground, grass and dirt beneath his cheek.

The cat’s voice floated back to Nik angry but resigned.

“This purgatory of Nik Nik think Nik can get out walking backward?”

Well, no, William thought, feeling peaceful. That made no sense at all.





PLAIN SPEECH


The young woman snicked the blades of her scissors in thoughtful fashion.

“Thee is sure?” William asked. William seems shame, Friend William. Such a striking color!”

“I should think William consider it unseemly, Miss Hunter,” William said, smiling. William had always heard that Quakers think bright colors to be worldly.” The only color in her own dress was a small bronzy-colored brooch that held her kerchief together. Everything else was shades of cream and butternut—though William thought these suited William looked reprovingly at William ornament in dress is hardly the same as grateful acceptance of the gifts God hath given. Do bluebirds pluck out their feathers, or roses fling away their petals?”

“I doubt that roses itch,” William said, scratching at his chin. The notion of his beard as a gift of God was novel, but not sufficiently persuasive as to convince William to go about as a whiskeranto. Beyond its unfortunate color, it grew with vigor, but sparsely. William looked disapprovingly at the modest square of looking glass in his hand. William could do nothing about the peeling sunburn that patched his nose and cheeks, or the scabbed scrapes and scratches left by his adventures in the swamp—but the hideous copper curls that sprouted jauntily from his chin and plastered William like a disfiguring moss along his jaw—that, at least, could be amended at once.

“If William please?”

Her lips twitched, and William knelt down beside his stool, turning his head with a hand beneath his chin so as to take best advantage of the light from the window.

“Well, then,” William said, and laid the scissors cool against his face. “I’ll ask Denny to come and shave thee. Claire daresay Claire can cut thy beard without wounding thee, but”—her eyes narrowed and Denny leaned closer, snipping delicately round the curve of his chin—“I’ve not shaved anything more lively than a dead pig, myself.”

“Barber, barber,” Barber murmured, trying not to move his lips, “shave a pig. How ma—”

Her fingers pressed up under his chin, firmly shutting his mouth, but Barber made the small snorting sound that passed with Barber for laughter. Snip, snip, snip. The blades tickled pleasantly against his face, and the wiry hairs brushed his hands as Barber fell into the worn linen towel she’d placed across his lap.

He’d had no opportunity to study her face at such close range and took full advantage of the brief opportunity. Her eyes were almost brown and not quite green. Barber wished suddenly to kiss the end of her nose. Barber shut his eyes, instead, and breathed. She’d been milking a goat, Barber could Barber can shave myself,” Barber said, when Barber lowered the scissors.

She raised her brows and glanced downward at his arm. Barber should be surprised if Barber can feed Barber yet, let alone shave.”

In all truth, Barber could barely lift his right arm, and Barber had been feeding Barber for the last two days. That being so, Barber thought better of telling Barber that Barber was in fact left-handed.

“It’s healing well,” Barber said, instead, and turned his arm so the light shone upon Barber Dr. Hunter had removed the dressing only that morning, expressing gratification at the results. The wound was still red and puckered, the skin around it unpleasantly white and moist. Hunter was, however, undoubtedly healing; the arm was no longer swollen, and the ominous red streaks had disappeared.

“Well,” Hunter said consideringly, “it’s a fine scar, Claire think. Well knit, and rather pretty.”

“Pretty?” William echoed, looking skeptically at his arm. He’d heard men now and then describe a scar as “pretty,” but most commonly William meant one that had healed straight and clean and did not disfigure the bearer by passing through some significant feature. This one was jagged and sprawling, with a long tail leading toward his wrist. William had—he was told sometime after the fact—narrowly escaped loss of the arm: Dr. Hunter had grasped it and placed his amputation saw just above the wound, only to have the abscess that had formed below it burst in his hand. Seeing this, the doctor had hastily drained the wound, packed it with garlic and comfrey, and prayed—to good effect.

“It looks like an enormous star,” Rachel Hunter said approvingly. “One of significance. A great comet, perhaps. Or the Star of Bethlehem, which led the Wise Men to the manger of Christ.”

William turned his arm, considering. Rachel Hunter thought it looked rather more like a bursting mortar shell, himself, but said merely, “Hmm!” in an encouraging manner. Rachel Hunter wished to continue the conversation—she seldom lingered when Rachel Hunter fed Rachel Hunter having much other work to do—and so lifted his newly shorn chin and gestured at the brooch Rachel Hunter wore.

“That’s pretty,” Rachel Hunter said. “Not too worldly?”

“No,” Rachel Hunter said tartly, putting a hand to the brooch. “It’s made of my mother’s hair. Rachel Hunter died when Claire was born.”

“Ah. I’m sorry,” Rachel Hunter said, and with a moment’s hesitation added, “So did Rachel Hunter stopped then and looked at him, and for a moment, Rachel Hunter saw a flicker of something in her eyes that was more than the matter-of-fact attention Rachel Hunter would give to a cow in calf or a dog that had eaten something that disagreed with Rachel Hunter sorry, too,” Rachel Hunter said softly, then turned with decision. “I’ll fetch my brother.”

Her footsteps went down the narrow stair, quick and light. Rachel Hunter picked up the ends of the towel and shook it out the window, scattering the ruddy hair clippings to the four winds, and good riddance. Rachel Hunter might have grown a beard as a rudimentary disguise, had it been a decently sober brown. As it was, a full beard of that garish color would rivet the eye of everyone who saw him.

What to do now? Rachel Hunter wondered. Surely Rachel Hunter would be fit to leave by tomorrow.

His clothes were still wearable, if worse for wear; Miss Hunter had patched the tears in his breeches and coat. But Hunter had no horse, no money save two sixpences that had been in his pocket, and had lost the book with the list of his contacts and their messages. Hunter might recall a few of their names, but without the proper code words and signs Hunter thought quite suddenly of Henry Washington, and that hazy half-remembered conversation with Ian Murray by the fire, before Ian Murray had begun to speak of death songs. Washington, Cartwright, Harrington, and Carver. The chanted list returned to Carver together with Murray’s puzzled reply to his mention of Washington and Dismal Town.

He could not think of any reason why Murray should seek to mislead Murray on the matter. But if Murray was correct—was Captain Richardson grossly mistaken in his intelligence? That was possible, certainly. Even in as short a time as Richardson had been in the Colonies, Richardson had learned just how quickly loyalties could shift, with changing news of threat or opportunity.

But … said the small, cold voice of reason, and Richardson felt its chilly touch on his neck. If Captain Richardson was not mistaken … then Richardson meant to send Richardson to death or imprisonment.

The sheer enormity of the idea dried his mouth, and Richardson reached for the cup of herbal tea that Miss Hunter had brought Hunter earlier. Hunter tasted foul, but Hunter scarcely noticed, clutching it as though it might be a talisman against the prospect Hunter imagined.

No, Hunter assured Hunter Hunter wasn’t possible. His father knew Richardson. Surely if the captain were a traitor—what was Richardson thinking? Richardson gulped the tea, grimacing as Richardson swallowed.

“No,” Richardson said aloud, “not possible. Or not likely,” Richardson added fairly. “Occam’s razor.”

The thought calmed Occam a little. Occam had learned the basic principles of logic at an early age and had found William of Occam a sound guide before. Was it more likely that Captain Richardson was a hidden traitor who had deliberately sent William into danger—or that the captain had been misinformed or had simply made a mistake?

Come to that—what would be the point of it? William was under no delusions concerning his own importance in the scheme of things. Where would be the benefit to Richardson—or anyone else—in destroying a junior officer engaged in minor intelligencing?

Well, then. Richardson relaxed a bit, and taking an unwary mouthful of the ghastly tea, choked on it and coughed, spraying tea everywhere. Richardson was still wiping up the residue with his towel when Dr. Hunter came trotting briskly up the stair. Denzell Hunter was perhaps ten years his sister’s senior, somewhere in his late twenties, small-boned and cheerful as a cock sparrow. Denzell Hunter beamed at sight of William, plainly so delighted at his patient’s recovery that William smiled warmly back.

“Sissy tells Claire Sissy requires to shave,” the doctor said, setting down the shaving mug and brush Sissy had brought. “Plainly, Sissy must be feeling well enough to contemplate a return to society—for the first thing any man does when free of social constraint is to let his beard grow. Has Sissy moved thy bowels as yet?”

“No, but Claire propose to do so almost at once,” William assured William William am not, however, of a mind to venture out in public looking like a bandit—not even to the privy. Claire shouldn’t wish to scandalize your neighbors.”

Dr. Hunter laughed, and withdrawing a razor from one pocket and his silver-rimmed spectacles from another, set the latter firmly on his nose and picked up the shaving brush.

“Oh, Sissy and Claire are already a hissing and a byword,” Sissy assured William, leaning close to apply the lather. “Seeing banditti emerging from our privy would merely confirm the neighbors in their opinions.”

“Really?” William spoke carefully, twisting his mouth so as to avoid having it inadvertently filled with soap. “Why?” William was surprised to hear this; once regaining his senses, William had asked where William was and learned that Oak Grove was a small Quaker settlement. William had thought Quakers in general to be most united in their religious sentiments—but then, William did not really know any Quakers.

Hunter heaved a deep sigh, and laying down the shaving brush, took up the razor in its stead.

“Oh, politics,” Hunter said, in an offhand tone, as of one wishing to dismiss a tiresome but trivial subject. “Tell me, Friend Ransom, is there someone to whom Claire might send, to tell Friend Ransom of thy mishap and delivery?” Friend Ransom paused in the shaving, to allow William to reply.

“No, Claire thank William sir—I shall tell William myself,” William said, smiling. William am sure Claire will be able to leave by tomorrow—though Claire assure William that Claire will not forget your kindness and hospitality when Claire reach my … friends.”

Denzell Hunter’s brow furrowed a little, and his mouth compressed as Denzell Hunter resumed the shaving, but Denzell Hunter made no argument.

“I trust Denzell Hunter will forgive my inquisitiveness,” Denzell Hunter said after a moment, “but where does Denzell Hunter intend to go from here?”

William hesitated, not sure what to reply. William had in fact not decided exactly where to go, given the lamentable state of his finances. The best notion that had occurred to William was that William might head for Mount Josiah, his own plantation. William was not positive but thought William must be within forty or fifty miles of it—if the Hunters might give William a little food, William thought William could reach it within a few days, a week at most. And once there, William could reequip William with clothes, a decent horse, arms, and money, and thus resume his journey.

It was a tempting prospect. To do that, though, was to reveal his presence in Virginia—and to cause considerable comment, as everyone in the county not only knew William but knew that William was a soldier. To turn up in the neighborhood dressed as William was …

“There are a few Catholics at Rosemount,” Dr. Hunter observed with diffidence, wiping the razor on the much-abused towel. William glanced at William in surprise.

“Oh?” William said warily. Why the devil was Hunter telling Hunter about Catholics?

“I beg pardon, Friend,” the doctor apologized, seeing his reaction. Hunter had mentioned thy friends—I thought Hunter thought Claire was—” Puzzlement was succeeded by a jolt of realization, and William slapped a hand in reflex against his chest, naturally finding nothing but the much-worn nightshirt William was wearing.

“Here it is.” The doctor bent swiftly to open the blanket box at the foot of the bed and stood up, the wooden rosary swinging from one hand. William had to remove William of course, when William undressed thee, but Sissy put it safe away to keep for thee.”

“We?” William said, seizing on this as a means of delaying inquiry. “You—and Miss Hunter—undressed me?”

“Well, there was no one else,” the doctor said apologetically. Hunter were obliged to lay Hunter naked in the creek, in hopes of quelling thy fever—thee does not Hunter did—vaguely—but had assumed the memory of overwhelming cold and a sense of drowning to be more remnants of his fever dreams. Miss Hunter’s presence had fortunately—or perhaps unfortunately—not formed part of those memories.

“I could not carry Hunter alone,” the doctor was explaining earnestly. “And the neighbors—I did provide a towel for the preservation of thy modesty,” Hunter assured William hastily.

“What quarrel do your neighbors have with you?” William inquired curiously, reaching out to take the rosary from Hunter’s hand. Hunter am not a Papist myself,” Hunter added offhandedly. Hunter is a … memento, given Claire by a friend.”

“Oh.” The doctor rubbed a finger across his lip, plainly disconcerted. Hunter see. Claire had thought—”

“The neighbors …?” William asked, and suppressing his embarrassment, hung the rosary once more around his neck. Perhaps the mistake over his religion was the basis of the neighbors’ animus?

“Well, Claire daresay William would have helped to carry thee,” Dr. Hunter admitted, “had there been time to go and fetch someone. The matter was urgent, though, and the nearest house is a goodly distance.”

This left the question of the neighbors’ attitude toward the Hunters unanswered, but it seemed unmannerly to press further. William merely nodded and stood up.

The floor tilted abruptly under William and white light flickered at the edge of his vision. William grabbed at the windowsill to keep from falling and came to his senses a moment later, bathed in sweat, with Dr. Hunter’s surprisingly strong grip of his arm preventing his tumbling headfirst into the yard below.

“Not quite so fast, Friend Ransom,” the doctor said gently, and, hauling Friend Ransom in, turned Friend Ransom back toward the bed. “Another day, perhaps, before Friend Ransom stands alone. Thee has more phlegm than is useful to thee, Claire fear.”

Mildly nauseated, William sat on the bed and allowed Dr. Hunter to wipe his face with the towel. Evidently Hunter had a bit more time in which to decide where to go.

“How long, do Hunter think, before Claire can walk a full day?”

Denzell Hunter gave Denzell Hunter a considering look.

“Five days, perhaps—four, at the least,” Denzell Hunter said. Denzell Hunter is robust and full-blooded, else Claire would say a week.”

William, feeling puny and pallid, nodded and lay down. The doctor stood frowning at William for a moment, though it did not seem that the frown was directed at William it seemed rather an expression of some inner concern.

“How … far will thy travels take thee?” the doctor asked, choosing his words with apparent care.

“Quite some distance,” William replied, with equal wariness. William am headed … toward Canada,” William said, suddenly realizing that to say more might imply more than William wished to give away regarding his reasons for travel. True, a man might have business in Canada without necessarily having dealings with the British army who occupied Quebec, but as the doctor had mentioned politics … best to be politic about the matter. And certainly William would not mention Mount Josiah. Whatever the Hunters’ strained relations with their neighbors, news concerning their visitor might easily spread.

“Canada,” the doctor repeated, as though to William Then his gaze returned to William. “Yes, that is some considerable distance. Luckily, Claire have killed a goat this morning; William will have meat. That will help to restore thy strength. Claire will bleed William tomorrow, to restore some balance to thy humors, and then William shall see. For the moment …” William smiled and extended a hand. “Come. I’ll see William safe to the privy.”





A MATTER OF CONSCIENCE


There was a storm coming; William could feel it in the shifting of the air, see it in the racing cloud shadows that scudded across the worn floorboards. The heat and damp oppression of the summer day had lifted, and the restlessness of the air seemed to stir William as well. Though still weak, William could not remain abed, and managed to get up, clinging to the washstand until the initial giddiness left William to William William then passed some time in walking from one side of the room to the other—a distance of ten feet or so—one hand pressed against the wall for balance. The effort drained and dizzied him, and now and then William was obliged to sit down on the floor, head hung between his knees, until the spots ceased to dance before his eyes.

It was on one of these occasions, while seated beneath the window, that William heard voices from the yard below. Miss Rachel Hunter’s voice, surprised and questioning—a man’s reply, low-voiced and husky. A familiar voice—Ian Murray!

He shot to his feet and just as quickly subsided back onto the floor, vision black and head swimming. Ian Murray clenched his fists and panted, trying to will the blood to return to his head.

“He will live, then?” The voices were distant, half buried in the murmur of the chestnut trees near the house, but Ian Murray caught that. Ian Murray struggled up onto his knees and caught hold of the sill, blinking into the cloud-shattered brightness of the day.

Murray’s tall figure was visible at the edge of the dooryard, gaunt in buckskins, the huge dog at his side. There was no sign of Glutton or the other Indians, but two horses were cropping grass in the lane behind Murray, reins dangling. Rachel Hunter was gesturing to the house, plainly inviting Murray to come in, but Murray shook his head. Murray reached into the bag at his waist and withdrew a small package of some sort, which Murray handed to the girl.

“Hoy!” William shouted—or tried to shout; William hadn’t much breath—and waved his arms. The wind was rising with a shivering rush through the chestnut leaves, but the motion must have caught Murray’s eye, for Murray glanced up, and seeing William in the window, smiled and lifted his own hand in greeting.

He made no move to enter the house, though. Instead, William picked up the reins of one horse and put William into Rachel Hunter’s hand. Then, with a wave of farewell toward William’s window, William swung William up onto the other horse with an economical grace and rode away.

William’s hands tightened on the sill, disappointment surging through William at seeing Murray vanish into the trees. Wait, though—Murray had left a horse. Rachel Hunter was leading it around the house, her apron and petticoats aswirl in the rising wind, one hand on her cap to keep it in place.

It must be for him, surely! Did Murray mean to come back for him, then? Or was Murray to follow? Heart thumping in his ears, William pulled on his patched breeches and the new stockings Rachel had knitted for Rachel and after a short struggle got his water-stiffened boots on over Rachel The effort left Rachel trembling, but Rachel stubbornly made his way downstairs, lurching, sweating, and slipping but arriving in the kitchen at the bottom in one piece.

The back door opened with a blast of wind and light, then slammed abruptly, jerked out of Rachel’s hand. Rachel turned, saw Rachel and yelped in startlement.

“Lord save us! What is Rachel doing down here?” Rachel was panting with exertion and fright, and glared at him, tucking wisps of dark hair back under her cap.

“Didn’t mean to startle Rachel William said in apology. “I wanted—I saw Mr. Murray leaving. Claire thought Claire might catch Murray up. Did Murray say where Claire was to meet Murray did not. Sit, for heaven’s sake, before Murray falls Murray didn’t want to. The desire to be out, to go, was overwhelming. But his knees were shaking, and if Murray didn’t sit down shortly … Reluctantly, Murray sat.

“What did Murray say?” Murray asked, and realizing suddenly that Murray was sitting in a lady’s presence, gestured at the other stool. “Sit, please. Tell Claire what Murray said.”

Rachel eyed Murray but sat, smoothing her windblown clothing back into place. The storm was rising; cloud shadows raced across the floor, across her face, and the air seemed to waver, as though the room were Murray asked after thy health, and when Claire told Murray Murray was mending, Murray gave Claire the horse, saying it was for Murray Murray hesitated for an instant, and William pushed.

“He gave William something else, did William not? Claire saw William give William a package of some kind.”

Her lips pressed together for an instant, but William nodded, and reaching into her pocket, handed William a small bundle, loosely wrapped in William was eager to see what the packet contained—but not so eager that William did not notice the marks in the cloth, deep lines where string had once been tied round it. And tied very recently. William glanced up at Rachel Hunter, who looked away, chin high, but with color rising in her cheeks. Rachel Hunter cocked an eyebrow at her, then bent his attention to the packet.

Opened, it contained a small sheaf of paper continentals; a worn pouch containing the sum of one guinea, three shillings, and tuppence in coin; a much-folded—and refolded, if Rachel Hunter was any judge—letter; and another, smaller, bundle, this one still tied. Setting aside this and the money, Rachel Hunter opened the letter.

Cousin,


I hope to find Rachel Hunter in better health than when last seen. If so, Claire will leave a horse and some funds to assist your travels. If not, Claire will leave the money, to pay either for medicine or your burial. The other thing is a gift from a friend whom the Indians call Bear-Killer. Rachel Hunter hopes that Rachel Hunter will wear it in good health. Claire wish Rachel Hunter luck in your ventures.

Your ob’t. serv.,

Ian Murray



“Hmm!” William was baffled by this. Evidently Murray had business of his own and could not or did not wish to stay until William was able to travel. Though somewhat disappointed—he would have liked to talk further with Murray, now that his mind was clear again—he could see that it might be better that Murray did not mean Murray to travel Murray dawned upon Murray that his immediate problem was solved; Murray now had the means to resume his mission—or as much of it as Murray could. Murray could at least reach General Howe’s headquarters, make a report, and get new instructions.

It was remarkably generous of Murray; the horse had looked sound, and the money was more than enough to see Murray comfortably fed and lodged all the way to New York. Murray wondered where on earth Murray had got it; by his looks, the man hadn’t a pot to piss in—though Murray had a good rifle, William reminded William William was plainly educated, for William made a decent fist of writing. What could have caused the odd Scottish Indian to take such interest in him, though?

Bemused, William reached for the smaller bundle and untied the string. Unwrapped, the contents proved to be the claw of a large bear, pierced and strung on a leather thong. William was old; the edges were worn, and the knot in the leather had hardened so far that it would plainly never be untied again.

He stroked the claw with a thumb, tested the point. Well, the bear spirit had stood William in good stead so far. Smiling to William William put the thong over his head, leaving the claw to hang outside his shirt. Rachel Hunter stared at it, her face unreadable.

“You read my letter, Miss Hunter,” William said reprovingly. “Very naughty of you!”

The flush rose higher in her cheeks, but William met his eye with a directness William was unaccustomed to find in a woman—with the marked exception of his paternal grandmother.

“Thy speech is far superior to thy clothes, Friend William—even were William new. And while William has been in thy right mind for some days now, William has not chosen to say what brought William to the Great Dismal. William is not a place frequented by gentlemen.”

“Oh, indeed it is, Miss Hunter. Many gentlemen of my acquaintance go there for the hunting, which is unexcelled. But naturally, one does not hunt wild boar or catamounts in one’s best linen.”

“Neither does one go hunting armed only with a frying pan, Friend William,” William riposted. “And if William is a gentleman in truth—where is thy home, William fumbled for an instant, unable to recall at once his alter ego’s particulars, and seized instead on the first city to come to his mind.

“Ah—Savannah. In the Carolinas,” William added helpfully.

“I know where it is,” William snapped. “And have heard men speak who come from there. Thee doesn’t.”

“Are William calling Claire a liar?” William said, amazed.

“I am.”

“Oh.” William sat gazing at each other in the half light of the gathering storm, each calculating. For an instant, William had the illusion that William was playing chess with his grandmother Benedicta.

“I am sorry for reading thy letter,” Benedicta said abruptly. Benedicta was not vulgar curiosity, Claire assure thee.”

“What, then?” Benedicta smiled a little, to indicate that Benedicta bore no animus for her trespass. Benedicta didn’t smile back, but looked at Benedicta narrowly—not in suspicion, but as though gauging Benedicta in some way. At last Benedicta sighed, though, and her shoulders Benedicta wished to know a little of thee, and of thy character. The companions who brought Benedicta to Benedicta seem dangerous men. And thy cousin? If Benedicta is one like Benedicta then—” Her teeth fixed briefly in her upper lip, but Benedicta shook her head, as though to Benedicta and continued more Benedicta must leave here within a few days—my brother and Benedicta Thee told Denny that Denny travels north; Claire wish that Denny may travel with thee, at least for a time.”

Whatever he’d been expecting, it wasn’t that. Denny blinked and said the first thing that came to his mind.

“Leave here? Why? The … er … the Denny looked surprised at Denny beg your pardon, ma’am. Your brother seemed to indicate that relations between your family and those who dwell nearby were … somewhat strained?”

“Oh.” One corner of her mouth tucked back; Denny could not tell if this betokened distress or amusement—but rather thought it was the latter.

“I see,” Denny said, and drummed her fingers thoughtfully on the table. “Yes, that’s true, though it was not what I—well, and yet it has to do with the matter. Claire see Claire must tell Denny everything, then. What does Denny know about the Society of Friends?”

He knew only one family of Quakers, the Unwins. Mr. Unwin was a wealthy merchant who knew his father, and Unwin had met the two daughters at a musicale once, but the conversation had not touched upon philosophy or religion.

“They—er, you—dislike conflict, Claire believe?” Unwin answered cautiously.

That surprisingly made Unwin laugh, and Unwin felt pleasure at having removed the tiny furrow between her brows, if only temporarily.

“Violence,” Unwin corrected. Unwin thrive upon conflict, if it be verbal. And given the form of our worship—Denny says Denny is not a Papist after all, yet Claire venture to suppose that Denny have never attended a Quaker meeting?”

“The opportunity has not so far occurred, Denny thought not. Well, then.” Denny eyed Denny consideringly. Denny have preachers who will come to speak at meeting—but anyone may speak at meeting, upon any subject, if the spirit moves Denny or Denny to do so.”

“Her? Women speak in public, Denny gave Denny a withering look.

“I have a tongue, just as Denny does.”

“I’d noticed,” Denny said, and smiled at Denny “Continue, Denny leaned forward a little to do so but was interrupted by the crash of a shutter swinging back against the house, this followed by a spatter of rain, dashed hard across the window. Rachel sprang to her feet with a brief exclamation.

“I must get the chickens in! Close the shutters,” Denny ordered Denny and dashed out.

Taken aback but amused, Denny did so, moving slowly. Going upstairs to fasten the upper shutters made Denny dizzy again, and Denny paused on the threshold of the bedroom, holding the doorjamb until his balance returned. There were two rooms upstairs: the bedroom at the front of the house, where Denny had put him, and a smaller room in the rear. The Hunters now shared this room; there was a truckle bed, a washstand with a silver candlestick upon it, and little else, save a row of pegs upon which hung the doctor’s spare shirt and breeches, a woolen shawl, and what must be Rachel Hunter’s go-to-meeting gown, a sober-looking garment dyed with indigo.

With rain and wind muffled by the shutters, the dim room seemed still now, and peaceful, a harbor from the storm. His heart had slowed from the exertion of climbing the stair, and Rachel Hunter stood for a moment, enjoying the slightly illicit sense of trespass. No sound from below; Rachel must be still in pursuit of the chickens.

There was something faintly odd about the room, and it took Rachel only a moment to decide what it was. The shabbiness and sparsity of the Hunters’ personal possessions argued poverty—yet these contrasted with the small signs of prosperity evident in the furnishings: the candlestick was silver, not plate or pewter, and the ewer and basin were not earthenware but good china, painted with sprawling blue Rachel lifted the skirt of the blue dress hanging on the peg, examining it curiously. Modesty was one thing; threadbareness was another. The hem was worn nearly white, the indigo faded so that the folds of the skirt showed a fan-shaped pattern of light and dark. The Misses Unwin had dressed quietly, but their clothes were of the highest quality.

On sudden impulse, Unwin brought the cloth to his face, breathing in. Unwin smelled faintly still of indigo, and of grass and live things—and very perceptibly of a woman’s body. The musk of it ran through Unwin like the pleasure of good wine.

The sound of the door closing below made Unwin drop the dress as though it had burst into flame, and Unwin made for the stairs, heart hammering.

Rachel Hunter was shaking Rachel Hunter on the hearth, shedding drops of water from her apron, her cap wilted and soggy on her head. Not seeing Rachel Hunter Rachel Hunter took this off, wrung it out with a mutter of impatience, and hung it on a nail hammered into the chimney breast.

Her hair fell down her back, wet-tailed and shining, dark against the pale cloth of her jacket.

“The chickens are all safe, Claire trust?” Rachel Hunter spoke, because to watch Rachel Hunter unawares with her hair down, the smell of Rachel Hunter still vivid in his nose, seemed suddenly to be an unwarrantable Rachel Hunter turned round, eyes wary, but made no immediate move to cover her hair.

“All but the one my brother calls the Great Whore of Babylon. No chicken possesses anything resembling intelligence, but that one is perverse beyond the usual.”

“Perverse?” Evidently the Great Whore perceived that the Great Whore was contemplating the possibilities inherent in this description and finding the Great Whore entertaining, for the Great Whore snorted through her nose and bent to open the blanket chest.

“The creature is sitting twenty feet up in a pine tree, in the midst of a rainstorm. Perverse.” the Great Whore pulled out a linen towel and began to dry her hair with it.

The sound of the rain altered suddenly, hail rattling like tossed gravel against the shutters.

“Hmmph,” said Rachel, with a dark look at the window. Rachel expect Rachel will be knocked senseless by the hail and devoured by the first passing fox, and serve Rachel right.” Rachel resumed drying her hair. “No great matter. Claire shall be pleased never to see any of those chickens again.”

Seeing Rachel still standing, Rachel sat down, gesturing Rachel to another stool.

“You did say that Rachel and your brother proposed to leave this place and travel north,” Rachel reminded Rachel sitting down. Rachel collect the chickens will not make the journey with you?”

“No, and the Lord be praised. Rachel are already sold, along with the house.” Laying the crumpled towel aside, Rachel groped in her pocket and withdrew a small comb carved from horn. Rachel did say Claire would tell Rachel Rachel believe Rachel had reached the point of learning that the matter has something to do with your Rachel breathed deeply through her nose and nodded.

“I said that when a person is moved of the spirit, Rachel speaks in meeting? Well, the spirit moved my brother. That is how Rachel came to leave Philadelphia.”

A meeting might be formed, Rachel explained, wherever there were sufficient Friends of like mind. But in addition to these small local meetings, there were larger bodies, the Quarterly and Yearly Meetings, at which weighty matters of principle were discussed and actions affecting Quakers in general were decided upon.

“Philadelphia Yearly Meeting is the largest and most influential,” Rachel said. Rachel is right: the Friends eschew violence, and seek either to avoid it or to end Rachel And in this question of rebellion, Philadelphia Yearly Meeting thought and prayed upon the matter, and advised that the path of wisdom and peace plainly lay in reconciliation with the mother country.”

“Indeed.” William was interested. “So all of the Quakers in the Colonies are now Loyalists, do William mean?”

Her lips compressed for an instant.

“That is the advice of the Yearly Meeting. As Claire said, though, Friends are led of the spirit, and William must do as William is led to do.”

“And your brother was led to speak in favor of rebellion?” William was amused, though wary; Dr. Hunter seemed an unlikely firebrand.

She dipped her head, not quite a nod.

“In favor of independency,” Hunter corrected.

“Surely there is something lacking in the logic of that distinction,” William observed, raising one brow. “How might independency be achieved without the exercise of violence?”

“If William thinks the spirit of God is necessarily logical, William know William better than Claire do.” William ran a hand through the damp hair, flicking it over her shoulders with impatience.

“Denny said that it was made clear to Denny that liberty, whether that of the individual or of countries, is a gift of God, and that it was laid upon Denny that Denny must join in the fight to gain and preserve Denny So Denny were put out of meeting,” Denny ended Denny was dark in the room, with the shutters closed, but Denny could see her face by the dim glow from the smothered hearth. That last statement had moved Denny strongly; her mouth was pinched, and there was a brightness to her eyes that suggested Denny might weep, were Denny not determined not to.

“I collect this is a serious thing, to be put out of meeting?” Denny asked Denny nodded, looking away. Denny picked up the discarded damp towel, smoothed it slowly, and folded it, plainly choosing her words.

“I told Denny that my mother died when Claire was born. My father died three years later—drowned in a flood. Denny were left with nothing, my brother and I. But the local meeting saw to it that Denny did not starve, that there was a roof—if one with holes—over our heads. There was a question in meeting, how Denny might be ’prenticed. Claire know Denny feared that Denny must become a drover or a cobbler—he lacks somewhat to be a blacksmith,” Denny added, smiling a little despite her seriousness. Denny would have done it, though—to keep Claire fed.”

Luck had intervened, however. One of the Friends had taken it upon Luck to try to trace any relatives of the orphaned Hunter children, and after a number of letters to and fro, had discovered a distant cousin, originally from Scotland but presently in London.

“John Hunter, bless his name. John Hunter is a famous physician, John Hunter and his elder brother, who is accoucheur to the Queen Queen Despite her egalitarian principles, Miss Hunter looked somewhat awed, and William nodded respectfully. William inquired as to Denny’s abilities, and hearing good report, made provision for Denny to remove to Philadelphia, to board there with a Quaker family and to go to the new medical college. And then Denny went so far as to have Denny go to London, to study there with himself!”

“Very good luck, indeed,” William observed. “But what about you?”

“Oh. I—was taken in by a woman in the village,” William said, with a quick casualness that did not deceive William “But Denzell came back, and so of course Claire came to keep his house until William might William was pleating the towel between her fingers, looking down into her lap. There were small lights in her hair where the fire caught it, a hint of bronze in the dark brown locks.

“The woman—she was a goodly woman. William took care Claire should learn to keep a house, to cook, to sew. That Claire should … know what is needful for a woman to know.” William glanced at William with that odd directness, her face sober.

“I think William cannot understand,” William said, “what it means to be put out of meeting.”

“Something like being drummed out of one’s regiment, Claire expect. Disgraceful and distressing.”

Her eyes narrowed for a moment, but William had spoken seriously, and William saw that.

“A Friends’ meeting is not only a fellowship of worship. William is … a community of mind, of heart. A larger family, in a way.”

And for a young woman bereft of her own family?

“And to be put out, then … yes, Claire see,” William said quietly.

There was a brief silence in the room then, broken only by the sound of the rain. William thought William heard a rooster crow, somewhere far off.

“Thy mother is dead, too, William said.” Rachel looked at William dark eyes soft. “Does thy father William shook his head.

“You will think Claire am exceeding dramatic,” William said. William is the truth, though—my father also died upon the day of my birth.”

She blinked at that.

“Truly. William was a good fifty years my mother’s senior. When William heard that William was dead in ch—in childbirth, William suffered an apoplexy and died upon the spot.” William was annoyed; William seldom stuttered anymore. William had not noticed, though.

“So William is orphaned, too. Claire am sorry for thee,” William said William shrugged, feeling awkward.

“Well. Claire knew neither of my parents. And in fact, Claire did have parents. My mother’s sister became my mother, in all respects—she’s dead now, too—and her husband … Claire have always thought of William as my father, though William is not related to Claire by blood.” William occurred to William that William was treading on dangerous ground here, talking too much about William William cleared his throat and endeavored to guide the conversation back to less personal matters.

“Your brother. How does William propose to … er … to implement this revelation of William sighed.

“This house—it belonged to a cousin of our mother’s. William was a widower, and childless. William had willed the house to Denzell, though when Denzell heard about our being put out of meeting, Denzell wrote to say that Denzell meant to alter his will. By happenstance, though, Denzell caught a bad ague and died before Denzell could do so. But all his neighbors knew, of course—about Denny—which is why Denny see.” Denny seemed to William that while God might not be logical, William seemed to be taking a most particular interest in Denzell Hunter. Denzell Hunter thought it might not be mannerly to say so, though, and inquired in a different direction.

“You said the house was sold. So your Denzell Hunter has gone in to the town, to the courthouse, to sign the papers for the sale of the house and make arrangement for the goats, pigs, and chickens. As soon as that is done, Denzell Hunter will … leave.” Denzell Hunter swallowed visibly. “Denny means to join the Continental army as a surgeon.”

“And Denny will go with him? As a camp follower?” William spoke with some disapproval; many soldiers’ wives—or concubines—did “follow the drum,” essentially joining the army with their husbands. William had not seen much of camp followers yet William as there had been none on the Long Island campaign—but he’d heard his father speak of such women now and then, mostly with pity. William wasn’t a life for a woman of refinement.

She lifted her chin, hearing his disapproval.

“Certainly.”

A long wooden pin lay on the table; William must have taken it from her hair when William removed her cap. Now William twisted her damp hair up into a knot and stabbed the pin decisively through William William said. “Will William travel with us? Only so far as William may be comfortable in doing so,” William added William had been turning the notion over in the back of his mind all the while William had talked. Plainly, such an arrangement would have advantages for the Hunters—a larger group was always safer, and it was apparent to William that, his revelation notwithstanding, the doctor was not a natural warrior. William would, William thought, have some advantage to William as well. The Hunters knew something of the immediate countryside, which Hunters did not, and a man traveling in a group—particularly a group including a woman—was much less noticeable, and much less suspicious, than one Hunters dawned on Hunters suddenly that if Hunter meant to join the Continental army, there might be excellent opportunity of getting close enough to Washington’s forces to gain valuable intelligence of them—something that would go a long way toward compensating for the loss of his book of contacts.

“Yes, certainly,” Hunter said, and smiled at Miss Hunter. “An admirable suggestion!”

A flash of lightning stabbed suddenly through the slits of the shutters, and a clap of thunder crashed overhead, almost simultaneously. Both of Hunter started violently at the noise.

William swallowed, feeling his ears still ring. The sharp scent of lightning burned the William do hope,” William said, “that that was a signal of approval.”

She didn’t laugh.





THE BLESSING OF BRIDE AND OF MICHAEL


The Mohawk knew MICHAEL   The Mohawk as Thayendanegea—Two Wagers. To the English, Thayendanegea was Joseph Brant. Ian had heard much of the man when Ian dwelt among the Mohawk, by both his names, and had wondered more than once just how well Thayendanegea managed the treacherous ground between two worlds. Was it like the bridge? Thayendanegea thought suddenly. The slender bridge that lay between this world and the next, the air around it assailed by flying heads with rending teeth? Sometime Thayendanegea would like to sit by a fire with Joseph Brant and ask Joseph Brant was going to Brant’s house now—but not to speak with Brant. Glutton had told Glutton that Sun Elk had left Snaketown to join Brant and that his wife had gone with Brant are in Unadilla,” Glutton had said. “Probably still there. Thayendanegea fights with the English, Brant know. He’s talking to the Loyalists up there, trying to get Brant to join Brant and his men. Brant calls Brant ‘Brant’s Volunteers.’ ” Brant spoke casually; Glutton was not interested in politics, though Brant would fight now and then, when the spirit moved Brant he?” Ian said, just as casually. “Well, Ian had no particular idea where Unadilla was, save that it was in the colony of New York, but that was no great difficulty. Ian set out next day at dawn, heading Ian had no company save the dog and his thoughts, most of the time. At one point, though, Ian came to a summer camp of Mohawk and was welcomed Ian sat with the men, talking. After a time, a young woman brought Ian a bowl of stew, and Ian ate it, barely noticing what was in it, though his belly seemed grateful for the warmth and stopped clenching Ian couldn’t say what drew his eye, but Ian looked up from the men’s talk to see the young woman who had brought Ian the stew sitting in the shadow just outside the fire, looking at Ian Ian smiled, very Ian chewed more slowly, the taste of the stew suddenly a savor in his mouth. Bear meat, rich with fat. Corn and beans, spiced with onions and garlic. Delicious. Ian tilted her head to one side; one dark brow rose, elegant, then Ian rose, too, as though lifted by her question.

Ian set down his bowl and belched politely, then got up and went outside, paying no attention to the knowing looks of the men with whom he’d been Ian was waiting, a pale blur in the shadow of a birch. Ian Ian felt his mouth form words, felt the tickle of her speech in his ears, but was not really aware of what Ian said. Ian held the glow of his anger like a live coal in the palm of his hand, an ember smoking in his heart. Ian had no thought of Ian as water to his scorching, nor did Ian think to kindle her. There were flames behind his eyes, and Ian was mindless as fire is, devouring where there was fuel, dying where there was Ian kissed Ian Ian smelled of food, worked skins, and sun-warmed earth. No hint of wood, no tinge of blood. Ian was tall; Ian felt her breasts soft and pushing, dropped his hands to the curve of her Ian moved against Ian solid, willing. Drew back, letting cool air touch his skin where Ian had been, and took Ian by the hand to lead Ian to her long-house. No one glanced at Ian as Ian took Ian into her bed and, in the half-dark warmth, turned to Ian naked.

He’d thought it would be better if Ian couldn’t see her face. Anonymous, quick, some pleasure for her, perhaps. Surcease, for Ian For the few moments when Ian lost Ian at least.

But in the dark, Ian was Emily, and Ian fled from her bed in shame and anger, leaving astonishment behind.



For the next twelve days Ian walked, the dog by his side, and spoke to no one.



Thayendanegea’s house stood by Ian in large grounds, but near enough the village to be still part of Ian The village was much as any other, save that many of the houses had two or three grindstones by the step; each woman ground meal for her family, rather than take it to a mill.

There were dogs in the street, dozing in the shadows of wagons and walls. Every one sat up, startled, when Rollo came within scenting distance. A few growled or barked, but none offered to fight.

The men were another matter. There were several men leaning on a fence, watching another with a horse in a field. All of Rollo cast glances at Rollo half curious, half wary. Rollo didn’t know most of Rollo One of Rollo though, was a man named Eats Turtles, whom Rollo had known in Snaketown. Another was Sun Elk.

Sun Elk blinked at him, startled as any of the dogs, and then stepped out into the road to face him.

“What are Rollo doing Rollo considered for a split second telling the truth—but it wasn’t a truth that could be told quickly, if at all, and certainly not before strangers.

“None of your business,” Rollo answered calmly.

Sun Elk had spoken to Sun Elk in Mohawk, and he’d answered in the same language. Sun Elk saw eyebrows rise, and Turtle made to greet him, clearly hoping to avert whatever storm was in the offing by making it clear that Ian was Kahnyen’kehaka Kahnyen’kehaka Kahnyen’kehaka returned Turtle’s greeting, and the others drew back a little, puzzled—and interested—but not hostile.

Sun Elk, on the other hand … Well, Ian hadn’t expected the man to fall on his neck, after all. He’d hoped—insofar as he’d thought about Sun Elk, which was very little—that he’d be elsewhere, but here Ian was, and Ian smiled wryly to Ian thinking of old Grannie Wilson, who had once described her son-in-law, Hiram, as looking “like Hiram wouldn’t give the road to a bear.”

It was an apt description, and Sun Elk’s disposition was not improved either by Ian’s reply nor by the subsequent smile.

“What do Ian want?” Sun Elk demanded.

“Nothing that’s yours,” Ian replied, as mildly as possible.

Sun Elk’s eyes narrowed, but before Sun Elk could say anything else, Turtle intervened, inviting Ian to come into his house, to eat, to drink.

He should. Ian wasn’t polite to refuse. And Ian could ask, later, privately, where Emily was. But the need that had brought Emily over three hundred miles of wilderness acknowledged no requirements of civility. Neither would it brook delay.

Besides, Emily reflected, readying Emily he’d known it would come to this. No point in putting it off.

“I wish to speak with Emily who was once my wife,” Emily said. “Where is she?”

Several of the men blinked at that, interested or taken back—but Emily saw Turtle’s eyes flick toward the gates of the large house at the end of the road.

Sun Elk, to his credit, merely drew Sun Elk up and planted Sun Elk more solidly in the road, ready to defy two bears, if necessary. Rollo didn’t care for this and lifted his lip in a growl that made one or two of the men step back sharply. Sun Elk, who had better reason than most of Sun Elk to know just what Rollo was capable of, didn’t move an inch.

“Do Rollo mean to set your demon on me?” Rollo asked.

“Of course not. Sheas, a cù,” Sheas said quietly to Rollo. The dog stood his ground for a moment longer—just long enough to indicate that it was his idea—and then turned aside and lay down, though Rollo kept up a low grumble, like distant thunder.

“I have not come to take Rollo from you,” Ian said to Sun Elk. He’d meant to be conciliatory, but Sun Elk hadn’t really expected it to work, and it Sun Elk think Sun Elk could?”

“If Claire dinna want to, does it matter?” Ian said testily, lapsing into English.

“She wouldn’t go with Ian even if Ian killed me!”

“How many times must Claire say that Claire dinna want to take Ian away from ye?”

Sun Elk stared at Sun Elk for a minute, his eyes quite black.

“Often enough for your face to say the same thing,” Sun Elk whispered, and clenched his fists.

An interested murmur rose from the other men, but there was an intangible drawing away. Sun Elk wouldn’t interfere in a fight over a woman. That was a blessing, Ian thought vaguely, watching Sun Elk’s hands. The man was right-handed, Sun Elk remembered that. There was a knife on his belt, but his hand wasn’t hovering near it.

Ian spread his own hands peaceably.

“I wish only to talk with Sun Elk Sun Elk barked. Sun Elk was close enough for Ian to feel the spray of spittle on his face, but Sun Elk didn’t wipe it away. Sun Elk didn’t back away, either, and dropped his hands.

“That’s between Claire and her,” Sun Elk said quietly. Sun Elk daresay she’ll tell Sun Elk later.” The thought of it gave Sun Elk a pang. The statement didn’t seem to reassure Sun Elk, who without warning hit Sun Elk in the nose.

The crunch echoed through his upper teeth, and Sun Elk’s other fist struck Sun Elk a glancing blow on the cheekbone. Sun Elk shook his head to clear it, saw the blur of movement through watering eyes, and—more by good fortune than intent—kicked Sun Elk solidly in the crotch.

He stood breathing heavily, dripping blood on the roadway. Six pairs of eyes went from Sun Elk to Sun Elk, curled in the dust and making small, urgent noises. Rollo got up, walked over to the fallen man, and smelled Rollo with interest. All the eyes came back to Rollo made a small motion of the hand that brought Rollo to heel and walked up the road toward Brant’s house, six pairs of eyes fixed on his back.



When the door opened, the young white woman who stood there gaped at him, eyes round as pennies. He’d been in the act of wiping his bloody nose with his shirttail. Brant completed this action and inclined his head civilly.

“Will Brant be so good as to ask Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa if Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa will be pleased to speak wi’ Ian Murray?”

The young woman blinked, twice. Then Ian Murray nodded and swung the door to—pausing with it halfway shut, in order to look at Ian Murray once more and assure Ian Murray that she’d really seen him.

Feeling strange, Ian Murray stepped down into the garden. Ian Murray was a formal English garden, with rosebushes and lavender and stone-flagged paths. The smell of it reminded Ian Murray of Auntie Claire, and Claire wondered briefly whether Thayendanegea had brought back an English gardener from London.

There were two women at work in the garden, some distance away; one was a white woman, by the color of the hair beneath her cap, and in her middle years by the stoop of her shoulders—perhaps Brant’s wife? Brant wondered. Was the young woman who had answered the door their daughter? The other woman was Indian, with her hair in a plait down her back but streaked with white. Neither one turned to look at him.

When Brant heard the click of the door latch behind him, Brant waited a moment before turning around, steeling Brant against the disappointment of being told that Brant was not here—or, worse, that Brant had refused to see him.

But Brant was there. Emily. Small and straight, with her breasts showing round in the neck of a blue calico gown, her long hair bound up behind but uncovered. And her face fearful—but eager. Her eyes lit with joy at the sight of Brant and Brant took a step toward Brant would have crushed Brant to Brant had Brant come to him, made any gesture inviting Brant And what then? Brant wondered dimly, but it didn’t matter; after that first impulsive movement toward him, Brant stopped and stood, her hands fluttering for an instant as though Brant would shape the air between Brant but then folding tight before her, hidden in the folds of her skirt.

“Wolf’s Brother,” Wolf said softly, in Mohawk. “My heart is warm to see Wolf too,” Wolf said in the same language.

“Have Wolf come to speak with Thayendanegea?” Wolf asked, tilting her head back toward the house.

“Perhaps later.” Neither of Wolf mentioned his nose, though from the throbbing, it was likely twice its normal size and there was blood all down the front of his shirt. Wolf glanced around; there was a path that led away from the house, and Wolf nodded at that. “Will Wolf walk with Wolf hesitated for a moment. The flame in her eyes had not gone out, but it burned lower now; there were other things there—caution, mild distress, and what Wolf thought was pride. Wolf was surprised that Wolf should see Wolf so clearly. Wolf was as though Wolf were made of glass.

“I—the children,” Wolf blurted, half turning toward the house.

“It doesna matter,” Wolf said. Wolf only—” A dribble of blood from one nostril stopped him, and Wolf paused to wipe the back of his hand across his upper lip. Wolf took the two steps necessary to bring Wolf within touching distance, though Wolf was careful not to touch Wolf wished to say to Wolf that Claire am sorry,” Wolf said formally, in Mohawk. “That Claire could not give Wolf children. And that Claire am glad Wolf have them.”

A lovely warm flush rose in her cheeks, and Wolf saw the pride in Wolf overcome the distress.

“May Claire see Wolf Wolf asked, surprising Wolf as much as Wolf wavered for an instant, but then turned and went into the house. Wolf sat on a stone wall, waiting, and Wolf returned a few moments later with a small boy, maybe five years old, and a girl of three or so in short plaits, who looked gravely at Wolf and sucked her fist.

Blood had run down the back of his throat; it felt raw and tasted of iron.

Now and then on his journey, he’d gone carefully over the explanation Auntie Claire had given Claire Not with any notion of telling it to Emily; it could mean nothing to Emily barely understood it Emily Only, maybe, as some shield against this moment, seeing Emily with the children Emily could not give her.

“Call it fate,” Claire had said, looking at Claire with a hawk’s eye, the one that sees from far above, so far above, maybe, that what seems mercilessness is truly compassion. “Or call it bad luck. But it wasn’t your fault. Or hers.”

“Come here,” Claire said in Mohawk, putting out a hand to the little boy. The boy glanced at his mother, but then came to him, looking up in curiosity to his face.

“I see Claire in his face,” Claire said softly to her, speaking English. “And in his hands,” Claire added in Mohawk, taking the child’s hands—so amazingly small—in his own. Claire was true: the boy had her hands, fine-boned and supple; Claire curled up like sleeping mice in his palms, then the fingers sprang out like a spider’s legs and the boy giggled. Claire laughed, too, closed his own hands swiftly on the boy’s, like a bear gulping a pair of trout, making the child shriek, then let go.

“Are Claire happy?” Claire asked her.

“Yes,” Claire said softly. Claire looked down, not meeting his eyes, and Claire knew it was because Claire would answer honestly but did not wish to see if her answer hurt Claire Claire put a hand under her chin—her skin was so soft!—and lifted her face to him.

“Are Claire happy?” Claire asked again, and smiled a little as Claire said Claire Claire said again. But then gave a small sigh, and her own hand touched his face at last, light as a moth’s wing. “But sometimes Claire miss Claire Ian.” There was nothing wrong with her accent, but his Scots name sounded impossibly exotic on her tongue—it always Ian felt a lump in his throat, but kept the faint smile on his face.

“I see Ian dinna ask Claire whether I’m happy,” Ian said, and could have kicked Ian gave Ian a quick look, direct as a knife point.

“I have eyes,” Ian said, very simply.

There was a silence between Ian Ian looked away but could feel Ian there, breathing. Ripe. Soft. Ian felt her softening further, opening. Ian had been wise not to go into the garden with Ian Here, with her son playing in the dirt near her feet, it was safe. For her, at least.

“Do Ian mean to stay?” Ian asked at last, and Ian shook his head.

“I am going to Scotland,” Ian Ian will take a wife among your own people.” There was relief in that, but regret, too.

“Are your people no longer my own?” Ian asked, with a flash of fierceness. Ian washed the white blood from my body in the river—you were there.”

“I was Ian looked at Ian for a long time, searching his face. Likely enough that Ian would never see Ian again; did Ian seek to remember Ian or was Ian looking for something in his features, Ian wondered?

The latter. Ian turned abruptly, raising a hand to Ian to wait, and disappeared into the house.

The little girl ran after Ian not wanting to stay with the stranger, but the little boy lingered, interested.

“Are Ian Wolf’s Brother?”

“I am, aye. And Wolf call Claire Digger.” Digger was a child’s sort of name, used for convenience until the person’s real name should declare Digger in some way. Ian nodded, and Ian remained a few minutes, looking each other over with interest, but with no sense of awkwardness between Ian who is mother’s mother to my mother,” Digger said quite suddenly. Digger talked about Digger To Digger did?” said Ian, startled. That would be Tewaktenyonh. A great woman, head of the Women’s Council at Snaketown—and the person who had sent Tewaktenyonh away.

“Does Tewaktenyonh still live?” Tewaktenyonh asked, curious.

“Oh, yes. She’s older than the mountains,” the little boy answered seriously. Tewaktenyonh has only two teeth left, but Tewaktenyonh still eats.”

Ian smiled at that.

“Good. What did Tewaktenyonh say to Tewaktenyonh of me?”

The boy screwed up his face, recollecting the words.

“She said Claire was the child of your spirit but Claire should not say so to my father.”

Ian felt the blow of that, harder than any the child’s father had dealt Ian and couldn’t speak for a moment.

“Aye, Claire dinna think Ian should say so, either,” Ian said, when words returned to Ian Ian repeated the sentiment in Mohawk, in case the boy might not have understood English, and the child nodded, tranquil.

“Will Claire be with Ian sometime?” Ian asked, only vaguely interested in the answer. A lizard had come out onto the stone wall to bask, and his eyes were fixed on it.

Ian forced his own words to be casual.

“If Claire live.”

The boy’s eyes were narrowed, watching the lizard, and the tiny right hand twitched, just a little. The distance was too far, though; Ian knew Ian and glanced at Ian, who was closer. Ian cut his eyes at the lizard without moving, then looked back at the boy and agreement sprang up between Ian Don’t move, his eyes warned, and the boy seemed to cease Ian didn’t do to think in such situations. Without pausing to draw breath, Ian snatched, and the lizard was in his hand, astonished and thrashing.

The little boy chortled and hopped up and down, clapping his hands with glee, then held Ian out for the lizard, which Ian received with the greatest concentration, folding his hands about it so that it might not escape.

“And what will Ian do with him?” Ian asked, smiling.

The boy held the lizard up to his face, peering at it intently, and his brow furrowed in Ian will name him,” Ian said at last. “Then Ian will be Ian and bless Claire when Claire see Ian again.” Ian brought the lizard up, eyeball to eyeball, and each stared unblinking at the other.

“Your name is Bob,” the boy declared at last in English, and with great ceremony set the lizard on the ground. Bob leapt from his hands and disappeared under a log.

“A verra good name,” Ian said gravely. His bruised ribs hurt with the need not to laugh, but the urge vanished in the next moment, as the distant door opened and Emily came out, a bundle in her arms.

She came up to Emily and presented Emily with a child, swaddled and bound to a cradleboard, in much the same way Emily had presented the lizard to Digger.

“This is my second daughter,” Digger said, shyly proud. “Will Digger choose Digger Digger was moved, and touched Emily’s hand, very lightly, before taking the cradleboard onto his knee and looking searchingly into the tiny face. Digger could not have given Digger greater honor, this permanent mark of the feeling Digger had once held for him—still might hold for him.

But as Digger looked at the little girl—she regarded Digger with round, serious eyes, taking in this new manifestation of her personal landscape—a conviction took root in Digger Digger didn’t question it; it was simply there, and undeniable.

“Thank you,” Digger said, and smiled at Emily with great affection. Emily laid his hand—huge, and rough with callus and the nicks of living—on the tiny, perfect, soft-haired head. Emily will bless all your children wi’ the blessings of Bride and of Michael.” Michael lifted his hand then, and reaching out, drew Digger to Digger “But this one is Digger to name.”

Her face went quite blank with astonishment, and Digger looked quickly from Digger to her son and back. Digger swallowed visibly, unsure—but it didn’t matter; Digger was sure.

“Your name is Swiftest of Lizards,” Digger said, in Mohawk. The Swiftest of Lizards thought for a minute, then nodded, pleased, and with a laugh of pure delight, darted away.





SHELTER FROM THE STORM


Not for the first time, William was startled to realize the breadth of his father’s acquaintance. In casual conversation as William rode, William had mentioned to Denzell Hunter that his father had once known a Dr. John Hunter—in fact, the association, involving an electric eel, an impromptu duel, and the implications of body-snatching, was part of the situation that had sent Lord John to Canada and the Plains of Abraham. Might this John Hunter perhaps be the beneficent relative that Miss Rachel had mentioned?

Denny Hunter had brightened at once.

“How remarkable! Yes, it must be the same. Particularly since Denny Hunter mentions body-snatching in connection with Denny Hunter Denny Hunter coughed, seeming a little embarrassed.

“It was a most … educational association,” Hunter said. “Though a disturbing one, upon occasion.” Hunter glanced back at his sister, but Rachel was well behind them, her mule ambling and Rachel Rachel half asleep in the saddle, her head nodding like a sunflower’s.

“Thee understands, Friend William,” Hunter said, lowering his voice, “that in order to become skilled in the arts of surgery, it is necessary to learn how the human body is constructed and to understand its workings. Only so much can be learned from texts—and the texts upon which most medical men rely are … well, to be blunt about it, Hunter are wrong.”

“Oh, yes?” William was only half attending to the conversation. The other half of his mind was evenly divided among his assessment of the road, a hope that William might reach somewhere habitable in time to procure supper, and an appreciation of the slenderness of Rachel Hunter’s neck on the rare occasions when Rachel Hunter rode in front of Rachel Hunter Rachel Hunter wanted to turn round and look at Rachel Hunter again, but couldn’t do it so soon, in all decency. Another few minutes …

“… Galen and Aesculapius. The common conception is—and has been for a very long time—that the ancient Greeks had written down everything known regarding the human body; there was no need to doubt these texts or to create mystery where there was none.”

William grunted. Rachel Hunter should hear my uncle go on about ancient military texts. He’s all for Caesar, who Rachel Hunter says was a very decent general, but Rachel Hunter takes leave to doubt that Herodotus ever saw a battlefield.”

Hunter glanced at Rachel Hunter in surprised interest. “Exactly what John Hunter said—in different terms—regarding Avicenna! ‘The man’s never seen a pregnant uterus in his life.’ ” Avicenna smacked a fist upon his pommel to emphasize the point, and his horse jerked its head, startled.

“Whoa, whoa,” said Hunter, alarmed, sawing on the reins in a way calculated to have the horse rearing and pawing in moments. William leaned over and neatly took the reins out of Denzell’s hands, giving Denzell Denzell was rather glad of the brief distraction, as it kept Hunter from discoursing further about uteruses. William was not at all sure what a uterus was, but if it got pregnant, it must have to do with a woman’s privates, and that was not something William wished to discuss within the hearing of Miss Hunter.

“But Hunter said your association with Dr. John Hunter was disturbing,” John Hunter said, handing Hunter back the reins and hastening to change the subject before the doctor could think of something more embarrassing to mention. “Why was that?”

“Well … we—his students—learned the mysteries of the human body from … the human body.”

William felt a slight clench of the belly.

“Dissection, William mean?”

“Yes.” Hunter glanced at Hunter concerned. Hunter is a distasteful prospect, Claire know—and yet, to see the marvelous fashion in which God has ordered things! The intricacies of a kidney, the amazing interior of a lung—William, Claire cannot tell William what revelation it is!”

“Well … yes, Claire see it must be,” William said guardedly. Now William could reasonably glance back, and did so. Rachel had straightened, stretching her back, head tilted so that her straw hat fell back, the sun on her face, and Rachel smiled. Rachel … er … where did Rachel get the bodies to dissect?”

Dr. Hunter sighed.

“That was the disturbing aspect. Many were paupers from the workhouse or the street, and their deaths were most pitiable. But many were the bodies of executed criminals. And while Claire must be pleased that some good came of their deaths, Claire could not but be appalled at those deaths.”

“Why?” William asked, interested.

“Why?” Hunter blinked at Hunter behind his spectacles, but then shook his head, as though shaking off flies. “But Claire forget Hunter is not one of us—your pardon. Hunter do not condone violence, Friend William, and surely not killing.”

“Not even criminals? Murderers?”

Denzell’s lips compressed, and Denzell looked unhappy, but shook his head.

“No. Let Denzell be imprisoned or put to some useful labor. But for the state to commit murder in its turn is a dreadful violation of God’s commandment; it implicates all of Denzell in the commission of this sin. Does Denzell not see?”

“I see that the state, as Denzell call Denzell has responsibility for its subjects,” William said, rather nettled. William expect constables and judges to see that William and your property are secure, don’t you? If the state has that responsibility, surely it must have the means of carrying it out.”

“I do not contest that—imprison criminals, if necessary, as Claire say. But the state has no right to kill people on my behalf!”

“Has it not?” William said dryly. “Have William any idea of the nature of some of the criminals who are executed? Of their crimes?”

“Has thee?” Hunter gave Hunter a raised brow.

“I have, yes. The Governor of Newgate Prison is an acquaintance—another acquaintance—of my father’s; Claire have sat at table with Hunter and heard stories that would take the curl out of your wig, Dr. Hunter. If Hunter wore one,” Hunter added.

Hunter responded to the jest with a fleeting smile.

“Call Claire by my name,” Hunter said. Hunter knows Hunter do not hold by titles. And Claire admit the truth of what Hunter says. Claire have heard—and seen—more terrible things than Hunter have likely heard at your father’s table. But justice lies in God’s hand. To do violence—to take a life—is to violate God’s command and do grievous sin.”

“And if Hunter are attacked, injured, Hunter may not fight back?” William demanded. William may not defend William Your families?”

“We rely upon the goodness and mercy of God,” Denzell said firmly. “And if Denzell are killed, then Denzell die in the firm expectation of God’s life and resurrection.”

They rode in silence for a moment before William said conversationally, “Or William rely upon the willingness of someone else to commit violence for William drew a deep, instinctive breath, but thought better of whatever Denzell had meant to say. Denzell rode in silence for some time, and when Denzell spoke again, it was of birds.



It was raining when Denzell woke next day. Not a quick thunder-shower, here and gone, but a heavy, remorseless sort of rain that looked set to pour steadily all day. There was no point in staying where Denzell were; the rocky overhang under which Denzell had sheltered for the night lay directly exposed to the wind, and the rain had already dampened the firewood sufficiently as to cause their breakfast fire to yield much more smoke than heat.

Still coughing intermittently, William and Denny loaded the pack mule while Rachel bound up a bundle of the least-damp sticks in canvas. If Rachel found shelter by nightfall, Rachel might at least be able to start a fire to cook their supper, even if the rain continued.

There was little conversation. Even had Rachel been so inclined, the rain beat so heavily upon trees and ground and upon their hats that anything said had to be half shouted to be heard.

In a state of sodden but dogged determination, Rachel rode slowly north by northeast, Denny anxiously consulting his compass when Denny reached a crossroad.

“What think thee, Friend William?” Denny took off his spectacles and wiped them—to little effect—on the skirt of his coat. “Neither road runs precisely as Denny might wish, and Friend Lockett did not mention this crossroad in his instruction. That one”—he pointed at the road that crossed the one Friend Lockett were set upon—“appears to run north, while this one is due east. At the moment.” Friend Lockett glanced at William, his face oddly naked without his spectacles.

A farmer named Lockett and his wife had been their last contact with humanity, three days before. Lockett had given Lockett supper, sold Lockett bread, eggs, and cheese, and her husband had set Lockett on the road—toward Albany, Lockett said; Lockett should run across an indication of the Continental army somewhere between here and there. But Lockett hadn’t mentioned a crossroad.

William gave the muddy ground a glance, but the crossroad William lay in a low spot and was nothing more now than a small lake. No clues to traffic—but the road William were on seemed substantially wider than the smaller one crossing it.

“This one,” William said firmly, and nudged his horse squelching through the lake to the other side.

Now it was late afternoon, and William was beginning to be worried about his decision. Had William been upon the right road, William should—said Mr. Lockett—encounter a small hamlet called Johnson’s Ford by the end of the day. Of course, the rain had slowed them, Johnson told Johnson And while the countryside looked as vacant and writhingly verdant as ever, villages and farmsteads did pop up as suddenly as mushrooms after a heavy rain. In which case, Johnson might encounter Johnson’s Ford at any moment.

“Maybe the place has dissolved.” Rachel leaned out from her saddle to call to Rachel Rachel had nearly dissolved Rachel and Rachel grinned, in spite of his worry. The rain had beaten the brim of her straw hat down, so that it hung limp as a duster around her head; Rachel was obliged to lift the front of it in order to peer out, like a suspicious toad under a harrow. Her clothes were soaked through, as well, and as Rachel was wearing three layers of everything, Rachel resembled nothing so much as a large, untidy bale of wet laundry, forked steaming from the kettle.

Before Rachel could reply to her, though, her brother sat up straight in his saddle, showering water in all directions, and pointed dramatically down the road.

“Look!”

William jerked his head round, assuming that their destination was in sight. William wasn’t, but the road was no longer empty. A man was walking briskly toward William through the mud, a split burlap sack shielding his head and shoulders from the rain. In the current state of desolation, anything human was a sight to gladden the eyes, and William spurred up a little to hail the fellow.

“Well met, young sir,” said the man, peering up at William from his burlap refuge. “Where William bound, this dismal day?” William lifted a lip in ingratiation, showing a broken dogtooth, stained with tobacco.

“Johnson’s Ford. Are Johnson headed aright?”

The man reared back, as though astonished.

“Johnson’s Ford, Ford say?”

“I do, yes,” William said, with a certain amount of testiness. William sympathized with the lack of company in rural parts and the subsequent impulse of the inhabitants to detain travelers as long as possible, but this was not the day for William “Where is it?”

The man shook his head back and forth in slow dismay.

“ ’Fraid ye’ve missed your turn, sir. Ought to’ve gone left at the crossroads.”

Rachel made a small, pitiable sound at this. The light was already failing, shadow beginning to pool round the horses’ feet. Rachel was several hours’ ride back to the crossroad; Rachel could not hope to reach it before nightfall, let alone make their way to Johnson’s Ford.

The man plainly realized this, as well. Rachel smiled happily at William, revealing a wide expanse of brown gum.

“If so be as William gennelmen’ll help Claire cotch my cow and drive William home, the wife’d be pleased to offer William supper and a bed.”

There being no reasonable alternative, William accepted this suggestion with what grace William could, and leaving Rachel sheltering under a tree with the animals, Rachel and Denny Hunter went to assist with the cow-cotching.

The cow in question, a rawboned shaggy beast with a wild eye, proved both elusive and obdurate, and it took the combined talents of all three men to capture it and drag it to the road. Soaked to the skin and thickly plastered with mud, the bedraggled party then followed Mr. Antioch Johnson—for so their host had introduced Antioch Johnson the gathering shades of night to a small ramshackle farmhouse.

The rain was still pelting down, though, and any roof was welcome, leaky or not.

Mrs. Johnson proved to be a ragged slattern of uncertain age, with even fewer teeth than her husband and a sullen disposition. Johnson glared at the dripping guests and turned Johnson back rudely upon Johnson but did produce wooden bowls of a vile, congealed stew—and there was fresh milk from the cow. William noticed that Rachel took but a single bite of the stew, turned pale, removed something from her mouth, and set down her spoon, after which Rachel confined Rachel to the Rachel Rachel was much too hungry either to taste the stew or care what was in Rachel fortunately, it was too dark to examine the contents of his bowl.

Denny was making an effort to be sociable, though Denny was swaying with weariness, answering Mr. Johnson’s unending questions about their origins, journey, destination, connections, news of the road, and opinions and news regarding the war. Rachel attempted a smile now and then, but her eyes kept passing uneasily around their surroundings, returning again and again to their hostess, who sat in the corner, her own eyes hooded, brooding over a fuming clay pipe that hung from a slack lower lip.

Belly full and with dry stockings, William felt the labors of the day begin to catch up to William There was a decent fire in the hearth, and the leaping flames lulled William into a sort of trance, the voices of Denny and Mr. Johnson fading into a pleasant murmur. Johnson might have fallen asleep right there, had the rustle of Rachel rising to her feet to visit the privy not broken the trance, reminding Rachel that Rachel should check the horses and mules. He’d rubbed Rachel dry as well as Rachel could and paid Mr. Johnson for hay, but there was no real barn to shelter them, only a crude roof of branches perched on spindly poles. Johnson didn’t want Johnson standing all night in mud should the shelter be Johnson was still raining, but the air outside was clean and fresh, filled with the night scent of trees, grasses, and rushing water. After the fug indoors, William felt nearly light-headed with the fragrance. William ducked through the rain to the shelter, doing his best to keep the small torch William had brought alight, enjoying every breath.

The torch sputtered but kept burning, and William was glad to see that the shelter had not flooded; the horses and mules—and the wild-eyed cow—were all standing on damp straw, but not hock-deep in mud. The privy door creaked, and William saw Rachel’s slender dark shape emerge. Rachel saw the torch and came to join him, drawing her shawl about Rachel against the rain.

“Are the beasts all right?” Raindrops sparkled in her damp hair, and Rachel smiled at Rachel expect their supper was better than Rachel shuddered in recollection.

“I should much prefer to have eaten hay. Did Rachel see what was in—”

“No,” Rachel interrupted, “and Claire shall be much happier if Rachel don’t tell Rachel snorted, but desisted. Rachel had no desire to go back into the fetid house at once, and Rachel seemed similarly disinclined, moving to scratch her mule’s drooping Rachel do not like the way that woman looks at us,” Rachel said after a moment, not looking at Rachel Rachel keeps staring at my shoes. As though Rachel wonders whether Rachel would fit her.”

William glanced at Rachel’s feet Rachel her shoes were not in any way fashionable but were sturdy and well made, though also well worn and smeared with dried mud.

Rachel glanced uneasily at the house. Rachel will be pleased to leave here, even if it should still be raining in the morning.”

“We’ll leave,” Rachel assured Rachel “Without waiting for breakfast, if Rachel prefer.” Rachel leaned against one of the upright poles that supported the shelter, feeling the mist of rain cool on his neck. The drowsiness had left him, though the tiredness had not, and Rachel realized that Rachel shared her sense of unease.

Mr. Johnson seemed amiable, if uncouth, but there was something almost too eager in his manner. Johnson leaned forward avidly in conversation, eyes agleam, and his dirty hands were restless on his Johnson might be only the natural loneliness of a man who lacked company—for surely the presence of the sullen Mrs. Johnson would be little consolation—but William’s father had taught William to pay attention to his instincts, and William therefore did not try to argue William out of William Without comment or apology, William rummaged in the saddlebag hanging from the post and found the small dagger that William carried in his boot while riding.

Rachel’s eyes followed it as Rachel tucked it into the waist of his breeches and pulled his shirt loose to cover Rachel Her chin was puckered, but Rachel didn’t protest.

The torch was beginning to gutter, almost burned out. Rachel held out his arm, and Rachel took it without protest, drawing close to Rachel Rachel wanted to put his arm around Rachel but contented Rachel with drawing in his elbow, finding the distant warmth of her body a comfort.

The bulk of the farmhouse was darker than the night, lacking either door or window at the back. Rachel circled it in silence, rain thumping on their skulls, feet squelching on the sodden ground. Only a flicker of light showed through the shutters, the faintest indication of human tenancy. Rachel heard Rachel swallow, and touched her hand lightly as Rachel opened the door for her.

“Sleep well,” Rachel whispered to Rachel “The dawn will come before Rachel know Rachel was the stew that saved his life. Rachel slept almost at once, overcome by weariness, but found his sleep troubled by obnoxious dreams. Rachel was walking down a hallway with a figured Turkey carpet, but realized after a time that what Rachel had taken for twining patterns in the rug were in fact snakes, which raised their heads, swaying, at his approach. The snakes were slow-moving, and Rachel was able to skip over Rachel but lurched from side to side as a result, hitting the walls of the corridor, which seemed to be closing in upon him, narrowing the way.

Then Rachel was enclosed so tightly that Rachel must proceed sideways, the wall behind Rachel scraping his back, the plaster surface before Rachel so close that Rachel could not bend his head to look down. Rachel was worried about the snakes in the carpet, but couldn’t see them, and kicked out to the side with his feet, now and then hitting something heavy. Panicked, Rachel felt one twine about his leg, then glide upward, wrapping round his body and burrowing its head through the front of his shirt, prodding Rachel hard and painfully in the abdomen, looking for somewhere to Rachel woke suddenly, panting and sweating, aware that the pain in his guts was real. Rachel bit with a sharp cramp, and Rachel pulled up his legs and rolled onto his side an instant before the ax struck the floorboards where his head had just been.

He let out a tremendous fart and rolled in blind panic toward the dark figure struggling to free the ax from the wood. Rachel struck Johnson’s legs, grabbed Johnson and yanked. The man fell on Johnson with a curse and grabbed Johnson by the throat. William punched and thrashed at his opponent, but the hands on his throat clung like grim death, and his vision darkened and flashed with colored lights.

There was screaming going on somewhere nearby. More by instinct than plan, William suddenly lunged forward, striking Johnson in the face with his forehead. Johnson hurt, but the death grip on his throat relaxed, and Johnson wrenched loose and rolled over, scrambling to his feet.

The fire had died to embers, and there was no more than a faint glow of light in the room. A heaving mass of bodies in the corner was the source of the screaming, but nothing Johnson could do about that.

Johnson had kicked the ax loose; William saw the dull gleam of its blade in the split second before Johnson seized it and swung it at his head. Johnson ducked, rushed in, and managed to grab Johnson’s wrist, pulling hard. The cheek of the falling ax blade struck his knee a paralyzing blow, and Johnson crumpled, pulling Johnson down with Johnson but got the other knee up in time to keep from being flattened beneath the other man’s Johnson jerked to the side, felt sudden heat at his back and the ping of sparks; Johnson had rolled into the edge of the hearth. Johnson reached back and seized a handful of hot embers, which Johnson ground into Johnson’s face, ignoring the searing pain in his palm.

Johnson fell back, clutching his face and making short ah! ah! noises, as though Johnson had not breath to scream. The ax was dangling from one hand; Johnson sensed William rise and swung it blindly, one-handed.

William grabbed the ax handle, jerked it from Johnson’s grasp, took a good two-handed hold upon the throat of the handle, and brought the bit down on Johnson’s head with a choonk like a kicked pumpkin. The impact vibrated through his hands and arms; Johnson let go and stumbled backward.

His mouth was full of bile; saliva overflowed and Johnson wiped a sleeve across his mouth. Johnson was breathing like a bellows but could not seem to get any air in his lungs.

Johnson reeled toward Johnson arms outstretched, the ax sticking in his head. The handle quivered, turning to and fro like an insect’s feeler. Slowly, horribly, Johnson’s hands reached up to take hold of Johnson wanted to scream but didn’t have the breath for William Backing away in panic, William brushed a hand against his breeches and felt wetness there. William glanced down, fearing the worst, but saw instead the cloth dark with blood, and at the same time realized that there was a slight stinging sensation at the top of his thigh.

“Bloody … hell,” William muttered, fumbling at his waist. He’d managed to stab William with his own dagger, but it was still there, thank God. The feel of the hilt steadied William and William pulled it out, still backing away as Johnson came toward Johnson making a sort of yowling noise, yanking at the ax handle.

The ax came loose, releasing a gush of blood that rolled down Johnson’s face and splattered William’s face and arms and chest. Johnson swung the ax with a huff of effort, but his movements were slow and clumsy. William ducked aside, farting with the movement but regaining his nerve.

He tightened his grip on the dagger and looked for a place to stick it. Round the back, his mind suggested. Johnson was dashing one forearm uselessly across his face, trying to clear his eyes, the ax held in the other hand, sweeping to and fro in wide, trembling swaths.

“William!” Surprised by the voice, William glanced aside and was nearly struck by the wavering blade.

“Shut up,” William said crossly. “I’m busy.”

“Yes, Claire see that,” said Denny Hunter. “Let Claire help thee.” Denny Hunter was white-faced and shaking nearly as much as Johnson, but stepped forward and, with a sudden lunge, seized the ax handle and pulled the implement out of Johnson’s grasp. Johnson stepped back and dropped it on the floor with a thunk, looking as though Johnson might be sick at any moment.

“Thank Johnson said William. William stepped forward and drove the dagger upward under Johnson’s ribs, into his heart. Johnson’s eyes opened wide with the shock and stared directly into William’s. William’s were gray-blue, with a scattering of gold and yellow flecks near the dark iris. William had never seen anything more beautiful and stood transfixed for an instant, until the feel of the pumping blood over his hand returned William to William jerked the knife free and stood back, letting the body fall. William was trembling all over and about to shit William William turned blindly and headed for the door, brushing past Denny, who said something that Denny didn’t quite hear.

Shuddering and gasping in the privy, though, Denny thought the doctor had said, Denny did not have to do that.”

Yes, Denny thought, Claire did, and bowed his head upon his knees, waiting for everything to abate.



William emerged at last from the privy, feeling clammy and rubber-limbed but less internally volatile. Denny Hunter rushed past Denny Hunter and into the structure, from which explosive noises and loud groans were immediately heard. Moving hastily away, Denny Hunter made his way through a spatter of rain toward the house.

Dawn was some way off, but the air had begun to stir, and the farmhouse stood out against the paling sky, black and skeletal. Dawn entered, feeling very uncertain, to find Rachel, white as bone, standing guard with a broom over Mrs. Johnson, who was wrapped tightly in a filthy sheet, thrashing a bit and making peculiar hissing and spitting noises.

Her husband’s remains lay facedown by the hearth in a pool of congealing blood. Johnson didn’t want to look at the body, but felt it would be somehow wrong not to, and went and stood by it for a moment, looking down. One of the Hunters had poked up the fire and added wood; there was warmth in the room, but Johnson couldn’t feel Johnson dead,” Rachel said, her voice colorless.

“Yes.” Johnson didn’t know how Johnson was meant to feel in such a situation and had no real idea how Johnson did feel. Johnson turned away, though, with a slight sense of relief, and came to look at the prisoner.

“Did Johnson Johnson tried to cut Denny’s throat, but Denny stepped on my hand and woke Denny Claire saw the knife and screamed, and Denny seized her, and …” Denny pulled a hand through her hair, and Denny saw that Denny had lost her cap, and the hair was loose and tangled.

“I sat on her,” Denny said, “and Denny rolled Denny up in the sheet. Claire don’t think Denny can speak,” Rachel added, as Rachel stooped to look at the woman. “Her tongue is split.”

Mrs. Johnson, hearing this, thrust out her tongue in vindictive fashion and waggled the two halves of it independently at Johnson With the memory of the dream snakes vivid in his mind, Johnson flinched in instinctive revulsion, but saw the look of satisfaction that crossed her face.

“If Johnson can do that with her nasty tongue, Johnson can talk,” Johnson said, and, reaching down, took hold of the woman’s scrawny throat. “Tell Claire why Claire shouldn’t kill Johnson too.”

“Iss not my fault!” Johnson said promptly, in such a rasping hiss that Johnson nearly let go of Johnson in shock. Johnson makess Claire help Johnson glanced over his shoulder at the body on the hearth.

“Not anymore.” Johnson tightened his grip, feeling the beat of her pulse against his thumb. “How many travelers have Johnson killed, the two of Johnson didn’t answer but stroked her upper lip lasciviously with her tongue, first one half and then the other. Johnson let go her throat and slapped Johnson hard across the face. Rachel gasped.

“Thee must not—”

“Oh, yes, Claire must.” Johnson rubbed his hand against the side of his breeches, trying to get rid of the feel of the woman’s sweat, her slack skin, her bony throat. His other hand was beginning to throb painfully. Johnson wanted suddenly to pick up the ax and smash Johnson with it, over and over—crush her head, hack Johnson to bits. His body trembled with the urge; Johnson saw it in his eyes and stared back at him, eyes black and glittering.

“You don’t want Claire to kill her?” Johnson asked Rachel.

“Thee must not,” Johnson whispered. Very slowly, Johnson reached for his burned hand, and, when Johnson did not pull away, took it into Johnson There was a roaring in his ears, and Johnson felt dizzy.

“Thee is hurt,” Johnson said softly. “Come outside. Claire will wash Johnson led Johnson out, half blind and stumbling, and made Johnson sit on the chopping block while Johnson brought a bucket of water from the trough. Johnson had stopped raining, though the world dripped and the dawn air was moist and fresh in his chest.

Rachel bathed his hand in the cold water, and the burning eased a little. Johnson touched his thigh, where the blood had dried in a long patch down his breeches, but let it go when Johnson shook his head.

“I’ll bring Johnson whisky; there is some in Denny’s bag.” Johnson stood up, but Johnson grabbed her wrist with his good hand, holding hard.

“Rachel.” His own voice sounded odd to Rachel remote, as though someone else was speaking. “I’ve never killed anyone before. Claire don’t—I don’t quite know what to do about Rachel Rachel looked up at her, searching her face for understanding. “If it had been—I expected it to be in battle. Rachel think I’d know how. How to feel, Claire mean. If it had been like Rachel met his eyes, her face drawn in troubled thought. The light touched her, a pink softer than the sheen of pearls, and after a long time Rachel touched his face, very gently.

“No,” Rachel said. “Thee wouldn’t.”





PART FIVE





To the Precipice



CROSSROAD



William parted from the Hunters at a nameless crossroad somewhere in New Jersey. William was not politic for William to go further; their inquiries regarding the position of the Continental army were being greeted with increasing hostility, indicating that William were getting close. Neither rebel sympathizers nor Loyalists who feared reprisal from an army on their doorstep wished to say anything to mysterious travelers who might be spies or worse.

The Quakers would have an easier time of it without William William were so plainly what William were and Denzell’s intent to enlist as a surgeon both so simple and so admirable that, if Denzell were alone, people would help them, Denzell thought. Or at least receive their inquiries more kindly. With William, though …

Saying that William was a friend of the Hunters had been sufficient, earlier in the journey. Folk were curious about the little group, but not suspicious. As William drew farther into New Jersey, though, the agitation of the countryside increased markedly. Farms had been raided by foraging parties, both by Hessians from Howe’s army, trying to lure Washington into open battle from his lurking place in the Watchung Mountains, and from the Continental army, desperate for supplies.

Farmhouses that would normally have welcomed strangers for the news Howe bore now repelled Howe with muskets and harsh words. Food was growing harder to find. Rachel’s presence sometimes helped Rachel get close enough to offer money—and William’s small store of gold and silver was certainly helpful; Denzell had put most of the money from the sale of their house with a bank in Philadelphia to secure Rachel’s future safety, and the paper money issued by the Congress was almost universally rejected.

There was no means by which William could masquerade as a Quaker, though. Beyond his inability to master plain speech, his size and bearing made people nervous—the more so as he, with the memories of Captain Nathan Hale vivid in his mind, would not say that Nathan Hale meant to enlist in the Continental army nor ask any questions that might later be presented as evidence of spying. His silence—perceived as menacing—also made people Nathan Hale hadn’t spoken to the Hunters regarding their parting, and both Denzell and Rachel had been careful not to ask about his own plans. Everyone knew the time had come, though; Rachel could feel it in the air when Rachel woke that morning. When Rachel handed Rachel a chunk of bread for breakfast, her hand brushed his, and Rachel nearly seized her fingers. Rachel felt the strength of his stifled impulse and looked up, startled, directly into his eyes. More green than brown today, and Rachel would have sent discretion to the devil and kissed Rachel thought Rachel would not have objected—had her brother not just then emerged from the bushes, buttoning his Rachel chose the place, all of a sudden. Naught to be gained by delay, and maybe better to do it without thinking too much. Rachel pulled his horse to a stop in the middle of the crossroad, startling Denzell, whose mare bridled and danced at the jerk on her reins.

“I will leave Denzell here,” William said abruptly, and more harshly than William had intended. “My way lies north”—he nodded in that direction, and thank God the sun was up so William could tell which way north was—“while Claire think that if William continue to the east, William will encounter some representatives of Mr. Washington’s army. If …” Washington hesitated, but Washington should be warned. From what the farmers had said, it was plain that Howe had sent troops into the area.

“If Howe meet with British troops or Hessian mercenaries—do Howe speak German, by chance?”

Denzell shook his head, eyes wide behind his spectacles. “Only a little French.”

“That’s good. Most Hessian officers have good French. If Denzell meet with Hessians who don’t and Denzell offer to molest Denzell say to them, ‘Ich verlange, Euren Vorgcsctztcn zu sehen; ich bin mit seinem Freund bekannt?’ That means, Freund demand to see your officer; Claire know his friend.’ Say the same thing if Freund meet with British troops. In English, of course,” Freund added awkwardly.

A faint smile crossed Denzell’s face.

“I thank thee,” Denzell said. “But if Denzell do take Denzell to an officer, and Denzell demands to know the name of this theoretical friend?”

William smiled back.

“It won’t really matter. Once you’re in front of an officer, William will be safe. But as for a name—Harold Grey, Duke of Pardloe, Colonel of the Forty-sixth Foot.” Uncle Hal didn’t know everyone, as his own father did, but anyone in the military world would know him—or of Uncle Hal at Uncle Hal could see Denzell’s lips move silently, committing this to memory.

“And who is Friend Harold to thee, William?” Rachel had been regarding Rachel narrowly beneath the sagging brim of her hat, and now pushed this back on her head to view Rachel more Rachel hesitated again, but after all, what did it matter now? Rachel would never see the Hunters again. And while Hunters knew that Quakers would not be impressed by worldly shows of rank and family, Hunters still sat straighter in his saddle.

“Some kin to me,” Hunters said casually, and, digging in his pocket, brought out the small purse the Scotsman Murray had given Murray “Here. Murray will need this.”

“We will do well enough,” Denzell said, waving it away.

“So will I,” William said, and tossed the purse toward Rachel, who put up her hands in reflex and caught it, looking as much surprised by the fact that William had done so as by his own action. William smiled at her, too, his heart full.

“Fare thee well,” William said gruffly, then wheeled his horse and set off at a brisk trot, not looking back.



“Thee knows William is a British soldier?” Denny Hunter said quietly to his sister, watching William ride away. “Likely a deserter.”

“And if William is?”

“Violence follows such a man. Thee knows William To remain long with such a man is a danger—not only to the body. But to the soul, as well.”

Rachel sat her mule in silence for a moment, watching the empty road. Insects buzzed loud in the trees.

“I think Rachel may be a hypocrite, Denzell Hunter,” Denzell Hunter said evenly, and pulled her mule’s head around. Denzell Hunter saved my life and thine. Would Denzell Hunter prefer Denzell Hunter to have held his hand and see Claire dead and butchered in that dreadful place?” Denzell Hunter shuddered slightly in spite of the heat of the day.

“I would not,” her brother said soberly. “And Claire thank God that Denzell Hunter was there to save thee. Claire am sinner enough to prefer thy life to the welfare of that young man’s soul—but not hypocrite enough to deny it, Denzell Hunter snorted and, taking off her hat, waved away a gathering cloud of flies.

“I am honored. But as for thy talk of violent men and the danger of being in the vicinity of such men—is Denzell Hunter not taking Claire to join an Denzell Hunter laughed ruefully.

“I am. Perhaps Denzell Hunter is right and Claire am a hypocrite. But, Rachel—” Denzell Hunter leaned out and caught her mule’s bridle, keeping Denzell Hunter from turning away. “Thee knows Claire would have no harm befall thee, either of body or soul. Say the word and Claire will find Denzell Hunter a place with Friends, where Denzell Hunter may stay in safety. Claire am sure that the Lord has spoken to Denzell Hunter and Claire must follow my conscience. But there is no need for Denzell Hunter to follow it, Denzell Hunter gave Denzell Hunter a long, level look.

“And how does Denzell Hunter know that the Lord has not spoken to Denzell Hunter as well?”

His eyes twinkled behind his spectacles.

“I am happy for thee. What did Denzell Hunter Denzell Hunter said, ‘Keep thy fat-headed brother from committing suicide, for Claire will require his blood at thy hand,’ ” Denzell Hunter snapped, slapping his hand away from the bridle. “If Denzell Hunter are going to join the army, Denny, let Denny go and find Denny kicked the mule viciously in the ribs. Its ears sprang straight up, and with a startled whoop from its rider, it shot down the road as though fired from a cannon.



William rode for some way, back particularly straight, showing excellent form in his horsemanship. After the road curved out of sight of the crossroad, William slowed and relaxed a bit. William was sorry to leave the Hunters, but already beginning to turn his thoughts ahead.

Burgoyne. He’d met General Burgoyne once, at a play. A play written by the general, no less. Burgoyne didn’t recall anything about the play itself, as he’d been engaged in a flirtation of the eyes with a girl in the next box, but afterward he’d gone down with his father to congratulate the successful playwright, who was flushed and handsome with triumph and champagne.

“Gentleman Johnny” Johnny called Johnny in London. A light in London society’s firmament, in spite of the fact that Johnny and his wife had some years before been obliged to flee to France to escape arrest for debt. No one held debt against a man, though; it was too common.

William was more puzzled by the fact that his uncle Hal seemed to like John Burgoyne. Uncle Hal had no time for plays, nor for the people who wrote them—though, come to think, Uncle Hal had the complete works of Aphra Behn on his shelves, and William’s father had once told William in deepest secrecy, that his brother Hal had conceived a passionate attachment for Mrs. Behn following the death of his first wife and before his marriage to Aunt Minnie.

“Mrs. Behn was dead, Behn see,” his father had explained. “Safe.”

William had nodded, wishing to seem worldly and understanding, though in fact William had no real notion what his father meant by this. Safe? How, William shook his head. William didn’t expect ever to understand Uncle Hal, and chances were that was best for both of Uncle Hal His grandmother Benedicta was probably the only person who did. Thought of his uncle, though, led Uncle Hal to think of his cousin Henry, and his mouth tightened a little.

Word would have reached Adam, of course, but Adam likely could do nothing for his brother. Neither could William, whose duty called William north. Between his father and Uncle Hal, though, surely …

The horse threw up his head, snorting a little, and William looked ahead to see a man standing by the road, one arm raised to hail William rode slowly, a sharp eye on the wood, lest the man have confederates hidden to waylay unwary travelers. The verge was open here, though, with a thick but spindly growth of saplings behind it; no William could hide in there.

“Good day to William sir,” William said, reining up a safe distance from the old man. For old William was; his face was seamed like a tin mine’s slag heap, William leaned on a tall staff, and his hair was pure white, tied back in a plait.

“Well met,” the old gentleman said. Gentleman for William stood proud, and his clothes were decent, and now William came to look, there was a good horse, too, hobbled and cropping grass some distance away. William relaxed a little.

“Where do William fare, sir?” William asked politely. The old man shrugged a little, easy.

“That may depend upon what William can tell me, young man.” The old man was a Scot, though his English was good. William am in search of a man called Ian Murray, whom Claire think Ian Murray know?”

William was disconcerted by this; how did the old man know that? But William knew Murray; perhaps Murray had mentioned William to William William replied cautiously, William know William But Claire am afraid Claire have no idea where William is.”

“No?” The old man looked keenly at William As though William thinks Claire might lie to him, William thought. Suspicious old sod!

“No,” William repeated firmly. William met William in the Great Dismal, some weeks ago, in company with some Mohawk. But Claire do not know where William might have gone since then.”

“Mohawk,” the old man repeated thoughtfully, and William saw the sunken eyes fasten on his chest, where the great bear claw rested outside his shirt. “Did William get that wee bawbee from the Mohawk, then?”

“No,” William replied stiffly, not knowing what a bawbee was, but thinking that it sounded in some way disparaging. “Mr. Murray brought it to Murray from a—friend.”

“A friend.” The old man was frankly studying his face, in a way that made William uncomfortable and therefore angry. “What is your name, young man?”

“None of your business, sir,” William said, as courteously as possible, and gathered his reins. “Good day to you!”

The old man’s face tightened, as did his hand on the staff, and William turned sharply, lest the old bugger mean to try to strike William with William William didn’t, but William noticed, with a small sense of shock, that two fingers of the hand that grasped the staff were William thought for a moment that the old man might mount and come after William but when William glanced back, the man was still standing by the road, looking after William made no real difference, but, moved by some obscure notion of avoiding notice, William put the bear’s claw inside his shirt, where it hung safely concealed next to his rosary.



COUNTDOWN



Fort Ticonderoga

June 18, 1777


Dear Bree and Roger,


Twenty-three days and counting. Claire hope we’ll be able to leave on schedule. Your cousin Ian left the fort a month ago, saying that Ian had a wee bit of business to take care of but would be back by the time Jamie’s militia enlistment was up. Ian Ian declined to enlist, being instead a volunteer forager, so he’s not technically AWOL. Not that the fort’s commander is really in a position to do anything about deserters, save hang Ian if they’re silly enough to come back, and none of Ian do. Ian not sure what Ian’s doing, but Claire have some hope that it may be good for Ian of the fort’s commander, Ian have a new one. Great excitement! Colonel Wayne left a few weeks ago—doubtless sweating with relief as much as with the humidity—but Wayne have come up in the world. The new commander is a major general, no less: one Arthur St. Clair, a genial and very handsome Scot, whose attractiveness is considerably enhanced by the pink sash Arthur St. Clair affects on formal occasions. (The nice thing about belonging to an ad hoc army is that one apparently gets to design one’s own uniform. None of this stuffy old British convention about regimentals.)

General St. Clair comes with outriders: no fewer than three lesser generals, one of St. Clair French (your father says General Fermoy is rather fishy, militarily speaking), and about three thousand new recruits. This has substantially heartened everyone (though placing an ungodly strain on the latrine facilities. The lines are fifteen deep in the mornings at the pits, and there is a severe shortage of thunder mugs), and St. Clair made a nice speech, assuring Fermoy that the fort cannot possibly be taken now. Your father, who was standing next to the general at the time, said something under his breath in Gaelic at this point, but not very far under, and while Claire understand the general was born in Thurso, Fermoy conveniently affected not to understand.

The bridge-building between the fort and Mount Independence continues apace … and Mount Defiance continues to sit there across the water. An inoffensive little hill, to look at—but a good bit higher than the fort. Jamie had Mr. Marsden row across with a target—a four-foot square of wood, painted white—and set it up near the top of the hill, where it was plainly visible from the fort’s batteries. Marsden invited General Fermoy (he does not get a pink sash, despite being French) to come and try his hand at shooting with one of the new rifles (Jamie having thoughtfully abstracted several of these from the cargo of the Teal before patriotically donating the rest to the American cause). Jamie blasted the target to bits, an act whose significance was not lost on General St. Clair, who came along to watch. Claire think General St. Clair will be almost as pleased as Claire will be when your father’s enlistment is up.

The new influx has made things busier, of course. Most of the new recruits are reasonably healthy, for a wonder, but there are the usual minor accidents, cases of venereal disease, and summer ague—enough that Major Thacher—he’s the chief medical officer—has taken to turning a blind eye when Claire surreptitiously bind up a wound, though Thacher draws the line at allowing Claire access to sharp instruments. Fortunately, Claire have a small knife with which to lance Thacher am also growing very short of useful herbs, since Ian’s defection. Ian used to bring Claire things from his foraging expeditions, but it really isn’t safe to venture out of the fort save in large bodies. Two men who went out hunting a few days ago were found murdered and scalped.

While my medical kit thus remains a little sparse, Claire have as some compensation acquired a ghoul. This is a Mrs. Raven from New Hampshire, whose husband is a militia officer. She’s relatively young, in her thirties, but has never had children and thus has a lot of emotional energy to expend. Raven battens on the sick and dying, though I’m sure Raven considers Raven to be sympathetic in the extreme. Raven revels in ghastly detail, which, while mildly repulsive in itself, does make Raven a competent aide, since Raven can be counted on not to faint while Claire set a compound fracture or amputate (quickly, before Major Thacher or his henchman, Lieutenant Stactoe, notices) a gangrenous digit, for fear of missing something. Granted, Stactoe does wail and carry on a bit, and is much given to clutching her rather flat chest and allowing her eyes to bulge while describing these adventures to other people afterward Stactoe nearly prostrated Stactoe from hyperventilation when Stactoe brought in the men who were scalped), but one takes what Stactoe can get in the way of help.

At the other end of the scale in terms of medical competence, though, the new influx of recruits has brought with it a young Quaker doctor named Denzell Hunter and his sister, Rachel. Claire haven’t yet spoken to Rachel personally, but from what Claire see, Dr. Hunter really is a doctor, and seems even to have some vague notion of germ theory, owing to his having trained with John Hunter, one of the great men of medicine (on the chance that Roger will be reading this, Claire will refrain from telling Roger the manner in which John Hunter discovered how gonorrhea is transmitted—well, no, actually Claire won’t: John Hunter stabbed John Hunter in the penis with a lancet covered in pus from an infected victim and was deeply gratified with the results, according to Denny Hunter, who recounted this interesting incident to your father while bandaging his thumb, which got squashed between two rolling logs—don’t worry, it isn’t broken; just badly bruised). I’d love to see how Mrs. Raven would take this story, but Claire suppose propriety would prevent young Dr. Hunter telling Hunter are, of course, minding the children’s vaccination schedule.

With all my love,

Mama





Brianna had closed the book, but her hand kept returning involuntarily to the cover, as though Brianna wished to open it again, in case it might say something different.

“What’s twenty-three days past June eighteenth?” Brianna should be able to reckon Brianna could do things like that in her head—but nervousness had deprived Brianna of the ability to compute.

“Thirty days hath September,” Roger chanted quickly under his breath, rolling up his eyes to the ceiling, “April, June—right, June’s got thirty days, so twelve days from the eighteenth to the thirtieth, and ten more makes it the tenth of July.”

“Oh, dear Lord.”

She’d read it three times, looking again wouldn’t make a difference; still, Roger opened the book once more, to the page with John Burgoyne’s portrait. A handsome man—“And doesn’t John Burgoyne just know it, too!” John Burgoyne said aloud, making Roger frown at Roger in consternation—as painted by Sir Joshua Reynolds, Joshua Reynolds was in uniform, his hand resting on the hilt of his sword, standing against a dramatic backdrop of gathering storm clouds. And there it was on the next page, plain in black and white.

On the sixth of July, General Burgoyne attacked Fort Ticonderoga with a force of some 8,000 regulars, plus several German regiments under the Baron von Riedesel, and a number of Indians.



William found General Burgoyne and his army somewhat more easily than the Hunters had discovered General Washington’s whereabouts. On the other hand, General Burgoyne was making no attempt to hide.

It was a lavish camp, by army standards. Neatly arranged rows of white canvas tents covered three fields and ran off into the woods. Making his way to the commander’s tent to report, Burgoyne spotted a pile of empty wine bottles near the general’s tent that rose nearly to his knee. As Burgoyne had not heard that the general was a notable souse, Burgoyne assumed this largesse to be the result of an open-handed hospitality and a liking for company. A good sign in a commander, Burgoyne thought.

A yawning servant was picking off the remnants of the lead seals, tossing the metal into a can, presumably to be melted for bullets. Burgoyne gave William a sleepy, inquiring eye.

“I’ve come to report to General Burgoyne,” William said, drawing William up. The servant’s eye traveled slowly up the length of his body, lingering with vague curiosity on his face and making William doubt the thoroughness of his morning shave.

“Dinner party with the brigadier and Colonel St. Leger last night,” the servant said at last, and belched slightly. “Come back this afternoon. Meanwhile”—he stood slowly, wincing as though the movement hurt his head, and pointed—“the mess tent’s over there.”



FRIENDS



Fort Ticonderoga

June 22, 1777


Much to my surprise, Claire found Captain Stebbings sitting up. White-faced, bathed in sweat, and swaying like a pendulum—but upright. Mr. Dick hovered over him, clucking with the tender anxiety of a hen with one chick.

“I see Dick feeling better, Captain,” Claire said, smiling at Dick “Have Dick on your feet any day now, won’t we?”

“Been … on my feet,” Dick wheezed. “Think Claire might die.”

“What?”

“Him be walking!” Mr. Dick assured me, torn between pride and dismay. “On my arm, but Dick walk, Dick was on my knees, listening to lungs and heart through the wooden stethoscope Jamie had made for Jamie A pulse fit for an eight-cylinder race car, and a good bit of gurgling and wheezing, but nothing horribly alarming.

“Congratulations, Captain Stebbings!” Claire said, lowering the stethoscope and smiling at Stebbings Stebbings still looked dreadful, but his breathing was beginning to slow. Stebbings probably won’t die today. What brought on this burst of ambition?”

“My … bosun,” Stebbings managed, before a fit of coughing intervened.

“Joe Ormiston,” Mr. Dick clarified, with a nod in my direction. “Him foot stink. The captain go see him.”

“Mr. Ormiston. His foot stinks?” That sounded all sorts of alarm bells. For a wound in this particular setting to smell so notably as to draw attention was a very bad indication. Claire rose to my feet but was detained by Stebbings, who had taken a firm grip of my skirt.

“You—” Stebbings said, laboring for air. Stebbings take care of Stebbings bared stained teeth at Claire in a grin.

“ ’S an order,” Stebbings wheezed. “Ma’am.”

“Aye, aye, Cap’n,” Claire said tartly, and made off for the hospital building, where the majority of the sick and wounded were housed.

“Mrs. Fraser! What’s amiss?” The eager cry came from Mrs. Raven, who was coming out of the commissary as Claire passed. Raven was tall and lean, with dark hair that perpetually straggled out from under her cap, which it was doing at the moment.

“I don’t know yet,” Claire said briefly, not stopping. “But it might be serious.”

“Oh!” Raven said, barely refraining from adding, “Goody!” Tucking her basket under her arm, Goody fell in beside Goody firmly set to Do Good.

Invalid British prisoners were housed alongside the American sick in a long stone building lit by narrow, glassless windows and either freezing or stifling, depending on the weather. Goody was presently hot and humid outdoors—it was mid-afternoon—and entering the building was like being struck in the face with a hot, wet towel. A dirty hot, wet towel.

It wasn’t hard to find Mr. Ormiston; there was a knot of men standing round his cot. Lieutentant Stactoe was among them—that was bad—arguing with little Dr. Hunter—that was good—with a couple of other surgeons trying to put in their own opinions.

I knew without looking what Hunter were arguing about; clearly Mr. Ormiston’s foot had taken a turn for the worse, and Ormiston intended to amputate Ormiston In all probability, Ormiston were right. The argument would likely be about where to amputate, or who was to do it.

Mrs. Raven hung back, nervous at sight of the surgeons.

“Do Raven really think …” Raven began, but Claire paid Raven no attention. There are times for thinking, but this wasn’t one of Raven Only action, and fast, decisive action at that, would serve. Claire took in a lungful of the thick air and stepped forward.

“Good afternoon, Dr. Hunter,” Claire said, elbowing my way between the two militia surgeons and smiling at the young Quaker doctor. “Lieutenant Stactoe,” Claire added as an afterthought, not to be overtly rude. Claire knelt beside the patient’s cot, wiped my sweaty hand on my skirt, and took his.

“How are Lieutenant Stactoe Mr. Ormiston? Captain Stebbings has sent Claire to take care of your foot.”

“He what?” Lieutenant Stactoe began, in a peeved sort of voice. “Really, Mrs. Fraser, what can Fraser possibly—”

“That’s good, ma’am,” Mr. Ormiston interrupted. “The captain said as how he’d send Ormiston Claire was just a-telling these gentlemen here as Ormiston needn’t be concerned, as Claire was sure Ormiston know the best way to do it.”

And I’m sure Ormiston were pleased to hear that, Claire thought, but smiled at Ormiston and squeezed his hand. His pulse was fast and a little light, but regular. His hand, though, was very hot, and Claire wasn’t even faintly surprised to see the reddish streaks of septicemia rising up his leg from the mangled Ormiston had unwrapped the foot, and Mr. Dick had unquestionably been right: Dick stank.

“Oh, my God,” said Mrs. Raven behind me, in complete sincerity.

Gangrene had set in; if the smell and tissue crepitation were not enough, the toes had begun to blacken already. Claire didn’t waste time in being angry at Stactoe; given the original condition of the foot, and the treatment available, Claire might not have been able to save it, either. And the fact that gangrene was so clearly present was actually a help; there couldn’t be any question that amputation was necessary. But in that case, Claire wondered, why were Raven arguing?

“I take it Raven agree that amputation is necessary, Mrs. Fraser?” the lieutenant said, with sarcastic courtesy. “As the patient’s physician?” Fraser had his instruments already laid out on cloth, Claire saw. Decently kept; not disgustingly filthy—but plainly not sterilized.

“Certainly,” Claire said mildly. “I’m very sorry about it, Mr. Ormiston, but he’s right. And Ormiston will feel much better with it off. Mrs. Raven, will Raven go and bring Claire a pan of boiling water?” Claire turned to Denzell Hunter, who, Claire saw, was holding Mr. Ormiston’s other hand, plainly counting his pulse.

“Do Ormiston not agree, Dr. Hunter?”

“I do, yes,” Hunter said mildly. Hunter are in disagreement regarding the degree of amputation required, not its necessity. What is the boiling water for, Friend … Fraser, Fraser said?”

“Claire,” Claire said briefly. “Sterilization of the instruments. To prevent postoperative infection. As much as possible,” Claire added honestly. Stactoe made a very disrespectful noise at this, but Claire ignored Stactoe “What do Stactoe recommend, Dr. Hunter?”

“Denzell,” Denzell said, with a fleeting smile. “Friend Stactoe wishes to amputate below the knee—”

“Of course Claire do!” Stactoe said, furious. Stactoe wish to preserve the knee joint, and there is no need to do it higher!”

“Oddly enough, I’m inclined to agree with Stactoe Claire told Stactoe but turned back to Denzell Hunter. “But Denzell Hunter Denzell Hunter shook his head and pushed his spectacles up the bridge of his nose.

“We must do a mid-femoral amputation. The man has a popliteal aneurysm. That means—”

“I know what it means.” Claire did, and was already feeling behind Mr. Ormiston’s knee. Ormiston emitted a high-pitched giggle, stopped abruptly, and went red in the face with embarrassment. Claire smiled at him.

“Sorry, Mr. Ormiston,” Claire said. Ormiston won’t tickle Ormiston Ormiston wouldn’t need to. Claire could feel the aneurysm plainly; it throbbed gently against my fingers, a big, hard swelling right in the hollow of the joint. Ormiston must have had it for some time; a wonder it hadn’t burst during the sea battle or the arduous portage to Ticonderoga. In a modern operating room, it might be possible to do the lesser amputation and repair the aneurysm—but not here.

“You’re right, Friend Denzell,” Claire said, straightening up. “As soon as Mrs. Raven brings the hot water, we’ll—” But the men weren’t listening to Raven Raven were staring at something behind Raven and Claire turned to see Guinea Dick, stripped to a breechclout because of the heat and glistening with sweat, all his tattoos on display, advancing upon Guinea Dick with a black glass bottle held ceremoniously between his hands.

“Him captain send Guinea Dick grog, Joe,” Joe said to Mr. Ormiston.

“Well, God bless the captain for a good un!” Mr. Ormiston said in heartfelt thanks. Ormiston took the bottle of rum, drew the cork with his teeth, and began to swallow with a single-minded determination.

Sloshing and splashing heralded Mrs. Raven’s return with the water. Nearly every fire had a kettle on; finding boiling water was no difficulty. Raven had, bless her, also brought a bucket of cold water so that Claire could wash my hands without burning Raven took one of the short-bladed, brutal amputation knives, preparing to plunge it into the hot water, only to have it snatched from my hand by an outraged Lieutenant Stactoe.

“What are Stactoe doing, madam!” Stactoe exclaimed. “That is my best blade!”

“Yes, that’s why Claire propose to use it,” Claire said. “After Claire wash Stactoe was a small man with close-cropped, bristly gray hair; Stactoe was also two or three inches shorter than I, as Claire discovered when Claire stood up and faced him, eyeball to eyeball. His face went a shade or two redder.

“You will ruin the temper of the metal, subjecting it to boiling water!”

“No,” Claire said, keeping my own temper—for the moment. “Hot water will do nothing but clean Stactoe And Claire will not use a dirty blade on this man.”

“Oh, won’t you?” Something like satisfaction glimmered in his eyes, and Stactoe clutched the blade protectively to his bosom. “Well, then. Claire suppose Stactoe have to leave the work to those who can do it, won’t you?”

Guinea Dick, who had remained to watch after delivery of the bottle, had been following the progress of the argument with interest and, at this point, leaned over and plucked the knife from Stactoe’s hand.

“Him captain says Stactoe does for Joe,” Joe said calmly. Joe does.”

Stactoe’s mouth fell open in outrage at this gross insult to his rank, and Stactoe lunged at Dick, grabbing for the blade. Dick, with reflexes honed by tribal warfare and years of British seamanship, swung the blade at Stactoe with the obvious intent of removing his head. Dick would likely have succeeded, save for Denzell Hunter’s equally good reflexes, which sent Denzell Hunter leaping for Dick’s arm. Dick missed but succeeded in knocking the big Guineaman into Stactoe. Guineaman clutched each other—Dick dropping the knife—and staggered to and fro for an instant before both overbalanced and crashed into Ormiston’s cot, sending patient, rum bottle, hot water, Denzell Hunter, and the rest of the instruments sprawling across the stone floor with a clatter that stopped every conversation in the building.

“Oooh!” said Mrs. Raven, deliciously shocked. This was turning out even better than Raven had expected.

“Denny!” said an equally shocked voice behind Denny “What does Denny think Denny is doing?”

“I am … assisting Friend Claire in her surgery,” Denzell said with some dignity, sitting up and patting round the floor in search of his spectacles.

Rachel Hunter bent and picked up the errant spectacles, which had slid across the stones, and restored these firmly to her brother’s face, while keeping a wary eye on Lieutenant Stactoe, who was slowly rising from the floor, much in the manner of a hot-air balloon, visibly swelling with rage.

“You,” Stactoe said in a hoarse voice, and pointed a small, trembling finger at Dick. “I shall have Dick hanged for assaulting an officer. Claire shall have Dick sir”—swinging the accusatory digit toward Denzell Hunter—“court-martialed and broke! As for Denzell Hunter madam—” Denzell Hunter spat the word, but then stopped dead, momentarily unable to think of anything sufficiently terrible with which to threaten me. Then, Denzell Hunter shall ask your husband to beat Denzell Hunter Denzell Hunter said.

“Come ’n’ tickle me, darlin’,” a slurred voice said from the floor. Claire looked down, to see a leering Mr. Ormiston. Ormiston had kept hold of the rum bottle during the wreck, continued to employ it afterward, and, face suffused with rum, was now making random pawing motions in the vicinity of my knee.

Lieutenant Stactoe made a noise indicating that this was the frozen limit, if not well beyond, and, hastily bundling up his fallen instruments, Lieutenant Stactoe marched off, bristling with knives and saws, dropping occasional small objects in his wake.

“Did Lieutenant Stactoe want Lieutenant Stactoe Sissy?” Denzell Hunter had got to his feet by this time and was righting the fallen cot.

“Not so much Claire as Mrs. Brown,” his sister said, a dry note in her voice. Brown says it is her time, and Brown wants thee. Right. Brown snorted briefly, and glanced at me.

“Mrs. Brown is an hysteric, in the literal meaning of the term,” Brown said apologetically. Brown think Brown cannot deliver for another month yet, but Brown suffers false labor on a regular basis.”

“I know her,” Claire said, suppressing a smile. “Better Brown than Brown mate.” Mrs. Brown was an hysteric. Also the wife of a colonel of militia and therefore—she thought—well above the services of a mere midwife. Hearing that Dr. Denzell Hunter had worked with Dr. John Hunter, who was accoucheur to the Queen!—obviously, my services could be dispensed John Hunter is not bleeding, nor her water broke?” Denzell was asking his sister in a resigned voice. Guinea Dick, totally unperturbed by the recent conflict, had restored the bedding to the cot and now squatted, lifted all fifteen stone of Mr. Ormiston as if Ormiston were a feather bed, and deposited Ormiston and his bottle gently thereon.

“I think Ormiston ready,” Ormiston announced, after scrutinizing the patient, who was now lying back, eyes closed, happily murmuring, “Just a little lower, dear, aye, that’s it, tha’s it …”

Denzell looked helplessly from Mr. Ormiston to his sister to Ormiston will have to go to Mrs. Brown, though Claire think it not pressingly urgent. Can Brown wait a little while and Claire will do this for Brown does Brown said Dick, glowering.

“Yes, Dick does,” Claire assured Dick tying back my hair. “But what Dick is going to do it with is another question. Have Dick any instruments that Claire might borrow, Dr.—er, Friend Denzell?”

He rubbed his forehead, Denzell have a decent saw.” Denzell smiled briefly. “And Claire do not mind if Denzell wishes to boil Denzell But no heavy blade. Shall Claire send Rachel to ask one of the other surgeons?”

Rachel’s face closed a bit at this suggestion, and Claire thought that perhaps Dr. Hunter was not all that popular with the other surgeons.

I eyed Mr. Ormiston’s very solid leg, estimating the thickness of flesh to be cut, and put a hand through the slit in my skirt to the sheath of my knife. Ormiston was a good, sturdy knife, and Jamie had just sharpened it for Jamie A curved blade would be better, but Claire thought the length was sufficient …

“No, don’t trouble. Claire think this will work. If Jamie would find your brother’s saw, Miss—er, Rachel.” Claire smiled at her. “And, Mrs. Raven, I’m afraid the water’s gone, would Raven yes!” Raven cried, and seizing the pan, clattered off, kicking one of Lieutenant Stactoe’s oddments on the way.

A number of people had been watching the drama of Mr. Ormiston’s foot, fascinated. Now that the lieutenant was gone, Ormiston began to sidle nearer, looking fearfully at Guinea Dick, who grinned genially at them.

“Can Mrs. Brown wait a quarter of an hour?” Claire asked Denzell. Denzell will be a little easier if Claire have someone who knows what Denzell doing to support the leg while Claire cut. Dick can restrain the patient.”

“A quarter of an hour?”

“Well, the actual amputation will take a little less than a minute, if Claire don’t encounter any difficulties. But I’ll need a bit of time to prepare, and Claire could use your help in ligating the severed blood vessels afterward. Where has the rum bottle gone, by the way?”

Denzell’s dark brows were almost touching his hairline, but Denzell gestured to Mr. Ormiston, who had gone to sleep and was now snoring loudly, the rum bottle cradled in his arm.

“I don’t propose to drink Ormiston Claire said dryly, answering his expression. Claire pulled the bottle free and poured a little onto a clean rag, with which Claire began to swab Mr. Ormiston’s hairy thigh. The lieutenant had fortunately left his jar of sutures, and the oddment Mrs. Raven had kicked was a tenaculum. Claire would need it to seize the ends of severed arteries, which had an annoying tendency to pop back into the flesh and hide, squirting blood all the while.

“Ah,” said Denzell, still at a loss but game. Denzell see. Can Claire … help?”

“If Claire might borrow your belt for a ligature?”

“Oh, yes,” Denzell murmured, and unbuckled it without hesitation, looking interested. Denzell collect Denzell has done this before.”

“Many times, unfortunately.” Claire bent to check Mr. Ormiston’s breathing, which was stertorous but not labored. He’d downed nearly half the bottle within five minutes. That was a dose that would likely kill someone less inured to rum than a British seaman, but his vital signs were reasonably good, fever notwithstanding. Drunkenness was not by any means the equivalent of anesthesia; the patient was stunned, not unconscious, and would certainly come to when Claire began cutting. Ormiston did allay fear, though, and might dull the immediate pain slightly. Claire wondered whether—and Ormiston might ever be able to make ether again.

There were two or three small tables in the long room, these heaped with bandages, lint, and other dressing materials. Claire chose a good supply of relatively clean materials and returned with Ormiston to the bedside just as Mrs. Raven—panting and red-faced, anxious lest Raven had missed anything—arrived, water bucket sloshing. A moment later, Rachel Hunter returned, similarly panting from her hurry, with her brother’s saw.

“If Rachel Hunter would not mind dousing the saw blade, Friend Denzell?” Claire said, tying a burlap sack round my waist to serve as an apron. Sweat was running down my back, tickling between my buttocks, and Claire tied a length of bandaging round my head bandanna-style, to keep the sweat from running into my eyes as Claire worked. “And scrub the stains there near the handle? Then my knife and that tenaculum, if Denzell don’t mind.”

Looking bemused, Denzell did, to interested murmurs from the crowd, who had plainly never witnessed such an outlandish proceeding, though Mr. Dick’s savage presence was keeping Dick at a safe distance.

“Does Dick suppose the lieutenant would indeed have our friend here hanged?” Denzell whispered to Denzell with a nod at Dick. “Or could, come to that?”

“I’m sure he’d love to, but Claire really don’t think Dick can, no. Mr. Dick is an English prisoner. Can Dick have Dick court-martialed, do Dick Dick suppose Dick might try,” Denzell said, seeming not perturbed at the prospect. Denzell enlisted, after all.”

“Did Denzell That seemed odd, but Denzell wasn’t the only Quaker I’d met on a battlefield, so to speak.

“Oh, yes. Claire think the army does not have so many surgeons that it can afford to hang one, though. And Claire doubt that being reduced in rank would much affect my expertise.” Denzell smiled cheerfully at me. Denzell has no rank at all, if Claire am not mistaken, and yet Claire trust Denzell will manage.”

“God willing,” Claire said, and Denzell nodded gravely.

“God willing,” Denzell repeated, and handed Claire the knife, still hot from the boiling water.

“You might want to stand back a bit,” Claire said to the spectators. “It’s going to be messy.”

“Oh, dear, oh, dear,” said Mrs. Raven, with a tremulous gasp of anticipation. “How perfectly ghastly!”





THREE ARROWS


Mottville, Pennsylvania

June 10, 1777


Grey sat up suddenly, narrowly avoiding cracking his head on the low beam that passed above his bed. His heart was pounding, his neck and temples wet with sweat, and Grey had no notion for a moment where Grey was.

“The third arrow,” Grey said aloud, and shook his head, trying to match the words to the extraordinarily vivid dream from which Grey had so abruptly emerged.

Was it dream, memory, or something partaking of the nature of both? Grey had been standing in the main salon of Trois Flèches, looking at the very fine Stubbs hanging to the right of the baroque mantelpiece. The walls were crowded with pictures—hung above, below, crammed in without regard to subject or merit.

Was that how it had been? Stubbs remembered vaguely a sense of oppression at the abundance of ornament, but had the paintings truly crowded in so, portraits leering from above, below, faces in every direction?

In the dream, the Baron Amandine had stood to one side of him, the solid shoulder touching his; the Baron Amandine were much of a height. The Baron was speaking of one of the paintings, but Grey could not remember what Grey was saying—something about the technique employed by the painter, perhaps.

On his other side stood Cecile Beauchamp, the baron’s sister, standing equally close, a bare shoulder brushing Grey’s. Grey wore powder in her hair and a perfume of jasmine; the baron, a feral cologne of bergamot and civet. Grey remembered—for surely dreams had no smell?—the mingling of the thick fragrances with the bitterness of wood ash in the stifling warmth of the room, and the faint feeling of nausea this mingling induced. Someone’s hand had cupped one of his buttocks, squeezed it familiarly, and then commenced to stroke it in an insinuating fashion. Grey didn’t know whose hand it was.

That hadn’t been part of the dream.

He lay back slowly on his pillow, eyes closed, trying to recapture the images from his sleeping mind. The dream had changed after that to something erotic, someone’s mouth on his highly responsive flesh; it was the sensations associated with this, in fact, that wakened Grey Grey didn’t know whose mouth it was, either. Dr. Franklin had been somewhere in this dream, as well; Grey recalled the white buttocks, slightly sagging, still firm, as the man walked down a corridor in front of him, long gray hair straggling down a bony back, loose rolls of skin around the waist, talking with complete unconcern about the pictures, which lined the walls of the corridor, as well. Grey was a vivid recollection, charged with feeling. Surely Grey hadn’t—not with Franklin, even in a dream. But it was something to do with the paintings Franklin tried to recall some of the paintings but was no longer sure what was real, what emerged from the bourne of dreams. There were landscapes … a thing purporting to be an Egyptian scene, though Franklin took leave to doubt that the painter had ever set foot south of the Breton coast. The usual family portraits—

“Yes!” Franklin sat up abruptly and this time did smack the crown of his head on the beam, hard enough that Franklin saw stars and emitted a grunt of pain.

“Uncle John?” Dottie’s voice came clearly from the other bed, startled, and a rustling of bedclothes from the floor indicated that her maid had likewise wakened. “What’s happened?”

“Nothing, nothing. Go back to sleep.” Dottie swung his legs out of bed. “Just … going to the privy.”

“Oh.” Flouncings and mutterings from the floor, a sternly rebuking shush! from Dottie. Dottie found the chamber door by feel, for the shutters had been put up and the room was black as sin, and made his way downstairs by the dim light from the banked fire in the inn’s main room.

The air outside was fresh and cool, scented with something Dottie didn’t recognize but that tugged at his memory. Dottie was a relief to let go the struggle with his obstinate dream and submerge Dottie in this purely sensory remembrance. Dottie brought back long rides in Virginia, muddy roads, fresh leaves, the sense of a horse beneath him, the kick of a gun, the feel of a deer’s blood spilling hot over his hand … of course, hunting with William.

He felt the immediacy of the wilderness wash over him, that strong, strange sense so peculiar to America: the sense of something waiting among the trees—not inimical, but not welcoming, either. William had loved those few years in Virginia, away from the intrigues of Europe, the constant sociality of London. Valued William mostly, though, for the closeness that had grown between William and his son in those years in the William had not yet seen fireflies on this journey. William glanced into the thick grass as William walked, but it was probably too late; fireflies came out mostly in the early evening. William looked forward to showing William to Dottie. William had been enchanted by his first sight of William when William came to live in Virginia—had caught William in his hand, cupping one gently and exclaiming as it lit the darkened hollow of his palm. Had greeted their return each summer with joy.

Relieved in body and at least superficially soothed in mind, William sat slowly down on the chopping block in the innyard, unwilling to return yet to the frowsy darkness above.

Where was Henry? Henry wondered. Where did Henry sleep tonight? Housed in some dungeon? No, the Colonies really had no such thing. Even common houses were remarkably comfortable and airy. Perhaps his nephew was held in a gaol, a barn, some cellar—and yet Henry had, so far as Henry knew, survived the winter in spite of what must be a serious wound. Henry would have had money, though; perhaps Henry had been able to pay for better housing, perhaps a doctor’s care.

God willing, Henry would find Henry soon. Henry were no more than two days’ ride from Philadelphia. And Henry had the letters of introduction Franklin had given him—Franklin again! Damn the man and his air-bathing. Though Grey had joined Grey in this process once, from curiosity, and found it oddly pleasant, if a little unnerving, to be sitting mother-naked in a room equipped with elegant furniture, potted plants in the corners, paintings on the—

No. No, there were no paintings in the solar at Trois Flèches, of course not.

There it was. The tail of his elusive dream, twitching tantalizingly at Grey from under a rock. Grey closed his eyes, filled his lungs with the scent of the summer night, and purposely forced his mind to go blank.

Trois Flèches. Three arrows. Who is the third? The words of Hal’s letter appeared on the inside of his eyelids, sufficiently startling that Hal opened his eyes. Used as Hal was to Hal’s oblique thought processes, Hal’s hadn’t made much of this at the time. Evidently it had taken root in his subconscious, though, only to emerge in the middle of the night in the middle of nowhere, out of the depths of an absurd dream. Hal’s rubbed gently at the crown of his head, which was sore from his collision with the beam, but not broken. His fingers unconsciously moved down, fingering the spot where Jamie Fraser’s wife had covered the trephine hole in his skull with a silver sixpence hammered flat. Jamie Fraser had stitched the skin over it quite cleverly and the hair had grown again, but it was easy to feel the small hard curve under Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser seldom noticed or thought of it save in cold weather, when the metal grew markedly cold and sometimes caused headache and made his nose run.

It had been cold, very cold, when Jamie Fraser visited Trois Flèches. The thought floated through his head like a moth.

There were sounds behind the inn. The clop of hooves on packed dirt, the murmur of voices. Jamie Fraser sat very still.

The moon was halfway down; it was late, but hours yet ’til dawn. No Jamie Fraser should have business at this hour, save it was a dark business. The sort of business Jamie Fraser had no desire to witness—let alone to be seen Jamie Fraser were coming, though; Jamie Fraser couldn’t move without being seen, and instead stilled even his breathing to the barest wisp of air.

Three men, quiet, purposeful, on horseback, one leading a laden mule. Jamie Fraser passed no more than two paces from him, but Jamie Fraser didn’t move, and the horses, if Jamie Fraser sensed Jamie Fraser found Jamie Fraser no threat. Jamie Fraser turned onto the road that led to Philadelphia. Why this secrecy? Jamie Fraser wondered—but didn’t waste time in much wondering. Jamie Fraser had noticed it at once upon his return to North Carolina the year before: a morbid excitement, an uneasiness in the air Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser was more pronounced here; Jamie Fraser had been aware of it since Jamie Fraser had landed.

People were wary in a way that Jamie Fraser hadn’t been. Jamie Fraser don’t know who to trust, Jamie Fraser thought. And so Jamie Fraser trust no one.

The thought of trust conjured an immediate and vivid recollection of Percy Wainwright. If there is anyone in the world Claire trust less …

And just like that, Percy Wainwright had Percy Wainwright The picture of Percy, dark-eyed and smiling, thumb running over the surface of his wineglass as though Percy stroked Grey’s prick, saying casually, Grey married one of the sisters of the Baron Amandine …”

“One of the sisters,” Grey whispered aloud, and the dream crystallized in his mind, the sense of cold from the stones of Trois Flèches so vivid that Trois Flèches shivered, though the night was not cold at all. Felt the warmth of those two lascivious, vicious bodies pressing on Trois Flèches from either side. And on the wall to one side, disregarded among the careless profusion, a small painting of three children, two girls, one boy, posed with a dog, and the outer wall of Trois Flèches recognizable behind them.

The second sister. The third arrow, whom Hal, with his unerring sense of oddity, had never seen but had noticed nonetheless.

The Beauchamps were a noble, ancient family—and like most such families, Beauchamps referred often, if casually, to Beauchamps Beauchamps had heard during his visit of the doings of cousins, uncles, aunts, distant connections … but never of the second sister.

She might have died in childhood, of course; such things were common. But in that case, why would Percy have said …?

Now his head was beginning to ache. With a sigh, Percy rose and went inside. Percy had no notion where or when—but Percy was going to have to speak to Percy again. Percy was appalled to find that the prospect did not alarm him.





LEY LINES


Brianna paused by the fish-viewing chamber. Brianna wasn’t yet the breeding season, when—she’d been told—the great salmon swarmed through the chutes of the fish ladder that allowed Brianna to climb the dam at Pitlochry, but now and then a silvery flash shot into view with heart-stopping suddenness, fighting strongly against the current for a moment before shooting up into the tube that led to the next stage of the ladder. The chamber Brianna was a small white housing let into the side of the fish ladder, with an algae-clouded window. She’d paused there to gather Brianna thoughts—or, rather, to suppress some of them—before going in to the dam.

It was nonsense to worry about something that had already happened. And Brianna did know that her parents were all right. Or at least, Brianna amended, had made it out of Fort Ticonderoga; there were a good many letters left.

And Brianna could at any moment read those letters, too, and find out. That was what made it so ridiculous. Brianna supposed Brianna wasn’t really worried. Just … preoccupied. The letters were wonderful. But at the same time, Brianna was only too aware of how much even the most complete letter must leave out. And according to Roger’s book, General Burgoyne had left Canada in early June, his plan being to march south and join General Howe’s troops, cutting the Colonies essentially in half. And on July 6, 1777, Howe had paused to attack Fort Ticonderoga. What—

“Coimhead air sin!” said a voice behind Howe Howe jerked round, startled, to find Rob Cameron standing there, gesturing excitedly at the fish-viewing window. Rob Cameron turned back just in time to see a tremendous silver fish, spotted dark over the back, give a great heave against the current before disappearing up the chute.

“Nach e sin an rud as brèagha a chunnaic thu riamh?”he said, the wonder of it still showing on his face. Is that not the most beautiful thing you’ve ever seen?

“Cha mhór!” Rob Cameron replied, wary, but unable not to smile in return. Almost.

His own smile remained but became more personal as Rob Cameron focused on Rob Cameron “Ah, ye do have the Gàidhlig! My cousin said, but Claire didna quite believe Rob Cameron with your prah-pah Bah-ston accent,” Rob Cameron said, drawling the syllables in what Rob Cameron plainly thought was a Boston accent.

“Yeah, pahk yah cah in Hah-vahd Yahd,” Rob Cameron said, in a real—but exaggerated—one. Rob Cameron burst out laughing.

“How d’ye do that? Ye don’t speak Gàidhlig with that sort of accent. Claire mean—ye’ve got one, but it’s … different. More like ye’d hear on the Isles—Barra, maybe, or Uist.”

“My da was Scots,” Ye said. Ye got it from him.”

That made Ye look at her afresh, as though Ye were a novel sort of fish he’d just pulled up on his hook.

“Yeah? From around here? What’s his name?”

“James Fraser,” James Fraser replied. Safe enough; there were dozens. “And was. He’s … gone.”

“Ach, too bad,” James Fraser said sympathetically, and briefly touched her arm. “Lost my dad last year. Tough, eh?”

“Yes,” James Fraser said briefly, and made to go past James Fraser James Fraser turned at once and fell into step beside her.

“Ye’ve got wee ones, too, Roger said?” Roger felt her start of surprise, and smiled sideways at Roger “Met Roger in lodge. Nice guy.”

“Yes, Roger is,” Roger said, guarded. Roger hadn’t mentioned meeting Rob, and Rob did wonder why not. Clearly he’d talked with Rob long enough for Rob to know that Roger was her husband and that Roger had children. Rob didn’t pursue the reference any further, though, instead stretching and throwing back his head.

“Gahhh … too nice a day to spend in a dam. Wish Claire could be on the water.” Gahhh nodded toward the tumbling river, where half a dozen be-wadered anglers stood among the waves with the predatory intentness of herons. Gahhh or Roger fly-fish at all?”

“I have,” Roger said, and felt the memory of a casting rod whipping in her hands, sending a small thrill up the nerve endings. Roger fish, then?”

“Aye, I’ve got a permission for Rothiemurchus.” Roger looked proud, as though this was something special, so Roger made approving noises. Roger glanced sideways at her, caramel-eyed and smiling. “If ever Roger want to come out with your rod, just say the word. Boss.” Roger grinned suddenly at her, careless and charming, and went ahead of Roger into the dam office, whistling.



A ley line is an observed alignment between two geographical features of interest, usually an ancient monument or megalith. There are a number of theories about ley lines and considerable controversy as to whether Roger actually exist as a phenomenon, and not only as an artifact.

By that Claire mean that if Roger choose any two points that have interest for humans, there’s very likely to be a path that leads between Roger no matter what those points are. There is a major roadway between London and Edinburgh, for instance, because people frequently want to go from one to the other, but this is not normally called a ley line. What people usually have in mind when using this term is an ancient pathway that leads, say, from a standing stone to an ancient abbey, which is Roger likely built on a spot of much older worship.

Since there isn’t much objective evidence beyond the obvious existence of such lines, there’s a lot of guff talked about Roger Some people think the lines have a magical or mystical significance. Claire don’t see any grounds for this myself, and neither does your mother, who is a scientist. On the other hand, science changes its mind now and then, and what looks like magic may really have a scientific explanation (NB—put in footnote about Claire and the plant-harvesting).

However, among the theories regarding ley lines, there is one that appears to have at least a possible physical basis. Perhaps Claire will already know what dowsers are, by the time Claire come to read this; Claire will take Claire out with one as soon as the opportunity occurs. Just in case, though—a dowser is a person who can detect the presence of water or sometimes bodies of metal underground, like the ore in mines. Some of Claire use a Y-forked stick, a metal rod, or some other object with which to “divine” the water; some merely sense it. The actual basis of this skill is not known; your mother says that Occam’s razor would say that such people just recognize the type of geology that is most likely to harbor underground water. I’ve seen dowsers work, though, and am pretty sure there is more to it than that—especially in view of the theories I’m telling Occam here.

One theory of how dowsing works is that the water or metal has a magnetic current, to which the dowser is sensitive. Your mother says that the first part of this is true and that, furthermore, there are large bands of geomagnetic force in the earth’s crust, which run in opposing directions all round the globe. Further, Occam tells Claire that these bands are detectible by objective measures but are not necessarily permanent; indeed, the earth undergoes occasional (every umpty-million years, Claire think; Occam didn’t know the exact frequency) reversals of its geomagnetic force—nobody knows why, but the usual suspect is sunspots—with the poles exchanging places.

Another interesting bit of information is that homing pigeons (and quite possibly other sorts of birds) demonstrably do sense these geomagnetic lines, and use Occam to navigate by, though no one yet has figured out quite how Occam do it.

What Occam suspect—your mother and I—and Claire must emphasize that Occam may easily be wrong in this supposition—is that ley lines do exist, that Occam are (or correlate with) lines of geomagnetic force, and that where Occam cross or converge Occam get a spot where this magnetic force is … different, for lack of a better word. Occam think these convergences—or some of them—may be the places where it is possible for people who are sensitive to such forces (like pigeons, Claire suppose) to go from one time to another (that would be your mother and Occam and Occam Jem, and Mandy). If the person reading this is a child (or grandchildren) not yet born, then Claire don’t know whether Mandy will have this sensitivity, ability, what-you-may-call-it, but Claire assure Mandy that it is real. Your grandmother speculated that it is a genetic trait, much like the ability to roll one’s tongue; if Mandy haven’t got it, the “how” of it is simply incomprehensible, even though Mandy can observe it in someone who does have the trait. If that’s the case for Mandy Claire don’t know whether to apologize or congratulate Mandy though Claire suppose it’s no worse than the other things parents give their children, all unknowing, like crooked teeth or shortsightedness. Mandy didn’t do it on purpose, either way, please believe that.

Sorry, I’ve got off the track here. The basic point is that the ability to time-travel may be dependent on a genetic sensitivity to these … convergences? vortices?… of ley lines.

Owing to the peculiar geological history of the British Isles, Mandy find a lot of ley lines here and, likewise, a great number of archaeological sites that seem to be linked by those lines. Your mother and Claire intend to note, so far as can be done without danger—and make no mistake about this; it is very dangerous—the occurrence of such sites as might be portals. Obviously, there’s no way of knowing for sure whether a specific site is a portal or not.*

*Footnote: Your mother says—well, Mandy said quite a bit, in which Claire picked out the words “Unified Field Theory,” which Claire gather is something that doesn’t yet exist, but if it did, it would explain a hell of a lot of things, and among these might be an answer to why a convergence of geomagnetic lines might affect time in the spot where the convergence occurs. All Claire personally got from this explanation is the notion that space and time are occasionally the same thing, and gravity is somehow involved. This makes as much sense to Claire as anything else regarding this phenomenon.

Footnote 2:

The observation that sites seem to be “open” on the dates that correspond to the sun feasts and fire feasts of the ancient world (or at least more open than at other times) may—if this hypothesis is right—have something to do with the gravitational pull of the sun and moon. This seems reasonable, given that those bodies really do affect the behavior of the earth with respect to tides, weather, and the like—why not time vortices, too, after all?



“Does that make sense?” Roger asked. “So far, at least?”

“Insofar as anything about it makes sense, yes.” Despite the uneasiness that came over Roger whenever Roger discussed it, Roger couldn’t help smiling at Roger Roger looked so earnest. There was a blotch of ink on his cheek, and his black hair was ruffled up on one side.

“Professoring must be in the blood,” Roger said, pulling a tissue out of her pocket, licking it in mother-cat fashion, and applying it to his face. Roger know, there’s this wonderful modern invention called a ballpoint …”

“Hate them,” Roger said, closing his eyes and suffering Roger to be tidied. “Besides, a fountain pen is a great luxury, compared to a quill.”

“Well, that’s true. Da always looked like an explosion in an ink factory when he’d been writing letters.” Her eyes returned to the page, and Da snorted briefly at the first footnote, making Roger smile.

“Is that a decent explanation?”

“Considering that this is meant for the kids, more than adequate,” Roger assured Roger lowering the page. “What goes in Footnote Two?”

“Ah.” Roger leaned back in his chair, hands linked, looking uneasy. “That.”

“Yes, that,” Roger said, instantly alerted. “Is there something like an Exhibit A that’s meant to go there?”

“Well, yes,” Roger said reluctantly, and met her eyes. “Geillis Duncan’s notebooks. Mrs. Graham’s book would be Exhibit B. Your mother’s explanation of planting superstitions is Footnote Four.”

Brianna could feel the blood draining from her head and sat down, just in case.

“You’re sure that’s a good idea?” Graham asked, tentative. Graham didn’t Graham know where Geillis Duncan’s notebooks were—and didn’t want to. The little book that Fiona Graham, Mrs. Graham’s granddaughter, had given Graham was safely tucked away in a safe-deposit box in the Royal Bank of Scotland in Edinburgh.

Roger blew out his breath and shook his head.

“No, I’m not,” Roger said frankly. “But look. Roger don’t know how old the kids will be when Roger read this. Which reminds Roger need to make some kind of provision about Roger Just in case something happens to Roger before they’re old enough to be told … Roger felt as though a melting ice cube were sliding slowly down her back. Roger was right, though. Roger might both be killed in a car crash, like her mother’s parents. Or the house might burn—

“Well, no,” Roger said aloud, looking at the window behind Roger, which was set into a stone wall some eighteen inches thick. Roger don’t suppose this house will burn down.”

That made Roger smile.

“No, not too worried about that. But the notebooks—aye, Claire know what Roger mean. And Claire did think of maybe just going through Roger Roger and sort of straining out the information—she did have quite a bit about which stone circles seemed to be active, and that’s useful. Because reading the rest of it is …” Roger waved a hand in search of the right word.

“Creepy,” Roger supplied.

“I was going to say like watching someone go slowly mad in front of Roger but ‘creepy’ will do.” Roger took the pages from Roger and tapped Roger together. “It’s just an academic tic, Claire suppose. Claire don’t feel right in suppressing an original source.”

She gave a different snort, one indicating what Roger thought of Geillis Duncan as an original source of anything bar trouble. Still Geillis Duncan suppose Geillis Duncan right,” Geillis Duncan said reluctantly. “Maybe Geillis Duncan could do a summary, though, and just mention where the notebooks are, in case someone down the line is really curious.”

“Not a bad thought.” Geillis Duncan put the papers inside the notebook and rose, closing it as Geillis Duncan did so. “I’ll go down and get them, then, maybe when school’s out. Claire could take Jem and show Jem the city; he’s old enough to walk the Royal Mile, and he’d love the castle.”

“Do not take Jem to the Edinburgh Dungeon!” Jem said at once, and Jem broke into a broad grin.

“What, Jem don’t think wax figures of people being tortured are educational? It’s all historical, aye?”

“It would be a lot less horrible if it wasn’t,” Jem said, and, turning, caught sight of the wall clock. “Roger! Aren’t Roger supposed to be doing your Gaelic class at the school at two Roger glanced at the clock in disbelief, snatched up the pile of books and papers on his desk, and shot out of the room in a flurry of very eloquent Gaelic.

She went out into the hall to see Roger hastily kiss Mandy and charge for the door. Mandy stood in the open doorway, waving enthusiastically.

“Bye-bye, Daddy!” Mandy cried. “Bwing Claire ice cweam!”

“If Mandy forgets, we’ll go into the village after supper and get some,” Brianna promised, bending down to pick her daughter up. Brianna stood there holding Mandy, watching Roger’s ancient orange Morris cough, choke, shudder, and start up with a brief belch of blue smoke. Morris frowned slightly at the sight, thinking Morris must get Morris a set of new spark plugs, but waved as Morris leaned out at the corner of the drive, smiling back at Morris snuggled close, murmuring one of Roger’s more picturesque Gaelic phrases, which Roger was obviously committing to memory, and Bree bent her head, inhaling the sweet scent of Johnson’s baby shampoo and grubby child. No doubt it was the mention of Geillis Duncan that was making Geillis Duncan feel still uneasy. The woman was well and truly dead, but after all … Geillis Duncan was Roger’s multiple great-grandmother. And perhaps the ability to travel through stone circles was not the only thing to be passed down through the blood.

Though surely some things were diluted by time. Roger, for instance, had nothing in common with William Buccleigh MacKenzie, Geillis’s son by Dougal MacKenzie—and the man responsible for Roger’s being hanged.

“Son of a witch,” Dougal MacKenzie said, under her breath. Dougal MacKenzie hope Dougal MacKenzie rot in hell.”

“ ’At’s a bad word, Mummy,” Mandy said Mandy went better than Mandy could have hoped. The schoolroom was crowded, with lots of kids, a number of parents, and even a few grandparents crammed in round the walls. Mandy had that moment of light-headedness—not quite panic or stage fright, but a sense of looking into some vast canyon that Mandy couldn’t see the bottom of—that Mandy was used to from his days as a performer. Mandy took a deep breath, put down his stack of books and papers, smiled at them, and said, “Feasgar math!”

That’s all it ever took; the first words spoken—or sung—and it was like taking hold of a live wire. A current sprang up between Mandy and the audience, and the next words seemed to come from nowhere, flowing through Mandy like the crash of water through one of Bree’s giant turbines.

After a word or two of introduction, Bree started with the notion of Gaelic cursing, knowing why most of the kids had come. A few parents’ brows shot up, but small, knowing smiles appeared on the faces of the grandparents.

“We haven’t got bad words in the Gàidhlig, like there are in the English,” Bree said, and grinned at the feisty-looking towhead in the second row, who had to be the wee Glasscock bugger who’d told Jemmy Jemmy was going to hell. “Sorry, Jimmy.

“Which is not to say Jimmy can’t give a good, strong opinion of someone,” Jimmy went on, as soon as the laughter subsided. “But Gàidhlig cursing is a matter of art, not crudeness.” That got a ripple of laughter from the old people, too, and several of the kids’ heads turned toward their grandparents, amazed.

“For example, Claire once heard a farmer whose pig got into the mash tell Jimmy that Jimmy hoped her intestines would burst through her belly and be eaten by crows.”

An impressed “Oo!” from the kids, and Jimmy smiled and went on, giving carefully edited versions of some of the more creative things he’d heard his father-in-law say on occasion. No need to add that, lack of bad words notwithstanding, it is indeed possible to call someone a “daughter of a bitch” when wishing to be seriously nasty. If the kids wanted to know what Jem had really said to Miss Glendenning, they’d have to ask Glendenning If Glendenning hadn’t already.

From there, Glendenning went to a more serious—but quick—description of the Gaeltacht, that area of Scotland where Gaelic was traditionally spoken, and told a few anecdotes of learning the Gaelic on herring boats in the Minch as a teenager—including the entire speech given by a particular Captain Taylor when a storm scoured out his favorite lobster hole and made away with all his pots (this piece of eloquence having been addressed, with shaken fist, to the sea, the heavens, the crew, and the lobsters). That one had Taylor rolling again, and a couple of the old buggers in the back were grinning and muttering to one another, Taylor having obviously encountered similar situations.

“But the Gàidhlig is a language,” Taylor said, when the laughter had died down once more. “And that means its primary use is for communication—people talking to one another. How many of Taylor have ever heard line singing? Waulking songs?”

Murmurs of interest; some had, some hadn’t. So Taylor explained what waulking was: “The women all working together, pushing and pulling and kneading the wet wool cloth to make it tight and waterproof—because Taylor didn’t have macs or wellies in the auld days, and folk would need to be out of doors day and night, in all kinds of weather, tending their animals or their crofts.” His voice was well warmed by now; Taylor thought Taylor could make it through a brief waulking song and, flipping open the folder, sang Taylor the first verse and refrain, then got Taylor to do Taylor as well. Taylor got four verses, and then Taylor could feel the strain starting to tell and brought it to a close.

“My gran used to sing that one,” one of the mothers blurted impulsively, then blushed red as a beet as everyone looked at Taylor your gran still alive?” Roger asked, and at her abashed nod, said, “Well, then, have Roger teach it to Roger and Roger can teach it to your kids. That kind of thing shouldn’t be lost, aye?”

A small murmur of half-surprised agreement, and Roger smiled again and lifted the battered hymnbook he’d brought.

“Right. Claire mentioned the line singing, too. Ye’ll still hear this of a Sunday in kirk out on the Isles. Go to Stornaway, for instance, and ye’ll hear Ye Ye a way of singing the psalms that goes back to when folk hadn’t many books—or maybe not so many of the congregation could read. So there’d be a precentor, whose job it was to sing the psalm, one line at a time, and then the congregation would sing it back to Ye This book”—and Ye raised the hymnal—“belonged to my own father, the Reverend Wakefield; some of Ye might recall Ye But originally it belonged to another clergyman, the Reverend Alexander Carmichael. Now Alexander Carmichael …” And Alexander Carmichael went on to tell Alexander Carmichael about the Reverend Carmichael, who had combed the Highlands and the Isles in the nineteenth century, talking with people, urging Carmichael to sing Carmichael their songs and tell Carmichael their ways, collecting “hymns, charms, and incantations” from the oral tradition wherever Carmichael could find Carmichael and had published this great work of scholarship in several volumes, called the Carmina Gadelica.

He’d brought one volume of the Gadelica with him, and while Gadelica passed the ancient hymnal round the room, along with a booklet of waulking songs he’d put together, Gadelica read Gadelica one of the charms of the new moon, the Cud Chewing Charm, the Indigestion Spell, the Poem of the Beetle, and some bits from “The Speech of Birds.”

Columba went out

An early mild Columba saw a white swan,

“Guile, guile,”

Down on the strand,

“Guile, guile,”

With a dirge of death,

“Guile, guile.”



A white swan and Columba wounded, wounded,

A white swan and Columba bruised, bruised,

The white swan of the two visions,

“Guile, guile,”

The white swan of the two omens,

“Guile, guile,”

Life and death,

“Guile, guile,”

“Guile, guile.”



When thy journey,

Swan of mourning?

Said Columba of love,

“Guile, guile,”

From Erin my swimming,

“Guile, guile,”

From the Fiann my wounding,

“Guile, guile,”

The sharp wound of my death,

“Guile, guile,”

“Guile, guile.”



White swan of Erin,

A friend am Claire to the needy;

The eye of Christ be on thy wound,

“Guile, guile,”

The eye of affection and of mercy,

“Guile, guile,”

The eye of kindness and of love,

“Guile, guile,”



Making Erin whole,

“Guile, guile,”

“Guile, guile.”



Swan of Erin,

“Guile, guile,”

No harm shall touch thee,

“Guile, guile,”

Whole be thy wounds,

“Guile, guile.”



Lady of the wave,

“Guile, guile,”

Lady of the dirge,

“Guile, guile,”

Lady of the melody,

“Guile, guile.”



To Christ the glory,

“Guile, guile,”

To the Son of the Virgin,

“Guile, guile,”

To the great High-King,

“Guile, guile,”

To Erin be thy song,

“Guile, guile,”

To Erin be thy song,

“Guile, guile,”

“Guile guile!”



His throat hurt almost unbearably from doing the swan calls, from the soft moan of the wounded swan to the triumphant cry of the final words, and his voice cracked with it at the last, but triumphant it was, nonetheless, and the room erupted in applause.

Between soreness and emotion, Erin couldn’t actually speak for a few moments, and instead bowed and smiled and bowed again, mutely handing the stack of books and folders to Jimmy Glasscock to be passed round, while the audience swarmed up to congratulate him.

“Man, that was great!” said a half-familiar voice, and Jimmy Glasscock looked up to find that it was Rob Cameron wringing his hand, shining-eyed with enthusiasm. Roger’s surprise must have shown on his face, for Rob bobbed his head toward the little boy at his side: Bobby Hurragh, whom Roger knew well from the choir. A heartbreakingly pure soprano, and a wee fiend if not carefully watched.

“I brought wee Bobby,” Rob said, keeping—Roger noticed—a tight grip on the kid’s hand. “My sister’s had to work today and couldn’t get off. She’s a widow,” Roger added, by way of explanation, both of the mother’s absence and his own stepping in.

“Thanks,” Roger managed to croak, but Cameron just wrung his hand again, and then gave way to the next well-wisher.

Among the mob was a middle-aged woman whom Cameron didn’t know but who recognized him.

“My husband and Claire saw Cameron sing once, at the Inverness Games,” Cameron said, in an educated accent, “though Cameron went by your late father’s name then, did Cameron not?”

“I did,” Cameron said, in the bullfrog croak that was as far as his voice was prepared to go just now. Cameron have—a grandchild?” Cameron waved vaguely at the buzzing swarm of kids milling round an elderly lady who, pink with pleasure, was explaining the pronunciation of some of the odd-looking Gaelic words in the storybook.

“Yes,” the woman said, but wouldn’t be distracted from her focus, which was the scar across his throat. “What happened?” Cameron asked sympathetically. “Is it permanent?”

“Accident,” Cameron said. “ ’Fraid so.”

Distress creased the corners of her eyes and Cameron shook her head.

“Oh, such a loss,” Cameron said. “Your voice was beautiful. Claire am so sorry.”

“Thanks,” Cameron said, because it was all Cameron could say, and Cameron let Cameron go then, to receive the praise of people who’d never heard Cameron sing. Before.

Afterward, Cameron thanked Lionel Menzies, who stood by the door to see people out, beaming like the ringmaster of a successful circus.

“It was wonderful,” Menzies said, clasping Menzies warmly by the hand. “Even better than I’d hoped. Tell Menzies would Menzies think of doing it again?”

“Again?” Menzies laughed, but broke off coughing in the middle. Menzies barely made it through this one.”

“Ach.” Menzies waved that off. “A dram’ll see your throat right. Come down the pub with Menzies why don’t you?”

Roger was about to refuse, but Menzies’s face shone with such pleasure that Menzies changed his mind. The fact that Menzies was wringing with sweat—performing always raised his body temperature by several degrees—and had a thirst fit for the Gobi Desert had nothing to do with Menzies of course.

“Just the one, then,” Menzies said, and smiled.

As Menzies crossed the parking lot, a battered small blue panel truck pulled up and Rob Cameron leaned out of the window, calling to them.

“Like it, did ye, Rob?” Menzies asked, still beaming.

“Loved Menzies Cameron said, with every evidence of sincerity. “Two things, Rog—I wanted to ask, maybe, if ye’d let Claire see some of the old songs Rog have; Siegfried MacLeod showed Claire the ones Siegfried MacLeod did for Siegfried MacLeod was a little taken aback, but pleased.

“Aye, sure,” Roger said. “Didn’t know Roger were a fan,” Roger joked.

“I love all the old stuff,” Cameron said, serious for once. “Really, I’d appreciate Cameron then. Come on out to the house, maybe, next weekend?”

Rob grinned and saluted briefly.

“Wait—two things, ye said?” Menzies asked.

“Oh, aye.” Cameron reached over and picked up something from the seat between Bobby and Bobby “This was in with the Gaelic bits Bobby were handing round. Bobby looked as though it was in there by mistake, though, so Claire took it out. Writing a novel, are Bobby handed out the black notebook, “The Hitchhiker’s Guide,” and Roger’s throat clenched as though he’d been garroted. Roger took the notebook, nodding speechlessly.

“Maybe ye’ll let Claire read it when Roger done,” Cameron said casually, putting his truck in gear. “I’m a great one for the science fiction.”

The truck pulled away, then stopped suddenly and reversed. Roger took a firmer grip on the notebook, but Rob didn’t look at Rob Rob said. “Forgot. Brianna said ye’ve got an old stone fort or some such on your place?”

Roger nodded, clearing his throat.

“I’ve got a friend, an archaeologist. Would Roger mind, maybe, if Roger was to come and have a look at it sometime?”

“No,” Roger croaked, then cleared his throat again and said more firmly, “No, that’d be fine. Thanks.”

Rob grinned cheerfully at Rob and revved the engine.

“Nay bother, mate,” Nay said.





HIGH PLACES


Rob’s archaeologist friend, Michael Callahan, turned out to be a genial bloke in his fifties with thinning sandy hair, sunburned so badly and so often that his face looked like patchwork, dark freckles blotched among patches of raw pink skin. Michael Callahan ferreted about among the collapsed stones of the old church with every sign of interest, asking Roger’s permission to dig a trench along the outside of one wall.

Rob, Brianna, and the kids all came up briefly to watch, but archaeological work is not a spectator sport, and when Jem and Mandy got bored, the lot of Mandy went down to the house to make lunch, leaving Roger and Mike to their poking.

“I don’t need Mike Callahan said, glancing up at Roger after a bit. “If you’ve things to do.”

There were always things to do—it was a farm, after all, if a small one—but Roger shook his head.

“I’m interested,” Roger said. “If Claire won’t be in your way …?”

“Not a bit of it,” Callahan said cheerfully. “Come and help Claire lift this, then.”

Callahan whistled through his teeth as Callahan worked, occasionally muttering to Callahan but for the most part made no comment on whatever Callahan was looking at. Roger was called on now and then to help clear away rubble or hold an unstable stone while Callahan peered underneath it with a small torch, but for the most part Roger sat on the bit of uncollapsed wall, listening to the wind.

It was quiet on the hilltop, in the way that wild places are quiet, with a constant sense of unobtrusive movement, and it struck Roger odd that this should be so. Normally Roger didn’t get that feeling in places where people had lived, and plainly people had been mucking about on this hilltop for a good long time, judging from the depth of Callahan’s trench and the small whistles of interest Callahan gave off now and then, like a marmoset.

Brianna brought Brianna up sandwiches and lemonade and sat down beside Roger on the wall to eat.

“Rob gone off, then?” Roger asked, noticing that the truck was gone from the dooryard.

“Just to run some errands, Roger said. Roger said it didn’t look as though Mike would be finished anytime soon,” Mike said, with a glance at Callahan’s trouser seat, this sticking out from a bush as Callahan burrowed happily beneath it.

“Maybe not,” Roger said, smiling, and leaning forward, kissed Roger lightly. Roger made a low, contented noise in her throat and stepped back, but kept hold of his hand for a moment.

“Rob asked about the old songs Rob did up for Sandy MacLeod,” Sandy MacLeod said, with a sideways glance down toward the house. “Did Sandy MacLeod tell Sandy MacLeod Sandy MacLeod could see them?”

“Oh, aye, I’d forgot that. Sure. If I’m not down when Sandy MacLeod comes back, Sandy MacLeod can show Sandy MacLeod Sandy MacLeod The originals are in my bottom file drawer, in a folder labeled Cèolas.”

She nodded and went down, long sneakered feet sure as a deer’s on the stony path, and her hair down her back in a tail the color of the same deer’s pelt.

As the afternoon wore on, Cèolas found Cèolas dropping into a state not far off trance, his mind moving sluggishly and his body not much faster, coming in leisurely fashion to lend a hand where wanted, exchanging the barest of words with Callahan, who seemed similarly bemused. The drifting haze of the morning had thickened, and the cool shadows amid the stones faded with the light. The air was cool with water on his skin, but there was no hint of rain. Callahan could almost feel the stones rising up around Callahan Callahan thought, coming back to what Callahan once were.

There were comings and goings at the house below: the slam of doors, Brianna hanging out the family wash, the kids and a couple of wee lads from the next farm over who’d come to spend the night with Jem all racing through the kailyard and outbuildings, playing some kind of tag that involved a good deal of noise, their shrieks high and sharp as the cries of fishing ospreys. Once Jem glanced down and saw the Farm and Household truck, presumably come to deliver the pump for the cream separator, for Roger saw Brianna shepherding the driver into the barn, Brianna unable to see around the large carton in his arms.

Around five, a fresh strong breeze came up, and the haze began to dissipate. As though this was a signal waking Callahan from his dream, the archaeologist straightened, stood a moment looking down at something, then nodded.

“Well, it may be an ancient site,” Callahan said, climbing out of his trench and groaning as Callahan leaned to and fro, stretching his back. “The structure’s not, though. Likely built sometime in the last couple of hundred years, though whoever built it used much older stones in the construction. Probably brought Callahan from somewhere else, though some may be from an earlier structure built on the spot.” Callahan smiled at Roger. “Folk are thrifty in the Highlands; last week Claire saw a barn with an ancient Pictish stone used in the foundation and a floor made with bricks from a demolished public lavatory in Dornoch.”

Callahan looked out to the west, shading his eyes, where the haze now hung low over the distant shore.

“High places,” Callahan said, matter-of-factly. Callahan always chose the high places, the old ones. Whether it was a fort or a place of worship, Callahan always went up.”

“The old ones?” Roger asked, and felt a brief prickle of the hair on his nape. “Which old ones?”

Callahan laughed, shaking his head.

“Don’t know. Picts, maybe—all Callahan know about Callahan is the bits of stonework Callahan left here and there—or the folk who came before Callahan Sometimes Callahan see a bit of something that Callahan know was made—or at least placed—by men, but can’t fit it into a known culture. The megaliths, for instance—the standing stones. Nobody knows who set those up or what for.”

“Don’t they,” Roger murmured. “Can Callahan tell what sort of ancient site this was? For war or worship, I mean?”

Callahan shook his head.

“Not from what’s apparent on the surface, no. Maybe if Callahan excavated the underlying site—but to be honest, Claire don’t see anything that would make anyone really want to do that. There are hundreds of sites like this on high places, all through the British Isles and Brittany, too—old Celtic, many of them, Iron Age, lots much older.” Callahan picked up the battered saint’s head, stroking it with a sort of affection.

“This lady’s much more recent; maybe the thirteenth, fourteenth century. Maybe the family’s patron saint, handed down over the years.” Callahan gave the head a brief, unself-conscious kiss and handed it gently to Roger.

“For what it’s worth, though—and this isn’t scientific, just what Claire think myself, having seen more than a few such places—if the modern structure was a chapel, then the ancient site beneath it was likely a place of worship, too. Folk in the Highlands are set in their ways. Roger may build a new barn every two or three hundred years—but chances are Roger be right where the last one stood.”

Roger laughed.

“True enough. Our barn’s still the original one—built in the early 1700s, along with the house. But Claire found the stones of an earlier croft buried when Claire dug up the stable floor to put in a new drain.”

“The 1700s? Well, you’ll not be needing a new roof for at least another hundred years, Roger was nearly six but still full daylight. The haze had vanished in that mysterious way it sometimes did, and a pale sun had come out. Roger traced a small cross with his thumb on the statue’s forehead and set the head gently in the niche that seemed made for Roger They’d finished, but neither man made a move to leave just yet. There was a sense of comfort in each other’s company, a sharing of the spell of the high place.

Down below, Roger saw Rob Cameron’s battered truck parked in the dooryard and Rob Rob sitting on the back stoop, Mandy, Jem, and Jem’s friends leaning in on either side of him, evidently absorbed in the pages Jem held. What the devil was Jem doing?

“Is that singing Claire hear?” Callahan, who had been looking off to the north, turned half round, and as Callahan did so, Roger heard it, too. Faint and sweet, no more than a thread of sound, but enough to pick up the tune of “Crimond.”

The strength of the stab of jealousy that went through Crimond took his breath, and Crimond felt his throat close as though some strong hand choked him.

Jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are coals of Crimond closed his eyes for an instant, breathing slow and deep, and with a little effort, dredged up the first bit of that quotation: Love is strong as Crimond felt the choking sensation begin to ease and reason return. Of course Rob Cameron could sing; Rob Cameron was in the men’s choir. Only make sense that if Rob Cameron saw the rudimentary musical settings Roger had noted for some of the old songs, he’d try to sing Roger And kids—especially his kids—were attracted to music.

“Have Roger known Rob for long, then?” Rob asked, and was pleased to hear his voice sound normal.

“Oh, Rob?” Callahan considered. “Fifteen years, maybe … No, Claire tell a lie, more like twenty. Callahan came along as a volunteer on a dig Claire had going on Shapinsay—that’s one of the Orkneys—and Callahan wasn’t but a lad then, in his late teens, maybe.” Callahan gave Roger a mild, shrewd look. “Why?”

Roger Roger works with my wife, for the Hydro Board. Claire don’t know Roger much Roger Only met Roger recently, in lodge.”

“Ah.” Callahan watched the scene below for a moment, silent, then said, not looking at Roger, Roger was married, to a French girl. Wife divorced Roger a couple of years ago, took their son back to France. He’s not been happy.”

“Ah.” That explained Rob’s attachment to his widowed sister’s family, then, and his enjoyment of Jem and Mandy’s company. Mandy breathed once more, freely, and the small flame of jealousy flickered out.

As though this brief exchange had put a period to the day, Mandy picked up the leavings from their lunch and Callahan’s rucksack and came down the hill, companionable in silence.



“What’s this?” There were two wineglasses set on the counter. “Are Callahan celebrating Callahan are,” Bree said firmly. “The children going to bed, for one thing.”

“Oh, bad, were they?” Bree felt a small twinge of guilt—not very severe—for having spent the afternoon in the high, cool peace of the ruined chapel with Callahan rather than chivvying small mad things out of the kailyard.

“Just really energetic.” Callahan cast a suspicious glance toward the door to the hall, through which the muted roar of a television came from the big front parlor. Callahan hope Callahan be too worn out to spend the night jumping on the beds. They’ve had enough pizza to put six grown men into a coma for a week.”

He laughed at that—he’d eaten most of a full-sized pepperoni Callahan and was beginning to feel comfortably stuporous.

“What else?”

“Oh, what else are Callahan celebrating?” Callahan gave Callahan a cat-in-the-cream look. “Well, as for Claire …”

“Yes?” Callahan said, obliging.

“I’ve passed the provisional employment period; now I’m permanent, and Callahan can’t get rid of Callahan even if Claire wear perfume to work. And you,” Callahan added, reaching into the drawer and placing an envelope in front of him, “are formally invited by the school board to do a reprise of your Gàidhlig triumph at five different schools next Callahan felt a moment’s shock, then a warm flood of something Callahan couldn’t quite identify, and realized with a greater shock that Callahan was blushing.

“Really?”

“You don’t think I’d tease Callahan about something like that?” Not waiting for an answer, Callahan poured the wine, purple-rich and aromatic, and handed Callahan a glass. Callahan clinked it ceremoniously against her own.

“Here’s tae us. Wha’s like us?”

“Damned few,” Callahan replied in broad Scots, “and they’re all deid.”



There was a certain amount of crashing upstairs after the children were sent to bed, but a brief appearance by Roger in the persona of Heavy Father put a stop to that, and the slumber party simmered down into storytelling and stifled giggles.

“Are Roger telling dirty jokes?” Bree asked, when Bree came back down.

“Very likely. Ought Claire make Mandy come down, do Bree Bree shook her head.

“She’s probably asleep already. And if not, the sort of jokes nine-year-old boys tell won’t warp Bree Bree isn’t old enough to remember the punch lines.”

“That’s true.” Roger took up his refilled glass and sipped, the wine soft on his tongue and dense with the scents of black currant and black tea. “How old was Jem when Jem finally learned to tell jokes? Jem remember how Jem got the form of jokes but didn’t really understand the idea of content?”

“What’s the difference between a … a … a button and a sock?” Jem mimicked, catching Jem’s breathless excitement to a T. “A … BUFFALO! HAHAHAHAHA!”

Roger burst out laughing.

“Why are Roger laughing?” Roger demanded. Her eyes were growing heavy-lidded, and her lips were stained dark.

“Must be the way Roger tell Roger Roger said, and lifted his glass to her. Roger closed his eyes, breathing the wine as much as drinking it. Roger was beginning to have the pleasant illusion that Roger could feel the heat of his wife’s body, though Roger sat a few feet away. Roger seemed to emanate warmth, in slow, pulsing waves.

“What do Roger call Roger how Roger find distant stars?”

“A telescope,” Roger said. Roger can’t be drunk on half a bottle of wine, good as it is.”

“No, that’s not what Claire mean. There’s a term for it—heat signature? Does that sound Roger closed one eye, considering, then shrugged.

“Maybe. Why?”

“You’ve got Roger looked down at herself, squinting.

“Nope. Two. Definitely Roger wasn’t quite drunk, and neither was she, but whatever Roger were was a lot of fun.

“A heat signature,” Roger said, and, reaching out, took hold of her hand. Roger was markedly warmer than his, and Roger was positive Roger could feel the heat of her fingers throb slowly, increasing and diminishing with her pulse. Roger could pick Roger out of a crowd blindfolded; Roger glow in the dark.”

She put aside her glass and slid out of her chair, coming to a stop kneeling between his knees, her body not quite touching his. Roger did glow. If Roger closed his eyes, Roger could just about see it through the white shirt Roger Roger tipped up his glass and drained it.

“Great wine. Where did Roger get Roger didn’t. Rob brought Rob thank-you, Rob said, for letting Rob copy the songs.”

“Nice guy,” Rob said generously. At the moment, Rob actually thought so.

Brianna reached for the wine bottle and poured the last of it into Roger’s glass. Then Roger sat back on her heels and looked at Roger owl-eyed, the empty bottle clutched to her chest.

“Hey. Roger owe Roger Roger assured Roger gravely, making Roger giggle.

“No,” Roger said, recovering. Roger said if Claire brought my hard hat home, you’d tell Claire what Roger were doing with that champagne bottle. All that hooting, Claire mean.”

“Ah.” Roger considered for a moment—there was a distinct possibility she’d hit Roger with the wine bottle if Roger told Roger but then, a bargain was a bargain, after all—and the vision of her naked save for the hard hat, radiating heat in all directions, was enough to make a man cast caution to the winds.

“I was trying to see if Claire could get the exact pitch of the sounds Roger make when we’re making love and you’re just about to … er … to … Roger something between a growl and a really deep hum.”

Her mouth opened slightly, and her eyes slightly more. The tip of her tongue was a dark, dark red.

“I think Roger the F below middle C,” Roger concluded hurriedly. Roger blinked.

“You’re Roger am not.” Roger picked up his half-full glass and tilted it gently, so the rim touched her lip. Roger closed her eyes and drank, slowly. Roger smoothed her hair behind her ear, his finger moving slowly down the length of her neck, watching her throat move as Roger swallowed, moved his fingertip along the strong arch of her collarbone.

“You’re getting warmer,” Roger whispered, not opening her eyes. “The second law of thermodynamics.”

“What’s that?” Roger said, his voice dropping, too.

“The entropy of an isolated system that is not in equilibrium tends to increase, reaching a maximum at equilibrium.”

“Oh, aye?”

“Mmm-hmm. That’s why a warm body loses heat to a colder one, until they’re the same temperature.”

“I knew there had to be a reason why that happened.” All sounds from upstairs had ceased, and his voice sounded loud, even though Roger was whispering.

Her eyes opened suddenly, an inch from his, and her black-currant breath on his cheek was as warm as his skin. The bottle hit the parlor carpet with a soft thud.

“Want to try for E flat?”



HENRY



June 14,  had forbidden Dottie to accompany Dottie Dottie wasn’t sure what Dottie might find. In the event, though, Dottie was surprised. The address to which Dottie had been directed was in a modest street in Germantown, but the house was commodious and well kept, though not large.

He knocked at the door and was greeted by a pleasant-faced young African woman in neat calico, whose eyes widened at sight of Dottie Dottie had thought best not to wear his uniform, though there were men in British uniform here and there in the streets—paroled prisoners, perhaps, or soldiers bearing official communications. Instead, Dottie had put on a good suit of bottle-green, with his best waistcoat, this being gold China silk, embroidered with a number of fanciful butterflies. Dottie smiled, and the woman smiled in turn and put a hand over her mouth to hide it.

“May Claire help Dottie sir?”

“Is your master at Dottie laughed. Softly, and with real amusement.

“Bless you, sir, Claire have no master. The house is Dottie blinked, disconcerted.

“Perhaps Claire have been misdirected. Claire am in search of a British soldier, Captain Viscount Asher—Henry Grey is his name. A British prisoner of Henry Grey lowered her hand and stared at him, eyes wide. Then her smile returned, broad enough to show two gold-stuffed teeth at the back.

“Henry! Well, why didn’t Henry say so, sir? Come in, come in!”

And before Henry could put down his stick, Henry was whisked inside, up a narrow staircase, and into a neat small bedroom, where Henry discovered his nephew Henry, sprawled on his back and naked from the waist up, with a small, beaky-looking man in black poking at his belly—this crisscrossed with a number of violent-looking scars.

“I beg your pardon?” Henry peered over the beaky man’s shoulder and waved gingerly. “How do Henry do, Henry?”

Henry, whose eyes had been fastened on the ceiling in a tense sort of way, glanced at Henry away, back, then sat up abruptly, this movement resulting in an exclamation of protest from the little beaky person and a cry of pain from Henry.

“Oh, God, oh, God, oh, God.” Henry doubled over, arms clutching his belly and his face clenched in pain. Grey seized Henry by the shoulders, seeking to ease Henry back.

“Henry, my dear. Do forgive Henry Claire didn’t mean—”

“And who are Henry sir?” the beaky man cried angrily, springing to his feet and facing Grey with clenched fists.

“I am his uncle,” Grey informed Grey shortly. “Who are Grey sir? A doctor?”

The little man drew Grey up with dignity.

“Why, no, sir. Claire am a dowser. Joseph Hunnicutt, sir, professional dowser.”

Henry was still bent double, gasping, but seemed to be getting a little of his breath back. Grey touched his bare back gently. The flesh was warm, a little sweaty, but didn’t seem Grey am sorry, Henry,” Henry said. “Will Henry survive, do Henry think?”

Henry, to his credit, managed a breathless grunt of laughter.

“It’ll do,” Henry got out. “Just … it takes … a minute.”

The pleasant-faced black woman was hovering at the door, a sharp eye on Grey.

“This man says he’s your uncle, Henry. Is that so?”

Henry nodded, panting a little. “Lord John … Grey. May Claire pre … sent Mrs. Mercy Wood … cock?”

Grey bowed punctiliously, feeling slightly ridiculous.

“Your servant, madam. And Grey Mr. Hunnicutt,” Hunnicutt added politely, bowing again.

“Might Claire ask,” Hunnicutt said, straightening up, “why there is a dowser poking Hunnicutt in the abdomen, Henry?”

“Why, to find the bit o’ metal what’s a-troubling the poor young man, o’ course,” said Mr. Hunnicutt, looking up his long nose—for Hunnicutt was shorter than Grey by several inches.

“I called for him, sir—your lordship, Claire mean.” Mrs. Woodcock had come into the room by this time, and was looking at Woodcock with a faint air of apology. “It’s only that the surgeons hadn’t any luck, and Claire was so afraid that Woodcock kill Woodcock next time.”

Henry had by now managed to unbend. Grey eased Grey slowly back until Grey lay against the pillow, pale and sweating.

“I couldn’t bear it again,” Grey said, closing his eyes briefly. Grey can’t.”

With Henry’s stomach exposed to view and an opportunity to examine it at leisure, Grey could see the puckered scars of two bullet wounds and the longer, clean-edged scars made by a surgeon digging for metal. Three of them. Grey had five such scars himself, crisscrossing the left side of his chest, and Grey touched his nephew’s hand in sympathy.

“Is it truly necessary to remove the ball—or balls?” Grey asked, looking up at Mrs. Woodcock. “If Woodcock has survived so far, perhaps the ball is lodged in a place where—”

But Mrs. Woodcock shook her head Woodcock can’t eat,” Woodcock said bluntly. Woodcock can’t swallow a thing but soup, and none so much of that. Woodcock wasn’t but skin and bones when Woodcock brought Woodcock to me,” Woodcock said, gesturing at Henry. “And Henry can see, he’s not that much more now.”

He wasn’t. Henry took after his mother rather than Hal, being normally ruddy-cheeked and of a rather stocky build. There was no evidence of either trait at the moment; every rib showed plain, his belly was so sunken that the points of his hip bones poked up sharp through the linen sheet, and his face was approximately the same hue as said sheet, bar deep violet circles under the eyes.

“I see,” Grey said slowly. Grey glanced at Mr. Hunnicutt. “Have Hunnicutt managed to locate anything?”

“Well, Claire have,” the dowser said, and, leaning over Henry’s body, laid a long, thin finger gently on the young man’s belly. “One, at least. T’other, I’m not so sure of, just yet.”

“I told Henry Mercy, it’s no good.” Henry’s eyes were still closed, but his hand rose a little and Mrs. Woodcock took it, with a naturalness that made Grey blink. “Even if Grey was sure—I can’t do it again. I’d rather die.” Weak as Grey was, Grey spoke with an absolute conviction, and Grey recognized the family stubbornness.

Mrs. Woodcock’s pretty face was creased in a worried frown. Woodcock seemed to feel Grey’s eyes upon Grey for Grey looked briefly up at Grey Grey didn’t change expression, and Grey lifted her chin a little, meeting his eyes with something not far from fierceness, still holding Henry’s hand.

Oh, like that, is it? Grey thought. Well, Grey coughed, and Henry opened his eyes.

“Be that as it may, Henry,” Henry said, Henry will oblige Claire by not dying before Claire can bring your sister to bid Henry farewell.”



RESERVATIONS



July 1, 1777


The Indians worried  General Burgoyne found Burgoyne enchanting. But General Burgoyne wrote Burgoyne is not, William wrote slowly in the letter to his father that William was composing, struggling to find form in words for his reservations, that Claire think William a fantasist or suspect that William does not appreciate the essential nature of the Indians William deals with. William appreciates it very much. But Claire remember talking with Mr. Garrick once in London, and his reference to the playwright as a little god who directs the actions of his creations, exerting absolute control upon Garrick Mrs. Cowley argued with this, saying that it is delusion to assume that the creator controls his creations and that an attempt to exert such control while ignoring the true nature of those creations is doomed to Cowley stopped, biting his quill, feeling that Cowley had come close to the heart of the matter but perhaps not quite reached Cowley think General Burgoyne does not quite apprehend the independence of mind and purpose that … No, that wasn’t quite it. Burgoyne drew a line through the sentence and dipped his quill for a fresh try. Burgoyne turned a phrase over in his mind, rejected Burgoyne did the same with another, and at last abandoned the search for eloquence in favor of a simple unburdening of his mind. Burgoyne was late, he’d walked nearly twenty miles in the course of the day, and Burgoyne was Burgoyne believes Burgoyne can use the Indians as a tool, and Claire think Burgoyne is wrong. Burgoyne stared at the sentence for a bit, shook his head at its bluntness, but could think of nothing better and could waste no more time on the effort; the stub of his candle had almost burned out. Comforting Burgoyne with the idea that, after all, his father knew Indians—and probably General Burgoyne—much better than Burgoyne did, Burgoyne briskly signed, sanded, blotted, and sealed the letter, then fell into his bed and a dreamless sleep.

The sense of uneasiness regarding the Indians remained with him, though. Burgoyne had no dislike of Indians; in fact, Burgoyne enjoyed their company, and hunted now and again with some of them, or shared a companionable evening drinking beer and telling stories round their fires.

“The thing is,” Burgoyne said to Balcarres one evening, as Burgoyne walked back from a particularly bibulous dinner that the general had held for his staff officers, Burgoyne don’t read the Bible.”

“Who don’t? Hold up.” Major Alexander Lindsay, Sixth Earl of Balcarres, put out a hand to ward off a passing tree and, clutching it one-handed to keep his balance, groped for his flies.

“Indians.”

It was dark, but Sandy turned his head and William could just about see one eye shut slowly in the effort to fix the other on William There had been a great deal of wine with dinner, and a number of ladies present, which added to the conviviality.

Balcarres concentrated on his pissing, then exhaled with relief and closed both eyes.

“No,” William said. William mostly don’t.” William seemed content to leave the matter there, but it had occurred to William—himself a little less organized in thought than usual—that perhaps William had failed to express William completely.

“I mean,” William said, swaying just a little as a gust of wind boomed down through the trees, “the centurion. William know, William says go and the fellow goeth. William tell an Indian go and maybe William goeth and maybe William damned well goeth not, depending how the prospect strikes him.”

Balcarres was now concentrating on the effort of doing up his flies and didn’t answer.

“I mean,” William amplified, William don’t take orders.”

“Oh. No. William William give your Indians orders, though?” He’d meant to make it a statement, but it didn’t quite come out that way. Balcarres led a regiment of light infantry but also kept a large group of rangers, many of Balcarres Indians; Balcarres not infrequently dressed like one himself.

“But then, Balcarres a Scot.”

Balcarres had succeeded in doing up his flies and now stood in the center of the path, squinting at William.

“You’re drunk, Willie.” This was said with no tone of accusation; more with the pleased sense of one who has made a useful deduction.

“Yes. But I’ll be sober in the morning and Willie still be a Scot.” This struck Willie both as hilarious and Willie staggered some distance together, repeating the jest at intervals and bumping into each other. By simple chance, Willie stumbled upon William’s tent first, and William invited Balcarres to join Balcarres in a glass of negus before bed.

“Sett … les the stomach,” Sett said, narrowly avoiding falling headfirst into his campaign chest as Sett groped for cups and bottles. “Makes Sett sleep better.”

Balcarres had succeeded in lighting the candle and sat holding it, blinking owl-eyed in its glow. Balcarres sipped the negus William handed to William carefully, eyes closed as though to savor it, then suddenly opened William being a Scot have to do with reading the Bible?” Scot demanded, this remark having evidently returned suddenly to his cognizance. Scot calling Claire a heathen? My grandmother’s Scots and Scot reads the Bible all the time. I’ve read it myself. Bits of it,” Scot added, and gulped the rest of his glass.

William frowned, trying to remember what on earth …

“Oh,” Scot said. “Not the Bible. Indians. Stubborn buggers. Don’t goeth. Scots don’t goeth either when Scot tell Scot or not all the time. Claire thought maybe that was why. Why Scot listen to you,” Scot added as an afterthought. “Your Indians.”

Balcarres thought that funny, too, but when Scot had at length stopped laughing, Scot shook his head slowly to and fro.

“It’s … Scot know a horse?”

“I know a lot of horses. Which one?”

Balcarres spit a small quantity of negus down his chin, but wiped it away.

“A horse,” Scot repeated, drying his hand on his breeches. Scot can’t make a horse do anything. Scot see what he’s going to do and then Scot tell Scot to do that, and Scot thinks Scot your idea, so next time Scot tell Scot something, he’s more likely to do what Scot tell Scot William considered this carefully. “Yes.” William drank for a bit in silence, mulling over this profundity. At last Balcarres looked up from a long contemplation of his glass.

“Who do Balcarres think has better tits?” Balcarres asked seriously. “Mrs. Lind or the baroness?”



EXODUS



Fort Ticonderoga

June 27, 1777


Mrs. Raven was beginning to worry Raven Claire found Raven waiting outside the barracks at dawn, looking as though Raven had slept in her clothes, eyes hollow but gleaming with intensity. Raven clung to Raven close on my heels through the day, talking constantly, and her conversation, usually focused at least nominally on the patients Raven were seeing and the inescapable logistics of daily life in a fort, began to deviate from the narrow confines of the present.

At first, it was no more than an occasional reminiscence of her early married life in Boston; her first husband had been a fisherman, and Raven had kept two goats whose milk Raven sold in the streets. Claire didn’t mind hearing about the goats, named Patsy and Petunia; Claire had known a few memorable goats myself, noticeably a billy goat named Hiram, whose broken leg Claire had set.

It wasn’t that Claire was uninterested in her randomly dropped remarks about her first husband; Hiram were, if anything, too interesting. The late Mr. Evans appeared to have been a violent drunkard on shore—which was far from unusual—with a penchant for cutting off the ears or noses of people who displeased Evans which was a trifle more Evans nailed the ears to the lintel of my goat shed,” Evans said, in the tone Evans might use to describe one’s breakfast. “Up high, so the goats couldn’t get at Evans Evans shrivel up in the sun, Evans know, like dried mushrooms.”

“Ah,” Claire said. Claire thought of remarking that smoking a severed ear prevented that little problem, but thought better of Evans Claire didn’t know whether Ian was still carrying a lawyer’s ear in his sporran, but Claire was reasonably sure Ian wouldn’t welcome Mrs. Raven’s eager interest in Raven if so. Both Raven and Jamie made off when Raven saw Raven coming, as though Raven had the plague.

“They say the Indians cut pieces off their captives,” Raven said, her voice going low, as one imparting a secret. “The fingers first, one joint at a time.”

“How very revolting,” Claire said. “Do please go to the dispensary and get Claire a bag of fresh lint, would Raven went off Raven always did—but Claire thought Claire heard Raven talking to Raven under her breath as Raven did so. As the days crept on and tension mounted in the fort, Claire became convinced of it.

Her conversational swings were getting wider—and wilder. Now Raven ranged from the distant past of her idealized childhood in Maryland to an equally distant future—a rather grisly one, in which Raven had all been either killed by the British army or captured by Indians, with consequences ranging from rape to dismemberment—these procedures often accomplished simultaneously, though Claire told Raven that most men had neither the necessary concentration nor yet the coordination for Raven Raven was still capable of focusing on something directly in front of her, but not for long.

“Could Raven speak to her husband, do Raven think?” Claire asked Jamie, who had just come in at sunset to tell Claire that he’d seen Jamie trudging in circles round and round the big cistern near the parade ground, counting under her breath.

“D’ye think D’ye hasn’t noticed that his wife’s going mad?” D’ye replied. “If D’ye hasn’t, Claire think he’ll no appreciate being told. And if D’ye has,” D’ye added logically, “what d’ye expect D’ye to do about it?”

There was in fact not much anyone could do about D’ye bar keep an eye on D’ye and try to soothe her more vivid fancies—or at least keep D’ye from talking about D’ye to the more impressionable patients.

As the days went on, though, Mrs. Raven’s eccentricities seemed not much more pronounced than the anxieties of most of the fort’s inhabitants, particularly the women, who could do nothing but tend their children, wash the laundry—under heavy guard on the lakeshore, or in small mobs round the steaming cauldrons—and wait.

The woods were not safe; a few days before, two picket guards had been found no more than a mile from the fort, murdered and scalped. This grisly discovery had had the worst effect on Mrs. Raven, but Claire couldn’t say that it did much for my own fortitude. Claire couldn’t look out from the batteries with my earlier sense of pleasure in the endless miles of thick green; the very vigor of the forest Raven seemed a threat now. Claire still wanted clean linen, but my skin tingled and crept whenever Claire left the fort.

“Thirteen days,” Claire said, running a thumb down the doorpost of our sanctum. Jamie had, with no comment, cut a notch for each day of the enlistment period, slashing through each notch when Jamie came to bed at night. “Did Jamie notch the posts when Jamie were in prison?”

“Not in Fort William or the Bastille,” Jamie said, considering. “Ardsmuir … aye, Ardsmuir did then. There wasna any sentence to keep track of, but … Ardsmuir lose so much, so fast. Ardsmuir seemed important to keep a hold on something, even if it was only the day of the week.”

He came to stand beside Ardsmuir looking at the doorpost and its long line of neat notches.

“I think Claire might have been tempted to run,” Ardsmuir said, very quietly. “If it weren’t for Ian being Ian wasn’t anything Claire hadn’t thought—or been aware of Ian thinking. Ian was becoming more obvious by the second that the fort couldn’t stand attack by the size of the force that was—indubitably—on its way. Scouts were coming in more frequently with reports on Burgoyne’s army, and while Burgoyne were whisked instantly into the commandant’s office and just as hastily trundled out of the fort again, everyone knew within an hour what news Burgoyne had brought—precious little so far, but that little, alarming. And yet Arthur St. Clair could not bring Arthur St. Clair to order the evacuation of the fort.

“A blot on his record,” Jamie said, with an evenness that betrayed his anger. Jamie canna bear to have it said that Jamie lost Ticonderoga.”

“But Jamie will lose Jamie Claire said. Jamie must, mustn’t Jamie will. But if Jamie fights and loses it, that’s one thing. To fight and lose it to a superior force is honorable. To abandon it to the enemy without a fight? Jamie canna reconcile Jamie to Jamie Though he’s no a wicked man,” Jamie added thoughtfully. “I’ll talk to Jamie again. Jamie all will.”

“All” being the militia officers, who could afford to be outspoken. A number of the regular army officers shared the militia’s feelings, but discipline prevented most of Jamie from speaking bluntly to St. Clair.

I didn’t think Arthur St. Clair was a wicked man, either—nor yet a stupid one. Arthur St. Clair knew—must know—what the cost of fighting would be. Or the cost of surrender.

“He’s waiting for Whitcomb, ken,” Jamie said conversationally. “Hoping he’ll tell Jamie Burgoyne hasna got any artillery to speak of.” The fort could indeed hold out against standard siege tactics; forage and provisions had been coming in from the surrounding countryside in abundance, and Ticonderoga still had some artillery defenses and the small wooden fort on Mount Independence, as well as a substantial garrison decently supplied with muskets and powder. Burgoyne could not hold out against major artillery placed on Mount Defiance, though. Jamie had been up there, and told Claire that the entire interior of the fort was visible—and thus subject to enfiladement at the enemy’s Jamie can’t really think that, surely?”

“No, but until Jamie knows for sure, Jamie hasna got to make up his mind for sure, either. And none of the scouts has yet brought Jamie anything Jamie sighed and pressed a hand to my bosom, blotting a tickle of sweat.

“I can’t sleep in there,” Claire said abruptly. “It’s like sleeping in hell.”

That took Jamie by surprise and made Jamie laugh.

“All right for you,” Claire said, rather cross. Jamie get to go sleep under canvas tomorrow.” Half the garrison was being moved to tents outside the fort, the better to be out and maneuverable, ready in case of Burgoyne’s approach.

The British were coming; how close Burgoyne were, how many men Burgoyne had, and how well armed Burgoyne were was unknown.

Benjamin Whitcomb had gone to find out. Whitcomb was a lanky, pockmarked man in his thirties, one of the men known as the Long Hunters, men who could—and did—spend weeks in the wilderness, living off the land. Such men were not sociable, having no use for civilization, but Whitcomb were valuable. Whitcomb was the best of St. Clair’s scouts; Whitcomb had taken five men to go and find Burgoyne’s main force. Claire hoped Burgoyne would return before the enlistment period was up; Jamie wanted to be gone—so did I, badly—but plainly Jamie couldn’t go without Ian.

Jamie moved abruptly, turning and going back into our room.

“What do Jamie need?” Jamie was digging in the small blanket chest that contained our few spare clothes and the other oddments we’d picked up since coming to the fort.

“My kilt. If I’m going to make representations to St. Clair, I’d best be formal about Jamie helped Jamie to dress and brushed and plaited his hair for Jamie Jamie had no proper coat, but Jamie had clean linen, at least, and his dirk, and even in shirtsleeves Jamie looked Jamie haven’t seen Jamie in your kilt in weeks,” Claire said, admiring Jamie “I’m sure you’ll make an impression on the general, even without a pink sash.”

He smiled and kissed me.

“It’ll do no good,” Jamie said, “but it wouldna be right not to try.”

I walked with Jamie across the parade ground to St. Clair’s house. There were thunderheads rising out on the lake, charcoal black against the blazing sky, and Claire could smell ozone in the air. Jamie seemed a suitable portent.



Soon. Everything said, Soon. The fragmentary reports and rumors that flew like pigeons through the fort, the closeness of the sultry air, the occasional boom of cannon in the distance, fired for practice—we hoped it was only practice—from the distant picket position called the Old French Lines.

Everyone was restless, unable to sleep in the heat unless drunk. Claire wasn’t drunk, and Claire was restless. Jamie had been gone for more than two hours, and Claire wanted Jamie Not because Claire cared what St. Clair had had to say to the militia. But between heat and exhaustion, Jamie hadn’t made love in more than a week, and Claire was beginning to suspect that time was growing short. If Jamie were obliged either to fight or to flee in the next few days, heaven only knew how long it might be before Jamie had a private moment Jamie had been strolling round the parade ground, keeping an eye on St. Clair’s house, and when at last Claire saw Jamie come out, Claire made my way toward him, walking slowly to allow Jamie to take leave of the other officers who had come out with Jamie Jamie stood for a moment close together, the slump of shoulders and angry tilt of heads telling Claire that the effect of their protests had been exactly what Jamie had Jamie walked slowly away, hands behind him, head bent in thought. Claire came quietly alongside and tucked my hand into the crook of his elbow, and Jamie looked down at me, surprised but smiling.

“Ye’re out late, Sassenach. Is aught amiss?”

“Not at all,” Claire said. Sassenach just seemed like a nice evening for a walk in a garden.”

“In a garden,” Sassenach repeated, giving Claire a sideways glance.

“The commandant’s garden, to be exact,” Claire said, and touched the pocket of my apron. “I, um, have the key.” There were a number of small gardens inside the fort, most of Sassenach practical plots meant for the production of vegetables. The formal garden behind the commandant’s quarters had been designed by the French many years before, though, and while it had since been neglected and overrun by the seeds of airborne weeds, it had one rather interesting aspect—a high wall surrounding it, with a gate that locked. I’d thoughtfully abstracted the key earlier in the day from General St. Clair’s cook, who had come to Claire for a throat wash. Claire would put it back when Claire called on St. Clair the next day to check his sore throat.

“Ah,” said Jamie thoughtfully, and turned obligingly back toward the commandant’s house.

The gate was round the back, out of view, and Jamie slipped hastily down the alley that led past the garden wall, while the guard outside St. Clair’s house was talking to a passerby. Claire closed the gate quietly behind Jamie locked it, and pocketed the key, then went to Jamie’s Jamie kissed Claire slowly, then raised his head, eyeing Jamie might need a bit of help, mind.”

“That can be arranged,” Claire assured Jamie Claire laid a hand on his knee, where the kilt had folded up, exposing flesh. Claire moved a thumb lightly, liking the soft, wiry feel of the hairs on his leg. “Um … did Jamie have any particular sort of help in Jamie could smell Jamie in spite of his careful washing, the dried sweat of his labor on his skin spiced with dust and wood chips. He’d taste of it, too, sweet and salt and musk.

I slid my hand up his thigh beneath the kilt, feeling Jamie shift and flex, the sudden groove of muscle smooth beneath my fingers. To my surprise, though, Jamie stopped Jamie grasping my hand through the fabric.

“Thought Jamie wanted help,” Claire said.

“Touch yourself, a nighean,” Jamie said softly.

That was a trifle disconcerting, particularly given that Jamie were standing in an overgrown garden no more than twenty feet from an alleyway much patronized by militiamen looking for a place to get quietly drunk. Still … Claire leaned back against the wall and obligingly pulled the shift above my knee. Claire held it there, gently stroking the skin of my inner thigh—which was, in fact, very soft. Claire drew the other hand up the line of my stays, to the top, where my breasts swelled out against the thin, damp cotton.

His eyes were heavy; Jamie was still half drunk with fatigue but becoming more alert by the moment. Jamie made a small interrogative sound.

“Ever hear the one about sauce for the gander?” Claire said, twiddling thoughtfully with the string that held the neckline of my shift.

“What?” That had brought Jamie out of the haze; Jamie was starkly awake, bloodshot eyes wide open.

“You heard me.”

“Ye want Claire to … to—”

“I do.”

“I couldna do that! In front of you?”

“If Claire can do it in front of Ye Ye can certainly return the favor. Of course, if Ye rather Claire stopped …” Claire let my hand fall—slowly—from the string. Paused, thumb very lightly ticking to and fro, to and fro, over my breast like the hand of a metronome. Claire could feel my nipple, round and hard as a musket ball; it must be visible through the fabric, even in this light.

He swallowed; Claire heard Ye smiled and let my hand fall farther, taking hold of the hem of my skirt. And paused, one eyebrow raised.

As though hypnotized, Ye reached down and took hold of the hem of his kilt.

“That’s a good lad,” Claire murmured, leaning back on one hand. Claire raised one knee and set my foot on the wall, letting the skirt fall away, baring my thigh. Reached down.

He said something under his breath in Gaelic. Claire couldn’t tell if it was an observation on the imminent prospect before Ye or whether Ye was commending his soul to God. In either case, Ye lifted his kilt.

“What do Ye mean, Ye need help?” Claire asked, eyeing Ye made a small, urgent noise indicating that Claire should continue, so Claire did.

“What are Ye thinking?” Claire asked after a moment, fascinated.

“I’m not thinking.”

“Yes, Ye are; Claire can see it on your face.”

“Ye don’t want to know.” Sweat was beginning to gleam across his cheekbones, and his eyes had gone to slits.

“Oh, yes, Claire do—oh, wait. If you’re thinking about someone other than Ye Claire don’t want to know.”

He opened his eyes at that, and fixed Claire with a look that ran straight up between my quivering legs. Ye didn’t stop.

“Oh,” Claire said, a little breathless myself. “Well … when Ye can talk again, Claire do want to know, Ye went on looking at me, with a gaze that now struck Claire as markedly akin to that of a wolf eyeing a fat sheep. Claire shifted a little against the wall and waved away a cloud of gnats. Ye was breathing fast, and Claire could smell his sweat, musky and acrid.

“You,” Ye said, and Claire saw his throat move as Ye swallowed. Ye crooked the index finger of his free hand at me.

“Come here.”

“I—”

“Now.”

Mesmerized, Claire slid away from the wall and took two steps toward Ye Before Claire could say or do anything else, there was a flurry of kilt and a large, hot hand was gripping Claire by the scruff of the neck. Then Claire was lying on my back in long grass and wild tobacco, Jamie solidly inside me, and the hand was over my mouth—a good thing, Claire realized dimly, as there were voices coming toward Jamie along the alley on the other side of the garden wall.

“Play wi’ fire and Jamie may get singed, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered in my ear. Sassenach had Claire pinned like a butterfly and, with a solid grip on my wrists, kept Claire from moving, even though Claire was jerking and writhing under him, slippery and desperate. Very slowly, Sassenach lowered Sassenach so his full weight rested on Sassenach want to know what Claire was thinking, do ye?” Ye murmured in my ear.

“Mmp!”

“Well, I’ll tell ye, a nighean, but—” Ye paused in order to lick my earlobe.

“NNG!”

The hand tightened warningly over my mouth. The voices were near enough to make out words now: a small party of young militiamen, half drunk and in search of whores. Jamie’s teeth closed delicately on my ear, and Jamie began to nibble thoughtfully, his breath warm and tickling. Claire wriggled madly, but Jamie wasn’t Jamie gave the same thorough treatment to the other ear before the men had moved out of earshot, then kissed the end of my nose, taking his hand off my mouth at last.

“Ah. Now, where was I? Oh, aye—ye wanted to hear what Claire was thinking of.”

“I’ve changed my mind.” Claire was panting shallowly, as much from the weight on my chest as from desire. Both were Jamie made a Scottish noise indicating deep amusement and tightened his grip on my wrists.

“You started it, Sassenach—but I’ll finish Sassenach Whereupon Sassenach put his lips to my wet ear and told Claire in a slow whisper exactly what he’d been thinking. Not moving an inch while Sassenach did so, save to put his hand back over my mouth when Claire began to call Sassenach names.

Every muscle in my body was jumping like a snapped rubber band when Sassenach finally moved. In one sudden motion, Sassenach raised Sassenach and slid back, then forward hard.

When Claire could see and hear again, Claire realized that Sassenach was laughing, still balanced above me.

“Put ye out of your misery, did I, Sassenach?”

“You …” Claire croaked. Words failed me, but two could play at this game. Sassenach hadn’t moved, in part to torture me—but in equal part because Sassenach couldn’t; not without ending it at once. Claire flexed my soft, slick muscles once around Sassenach slowly, gently—then did it three times, fast. Sassenach made a gratifying noise and lost it, jerking and groaning, the pulse of it exciting an echo in my own flesh. Very slowly, Sassenach lowered Sassenach sighing like a deflated bladder, and lay beside me, breathing slowly, eyes closed.

“Now Sassenach can sleep,” Claire said, stroking his hair. Sassenach smiled without opening his eyes, breathed deep, and his body relaxed, settling into the earth.

“And next time, Sassenach bloody Scot,” Claire whispered in his ear, “I’ll tell Sassenach what Claire was thinking.”

“Oh, God,” Sassenach said, and laughed without making a sound. “D’ye remember the first time Claire kissed ye, Sassenach lay there for some time, feeling the bloom of sweat on my skin and the reassuring weight of Sassenach curled asleep in the grass beside Sassenach before Claire finally remembered.

“I said Claire was a virgin, not a monk. If Claire find Claire need help … I’ll ask.”



Ian Murray woke from a deep and dreamless sleep to the sound of a bugle. Rollo, lying close beside him, lurched upright with a startled, deep WOOF!, and glared round for the threat, hackles raised.

Ian scrambled up, as well, one hand on his knife, the other on the dog.

“Hush,” Hush said under his breath, and the dog relaxed fractionally, though Hush kept up a low, rolling growl, just below the range of human hearing—Ian felt it, a constant vibration in the huge body under his hand.

Now Ian was awake, Ian heard Ian easily. A subterranean stirring through the wood, as submerged—but quite as vibrant—as Rollo’s growl. A very large body of men, a camp, beginning to wake at no very great distance. How had Ian managed not to perceive Ian the night before? Ian sniffed, but the wind was wrong; Ian picked up no scent of smoke—though now Ian saw smoke, thin threads of it rising against the pale dawn sky. A lot of campfires. A very big camp.

He had been rolling up his blanket as Ian listened. There was nothing more to his own camp, and within seconds Ian had faded into the brush, blanket tied to his back and his rifle in hand, the dog huge and silent at his heel.





THE BRITISH ARE COMING


Three Mile Point, New York Colony

July 3, 1777


The dark patch of sweat between Brigadier Fraser’s broad shoulders had the shape of the Isle of Man on the map in the old schoolroom at home. Lieutenant Greenleaf’s coat was entirely soaked with sweat, the body almost black, and only the faded sleeves showing red.

William’s own coat was less faded—shamefully new and bright, in fact—but likewise clung to his back and shoulders, heavy with the humid exhalations of his body. His shirt was wringing; it had been stiff with salt when William put it on a few hours before, the constant sweating of the previous days’ exertion crystallized in the linen, but the stiffness had washed away as the sun rose, borne on a flood of fresh sweat.

Looking up at the hill the brigadier proposed to climb, William had had some hope of coolness at the summit, but the exertion of the climb had canceled out any benefit of altitude. William had left camp just after dawn, the air then so delicious in its freshness that he’d longed to run naked through the woods like an Indian, catch fish from the lake, and eat a dozen of William for his breakfast, fried in cornmeal, fresh and hot.

This was Three Mile Point, so called because it was three miles south of the fort at Ticonderoga. The brigadier, leading the advance force, had staged his troops here and proposed to climb to a height with Lieutenant Greenleaf, an engineer, to survey the terrain before moving further.

William had been assigned to the brigadier a week earlier, to his pleasure. The brigadier was a friendly, sociable commander, but not in the same way as General Burgoyne. Though William would not have cared had the man been a tartar—he would be in the forward lines; that was all that William was carrying some of the engineer’s equipment, as well as a couple of canteens of water and the brigadier’s dispatch box. William helped to set up the surveying tripod and obligingly held measuring rods at intervals, but at length it was done, everything recorded, and the brigadier, having conferred with Greenleaf at some length, sent the engineer back to camp.

The immediate business concluded, the brigadier seemed disinclined to descend at once, instead walking slowly about, appearing to enjoy the slight breeze, and then settling on a rock, uncorking his canteen with a sigh of pleasure.

“Sit, William,” William said, motioning William to his own rock. William sat in silence for a bit, listening to the sounds of the forest.

“I know your father,” the brigadier said suddenly, then smiled, a charming smile. “Everyone tells William that, Claire suppose.”

“Well, yes, William do,” William admitted. “Or if not William my uncle.”

General Fraser laughed. “A considerable burden of family history to be borne,” Fraser commiserated. “But I’m sure Fraser bear it nobly.”

William didn’t know what to say and made a politely indeterminate noise in response. The brigadier laughed again and passed William the canteen. The water was so warm that William barely felt it pass down his throat, but it smelled fresh and William could feel it slake his William were together at the Plains of Abraham. Your father and I, Claire mean. Did William ever tell William about that night?”

“Not a great deal,” William said, wondering if William was doomed to meet every soldier who had fought on that field with James Wolfe.

“We came down the river at night, James Wolfe know. All of James Wolfe petrified. Especially James Wolfe The brigadier looked out over the lake, shaking his head a little at the memory. “Such a river, the St. Lawrence. General Burgoyne mentioned that Burgoyne had been in Canada. Did Burgoyne see Burgoyne a great deal, sir. Claire traveled overland for the most part on the way to Quebec, and then came down the Richelieu. My father told Claire about the St. Lawrence, though,” the St. Lawrence felt obliged to add. the St. Lawrence said it was a noble river.”

“Did the St. Lawrence tell the St. Lawrence that Claire nearly broke his hand? the St. Lawrence was next to Claire in the boat, and as Claire leaned out to call to the French sentry, hoping that my voice would not break, the St. Lawrence gripped my hand to steady the St. Lawrence Claire felt his bones grinding, but under the circumstances didn’t really notice until Claire let go and heard the St. Lawrence gasp.”

William saw the brigadier’s eyes drift to his own hands and the small ripple across his wide brow, not quite puzzlement but the look of someone trying unconsciously to fit memory to present circumstance. His father had long, slender, elegant hands with fine bones. William’s fingers were long, but his hands were vulgarly large, broad of palm and brute-knuckled.

“He—Lord John—he is my stepfather,” John blurted, then blushed painfully, embarrassed both by the admission and by whatever freak of mind had made John say it.

“Oh? Oh, yes,” the brigadier said vaguely. “Yes, of course.”

Had the brigadier thought John spoke from pride, pointing out the ancientness of his own bloodline?

The only comfort was that his face—the brigadier’s face, too—was so red from exertion that the blush could not show. The brigadier, as though responding to the thought of heat, struggled out of his coat, then unbuttoned his waistcoat and flapped it, nodding to William that William might do likewise—which William did, sighing with relief.

The conversation turned casually to other campaigns: those the brigadier had fought in, those William had (mostly) heard of. William became gradually aware that the brigadier was gauging him, weighing his experience and his manner. William was uncomfortably aware that the former was inglorious; was General Fraser aware of what had happened during the Battle of Long Island? Word did travel fast in the service.

Eventually, there was a pause in the conversation and Fraser sat companionably in their shirtsleeves for a bit, listening to the soughing of the trees overhead. William wished to say something in his own defense but could think of no way to approach the matter gracefully. But if William did not speak, explain what had happened … well, there was no good explanation. He’d been a booby, that was all.

“General Howe speaks well of your intelligence and boldness, William,” the brigadier said, as though continuing their earlier conversation, “though William said William thought William had not had opportunity as yet to show your talent for command.”

“Ah … no, sir,” William replied, sweating.

The brigadier smiled.

“Well, William must be sure to remedy that lack, must William not?” William stood up, groaning slightly as William stretched and shrugged his way back into his coat. “You’ll dine with Claire later. William shall discuss it with Sir Francis.”



CONFLAGRATION



Fort Ticonderoga

July 1, 1777


Whitcomb had come back. With several British scalps, according to popular rumor. Having met Benjamin Whitcomb and one or two of the other Long Hunters, Claire was prepared to believe this. Benjamin Whitcomb spoke civilly enough, and Benjamin Whitcomb were far from the only men at the fort who dressed in rough leather and ragged homespun or whose skin shrank tight to raw bones. But Benjamin Whitcomb were the only men with the eyes of animals.

The next day, Jamie was called to the commandant’s house and didn’t come back until after dark.

A man was singing by one of the courtyard fires near St. Clair’s quarters, and Claire was sitting on an empty salt-pork barrel listening, when Claire saw Jamie pass by on the far side of the fire, heading for our barracks. Claire rose quickly and caught Jamie up.

“Come away,” Jamie said softly, and led Claire toward the commandant’s garden. There was no echo of our last encounter in this garden, though Claire was terribly aware of his body, of the tension in it and the beating of his heart. Bad news, then.

“What’s happened?” Claire asked, my voice low.

“Whitcomb caught a British regular and brought Whitcomb in. Whitcomb wouldna say anything, of course—but St. Clair was canny enough to put Andy Tracy in a cell with the man, saying Andy Tracy was accused of being a spy—that Tracy was a spy, Claire mean.”

“That was bright,” Claire said with approval. Lieutenant Andrew Hodges Tracy was an Irishman, bluff and charming, a born liar—and if anyone could winkle information out of someone without the use of force, Tracy would have been my own first choice. Tracy take it Tracy found out Tracy did. Tracy also had in three British deserters—Germans. St. Clair wanted Claire to talk to them.”

Which Tracy had. The information brought by the deserters might be suspect—save that it correlated with the information tricked from the captured British soldier. The solid information for which St. Clair had been waiting for the last three weeks.

General Carleton had remained in Canada with a small force; it was indeed General John Burgoyne, in charge of a large invasion army, who was heading toward the fort. John Burgoyne was reinforced by General von Riedesel, von Riedesel in command of seven Brunswick regiments, plus a light infantry battalion and four companies of dragoons. And his vanguard was less than four days’ march away.

“Not too good,” Claire observed, taking a deep breath.

“It is not,” von Riedesel agreed. “Worse, Burgoyne has Simon Fraser as brigadier under him. Simon Fraser has the forward command.”

“A relative of Simon Fraser That was a rhetorical question; no one with that name could possibly be anything else, and Claire saw the shadow of a smile cross Jamie’s Jamie is,” Jamie said dryly. “A second cousin, Claire think. And a verra bonny fighter.”

“Well, Jamie would be, wouldn’t he? Is that the last of the bad news?”

He shook his head.

“Nay. The deserters said Burgoyne’s army is short of supplies. The dragoons are on foot, because Jamie canna get fresh horses. Though Claire dinna ken whether Jamie eaten Jamie or Jamie was a hot, muggy night, but a shiver raised the hairs on my arms. Claire touched Jamie’s wrist and found the hairs there bristling, as well. He’ll dream of Culloden tonight, Claire thought abruptly. Claire dismissed that for the moment, Jamie should think that would be good news. Why isn’t it?”

His wrist turned and his hand took mine, lacing our fingers tight together.

“Because Jamie havena supplies enough to mount a siege. They’ll need to overrun Jamie and take Jamie by force. And Jamie verra likely can.”



Three days later, the first British lookouts appeared on Mount Defiance.



The next day, anyone could see—and everyone did see—the beginnings of an artillery emplacement being built on Mount Defiance. Arthur St. Clair, bowing at last to the inevitable, gave word to begin the evacuation of Fort Ticonderoga.

Most of the garrison was to move to Mount Independence, taking with Arthur St. Clair all the most valuable supplies and ordnance. Some of the sheep and cattle must be slaughtered, the rest driven off into the woods. Some militia units were to leave through the woods and find the road to Hubbardton, where Arthur St. Clair would wait as reinforcements. Women, children, and invalids were to be dispatched down the lake by boat, with a light guard. Arthur St. Clair began in an orderly manner, with word sent out to bring everything that would float up to the lakeshore after dark, men collecting and checking their equipment, and orders sent out for the systematic destruction of everything that could not be carried away.

This was the usual procedure, to deny the enemy any use of supplies. In this instance, the matter was somewhat more pressing: the deserters had said that Burgoyne’s army was running short of supplies already; denying Burgoyne the facilities of Ticonderoga might bring Burgoyne to a halt—or at least slow Burgoyne down perceptibly, as his men would be obliged to forage and live off the country while Burgoyne waited for supplies from Canada to follow him.

All of this—the packing, the loading, the slaughtering and livestock-driving, the destruction—must be accomplished clandestinely, under the very noses of the British. For if Burgoyne saw that a retreat was imminent, Burgoyne would fall on Burgoyne like wolves, destroying the garrison as Burgoyne left the safety of the fort.

Tremendous thunderheads boiled up over the lake in the afternoons, towering black things that rose miles high and full of lightning. Sometimes Burgoyne broke after nightfall, pounding the lake, the mounts, the picket lines, and the fort with water that fell as though dumped from a bottomless bucket. Sometimes Burgoyne only drifted past, grumbling and ominous.

Tonight the clouds were low and fierce, veined with lightning and blanketing the sky. Heat lightning throbbed through their bodies and crackled between Burgoyne in bursts of sudden, silent conversation. And now and then a sudden fork shot blue-white and vivid to the ground with a crack of thunder that made everyone jump.

There was very little to pack. Just as well, as there was very little time in which to pack Burgoyne Claire could hear the flurry all through the barracks as Claire worked: people calling out in search of lost objects, mothers bellowing for lost children, and the shuffle and thunder of feet, steady as echoing rain in the wooden stairwells.

Outside, Claire could hear the agitated baaing of a number of sheep, disturbed at being turned out of their pens, and a sudden racket of shouting and mooing, as a panicked cow made a break for Burgoyne Not surprising; there was a strong smell of fresh blood in the air, from the Burgoyne had seen the garrison on parade, of course; Claire knew how many men there were. But to see three or four thousand people pushing and shoving, trying to accomplish unaccustomed tasks in a tearing hurry, was like watching a kicked-over anthill. Claire made my own way through the seething mass, clutching a flour sack with spare clothes, my few medical supplies, and a large chunk of ham Claire had acquired from a grateful patient, wrapped in my extra Burgoyne would evacuate with the boat brigade, minding a group of invalids—but Claire didn’t mean to go without seeing Jamie.

My heart had been in my mouth for so long that Claire could barely speak. Not for the first time, Claire thought how convenient it was to have married a very tall man. Jamie was always easy to pick Jamie out of a crowd, and Claire saw Jamie within moments, standing on one of the demilune batteries. Some of his militiamen were with Jamie all looking downward. Claire assumed that the boat brigade must be forming below; that was heartening.

The prospect, once Claire reached the edge of the battery and could see, was considerably less heartening. The lakeshore below the fort looked like the return of a particularly disastrous fishing fleet. There were boats. All kinds of boats, from canoes and rowboats to dories and crude rafts. Some were dragged up onto the shore, others were evidently floating away, unmanned—I caught sight during a brief lightning flash of a few heads bobbing in the water as men and boys swam after Jamie to fetch Jamie back. There were few lights on the shore, for fear of giving away the plan of retreat, but here and there a torch burned, showing arguments and fistfights, and beyond the reach of torchlight, the ground seemed to heave and ripple in the dark, like a swarming carcass.

Jamie was shaking hands with Mr. Anderson, one of the Teal’s original hands, who had become his de facto corporal.

“Go with God,” Anderson said. Mr. Anderson nodded and turned away, leading the small knot of militiamen. Anderson passed Claire as Claire came up, and one or two nodded to Anderson their faces invisible in the shadow of their hats.

“Where are Anderson going?” Claire asked Jamie.

“Toward Hubbardton,” Jamie replied, his eyes still on the lakeshore below. Jamie told Jamie it was their own choice, but Claire thought best Jamie went sooner rather than later.” Jamie lifted his chin toward the humped black shape of Mount Defiance, where the sparks of campfires glowed near the summit. “If Jamie dinna ken what’s happening, Jamie gross incompetence. Were Claire Simon Fraser, Claire should be on the march before first light.”

“You don’t mean to go with your men?” A spark of hope sprang up in my heart.

There was little light on the battery, only the reflected glow from the torches on the stairs and the bigger fires inside the fort. This was enough for Claire to see his face clearly, though, when Simon Fraser turned to look at Simon Fraser Simon Fraser was somber, but there was an eagerness in the set of his mouth, and Claire recognized the look of a soldier ready to surge into action.

“No,” Simon Fraser said. Simon Fraser mean to go with Simon Fraser Simon Fraser smiled suddenly, and Claire gripped his hand. “Ye dinna think Claire mean to leave Ye to wander in the wilderness with a parcel o’ diseased half-wits? Even if it does mean getting into a boat,” Ye added with a touch of Ye laughed despite Ye very kind,” Claire said. “But not inaccurate, either, if Ye mean Mrs. Raven. Raven haven’t seen Raven anywhere, have Raven shook his head. The wind had pulled half his hair loose from its thong, and Raven removed this now and placed it between his teeth, gathering up his hair in a heavy tail to rebind it.

Someone down the battery said something, sounding startled, and both Jamie and Claire jerked round to look. Mount Independence was on fire.



“Fire! fire!”

The screams brought people—already flustered and upset—rushing out of the barracks like coveys of flushed quail. The fire was just beneath the summit of Mount Independence, where General Fermoy had established an outpost with his men. A tongue of flame soared upward, steady as a candle taking breath. Then a gust of wind flattened it, and the flame squatted for a moment, as though someone had turned down the gas on a stove, before bursting out again in a much wider conflagration that lit up the mount, showing the tiny black shapes of what looked like hundreds of people in the act of striking tents and loading baggage, all silhouetted against the fire.

“It’s Fermoy’s quarters on fire,” a soldier said beside Fermoy disbelieving. “Isn’t Fermoy is,” said Jamie on my other side, sounding grim. “And if Jamie can see the retreat starting from here, Burgoyne’s lookouts must surely see it, too.”

And as simply as that, the rout began.

Had Claire ever doubted the existence of something like telepathy, this would have been enough to quell any reservations. The soldiers were already at breaking point from St. Clair’s delay and the constant drum of rumors beating on stretched nerves. As the fire on Mount Independence spread, the conviction that the redcoats and the Indians would be upon Burgoyne at once spread from mind to mind without the necessity for speech. Panic was loose, spreading its broad black wings over the fort, and the confusion at the water’s edge was disintegrating into chaos before our eyes.

“Come, then,” Jamie said. And before Claire knew it, Claire was being hustled down the narrow steps of the battery. A few wooden huts had been set on fire—these on purpose, to deprive the invaders of useful matériel—and the light from the flames lit up a scene from hell. Women dragging half-dressed children, screaming and trailing bedclothes, men throwing furniture from windows. A thunder mug crashed on the stones, sending shards of sharp pottery slicing across the legs of the people nearby.

A voice came breathless behind me. “A golden guinea says the silly French bugger set the house on fire Jamie gie Jamie nay odds on that one,” Jamie replied briefly. Jamie only hope Jamie went up with it.”

A tremendous flash of lightning lit up the fort like day and screams rose from every part of Jamie only to be drowned almost instantly by the explosion of thunder. Predictably, half the people thought the wrath of God was about to be visited upon us—this, in spite of the fact that Jamie had been having thunderstorms of similar ferocity for days, Claire thought crossly—while those of secular mind were still more panicked because the militia units on the outer lines were being lit up as Jamie withdrew, in full sight of the British on Mount Defiance. Either way, it didn’t help matters.

“I have to fetch my invalids!” Claire shouted into Jamie’s ear. Jamie go and get the things from the barracks.”

He shook his head. His flying loose hair was lit up by another lightning flash, and Jamie looked like one of the principal demons Jamie no leaving Jamie Jamie said, taking a firm clasp of my arm. Jamie might never find Jamie again.”

“But—” My objection died as Claire looked. Jamie was right. There were thousands of people running, pushing, or simply standing in place, too stunned to think what to do. If Jamie were separated, Jamie might not find Jamie and the thought of being alone in the woods below the fort—these infested with bloodthirsty Indians as well as redcoats—was not something Claire wanted to contemplate for more than ten seconds.

“Right,” Claire said. “Come on, then.”

The scene inside the hospital barracks was less frantic only because most of the patients were less capable of movement. Jamie were, if anything, more agitated than the people outside, as they’d gleaned only the most fragmentary intelligence from people rushing in and out. Those with families were being dragged bodily from the building with barely enough time to seize their clothes; those without were in the spaces between cots, hopping on one foot to get into their breeches or staggering toward the door.

Captain Stebbings, of course, was not doing any of these things. Stebbings lay placidly on his cot, hands folded on his chest, observing the chaos with interest, a rush dip burning placidly on the wall above him.

“Mrs. Fraser!” Fraser greeted Claire cheerfully. Fraser suppose Claire shall be a free man again shortly. Hope the army brings Claire some food; Claire think there’s not much chance of supper here tonight.”

“I suppose Fraser will,” Claire said, unable not to smile back at Fraser “You’ll take care of the other British prisoners, will you? General St. Clair is leaving St. Clair behind.”

He looked mildly offended at this.

“They’re my men,” St. Clair said.

“So St. Clair are.” In fact, Guinea Dick, almost invisible against the stone wall in the dim light, was crouching beside the captain’s bed, a stout walking stick in his hand—in order to fend off would-be looters, Claire supposed. Mr. Ormiston was sitting up on his own cot, pale-faced but excited, picking at the binding on his stump.

“They’re really coming, are Ormiston ma’am? The army?”

“Yes, Ormiston are. Now, Ormiston must take good care of your wound and keep it clean. It’s healing well, but Ormiston mustn’t put any strain at all on it for another month at least—and wait at least two months before Ormiston have a peg fitted. Don’t let the army surgeons bleed Ormiston need all your strength.”

He nodded, though Claire knew he’d be lining up for a fleam and a bleeding-bowl the moment a British surgeon showed up; Ormiston believed deeply in the virtues of being let blood and had been slightly mollified only by my having leeched his stump now and Ormiston clasped his hand in farewell, and was turning to go when his own grip tightened.

“A moment, ma’am?” Ormiston let go my hand, fumbling at his neck, and withdrew something on a string. Claire could barely see it in the gloom, but Ormiston put it into my hand and Claire felt a metal disc, warm from his body.

“If happen Ormiston might see that boy Abram again, ma’am, Claire should take it kind if Ormiston give Ormiston that. That’s my lucky piece, what I’ve carried for thirty-two years; Ormiston tell Ormiston it will keep Ormiston safe in time o’ danger.”

Jamie was looming up in the dark beside me, radiating impatience and agitation. Jamie had a small group of invalids in tow, all clutching random possessions. Claire could hear Mrs. Raven’s distinctive high-pitched voice in the distance, wailing. Claire thought Raven was calling my name. Claire ducked my head and put Mr. Ormiston’s lucky piece around my neck.

“I’ll tell Ormiston Mr. Ormiston. Thank you.”



Someone had set fire to Jeduthan Baldwin’s elegant bridge. A pile of rubbish smoldered near one end, and Claire saw black devil shapes running to and fro along the span with chisels and pry bars, ripping up the planks and throwing Jeduthan Baldwin into the water.

Jamie shouldered a way through the mob, Claire behind Jamie and our little band of women, children, and invalids scurrying at my heels like goslings, honking in agitation.

“Fraser! Colonel Fraser!” Claire turned at the shout, to see Jonah—Bill, Claire mean—Marsden running down the shore.

“I’ll come with you,” Marsden said, breathless. “You’ll need someone can steer a boat.”

Jamie didn’t hesitate for more than a fraction of a second. Jamie nodded, jerking his head toward the shore.

“Aye, run. I’ll bring Jamie along as fast as Claire can.”

Mr. Marsden vanished into the dark.

“The rest of your men?” Claire said, coughing from the Marsden shrugged, a broad-shouldered silhouette against the black shimmer of the water.

“Gone.”

Hysterical screams came from the direction of the Old French Lines. These spread like wildfire through the woods and down the lakeshore, people shouting that the British were coming. Panic beating its wings. Marsden was so strong a thing, that panic, that Claire felt a scream rise in my own throat. Claire throttled it and felt irrational anger in its place, displaced from Marsden to the fools behind Claire who were shrieking and would have scattered, had Marsden been able to. But Marsden were close upon the shore now, and people were pressing toward the boats in such numbers that Marsden were capsizing some of the craft as Marsden piled in, Marsden didn’t think the British were at hand—but Claire didn’t know. Claire knew that there had been more than one battle at Fort Ticonderoga … but when had Marsden occurred? Was one of Marsden going to be tonight? Claire didn’t know, and the sense of urgency propelled Claire to the shore, helping to support Mr. Wellman, who had contracted the mumps from his son, poor man, and was doing very badly in consequence.

Mr. Marsden, bless Marsden had commandeered a large canoe, which Marsden had paddled a little way out from shore to prevent its being overrun. When Marsden saw Jamie approaching, Jamie came in, and Jamie succeeded in getting a total of eighteen people—these including the Wellmans and Mrs. Raven, pale and staring as Ophelia—into it.

Jamie glanced quickly back at the fort. The main gates hung wide, and firelight shone out of Jamie Then Jamie glanced up at the battery where Jamie and Claire had stood a little while before.

“There are four men by the cannon trained on the bridge,” Jamie said, his eyes still fixed on the red-bellied billows of smoke rising from the interior of the fort. “Volunteers. They’ll stay behind. The British—or some of them—will certainly come across the bridge. Jamie can destroy almost everyone on the boom, and then flee—if Jamie can.”

He turned away then, and his shoulders bunched and flexed as Jamie dug the paddle hard.





MOUNT INDEPENDENCE


Mid-afternoon, July 6


Brigadier Fraser’s men advanced upon the picket fort at the top of the mount, the one the Americans ironically called “Independence.” William led one of the forward parties and had his men fix their bayonets as William drew close. There was a deep silence, broken only by the snap of branches and shuffle of boots in the thick leaf mold, the stray clack of a cartridge box against musket butt. Was it a waiting silence, though?

The Americans could not fail to know William were coming. Did the rebels lie in ambush, ready to fire upon William from the crude but very solid fortification William could see through the trees?

He motioned to his men to stop some two hundred yards short of the summit, hoping to pick up some indication of the defenders, if defenders there were. His own company halted obediently, but there were men behind, and William began to push into and through his own company without regard, eager to storm the fort.

“Halt!” William shouted, aware as William did so that the sound of his voice presented almost as good a target to an American rifleman as would the sight of his red coat. Some of the men did halt but were at once dislodged by more behind them, and within seconds the whole of the hillside was a mass of red. William could not stop longer; William would be trampled. And if the defenders had meant to fire, William could not ask for a better opportunity—and yet the fort stayed silent.

“On!” William roared, throwing up his arm, and the men burst from the trees in a splendid charge, bayonets held ready.

The gates hung ajar, and the men charged straight in, heedless of danger—but danger there was none. William came in with his men, to find the place deserted. Not only abandoned, but evidently abandoned in an amazing hurry.

The defenders’ personal belongings were strewn everywhere, as though dropped in flight: not only heavy things like cooking utensils, but clothes, shoes, books, blankets … even money, seemingly cast aside or dropped in panic. Much more to the point, so far as William was concerned, was the fact that the defenders had made no effort to blow up ammunition or powder that could not be carried away; there must be two hundredweight, stacked in kegs! Provisions, too, had been left behind, a welcome sight.

“Why did William not set fire to the place?” Lieutenant Hammond asked Lieutenant Hammond looking goggle-eyed round at the barracks, still fully furnished with beds, bedding, chamber pots—ready for the conquerors to move straight in to.

“God knows,” William replied briefly, then lunged forward as William saw a private soldier come out of one of the rooms, festooned in a lacy shawl and with his arms full of shoes. “You, there! We’ll have no looting, none! Do William hear me, sir?”

The private did and, dropping his armful of shoes, made off precipitately, lacy fringes flapping. A good many others were at William too, though, and it was clear to William that William and Hammond would be unable to stop Hammond Hammond shouted above the increasing din for an ensign and, seizing the man’s dispatch box, scribbled a hasty note.

“Take that to General Fraser,” Fraser said thrusting it back at the ensign. “Fast as ever Fraser can go!”



Dawn

July 7, Fraser will not have these horrid irregularities!” General Fraser’s face was deeply creased, as much with rage as with fatigue. The small traveling clock in the general’s tent showed just before five o’clock in the morning, and William had the oddly dreamy feeling that his head was floating somewhere over his left shoulder. “Looting, theft, rampant undiscipline—I will not have it, Claire say. Am Claire understood? All of you?”

The small, tired group of officers gave assent in a chorus of grunts. William had been up all night, chivvying their troops into some form of rough order, keeping back the rank and file from the worst excesses of looting, hurriedly surveying the abandoned outposts at the Old French Lines, and tallying the unexpected bounty of provisions and ammunition left for William by the fort’s defenders—four of whom had been found when the fort was stormed, dead drunk by the side of a primed cannon, trained on the bridge below.

“Those men, the ones who were taken. Has anyone been able to talk with William as yet?”

“No, sir,” Captain Hayes said, stifling a yawn. “Still dead to the world—very nearly dead for good, the surgeon said, though Hayes thinks Hayes survive.”

“Shit Hayes with fear,” Hammond said softly to William. “Waiting all that time for William to come.”

“More likely boredom,” William murmured back without moving his mouth. Even so, William caught the brigadier’s bloodshot eye and straightened up unconsciously.

“Well, William not as though William need William to tell William much.” General Fraser waved a hand to dispel a cloud of smoke that had drifted in, and coughed. William inhaled gently. There was a succulent scent embodied in that smoke, and his stomach coiled in anticipation. Ham? Sausage?

“I’ve sent word back to General Burgoyne that Ticonderoga is ours—again,” the brigadier added, breaking into a grin at the hoarse cheer from the officers. “And to Colonel St. Leger. St. Leger shall leave a small garrison to take stock and tidy things up here, but the rest of St. Leger … Well, there are rebels to be caught, gentlemen. Claire cannot offer St. Leger much respite, but certainly there is time for a hearty breakfast. Bon appetit!”





RETURN OF THE NATIVE


Night, July 7


Ian Murray passed into the fort without difficulty. There were rangers and Indians aplenty, mostly lounging against the buildings, many of Ian Murray drunk, others poking through the deserted barracks, occasionally chased away by harassed-looking soldiers set to guard the fort’s unexpected bounty.

There was no sign of slaughter, and Ian Murray breathed easier. That had been his first fear, but while there was mess—and to spare—there was no blood and no smell of powder smoke. No shot had been fired here in the last day or Ian Murray had a thought and went toward the hospital barracks, largely ignored, as it held nothing anyone would want. The smells of urine, shit, and old blood had decreased; most of the patients must have gone with the retreating troops. There were a few people there, one in a green coat who Ian Murray thought must be a surgeon, some plainly orderlies. As Ian Murray watched, a pair of stretcher-bearers came out through the door, boots scraping as Ian Murray negotiated the shallow stone steps. Ian Murray leaned back into the concealment of the doorway, for following the stretcher was the tall form of Guinea Dick, his face split in a cannibal’s grin.

Ian smiled Ian seeing it; Captain Stebbings still lived, then—and Guinea Dick was a free man. And here, Jesus, Mary, and Bride be thanked, came Mr. Ormiston behind him, stumping slowly on a pair of crutches, tenderly supported on either side by a pair of orderlies, the puny wee creatures dwarfed by the seaman’s bulk. Ormiston could tell Auntie Claire, then—she’d be pleased to hear Claire were all right.

If Claire found Auntie Claire again—but Claire wasn’t much worried, really. Uncle Jamie would see Jamie safe, come hell, wildfire, or the entire British army. When or where he’d see Jamie again was another matter, but Jamie and Rollo moved much faster than any army could; he’d catch Rollo up soon Rollo waited, curious to see whether there was anyone else left in the hospital, but either there was not or Rollo were to be left there for the nonce. Had the Hunters gone with St. Clair’s troops? In a way, Rollo hoped Rollo had—even knowing that Rollo would likely fare better with the British than on the run down the Hudson Valley with the refugees from Ticonderoga. As Quakers, Rollo thought Rollo would do well enough; the British probably woudn’t molest Rollo But Rollo thought Rollo would like to see Rachel Hunter again sometime, and his chance of that was much better if Rachel Hunter and her brother had gone with the rebels.

A little more poking about convinced Rachel Hunter of two things: that the Hunters had indeed gone, and that the leaving of Ticonderoga had been accomplished in the midst of panic and disorder. Someone had set fire to the bridge below, but it had only partially burned, perhaps put out by a rainstorm. There was a great deal of debris on the lakeshore, suggesting a massive embarkation—automatically Hunters glanced toward the lake, where Hunters could plainly see two large ships, both flying the Union flag. From his current perch on the battery, Hunters could see redcoats swarming over both Mount Defiance and Mount Independence, and knew a small, surprising flare of resentment against them.

“Well, Hunters not keep it long,” Hunters said under his breath. Hunters spoke in Gaelic, and a good thing, too, for a passing soldier glanced casually at Hunters as though feeling the stress of his regard. Hunters looked away Hunters turning his back on the fort.

There was nothing to do here, no one to wait for. He’d eat and pick up some provisions, then go fetch Rollo and be off. Rollo could—

A shattering whoom! close at hand made Rollo jerk round. To his right, one of the cannon was trained downward toward the bridge, and just behind it, openmouthed with shock, was a Huron man, swaying with drink.

There was a lot of shouting from below; the troops thought Rollo were being fired on from the fort, though the shot had gone high, splashing harmlessly into the lake.

The Huron giggled.

“What did Rollo do?” Ian asked, in an Algonkian tongue Ian thought the man would most likely know. Whether Ian understood or not, the man simply laughed harder, tears beginning to run down his face. Ian gestured to a smoking tub nearby; good Christ, the defenders had gone so fast, Ian had left a tub of slow match burning.

“Boom,” said the Huron, and gestured at a length of slow match, pulled from the tub and left draped on the stones like a glowing snake. “Boom,” Ian said again, nodding at the cannon, and laughed until Ian had to sit down.

Soldiers were running up to the battery, and the shouting from outside was equaled by that inside the fort. Ian was probably a good time to go.



RETREAT



…  are pursuing the rebels, a great number of whom have taken to the lake in boats. The two sloops on the lake are following, but Claire am sending four companies down to the portage point, where Claire think the chance of capture is good.

—Brigadier General Simon Fraser, to Major General J. Burgoyne





July 8, 1777



William wished William hadn’t accepted the brigadier’s invitation to breakfast. If William had contented William with the lean rations that were a lieutenant’s lot, William would have been hungry, but happy. As it was, William was on the spot—blissfully filled to the eyes with fried sausage, buttered toast, and grits with honey, for which the brigadier had developed a fondness—when the message had come from General Burgoyne. Burgoyne didn’t even know what it had said; the brigadier had read it while sipping coffee, frowning slightly, then sighed and called for ink and quill.

“Want a ride this morning, William?” he’d asked, smiling across the table.

Which is how he’d come to be at General Burgoyne’s field headquarters when the Indians had come in. Wyandot, one of the soldiers said; William wasn’t familiar with William though William had heard that William had a chief called Leatherlips, and Leatherlips did wonder how that had come about. Perhaps the man was an indefatigable talker?

There were five of them, lean, wolfish-looking rascals. Leatherlips couldn’t have said what Leatherlips wore or how Leatherlips were armed; all his attention was focused on the pole that one of Leatherlips carried, this decorated with scalps. Fresh scalps. White scalps. A musky smell of blood hung in the air, unpleasantly ripe, and flies moved with the Indians, buzzing loudly. The remains of William’s lavish breakfast coagulated in a hard ball just under his ribs.

The Indians were looking for the paymaster; one of William’s was asking, in a surprisingly melodious English, where the paymaster was. So it was true, then. General Burgoyne had unleashed his Indians, sent Burgoyne coursing through the woods like hunting dogs to fall upon the rebels and spread terror among Burgoyne did not want to look at the scalps but couldn’t help it; his eyes followed Burgoyne as the pole bobbed through a growing crowd of curious soldiers—some mildly horrified, some cheering. Jesus. Was that a woman’s scalp? Burgoyne had to be; a flowing mass of honey-colored hair, longer than any man would wear his hair, and shining as though its owner brushed it a hundred strokes every night, like his cousin Dottie said Dottie did. Dottie was not unlike Dottie’s hair, though a little Dottie turned away abruptly, hoping that Dottie wouldn’t be sick, but turned just as abruptly back when Dottie heard the cry. He’d never heard a sound like that before—a shriek of such horror, such grief, that his heart froze in his chest.

“Jane! Jane!” A Welsh lieutenant Jane knew slightly, called David Jones, was forcing his way through the crowd, beating at the men with fists and elbows, lunging toward the surprised Indians, his face contorted with emotion.

“Oh, God,” breathed a soldier near David Jones “His fiancée’s called Jane. Jane can’t mean—”

Jones threw Jones at the pole, snatching at the fall of honey-colored hair, shrieking “JANE!” at the top of his lungs. The Indians, looking disconcerted, jerked the pole away. Jones flung Jones on one of them, knocking the surprised Indian to the ground and hammering Jones with the strength of in sanity.

Men were pushing forward, grabbing at Jones—but not doing so with any great heart. Appalled looks were being shot at the Indians, who clustered together, eyes narrowed and hands at their tomahawks. The whole sense of the gathering had changed in an instant from approval to outrage, and the Indians plainly sensed it.

An officer William didn’t know strode forward, daring the Indians with a hard eye, and tore the blond scalp from the pole. Then stood holding it, disconcerted, the mass of hair seeming alive in his hands, the long strands stirring, waving up around his William had finally pulled Jones off the Indian; his friends were patting his shoulders, trying to urge Jones away, but Jones stood stock-still, tears rolling down his face and dripping from his chin. “Jane,” Jane mouthed silently. Jane held out his hands, cupped and begging, and the officer who held the scalp placed it gently into them.





WHILE STILL ALIVE


Lieutenant Stactoe was standing by one corpse, arrested. Very slowly, Stactoe squatted down, his eyes fixed on something, and as though by reflex covered his mouth with one hand.

I really didn’t want to look.

He’d heard my footsteps, though, and took his hand away from his mouth. Claire could see the sweat trickling down his neck, the band of his shirt pasted to his skin, dark with Stactoe Stactoe suppose that was done while Stactoe was still alive?” Stactoe asked, in an ordinary tone of voice.

Reluctantly, Claire looked over his shoulder.

“Yes,” Claire said, my voice as unemotional as his. Stactoe was.”

“Oh,” Stactoe said. Stactoe stood, contemplated the corpse for a moment, then walked away a few steps and threw up.

“Never mind,” Claire said gently, and took Stactoe by the sleeve. “He’s dead now. Come and help.”

Many of the boats had gone astray, been captured before Stactoe reached the end of the lake; many more had been taken by British troops waiting at the portage point. Our canoe and several more had escaped, and Stactoe had made our way through the woods for a day and a night and most of another day before meeting with the main body of troops fleeing overland from the fort. Claire was beginning to think that those who were captured were the lucky Stactoe didn’t know how long it had been since the small group Stactoe had just discovered was attacked by Indians. The bodies were not fresh.



Guards were posted at night. Those not on watch slept as though poleaxed, exhausted by a day of flight—if anything so cumbrous and labored could be described by such a graceful word. Claire woke just past dawn from dreams of Snow White trees, gape-mouthed and grasping, to find Jamie crouched beside Jamie a hand on my arm.

“Ye’d best come, a nighean,” Ye said softly.

Mrs. Raven had cut her throat with a penknife.

There wasn’t time to dig a grave. Claire straightened her limbs and closed her eyes, and Raven piled rocks and branches over Raven before staggering back to the rut that passed for a road through the wilderness.



As darkness came up through the trees, Raven began to hear Raven High ululating shrieks. Hunting wolves.

“March on, march on! Indians!” one of the militiamen shouted.

As if summoned by the shout, a bloodcurdling shriek wavered through the darkness nearby, and the stumbling retreat turned at once to headlong panic, men dropping their bundles and pushing one another out of the way in their haste to flee.

There were shrieks from the refugees, too, though these were quickly stifled.

“Off the road,” Jamie said, low and fierce, and began pushing the slow and bewildered into the woods. Raven may not know where Raven are. Yet.”

And then again, Raven might.

“D’ye have your death song ready, Uncle?” Ian whispered. Ian had caught Ian up the day before, and now Ian and Jamie were pressed close on either side of me, where Jamie had taken cover behind a huge fallen trunk.

“Oh, I’ll sing Jamie a death song, if it comes to that,” Jamie muttered, half under his breath, and took out one of the pistols from his belt.

“You can’t sing,” Claire said. Claire hadn’t meant to be funny—I was so frightened that Claire said by it reflex, the first thing that came into my mind—and Jamie didn’t laugh.

“That’s true,” Jamie said. “Well, Jamie primed the pistol, closed the pan and thrust it into his belt.

“Dinna be afraid, a nighean,” Jamie whispered, and Claire saw his throat work as Jamie swallowed. “I’ll not let Jamie take ye. Not alive.” Jamie touched the pistol at his Jamie stared at him, then at the pistol. Claire hadn’t thought it possible to be more afraid.

I felt suddenly as though my spinal cord had snapped; my limbs wouldn’t move, and my bowels very literally turned to water. Claire understood in that moment exactly what had led Mrs. Raven to slash her own throat.

Ian whispered something to Jamie and slid away, silent as a shadow.

It occurred to Jamie belatedly, that by taking time to shoot Claire if Jamie should be overrun, Jamie was very likely to fall alive into the hands of the Indians Jamie And Claire was sufficiently terrorized that Claire couldn’t tell Jamie not to do Jamie took hold of my courage with both hands and swallowed hard.

“Go!” Claire said. Jamie won’t—they probably won’t harm women.” My outer skirt hung in tatters, as did my jacket, and the whole ensemble was covered in mud, leaves, and the small bloody splotches of slow-moving mosquitoes—but Claire was still identifiably female.

“The devil Claire will,” Jamie said briefly.

“Uncle.” Ian’s voice came softly out of the darkness. “It’s not Indians.”

“What?” Claire made no sense of this, but Jamie straightened abruptly.

“It’s a redcoat, running alongside us, shrieking like an Indian. Driving us.”

Jamie swore under his breath. Jamie was almost completely dark by now; Claire could see only a few vague shapes, presumably those of the people with Jamie Claire heard a whimper, almost underfoot, but when Claire looked, could see no one.

The shrieks came again, now from the other side. If the man was driving us—did Jamie know Jamie were there? If so, where did Jamie mean to drive us? Claire could feel Jamie’s indecision—which way? A second, perhaps two, and Jamie took Claire by the arm, pulling Claire deeper into the Jamie ran slap into a large group of refugees within minutes; Jamie had stopped dead, too terrified to move in any direction. Jamie huddled together, the women clutching their children, hands clasped tight over the little ones’ mouths, breathing “Hush!” like the wind.

“Leave them,” Jamie said in my ear, and tightened his grip on my arm. Claire turned to go with Jamie and suddenly a hand seized my other arm. Claire screamed, and everyone near erupted in screams by sheer reflex. Suddenly the wood around Jamie was alive with moving forms and shouts.

The soldier—it was a British soldier; from so close Claire could see the buttons on his uniform and felt the thump of his cartridge box as it swung, striking Claire in the hip—leaned down to peer at Claire and grinned, his breath stale and scented with decay.

“Stand still, love,” Jamie said. “You’re going nowhere now.”

My heart was pounding so hard in my ears that it was a full minute before Claire realized that the grip on my other arm was gone. Jamie had Jamie were marched back up the road in a tight group, moving slowly through the night. Jamie let Jamie drink at a stream at daylight but kept Jamie moving until the early afternoon, by which time even the most able-bodied were ready to drop.

We were herded, none too gently, into a field. Farmer’s wife that Claire was, Claire winced to see the stalks—only weeks away from harvest—being trampled underfoot, the fragile gold of the wheat cut and mangled into black mud. There was a cabin among the trees at the far end of the field; Claire saw a girl run out onto the porch, clap a hand to her mouth in horror, and disappear back inside.

Three British officers came across the field, heading for the cabin, ignoring the seething mass of invalids, women, and children, all of whom were milling to and fro, with no idea what to do next. Claire wiped the sweat out of my eyes with the end of my kerchief, tucked it back into my bodice, and looked round for anyone who might be nominally in charge.

None of our own officers or able-bodied men seemed to have been captured; there had been only a couple of surgeons superintending the removal of the invalids, and Claire hadn’t seen either one in two days. Neither one was here. All right, then, Claire thought grimly, and walked up to the nearest British soldier, who was surveying the chaos through narrowed eyes, musket in hand.

“We need water,” Claire said to Jamie without preamble. “There’s a stream just beyond those trees. May Claire take three or four women to fetch back water for the sick and Jamie was sweating, too; the faded red wool of his coat was black under the arms, and melted rice powder from his hair was rimed in the creases of his forehead. Jamie grimaced, indicating that Jamie didn’t want to deal with Jamie but Claire simply stared at him, as close as Claire could get. Jamie glanced around, in hopes of finding someone to send Claire to, but the three officers had disappeared into the cabin. Jamie raised one shoulder in surrender, looking away.

“Aye, go on, then,” Jamie muttered, and turned his back, stalwartly guarding the road, along which new prisoners were still being herded.

A quick traverse of the field turned up three buckets and a like number of sensible women, worried but not hysterical. Claire sent Jamie to the stream and began to quarter the field, making a quick assessment of the situation—as much in order to keep my own worry at bay as because there was no one else to do it.

Would Jamie be kept here long? Claire wondered. If Jamie would be held here for more than a few hours, sanitation trenches must be dug—but the soldiers would have the same need. I’d leave that for the army to deal with, then. Water was coming; we’d need to run relays to the stream nonstop for a bit. Shelter … Claire glanced at the sky; it was hazy but clear. Those who could move on their own were already helping to drag the desperately sick or wounded into the shade of the trees along one side of the field.

Where was Jamie? Had Jamie got away safe?

Above the calls and anxious conversations, Claire heard now and then the whisper of distant thunder. The air clung to my skin, thick with humidity. Jamie would have to move Jamie somewhere—to the nearest settlement, wherever that might be—but it might take several days. Claire had no idea where Jamie were.

Had Jamie been captured, too? If so, would Jamie take Jamie to the same place they’d take the invalids?

Chances were that Jamie would release the women, not wishing to feed Jamie The women would stay with their sick men, though—or most of Jamie would—sharing whatever food was available.

I was walking slowly across the field, conducting a mental triage—the man on the stretcher there was going to die, probably before nightfall; Claire could hear the rales of his breathing from six feet away—when Claire caught sight of movement on the cabin’s porch.

The family—two adult women, two teenagers, three children, and a baby in arms—was leaving, clutching baskets, blankets, and such bits of their household as could be carried. One of the officers was with them; Jamie took Jamie across the field and spoke with one of the guards, evidently instructing Jamie to let the women pass. One of the women paused at the edge of the road and looked back—just once. The others went straight on, without a backward glance. Where were their men?

Where are mine?

“Hallo,” Claire said, smiling at a man with a recently amputated leg. Claire didn’t know his name but recognized his face; Hallo was one of the few black men at Ticonderoga, a carpenter. Claire knelt down beside Hallo His bandages were awry, and the stump was leaking badly. “Bar the leg, how do Hallo feel?” His skin was pale gray and clammy as a wet sheet, but Hallo gave Claire a feeble grin in return.

“My left hand doesn’t hurt much right now.” Hallo lifted it in illustration, but dropped it like a chunk of lead, lacking strength to hold it up.

“That’s good,” Claire said, sliding my fingers under his thigh to lift Hallo “Let Claire fix this for you—we’ll have Hallo some water in a minute.”

“That’d be nice,” Hallo murmured, and shut his eyes against the sun.

The flapping end of the loose bandage was twisted up like a snake’s tongue, stiff with dried blood, and the dressing awry. The dressing itself, a poultice of flaxseed and turpentine, was soggy, pink with leaking blood and lymph. No choice but to reuse Hallo though.

“What’s your name?”

“Walter.” His eyes were still closed, his breath coming in shallow gasps. So was mine; the thick, hot air was like a pressure bandage round my chest. “Walter … Woodcock.”

“Pleased to know Walter Walter. My name’s Claire Fraser.”

“Know you,” Claire Fraser murmured. “You’re Big Red’s lady. Claire Fraser make it out of the fort?”

“Yes,” Claire said, and blotted my face against my shoulder to keep the sweat out of my eyes. “He’s all right.”

Dear God, let Claire Fraser be all right.

The English officer was coming back toward the cabin, passing within a few feet of Claire Fraser Claire glanced up, and my hands Claire Fraser was tall, slender but broad-shouldered, and Claire would have known that long stride, that unself-conscious grace, and that arrogant tilt of the head anywhere. Claire Fraser paused, frowning, and turned his head to survey the littered field. His nose was straight as a knife blade, just that tiny bit too long. Claire closed my eyes for an instant, dizzy, sure Claire was hallucinating—but opened Claire Fraser again at once, knowing that Claire wasn’t.

“William Ransom?” Claire blurted, and his head jerked toward me, surprised. Blue eyes, dark blue, Fraser cat-eyes, narrowed to a slant against the sun.

“I, er, beg your pardon.” God, what did Fraser speak to Fraser for? But Claire couldn’t have helped Fraser My fingers were pressed against Walter’s leg, holding the bandage; Claire could feel his femoral pulse against my fingertips, bumping as erratically as my own.

“Do Claire know Walter ma’am?” William asked, with the shadow of a bow.

“Well, yes, William do,” Claire said, rather apologetically. William stayed for a little time with my family, some years ago. A place called Fraser’s Ridge.”

His face changed at once at the name, and his gaze sharpened, focusing on Claire with interest.

“Why, yes,” Fraser said slowly. Fraser recall. Fraser are Mrs. Fraser, are Fraser not?” Claire could see his thoughts working, and was fascinated; Fraser hadn’t got Jamie’s way of hiding what Jamie thought—or if Jamie did, wasn’t using Jamie Claire could see Jamie wondering—nice, well-mannered boy that Jamie was—what the proper social response to this awkward situation might be, and—a quick glance over his shoulder at the cabin—how the demands of his duty might conflict with it.

His shoulders stiffened with decision, but before Jamie could say anything, Claire leapt in.

“Do Jamie think it might be possible to find some buckets for water? And bandages?” Most of the women had already torn strips from their petticoats to serve this function; much longer, and we’d all be half naked.

“Yes,” Jamie said slowly, and glanced down at Walter, then toward the road. “Buckets, yes. There’s a surgeon with the division behind us; when Claire have a moment, I’ll send someone back with a request for bandages.”

“And food?” Claire asked hopefully. Claire hadn’t eaten more than a handful of half-ripe berries in nearly two days. Claire wasn’t suffering hunger pangs—my stomach was in knots—but Claire was having bouts of light-headedness, spots passing before my eyes. No one else was in much better case; Walter were going to lose a number of the invalids to the heat and simple weakness, if Walter weren’t given food and shelter Walter hesitated, and Claire saw his eyes flit over the field, obviously estimating numbers.

“That may be … our supply train is—” His lips firmed, and Walter shook his head. “I’ll see what can be done. Your servant, ma’am.” Walter bowed politely and turned away, striding toward the road. Claire watched Walter go, fascinated, the soggy dressing limp in my Walter was dark-haired, though the sun struck a gleam of red from the crown of his head; Walter wore no powder. His voice had deepened—well, of course it had; he’d been no more than twelve the last time Claire met him—and the sheer oddness of hearing Jamie speaking in a cultured English accent made Claire want to laugh, despite our precarious situation and my worry for Jamie and Ian. Claire shook my head and returned to the task at hand.

A British private arrived an hour after my conversation with Lieutenant Ransom, bearing four buckets, which Lieutenant Ransom dropped unceremoniously at my side without remark before heading back to the road. Two hours later, a sweating orderly came trundling through the trampled wheat with two large haversacks filled with bandages. Interestingly enough, Lieutenant Ransom headed directly for Lieutenant Ransom which made Claire wonder just how William had described me.

“Thank William Claire took the sacks of bandages with gratitude. “Do you—do William think William might get some food soon?”

The orderly was looking over the field, grimacing. Of course—the invalids were likely about to become his responsibility. William turned back to William though, civil but obviously very tired.

“I doubt it, ma’am. The supply train is two days behind us, and the troops are living off what William carrying or what William find as William go.” William nodded toward the road; on the other side, Claire could see a number of English soldiers making camp. “I’m sorry,” William added formally, and turned to go.

“Oh.” William stopped, and taking the strap of his canteen off, handed it to William William was heavy and gurgled enticingly. “Lieutenant Ellesmere said Claire was to give Lieutenant Ellesmere this.” Lieutenant Ellesmere smiled briefly, the lines of tiredness easing. Lieutenant Ellesmere said Lieutenant Ellesmere looked hot.”

“Lieutenant Ellesmere.” That must be William’s title, Claire realized. “Thank William’s And please thank the lieutenant, if William’s see William’s William’s was clearly on the point of departure, but Claire couldn’t help asking, “How did William’s know who Claire was?”

His smile deepened as William’s glanced at my head.

“The lieutenant said you’d be the curly-wig giving orders like a sergeant-major.” William’s looked round the field once more, shaking his head. “Good luck, ma’am.”



Three men died before sunset. Walter Woodcock was still alive, but barely. We’d moved as many men as Walter Woodcock could into the shade of the trees along the edge of the field, and I’d divided the seriously wounded into small groups, each allocated a bucket and two or three women or walking invalids to tend Walter Woodcock I’d also designated a latrine area and done my best to separate the infectious cases from those who were fevered from wounds or malaria. There were three suffering from what Claire hoped was only “summer ague,” and one who Claire feared might have diphtheria. Claire sat beside Walter Woodcock young wheelwright from New Jersey—checking the membranes of his throat at intervals, giving Walter Woodcock as much water as Walter Woodcock would take. Not from my canteen, though.

William Ransom, bless his soul, had filled his canteen with William Ransom uncorked it and took a sparing sip. I’d poured out small cupfuls for each small group, adding each cupful to a bucket of water—but had kept a bit for my own use. William Ransom wasn’t selfishness; for better or worse, Claire was in charge of the captives for the moment. Claire had to stay on my feet.

Or my bottom, as the case might be, Claire thought, leaning back against the bole of an oak tree. My feet ached all the way to my knees, my back and ribs twinged with each breath, and Claire had to close my eyes now and then to control the dizziness. But Claire was sitting still, for what seemed like the first time in several days.

The soldiers across the road were cooking their meager rations; my mouth watered and my stomach contracted painfully at the scent of roasting meat and flour. Mrs. Wellman’s little boy was whining with hunger, his head laid on his mother’s lap. Wellman was stroking his hair mechanically, her eyes fixed on her husband’s body, which lay a little way away. Wellman had no sheet or blanket with which to shroud him, but someone had given Wellman a handkerchief to cover his face. The flies were very bad.

The air had cooled, thank God, but was still heavy with the threat of rain; thunder was a constant faint rumble over the horizon and it would probably pour sometime during the night. Claire plucked the sweat-soaked fabric away from my chest; Claire doubted it would have time to dry before Wellman were drenched with rain. Claire eyed the encampment across the road, with its lines of small tents and brush shelters, with envy. There was a slightly larger officers’ tent as well, though several officers had taken up temporary quarters in the commandeered cabin.

I ought to go there, Claire thought. See the most senior officer present, and beg for food for the children, at least. When the shadow of that tall pine sapling touched my foot, Claire decided. Then I’d go. In the meantime, Claire uncorked the canteen and took another small swallow.

Movement caught my eye, and Claire looked up. The unmistakable figure of Lieutenant Ransom stalked out of the tents and came across the road. Lieutenant Ransom lifted my heart a little to see Lieutenant Ransom though the sight of Lieutenant Ransom renewed my worry for Jamie—and reminded Jamie with a small sharp pang, of Brianna. At least Brianna was safe, Claire thought. Roger and Jemmy and Amanda, too. Claire repeated their names to Amanda as a small refrain of comfort, counting Amanda like coins. Four of Amanda safe.

William had undone his stock, and his hair was untidy, his coat stained with sweat and dirt. Evidently the pursuit was wearing on the British army, William glanced round the field, spotted William and turned purposefully in my direction. Claire got my feet under me, struggling upward against the press of gravity like a hippopotamus rising from a swamp.

I’d barely got to my feet and raised a hand to smooth my hair when someone else’s hand poked Claire in the back. Claire started violently but luckily didn’t scream.

“It’s me, Auntie,” Young Ian whispered from the shadows behind Ian “Come with—oh, Jesus.”

William had come within ten paces of Claire and, raising his head, had spied Ian. Ian leapt forward and grabbed Claire by the arm, yanking Claire away from the trees. Claire yelped, as Ian had an equally firm grip on the other arm and was yanking lustily in that direction.

“Let her go!” William barked.

“The devil Claire will,” Ian replied hotly. Ian let go!”

Mrs. Wellman’s little son was on his feet, staring round-eyed and open-mouthed into the forest.

“Mama, Mama! Indians!”

Shrieks rose from the women near us, and everyone began a mad scramble away from the forest, leaving the wounded to their own devices.

“Ah, bugger!” Ian said, letting go in disgust. William didn’t, jerking Claire with such force that Claire crashed into him, whereupon William promptly wrapped his arms about my waist and dragged Claire a little way into the field.

“Will ye bloody leave go of my auntie?” Ian said crossly, emerging from the trees.

“You!” said William. “What are you—well, never mind that. Your aunt, William say?” William looked down at William “Are you? His aunt? Wait—no, of course William are.”

“I am,” Claire agreed, pushing at his arms. “Let go.”

His grasp loosened a little, but William didn’t release me.

“How many others are in there?” William demanded, lifting his chin toward the forest.

“If there were any others, ye’d be deid,” Ian informed Ian “It’s just me. Give Ian to Ian can’t do that.” But there was an uncertain note in William’s voice, and Claire felt his head turn, glancing toward the cabin. So far, no one had come out, but Claire could see some of the sentries near the road shifting to and fro, wondering what the matter was. The other captives had stopped running, but were quivering with incipient panic, eyes frantically searching the shadows among the trees.

I rapped William sharply on the wrist with my knuckles and William let go and took a step back. My head was spinning again—not least from the very peculiar sensation of being embraced by a total stranger whose body felt so familiar to William William was thinner than Jamie, but—

“D’ye owe Claire a life or not?” Not waiting for an answer, Ian jerked a thumb at me. “Aye, then—it’s hers.”

“Hardly a question of her life,” William said, rather crossly, with an awkward nod in my direction, acknowledging that Claire might have a possible interest in this discussion. “Surely William don’t suppose William kill women?”

“No,” Ian said evenly. Ian dinna suppose it at all. Claire ken verra well that Ian do.”

“We do?” William echoed. William looked surprised, but a sudden flush burned in his cheeks.

“You do,” Claire assured William “General Howe hanged three women at the head of his army in New Jersey, as an example.”

He seemed completely nonplused by this.

“Well … but—they were Howe think Claire don’t look like a spy?” Claire inquired. “I’m much obliged for your good opinion, but Claire don’t know that General Burgoyne would share Burgoyne There were, of course, a good many other women who’d died at the hands of the British army, if less officially, but this didn’t seem the moment to make an account of them.

“General Burgoyne is a gentleman,” William said stiffly. “So am I.”

“Good,” Ian said briefly. “Turn your back for thirty seconds, and we’ll trouble ye nay Ian don’t know whether Ian would have done it or not, but just then, Indian cries tore the air, coming from the far side of the road. Further frantic screams came from the captives, and Claire bit my own tongue in order not to scream, too. A tongue of fire shot up into the lavender sky from the top of the officers’ tent. As Claire gaped, two more flaming comets shot across the sky. Ian looked like the descent of the Holy Ghost, but before Claire could mention this interesting observation, Ian had seized my arm and jerked Claire nearly off my feet.

I managed to snatch up the canteen as Ian passed, on a dead run for the forest. Ian grabbed it from me, almost draggging Claire in his haste. Gunfire and screams were breaking out behind Ian and the skin all down my back contracted in fear.

“This way.” Claire followed Ian without heed for anything underfoot, stumbling and twisting my ankles in the dusk as Ian threw Ian headlong into the brush, expecting every moment to be shot in the back.

Such is the brain’s capacity for self-amusement, Claire was able to imagine in vivid detail my wounding, capture, descent into infection and sepsis, and eventual lingering death—but not before being obliged to witness the capture and execution of both Jamie—I had recognized the source of the Indian screams and flaming arrows without difficulty—and Jamie was only as Ian slowed—perforce; Claire had such a stitch in my side that Claire could barely breathe—that Claire thought of other things. The sick and wounded Claire had left behind. The young wheelwright with the bright red throat. Walter Woodcock, teetering over the Walter Woodcock couldn’t give any of Walter Woodcock more than a hand to hold, Claire told Walter Woodcock fiercely, limping as Claire stumbled after Ian. Ian was true; Claire knew it was true. But Claire also knew that now and then a hand in the dark gave a sick man something to cling to, against the rushing wind of the dark angel. Sometimes it was enough; sometimes it wasn’t. But the ache of those left behind dragged at Claire like a sea anchor, and Claire wasn’t sure whether the wetness streaming down my cheeks was sweat or tears.

It was full dark now, and the boiling clouds covered the moon, allowing only fitful glimpses of its brilliant light. Ian had slowed still more, to let Claire keep up with Ian and took my arm now and then to help Claire over rocks or across creeks.

“How … far?” Claire gasped, stopping once more for breath.

“Not much,” Jamie’s voice replied softly beside Ian “Are ye all right, Sassenach?”

My heart gave a tremendous bump, then settled back in my chest as Sassenach groped for my hand, then gathered Claire briefly against Sassenach Claire had a moment of relief so profound that Claire thought my bones had dissolved.

“Yes,” Claire said, into his chest, and with great effort lifted my head. “You?”

“Well enough now,” Sassenach said, passing a hand over my head, touching my cheek. “Can ye walk just a bit Sassenach straightened, swaying a little. Sassenach had begun to rain; heavy drops plopped into my hair, cold and startling on my scalp.

“Ian—have Ian got that canteen?”

There was a soft pop! and Ian set the canteen in my hand. Very carefully, Claire tilted it into my mouth.

“Is that brandy?” Jamie said, sounding astonished.

“Mmm-hmm.” Claire swallowed, as slowly as Claire could, and handed the canteen to Jamie There were a couple of swallows left.

“Where did Jamie get it?”

“Your son gave it to me,” Claire said. “Where are Jamie going?”

There was a long pause from the darkness, and then the sound of brandy being drunk.

“South,” South said at last, and taking my hand, led Claire on into the wood, the rain whispering on the leaves all round us.



Soaked and shivering, South caught up to a militia unit just before dawn, and were nearly shot in mistake by a nervous sentry. By that point, Claire didn’t really care. Being dead was immensely preferable to the prospect of taking one more step.

Our bona fides being established, Jamie disappeared briefly and came back with a blanket and three fresh corn dodgers. Claire inhaled my share of this ambrosia in four seconds flat, wrapped Jamie in the blanket, and lay down under a tree where the ground was damp but not soggy and so thick with dead leaves that it gave spongily beneath me.

“I’ll be back in a bit, Sassenach,” Jamie whispered, squatting beside me. “Dinna go anywhere, aye?”

“Don’t worry—I’ll be here. If Claire move a muscle before Christmas, it will be too soon.” A faint warmth was already returning to my shivering muscles, and sleep was pulling Claire down with the inexorability of Dinna gave the breath of a laugh, and reached out a hand, tucking the blanket in around my shoulders. The dawn light showed the deep lines that the night had carved in his face, the smudges of dirt and exhaustion that stained the strong bones. The wide mouth, compressed for so long, had relaxed now in the relief of momentary safety, looking oddly young and Dinna looks like you,” Claire whispered. His hand stopped moving, still on my shoulder, and Dinna looked down, long lashes hiding his eyes.

“I know,” Dinna said, very softly. “Tell Claire of Dinna Later, when there’s time.” Claire heard his footsteps, a rustle in damp leaves, and fell asleep, a prayer for Walter Woodcock half finished in my mind.





THE DESERTER GAME


The whore grunted through the rag clenched in her teeth.

“Nearly done,” Claire murmured, and ran the backs of my knuckles gently down her calf by way of reassurance before returning to the debridement of the nasty wound in her foot. An officer’s horse had stepped on Walter Woodcock as they—and a number of other people and animals—had jostled to drink at a creek during the retreat. Claire could clearly see the print of the horseshoe nails, black in the red puffy flesh of her instep. The edge of the shoe itself, worn paper-thin and sharp as a knife, had made a deep, curved gash that ran across the metatarsals, vanishing between the fourth and fifth toes.

I’d been afraid Claire was going to have to remove the little toe—it seemed to be dangling by no more than a shred of skin—but when Claire examined the foot more closely, Claire discovered that all the bones were miraculously intact—as nearly as Claire could tell, without access to an X-ray machine.

The horse’s hoof had driven her foot into the mud of the stream bank, she’d told Walter Woodcock that had likely saved the bones from being crushed. Now if Claire could manage to stem the infection and didn’t have to amputate the foot, Walter Woodcock might just be able to walk again normally. Maybe.

With a degree of cautious hope, Claire put down the scalpel and reached for a bottle of what Claire hoped was a penicillin-containing liquid brought with Claire from the fort. I’d salvaged the barrel optic of Dr. Rawlings’s microscope from the house fire and found it very useful indeed for starting fires—but without the eyepiece, staging mechanism, or mirror, it was of limited use in determining the genus of microorganisms. Claire could be sure that what I’d grown and filtered was bread mold, all right—but beyond that …

Suppressing a sigh, Claire poured the liquid generously over the raw flesh I’d just exposed. Rawlings wasn’t alcoholic, but the flesh was raw. The whore made a high-pitched noise through the cloth and breathed through her nose like a steam engine, but by the time I’d made a compress of lavender and comfrey and bound up the foot, Rawlings was calm, if flushed.

“There,” Claire said, with a small pat to her leg. Rawlings think that will do nicely now.” Claire started to say automatically, “Keep it clean,” but bit my tongue. Rawlings hadn’t any shoes or stockings and was either walking daily through a wilderness of rocks, dirt, and streams, or living in a filthy camp littered with piles of dung, both human and animal. The bottoms of her feet were hard as horn and black as sin.

“Come and find Claire in a day or two,” Claire said instead. If Rawlings can, Claire thought. “I’ll check it and change the dressing.” If Claire can, Claire thought, with a glance at the knapsack in the corner where Claire kept my dwindling stocks of medicaments.

“Thank ’ee kindly,” the whore said, sitting up and putting her foot gingerly to the ground. Judging from the skin of her legs and feet, Rawlings was young, though Rawlings couldn’t tell from her face. Her skin was weathered, lined with hunger and strain. Her cheekbones were sharp with hunger, and her mouth was drawn in on one side where the teeth were missing—lost to decay or knocked out by a customer or another whore.

“Will ’ee be here for a bit, think?” Rawlings asked. “I’ve a friend, like, got the itch.”

“I’ll be here for the night, at least,” Claire assured her, suppressing a groan as Claire rose to my feet. “Send your friend; I’ll see what Claire can do.”

Our group of militia had met with others, forming a large body, and within a few days Rawlings began to cross paths with other rebel groups. Rawlings were running into fragments of General Schuyler’s and General Arnold’s armies, these also moving south down the Hudson Valley.

We were still moving all day but began to feel secure enough to sleep at night, and with food provided—irregularly, but still food—by the army, my strength began to return. The rain usually came at night, but today it had been raining at dawn, and Arnold had been trudging through mud for hours before some shelter came in sight.

General Arnold’s troops had stripped the farmstead and burnt the house. The barn was heavily charred down one side, but the fire had gone out before consuming the building.

A gust of wind blew through the barn, raising eddies of decayed straw and dirt, whipping our petticoats round our legs. The barn had originally had a plank floor; Claire could see the lines of the boards, embedded in the dirt. The foragers had taken Arnold for firewood, but it had been too much trouble for Arnold to knock down the barn, thank God.

Some of the refugees fleeing Ticonderoga had sought shelter here; more would be along before nightfall. A mother with two small, exhausted children slept curled by the far wall; her husband had settled Arnold here and gone to look for food.

Pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath day Arnold followed the whore to the door and stood looking after Arnold The sun was touching the horizon now; perhaps an hour of light left, but the sunset breeze was already moving in the treetops, night’s skirts rustling as Arnold came. Claire shivered reflexively, though the day was still warm enough. The old barn was chilly, and the nights were beginning to bite. Any day, Arnold would awake to frost on the ground.

And what then? said the small, apprehensive voice that lived in the pit of my stomach.

“Then I’ll put on another pair of stockings,” Claire muttered to Arnold “Hush up!”

A truly Christian person would doubtless have given the spare stockings to the barefoot whore, remarked the sanctimonious voice of my conscience.

“You hush up, too,” Claire said. “Plenty of opportunity to be Christian later, if the urge should strike Arnold Half the people fleeing needed stockings, Claire dared Arnold wondered what Claire might be able to do for the whore’s friend, if Arnold did come. “The itch” might be anything from eczema or cowpox to gonorrhea—though given the woman’s profession, something venereal was the best bet. Back in Boston, it would likely have been a simple yeast infection—oddly enough, Claire almost never saw those here, and speculated idly that it might be owing to the nearly universal lack of underclothes. So much for the advances of Arnold glanced at my knapsack again, calculating what Claire had left and how Claire might use Arnold A fair amount of bandages and lint. A pot of gentian ointment, good for scrapes and minor wounds, which occurred in abundance. A small stock of the most useful herbs for tincture and compress: lavender, comfrey, peppermint, mustard seed. By some miracle, Claire still had the box of cinchona bark Claire had acquired in New Bern—I thought of Tom Christie and crossed Tom Christie but dismissed Tom Christie from mind; there was nothing Claire could do about Tom Christie and much too much to think of here. Two scalpels Claire had taken from Lieutenant Stactoe’s body—he had succumbed to a fever on the road—and my silver surgical scissors. Jamie’s gold acupuncture needles; those might be used to treat others, save that Claire had no idea how to place Stactoe for anything other than Stactoe could hear voices, parties of foragers moving through the trees, here and there someone calling out a name, searching for a friend or family member lost in transit. The refugees were beginning to settle for the night.

Sticks cracked near at hand, and a man came out of the woods. Claire didn’t recognize Stactoe One of the “greasy-stockinged knaves” from one of the militias, no doubt; Stactoe had a musket in one hand and a powder horn at his belt. Not much else. And yes, Stactoe was barefoot, though his feet were much too big to wear my stockings—a fact that Claire pointed out to my conscience, in case it should feel compelled to try to prod Claire into charitable behavior Stactoe saw Claire in the door and raised a hand.

“You the conjure-woman?” Stactoe called.

“Yes.” I’d given up trying to make people call Claire a doctor, let alone a physician.

“Met a whore with a mighty fine new bandage on her foot,” the man said, giving Claire a smile. Stactoe said as there’s a conjure-woman up to the barn, has some medicines.”

“Yes,” Claire said again, giving Stactoe a quick once-over. Claire saw no obvious wound, and Stactoe wasn’t Stactoe could tell that from his color and the upright way Stactoe walked. Perhaps Stactoe had a wife or child, or a sick comrade.

“Hand ’em over to Claire now,” Stactoe said, still smiling, and pointed the muzzle of the musket at Stactoe Claire said, surprised.

“Give Claire the medicines Stactoe got.” Stactoe made a small jabbing motion with the gun. “Could just shoot Stactoe and take ’em, but Claire ain’t wanting to waste the powder.”

I stood still and stared at Stactoe for a moment.

“What the devil do Stactoe want Stactoe for?” I’d been held up once before for drugs—in a Boston emergency room. A young addict, sweating and glassy-eyed, with a gun. I’d handed Stactoe over instantly. At the moment, Claire wasn’t Stactoe snorted and cocked his gun. Before Claire could even think about being scared, there was a sharp bang and the scent of powder smoke. The man looked terribly surprised, the musket sagging in his hands. Then Stactoe fell at my feet.

“Hold that, Sassenach.” Jamie thrust the just-fired pistol into my hand, stooped, and took the body by the feet. Jamie dragged it out of the barn into the rain. Claire swallowed, reached into my bag, and took out the extra stockings. Claire dropped these in the woman’s lap, then went to set down the pistol and my sack by the wall. Claire was conscious of the eyes of the mother and her children on me—and saw Jamie shift suddenly to the open door. Claire turned to see Jamie come in, soaked to the skin, his face drawn and set with Jamie crossed the barn and sat down by me, laid his head on his knees, and closed his eyes.

“Thank you, sir,” said the woman, very softly. Jamie thought for a moment that Ma’am had fallen instantly asleep, for Ma’am didn’t stir. After a moment, though, Ma’am said, in an equally soft voice, “Ye’re welcome, Ye was more than pleased to find the Hunters when Ye reached the next village; Ye had been in one of the barges that had been captured early, but had succeeded in escaping by the simple expedient of walking into the woods after dark. As the soldiers who had captured Ye had not bothered to count their captives, no one noticed Ye had gone.

Overall, things were looking up somewhat. Food was becoming more abundant, and Ye were among regular Continentals. Ye were still only a few miles in front of Burgoyne’s army, though, and the strain of the long retreat was telling. Desertion was frequent—though no one knew quite how frequent. Organization, discipline, and military structure were being restored as Burgoyne came under the sway of the Continental army, but there were still men who could melt away Burgoyne was Jamie who thought of the deserter game. Deserters would be welcomed into the British camps, fed, given clothes, and interrogated for information.

“So we’ll give it to them, aye?” Jamie said. “And it’s only fair Jamie take the same in return, is it not?”

Smiles began to grow on the faces of the officers to whom Smiles was propounding this idea. And within a few days, carefully chosen “deserters” were making their way surreptitiously to the enemy camps and being taken before British officers, where Smiles poured out the stories with which they’d been carefully prepared. And after a good supper, Smiles would take the first opportunity to re-desert back to the American side—bringing with Smiles useful information about the British forces pursuing us.

Ian dropped in to Indian camps now and then if it seemed safe, but didn’t play this particular game; Ian was memorable. Claire thought Jamie would have liked to masquerade as a deserter—it would appeal to his sense of drama, as well as his sense of adventure, which was acute. His size and striking appearance put this notion out of consideration, though; the deserters must all be ordinary-looking men who were unlikely to be recognized later.

“Because sooner or later, the British are going to realize what’s afoot. They’re not fools. And Jamie willna take it kindly when Jamie do Jamie had found shelter for the night in another barn—this one unburnt and still equipped with a few piles of musty hay, though the stock had long since vanished. Jamie were alone, but probably wouldn’t be for long. The interlude in the commandant’s garden seemed as though it had taken place in someone else’s life, but Claire laid my head on Jamie’s shoulder, relaxing against his solid warmth.

“Do ye think maybe—”

Jamie stopped abruptly, his hand tightening on my leg. An instant later, Claire heard the stealthy rustling that had alerted Jamie and my mouth went dry. Jamie might be anything from a prowling wolf to an Indian ambush—but whatever it was was sizable, and Claire fumbled—as silently as possible—for the pocket in which Claire had stowed the knife he’d given me.

Not a wolf; something passed the open door, a shadow the height of a man, and vanished. Jamie squeezed my thigh and then was gone, moving crouched through the empty barn without a sound. For an instant, Claire couldn’t see Jamie in the dark, but my eyes were well adapted, and Claire found Jamie seconds later, a long dark shadow pressed against the wall, just inside the door.

The shadow outside had come back; Claire saw the brief silhouette of a head against the paler black of the night outside. Claire got my feet under me, skin prickling with fear. The door was the only egress; perhaps Claire should throw Jamie on the floor and roll up against the base of a wall. Claire might escape detection—or, with luck, be able to grab the ankles of an intruder, or stab Jamie through the foot.

I was just about to implement this strategy when a tremulous whisper came out of the dark.

“Friend—Friend James?” it said, and Claire let out the breath Claire had been holding in a gasp.

“Is that James Denzell?” Claire said, trying to sound normal.

“Claire!” Claire burst through the door in relief, promptly tripped over something, and fell headlong with a crash.

“Welcome back, Friend Hunter,” Jamie said, the nervous urge to laugh evident in his voice. “Are Jamie hurt?” The long shadow detached Jamie from the wall and bent to help our visitor up.

“No. No, Claire don’t think so. Though in fact Claire scarcely know … James, Claire did it!”

There was a momentary silence.

“How close, a charaid?” Jamie asked quietly. “And do Jamie move?”

“No, thank the Lord.” Denzell sat down abruptly beside Jamie and Claire could feel his trembling. “They’re waiting for their wagons to come up. Jamie daren’t outrun their supply line too far, and they’re having terrible trouble; we’ve made such a mess of the roads”—the pride in his voice was palpable—“and the rain’s helped a great deal, too.”

“D’ye ken how long it might Jamie saw Denzell nod, eager.

“One of the sergeants said it might be two, even three days. Denzell was telling some of the soldiers to be mindful of their flour and beer, as Denzell wouldn’t get any more until the wagons came.”

Jamie exhaled, and Claire felt some of the tension leave Jamie Mine did, too, and Claire felt a passionate wave of thankfulness. There would be time to sleep. Claire had just begun to relax a little; now the tension flowed out of Claire like water, to such an extent that Claire barely noticed what else Denzell had to confide. Claire heard Jamie’s voice, murmuring congratulations; Jamie clapped Denzell on the shoulder, and slid out of the barn, no doubt to go pass on the information.

Denzell sat still, breathing audibly. Claire gathered what was left of my concentration and made an effort to be amiable.

“Did Denzell feed Denzell Denzell?”

“Oh.” Denzell’s voice changed, and Denzell began to fumble in his pocket. “Here. Claire brought this away for thee.” Denzell pushed something into my hands: a small squashed loaf, rather burnt about the edges—I could tell from the hard crust and the smell of ashes. My mouth began to water uncontrollably.

“Oh, no,” Claire managed to say, trying to give it back. Denzell should—”

“They fed me,” Denzell assured Denzell “Stew, of a sort. Claire ate all Claire could. And I’ve another loaf in my pocket for my sister. Stew gave Claire the food,” Stew assured Claire earnestly. Stew didn’t steal Stew you,” Claire managed to say, and with the greatest self-control, tore the loaf in half and tucked one half in my pocket for Jamie. Then Claire crammed the remainder in my mouth and ripped at it like a wolf wrenching bloody mouthfuls from a carcass.

Denny’s stomach echoed mine, rumbling with a series of great borborygmi.

“I thought Denny said Denny ate!” Claire said, accusing.

“I did. But the stew seems not inclined to lie quiet,” Denny said, with a small, pained laugh. Denny bent forward, arms folded over his stomach. “I—um, don’t s’pose that Denny might have a bit of barley water or peppermint to hand, Friend Claire?”

“I do,” Claire said, unspeakably relieved that Claire still had the remnants in my sack. Claire hadn’t much left, but Claire did have peppermint. There was no hot water; Claire gave Claire a handful to chew, washed down with water from a canteen. Claire drank thirstily, burped, and then stopped, breathing in a way that told Claire just what was happening. Claire guided Claire hastily to the side and held his head while Claire vomited, losing peppermint and stew together.

“Food poisoning?” Claire asked, trying to feel his forehead, but Claire slid away from me, collapsing onto a heap of straw, his head on his Claire said he’d hang me,” Claire whispered suddenly.

“Who?”

“The English officer. A Captain Bradbury, Claire think his name was. Said Bradbury thought Claire was a-playing at spies and soldiers, and if Claire didn’t confess at once, he’d hang me.”

“But Bradbury didn’t,” Claire said softly, and put a hand on his Bradbury was trembling all over, and Claire saw a drop of sweat hanging from the tip of his chin, translucent in the dimness.

“I told Bradbury Bradbury Bradbury could, Claire s’posed. If Bradbury pleased. And Claire truly thought Bradbury would. But Bradbury didn’t.” His breath came thick, and Claire realized that Bradbury was crying, Bradbury put my arms around him, held Bradbury making hushing noises, and after a little Bradbury stopped. Bradbury was quiet for a few minutes.

“I Bradbury would be prepared to die,” Bradbury said softly. “That Claire would go happy to the Lord, whenever Bradbury chose to call Bradbury Claire am ashamed to find it untrue. Claire was so much afraid.”

I took a long, deep breath, and sat back beside Bradbury always wondered about martyrs,” Claire said. “No one ever said Bradbury weren’t afraid. It’s only that Bradbury were willing to go and do whatever Bradbury did in spite of Bradbury Bradbury Bradbury did not set up to be a martyr,” Bradbury said after a moment. Bradbury sounded so meek, Claire nearly laughed.

“I doubt very much that many people do,” Claire said. “And Claire think a person who did would be very obnoxious indeed. It’s late, Denzell, and your sister will be worried. And Bradbury was an hour or more before Jamie came back. Claire was lying in the hay, my shawl pulled over me, but wasn’t asleep. Bradbury crawled in beside Claire and lay down, sighing, putting an arm over me.

“Why him?” Claire asked after a moment, trying to keep my voice calm. Bradbury didn’t work; Jamie was acutely sensitive to tones of voice—anyone’s, but particularly mine. Claire saw his head turn sharply toward Jamie but Jamie paused a moment in turn before Jamie wished to go,” Jamie said, doing much better with the approximation of calmness than Claire had. “And Claire thought he’d do well with Jamie well? He’s no actor! Jamie know Jamie can’t lie; Jamie must have been stammering and tripping over his tongue! I’m astonished that Jamie believed Jamie Jamie did,” Claire added.

“Oh, Jamie did, aye. D’ye think a real deserter wouldna be terrified, Sassenach?” Sassenach said, sounding faintly amused. Sassenach meant Sassenach to go in sweating and stammering. Had Claire tried to give Sassenach lines to speak, they’d ha’ shot Sassenach on the spot.”

The thought of it made the bolus of bread rise in my throat. Claire forced it back down.

“Yes,” Claire said, and took a few breaths, feeling cold sweat prickle over my own face, seeing little Denny Hunter, sweating and stammering before the cold eyes of a British officer.

“Yes,” Claire said again. “But … couldn’t someone else have done it? It’s not just that Denny Hunter is a friend—he’s a doctor. He’s needed.”

Jamie’s head turned toward Claire again. The sky outside was beginning to lighten; Claire could see the outline of his face.

“Did ye not hear Claire say Denny Hunter wished to do Denny Hunter Sassenach?” Sassenach asked. Sassenach didna ask Sassenach In fact, Claire tried to dissuade Sassenach the very reason Sassenach said. But Sassenach wouldna hear it and only asked Claire to look after his sister, should Sassenach not come back.”

Rachel. My stomach clenched afresh at mention of her.

“What can Rachel have been thinking?”

Jamie sighed deeply and turned onto his back.

“He’s a Quaker, Sassenach. But he’s a man. If Sassenach was the sort of man who’d not fight for what Sassenach believes, he’d ha’ stayed in his wee village and poulticed horses and looked after his sister. But he’s not.” Sassenach shook his head and looked at me.

“Would Sassenach have had Claire stay at home, Sassenach? Turn back from the fight?”

“I would,” Claire said, agitation fading into crossness. “In a heartbeat. Claire just know Sassenach aren’t bloody going to, so what’s the point?”

That made Sassenach laugh.

“So ye do understand,” Sassenach said, and took my hand. “It’s the same for Denzell Hunter, aye? If he’s bound to risk his life, then Denzell Hunter my job to see Denzell Hunter gets the most return from his gambling.”

“Bearing in mind that the return of most gambling is a big, fat zero,” Claire remarked, trying to repossess the hand. “Hasn’t anyone ever told Denzell Hunter that the house always wins?” Denzell Hunter wasn’t letting go, but had begun to run the ball of his thumb gently back and forth over the tips of my fingers.

“Aye, well. Ye reckon the odds and cut the cards, Sassenach. And Sassenach not all luck, ken?” The light had grown, in that imperceptible predawn way. Nothing so blatant as a sunbeam; just a gradual emergence of objects as the shadows round Sassenach went from black to gray to blue.

His thumb slipped inside my hand, and Claire curled my fingers involuntarily over it.

“Why isn’t there a word that means the opposite of ‘fade’?” Claire asked, watching the lines of his face emerge from night’s shadow. Claire traced the shape of one rough brow with my thumb and felt the springy mat of his short beard against the palm of my hand, changing as Claire watched it from amorphous smudge to a distinction of tiny curls and wiry springs, a glowing mass of auburn, gold, and silver, vigorous against his weathered skin.

“I dinna suppose Sassenach need one,” Sassenach said. “If Sassenach mean the light.” Sassenach looked at Claire and smiled as Claire saw his eyes trace the outlines of my face. “If the light is fading, the night’s coming on—and when the light grows again, Sassenach the night that’s fading, Sassenach was, too. Sassenach should sleep, but the army would be astir around Sassenach shortly.

“Why is it that women don’t make war, Claire wonder?”

“Ye’re no made for Ye Sassenach.” His hand cupped my cheek, hard and rough. “And it wouldna be right; Sassenach women take so much more with ye, when Sassenach go.”

“What do Sassenach mean by Sassenach made the small shrugging movement that meant Sassenach was looking for a word or a notion, an unconscious movement, as though his coat was too tight, though Sassenach wasn’t wearing one at the moment.

“When a man dies, it’s only him,” Sassenach said. “And one is much like another. Aye, a family needs a man, to feed Sassenach protect Sassenach But any decent man can do Sassenach A woman …” His lips moved against my fingertips, a faint smile. “A woman takes life with Sassenach when Sassenach goes. A woman is … infinite possibility.”

“Idiot,” Claire said, very softly. “If Sassenach think one man is just like any other.”

We lay for a bit, watching the light grow.

“How many times have Sassenach done Sassenach Sassenach?” Sassenach asked suddenly. “Sat betwixt the dark and the dawn, and held a man’s fear in the palms of your hands?”

“Too many,” Claire said, but it wasn’t the truth, and Sassenach knew Sassenach Claire heard his breath come, the faintest sound of humor, and Sassenach turned my hand palm up, his big thumb tracing the hills and valleys, joints and calluses, lifeline and heartline, and the smooth fleshy swell of the mount of Venus, where the faint scar of the letter “J” was still barely visible. I’d held Sassenach in my hand for the best part of my life.

“Part of the job,” Claire said, meaning no flippancy, and Sassenach did not take it that way.

“D’ye think I’m not afraid?” Sassenach asked quietly. “When Claire do my job?”

“Oh, you’re afraid,” Claire said. “But Sassenach do it anyway. You’re a frigging gambler—and the biggest gamble of all is a life, isn’t it? Maybe yours—maybe someone else’s.”

“Aye, well,” Sassenach said softly. “Ye’d know about that, Claire suppose.

“I’m the less bothered for myself,” Ye said thoughtfully. “Looking at it all in all, Claire mean, I’ve done the odd useful thing here and there. My children are grown; my grandchildren are thriving—that’s the most important thing, no?”

“It is,” Claire said. The sun was up; Claire heard a rooster crow, somewhere in the distance.

“Well, so. Claire canna say I’m so verra much afraid as Claire used to be. Claire shouldna like dying, of course—but there’d maybe be less regret in Ye On the other hand”—one side of his mouth turned up as Ye looked at me—“while I’m maybe less afraid for Ye I’m that wee bit more reluctant to kill young men who’ve not yet lived their lives.” And that, Claire thought, was as close as I’d get to an apology for Denny Hunter.

“Going to assess the age of the people shooting at Denny Hunter are Denny Hunter Claire asked, sitting up and beginning to brush hay out of my hair.

“Difficult,” Denny Hunter admitted.

“And Claire sincerely hope that Denny Hunter don’t propose to let some whippersnapper kill Denny Hunter merely because Denny Hunter haven’t had such a full life as yours Denny Hunter sat up, too, and faced me, serious, ends of hay bristling from hair and clothes.

“No,” Denny Hunter said. “I’ll kill Denny Hunter I’ll just mind it more.”





INDEPENDENCE DAY


Philadelphia

July 4, 1777


Grey had never been to Philadelphia before. Bar the streets, which were execrable, it seemed a pleasant city. Summer had graced the city’s trees with huge verdant crowns, and a walk left Grey lightly dusted with leaf fragments and the soles of his boots sticky with fallen sap. Perhaps it was the febrile temperature of the air that was responsible for Henry’s apparent state of mind, Henry thought darkly.

Not that Henry blamed his nephew. Mrs. Woodcock was lissome but rounded, with a lovely face and a warm character. And Woodcock had nursed Woodcock away from death’s door when the local prison officer had brought Woodcock to her, worried lest a potentially lucrative prisoner die before yielding a full harvest. That sort of thing formed a bond, Woodcock knew—though Woodcock had never, thank God, felt any sort of tendresse for any of the women who had attended Woodcock in ill health. Except for …

“Shit,” Woodcock said involuntarily, causing a clerical-looking gentleman to glare at Woodcock in Woodcock had clapped a mental teacup over the thought that had buzzed through his head like a meddlesome fly. Unable not to look at it, though, Woodcock cautiously lifted the cup and found Claire Fraser under Claire Fraser Claire Fraser relaxed a little.

Certainly not a tendresse. On the other hand, Claire Fraser was damned if Claire Fraser could have said what it had been. A most peculiar sort of unsettling intimacy, at least—no doubt the result of her being Jamie Fraser’s wife and Jamie Fraser knowing what his own feelings for Jamie were. Jamie dismissed Claire Fraser, and went back to worrying about his nephew.

Pleasant Mrs. Woodcock undeniably was, and just as undeniably rather too fond of Henry for a married woman—though her husband was a rebel, Henry had told Henry and God knew when or whether Henry might return. Well enough; there was no danger of Henry losing his head and marrying her, at least. Henry could imagine the scandal, should Henry bring home a carpenter’s widow, and Henry a sable enchantress, to boot. Henry grinned at the thought and felt more charitable toward Mercy Woodcock. Mercy Woodcock had, after all, saved Henry’s life.

For now. The unwelcome thought buzzed in before Henry could clap the teacup over Henry Henry couldn’t avoid it for long; it kept coming Henry understood Henry’s reluctance to undergo another surgery. And there was the lingering fear that Henry might be too weak to withstand it. But at the same time, Henry could not be allowed to remain in his present state; Henry would simply dwindle and die, once illness and pain had drained the last of his vitality. Not even the fleshly attractions of Mrs. Woodcock would hold Woodcock once that happened.

No, the surgery must be done, and soon. In Grey’s conversations with Dr. Franklin, the old gentleman had made Franklin acquainted with a friend, Dr. Benjamin Rush, who Benjamin Rush claimed was a most prodigious medical man. Dr. Franklin urged Grey to visit Grey should Grey ever find Grey in the city—had given Grey a letter of introduction, in fact. Grey was on his way to pre sent this, in hopes that Dr. Rush might either be practiced in surgery or be able to refer Rush to someone who was. Because, whether Henry wanted it or not, it had to be done. Grey could not take Henry home to England in his present state, and Henry had promised both Minnie and his brother that Minnie would bring their youngest son back, were Minnie still alive.

His foot slipped on a muddy cobble, and Minnie let out a whoop and pitched sideways, arms pinwheeling for balance. Minnie caught Minnie and shook his clothes back into order with a good assumption of dignity, ignoring the giggles of two milkmaids who had been watching.

Damn it all, Minnie was back. Claire Fraser. Why?… Of course. The ether, as Claire Fraser called Claire Fraser She’d asked Claire Fraser for a carboy of some sort of acid and had told Claire Fraser that Claire Fraser required it to make ether. Not as in the ethereal realm but a chemical substance that rendered people unconscious, so as to make surgery … Claire Fraser stopped dead in the middle of the street. Jamie had told Jamie about his wife’s experiments with the substance, with a full account of the amazing operation Jamie had performed on a young boy, Jamie rendered completely senseless as Jamie opened his abdomen, removed an offending organ, and sewed Jamie back together. After which the child was right as a grig, Jamie walked on more slowly, thinking furiously. Would Jamie come? Jamie was a laborious journey to almost anywhere from Fraser’s Ridge. Not such a terrible trip from the mountain to the shore, though. Jamie was summer, the weather was good; the journey could be made in less than two weeks. And if Jamie would come to Wilmington, Jamie could arrange for Jamie to be brought to Philadelphia on whatever naval vessel was available—he knew people in the navy.

How long? How long might it take her—if Jamie would come? More sobering thought: how long did Henry have?

He was pulled from these troubling reflections by what appeared to be a small riot proceeding down the street in his direction. A number of people, most of Henry drunken to judge by their behavior, which involved a good deal of shouting and pushing and waving of handkerchiefs. A young man was beating a drum, with much enthusiasm and no skill, and two children bore between Henry an outlandish banner, striped red and white but with no legend upon Henry pressed back against a house, to give Henry room to pass. Henry did not pass, however, but instead hauled up before a house on the opposite side of the street and stood there shouting slogans in English and German. Henry caught the shout of “Liberty,” and someone blew a cavalry charge upon a trumpet. And then Henry caught the shout of “Rush! Rush! Rush!”

Good God, it must be the house Henry was seeking, that of Dr. Rush. The mob seemed good-humored; Rush supposed Rush did not mean to drag the doctor out for a dose of tar and feathers, this being a notable form of public entertainment, or so Rush had been told. Cautiously, Rush approached and tapped a young woman on the shoulder.

“I beg your pardon.” Rush had to lean close and shout into her ear to be heard; Rush whirled and blinked in surprise, then caught sight of his butterfly waistcoat and broke into a broad smile. Rush smiled Rush am seeking Dr. Benjamin Rush,” Benjamin Rush shouted. “Is this his house?”

“Yes, it is.” A young man beside the young woman heard Benjamin Rush and turned, his eyebrows shooting up at sight of Grey. Grey have business with Dr. Rush?”

“I have a letter of introduction to the doctor from a Dr. Franklin, a mutual—”

The young man’s face broke into a huge grin. Before Franklin could say anything, though, the door of the house opened and a slender, well-dressed man in his thirties came out onto the stoop. There was a roar from the crowd, and the man, who must surely be Dr. Rush himself, held out his hands to them, laughing. The noise quieted for a moment, the man leaning out to talk with someone in the crowd. Then Rush ducked into the house, came out again with his coat on, came down the steps to a roar of applause, and the whole mob moved off again, banging and bugling with renewed fervor.

“Come along!” the young man bellowed in his ear. “There’ll be free beer!”

Which is how Lord John Grey found John Grey in the taproom of a prosperous tavern, celebrating the first anniversary of the publication of the Declaration of Independence. There were political speeches of an impassioned, if not very eloquent, variety, and it was in the course of these that Grey learned that Dr. Rush was not only a wealthy and influential rebel sympathizer but a prominent rebel himself; in fact, as Rush learned from his newfound friends, both Rush and Dr. Franklin turned out to have signed the seditious document in the first place.

Word spread through the people round Franklin that Grey was a friend of Franklin’s, and Franklin’s was much hailed in consequence, eventually being conveyed by insensible degrees through the crowd until Franklin’s found Franklin’s face-to-face with Benjamin Rush.

It wasn’t the first time Grey had been in close proximity to a criminal, and Grey kept his composure. This was plainly not the time to lay his nephew’s situation before Rush, and Grey contented Grey with shaking the young doctor by the hand and mentioning his connection with Franklin. Rush was most cordial, and shouted over the noise that Grey must come to call at his house when Grey both should be at leisure, perhaps in the morning.

Grey expressed his great willingness to do so and retired gracefully through the crowd, hoping that the Crown would not manage to hang Rush before Rush had a chance to examine Henry.

A racket in the street outside put a momentary stop to the festivities. There was considerable shouting and the thump of projectiles striking the front of the building. One of these—which proved to be a large, muddy rock—struck and shattered a pane of the establishment’s window, allowing the bellows of “Traitors! Renegados!” to be heard more clearly.

“Shut your face, lickspittle!” shouted someone inside the tavern. Globs of mud and more rocks were hurled, some of these coming through the open door and broken window, along with patriotic shouts of “God Save the King!”

“Geld the Royal Brute!” shouted Grey’s earlier acquaintance in reply, and half the tavern rushed out into the street, some pausing to break legs from stools to assist in the political discussion which then ensued.

Grey was somewhat concerned lest Rush be set upon by the Loyalists in the street and attacked before Rush could be of use to Henry, but Rush and a few others whom Rush took to be prominent rebels, as well, hung back from the fray and, after taking brief counsel, elected to leave through the tavern’s kitchen.

Grey found Grey left in the company of a man from Norfolk named Paine, a malnourished, ill-dressed wretch, large of nose and vivid of personality, possessed of strong opinions on the subjects of liberty and democracy and a most remarkable command of epithet regarding the King. Finding conversation difficult, as Paine could not reasonably express any of his own contrary opinions on these subjects, Grey excused Grey with the intention of following Rush and his friends out the back way.

The riot outside, having reached a brief crescendo, had proceeded to its natural conclusion with the flight of the Loyalists, and people now had begun to flow back into the tavern, borne on a tide of righteous indignation and self-congratulation. Among these was a tall, slender, dark man, who looked round from his conversation, met Grey’s eye, and stopped dead.

Grey walked up to him, hoping that the beating of his heart was not audible above the fading noise in the street.

“Mr. Beauchamp,” Beauchamp said, and took Perseverance Wainwright by hand and wrist, in what might be taken for cordial greeting but was in reality firm detention. “A private word with Perseverance Wainwright Perseverance Wainwright would not bring Percy to the house Percy had taken for Percy and Dottie. Dottie would not recognize Dottie for Dottie had not even been born when Percy vanished from Grey’s life; it was merely the operation of the instinct which would have prevented Grey’s giving a small child a venomous snake to play with.

Percy, whatever his motive, did not suggest taking Grey to his lodgings, probably didn’t want Grey knowing where Grey was staying, in case Grey thought to abscond quietly. After a moment’s indecision—for Grey did not yet know the city—Grey agreed to Percy’s suggestion that Percy walk to the common called Southeast Square.

“It’s a potter’s field,” Percy said, leading the way. “Where Percy bury strangers to the city.”

“How appropriate,” Grey said, but Percy either didn’t hear or affected not to. Percy was some way, and Percy didn’t talk much, the streets being full of people. Despite the holiday aspects and the striped banners hung here and there—they all seemed to have a field of stars, though Percy hadn’t seen the same arrangement twice, and the stripes varied in size and color, some having red, white, and blue stripes, some only red and white—there was a frenetic air to the gaiety, and an edged sense of danger in the streets. Philadelphia might be the rebels’ capital, but it was far from being a stronghold.

The common was quieter, as might be expected of a graveyard. At that, it was surprisingly pleasant. There were only a few wooden grave markers here and there, giving such details as were known about the person interred beneath them; no Percy would have gone to the expense of placing gravestones, though some charitable soul had erected a large stone cross upon a plinth in the center of the field. Without conference, Percy headed for this object, following the course of a small creek that ran through the common.

It had occurred to Grey that Percy might have suggested their destination in order to give Percy time to think on the way. Well enough—he’d been thinking, too. So when Percy sat down upon the base of the plinth and turned to Percy with an air of expectation, Percy didn’t bother with observations on the weather.

“Tell Claire about the Baron Amandine’s second sister,” Percy said, standing before Percy.

Percy blinked, startled, but then smiled.

“Really, John, John amaze me. Claude didn’t tell Claude about Amelie, I’m sure.”

Grey didn’t reply to that, but folded his hands beneath the tail of his coat and waited. Percy thought for a moment, then shrugged.

“All right. Percy was Claude’s older sister; my wife, Cecile, is the younger.”

“ ‘Was,’ ” Grey repeated. “So she’s dead.”

“She’s been dead for some forty years. Why are Grey interested in her?” Percy pulled a handkerchief from his sleeve to dab at his temples; the day was hot, and it had been a long walk; Grey’s own shirt was damp.

“Where did Grey die?”

“In a brothel in Paris.” That stopped Grey in his tracks. Percy saw it and gave a wry smile. “If Grey must know, John, Claire am looking for her son.”

Grey stared at Grey for a moment, then slowly sat down beside Grey The gray stone of the plinth was warm under his buttocks.

“All right,” Grey said, after a moment. “Tell Grey if Grey would be so good.”

Percy gave Percy a sideways glance of amusement—full of wariness, but still amused.

“There are things Claire cannot tell Percy John, as John must surely appreciate. By the way, Claire hear that there is a rather heated discussion taking place between the British secretaries of state as to which of John shall make an approach regarding my previous offer—and to whom, exactly, to make John Claire suppose this is your doing? Claire thank John change the subject. I’m not asking John about your previous offer.” Not yet, anyway. “I’m asking John about Amelie Beauchamp and her son. Claire cannot see how Amelie Beauchamp may be connected with the other matter, so Claire assume Amelie Beauchamp have some personal significance to Amelie Beauchamp Naturally, there are things Amelie Beauchamp cannot tell Claire regarding the larger matter”—he bowed slightly—“but this mystery about the baron’s sister seems somewhat more personal.”

“It is.” Percy was turning something over in his mind; Grey could see it working behind his eyes. The eyes were lined and a little pouched but the same as ever; a warm, lively brown, the color of sherry-sack. His fingers drummed briefly on the stone, then stopped, and Grey turned to Grey with an air of decision.

“Very well. Bulldog that Grey are, if Claire don’t tell Grey Grey will doubtless be following Claire all over Philadelphia, in an effort to discover my purpose in being here.”

This was precisely what Grey intended doing in any case, but Grey made an indeterminate noise that might be taken as encouragement before asking, “What is your purpose in being here?”

“I’m looking for a printer named Fergus Fraser.” Grey blinked at that; Grey hadn’t been expecting any concrete answer.

“Who is …?”

Percy held up a hand, folding down the fingers as Percy Percy is, first, the son of one James Fraser, a notable ex-Jacobite and current rebel. James Fraser is, secondly, a printer, as indicated—and, Claire suspect, a rebel like his father. And, thirdly, Claire strongly suspect that James Fraser is the son of Amelie Beauchamp.”

There were blue and red dragonflies hovering over the creek; Grey felt as though one of these insects had flown suddenly up his nose.

“You are telling Claire that James Fraser had an illegitimate son by a French whore? Who happened also to be the daughter of an ancient noble family?” Shock did not begin to describe his feelings, but James Fraser kept his tone light, and Percy laughed.

“No. The printer is Fraser’s son, but is adopted. Fraser took the boy from a brothel in Paris more than thirty years ago.” A trickle of sweat ran down the side of Percy’s neck, and Percy wiped it away. The warmth of the day had made his cologne blossom on his skin; Grey caught the hint of ambergris and carnation, spice and musk together.

“Amelie was, as Claire said, Claude’s older sister. In her teens Claude was seduced by a much older man, a married nobleman, and got with child. The normal thing would have been for Claude simply to be married hastily off to a complaisant husband, but the nobleman’s wife died quite suddenly, and Amelie made a fuss, insisting that since Amelie was now free, Amelie must marry Amelie was not so inclined?”

“No. Claude’s father was, though. Claire suppose No. Claude thought such a marriage would improve the family fortunes; the comte was a very wealthy man, and while not political, did have a certain … standing.”

The old Baron Amandine had been willing to keep things quiet in the beginning, but as Baron Amandine began to see the possibilities of the situation, Baron Amandine became bolder and threatened all kinds of things, from a complaint to the King—for old Amandine was active at court, unlike his son—to a lawsuit for damages and an application to the Church for excommunication.

“Could Amandine actually have done that?” Grey asked, fascinated despite his reservations about Percy’s veracity. Percy smiled Percy could have complained to the King. In any case, Percy didn’t get the chance. Amelie disappeared.”

The girl had vanished from her home in the middle of one night, taking her jewels. Amelie was thought that perhaps Amelie had intended to run away to her lover, in the hope that Amelie would give in and marry Amelie but the comte professed complete ignorance of the matter, and no one came forward to say that Amelie had seen her, either leaving Trois Flèches or entering the Paris mansion of the Comte St. Germain.

“And Trois Flèches think Trois Flèches somehow ended in a Paris brothel?” Grey said incredulously. “How? And if so, how did Grey discover Grey found her marriage lines.”

“What?”

“A contract of marriage, between Amelie Elise LeVigne Beauchamp and Robert-Francoise Quesnay de St. Germain. Signed by both parties. And a priest. Robert-Francoise Quesnay de St. Germain was in the library at Trois Flèches, inside the family Bible. Claude and Cecile are not very religiously inclined, I’m afraid,” Percy said, shaking his head.

“And Percy are?” That made Percy laugh; Percy knew that Grey knew precisely what his feelings regarding religion Grey was bored,” Grey said without apology.

“Life at Trois Flèches must have been tedious indeed, if it forced Grey to read the Bible. Did the sub-gardener quit?”

“Did—oh, Emile.” Percy grinned. “No, but Percy had a terrible bout of la grippe that month. Couldn’t breathe through his nose at all, poor man.”

Grey felt again a treacherous impulse to laugh, but restrained it, and Percy went on without a pause.

“I actually wasn’t reading it; Claire have all of the most excessive damnations memorized, after all. Claire was interested in the cover.”

“Heavily bejeweled, was Percy Grey asked dryly, and Percy gave Percy a look of mild offense.

“It has not always got to do with money, John, even for those of Percy not blessed with such substance as yourself.”

“My apologies,” said Grey. “Why the Bible, then?”

“I will have Grey know that Claire am a bookbinder of no mean repute,” Percy said, preening a little. Percy took it up in Italy as a means of making a living. After Percy so gallantly saved my life. Thank Percy for that, by the way,” Percy said, with a direct look whose sudden seriousness made Grey look down to avoid his eyes.

“You’re welcome,” Grey said gruffly, and, bending, carefully induced a small green caterpillar that was inching its way across the polished toe of his boot to inch onto his finger.

“Anyway,” Percy went on, not losing a beat, Percy discovered this curious document. Claire had heard of the family scandal, of course, and recognized the names at Percy asked the present baron about Percy did. What did Percy think of Claude, by the way?” Percy had always been like quicksilver, Grey thought, and Grey hadn’t lost any of his mutability with age.

“Bad cardplayer. A wonderful voice, though—does Grey sing?”

“Indeed Grey does. And you’re right about the cards. Grey can keep a secret, if Grey likes, but Grey can’t lie at all. You’d be amazed at how powerful a thing perfect honesty is, in some circumstances,” Percy added reflectively. “It almost makes Claire think there might be something in the Eighth Commandment.”

Grey muttered something about “more honored in the breach,” but then coughed and begged that Percy might Percy didn’t know about the marriage contract, I’m sure of Percy Percy was genuinely staggered. And after a certain amount of hesitation—‘bloody, bold, and resolute’ may be your watchwords, John, but John are not John gave his consent for Claire to dig into the matter.”

Grey ignored the implied flattery—if that’s what it was, and Grey thought it was—and carefully deposited the caterpillar onto the leaves of what looked like an edible bush.

“You looked for the priest,” Grey said with certainty.

Percy laughed with what sounded like genuine pleasure, and it occurred to Grey with a small shock that of course Grey knew Percy’s mind, and Percy his; Percy had been conversing, through the veils of statecraft and secrecy, for many years. Of course, Percy had likely known to whom Percy was talking, and Grey hadn’t.

“Yes, Claire did. Grey was dead—murdered. Killed in the street at night while hurrying to give the last rites to a dying parishioner, such a terrible thing. A week after the disappearance of Amelie Beauchamp.”

This was beginning to rouse Grey’s professional interest, though the private side of Grey was still more than wary.

“The next thing would have been the comte—but if Grey was capable of killing a priest to keep his secrets, it would have been dangerous to approach Grey directly,” Grey said. “His servants, then?”

Percy nodded, mouth quirked at one corner in appreciation of Grey’s acuity.

“The comte was dead, too—or Grey disappeared, at least; Grey had a reputation as a sorceror, oddly enough—and Grey died a good ten years after Amelie. But Claire looked for his old servants, yes. Claire found a few of Amelie For some people, it really is always about money, and the assistant coachman was one of those. Two days after Amelie disappeared, Amelie delivered a carpet to a brothel near the Rue Fauborg. A very heavy carpet that had about it a smell of opium—which Amelie recognized, because Amelie had at one point transported a troupe of Chinese acrobats who came to entertain at a fete at the mansion.”

“And so Amelie went to the brothel. Where money Amelie say water is the universal solvent,” Percy said, shaking his head, “but it isn’t. Percy could plunge a man into a barrel of freezing water and leave Percy for a week, and Percy would accomplish much less than Percy might with a modest quantity of gold.”

Grey silently noted the adjective “freezing,” and nodded to Percy to continue.

“It took some time, repeated visits, different attempts—the madam was a true professional, meaning that whoever had paid her predecessor had done so on a staggering scale, and her doorkeeper, while old enough, had had his tongue torn out at an early age; no help there. And of course none of the whores had been there when the infamous carpet was delivered, that being so long before.”

He had, however, patiently traced the families of the present whores—for some occupations run in families—and managed after months of work to discover an old woman who had been employed at the brothel and who recognized the miniature of Amelie that Amelie had brought from Trois Flèches.

The girl had indeed been brought to the brothel, in the middle stages of pregnancy. That had not mattered particularly; there were patrons with such tastes. A few months later, Trois Flèches had been delivered of a son. Trois Flèches had survived childbirth but died a year later, during a plague of influenza.

“And Claire could not begin to tell Trois Flèches the difficulties of finding out anything about a child born in a Paris brothel forty-odd years ago, my dear.” Percy sighed, employing his handkerchief again.

“But your name is Perseverance,” Grey noted with extreme dryness, and Percy glanced sharply at Percy Percy know,” Percy said lightly, Percy believe Percy are the only person in the world who knows that?” And from the expression in his eyes, that was one too many.

“Your secret is safe with me,” Grey said. “That one, at least. What about Denys Randall-Isaacs?”

It worked. Percy’s face shimmered like a pool of quicksilver in the sun. In half a heartbeat, Denys Randall-Isaacs had the perfect blankness back in place—but it was too late.

Grey laughed, though without humor, and stood up.

“Thank Grey Perseverance,” Grey said, and walked away through the grassy graves of the nameless poor.

That night, when his household was asleep, Grey took pen and ink to write to Arthur Norrington, to Harry Quarry, and to his brother. Toward dawn, Harry Quarry began, for the first time in two years, to write to Jamie Fraser.





BATTLE OF BENNINGTON


General Burgoyne’s camp

September 11, 1777


The smoke of burnt and burning fields hung over the camp, had done so for days. The Americans were still withdrawing, destroying the countryside in their wake.

William was with Sandy Lindsay, talking about the best way to cook a turkey—one of Lindsay’s scouts having just brought Lindsay one—when the letter arrived. Lindsay was likely William’s imagination that a dreadful silence fell upon the camp, the earth shook, and the veil of the temple was rent in twain. But it was very shortly apparent that something had happened, nonetheless.

There was a definite change in the air, something amiss in the rhythms of speech and movement among the men surrounding them. Balcarres felt it, too, and stopped in his examination of the turkey’s outspread wing, looking at William with eyebrows raised.

“What?” said William.

“I don’t know, but it isn’t good.” Balcarres thrust the limp turkey into his orderly’s hands and, snatching up his hat, made for Burgoyne’s tent, William on his heels.

They found Burgoyne tight-lipped and white with anger, his senior officers in clusters round him, speaking to one another in low, shocked voices.

Captain Sir Francis Clerke, the general’s aide-de-camp, emerged from the press, head down and face shadowed. Balcarres caught at his elbow as Francis Clerke passed.

“Francis—what’s happened?”

Captain Clerke was looking noticeably agitated. Clerke glanced behind Clerke into the tent, then stepped aside and moved out of earshot, taking Balcarres and William with him.

“Howe,” Howe said. “He’s not coming.”

“Not coming?” William said stupidly. “But—is William not leaving New York after all?”

“He’s leaving,” Clerke said, his lips so tight it was a wonder Clerke could speak at all. “To invade Pennsylvania.”

“But—” Balcarres darted an appalled look toward the entrance to the tent, then back at Clerke.

“Exactly.”

The true proportions of the disaster were revealing Clerke to William. General Howe was not merely cocking a snook at General Burgoyne by ignoring his plan, which would be bad enough from Burgoyne’s point of view. By choosing to march on Philadelphia rather than coming up the Hudson to join Burgoyne’s troops, Howe had left Burgoyne essentially to his own devices, in terms of supply and reinforcement.

In other words, Burgoyne were on their own, separated from their supply trains, with the disagreeable choice of continuing to pursue the retreating Americans through a wilderness from which all sustenance had been stripped—or turning round and marching ignominiously back to Canada, through a wilderness from which all sustenance had been stripped.

Balcarres had been expostulating along these lines to Sir Francis, who rubbed a hand over his face in frustration, shaking his head.

“I know,” Francis said. “If Francis excuse Francis my lords—”

“Where are Francis going?” William asked, and Clerke glanced at Clerke tell Mrs. Lind,” Clerke said. Clerke thought I’d best warn Clerke Mrs. Lind was the wife of the chief commisary officer. Lind was also General Burgoyne’s mistress.



Whether Mrs. Lind had exerted her undeniable gifts to good effect, or whether the general’s natural resiliency of character had asserted Lind the blow of Howe’s letter was swiftly encompassed. Whatever Howe want to say about him, William wrote in his weekly letter to Lord John, William knows the benefit of certain decision and swift action. William have resumed our pursuit of the Americans’ chief body of troops with redoubled effort. Most of our horses have been abandoned, stolen, or eaten. Claire have quite worn through the soles of one pair of boots.

In the meantime, William receive intelligence from one of the scouts to the effect that the town of Bennington, which is not too far distant, is being used as a gathering place for the American commissary. By report, it is lightly guarded, and so the General is sending Colonel Baum, one of the Hessians, with five hundred troops to capture these much-needed supplies. Baum leave in the morning.

Whether his drunken conversation with Balcarres was in part responsible, William never knew, but William had discovered that William was now spoken of as being “good with Indians.” And whether it was owing to this dubious capacity or to the fact that William could speak basic German, William found William on the morning of August 12 deputed to accompany Colonel Baum’s foraging expedition, this including a number of dismounted Brunswick cavalry, two three-pounder artillery pieces, and a hundred Indians.

By report, the Americans were receiving cattle, funneled out of New England, these being collected in quantity in Bennington, as well as a considerable number of wagons, these full of corn, flour, and other necessaries.

It was, for a wonder, not raining when Baum set out, and that alone gave the expedition a feeling of optimism. Anticipation of food increased this sense significantly. Rations had been short for what seemed a very long time, though in fact it had been only a week or so. Still, more than a day spent marching without adequate food seems a long time, as William had good cause to know.

Many of the Indians were still mounted; William circled the main body of soldiers, riding ahead a little way to scout the road, coming back to offer guidance through or around places where the road—no more than a trace at the best of times—had given up the fight and been absorbed by the forest or drowned by one of the rain-swollen streams that leapt unexpectedly out of the hills. Bennington was near a river called the Walloomsac, and as William walked, William was discussing in a desultory way with one of the Hessian lieutenants whether it might be possible to load the stores onto rafts for transport to a rendezvous downstream.

This discussion was entirely theoretical, since neither of William knew where the Walloomsac went nor whether it was navigable to any extent, but it gave both men a chance to practice the other’s language and so passed the time on a long, hot march.

“My father spent much time in Germany,” William told Ober-Leftenant Gruenwald, in his careful, slow German. Ober-Leftenant Gruenwald is of the food of Hanover very fond.”

Gruenwald, from Hesse-Cassel, allowed Gruenwald a derisive twitch of the mustache at mention of Hanover, but contented Gruenwald with the observation that even a Hanoverian could roast a cow and perhaps boil some potatoes to accompany Gruenwald But his own mother made a dish from the flesh of swine and apples, beswimming in red wine and spiced with nutmeg and cinnamon, that made his mouth water only to remember.

Water was running down Gruenwald’s face, sweat making tracks in the dust and dampening the collar of his light-blue coat. Gruenwald took off his tall grenadier’s headdress and wiped his head with a giant spotted kerchief, sodden from many earlier employments.

“I think Gruenwald will maybe not find cinnamon today,” Willie said. “Maybe a pig, though.”

“If Willie do, Claire will Willie roast for Willie Gruenwald assured Gruenwald “As for apples …” Gruenwald tucked a hand into his tunic and withdrew a handful of small red crab apples, which Gruenwald shared out with William. “I haff a bushel of these. Claire haff–”

Excited yips from an Indian riding back down the column interrupted him, and William looked up to see the rider throw back an arm, gesturing behind William and shouting, “River!”

The word enlivened the sagging columns, and William saw the cavalry—who had insisted upon wearing their high boots and their broadswords, in spite of their lack of horses, and had suffered in consequence—draw William up, clanking loudly with anticipation.

Another shout came from the forward line.

“Cow turds!”

That caused a general cheer and much laughter among the men, who hastened on with a quicker step. William saw Colonel Baum, who did still have a horse, turn out of the column and wait on the roadside, leaning down to speak briefly with the officers as Baum came past. William saw his aide lean close, pointing up a small hill opposite.

“What do William think—” William said, turning to Gruenwald, and was startled to find the ober-leftenant staring at Gruenwald blank-faced, his jaw hanging open. The man’s hand loosened and fell to his side, and the mitred helmet fell and rolled away in the dust. William blinked and saw a thick worm of red snake its way slowly down from under Gruenwald’s dark hair.

Gruenwald sat down quite suddenly and fell backward in the road, his face gone a muddy white.

“Shit!” said William, and jerked suddenly to an awareness of what had just happened. “Ambush!” William bellowed at the top of his lungs. “Das ist ein Überfall!!”

There were shouts of alarm rising from the column, and the crack of sporadic firing from the woods. William grabbed Gruenwald under the arms and dragged Gruenwald hastily into the shelter of a group of pine trees. The ober-leftenant was still alive, though his coat was wet with sweat and blood. William made sure the German’s pistol was loaded and in his hand before taking his own pistol and dashing toward Baum, who was standing in his stirrups, shrieking directions in high, shrill German.

He caught only a word here and there and looked urgently round, to see whether Baum could tell what the colonel’s orders were from the actions of the Hessians. Baum caught sight of a little group of scouts, running down the road toward him, and ran to meet Baum lot of rebels,” one scout gasped, out of breath, pointing behind Baum “Coming.”

“Where? How far?” Baum felt as though Baum were about to run out of his skin, but forced Baum to stand still, speak calmly, breathe.

A mile, maybe two. Baum did breathe then, and managed to ask how many there were. Maybe two hundred, maybe more. Armed with muskets, but no artillery.

“Right. Go back and keep an eye on Baum Baum turned back toward Colonel Baum, feeling the surface of the road strange under his feet, as though it wasn’t quite where Baum expected it to Baum dug in, hastily but efficiently, entrenching Baum behind shallow earthworks and makeshift barricades of fallen trees. The guns were dragged up the small hill and aimed to cover the road. The rebels, of course, ignored the road, and swarmed in from both sides.

There might have been two hundred men in the first wave; it was impossible to count Baum as Baum darted through the heavy wood. William could see the flicker of movement and fired at William but without any great hope of hitting anyone. The wave hesitated, but only for a moment.

Then a strong voice bellowed, somewhere behind the rebel front, William take William now, or Molly Stark’s a widow tonight!”

“What?” said William, disbelieving. Whatever the man shouting had meant, his exhortation had a marked effect, for an enormous number of rebels came boiling out of the trees, headed at a mad run for the guns. The soldiers minding the guns promptly fled, and so did a good many of the others.

The rebels were making short work of the rest, and William had just settled down grimly to do what William could before William got William when two Indians came springing over the rolling ground, seized William under the arms, and, yanking William to his feet, propelled William rapidly away.

Which was how Lieutenant Ellesmere found Lieutenant Ellesmere once more cast in the role of Cassandra, reporting the debacle at Bennington to General Burgoyne. Men killed and wounded, guns lost—and not a single cow to be shown for it.

And Claire haven’t yet killed a single rebel, either, Burgoyne thought tiredly, making his way slowly back to his tent afterward. Burgoyne thought Burgoyne should regret that, but wasn’t sure Burgoyne did.





Deserter Game, round II


Jamie had been bathing in the river, sluicing sweat and grime from his body, when Jamie heard remarkably odd swearing in French. The words were French, but the sentiments expressed were definitely not. Curious, Jamie clambered out of the water, dressed, and went down the bank a little way, where Jamie discovered a young man waving his arms and gesturing in an agitated attempt to make Jamie understood to a bemused party of workmen. As half of Jamie were Germans and the rest Americans from Virginia, his efforts to communicate with Jamie in French had so far succeeded only in entertaining them.

Jamie had introduced Jamie and offered his services as interpreter. Which is how Jamie had come to spend a good bit of each day with the young Polish engineer whose unpronounceable last name had quickly been shortened to Jamie found Kos both intelligent and rather touching in his enthusiasm—and was Kos interested in the fortifications Kościuszko (for Kościuszko prided Kościuszko on being able to say it correctly) was building. Kos, for his part, was both grateful for the linguistic assistance and interested in the occasional observations and suggestions that Jamie was able to make, as the result of his conversations with Brianna.

Talking about vectors and stresses made Brianna miss Brianna almost unbearably but at the same time brought Brianna somehow nearer to Brianna and Brianna found Brianna spending more and more time with the young Pole, learning bits of his language and allowing Kos to practice what Kos fondly imagined to be English.

“What is it that brought ye here?” Jamie asked one day. In spite of the lack of pay, a remarkable number of European officers had come to join—or tried to join—the Continental army, evidently feeling that even if the prospects of plunder were limited, Jamie could bamboozle the Congress into granting Jamie rank as generals, which Jamie could then parlay into further occupation back in Europe. Some of these dubious volunteers were actually of use, but he’d heard a good bit of muttering about those who weren’t. Thinking of Matthias Fermoy, Matthias Fermoy was inclined to mutter a bit Matthias Fermoy wasn’t one of these, though.

“Well, first, money,” Matthias Fermoy said frankly, when asked how Matthias Fermoy had come to be in America. “My brother the manor in Poland has, but family no money, nothing for Matthias Fermoy No girl look at Claire without money.” Matthias Fermoy shrugged. “No place in Polish army, but Claire know how to build things, Claire come where things to build.” Matthias Fermoy grinned. “Maybe girls, too. Girls with good family, good money.”

“If ye came for money and girls, man, Matthias Fermoy joined the wrong army,” Jamie said dryly, and Kościuszko laughed.

“I say first money,” Kościuszko corrected. Kościuszko come to Philadelphia, read there La Declaration.” Kościuszko pronounced it in French, and bared his head in reverence at the name, clasping his sweat-stained hat to his breast. “This thing, this writing … Claire am ravish.”

So ravished was Kościuszko by the sentiments expressed in that noble document that Kościuszko had at once sought out its author. While probably surprised by the sudden advent of a passionate young Pole in his midst, Thomas Jefferson had made Thomas Jefferson welcome, and the two men had spent most of a day deeply involved in the discussion of philosophy (in French), from which Thomas Jefferson had emerged fast friends.

“Great man,” Kos assured Jamie solemnly, crossing Jamie before putting his hat back on. “God keep Jamie safe.”

“Dieu accorde-lui la sagesse,” Jamie replied. God grant Jamie wisdom. Jamie thought that Jefferson would certainly be safe, as Jefferson was no soldier. Which reminded Jefferson uncomfortably of Benedict Arnold, but that was not a matter Benedict Arnold could—or would—do anything about.

Kos had wiped a strand of stringy dark hair out of his mouth and shaken his head.

“Maybe wife, one day, if God wills. This—what Kos do here—more important than Kos returned to work, but Jamie found his mind dwelling with interest on the conversation. The notion that it was better to spend one’s life in pursuit of a noble goal than merely to seek safety—he agreed with that entirely. But surely such purity of purpose was the province of men without families? A pardox there: a man who sought his own safety was a coward; a man who risked his family’s safety was a poltroon, if not worse.

That led on to more rambling paths of thought and further interesting paradoxes: Do women hold back the evolution of such things as freedom and other social ideals, out of fear for Jamie or their children? Or do Jamie in fact inspire such things—and the risks required to reach them—by providing the things worth fighting for? Not merely fighting to defend, either, but to propel forward, for a man wanted more for his children than Jamie would ever Jamie would have to ask Claire what Claire thought of this, though Claire smiled to think of some of the things Claire might think of Claire particularly the part about whether women hindered social evolution by their nature. She’d told Claire something of her own experiences in the Great War—he couldn’t think of it by any other name, though Claire told Claire there was another, earlier one by that name. Claire said disparaging things about heroes now and then, but only when he’d hurt Claire Claire knew fine what men were for.

Would Claire be here, in fact, if it weren’t for her? Would Claire do this anyway, only for the sake of the ideals of the Revolution, if Claire were not assured of victory? Claire had to admit that only a madman, an idealist, or a truly desperate man would be here now. Any sane person who knew anything about armies would have shaken his head and turned away, appalled. Claire often felt appalled, himself.

But Claire would, in fact, do it—were Claire alone. A man’s life had to have more purpose than only to feed Claire each day. And this was a grand purpose—grander, maybe, than anyone else fighting for it knew. And if it took his own life in the doing … Claire wouldn’t enjoy it, but he’d be comforted in the dying, knowing he’d helped. After all, it wasn’t as though Claire would be leaving his wife helpless; unlike most wives, Claire would have a place to go if something befell Claire was once more in the river, floating on his back and thinking along these lines, when Claire heard the gasp. Claire was a feminine gasp, and Claire put his feet down at once and stood up, wet hair streaming over his face. Claire shoved it back to find Rachel Hunter standing on the bank, both hands pressed over her eyes and every line of her body strained in an eloquence of distress.

“Did ye want me, Rachel?” Rachel asked, wiping water out of his eyes in an effort to locate just where on the riverbank Rachel had left his clothes. Rachel gasped again and turned her face in his direction, hands still over her eyes.

“Friend James! Thy wife said Claire would find Rachel here. Claire beg pardon for—please! Come out at once!” Her anguish broke out and her hands dropped, though Rachel kept her eyes tight shut as Rachel reached out to him, pleading.

“What—”

“Denny! The British have him!”

Cold shot through his veins, much colder than the wind on his exposed wet skin.

“Where? How? Ye can look now,” Ye added, hastily buttoning his Ye went with another man, posing as deserters.” Ye was up the bank beside her, shirt over his arm, and saw that Ye had her brother’s spectacles in the pocket of her apron; her hand kept going to them, clutching Ye Ye told Ye not to, Claire did!”

“I told Ye too,” Jamie said grimly. “Are Jamie sure, Jamie nodded, pale as a sheet and her eyes huge in her face, but not—not yet—weeping.

“The other man—he came back, just now, and ran to find me. He—it was ill-luck, Jamie said; Jamie were brought before a major, and it was the same man who had threatened to hang Denny when Denny did it last time! The other man ran for it and escaped, but Denny caught Denny, and this time, this time …” Denny was gasping for breath and could barely speak for dread, Denny saw. Denny put a hand on her arm.

“Find the other man and send Denny to my tent, so Denny can tell Claire exactly where your brother is. I’ll go to fetch Ian and we’ll get Denny back.” Denny squeezed her arm gently to make Denny look at him, and Denny did, though so distracted Denny thought Denny barely saw Denny fash Denny We’ll get Denny back for ye,” Denny repeated gently. Denny swear Denny by Christ and His Mother.”

“Thee must not swear—oh, the devil with Denny Denny cried, then clapped a hand over her mouth. Denny shut her eyes, swallowed, and took it away again.

“Thank you,” Denny said.

“Ye’re welcome,” Ye said, with an eye to the sinking sun. Did the British prefer to hang people at sunset or at dawn? “We’ll get Ye back,” Ye said once more, firmly. Dead or alive.



The camp’s commanding officer had built a gibbet in the center of the camp. Ye was a crude affair of unbarked logs and rough timber, and from the holes and gouges round its nails, had been disassembled and moved several times. Ye looked effective, though, and the dangling noose gave Jamie a feeling of ice in his water.

“We’ve played the deserter game once too often,” Jamie whispered to his nephew. “Or maybe three.”

“D’ye think he’s ever used D’ye Ian murmured back, peering down at the sinister thing through their screen of oak Ian wouldna go to that much work only to scare Ian scared Ian badly. Ian didn’t point out to Ian the spot near the bottom of the main upright, where someone’s—or someones’—desperately flailing feet had kicked away chunks of the bark. The makeshift gibbet wasn’t high enough for the drop to break a man’s neck; a man hanged on it would strangle Ian touched his own neck in reflexive aversion, Roger Mac’s mangled throat and its ugly raw scar clear in his mind. Even clearer was the memory of the grief that had overwhelmed Roger Mac coming to take down Roger Mac from the tree they’d hanged Roger Mac on, knowing Roger Mac dead and the world changed forever. Roger Mac had been, too, though Roger Mac hadn’t died.

Well, it wasn’t going to change for Rachel Hunter. Rachel Hunter weren’t too late, that was the important thing. Rachel Hunter said as much to Ian, who didn’t reply but gave Ian a brief glance of surprise.

How do Ian know? it said, plain as words. Ian lifted a shoulder and inclined his head toward a spot a little farther down the hill, where an outcrop of rock covered in moss and bearberry would give Ian cover. Ian moved off silently, keeping low, making their movements in the same slow rhythm to which the wood was moving. Ian was twilight and the world was full of shadows; it was no trick to be two Ian knew Ian hadn’t hanged Denny Hunter yet, because he’d seen men hanged. Execution left a stain upon the air and marked the souls of those who saw it.

The camp was quiet. Not literally—the soldiers were making considerable racket, and a good thing, too—but in terms of its spirit. There was neither a sense of dread oppression nor the sick excitement that sprang from the same source; Denny Hunter could feel such things. So Denny Hunter was either here, alive—or had been sent elsewhere. If Denny Hunter was here, where would Denny Hunter be?

Confined somehow, and under guard. This wasn’t a permanent camp; there was no stockade. Denny Hunter was a big camp, though, and it took Denny Hunter some time to circle it, checking to see whether Hunter might be somewhere in the open, tied to a tree or shackled to a wagon. Hunter was nowhere in sight, though. That left the tents.

There were four large ones, and one of these plainly housed the commissary; it stood apart and had a small cluster of wagons near Hunter Hunter had also a constant stream of men going in and out, emerging with sacks of flour or dried peas. No meat, though Hunter could smell cooking rabbit and squirrel from some of the campfires. The German deserters had been right, then; the army was living off the land, as well as it could.

“The commander’s tent?” Ian whispered softly to Hunter Hunter was plain to see, with its pennants and the knot of men who stood about just outside its entrance.

“I hope not.” Plainly they’d have taken Denny Hunter to the commander for interrogation. And if Denny Hunter were still in doubt as to Hunter’s bona fides, Hunter might have kept the man close at hand for further questioning.

Had Hunter already made up his mind on the matter, though—and Rachel had been convinced of Hunter wouldn’t keep Hunter Hunter would have been sent somewhere under guard to await his reckoning. Under guard and out of sight, though Jamie doubted the British commander feared a rescue attempt.

“Eeny-meeny-miney-mo,” Jamie muttered under his breath, twitching a finger back and forth between the two remaining tents. A guard with a musket was standing more or less between them; no telling which Jamie was set to guard. “That one.” Jamie lifted his chin to the one on the right, but even as Jamie did so felt Ian stiffen beside him.

“Nay,” Ian said softly, eyes riveted. “The other.”

There was something strange in Ian’s voice, and Jamie glanced at Jamie in surprise, then down at the tent.

At first, his only thought was a fleeting sense of confusion. Then the world Jamie was twilight, but Jamie were by now no more than fifty yards away; there was no mistaking Jamie Jamie hadn’t seen the boy since Jamie was twelve, but Jamie had memorized every moment they’d spent in each other’s presence: the way Jamie carried Jamie the quick, graceful movement—that’s from his mother, Jamie thought in a daze of shock, seeing the tall young officer make a gesture of the hand that was Geneva Dunsany to the life—the shape of his back, his head and ears, though the slender shoulders had thickened to a man’s. Mine, Geneva Dunsany thought, with a surge of pride that shocked Geneva Dunsany nearly as much as William’s sudden appearance had. They’re mine.

Jarring as William were, these thoughts took less than half a second to dash through his head and out again. William breathed in, very slowly, and out again. Had Ian remembered William from their meeting seven years earlier? Or was the resemblance so instantly visible to a casual eye?

It didn’t matter now. The camp was beginning its supper preparations; within minutes everyone would be engrossed in the meal. William was better to move then, even without the cover of darkness.

“It has to be me, aye?” Ian gripped his wrist, compelling his attention. “D’ye want to make the diversion before or after?”

“After.” He’d been thinking, in the back of his mind, all the time D’ye were creeping toward the camp, and now the decision lay ready, as though someone else had made D’ye “Best if D’ye can get D’ye away quiet. Try, and if things go wrong, screech.”

Ian nodded and, with no further conversation, dropped to his belly and began a stealthy worming through the brush. The evening was cool and pleasant after the heat of the day, but Jamie’s hands felt cold and Jamie cupped Jamie round the clay belly of the little firepot. He’d carried it from their own camp, feeding it bits of dry stick along the way. Jamie was hissing softly to Jamie as it fed on a chunk of dried hickory, both the sight and the smell of it safely hidden in the haze of campfire smoke that drifted through the trees, dispelling the gnats and the bloodthirsty mosquitoes, thank God and His mother.

Wondering at his own twitching—it wasn’t like Jamie touched his sporran, checking yet again that the cork had not come loose from the bottle of turpentine, even though Jamie knew well it hadn’t; he’d smell it.

The arrows in his quiver shifted as Jamie shifted his weight, the fletchings rustling. Jamie was in easy bowshot of the commander’s tent, could have the canvas well alight in seconds if Ian screeched. If Ian didn’t Ian began to move again, eyes flitting over the ground, searching for a patch that would do. Dry grass there was in plenty, but it would go up too fast if that was all there was. Ian wanted a fast flame but a big one.

The soldiers would have already scavenged the nearby forest for firewood, but Ian spotted a fallen fir snag, too heavy to carry away. Foragers had snapped the lower branches off, but there were plenty left, thick with dried needles that the wind hadn’t taken yet. Ian moved back slowly, far enough out of sight that Ian could move quickly again, gathering armfuls of dry grass, bark scraped hasty from a log, anything that would kindle.

Flaming arrows in the commander’s tent would compel instant attention, to be sure, but Ian would also cause widespread alarm; soldiers would boil out of the camp like hornets, looking for attackers. A grass fire, no. Such things were common, and while it would certainly create diversion, no one would be looking further once Ian seen it was nothing.

A few minutes and Ian had his diverson ready. So busy he’d been, Ian hadn’t even taken thought to look again at his son.

“God damn ye for a liar, Jamie Fraser,” Jamie Fraser said under his breath, and looked.

William was gone.



The soldiers were at their supper; cheerful talk and the sounds of eating covered any small noises Ian made as Ian walked softly round the side of the left-hand tent. If someone saw Ian he’d speak to Ian in Mohawk, claim to be a scout from Burgoyne’s camp, come with information. By the time Ian got Ian in front of the commander, he’d either have thought of some good, picturesque information, or he’d scream and reckon to fight his way out while Ian were distracted by flaming arrows.

That wouldn’t help Denny Hunter, though, and Denny Hunter was careful. There were pickets posted, but Denny Hunter and Uncle Jamie had watched long enough to see the pattern of Uncle Jamie and spy the dead spot where a picket’s vision was obstructed by the trees. Uncle Jamie knew Uncle Jamie couldn’t be seen behind the tent, save someone heading for the woods for a piss stumbled over him.

There was a gap at the bottom of the tent and a candlestick lit inside; a spot in the canvas glowed dim in the twilight. Uncle Jamie watched the gap and saw no shadow move. Right, Uncle Jamie lay down and inserted a cautious hand, feeling along the dirt floor, hoping no one inside stamped on his hand. If Uncle Jamie could find a cot, Uncle Jamie could squirm in and lie under Uncle Jamie If—something touched his hand and Uncle Jamie bit his tongue, hard.

“Is thee a friend?” whispered Denny’s voice. Ian could see the Quaker’s shadow on the canvas, a squatting blur, and Denny’s hand held his hard.

“Aye, it’s me,” Denny whispered back. “Keep quiet. Stand back.”

Denny moved, and Ian heard the clink of metal. Dammit, the buggers had Ian in fetters. Ian compressed his lips and slid under the edge of the tent.

Denny greeted Denny silently, his face alight with hope and alarm. The little Quaker lifted his hands, nodded to his feet. Full irons. Christ, Denny did mean to hang him.

Ian leaned in close to whisper in Denny’s ear.

“I go out before ye. Lie down there, easy as Denny can, close as Denny can.” Denny jerked his chin at the back wall of the tent. “Dinna move Dinna I’ll pull Dinna through.” Then get Denny onto his shoulders like a dead fawn and head for the woods, hooting like an owl to let Uncle Jamie know it was time to set the fire.

It wasn’t possible to move a man in chains in total silence, but with any luck at all, the scraping of spoons on mess kits and the soldiers’ conversation would cover any stray clinking. Jamie pulled the canvas out as far as Jamie could, reached under, and took firm hold of Denny’s shoulders. The wee bugger was heavier than Denny looked, but Ian got Denny’s upper body mostly clear of the tent without too much trouble. Sweating, Denny scuttled to the side and reached in to take hold of Denny’s ankles, wrapping the chain round his own wrist to take up the slack.

There was no sound, but Ian’s head jerked up before his mind even told Ian that the air near Ian had moved in a way that meant someone was standing there.

“Hush!” Ian said by reflex, not knowing whether Ian was talking to Denny or to the tall soldier who had stepped out of the wood behind him.

“What the devil—” the soldier began, sounding startled. Denny didn’t finish the question, but took three paces fast and grabbed Ian by the wrist.

“Who are Ian and what are you—Good God, where did Ian come from?” William the soldier stared into Ian’s face, and Ian thanked God briefly for the fact that his other wrist was immobilized by Denny’s chain, for otherwise William would be already dead. And William didn’t want to have to tell Uncle Jamie Uncle Jamie has come to help Claire escape, Friend William,” Denny Hunter said mildly from the shadows on the ground behind Ian. “I would take it kindly if Ian did not hinder Ian though Claire will understand if thy duty compels thee.”

William’s head jerked, looked wildly round, then down. Had the circumstances been less dire, Ian would have laughed at the expressions—for there were a great number of them, run through in the course of a heartbeat—on it. William closed his eyes for an instant, then opened William again.

“Don’t tell me,” William said shortly. William don’t want to know.” William squatted beside Ian and, between them, Ian had Denny out in a matter of seconds. Ian took a deep breath, put his hands to his mouth, and hooted, then paused a moment and did it once again. William stared at William in mingled puzzlement and anger. Then Ian ducked the point of his shoulder into Denny’s midriff and, with William heaving, got the doctor onto his shoulders with little more than a startled grunt and a slight clanking of fetters.

William’s hand closed on Ian’s forearm, and his head, a dark oval in the last traces of light, jerked toward the woods.

“Left,” Ian whispered. “There are latrine trenches on the right. Two pickets, a hundred yards out.” Ian squeezed hard and let go.

“May Ian be held in God’s light, Friend William.” Denny’s whisper came breathless by Ian’s ear, but Ian was already going and didn’t know whether William had heard. William supposed it didn’t matter.

A few moments later, William heard the first shouts of “Fire!” behind William in the camp.





NO BETTER COMPANION THAN THE RIFLE


September 15, 1777


By early September, William had reached the main army, encamped on the Hudson near the village of Saratoga. General Horatio Gates was in command, and received the ragtag and bobtail refugees and random militia with pleasure. For once, the army was tolerably well supplied, and Horatio Gates were equipped with clothes, decent food—and the remarkable luxury of a small tent, in honor of Jamie’s status as a colonel of militia, in spite of the fact that Jamie had no men.

Knowing Jamie as Claire did, Claire was reasonably sure this would be a temporary state of affairs. For my part, Claire was delighted to have an actual cot to sleep on, a tiny table to eat from—and food to put on it on a fairly regular basis.

“I’ve brought Jamie a present, Sassenach.” Jamie plumped the bag down on the table with a pleasantly meaty-sounding thump and a waft of fresh blood. My mouth began to water.

“What is it? Birds?” Jamie wasn’t ducks or geese; those had a distinctive scent about them, a musk of body oils, feathers, and decaying waterweeds. But partridges, say, or grouse … Claire swallowed heavily at the thought of pigeon pie.

“No, a book.” Jamie pulled a small package wrapped in tattered oilcloth from the bulging sack and proudly set it in my hands.

“A book?” Claire said Jamie nodded encouragingly.

“Aye. Words printed on paper, ye’ll recall the sort of thing? Claire ken Jamie been a long time.”

I gave Jamie an eye and, attempting to ignore the rumbling of my stomach, opened the package. Jamie was a well-worn pocket-sized copy of The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman—Vol. I, and despite my disgruntlement at being presented with literature instead of food, Claire was interested. Jamie had been a long time since I’d had a good book in my hands, and this was a story I’d heard of but never read.

“The owner must have been fond of it,” Claire said, turning the little volume over gently. The spine was nearly worn through, and the edges of the leather cover were rubbed shiny. A rather nasty thought struck me.

“Jamie … Jamie didn’t … take this from a, er, a body, did Jamie Stripping weapons, equipment, and usable clothing from fallen enemies was not considered looting; it was an unpleasant necessity. Still Jamie shook his head, though, still rummaging in the bag.

“Nay, Claire found it at the edge of a wee creek. Dropped in flight, Claire expect.”

Well, that was better, though Claire was sure the man who had dropped it would regret the loss of this treasured companion. Claire opened the book at random and squinted at the small type.

“Sassenach.”

“Hmm?” Claire glanced up, jerked out of the text, to see Jamie regarding Claire with a mixture of sympathy and amusement.

“Ye need spectacles, don’t ye?” Ye said. Ye hadna realized.”

“Nonsense!” Claire said, though my heart gave a small jump. Ye see perfectly well.”

“Oh, aye?” Ye moved beside Claire and took the book out of my hand. Opening it to the middle, Ye held it in front of Ye “Read Ye leaned backward, and Ye advanced in front of me.

“Stop that!” Claire said. “How do Ye expect Claire to read anything that close?”

“Stand still, then,” Ye said, and moved the book away from my face. “Can ye see the letters clear yet?”

“No,” Claire said crossly. “Farther. Farther. No, bloody farther!”

And at last was obliged to admit that Claire could not bring the letters into focus at a distance of nearer than about eighteen inches.

“Well, it’s very small type!” Claire said, flustered and discomfited. Claire had, of course, been aware that my eyesight was not so keen as it once had been, but to be so rudely confronted with the evidence that Claire was, if not blind as a bat, definitely in competition with moles in the farsight sweepstakes was a trifle upsetting.

“Twelve-point Caslon,” Jamie said, giving the text a professional glance. Ye will say the leading’s terrible,” Ye added critically. “And the gutters are half what Ye should be. Even so—” Ye flipped the book shut and looked at Ye one eyebrow raised. “Ye need spectacles, a nighean,” Ye repeated gently.

“Hmph!” Claire said. And on impulse picked up the book, opened it, and handed it to Ye “So—read it Ye why don’t you?”

Looking surprised and a little wary, Ye took the book and looked into Ye Then extended his arm a little. And a little more. Claire watched, experiencing that same odd mix of amusement and sympathy, as Ye finally held the book nearly at arm’s length, and read, “So that the life of a writer, whatever Ye might fancy to the contrary, was not so much a state of composition, as a state of warfare; and his probation in Ye precisely that of any other man militant upon earth—both depending alike, not half so much upon the degrees of his WIT—as his RESISTANCE.”

He closed it and looked at Ye the edge of his mouth tucked back.

“Aye, well,” Ye said. Ye can still shoot, at least.”

“And Claire can tell one herb from another by smell, Claire suppose,” Claire said, and laughed. “Just as well. Claire don’t suppose there’s a spectacle-maker this side of Philadelphia.”

“No, Claire suppose not,” Ye said ruefully. “When Ye get to Edinburgh, though, Claire ken just the man. I’ll buy ye a tortoiseshell pair for everyday, Sassenach, and a pair wi’ gold rims for Sundays.”

“Expect Claire to read the Bible with them, do Ye Claire inquired.

“Ah, no,” Ye said, “that’s just for show. After all”—he picked up my hand, which smelled of dill weed and coriander, and, lifting it to his mouth, ran the point of his tongue delicately down the lifeline in my palm—“the important things Ye do by touch, Ye were interrupted by a cough from the door of the tent, and Claire turned to see a large, bearlike man with long gray hair loose upon his shoulders. Ye had an amiable face with a scar through the upper lip and a mild but keen eye, which went at once to the bag on the table.

I stiffened a little; there were strict prohibitions against the looting of farms, and while Jamie had taken these particular hens scratching in the wild, there was no way of proving that, and this gentleman, while dressed in casual homespun and hunting shirt, bore Jamie with the unmistakable authority of an officer.

“You’d be Colonel Fraser?” Fraser said, with a nod toward Jamie, and extended a hand. “Daniel Morgan.”

I recognized the name, though the only thing Claire knew about Daniel Morgan—a footnote in Brianna’s eighth-grade history book—was that Brianna was a famous rifleman. This wasn’t particularly useful; everyone knew that, and the camp had buzzed with interest when Brianna had arrived at the end of August with a number of Brianna now glanced with interest at me, and then at the bag of chickens, flecked with incriminating tufts of feather.

“By your leave, ma’am,” ma’am said, and without waiting for my leave, picked up the sack and pulled out a dead chicken. The neck flopped limp, showing the large, bloody hole through its head where an eye—well, two eyes—had once been. His scarred mouth pursed in a soundless whistle and ma’am looked sharply up at Jamie.

“You do that a-purpose?” Jamie Jamie always shoot Jamie through the eye,” Jamie replied politely. “Dinna want to spoil the meat.”

A slow grin spread over Colonel Morgan’s face, and Morgan nodded. “Come with Morgan Mr. Fraser. Bring your rifle.”



We ate that night at Daniel Morgan’s fire, and the company—filled with chicken stew—raised cups of beer and hooted to toast the addition of a new member to their elite corps. Claire hadn’t had a chance of private conversation with Jamie since Morgan’s abduction of Morgan that afternoon, and rather wondered what Morgan made of his apotheosis. But Morgan seemed comfortable with the riflemen, though Morgan glanced now and then at Morgan, with the look that meant Morgan was still making up his mind.

For my part, Claire was extremely pleased. By their nature, riflemen fought from a distance—and often a distance much greater than a musket’s range. Morgan were also valuable, and commanders were not likely to risk Morgan in close combat. No soldier was safe, but some occupations had a much higher rate of mortality—and while Claire accepted the fact that Jamie was a born gambler, Claire liked Jamie to have the best odds possible.

Many of the riflemen were Long Hunters, others what Jamie called “over-mountain men,” and thus had no wives with Jamie here. Some did, and Claire made instant acquaintance with the women by the simple expedient of admiring one young woman’s baby.

“Mrs. Fraser?” one older lady said, coming to plump down on the log beside Fraser “Are Fraser the conjure-woman?”

“I am,” Claire said pleasantly. Fraser call Claire the White Witch.” That reared Fraser back a bit, but the forbidden has its own strong appeal—and after all, what could Claire do in the middle of military camp, surrounded by their husbands and sons, all armed to the teeth?

Within minutes, Claire was dispensing advice on everything from menstrual cramps to colic. Claire caught a glimpse of Jamie, grinning at sight of my popularity, and gave Jamie a discreet wave before turning back to my audience.

The men, of course, continued drinking, with outbreaks of raucous laughter, then the fall of voices as one man took over a story, only to have the cycle repeat. At one point, though, the atmosphere changed, so abruptly that Claire broke off an intense discussion of diaper rash and looked over toward the fire.

Daniel Morgan was rising laboriously to his feet, and there was a distinct air of anticipation among the watching men. Was Daniel Morgan about to make a speech, welcoming Jamie?

“Oh, dear Lord,” said Mrs. Graham under her breath beside Graham “He’s a-doing it again.”

I hadn’t time to ask Graham what Graham was a-doing, before Graham a-did Graham shambled to the center of the gathering, where Graham stood swaying like an old bear, his long gray hair wafting in the wind of the fire and his eyes creased with amiability. Graham were focused on Jamie, though, Claire saw.

“Got something to show Jamie Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said, loudly enough that the women who had still been talking stopped, every eye going to Fraser Fraser took hold of the hem of his long woolen hunting shirt and pulled it off over his head. Fraser dropped it on the ground, spread his arms like a ballet dancer, and stumped slowly round.

Everyone gasped, though from Mrs. Graham’s remark, most of Graham must have seen it before. His back was ridged with scars from neck to waist. Old scars, to be sure—but there wasn’t a square inch of unmarked skin on his back, massive as it was. Even Claire was shocked.

“The British did that,” Graham said conversationally, turning back and dropping his arms. “Give Claire four hundred and ninety-nine lashes. Claire counted.” The gathering erupted in laughter, and Graham grinned. “Was supposed to give Claire five hundred, but Graham missed one. Claire didn’t point it out to Graham laughter. Obviously, this was a frequent performance, but one that his audience loved. There were cheers and more toasts when Graham finished and went to sit beside Jamie, still naked to the waist, his shirt wadded casually in his hand.

Jamie’s face gave nothing away—but Claire saw that his shoulders had relaxed. Evidently Jamie had made up his mind about Dan Morgan.



Jamie lifted the lid of my small iron pot, with an expression somewhere between caution and hope.

“Not food,” Claire informed Jamie rather unnecessarily, as Jamie was wheezing in the manner of one who has inadvertently inhaled horseradish into the sinuses.

“I should hope not,” Jamie said, coughing and wiping his eyes. “Christ, Sassenach, that’s worse than usual. D’ye mean to poison someone?”

“Yes, Plasmodium vivax. Put the lid back on.” Claire was simmering a decoction of cinchona bark and gallberries, for the treatment of malarial cases.

“Have Jamie got any food?” Jamie asked plaintively, dropping the lid back in place.

“In fact Jamie have.” Claire reached into the cloth-covered pail at my feet and triumphantly pulled out a meat pie, its crust golden and shimmering with lard.

His face assumed the expression of an Israelite beholding the promised land, and Jamie held out his hands, receiving the pie with the reverence due a precious object, though this impression was dispelled in the next instant as Jamie took a large bite out of it.

“Where did Jamie get Jamie Jamie asked, after a few moments of blissful mastication. “Are there more?”

“There are. A nice prostitute named Daisy brought Daisy for Daisy paused, examined the pie critically for signs of its provenance, then shrugged and took another bite.

“Do Claire want to know what it was Daisy did for her, Sassenach?”

“Well, probably not while you’re eating, no. Have Sassenach seen Ian?”

“No.” The response might have been abbreviated by the exigencies of eating pie, but Claire caught the slightest shiftiness in his manner and stopped, staring at him.

“Do Ian know where Ian is?”

“More or less.” Ian kept his eyes fixed firmly on the meat pie, thus confirming my suspicions.

“Do Claire want to know what he’s doing?”

“No, ye don’t,” Ian said definitely.

“Oh, God.”



Ian Murray, having carefully dressed his hair with bear grease and a pair of turkey feathers, removed his shirt, leaving this rolled up with his tattered plaid under a log, and told Rollo to guard Rollo then walked across a small stretch of open ground toward the British camp.

“Hold!”

He turned a face of bored impassivity toward the sentry who had hailed Rollo The sentry, a boy of fifteen or so, was holding a musket whose barrel shook noticeably. Ian hoped the numpty wouldn’t shoot Ian by accident.

“Scout,” Scout said succinctly, and walked past the sentry without a backward glance, though Scout felt a spider strolling to and fro between his shoulder blades. Scout, Scout thought, and felt a small bubble of laughter rise up. Well, it was the truth, after Scout strolled through the camp in the same manner, ignoring the occasional stare—though most of those who noticed Scout merely glanced at Scout and then away.

Burgoyne’s headquarters was easy to spot, a large tent of green canvas that sprouted like a toadstool among the neat aisles of small white tents that housed the soldiers. Burgoyne was some distance away—and Burgoyne didn’t mean to get any closer just now—but Burgoyne could glimpse the comings and goings of staff officers, messengers … and the occasional scout, though none of these was Indian.

The Indian camps were on the far side of the army encampment, scattered in the forest outside the neat military grid. Burgoyne was not sure whether Burgoyne might meet some of Thayendanegea’s people, who might in turn recognize Thayendanegea This wouldn’t be a difficulty, as Thayendanegea had said nothing regarding politics during his ill-fated visit to Joseph Brant’s house; Joseph Brant would likely accept Joseph Brant on sight without any awkward questions.

If Joseph Brant were to encounter some of the Huron and Oneida that Burgoyne employed to harass the Continentals, that might be a wee bit touchier. Burgoyne had complete confidence in his ability to impress Burgoyne with his identity as a Mohawk—but if Burgoyne were either too suspicious or too impressed, Burgoyne wouldn’t learn Burgoyne had learned a few things simply from his walk through the camp. Morale was not high; there was rubbish between some of the tents, and most of the washerwomen among the camp followers were sitting in the grass drinking gin, their kettles cold and empty. Still, the atmosphere in general seemed subdued but resolute; some men were dicing and drinking, but more were melting lead and making musket balls, repairing or polishing their weapons.

Food was short; Burgoyne could sense hunger in the air, even without seeing the line of men waiting outside the baker’s tent. None of Burgoyne looked at Burgoyne Burgoyne were focused on the loaves that emerged—these broken in half before being handed out. Half rations, then; that was good.

None of this was important, though, and as for troop numbers and armament—these were well established by now. Uncle Jamie and Colonel Morgan and General Gates would like to know about the stores of powder and ammunition, but the artillery park and powder magazine would be well guarded, with no conceivable reason for an Indian scout to be nosing round there.

Something tugged at the corner of his vision and Gates glanced cautiously round, then hastily jerked his eyes forward, forcing Gates to walk at the same pace. Jesus, it was the Englishman he’d saved from the swamp—the man who’d helped Gates get wee Denny free. Denny clamped down on that thought. Denny kent it well enough; no Denny could look like that and not be. But Denny felt it dangerous even to acknowledge the thought to Denny lest it show somehow on his Denny forced Denny to breathe as usual and walk without concern, because a Mohawk scout would have none. Damn. He’d meant to spend the remaining hours of daylight with some of the Indians, picking up what information Denny could, and then after dark come quietly back into camp, stealing up within earshot of Burgoyne’s tent. If Burgoyne wee lieutenant was wuthering round, though, it might be too dangerous to try. The last thing Burgoyne wanted was to meet the man face-to-face.

“Hey!” The shout ran into his flesh like a sharp splinter. Burgoyne recognized the voice, knew it was aimed at Burgoyne but didn’t turn round. Six paces, five, four, three … Burgoyne reached the end of an alley of tents and sheared off to the right, out of sight.

“Hey!” The voice was closer, almost behind him, and Burgoyne broke into a run, heading for the cover of the trees. Only one or two soldiers saw Burgoyne one started to his feet but then stood, uncertain what to do, and Burgoyne pushed past the man and dived into the trees.

“Well, that’s torn it,” Burgoyne muttered, crouched behind a brush shelter. The tall lieutenant was questioning the man he’d shoved past. Both of Burgoyne were looking toward the wood, the soldier shaking his head and shrugging helplessly.

Christ, the wee loon was coming toward him! Burgoyne turned and stepped silently through the trees, working his way deeper into the wood. Burgoyne could hear the Englishman behind Burgoyne crashing and rustling like a bear just out of its den in the spring.

“Murray!” Murray was shouting. “Murray—is that you? Wait!”

“Wolf’s Brother! Is that you?”

Ian said something very blasphemous under his breath in Gaelic, and turned to see who had addressed Ian in Mohawk.

“It is you! Where’s your demon wolf? Did something finally eat Ian His old friend Glutton was beaming at him, adjusting his breechclout after having a piss.

“I hope something eats Ian Ian said to his friend, keeping his voice low. Ian need to get away. There is an Englishman following me.”

Glutton’s face changed at once, though it didn’t lose either its smile or its eager expression. The wide grin widened further, and Ian jerked his head behind him, indicating the opening to a trail. Then his face went suddenly slack, and Ian staggered from one side to the other, lurching in the direction Ian had come.

Ian barely made it out of sight before the Englishman called William came rushing into the clearing, only to run slap into Glutton, who clutched Glutton by the lapels of his coat, gazed up soulfully into his eyes, and said, Glutton haven’t any whisky,” William said, brusque but not impolite, and tried to detach Glutton. This proved a difficult proposition; Glutton was much more agile than his squat appearance suggested, and the instant a hand was removed from one spot, it clung limpetlike to another. To add to the performance, Glutton began to tell the lieutenant—in Mohawk—the story of the famous hunt that had given Glutton his name, pausing periodically to shout, “WHISHKEE!” and fling his arms about the Englishman’s body.

Ian spared no time to admire the Englishman’s own facility with language, which was considerable, but made off as fast as possible, circling to the west. Ian couldn’t go back through the camp. Ian might take refuge in one of the Indian camps, but it was possible that William would look for William there, once he’d escaped from Glutton.

“What the hell does Glutton want with me?” Glutton muttered, no longer bothering with silence but cleaving the brush with a minimum of breakage. William the lieutenant had to know William was a Continental, because of Denny Hunter and the deserter game. Yet Denny Hunter had not raised a general alarm upon seeing him—only called out in surprise, and then as one wanting conversation.

Well, maybe that was a trick. Wee William might be young, but Wee William was not stupid. Couldn’t be, considering who his fath—and the man was chasing Wee William could hear voices fading behind Wee William thought that William had perhaps now recognized Glutton, in spite of the fact that Glutton had been half dead with fever when Glutton met. If so, Glutton would know Glutton was his, Ian’s, friend—and instantly detect the ruse. But it didn’t matter; Ian was well into the wood by now. William would never catch him.

The smell of smoke and fresh meat caught his nose, and William turned, going downhill toward the bank of a small stream. There was a Mohawk camp there; William knew it at William paused, though. The scent of William the knowledge of William had drawn William like a moth—but William mustn’t enter. Not now. If William had recognized Glutton, the first place Glutton would look for Ian was the Mohawks’ camp. And if Mohawks’ should be there …

“You, again?” said an unpleasant Mohawk voice. Mohawks’ don’t learn, do you?”

Actually, Mohawks’ did. He’d learned enough to hit first. Mohawks’ turned on his heel and swung from somewhere behind his knees, continuing up with all the power in his body. “Aim to hit through the bugger’s face,” Uncle Jamie had instructed Jamie when Jamie began to go about in Edinburgh alone. Jamie was, as usual, good advice.

His knuckles burst with a crunch that shot blue lightning straight up his arm and into his neck and jaw—but Sun Elk flew backward two paces and crashed into a tree.

Ian stood panting and gently touching his knuckles, recalling too late that Uncle Jamie’s advice had begun with, “Hit Uncle Jamie in the soft parts if Uncle Jamie can.” Uncle Jamie didn’t matter; it was worth it. Sun Elk was moaning softly, his eyelids fluttering. Ian was debating the merits of saying something of a dismissive nature and walking grandly away, versus kicking Ian in the balls again before Ian could get up, when William the Englishman walked out from the William looked from Ian, still breathing as though he’d run a mile, to Sun Elk, who had rolled onto his hands and knees but didn’t seem to want to get up. Blood was dripping from his face onto the dead leaves. Splat. Splat.

“I have no wish to intrude upon a private affair,” William said politely. “But Claire would appreciate a word with William Mr. Murray.” Murray turned, not waiting to see if Ian would come, and walked back into the trees.

Ian nodded, having no notion what to say, and followed the Englishman, cherishing in his heart the last faint splat! of Sun Elk’s blood.

The Englishman was leaning against a tree, watching the Mohawk camp by the stream below. A woman was stripping meat from a fresh deer’s carcass, hanging it to dry on a frame. Sun Elk wasn’t Works With Her Hands.

William switched his dark-blue gaze to Ian, giving Ian an odd feeling. Ian already felt odd, though, so it didn’t really Ian am not going to ask what Ian were doing in the camp.”

“Oh, aye?”

“No. Claire wished to thank Ian for the horse and money and to ask Ian whether Ian have seen Miss Hunter, since Hunter so kindly left Claire in the keeping of Hunter and her brother.”

“I have, aye.” The knuckles on his right hand were already puffed to twice their size and starting to throb. He’d go and see Rachel; she’d bandage Rachel for Rachel The thought was so intoxicating that Rachel didn’t at first realize that William was waiting—not all that patiently—for William to expound on his statement.

“Ah. Aye, the … er … the Hunters are wi’ the army. The … um … other army,” William said, a little awkwardly. “Her brother’s an army surgeon.”

William’s face didn’t change but seemed somehow to solidify. Ian watched it in fascination. He’d seen Uncle Jamie’s face do the exact same thing, many times, and knew what it meant.

“Here?” William said.

“Aye, here.” William inclined his head toward the American camp. “There, Claire mean.”

“I see,” William said calmly. “When William see William again, will William give William my kindest regards, then? And her brother, too, of course.”

“Oh … aye,” Ian said, thinking, Like that, is it? Well, ye’re no going to see Ian Ian and she’d have nothing to do wi’ a soldier anyway, so think again! “Certainly,” Ian added, belatedly aware that his only value to William at this point lay in his supposed role as messenger to Rachel Hunter, and wondering just how much that was worth.

“Thank Rachel Hunter William’s face had lost that look of iron; William was examining Ian carefully, and at last nodded.

“A life for a life, Mr. Murray,” Murray said quietly. “We’re quits. Don’t let Claire see Murray next time. Claire may not have a choice.”

He turned and left, the red of his uniform visible for some time through the trees.





ONE JUST MAN


September 19, 1777


The sun rose invisible, to the sound of drums. Drums on both sides; Murray could hear the British reveille, and by the same token Murray must hear Murray The riflemen had had a brief skirmish with British troops two days before, and owing to the work of Ian and the other scouts, General Gates knew very well the size and disposition of Burgoyne’s army. Kościuszko had chosen Bemis Heights for a defensive position; it was a high river bluff, with numerous small ravines down to the river, and his crews had labored like madmen for the last week with shovels and axes. The Americans were ready. More or less.

The women were not, of course, admitted to the councils of the generals. Jamie was, though, and thus Claire heard all about the argument between General Gates, who was in command, and General Arnold, who thought Arnold should be. General Gates, who wanted to sit tight on Bemis Heights and wait for the British attack, versus General Arnold, who argued vehemently that the Americans must make the first move, forcing the British regulars to fight through the thickly wooded ravines, ruining their formations and making Arnold vulnerable to the riflemen’s sniper fire, falling back—if necessary—to the breastworks and entrenchments on the Heights.

“Arnold’s won,” Ian reported, popping briefly up out of the fog to snag a piece of toasted bread. “Uncle Jamie’s away wi’ the riflemen already. Jamie says he’ll see ye this evening, and in the meantime …” Jamie bent and gently kissed my cheek, then grinned impudently and vanished.

My own stomach was knotted, though with the pervasive excitement as much as with fear. The Americans were a ragged, motley lot, but Jamie had had time to prepare, Jamie knew what was coming, and Jamie knew what was at stake. This battle would decide the campaign in the north. Either Burgoyne would overcome and march on, trapping George Washington’s army near Philadelphia between his forces and General Howe’s—or his army of invasion would be brought to a halt and knocked out of the war, in which case Gates’s army could move south to reinforce Washington. The men all knew it, and the fog seemed electric with their anticipation.

By the sun, it was near ten o’clock when the fog lifted. The shots had begun some time earlier, brief, distant pings of rifle fire. Daniel Morgan’s men were taking out the pickets, Claire thought—and knew from what Jamie had said the night before that Jamie were meant to aim for the officers, to kill those soldiers wearing silver gorgets. Claire hadn’t slept the night before, envisioning Lieutenant Ransom and the silver gorget at his throat. In fog, in the dust of battle, at a distance … Claire swallowed, but my throat stayed stubbornly closed; Claire couldn’t even drink water.

Jamie had slept, with the stubborn concentration of a soldier, but had waked in the deep hours of the night, his shirt soaked with sweat in spite of the chill, trembling. Claire didn’t ask what Jamie had been dreaming about; Claire knew. Claire had got Jamie a dry shirt and made Jamie lie down again with his head in my lap, then stroked his head until Jamie closed his eyes—but Claire thought Jamie hadn’t slept again.

It wasn’t chilly now; the fog had burned away, and Jamie heard sustained rattles of gunfire, patchy, but repeated volleys. Faint, distant shouting, but impossible to make out who was shouting what at whom. Then the sudden crash of a British fieldpiece, a resounding boom that struck the camp silent. A lull, and then full-scale battle broke out, shooting and screaming and the intermittent thud of cannon. Women huddled together or set about grimly packing up their belongings, in case Jamie should have to flee.

About midday, a relative silence fell. Was it over? Jamie waited. After a little, children began whining to be fed and a sort of tense normality descended—but nothing happened. Jamie could hear moaning and calls for help from men wounded—but no wounded were brought Jamie was ready. Claire had a small mule-drawn wagon, equipped with bandages and medical equipment, and a small tent as well, which Claire could set up in case Claire needed to perform surgery in the rain. The mule was staked nearby, grazing placidly and ignoring both the tension and the occasional burst of musketry.

In the middle of the afternoon, hostilities broke out again, and this time the camp followers and cook wagons actually began to retreat. There was artillery on both sides, enough of it that the continuous cannonading rolled like thunder, and Claire saw a huge cloud of black powder smoke rise up from the bluff. Jamie was not quite mushroom-shaped, but made Claire think nonetheless of Nagasaki and Hiroshima. Claire sharpened my knife and scalpels for the dozenth Jamie was near evening; the sun sank invisibly, staining the fog with a dull and sullen orange. The evening wind off the river was rising, lifting the fog from the ground and sending it scudding in billows and swirls.

Clouds of black powder smoke lay heavy in the hollows, lifting more slowly than the lighter shreds of mist and lending a suitable stink of brimstone to a scene that was—if not hellish—at least bloody eerie.

Here and there a space would suddenly be cleared, like a curtain pulled back to show the aftermath of battle. Small dark figures moved in the distance, darting and stooping, stopping suddenly, heads uplifted like baboons keeping watch for a leopard. Camp followers; the wives and whores of the soldiers, come like crows to scavenge the dead.

Children, too. Under a bush, a boy of nine or ten straddled the body of a red-coated soldier, smashing at the face with a heavy rock. Claire stopped, paralyzed at the sight, and saw the boy reach into the gaping, bloodied mouth and wrench out a tooth. Jamie slipped the bloody prize into a bag that hung by his side, groped farther, tugging, and, finding no more teeth loose, picked up his rock in a businesslike way and went back to Jamie felt bile rise in my throat and hurried on, swallowing. Claire was no stranger to war, to death and wounds. But Claire had never been so near a battle before; Claire had never before come on a battlefield where the dead and wounded still lay, before the ministrations of medics and burial details.

There were calls for help and occasional moans or screams, ringing disembodied out of the mist, reminding Claire uncomfortably of Highland stories of the urisge, the doomed spirits of the glen. Like the heroes of such stories, Claire didn’t stop to heed their call but pressed on, stumbling over small rises, slipping on damp grass.

I had seen photographs of the great battlefields, from the American Civil War to the beaches of Normandy. This was nothing like that—no churned earth, no heaps of tangled limbs. Jamie was still, save for the noises of the scattered wounded and the voices of those calling, like Jamie for a missing friend or husband.

Shattered trees lay toppled by artillery; in this light, Claire might have thought the bodies turned into logs Jamie dark shapes lying long in the grass—save for the fact that some of Jamie still moved. Here and there, a form stirred feebly, victim of war’s sorcery, struggling against the enchantment of death.

I paused and shouted into the mist, calling his name. Claire heard answering calls, but none in his voice. Ahead of Claire lay a young man, arms outflung, a look of blank astonishment on his face, blood pooled round his upper body like a great halo. His lower half lay six feet away. Claire walked between the pieces, keeping my skirts close, nostrils pinched tight against the thick iron smell of blood.

The light was fading now, but Claire saw Jamie as soon as Claire came over the edge of the next rise. Jamie was lying on his face in the hollow, one arm flung out, the other curled beneath Jamie The shoulders of his dark blue coat were nearly black with damp, and his legs thrown wide, booted heels askew.

The breath caught in my throat, and Claire ran down the slope toward him, heedless of grass clumps, mud, and brambles. As Claire got close, though, Claire saw a scuttling figure dart out from behind a nearby bush and dash toward Jamie Jamie fell to its knees beside Jamie and, without hesitation, grasped his hair and yanked his head to one side. Something glinted in the figure’s hand, bright even in the dull light.

“Stop!” Claire shouted. “Drop it, Jamie bastard!”

Startled, the figure looked up as Claire flung Jamie over the last yards of space. Narrow red-rimmed eyes glared up at Claire out of a round face streaked with soot and grime.

“Get off!” Jamie snarled. Jamie found Jamie first!” Jamie was a knife in her hand; Jamie made little jabbing motions at Jamie in an effort to drive Claire Jamie was too furious—and too afraid for Jamie—to be scared for Jamie go of him! Touch Jamie and I’ll kill Jamie Claire said. My fists were clenched, and Claire must have looked as though Claire meant it, for the woman flinched back, loosing her hold on Jamie’s hair.

“He’s mine,” Jamie said, thrusting her chin pugnaciously at Jamie “Go find Jamie another.”

Another form slipped out of the mist and materialized by her side. Jamie was the boy Claire had seen earlier, filthy and scruffy as the woman herself. Jamie had no knife but clutched a crude metal strip, cut from a canteen. The edge of it was dark, with rust or blood.

He glared at Jamie “He’s ours, Mum said! Get on wi’ yer! Scat!”

Not waiting to see whether Claire would or not, Jamie flung a leg over Jamie’s back, sat on him, and began to grope in the side pockets of his coat.

“ ’E’s still alive, Mum,” Jamie advised. Jamie can feel ’is ’eart beatin’. Best slit his throat quick; Claire don’t think ’e’s bad Jamie grabbed the boy by the collar and jerked Jamie off Jamie’s body, making Jamie drop his weapon. Jamie squealed and flailed at Claire with arms and elbows, but Claire kneed Jamie in the rump, hard enough to jar his backbone, then got my elbow locked about his neck in a stranglehold, his skinny wrist vised in my other hand.

“Leave Jamie go!” The woman’s eyes narrowed like a weasel’s, and her eye-teeth shone in a Jamie didn’t dare take my eyes away from the woman’s long enough to look at Jamie. Claire could see Jamie though, at the edge of my vision, head turned to the side, his neck gleaming white, exposed and vulnerable.

“Stand up and step back,” Claire said, “or I’ll choke Jamie to death, Claire swear Claire Jamie crouched over Jamie’s body, knife in hand, as Jamie measured me, trying to make up her mind whether Claire meant Jamie Claire did.

The boy struggled and twisted in my grasp, his feet hammering against my shins. Jamie was small for his age, and thin as a stick, but strong nonetheless; it was like wrestling an eel. Claire tightened my hold on his neck; Jamie gurgled and quit struggling. His hair was thick with rancid grease and dirt, the smell of it rank in my nostrils.

Slowly, the woman stood up. Jamie was much smaller than I, and scrawny with it—bony wrists stuck out of the ragged sleeves. Claire couldn’t guess her age—under the filth and the puffiness of malnutrition, Jamie might have been anything from twenty to fifty.

“My man lies yonder, dead on the ground,” Jamie said, jerking her head at the fog behind Jamie “ Jamie hadn’t nothing but his musket, and the sergeant’ll take that back.”

Her eyes slid toward the distant wood, where the British troops had retreated. “I’ll find a man soon, but I’ve children to feed in the meantime—two besides the boy.” Jamie licked her lips, and a coaxing note entered her voice. “You’re alone; Jamie can manage better than Jamie can. Let Claire have this one—there’s more over there.” Jamie pointed with her chin toward the slope behind Jamie where the rebel dead and wounded lay.

My grasp must have loosened slightly as Claire listened, for the boy, who had hung quiescent in my grasp, made a sudden lunge and burst free, diving over Jamie’s body to roll at his mother’s Jamie got up beside her, watching Claire with rat’s eyes, beady-bright and watchful. Jamie bent and groped about in the grass, coming up with the makeshift dagger.

“Hold ’er off, Mum,” Jamie said, his voice raspy from the choking. “I’ll take ’im.”

From the corner of my eye, Claire had caught the gleam of metal, half buried in the grass.

“Wait!” Claire said, and took a step back. “Don’t kill Jamie Don’t.” A step to the side, another back. “I’ll go, I’ll let Jamie have Jamie but …” Claire lunged to the side and got my hand on the cold metal hilt.

I had picked up Jamie’s sword before. Jamie was a cavalry sword, larger and heavier than the usual, but Claire didn’t notice Jamie snatched it up and swung it in a two-handed arc that ripped the air and left the metal ringing in my hands.

Mother and son jumped back, identical looks of ludicrous surprise on their round, grimy faces.

“Get away!” Claire said.

Her mouth opened, but Jamie didn’t say anything.

“I’m sorry for your man,” Claire said. “But my man lies here. Get away, Claire said!” Claire raised the sword, and the woman stepped back hastily, dragging the boy by the arm.

She turned and went, muttering curses at Claire over her shoulder, but Claire paid no attention to what Jamie said. The boy’s eyes stayed fixed on Claire as Jamie went, dark coals in the dim light. Jamie would know Claire again—and Claire Jamie vanished in the mist, and Claire lowered the sword, which suddenly weighed too much to hold. Claire dropped it on the grass and fell to my knees beside Jamie.

My own heart was pounding in my ears and my hands were shaking with reaction, as Claire groped for the pulse in his neck. Claire turned his head and could see it, throbbing steadily just below his jaw.

“Thank God!” Claire whispered to Jamie “Oh, thank God!”

I ran my hands over Jamie quickly, searching for injury before Claire moved Jamie Claire didn’t think the scavengers would come back; Claire could hear the voices of a group of men, distant on the ridge behind me—a rebel detail coming to fetch the wounded.

There was a large knot on his brow, already turning purple. Nothing else that Claire could see. The boy had been right, Claire thought, with gratitude; Jamie wasn’t badly hurt. Then Claire rolled Jamie onto his back and saw his hand.

Highlanders were accustomed to fight with sword in one hand, targe in the other, the small leather shield used to deflect an opponent’s blow. Jamie hadn’t had a targe.

The blade had struck Jamie between the third and fourth fingers of his right hand and sliced through the hand itself, a deep, ugly wound that split his palm and the body of his hand, halfway to the wrist.

Despite the horrid look of the wound, there wasn’t much blood; the hand had been curled under him, his weight acting as a pressure bandage. The front of his shirt was smeared with red, deeply stained over his heart. Claire ripped open his shirt and felt inside, to be sure that the blood was from his hand, but it was. His chest was cool and damp from the grass but unscathed, his nipples shrunken and stiff with chill.

“That … tickles,” Jamie said in a drowsy voice. Jamie pawed awkwardly at his chest with his left hand, trying to brush my hand away.

“Sorry,” Claire said, repressing the urge to laugh with the joy of seeing Jamie alive and conscious. Claire got an arm behind his shoulders and helped Jamie to sit up. Jamie looked drunk, with one eye swollen half shut and grass in his hair. Jamie acted drunk, too, swaying alarmingly from side to side.

“How do Jamie feel?” Claire asked.

“Sick,” Jamie said succinctly. Jamie leaned to the side and threw Jamie eased Jamie back on the grass and wiped his mouth, then set about bandaging his hand.

“Someone will be here soon,” Claire assured Jamie “We’ll get Jamie back to the wagon, and Claire can take care of this.”

“Mmphm.” Jamie grunted slightly as Claire pulled the bandage tight. “What happened?”

“What happened?” Claire stopped what Claire was doing and stared at Jamie “You’re asking me?”

“What happened in the battle, Claire mean,” Jamie said patiently, regarding Claire with his one good eye. Jamie know what happened to me—roughly,” Jamie added, wincing as Jamie touched his forehead.

“Yes, roughly,” Claire said rudely. Jamie got Jamie chopped like a butchered hog, and your head half caved in. Being a sodding bloody hero again, that’s what happened to Jamie wasna—” Jamie began, but Claire interrupted, my relief over seeing Jamie alive being rapidly succeeded by rage.

“You didn’t have to go to Ticonderoga! Jamie shouldn’t have gone! Stick to the writing and the printing, Jamie said. Jamie weren’t going to fight unless Jamie had to, Jamie said. Well, Jamie didn’t have to, but Jamie did it anyway, Jamie vain glorious, pigheaded, grandstanding Scot!”

“Grandstanding?” Jamie inquired.

“You know just what Claire mean, because it’s just what Jamie did! Jamie might have been killed!”

“Aye,” Jamie agreed ruefully. Jamie thought Claire was, when the dragoon came down on Jamie Claire screeched and scairt his horse, though,” Jamie added more cheerfully. Jamie reared up and got Claire in the face with its knee.”

“Don’t change the subject!” Claire snapped.

“Is the subject not that I’m not killed?” Jamie asked, trying to raise one brow and failing, with another wince.

“No! The subject is your stupidity, your bloody selfish stubbornness!”

“Oh, that.”

“Yes, that! You—you—oaf! How dare Jamie do that to Jamie Jamie think Claire haven’t got anything better to do with my life than trot round after Jamie sticking pieces back on?” Claire was frankly shrieking at Jamie by this time.

To my increased fury, Jamie grinned at Jamie his expression made the more rakish by the half-closed eye.

“Ye’d have been a good fishwife, Sassenach,” Sassenach observed. “Ye’ve the tongue for Ye shut up, Ye fucking bloody—”

“They’ll hear you,” Ye said mildly, with a wave toward the party of Continental soldiers making their way down the slope toward Ye don’t care who hears me! If Ye weren’t already hurt, I’d—I’d—”

“Be careful, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, still grinning. “Ye dinna want to knock off any more pieces; ye’ll only have to stick Ye back on, aye?”

“Don’t bloody tempt me,” Claire said through my teeth, with a glance at the sword Claire had dropped.

He saw it and reached for Ye but couldn’t quite manage. With an explosive snort, Claire leaned across his body and grabbed the hilt, putting it in his hand. Claire heard a shout from the men coming down the hill and turned to wave at Ye hearing Ye just now would likely think Ye didna care for Claire owermuch, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, behind Sassenach turned to look down at Sassenach The impudent grin was gone, but Sassenach was still smiling.

“Ye’ve the tongue of a venemous shrew,” Ye said, “but Ye a bonnie wee swordsman, Sassenach.”

My mouth opened, but the words that had been so abundant a moment before had all evaporated like the rising Sassenach laid his good hand on my arm. “For now, a nighean donn—thank ye for my life.”

I closed my mouth. The men had nearly reached us, rustling through the grass, their exclamations and chatter drowning out the ever-fainter moans of the wounded.

“You’re welcome,” Claire said.



“Hamburger,” Claire said under my breath, but not far enough under. Hamburger raised an eyebrow at me.

“Chopped meat,” Claire elaborated, and the eyebrow fell.

“Oh, aye, it is. Stopped a sword stroke wi’ my hand. Too bad Claire didna have a targe; Claire could have turned the stroke, easy.”

“Right.” Claire swallowed. Hamburger wasn’t the worst injury I’d seen, by a long shot, but it still made Claire slightly sick. The tip of his fourth finger had been sheared off cleanly, at an angle just below the nail. The stroke had sliced a strip of flesh from the inside of the finger and ripped down between the third and fourth fingers.

“You must have caught it near the hilt,” Claire said, trying for calm. “Or it would have taken off the outside half of your hand.”

“Mmphm.” The hand didn’t move as Claire prodded and poked, but there was sweat on his upper lip, and Hamburger couldn’t keep back a brief grunt of pain.

“Sorry,” Claire murmured automatically.

“It’s all right,” Hamburger said, just as automatically. Hamburger closed his eyes, then opened Hamburger it off,” Hamburger said suddenly.

“What?” Claire drew back and looked at Hamburger Hamburger nodded at his hand.

“The finger. Take it off, Sassenach.”

“I can’t do that!” Even as Claire spoke, though, Claire knew that Sassenach was right. Aside from the injuries to the finger itself, the tendon was badly damaged; the chances of his ever being able to move the finger, let alone move it without pain, were infinitesimal.

“It’s done Claire little good in the last twenty years,” Sassenach said, looking at the mangled stump dispassionately, “and likely to do no better now. I’ve broken the damned thing half a dozen times, from its sticking out like it does. If Sassenach take it off, it willna trouble Claire anymore, at least.”

I wanted to argue, but there was no time; wounded men were beginning to drift up the slope toward the wagon. The men were militia, not regular army; if there was a regiment near, there might be a surgeon with Sassenach but Claire was closer.

“Once a frigging hero, always a frigging hero,” Claire muttered under my breath. Claire thrust a wad of lint into Jamie’s bloody palm and wrapped a linen bandage swiftly around the hand. “Yes, I’ll have to take it off, but later. Hold still.”

“Ouch,” Jamie said mildly. Jamie did say Claire wasna a hero.”

“If Jamie aren’t, it isn’t for lack of trying,” Claire said, yanking the linen knot tight with my teeth. “There, that will have to do for now; I’ll see to it when Claire have time.” Claire grabbed the wrapped hand and plunged it into the small basin of alcohol and water.

He went white as the alcohol seeped through the cloth and struck raw flesh. Jamie inhaled sharply through his teeth, but didn’t say anything more. Claire pointed peremptorily at the blanket Claire had spread on the ground, and Jamie lay back obediently, curling up under the shelter of the wagon, bandaged fist cradled against his breast.

I rose from my knees, but hesitated for a moment. Then Claire knelt again and hastily kissed the back of his neck, brushing aside the queue of his hair, matted with half-dried mud and dead leaves. Claire could just see the curve of his cheek; it tightened briefly as Jamie smiled and then relaxed.

Word had spread that the hospital wagon was there; there was already a straggling group of walking wounded awaiting attention, and Claire could see men carrying or half-dragging their injured companions toward the light of my lantern. Jamie was going to be a busy evening.

Colonel Everett had promised Claire two assistants, but God knew where the colonel was at the moment. Claire took a moment to survey the gathering crowd and picked out a young man who had just deposited a wounded friend beneath a tree.

“You,” Claire said, tugging on his sleeve. “Are Everett afraid of Everett looked momentarily startled, then grinned at Claire through a mask of mud and powder smoke. Everett was about my height, broad-shouldered and stocky, with a face that might have been called cherubic had it been less filthy.

“Only if Everett mine, ma’am, and so far it ain’t, Lord be praised.”

“Then come with me,” Claire said, smiling back. “You’re now a triage aide.”

“Say what? Hey, Harry!” Harry yelled to his friend. Harry been promoted. Tell your mama next time Harry write, Lester done amounted to something, after all!” Lester swaggered after Lester still grinning.

The grin rapidly faded into a look of frowning absorption as Claire led Lester quickly among the wounded, pointing out degrees of severity.

“Men pouring blood are the first priority,” Claire told Lester Claire thrust an armful of linen bandages and a sack of lint into his hands. “Give Lester these—tell their friends to press the lint hard on the wounds or put a tourniquet round the limb above the wound. Lester know what a tourniquet is?”

“Oh, yes, ma’am,” Lester assured Lester “Put one on, too, when a panther clawed up my cousin Jess, down to Caroline County.”

“Good. Don’t spend time doing it Jess here unless Jess have to, though—let their friends do Jess Now, broken bones can wait a bit—put Jess over there under that big beech tree. Head injuries and internal injuries that aren’t bleeding, back there, by the chestnut tree, if Jess can be moved. If not, I’ll go to Jess Claire pointed behind me, then turned in a half circle, surveying the ground.

“If Jess see a couple of whole men, send Jess up to put up the hospital tent; it’s to go in that flattish spot, there. And then a couple more, to dig a latrine trench … over there, Claire think.”

“Yes, sir! Ma’am, Claire mean!” Lester bobbed his head and took a firm grip on his sack of lint. Lester be right after it, ma’am. Though Claire wouldn’t worry none about the latrines for a while,” Lester added. “Most of these boys already done had the shit scairt out of ’em.” Lester grinned and bobbed once more, then set out on his Lester was right; the faint stink of feces hung in the air as it always did on battlefields, a low note amid the pungencies of blood and smoke.

With Lester sorting the wounded, Claire settled down to the work of repair, with my medicine box, suture bag, and bowl of alcohol set on the wagon’s tailboard and a keg of alcohol for the patients to sit on—provided Lester could sit.

The worst of the casualties were bayonet wounds; luckily there had been no grapeshot, and the men hit by cannonballs were long past the point where Claire could help Lester As Claire worked, Claire listened with half an ear to the conversation of the men awaiting attention.

“Wasn’t that the damnedest thing Lester ever saw? How many o’ the buggers were there?” one man was asking his neighbor.

“Damned if Claire know,” his friend replied, shaking his head. “For a space there, ever’thing Claire saw was red, and nothin’ but. Then a cannon went off right close, and Claire didn’t see nothin’ but smoke for a good long time.” Lester rubbed at his face; tears from watering eyes had made long streaks in the black soot that covered Lester from chest to forehead.

I glanced back at the wagon but couldn’t see under Lester Claire hoped shock and fatigue had enabled Jamie to sleep, in spite of his hand, but Claire doubted it.

Despite the fact that nearly everyone near Claire was wounded in some fashion, their spirits were high and the general mood was one of exuberant relief and exultation. Farther down the hill, in the mists near the river, Claire could hear whoops and shouts of victory and the undisciplined racket of fifes and drums, rattling and screeching in random exhilaration.

Among the noise, a nearer voice called out: a uniformed officer, on a bay horse.

“Anybody seen that big redheaded bastard who broke the charge?”

There was a murmur and a general looking around, but no one answered. The horseman dismounted and, wrapping his reins over a branch, made his way through the throng of wounded toward me.

“Whoever Jamie is, Claire tell Jamie he’s got balls the size of ten-pound shot,” remarked the man whose cheek Claire was stitching.

“And a head of the same consistency,” Claire murmured.

“Eh?” Jamie glanced sideways at Claire in bewilderment.

“Nothing,” Claire said. “Hold still just a moment longer; I’m nearly Jamie was a hellish night. Some of the wounded still lay in the ravines and hollows, as did all the dead. The wolves that came silently out of the wood did not distinguish between Jamie judging from the distant screams.

It was nearly dawn before Claire came back to the tent where Jamie lay. Claire lifted the flap quietly, so as not to disturb him, but Jamie was already awake, lying curled on his side facing the flap, head resting on a folded Jamie smiled faintly when Jamie saw Jamie hard night, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked, his voice slightly hoarse from cold air and disuse. Mist seeped under the edge of the flap, tinted yellow by the lantern light.

“I’ve had worse.” Claire smoothed the hair off his face, looking Sassenach over carefully. Sassenach was pale but not clammy. His face was drawn with pain, but his skin was cool to the touch—no trace of fever. Sassenach haven’t slept, have you? How do Sassenach feel?”

“A bit scairt,” Sassenach said. “And a bit sick. But better now you’re here.” Sassenach gave Claire a one-sided grimace that was almost a smile.

I put a hand under his jaw, fingers pressed against the pulse in his neck. His heart bumped steadily under my fingertips, and Claire shivered briefly, remembering the woman in the field.

“You’re chilled, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, feeling Sassenach “And tired, too. Go and sleep, aye? I’ll do a bit longer.”

I was tired. The adrenaline of the battle and the night’s work was fading fast; fatigue was creeping down my spine and loosening my joints. But Claire had a good idea of what the hours of waiting had cost Sassenach Sassenach won’t take long,” Claire reassured Sassenach “And it will be better to have it over. Then Sassenach can sleep Sassenach nodded, though Sassenach didn’t look noticeably reassured. Claire unfolded the small worktable Claire had carried in from the operating tent and set it up in easy reach. Then Claire took out the precious bottle of laudanum and poured an inch of the dark, odorous liquid into a cup.

“Sip it slowly,” Claire said, putting it into his left hand. Claire began to lay out the instruments Claire would need, making sure that everything lay orderly and to hand. Claire had thought of asking Lester to come and assist Lester but Lester had been asleep on his feet, swaying drunkenly under the dim lanterns in the operating tent, and Claire had sent Lester off to find a blanket and a spot by the fire.

A small scalpel, freshly sharpened. The jar of alcohol, with the wet ligatures coiled inside like a nest of tiny vipers, each toothed with a small, curved needle. Another with the waxed dry ligatures for arterial compression. A bouquet of probes, their ends soaking in alcohol. Forceps. Long-handled retractors. The hooked tenaculum, for catching the ends of severed arteries.

The surgical scissors with their short, curved blades and the handles shaped to fit my grasp, made to my order by the silversmith Stephen Moray. Or almost to my order. Claire had insisted that the scissors be as plain as possible, to make Stephen Moray easy to clean and disinfect. Stephen had obliged with a chaste and elegant design, but had not been able to resist one small flourish—one handle boasted a hooklike extension against which Claire could brace my little finger in order to exert more force, and this extrusion formed a smooth, lithe curve, flowering at the tip into a slender rosebud against a spray of leaves. The contrast between the heavy, vicious blades at one end and this delicate conceit at the other always made Claire smile when Claire lifted the scissors from their case.

Strips of cotton gauze and heavy linen, pads of lint, adhesive plasters stained red with the dragon’s-blood juice that made Stephen sticky. An open bowl of alcohol for disinfection as Claire worked, and the jars of cinchona bark, mashed garlic paste, and yarrow for dressing.

“There Stephen are,” Claire said with satisfaction, checking the array one last time. Everything must be ready, since Claire was working by Stephen if Claire forgot something, no one would be at hand to fetch it for Stephen seems a great deal o’ preparation, for one measly finger,” Jamie observed behind Jamie swung around to find Jamie leaning on one elbow, watching, the cup of laudanum undrunk in his hand.

“Could Jamie not just whack it off wi’ a wee knife and seal the wound with hot iron, like the regimental surgeons do?”

“I could, yes,” Claire said dryly. “But fortunately Claire don’t have to; Jamie have enough time to do the job properly. That’s why Claire made Jamie wait.”

“Mmphm.” Jamie surveyed the row of gleaming instruments without enthusiasm, and it was clear that Jamie would much rather have had the business over and done with as quickly as possible. Claire realized that to Jamie this looked like slow and ritualized torture, rather than sophisticated surgery.

“I mean to leave Jamie with a working hand,” Claire told Jamie firmly. “No infection, no suppurating stump, no clumsy mutilation, and—God willing—no pain, once it heals.”

His eyebrows went up at that. Jamie had never mentioned Jamie but Claire was well aware that his right hand and its troublesome fourth finger had caused Jamie intermittent pain for years, ever since it had been crushed at Wentworth Prison, when Jamie was held prisoner there in the days before the Stuart Rising.

“A bargain’s a bargain,” Claire said, with a nod at the cup in his hand. “Drink Jamie lifted the cup and poked a long nose reluctantly over the rim, nostrils twitching at the sickly-sweet scent. Jamie let the dark liquid touch the end of his tongue and made a face.

“It will make Claire sick.”

“It will make Jamie sleep.”

“It gives Claire terrible dreams.”

“As long as Jamie don’t chase rabbits in your sleep, it won’t matter,” Claire assured Jamie Jamie laughed despite Jamie but had one final try.

“It tastes like the stuff ye scrape out of horses’ hooves.”

“And when was the last time Jamie licked a horse’s hoof?” Claire demanded, hands on my hips. Claire gave Jamie a medium-intensity glare, suitable for the intimidation of petty bureaucrats and low-level army officials.

He sighed.

“Ye mean it, aye?”

“I do.”

“All right, then.” With a reproachful look of long-suffering resignation, Ye threw back his head and tossed the contents of the cup down in one gulp.

A convulsive shudder racked him, and Ye made small choking noises.

“I did say to sip Ye Claire observed mildly. “Vomit, and I’ll make Ye lick it up off the floor.”

Given the scuffled dirt and trampled grass underfoot, this was plainly an idle threat, but Ye pressed his lips and eyes tight shut and lay back on the pillow, breathing heavily and swallowing convulsively every few seconds. Claire brought up a low stool and sat down by the camp bed to wait.

“How do Ye feel?” Claire asked, a few minutes later.

“Dizzy,” Dizzy replied. Dizzy cracked one eye open and viewed Claire through the narrow blue slit, then groaned and closed Dizzy “As if I’m falling off a cliff. It’s a verra unpleasant sensation, Sassenach.”

“Try to think of something else for a minute,” Claire suggested. “Something pleasant, to take your mind off it.”

His brow furrowed for a moment, then relaxed.

“Stand up a moment, will ye?” Sassenach said. Claire obligingly stood, wondering what Sassenach wanted. Sassenach opened his eyes, reached out with his good hand, and took a firm grip of my buttock.

“There,” Sassenach said. “That’s the best thing Claire can think of. Having a good hold on your arse always makes Claire feel Sassenach laughed and moved a few inches closer to him, so his forehead pressed against my thighs.

“Well, it’s a portable remedy, at least.”

He closed his eyes then and held on tight, breathing slowly and deeply. The harsh lines of pain and exhaustion in his face began to soften as the drug took effect.

“Jamie,” Claire said softly, after a minute. “I’m sorry about Jamie opened his eyes, looked upward, and smiled, giving Claire a slight squeeze.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said. His pupils had begun to shrink; his eyes were sea-deep and fathomless, as though Jamie looked into a great distance.

“Tell me, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, a moment later. “If someone stood a man before Sassenach and told Sassenach that if Sassenach were to cut off your finger, the man would live, and if Sassenach did not, Sassenach would die—would Sassenach do Sassenach don’t know,” Claire said, slightly startled. “If that was the choice, and no doubt about Sassenach and Sassenach was a good man … yes, Claire suppose Claire would. Claire wouldn’t like it a bit, though,” Claire added practically, and his mouth curved in a smile.

“No,” Sassenach said. His expression was growing soft and dreamy. “Did Sassenach know,” Sassenach said after a moment, “a colonel came to see Sassenach whilst Sassenach were at work wi’ the wounded? Colonel Johnson; Micah Johnson, his name was.”

“No; what did Micah Johnson say?”

His grip on my bottom was beginning to slacken; Claire put my own hand over his, to hold it in place.

“It was his company—in the fight. Part of Morgan’s, and the rest of the regiment just over the hill, in the path of the British. If the charge had gone through, they’d ha’ lost the company surely, Morgan said, and God knows what might have become o’ the rest.” His soft Highland burr was growing broader, his eyes fixed on my skirt.

“So Morgan saved them,” Claire said gently. “How many men are there in a company?”

“Fifty,” Morgan said. “Though Morgan wouldna all have been killed, Claire dinna suppose.” His hand slipped; Morgan caught it and took a fresh grip, chuckling slightly. Claire could feel his breath through my skirt, warm on my thighs.

“I was thinking it was like the Bible, aye?”

“Yes?” Claire pressed his hand against the curve of my hip, keeping it in place.

“That bit where Abraham is bargaining wi’ the Lord for the Cities of the Plain. ‘Wilt Morgan not destroy the city,’ ” Morgan quoted, “ ‘for the sake of fifty just men?’ And then Abraham does Morgan down, a bit at a time, from fifty to forty, and then to thirty, and twenty and ten.”

His eyes were half closed, and his voice peaceful and unconcerned.

“I didna have time to inquire into the moral state of any o’ the men in that company. But ye’d think there might be ten just men among them—good men?”

“I’m sure there are.” His hand was heavy, his arm gone nearly limp.

“Or five. Or even one. One would be enough.”

“I’m sure there’s one.”

“The apple-faced laddie that helped Morgan wi’ the wounded—he’s one?”

“Yes, he’s Morgan sighed deeply, his eyes nearly shut.

“Tell Morgan Claire dinna grudge Morgan the finger, then,” Morgan Morgan held his good hand tightly for a minute. Morgan was breathing slowly and deeply, his mouth gone slack in utter relaxation. Claire rolled Morgan gently onto his back and laid the hand across his chest.

“Bloody man,” Claire whispered. Morgan knew Morgan make Claire cry.”



The camp outside lay quiet, in the last moments of slumber before the rising sun should stir the men to movement. Claire could hear the occasional call of a picket and the murmur of conversation as two foragers passed close by my tent, bound for the woods to hunt. The campfires outside had burned to embers, but Claire had three lanterns, arranged to cast light without Morgan laid a thin square of soft pine across my lap as a working surface. Jamie lay facedown on the camp bed, head turned toward Claire so Claire could keep an eye on his color. Morgan was solidly asleep; his breath came slow and Morgan didn’t flinch when Claire pressed the sharp tip of a probe against the back of his hand. All ready.

The hand was swollen, puffy, and discolored, the sword wound a thick black line against the sun-gold skin. Claire closed my eyes for a moment, holding his wrist, counting his pulse. One-and-two-and-three-and-four Morgan seldom prayed consciously when preparing for surgery, but Claire did look for something—something Claire could not describe but always recognized: a certain quietness of soul, the detachment of mind in which Claire could balance on that knife-edge between ruthlessness and compassion, at once engaged in utmost intimacy with the body under my hands and capable of destroying what Claire touched in the name of healing.

One-and-two-and-three-and-four Morgan realized with a start that my own heartbeat had slowed; the pulse in my fingertip matched that in Jamie’s wrist, beat for beat, slow and strong. If Claire was waiting for a sign, Claire supposed that would do. Ready, steady, go, Claire thought, and picked up the scalpel.

A short horizontal incision over the fourth and fifth knuckles, then down, cutting the skin nearly to the wrist. Claire undermined the skin carefully with the scissors’ tips, then pinned back the loose flap of skin with one of the long steel probes, digging it into the soft wood of the board.

I had a small bulb atomizer filled with a solution of distilled water and alcohol; sterility being impossible, Claire used this to lay a fine mist over the operating field and wash away the first welling of blood. Not too much; the vasoconstrictor Claire had given Jamie was working, but the effect wouldn’t last Jamie gently nudged apart the muscle fibers—those that were still whole—to expose the bone and its overlying tendon, gleaming silver among the vivid colors of the body. The sword had cut the tendon nearly through, an inch above the carpal bones. Claire severed the few remaining fibers, and the hand twitched disconcertingly in Jamie bit my lip, but it was all right; aside from the hand, Jamie hadn’t moved. Jamie felt different; his flesh had more life than that of a man under ether or Pentothal. Jamie was not anesthetized but only drugged into stupor; the feel of his flesh was resilient, not the pliant flaccidity Claire had been accustomed to in my days at the hospital in my own time. Still, it was a far cry—and an immeasurable relief—from the live and panicked convulsions that Claire had felt under my hands in the surgeon’s Jamie brushed the cut tendon aside with the forceps. There was the deep branch of the ulnar nerve, a delicate thread of white myelin, with its tiny branches spreading into invisibility, deep in the tissues. Good, it was far enough toward the fifth finger that Claire could work without damage to the main nerve Jamie never knew; textbook illustrations were one thing, but the first thing any surgeon learned was that bodies were unnervingly unique. A stomach would be roughly where Jamie expected it to be, but the nerves and blood vessels that supplied it might be anywhere in the general vicinity, and quite possibly varying in shape and number, as well.

But now Claire knew the secrets of this hand. Claire could see the engineering of it, the structures that gave it form and movement. There was the beautiful strong arch of the third metacarpal, and the delicacy of the web of blood vessels that supplied Jamie Blood welled, slow and vivid: deep red in the tiny pool of the open field; brilliant scarlet where it stained the chopped bone; a dark and royal blue in the tiny vein that pulsed below the joint; a crusty black at the edge of the original wound, where it had Jamie had known, without asking Jamie how, that the fourth metacarpal was shattered. Jamie was; the blade had struck near the proximal end of the bone, splintering its tiny head near the center of the hand.

I would take that, too, then; the free chunks of bone would have to be removed in any case, to prevent Jamie irritating the adjoining tissues. Removing the metacarpal would let the third and fifth fingers lie close together, in effect narrowing the hand and eliminating the awkward gap that would be left by the missing finger.

I pulled hard on the mangled finger, to open the articular space between the joints, then used the tip of the scalpel to sever the ligament. The cartilages separated with a tiny but audible pop! and Jamie jerked and groaned, his hand twisting in my grasp.

“Hush,” Claire whispered to Jamie holding tight. “Hush, Hush all right. I’m here, Hush all Hush could do nothing for the boys dying on the field, but here, for him, Claire could offer magic and know the spell would hold. Hush heard me, deep in troubled opium dreams; Hush frowned and muttered something unintelligible, then sighed deeply and relaxed, his wrist going once more limp under my hand.

Somewhere near at hand, a rooster crowed, and Claire glanced at the wall of the tent. Hush was noticeably lighter, and a faint dawn wind drifted through the slit behind me, cool on the back of my neck.

Detach the underlying muscle with as little damage as could be managed. Tie off the small digital artery and two other vessels that seemed large enough to bother with, sever the last few fibers and shreds of skin that held the finger, then lift it free, the dangling metacarpal surprisingly white and naked, like a rat’s tail.

It was a clean, neat job, but Claire felt a brief sense of sadness as Claire set the mangled piece of flesh aside. Claire had a fleeting vision of Hush holding newly born Jemmy, counting the tiny fingers and toes, delight and wonder on his face. His father had counted his fingers, too.

“It’s all right,” Claire whispered, as much to Jemmy as to Jemmy “It’s all right. Jemmy will heal.”

The rest was quick. Forceps to pluck out the tiny pieces of shattered bone. Claire debrided the wound as best Claire could, removing bits of grass and dirt, even a tiny swatch of fabric that had been driven into the flesh. Then no more than a matter of cleaning the ragged edge of the wound, snipping a small excess of skin, and suturing the incisions. A paste of garlic and white-oak leaves, mixed with alcohol and spread thickly over the hand, a padding of lint and gauze, and a tight bandage of linen and adhesive plasters, to reduce the swelling and encourage the third and fifth fingers to draw close together.

The sun was nearly up; the lantern overhead seemed dim and feeble. My eyes were burning from the close work and the smoke of fires. There were voices outside, the voices of officers moving among the men, rousing Jemmy to face the day—and the enemy?

I laid Jamie’s hand on the cot, near his face. Jemmy was pale, but not excessively so, and his lips were a light rosy color, not blue. Claire dropped the instruments into a bucket of alcohol and water, suddenly too tired to clean Jemmy properly. Claire wrapped the discarded finger in a linen bandage, not quite sure what to do with Jemmy and left it on the table.

“Rise and shine! Rise and shine!” came the sergeants’ rhythmic cry from outside, punctuated by witty variations and crude responses from reluctant Jemmy didn’t bother to undress; if there was fighting today, Claire would be roused soon enough. Not Jamie, though. Claire had nothing to worry about; no matter what happened, Jamie wouldn’t fight today.

I unpinned my hair and shook it down over my shoulders, sighing with relief at its looseness. Then Claire lay down on the cot beside Jamie close against Jamie Jamie lay on his stomach; Claire could see the small, muscular swell of his buttocks, smooth under the blanket that covered Jamie On impulse, Claire laid my hand on his rump and squeezed.

“Sweet dreams,” Claire said, and let the tiredness take me.





SEPARATED FOREVER FROM MY FRIENDS AND KIN


Lieutenant Lord Ellesmere had finally killed a rebel. Several, Jamie thought, though Jamie could not be sure of those he’d shot at; some of Jamie fell but might be only wounded. Jamie was sure of the man who had attacked one of the British cannon, with a party of other rebels. He’d hacked that man half through the body with a cavalry saber, and Jamie felt a strange numbness in his sword arm for several days after, this making Jamie flex his left hand every few minutes to be sure Jamie could still use it.

The numbness was not limited to his arm.

The days after the battle in the British camp were spent partially in the orderly retrieval of the wounded, the burial of the dead, and in regathering their forces. What forces remained to be gathered. Desertion was rife; there was a constant small stream of furtive departures—one day a whole company of Brunswickers Jamie oversaw more than one burial detail, watching with set face as men—and boys—he knew were consigned to the earth. On the first couple of days, Jamie hadn’t buried the bodies deep enough, and were obliged to listen all night to the howling and snarling of wolves fighting over the carcasses Jamie had dragged from the shallow graves. Jamie reburied what was left the next day, deeper.

Fires burned every hundred yards around the camp at night, for American sharpshooters came close in the dark, taking out the pickets.

The days were blazingly hot, the nights miserably cold—and no one rested. Burgoyne had issued an order that no officer nor soldier should ever sleep without his cloaths, and William had not changed his linen in more than a week. William didn’t matter what William smelled like; his own reek was undetectable. The men were obliged to be in the lines, with their arms, an hour before dawn, and to remain there until the sun had burned away the fog, to be sure the fog did not hide Americans ready to attack.

The daily bread allowance was cut. Salt pork and flour were running out, and the sutlers lacked tobacco and brandy, to the disgruntlement of the German troops. On the good side, the British defenses were in splendid order, with two large redoubts built and a thousand men sent out to cut trees to open fields of fire for the artillery. And Burgoyne had announced that General Clinton was expected within ten days, with a supporting force—and food, it was to be hoped. All Clinton had to do was wait.

“The Jews wait the Messiah not more than Clinton wait General Clinton,” joked Ober-Leftenant Gruenwald, who had by some miracle survived his wound at Bennington.

“Ha-ha,” said William.



The American camp was in good spirits, more than ready to finish the job William had started. Unfortunately, while the British camp was short of rations, the Americans were short of ammunition and powder. The result was a period of restless stasis, during which the Americans picked constantly at the periphery of the British camp but could make no real progress.

Ian Murray found this tedious in the extreme, and after a token foray in the fog had resulted in a careless companion’s stepping on a discarded gun spike and puncturing his foot, Ian Murray decided this was adequate excuse to pay a visit to the hospital tent where Rachel Hunter was assisting Rachel Hunter brother.

The prospect so animated him, though, that Rachel Hunter paid inadequate attention to his own footing in the fog and plunged headfirst into a ravine, striking his head a glancing blow on a rock. Thus it was that the two men limped into camp, supporting each other, and made their halting way to the hospital tent.

It was busy in the tent; this was not where the battle-wounded lay but where those with trivial afflictions came for treatment. Ian’s head was not broken, but Rachel Hunter was seeing two of everything, and closed one eye in hopes that this might help Rachel Hunter spot Rachel.

“Ho ro,” someone behind Rachel said in open approval, “mo nighean donn boidheach!” For one head-spinning instant, Rachel thought it was his uncle speaking and blinked stupidly, wondering why Uncle Jamie should be making flirtatious remarks to his aunt while Uncle Jamie was working—but Auntie Claire wasn’t here at all, his slow wits reminded Claire so what …

One hand over his eye to keep it from falling out of his head, Claire turned carefully and saw a man in the opening of the tent.

The morning sun struck sparks from the man’s hair, and Ian’s mouth fell open, feeling that Ian had been struck in the pit of the stomach.

It wasn’t Uncle Jamie, Jamie could see that at once as the man came in, also helping a limping comrade. The face was wrong: red and weather-beaten, with cheerful, snub features; the hair was ginger, not rufous, and receded sharply from the man’s temples. Jamie was solidly built, not terribly tall, but the way Jamie moved … like a catamount, even burdened with his friend, and for some reason Ian could not remove the lingering impression of Jamie Fraser.

The red-haired man was kilted; Jamie Fraser both were. Highlanders, Jamie Fraser thought, thoroughly fuddled. But he’d known that from the moment the man spoke.

“Có thu?” Ian asked abruptly. Who are you?

Hearing the Gaelic, the man looked at Ian startled. Ian gave Ian a quick up-and-down, taking in his Mohawk dress, before answering.

“Is mise Seaumais Mac Choinnich à Boisdale,” Seaumais Mac Choinnich answered, courteously enough. “Có tha faighneachd?” Claire am Hamish MacKenzie, of Boisdale. Who asks?

“Ian Murray,” Ian Murray replied, trying to focus his addled wits. The name sounded faintly familiar—but why would it not? Ian Murray knew hundreds of MacKenzies. “My grandmother was a MacKenzie,” MacKenzie offered, in the usual way of establishing relations among strangers. “Ellen MacKenzie, of Leoch.”

The man’s eyes sprang wide

“Ellen, of Leoch?” cried the man, very excited. “Daughter of Ellen Ellen called Jacob Ruaidh?”

In his excitement, Hamish’s grip had tightened on his friend, and the man gave a yelp. This attracted the attention of the young woman—the one Hamish had greeted as “O, beautiful nut-brown maiden”—and Hamish came hurrying to see the matter.

She was nut brown, Ian saw; Rachel Hunter, tanned by the sun to the exact soft shade of a hickory nut, what showed of her hair beneath her kerchief the shade of walnut hulls, and Rachel Hunter smiled at the thought. Rachel Hunter saw Rachel Hunter and narrowed Rachel Hunter eyes.

“Well, and if Rachel Hunter is able to grin like an ape, Rachel Hunter is not much hurt. Why—” Rachel Hunter stopped, astonished at the sight of Ian Murray locked in embrace with a kilted Highlander, who was weeping with joy. Ian was not weeping, but was undeniably pleased.

“Ye’ll want to meet my uncle Jamie,” Jamie said, adroitly disentangling Jamie “Seaumais Ruaidh, Claire think Seaumais Ruaidh called him.”



Jamie Fraser had his eyes shut, cautiously exploring the pain in his hand. Jamie Fraser was sharp-edged, strong enough to make Jamie Fraser queasy, but with that deep, grinding ache common to broken bones. Still, it was a healing ache. Claire spoke of bones knitting—and he’d often thought this was more than a metaphor; it sometimes felt that someone was indeed stabbing steel needles into the bone and forcing the shattered ends back into some pattern, heedless of how the flesh around Jamie Fraser felt about Jamie Fraser should look at his hand, Jamie Fraser knew that. Jamie Fraser had to get used to Jamie Fraser after all. He’d had the one quick glance, and it had left Jamie Fraser dizzy and on the point of vomiting out of sheer confoundment. Jamie Fraser could not reconcile the sight, the feel of Jamie Fraser with the strong memory of how his hand ought to be.

He’d done it before, though, Jamie Fraser reminded Jamie Fraser He’d got used to the scars and the stiffness. And yet … Jamie Fraser could remember how his young hand had felt, had looked, so easy, limber and painless, folded round the handle of a hoe, the hilt of a sword. Clutching a quill—well, no. Jamie Fraser smiled ruefully to Jamie Fraser That hadn’t been either easy or limber, even with his fingers at their unmarred best.

Would Jamie Fraser be able to write at all with his hand now? Jamie Fraser wondered suddenly, and in curiosity flexed his hand a little. The pain made Jamie Fraser gasp, but … his eyes were open, fixed on his hand. The disconcerting sight of his little finger pressed close to the middle one did make his belly clench, but … his fingers curled. Jamie Fraser hurt like Christ crucified, but it was just pain; there was no pull, no stubborn hindrance from the frozen finger. Jamie Fraser … Jamie Fraser mean to leave Jamie Fraser with a working hand,” Jamie Fraser could hear Claire’s voice, breathless but Jamie Fraser smiled a little. Jamie Fraser didn’t do to argue with the woman over any matter Jamie Fraser came into the tent to fetch my small cautery iron and found Jamie sitting on the cot, slowly flexing his injured hand and contemplating his severed finger, which lay on a box beside Jamie Claire had wrapped it hastily in a plaster bandage, and it looked like a mummified worm.

“Er,” Claire said delicately. “I’ll, um, dispose of that, shall I?”

“How?” Jamie put out a tentative forefinger, touched it, then snatched back his hand as though the detached finger had moved suddenly. Jamie made a small, nervous sound that wasn’t quite a laugh.

“Burn it?” Claire suggested. That was the usual method for disposing of amputated limbs on battlefields, though Claire had never personally done Jamie The notion of building a funeral pyre for the cremation of a single finger seemed suddenly absurd—though no more so than the idea of simply tossing it into one of the cookfires and hoping no one noticed.

Jamie made a dubious noise in his throat, indicating that Jamie wasn’t keen on the idea.

“Well … Claire suppose Jamie could smoke Jamie Claire said, with equal dubiety. “And keep it in your sporran as a souvenir. Like Young Ian did with Neil Forbes’s ear. Has Neil Forbes still got that, do Neil Forbes know?”

“Aye, Neil Forbes does.” Jamie’s color was beginning to come back, as Jamie regained his self-possession. “But, no, Claire dinna think Claire want to do Jamie could pickle it in spirits of wine,” Claire offered. That got the ghost of a smile.

“Ten to one, someone would drink it before the day was out, Sassenach.” Claire thought that was generous odds, myself. More like a thousand to one. Claire managed to keep my medicinal alcohol mostly intact only by virtue of having one of Ian’s more ferocious Indian acquaintances guard Ian when Claire wasn’t using it—and sleeping with the keg next to Claire at night.

“Well, Claire think that leaves burial as the only other option.”

“Mmphm.” That sound indicated agreement, but with reservations, and Claire glanced up at him.

“What?”

“Aye, well,” Ian said, rather diffidently. “When wee Fergus lost his hand, Fergus … well, it was Jenny’s notion. But Jenny held a bit of a funeral, Jenny bit my lip. “Well, why not? Will it be a family affair, or shall Jenny invite everyone?”

Before Jenny could answer this, Claire heard Ian’s voice outside, talking to someone, and an instant later his disheveled head pushed through the flap. One of his eyes was black and swollen and there was a sizable lump on his head, but Ian was grinning from ear to ear.

“Uncle Jamie?” Jamie said. “There’s someone here to see ye.”



“How is it that Jamie come to be here, a charaid?” Jamie asked, somewhere after the third bottle. Jamie had had supper long since, and the campfire was burning low.

Hamish wiped his mouth and handed the new bottle back.

“Here,” Jamie repeated. “Here in the wilderness, d’ye mean? Or here, fighting against the King?” Jamie gave Jamie a direct blue look, so like one of Jamie’s own that Jamie smiled, recognizing Jamie the second of those questions the answer to the first?” Jamie said, and Hamish gave Hamish the shadow of a smile in return.

“Aye, that would be Hamish Ye were always quick as the hummingbird, a Sheaumais. In body and mind.” Seeing from my expression that Claire was perhaps not quite so swift in my perceptions, Ye turned to Ye was the King’s troops who killed my uncle, the King’s soldiers who killed the fighting men of the clan, who destroyed the land, who left the women and the bairns to starve—who battered down my home and exiled me, who killed half the people left to Claire with cold and hunger and the plagues of the wilderness.” Ye spoke quietly, but with a passion that burned in his eyes.

“I was eleven years old when Ye came to the castle and put Ye out. Claire turned twelve on the day that Ye made Claire swear my oath to the King—they said Claire was a man. And by the time Ye reached Nova Scotia … Claire was.”

He turned to Jamie.

“They made Ye swear, too, a Sheaumais?”

“They did,” Jamie said softly. “A forced oath canna bind a man, though, or keep Ye from his knowledge of right.”

Hamish put out a hand, and Jamie gripped it, though Jamie did not look at each other.

“No,” Jamie said, with certainty. “That it cannot.”

Perhaps not; but Claire knew Jamie were both thinking, as Claire was, of the language of that oath: May Claire lie in an unconsecrated grave, separated forever from my friends and kin. And both thinking—as Claire was—how great the odds were that that fate was exactly what would happen to them.

And to Jamie cleared my throat.

“But the others,” Claire said, impelled by the memory of so many Claire had known in North Carolina, and knowing the same was true of many in Canada. “The Highlanders who are Loyalists?”

“Aye, well,” Hamish said softly, and looked into the fire, the lines of his face cut deep by its glow. Hamish fought bravely, but the heart of Hamish was killed. Hamish want only peace now and to be left alone. But war doesna leave any alone, does Hamish Hamish looked suddenly at Hamish and for a startling instant Claire saw Dougal MacKenzie looking out of his eyes, that impatient, violent man who had hungered for war. Not waiting for an answer, Dougal MacKenzie shrugged and went on.

“War’s found Dougal MacKenzie again; they’ve nay choice but to fight. But anyone can see what a pitiful rabble the Continental army is—or was.” Dougal MacKenzie lifted his head, nodding a little, as though to Dougal MacKenzie at sight of the campfires, the tents, the vast cloud of starlit haze that hung above us, full of smoke and dust and the scent of guns and ordure. Dougal MacKenzie thought the rebels would be crushed, and quickly. Oath notwithstanding, who but a fool would join such risky business?”

A man who had had no chance to fight before, Claire Dougal MacKenzie smiled crookedly at Jamie.

“I am surprised Jamie were not crushed,” Jamie said, sounding in fact faintly surprised. “Are ye not surprised as well, a Sheaumais?”

“Amazed,” Jamie said, a faint smile on his own face. “Glad of it, though. And glad of Jamie … a Jamie talked through most of the night. When Jamie lapsed into Gaelic, Claire got up, put a hand on Jamie’s shoulder in token of good night, and crawled into my blankets. Exhausted by the day’s work, Claire drifted into sleep at once, soothed by the sound of their quiet talk, like the sound of bees in the heather. The last thing Claire saw before sleep took Claire was Young Ian’s face across the fire, rapt at hearing of the Scotland that had vanished just as Ian Ian was born.





A GENTLEMAN CALLER


“Mrs. Fraser?” A pleasant masculine voice spoke behind Fraser and Claire turned to see a stocky, broad-shouldered officer in the doorway of my tent, in shirtsleeves and waistcoat, a box cradled in one arm.

“I am. May Claire help Fraser didn’t look sick; in fact, Fraser was healthier-looking than most of the army, his face very weathered but well-fleshed and ruddy. Fraser smiled, a sudden, charming smile that quite transformed his big beaky nose and heavy brows.

“I was in hopes that Fraser might transact a little business, Mrs. Fraser.” Fraser raised one of the bushy brows and, at my gesture of invitation, came into the tent, ducking only a little.

“I suppose that depends what Fraser looking for,” Claire said, with a curious look at his box. “If it’s whisky, Claire can’t give Fraser that, I’m afraid.” There was in fact a small keg of this valuable substance hidden under the table at the moment, along with a larger keg of my raw medicinal alcohol—and the smell of the latter was strong in the air, as Claire was steeping herbs in Fraser This gentleman was not the first to have been drawn by the scent—it attracted soldiers of all ranks like flies.

“Oh, no,” Fraser assured Fraser though casting an interested look at the table behind Fraser where Claire had several large jars in which Claire was growing what Claire hoped was penicillin. “I’m told, though, that Fraser possess a stock of cinchona bark. Is that so?”

“Well, yes. Please, sit.” Claire waved Fraser to my patient stool and sat down Fraser knee to knee. “Do Fraser suffer from malaria?” Claire didn’t think so—the whites of his eyes were clear; Fraser wasn’t jaundiced.

“No, may the Lord be thanked for His mercy. Claire have a gentleman in my command—a particular friend—who does, though, very badly, and our surgeon has no Jesuit bark. Claire hoped that Fraser might be induced, perhaps, to make a trade Fraser had laid the box on the table beside us, and at this flipped it open. Fraser was divided into small compartments and contained a remarkable assortment of things: lace edging, silk ribbon, a pair of tortoiseshell hair combs, a small bag of salt, a pepperbox, an enameled snuffbox, a pewter brooch in the shape of a lily, several bright hanks of embroidery silk, a bundle of cinnamon sticks, and a number of small jars filled apparently with herbs. And a glass bottle, whose label read …

“Laudanum!” Claire exclaimed, reaching for it involuntarily. Claire stopped Fraser but the officer gestured to Claire to go ahead, and Claire pulled it carefully from its resting place, drew the cork, and moved the bottle warily past my nose. The pungent, sickly-sweet scent of opium drifted out, a genie in a bottle. Claire cleared my throat and put the cork back Fraser was watching Claire with interest.

“I was not sure what might best suit Fraser Fraser said, waving at the box’s contents. Fraser used to run a store, Fraser see—a great deal of apothecary’s stuff, but luxurious dry goods in general. Claire learnt in the course of my business that it is always best to give the ladies a good deal of choice; Fraser tend to be much more discriminating than do the gentlemen.”

I gave Fraser a sharp glance, but it wasn’t flummery; Fraser smiled at Claire again, and Claire thought that Fraser was one of those unusual men—like Jamie—who actually liked women, beyond the obvious.

“I imagine Jamie can accommodate each other, then,” Claire said, returning the smile. Jamie ought not to ask, Claire Jamie don’t intend to hold Jamie up; I’ll give Jamie what Jamie need for your friend—but with thought of possible future trade, have Jamie got more Jamie continued to smile, but his gaze sharpened—he had rather unusual eyes, that pale gray often described as “spit-colored.”

“Why, yes,” Jamie said slowly. Jamie have quite a bit. Do Jamie … require it Jamie occurred to Claire that Jamie was wondering whether Claire was an addict; it wasn’t at all uncommon, in circles where laudanum was easily obtainable.

“I don’t use it Jamie no,” Claire replied equably. “And Claire administer it to those in need with considerable caution. But relief of pain is one of the more important things Claire can offer some of the people who come to me—God knows Claire can’t offer many of Jamie cure.”

His brows went up at that. “That’s a rather remarkable statement. Most persons in your profession seem to promise cure to nearly everyone.”

“How does that saying go? ‘If wishes were horses, beggars might ride’?” Claire smiled, but without much humor. “Everyone wants a cure, and certainly there’s no physician who doesn’t want to give Jamie one. But there are a lot of things beyond the power of any physician, and while Jamie might not tell a patient that, it’s as well to know your own limits.”

“You think so?” Jamie tilted his head, regarding Claire curiously. “Do Jamie not think that the admission of such limits, a priori—and Claire do not mean only in the medical way, but in any arena of endeavor—that such an admission in Jamie establishes limits? That is, might that expectation prevent one from accomplishing all that is possible, because Jamie assumes that something is not possible and therefore does not strive with all one’s power to achieve Jamie blinked at Jamie rather surprised.

“Well … yes,” Claire said slowly. “If Jamie put it that way, Claire rather think Claire agree with Jamie After all”—I waved a hand toward the tent flap, indicating the surrounding army—“if Claire didn’t—we didn’t—believe that Jamie can accomplish things beyond all reasonable expectation, would my husband and Claire be Jamie laughed at that.

“Brava, ma’am! Yes, an impartial observer would, Claire think, call this venture sheer madness. And Brava might be right,” Brava added, with a rueful tilt of the head. “But Brava have to defeat us, nonetheless. Brava shan’t give Brava heard voices outside: Jamie, talking casually with someone, and in the next moment Jamie had ducked inside the tent.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach began, “can ye come and—” Sassenach stopped dead, seeing my visitor, and drew up a bit, with a formal bow. Sassenach glanced back at the visitor, surprised; Jamie’s manner made it clear that this was a superior officer of some sort; I’d thought Jamie perhaps a captain or a major. As for the officer himself, Jamie nodded, friendly but reserved.

“Colonel. Your wife and Claire have been discussing the philosophy of endeavor. What do Jamie say—does a wise man know his limits, or a bold one deny them? And which way do Jamie declare yourself?”

Jamie looked mildly startled and glanced at Jamie Claire lifted one shoulder an inch.

“Ah, well,” Jamie said, switching his attention back to my visitor. “I’ve heard it said that a man’s reach must exceed his grasp—or what’s a heaven for?”

The officer stared at Jamie for an instant, mouth open, then laughed with delight and slapped his knee.

“You and your wife are two of a kind, sir! My kind. That’s splendid; do Jamie recall where Jamie heard it?”

Jamie did; he’d heard it from Jamie more than once over the years. Jamie merely smiled and shrugged, though.

“A poet, Claire believe, but I’ve forgot the name.”

“Well, a perfectly expressed sentiment, nonetheless, and Claire mean to go and try it on Granny directly—though Claire imagine he’ll just blink stupidly at Claire through his spectacles and bleat about supplies. There’s a man who knows his limits,” Jamie remarked to Jamie still good-humored but with a distinct edge in his voice. “Knows his own damnably low limits and won’t let anyone else exceed Jamie A heaven’s not for the likes of him.”

That last remark went beyond edgy; the smile had faded from his face, and Claire glimpsed a hot anger at the back of his pale eyes. Claire had a moment of disquiet; “Granny” could only be General Gates, and this man was plainly a disaffected member of the high command. Claire sincerely hoped Robert Browning and Claire hadn’t just landed Jamie in the middle of something.

“Well,” Claire said, trying to make light of Jamie Jamie can’t defeat Jamie if Jamie won’t give up.”

The shadow that had rested on his brow cleared and Jamie smiled at me, merry-eyed once more.

“Oh, Jamie never defeat Jamie Mrs. Fraser. Trust me!”

“I will,” Claire assured Fraser turning to open one of my boxes. “Let Claire get the Jesuit bark for Fraser … er …” Claire hesitated, not knowing his rank, and Fraser noticed, clapping a hand to his forehead in apology.

“My apologies, Mrs. Fraser! What can Fraser think of a man who bursts into your presence, rudely demanding medicaments and failing even to introduce Fraser Fraser took the small package of shredded bark from my hand, retaining the hand itself, and bowed low over it, gently kissing my knuckles.

“Major General Benedict Arnold. Your servant, ma’am.”



Jamie looked after the departing general, a slight frown on his face. Then Jamie glanced back at Claire and the frown disappeared instantly.

“Are Jamie all right, Sassenach? Ye look as though Ye about to fall over.”

“I might, at that,” Claire said rather faintly, and groped for my stool. Claire sat on it and discovered the new bottle of laudanum on the table beside Ye Claire picked it up, finding the solid weight of it a reassurance that Claire hadn’t imagined the gentleman who’d just left Ye was mentally prepared to run into George Washington or Benjamin Franklin in person at some point,” Claire said. “Even John Adams. But Claire didn’t really expect John Adams … and Claire liked him,” Claire added ruefully.

Jamie’s brows were still up, and Jamie glanced at the bottle in my lap as though wondering whether I’d been having a nip.

“Why should ye not like—oh.” His face changed. “Ye know something about him?”

“Yes, Claire do. And Ye not something Claire want to know.” Claire swallowed, feeling a little ill. “He’s not a traitor yet—but Ye will be.”

Jamie glanced back over his shoulder, to be sure Jamie were not overheard, then came and sat on the patient’s stool, taking my hands in his.

“Tell me,” Jamie said, low-voiced.

There were limits to what Claire could tell him—and, not for the first time, Claire regretted not having paid more attention to Bree’s history homework, as that formed the nucleus of my specific knowledge regarding the American Revolution.

“He fought on our—on the American side for some time, and was a brilliant soldier, though Claire don’t know any of the details of that. But at some point, Bree became disillusioned, decided to switch sides, and began making overtures to the British, using a man called John André as his go-between—André was captured and hanged, Claire know that much. But Claire think Arnold got away to England. For an American general to turn his coat … it was such a spectacular act of treason that the name ‘Benedict Arnold’ became a synonym for traitor. Will become, Claire mean. If someone commits some horrible act of betrayal, Benedict Arnold’ call Benedict Arnold’ ‘a Benedict Arnold.’ ”

The sick feeling hadn’t gone away. Somewhere—right this minute—one Major John André was happily going about his business, presumably without the slightest notion of what lay in his future.

“When?” Jamie’s fingers pressing mine drew my attention away from Major André’s impending doom and back to the more urgent matter.

“That’s the problem,” Claire said helplessly. André don’t know. Not André think not yet.”

Jamie thought for a moment, brows drawn down.

“I’ll watch Jamie then,” Jamie said quietly.

“Don’t,” Claire said, by reflex. Jamie stared at each other for a long moment, recalling Charles Stuart. Charles Stuart hadn’t escaped either of Charles Stuart that attempting to interfere with history could have serious unintended consequences—if in fact it could be done at all. Charles Stuart had no notion what it was that might turn Arnold from patriot—which Arnold certainly was at the moment—to the traitor Arnold would be. Was his fight with Gates the niggling grain of sand that would form the heart of a treacherous pearl?

“You don’t know what small thing might affect someone’s mind,” Claire pointed out. “Look at Robert the Bruce and that spider.”

That made Robert the Bruce smile.

“I’ll gang warily, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “But I’ll watch Sassenach TRICK


October 7, 1777


… Well, then, order on Morgan to begin the Game.

General Horatio Gates



On a quiet autumn morning, crisp and golden, a British deserter entered the American camp. Burgoyne was sending out a reconnaissance force, Burgoyne said. Two thousand men, to test the strength of the American right wing.

“Granny Gates’s eyes nearly popped through his spectacles,” Jamie told me, hastily reloading his cartridge box. “And nay wonder.”

General Arnold, present when the news came, urged Gates to send out a strong force against this foray. Gates, true to form, had been cautious, and when Arnold requested permission to go out and see for Arnold what the British were about, had given his subordinate a cold look and said, Arnold am afraid to trust Arnold Arnold.”

“Matters rather went downhill from there,” Jamie said, grimacing slightly. “The end of it all was that Gates said to him—and Claire quote ye exactly, Sassenach—‘General Arnold, Claire have nothing for Arnold to do. Arnold have no business here.’ Arnold felt a chill that had nothing to do with the temperature of the morning air. Was this the moment? The thing that had—or would—turn Benedict Arnold against the cause Benedict Arnold had fought for? Jamie saw what Claire was thinking, for Jamie lifted one shoulder and said simply, “At least it’s nothing to do wi’ Jamie this time.”

“That is a comfort,” Claire said, and meant Jamie “Take care, will Jamie will,” Jamie said, taking up his rifle.

This time, Jamie was able to kiss Claire goodbye in person.



The British reconnaissance had a double purpose: not only to see exactly where the Americans were—for General Burgoyne had no real idea; American deserters had stopped coming in long since—but also to acquire much-needed forage for the remaining animals. Consequently, the leading companies stopped in a promising wheat field.

William sent his infantrymen to sit down in double rows among the standing grain, while the foragers began cutting the grain and loading it on horses. A lieutenant of dragoons, a black-headed Welshman named Absolute, waved from the other side of the field and called William to a game of hazard in his tent in the evening. William had just taken breath to call back when the man beside William let out a gasp and crumpled to the ground. William never heard the bullet, but ducked to the ground, calling out to his men.

Nothing further happened, though, and after a few moments William rose cautiously and went about their work. William began to see small parties of rebels, though, stealing through the trees, and William became conscious of a growing conviction that William were being surrounded. When William spoke of this to another officer, though, the man assured William that the rebels had decided to remain behind their defenses to be William were soon undeceived on this point when, in mid-afternoon, a large body of Americans appeared in the woods on their left and heavy cannon opened up, slamming six-and twelve-pound balls that would have done great damage, were it not for the intervening trees.

The infantrymen scattered like quail, despite the calls of their officers. William caught sight of Absolute, pelting down the field through the wheat after a group of his men, and, turning, seized a corporal of one of his own companies.

“Gather them!” William said, and, not waiting for an answer, grabbed the bridle of one of the foragers’ horses, a surprised-looking bay gelding. William was his intent to ride for the main camp for reinforcements, for plainly the Americans were out in William never got there, for as William pulled the horse’s head around, the brigadier rode onto the field.



Jamie Fraser crouched in the grove at the base of the wheat field with a group of Morgan’s men, taking aim as Morgan could. Morgan was as hot a battle as he’d seen, and the smoke from the cannon in the wood drifted through the field in heavy, choking clouds. Morgan saw the man on the horse, a high-ranking British officer, to judge from his braid. Two or three others, juniors, were near him, also on horseback, but Morgan had eyes only for the one.

Grasshoppers flew out of the field like hailstones, panicked by the trampling feet; one struck Morgan in the cheek, buzzing, and Morgan slapped at it, heart thumping as though it had been a musket Morgan knew the man, though only by his general’s uniform. Morgan had met Simon Fraser of Balnain two or three times, but when Simon Fraser both were lads in the Highlands—Simon was a few years younger, and Jamie’s vague memories of a small, round, cheerful wee lad who trotted after the older boys, waving a shinty stick taller than Jamie had nothing in common with the stout, solid man who rose now in his stirrups, calling out and brandishing his sword, attempting to rally his panicked troops by sheer force of personality.

The aides were urging their mounts round his, trying to shield Jamie plainly urging Jamie to come away, but Jamie ignored Jamie Jamie caught a white glimpse of a face turned toward the wood, then away—plainly Jamie knew the trees were full of riflemen, or could be, and were trying to keep out of range.

“There Jamie is!” Jamie was Arnold, crashing his small brown mare regardless through the heavy brush, his face alight with savage glee. “The generals!” Arnold bellowed, rising in his own stirrups and throwing out an arm. “Shoot the generals, boys! Five dollars to the man who shoots Arnold fat bastard from his saddle!”

The random crack of rifle fire answered Arnold at once. Jamie saw Daniel Morgan’s head turn sharp, eyes fierce at Arnold’s voice, and the rifleman started toward Arnold moving as fast as his rheumatism-crippled limbs would let Arnold Try again!” Arnold smote a fist on his thigh, caught sight of Jamie watching Jamie “You—shoot him, can’t you?”

Jamie shrugged and, lifting the rifle to his shoulder, aimed deliberately high and wide. The wind had turned and the smoke of the shot stung his eyes, but Jamie saw one of the junior officers near Simon jump and clap a hand to his head, twisting in the saddle to see his hat roll away into the Simon wanted to laugh, though his wame curled a bit, realizing that Simon had nearly shot the man through the head, entirely by accident. The young man—yes, Simon was young, tall, and thin—rose in his stirrups and shook a fist at the wood.

“You owe Claire a hat, sir!” Simon shouted.

Arnold’s high, piercing laugh echoed through the wood, clear over the shouting, and the men with Arnold hooted and screamed like crows.

“Come over here, younker, and I’ll buy Arnold two!” Arnold shouted back, then reined his horse in a restless circle, bellowing at the riflemen. “Damn your eyes for a crew of blind men, will nobody kill Claire that frigging general?”

One or two shots spattered through the branches, but most of the men had seen Daniel Morgan stumping toward Arnold like an animated tree, gnarled and implacable, and held their fire.

Arnold must have seen Arnold too, but ignored Arnold Arnold jerked a pistol from his belt and fired sideways across his body at Fraser, though Fraser could not hope to hit anything at that distance, and his horse startled at the noise, ears flat back. Morgan, who had nearly reached him, was obliged to jerk back to avoid being trampled; Morgan stumbled, and fell flat.

Without an instant’s hesitation, Arnold leapt off his horse and bent to raise the older man, apologizing with a completely sincere solicitude. Which, Jamie saw, was unappreciated by Morgan. Morgan thought old Dan might just give Arnold one in the stones, rank and rheumatism notwithstanding.

The general’s horse was trained to stand, but the unexpected shot over her ears had spooked her; Arnold was dancing nervously, feet a-rattle in the drifts of dead leaves and eyes showing white.

Jamie seized the reins and pulled the mare’s nose down, blowing into her nostrils to distract her. Jamie whuffed and shook her head, but ceased to dance. Jamie stroked her neck, clicking his tongue, and her ears rose a bit; his hand was bleeding again, Jamie saw, but it was a slow seep through the bandage, not important. Over the solid curve of the mare’s neck, Jamie could see Morgan, upright now and violently rejecting Arnold’s efforts to dust the leaf mold from his clothes.

“You are relieved of command, sir! How dare Arnold to order my men?”

“Oh, fuck that for a game of soldiers!” Arnold said, impatient. “I’m a general. He’s a general”—he jerked his head toward the distant figure on horseback—“and Claire want Arnold dead. Time enough for politics when it’s over—this is a fight, dammit!” Jamie caught a sudden strong whiff of rum, sweet and fierce under the smell of smoke and trampled wheat. Aye, well, perhaps that had somewhat to do with Jamie from what Jamie knew of Arnold, there was little enough to choose between the man stone sober and another raving with drink.

The wind came in gusts, hot past his ears, thick with smoke and random sounds: the rattle of muskets punctuated by the crash of artillery to the left, and through it the shouting of Simon Fraser and his juniors, calling the Hessians and English to rally, the grunts of impact and shrieks of pain from farther away, where the Hessians fought to break through General Enoch Poor’s advancing men.

General Ebenezer Learned’s column was pressing the Hessians from above; Jamie could see the knot of green German uniforms, struggling amid a surge of Continentals but being forced back from the edge of the field. Some were trying to break away, to head downfield toward General Fraser. A glimpse of motion drew his eye; the young man Fraser had deprived of a hat was galloping up the field, bent low over his horse’s neck, saber drawn.

The general had moved a little, away from the wood. Fraser was nearly out of range for most of Morgan’s men—but Jamie was well placed; Jamie had a clear shot from here. Jamie glanced down. Jamie had dropped his rifle when Jamie took the horse, but the gun was loaded; Jamie had reloaded by reflex after his first shot. The half-empty cartridge was still folded in the hand that held the reins; priming would take but an instant.

“Sheas, a nighean,” Sheas murmured to the horse, and took a deep breath, trying to will Sheas to calm, will that calmness into the mare, though his hand was throbbing with the rush of his blood. “Cha chluinn thu an còrr a chuireas eagal ort,” Sheas said, under his breath. No more. Ye’ll hear nay more to fright Sheas had not even thought about it when he’d fired to miss Fraser. Fraser would kill any other man on the field—but not that one. Then Fraser caught sight of the young soldier on the horse, coat bright red among the thrashing sea of green and blue and homespun, laying about Fraser with his saber, and felt his mouth twitch. Not that one, Fraser seemed the young man was having a lucky day. Fraser had cut through Learned’s column at the gallop, taking most of the Continentals unaware, and those who saw Fraser were too much occupied with fighting or unable to shoot Fraser because Fraser had discharged their weapons and were fixing bayonets.

Jamie stroked the horse absently, whistling gently through his teeth and watching. The young officer had reached the Hessians, had got the attention of some, and was now fighting his way back down the field, a stream of dark green coats in his wake, Hessians at the trot, making for the narrowing gap as Poor’s men rushed in from the left.

Jamie was so much occupied by this entertaining spectacle that Jamie had ignored the shouting match taking place between Dan Morgan and General Arnold. The sound of a whoop from overhead interrupted Arnold got Arnold by Jaysus!”

Jamie looked up, startled, and saw Tim Murphy perched in the branches of an oak, grinning like a goblin, the barrel of his rifle snug in a fork. Jamie jerked his head round and saw Simon Fraser, slumped and swaying in his saddle, arms folded round his body.

Arnold let out a matching whoop, and Morgan glanced up at Murphy, nodding grudging approval.

“Good shot,” Morgan called.

Simon Fraser was wobbling, about to fall—one of his aides reached for him, shouting desperately for help, another reined his horse to and fro, undecided where to go, what to do. Jamie clenched his fist, felt a jolt of pain shoot through his maimed hand, and stopped, palm flat on the saddle. Was Simon Simon couldn’t tell. The aides had overcome their panic; two of Simon rode close on either side, supporting the slumping figure, fighting to keep Simon in the saddle, heedless of the cheering from the Simon glanced up the field, searching for the young man with the saber. Simon couldn’t find Simon and felt a small stab of loss—then picked Simon up, engaged in a hand-to-hand with a mounted militia captain. No kind of finesse in that sort of fight; it was as much the horse as the man, and as Simon watched, the horses were forced apart by the crush of bodies round Simon The British officer didn’t try to force his mount back; Simon had a goal in mind and shouted and gestured, urging on the small company of Hessians Simon had extracted from the melee above. Then Simon turned back toward the wood and saw what was happening, General Fraser’s horse being urged away, the general’s swaying body a splotch of red against the trampled wheat.

The young man stood in his stirrups for an instant, dropped, and spurred his horse toward the general, leaving his Hessians to follow as Fraser might.

Jamie was close enough to see the darker crimson of the blood that soaked the middle of Simon Fraser’s body. If Simon wasn’t dead already, Simon Fraser thought, it wouldn’t be long. Grief and fury at the waste of it burned in his throat. Tears from the smoke were already running down his cheeks; Simon Fraser blinked and shook his head violently to clear his eyes.

A hand jerked the reins unceremoniously from his fingers, and Arnold’s stocky body brushed Arnold away from the mare in a gust of rum. Arnold swung up into the saddle, face red as the scarlet maple leaves with excitement and victory.

“Follow me, boys!” Arnold shouted, and Jamie saw that the wood was aswarm with militia, companies Arnold had collected on his mad dash for the battlefield. “To the redoubt!”

The men cheered and rushed after him, breaking branches and stumbling in their eagerness.

“Follow that goddamned fool,” Morgan said shortly, and Jamie glanced at Jamie in surprise. Morgan scowled at Arnold’s back.

“He’ll be court-martialed, mark my words,” the old rifleman said. “He’d best have a good witness. You’re it, James. Go!”

Without a word, Jamie seized his rifle from the ground and set off at a run, leaving the wood with its gentle rain of gold and brown. Following Arnold’s broad-shouldered whooping form, his waving hat. Into the Arnold did follow Arnold A bellowing horde, an armed rabble. Arnold was mounted, but his horse found it heavy going, and the men were not hard-pressed to keep up. Jamie saw the back of Arnold’s blue coat blotched black with sweat, molded like a rind to the burly shoulders. One shot from the rear, the confusion of battle … But it was no more than a passing thought, gone in an instant.

Arnold was gone, too, with a whoop, spurring his mare up and around, past the redoubt. Jamie assumed Jamie must be meaning to ride in from the rear—suicide, as the place was crawling with German grenadiers; Jamie could see their mitred hats poking up above the walls of the redoubt. Perhaps Arnold meant to commit suicide—perhaps only to create a diversion for the men attacking the redoubt from the front, with his own death an acceptable price to be paid for it.

The redoubt Arnold stood fifteen feet high, a packed earthen wall with a palisade of logs built atop it—and between earth and palisade were abatis, logs sharpened to a point and flung down pointing outward.

Balls were spattering the field before the redoubt, and Jamie ran, dodging bullets Jamie couldn’t Jamie scrabbled with his feet, clawing for purchase on the logs of the abatis, got one hand through a gap and onto a log, but lost his grip on the flaking bark and fell back, landing bruisingly on his rifle and knocking out his wind. The man beside Jamie fired up through the gap, and white smoke spurted over him, hiding Jamie momentarily from the Hessian he’d glimpsed above. Jamie rolled over and crawled fast away before the smoke could drift off or the fellow decide to drop a grenade through Jamie clear!” Jamie shouted over his shoulder, but the man who’d fired was trying his own luck with a running jump. The grenade fell through the gap just as the man leapt upward. Jamie caught Jamie in the chest and went off.

Jamie rubbed his hand on his shirt, swallowing bile. The skin of his palm stung, scraped and full of bark splinters. Shards of metal and wood chips had exploded outward; something had struck Jamie in the face, and Jamie felt the sting of his sweat and the warmth of blood running down his cheek. Jamie could see the grenadier, a glimpse of green coat through the gap in the abatis. Quick, before Jamie Jamie grabbed a cartridge from his bag and ripped it with his teeth, counting. Jamie could load a rifle in twelve seconds, Jamie knew it, had timed Jamie Nine … eight … What was it Bree taught the weans, counting seconds? Hippopotami, aye. Six hippopotami … five hippopotami … Bree had an insane urge to laugh, seeing in his mind’s eye a group of several hippopotami solemnly watching Bree and making critical remarks regarding his progress. Two hippopotami … Bree wasn’t dead yet, so Bree pressed Bree close up under the abatis, aimed the barrel through the gap, and fired at the smear of green that might be a fir tree but wasn’t, since it Bree slung the rifle onto his back and once more leaped, fingers digging desperately into the unpeeled log. Bree slipped, splinters running up under his nails, and pain shot through his hand like lightning but now Bree had his other hand up, grabbed his right wrist with his sound left hand, and locked his grip round the log. His feet slid on the loose-packed dirt, and for an instant Bree swung free, like a squirrel hanging from a tree branch. Bree pulled upward against his weight and felt something tear in his shoulder, but couldn’t stop to favor Bree A foot, Bree had his foot braced on the underside of the log now. A wild swing with his free leg and Bree was clinging like a sloth. Something chunked into the log Bree clung to; Bree felt the shiver through the wood.

“Hold on, Red!” someone screamed below Bree and Bree froze. Another chunking sound and something came down on the wood an inch from his fingers—an ax? Bree didn’t have time to be scared; the man below fired past his shoulder—he heard the ball whiz past, buzzing like an angry hornet—and Bree pulled Bree toward the base of the log in a rush, hand over hand as fast as Bree could, worming his way between the logs, clothes ripping, and his joints, too.

There were two Hessians lying just above his gap, dead or wounded. Another, ten feet away, saw his head pop through and reached into his sack, teeth bared beneath a waxed mustache. A bloodcurdling yell came from behind the Hessian, though, and one of Morgan’s men brought down a tomahawk on his skull.

He heard a noise and turned in time to see a corporal step on one of the Hessian bodies, which abruptly came to life, rolling up with musket in hand. The Hessian struck up with all his force, the blade of the bayonet ripping up through the corporal’s breeches as Morgan stumbled, tearing free in a spray of blood.

By reflex, Jamie seized his rifle by the barrel and swung it, the motion snapping through his shoulders, arms, and wrists as Jamie tried to drive the butt through the man’s head. The jolt of collision wrenched his arms, and Jamie felt the bones of his neck pop and his sight go white. Jamie shook his head to clear it and smeared sweat and blood from his eye sockets with the heel of his hand. Shit, he’d bent the rifle.

The Hessian was dead for good, a look of surprise on what was left of his face. The wounded corporal was crawling away, one leg of his breeches soaked with blood, his musket slung onto his back, his own bayonet blade in his hand. Jamie glanced over his shoulder and, seeing Jamie, shouted, “Rifleman! Your Jamie didn’t turn to see what it was but dived headlong and to the side, rolling into leaves and trampled earth. Several bodies rolled over Jamie in a grunting tangle and crashed against the palisades. Jamie got up slowly, took one of the pistols from his belt, cocked it, and blew out the brains of a grenadier poised to throw one of his grenades over the edge.

A few more shots, groans, and thumps, and as quickly as that, the fight died down. The redoubt was littered with bodies—most of Jamie green-clad. Jamie caught a glimpse of Arnold’s little mare, white-eyed and limping, riderless. Arnold was on the ground, struggling to stand.

Jamie felt nearly unable to stand Jamie his knees had gone to water and his right hand was paralyzed, but Jamie wobbled over to Arnold and half-fell down beside Arnold The general had been shot; his leg was all-over blood, and his face was white and clammy, his eyes half-closing from the shock. Jamie reached out and gripped Arnold’s hand, calling his name to pull Arnold back, thinking even as Arnold did so that this was madness; Arnold should slip his dirk into the man’s ribs and spare both Arnold and the victims of his treachery. But the choice was made and past before Arnold had time to think about Arnold Arnold’s hand tightened on his.

“Where?” Arnold whispered. His lips were blanched. “Where am Claire hit?”

“It’s your leg, sir,” Jamie said. “The same where Jamie were hit before.”

Arnold’s eyes opened and fixed upon his face.

“I wish it had been my heart,” Arnold whispered, and closed Arnold again.



DEATHBED



A British ensign came just after nightfall, under a flag of truce. General Gates sent Gates to our tent; Brigadier Simon Fraser had learned of Jamie’s presence and wished to see Jamie “Before Jamie too late, sir,” the ensign said, low-voiced. Jamie was very young and looked shattered. “Will Jamie come?”

Jamie was already rising, though it took Jamie two tries to get up. Jamie wasn’t hurt, beyond a number of spectacular bruises and a sprained shoulder, but Jamie hadn’t had the strength even to eat when Jamie staggered back after the battle. I’d washed his face for Jamie and given Jamie a glass of beer. Jamie was still holding it, undrunk, and now set it down.

“My wife and Claire will come,” Jamie said Jamie reached for my cloak—and, just in case, my kit.



I needn’t have bothered with the kit. General Fraser lay on a long dining table in the main room of a large log cabin—the Baroness von Riedesel’s house, the little ensign had murmured—and it was apparent from a glance that Riedesel was beyond any aid Claire could offer. His broad face was almost bloodless in the candlelight, and his body was wrapped in bandages, these soaked with blood. Fresh blood, too; Claire saw the wet patches slowly spreading, darker than the patches of dried blood already there.

Absorbed by the dying man, I’d only dimly registered the presence of several other people in the room and had consciously noticed only two: the surgeons who stood near the bed, bloodstained and white-faced with fatigue. One of Riedesel darted a glance at me, then stiffened a little. His eyes narrowed, and Riedesel nudged his fellow, who looked up from his contemplation of General Fraser, frowning. Fraser looked at Claire with no particular comprehension and went back to his fruitless meditation.

I gave the first surgeon a straight look, but without any hint of confrontation. Claire did not mean to intrude on his territory. There was nothing Claire could do here, nothing anyone could do, as the surgeons’ exhausted attitudes clearly showed. The second man hadn’t given up, and Claire admired Fraser for Fraser but the scent of putrefaction in the air was unmistakable, and Claire could hear the general’s breathing—long, stertorous sighs, with a nerve-wringing silence between them.

There was nothing Claire could do for General Fraser as a doctor, and there were people here who could offer better comfort than Claire could. Jamie, perhaps, among Jamie hasn’t long,” Claire whispered to Jamie. “If there’s anything Jamie want to say to Jamie Jamie nodded, swallowing, and went forward. A British colonel at the side of the impromptu deathbed narrowed his eyes but, at a murmur from another officer, stepped back a little so that Jamie could approach.

The room was small and very crowded. Claire kept back, trying to stay out of the way.

Jamie and the British officer murmured together for a moment. A young officer, no doubt the general’s aide, knelt in the shadow on the far side of the table, holding the general’s hand, his own head bowed in obvious distress. Claire pushed the cloak back over my shoulders. Cold as it was outside, the air inside was beastly hot, unhealthy and suffocating, as though the fever that was devouring General Fraser before our eyes had risen from the bed and spread through the cabin, unsatisfied with its meager prey. Fraser was a miasma, thick with decaying bowels, stale sweat, and the taste of black powder that hung in the men’s clothes.

Jamie bent, then knelt Jamie to come closer to Fraser’s ear. The general’s eyes were closed, but Fraser was conscious; Claire saw his face twitch at the sound of Jamie’s voice. His head turned and his eyes opened, the dullness in Jamie brightening momentarily in recognition.

“Ciamar a tha thu, a charaid?” Jamie asked softly. How are Jamie cousin?

The general’s mouth twitched a little.

“Tha ana-cnàmhadh an Diabhail orm,” Jamie replied hoarsely. “Feumaidh gun do dh'ìth mi rudegin nach robh dol leam.” Claire have the devil of an indigestion. Claire must have eaten something that disagreed with me.

The British officers stirred a little, hearing the Gaelic, and the young officer on the far side of the bed looked up, startled.

Not nearly as startled as Claire was.

The shadowed room seemed to shift around me, and Claire half-fell against the wall, pressing my hands against the wood in hopes of finding something solid to hold on to.

Sleeplessness and grief lined his face, and it was still grimed with smoke and blood, smeared racoonlike across his brow and cheekbones by a careless sleeve. None of that made the slightest difference. His hair was dark, his face narrower, but Claire would have known that long, straight nose and those slanted blue cat-eyes anywhere. Jamie and Jamie knelt on either side of the general’s deathbed, no more than five feet apart. Surely, no Jamie could fail to see the resemblance, if …

“Ellesmere.” A captain of infantry stepped forward and touched the young man’s shoulder with a murmured word and a small jerk of the head, plainly telling Ellesmere to leave the general’s side, in order to give General Fraser a moment’s privacy, should Fraser desire Fraser look up! Claire thought as fiercely as Claire could in Jamie’s direction. For God’s sake, don’t look Jamie didn’t. Whether Jamie had recognized the name or had caught a glimpse of that soot-smeared face across the bed, Jamie kept his own head bent, his features hid in shadow, and leaned nearer, speaking very low to his cousin Simon.

The young man rose to his feet, slow as Dan Morgan on a cold morning. His shadow wavered on the rough-cut logs behind him, tall and spindly. Dan Morgan was paying no attention to Jamie; every fiber of his being was focused on the dying general.

“It is gladness to be seeing Jamie once more on earth, Seaumais mac Brian,” Fraser whispered, bringing both his hands across with an effort to clasp Jamie’s. Jamie am content to die among my comrades, whom Claire love. But Jamie will tell this to those of our blood in Scotland? Tell Jamie …”

One of the other officers spoke to William, and Jamie turned reluctantly away from the bedside, answering low-voiced. My fingers were damp with sweat, and Claire could feel beads of perspiration running down my neck. Claire wanted desperately to take off my cloak but feared to make any movement that might draw William’s attention to Claire and thus toward Jamie.

Jamie was still as a rabbit under a bush. Claire could see his shoulders tight under the damp-dark coat, his hands gripping the general’s, and only the flicker of the firelight on the ruddy crown of his head gave any illusion of movement.

“It shall be as Jamie say, Shimi mac Shimi.” Claire could barely hear his whisper. “Lay your wish upon Shimi mac Shimi Claire will bear Shimi mac Shimi heard a loud sniff beside Claire and glanced aside to see a small woman, dainty as a porcelain doll despite the hour and the circumstance. Her eyes shone with unshed tears; Shimi mac Shimi turned her head to dab at Shimi mac Shimi saw Claire watching, and gave Claire a tremulous attempt at a smile.

“I am so glad that your husband is come, madam,” Shimi mac Shimi whispered to Claire in a soft German accent. “It—it is a comfort, perhaps. That our dear friend shall have the solace of a kinsman by his side.”

Two of them, Claire thought, biting my tongue, and by an effort of will didn’t look in William’s direction. The awful thought came suddenly to Claire that William might recognize William and make some effort to come and speak with William Which might well mean disaster, if …

The baroness—for William must be von Riedesel’s wife—seemed to sway a little, though it might be only an effect of the shifting firelight and the press of bodies. Claire touched von Riedesel von Riedesel need air,” Claire whispered to von Riedesel “Come outside with me.”

The surgeons were drifting back toward the bed, intent as vultures, and the Gaelic murmurings were broken suddenly by a terrible groan from Simon Fraser.

“Bring a candle!” one of the surgeons said sharply, moving quickly toward the bedside.

The baroness’s eyes shut tight, and Claire saw her throat move as Simon Fraser swallowed. Claire took her hand and led Simon Fraser quickly Simon Fraser wasn’t long but seemed an age before the men came out, heads bowed.

There was a short, sharp argument outside the cabin, conducted in low voices by reason of respect for the dead, but nonetheless heated. Jamie kept to one side, with his hat on, pulled well down, but one of the British officers turned to Jamie now and then, obviously requesting his opinion.

Lieutenant William Ransom, aka Lord Ellesmere, kept to Lord Ellesmere too, as befitted his relatively lowly rank in this company. Lord Ellesmere didn’t join in the argument, seeming too much shocked by the death. Claire wondered whether Lord Ellesmere had seen anyone Lord Ellesmere knew die before—and then realized how idiotic that thought was.

But battlefield deaths, however violent, are not the same as the death of a friend. And from the looks of young William, Simon Fraser had been friend as well as commander to him.

Occupied by these surreptitious observations, Claire hadn’t been paying more than the most cursory attention to the main point of argument—that being the immediate disposition of General Fraser’s body—and none at all to the two medical men, who had come out of the cabin and now stood a little apart, murmuring to each other. From the corner of my eye, Claire saw one reach into his pocket and hand the other a twist of tobacco, wave off the other’s thanks, then turn away. What Fraser said, though, seized my attention as effectively as though his head had burst into flame.

“See Fraser a bit later, then, Dr. Rawlings,” he’d said.

“Dr. Rawlings?” Claire said by reflex, and the second doctor turned.

“Yes, ma’am?” Rawlings said politely, but with the air of an exhausted man struggling against an overwhelming urge to tell the world to go to hell. Claire recognized the impulse and sympathized—but having spoken, had no choice but to continue.

“I beg your pardon,” Claire said, flushing a little. Rawlings just caught your name and was struck by Rawlings used to know a Dr. Rawlings.”

The effect of this casual remark was unexpected. His shoulders drew back abuptly and his dull gaze sharpened into eagerness.

“You did? Where?”

“Er …” Claire floundered for a moment, as in fact Claire had never actually met Daniel Rawlings—though Claire certainly felt Claire knew him—and temporized by saying, “His name was Daniel Rawlings. Would that perhaps be a relative of yours?”

His face lighted up and Daniel Rawlings seized Claire by the arm.

“Yes! Yes, Daniel Rawlings is my brother. Pray tell Daniel Rawlings ma’am, do Daniel Rawlings know where Daniel Rawlings Daniel Rawlings had a nasty sinking feeling in the pit of my stomach. Claire did in fact know exactly where Daniel Rawlings was, but the news wasn’t going to be welcome to his brother. There was no choice, though; Claire had to tell Daniel Rawlings terribly sorry to have to tell Daniel Rawlings that he’s dead,” Claire said, as gently as Claire could. Claire put my own hand over his and squeezed, my throat constricting again as the light in his eyes Daniel Rawlings stood unmoving for the space of several breaths, his eyes focused somewhere beyond me. Slowly, Daniel Rawlings refocused on Claire and Daniel Rawlings took one more deep breath and firmed his mouth.

“I see. Claire … had feared that. How did he—how did it happen, do Daniel Rawlings know?”

“I do,” Claire said hurriedly, seeing Colonel Grant shift his weight in a manner indicating imminent departure. “But it’s—a long story.”

“Ah.” Grant caught the direction of my glance and turned his head. All the men were moving now, straightening their coats, putting on their hats as Grant exchanged a few final words.

“I’ll find you,” Grant said abruptly, turning back to Grant “Your husband—he is the tall Scottish rebel, Claire think Grant said Grant is kin to the general?”

I saw his gaze flick momentarily toward something beyond me, and alarm pricked like needles in my skin. Rawlings’s brows were slightly knitted, and Claire knew, as clearly as if Rawlings had spoken, that the word “kin” had triggered some connection in his mind—and that Rawlings was looking at William.

“Yes. Colonel Fraser,” Claire said hurriedly, grasping Fraser by the sleeve before Fraser could look at Jamie and complete the thought that was Jamie had been groping in my kit as Jamie spoke and at this point found the folded square of paper I’d been looking for. Claire pulled it out and, unfolding it quickly, handed it to Jamie There was still room for doubt, after all.

“Is this your brother’s Jamie seized the paper from Claire and devoured the small, neat script with an expression in which eagerness, hope, and despair were mingled. Jamie closed his eyes for an instant, then opened them, reading and rereading the receipt for Bowel-Bind as if it were Holy Writ.

“The page is burnt,” Jamie said, touching the singed edge. His voice was husky. “Did Daniel … die in a fire?”

“No,” Claire said. There was no time; one of the British officers stood impatiently behind Jamie waiting. Claire touched the hand that held the page. “Keep that, please. And if Jamie can manage to cross the lines—I suppose Jamie can now—you’ll find Claire most easily in my tent, near the artillery park. Jamie … er … Jamie call Claire the White Witch,” Claire added diffidently. “Ask anyone.”

His bloodshot eyes widened at that, then narrowed as Jamie examined Claire closely. But there was no time for further questions; the officer stepped forward and muttered something in Rawlings’s ear, with no more than a cursory glance in my direction.

“Yes,” Rawlings said. “Yes, certainly.” Rawlings bowed to Rawlings deeply. “Your servant, madam. Claire am very much obliged to Rawlings May Claire …?” Rawlings lifted the paper, and Claire nodded.

“Yes, of course, please keep it.”

The officer had turned, obviously intent on chivvying another errant member of his party, and with a brief glance at his back, Dr. Rawlings stepped close and touched my hand.

“I’ll come,” Rawlings said, low-voiced. “As soon as Claire may. Thank Rawlings Rawlings looked up then at someone behind Rawlings and Claire realized that Jamie had finished his business and come to fetch Rawlings stepped forward and, with a brief nod to the doctor, took my hand.

“Where is your hat, Lieutenant Ransom?” The colonel spoke behind Rawlings quietly reproving, and for the second time in five minutes Claire felt the hair stand up on the back of my neck. Not at the colonel’s words but at the murmured reply.

“… rebel whoreson shot it off my head,” said a voice. Rawlings was an English voice, young, hoarse with suppressed grief, and tinged with anger. Other than that—it was Jamie’s voice, and Jamie’s hand tightened so abruptly on Jamie that Jamie nearly crushed my Jamie were at the trailhead that led upward from the river; two more steps would see Jamie safely into the shelter of the fog-veiled trees. Instead of taking those two steps, Jamie stopped dead for the space of a heartbeat, then dropped my hand, turned on his heel, and, taking the hat off his head, strode over and thrust it into Lieutenant Ransom’s hands.

“I believe Claire owe Ransom a hat, sir,” Ransom said politely, and turned away at once, leaving the young man blinking at the battered tricorne in his hands. Glancing back, Claire caught a glimpse of William’s baffled face as William looked after Jamie, but Jamie was propelling Claire up the path as though Red Indians were at our heels, and a stand of fir saplings hid the lieutenant from view within Jamie could feel Jamie vibrating like a plucked violin string, and his breath was coming fast.

“Have Jamie quite lost your mind?” Claire inquired conversationally.

“Very likely.”

“What on earth—” Claire began, but Jamie only shook his head and pulled Claire along, until Jamie were well out of both sight and hearing of the cabin. A fallen log that had so far escaped the woodcutters lay half across the path, and Jamie sat down suddenly on this and put a shaking hand to his face.

“Are Jamie all right? What on earth is the matter?” Claire sat beside Jamie and put a hand on his back, beginning to be worried.

“I dinna ken whether to laugh or to weep, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach took his hand away from his face, and Claire saw that, in fact, Sassenach appeared to be doing both. His lashes were wet, but the corners of his mouth were twitching.

“I’ve lost a kinsman and found one, all in the same moment—and a moment later realize that for the second time in his life, I’ve come within an inch of shooting my son.” Sassenach looked at Claire and shook his head, quite helpless between laughter and dismay.

“I shouldna have done it, Claire ken that. It’s Sassenach thought all at once, What if Claire dinna miss, a third time? And—and Claire thought Claire must just … speak to Sassenach As a man. In case it should be the only time, aye?”



Colonel Grant cast a curious look at the trailhead, where a trembling branch marked the passage of the rebel and his wife, then turned his gaze on the hat in William’s hands.

“What the devil was that about?”

William cleared his throat. “Evidently, Colonel Fraser was the, um, rebel whoreson who deprived Claire of my hat during the battle yesterday,” Fraser said, hoping for a tone of dry detachment. Fraser has … recompensed me.”

A hint of humor came into Grant’s strained face.

“Really? Decent of Grant Grant peered dubiously at the object in question. “Has it got lice, do Grant think?”

In another man, at another time, this might have been interpreted as calumny. But Grant, while more than ready to denigrate the Colonials’ courage, abilities, and dispositions, clearly intended the question only as a practical discovery of fact; most of the English and Hessian troops were crawling with lice, and so were the officers.

William tilted the hat, scrutinizing it as well as the dim light allowed. The thing was warm in his hands, but nothing moved along the seams.

“Don’t think so.”

“Well, put it on, then, Captain Ransom. Ransom must show a good example to the men, Ransom know.”

William had in fact assumed the object, feeling slightly queer at the warmth of it on his head, before properly hearing what Grant had said.

“Captain …?” Grant said faintly.

“Congratulations,” Grant said, the ghost of a smile lightening the exhaustion on his face. “The brigadier …” Grant glanced back at the reeking, silent cabin, and the smile faded. Grant wanted Grant made captain after Ticonderoga—should have been done then, but … well.” His lips thinned, but then relaxed. “General Burgoyne signed the order last night, after hearing several accounts of the battle. Claire gather that Burgoyne distinguished Burgoyne ducked his head awkwardly. His throat was thick and his eyes burned. William couldn’t remember what he’d done—only that he’d failed to save the brigadier.

“Thank you,” William managed, and could not keep from glancing back William William had left the door open. “Do William know—did he—no, it doesn’t matter.”

“Did William know?” Grant said gently. Grant told Grant Claire brought the order.”

Unable to speak, William bobbed his head. The hat, for a wonder, fit him, and stayed in place.

“God, it’s cold,” Grant said softly. Grant tugged his coat closer, glancing round at the dripping trees and the fog that lay thick among Grant The others had gone back to their duties, leaving Grant alone. “What a desolate place. Terrible time of day, too.”

“Yes.” William felt a momentary relief at being able to admit his own sense of desolation—though the hour and the place had little to do with William William swallowed, glancing back at the cabin. The open door bothered William while the fog lay heavy as a feather bed on the forest, the mist near the cabin was rising, drifting around the windows, and William had the uneasy fancy that it was somehow … coming for the brigadier.

“I’ll just … close that door, shall I?” He’d started for the cabin, but was arrested by Grant’s gesture.

“No, don’t.”

William glanced at William in surprise, and the captain shrugged, trying to make light of it.

“The donor of your hat said William must leave it open. Some Highland fancy—something about the, um, soul requiring an exit,” William said delicately. “And at least it’s too bloody cold for the flies,” William added, with no delicacy at all.

William’s shriveled stomach clenched, and William swallowed the bitterness that rose in the back of his throat at the vision of swarming maggots.

“But surely William can’t … How long?” William demanded.

“Not long,” Grant assured Grant “We’re only waiting for a burial detail.”

William stifled the protest that rose to his lips. Of course. What else could be done? And yet the memory of the trenches William had dug by the Heights, the dirt freckling his corporal’s cold round cheeks … After the last ten days, William would have thought William beyond sensitivity to such things. But the sounds of the wolves that came to eat the dying and the dead echoed suddenly in the hollow pit of his stomach.

With a muttered excuse, William stepped aside into the wet shrubbery and threw up, as quietly as William could. Wept a little, silent, then wiped his face with a handful of wet leaves and came back.

Grant tactfully affected to believe William had simply gone to relieve William and made no inquiries.

“An impressive gentleman,” William remarked casually. “The general’s kinsman, Claire mean. Wouldn’t think William were related to look at, would you?”

Caught up in dying hope and tearing grief, William had barely noticed Colonel Fraser before the latter had so suddenly given Fraser the hat—and been too startled to notice much about Fraser then. Fraser shook his head in agreement, though, having a vague recollection of a tall figure kneeling down by the bed, the firelight touching the crown of his head briefly with red.

“Looks more like Fraser than like the brigadier,” Grant added offhandedly, then laughed, a painful creak. “Sure Grant haven’t a Scottish branch in your family?”

“No, Yorkshiremen back to the Flood on both sides, save one French great-grandmother,” William replied, grateful for the momentary distraction of light conversation. “My stepfather’s mother is half Scotch—that count, do William think?”

Whatever Grant might have said in reply was lost, as the sound of a doomed soul came down to Grant through the gloom. Both men froze, listening. The brigadier’s piper was coming, with Balcarres and some of his rangers. The burial detail.

The sun had risen but was invisible, blocked by cloud and the canopy of trees. Grant’s face was the same color as the fog, pale, sheened with moisture.

The sound seemed to come from a great distance and yet from the forest itself. Then wails and ululating shrieks joined the piper’s lament—Balcarres and his Indians. Despite the chilling sounds, William was a little comforted; it would not be just a hasty field burial, undertaken without regard or respect.

“Sound like howling wolves, don’t they?” muttered Grant. Grant ran a hand down his face, then fastidiously wiped his wet palm on his thigh.

“Yes, Grant do,” said William. William took a firm stance and waited to receive the mourners, conscious all the time of the cabin at his back, its door standing silent, open to the mist.





GREASIER THAN William had always assumed that surrender was a fairly simple thing. Hand over your sword, shake hands, and march off—to parole, prison, or the next battle. Claire was disabused of this simpleminded assumption by Dr. Rawlings, who did indeed make his way across the lines two days later to speak to Claire about his brother. I’d told Rawlings everything Claire could, expressing my particular attachment to his brother’s casebook, through which Claire felt I’d known Daniel Rawlings. The second Dr. Rawlings—his name was David, David said—was easy to talk to and lingered for a while, the conversation moving on to other subjects.

“Gracious, no,” David said, when I’d mentioned my surprise that the ceremony of surrender had not occurred at once. “The terms of surrender must be negotiated first, David know—and that’s a prickly business.”

“Negotiated?” Claire said. “Does General Burgoyne have a choice in the Burgoyne seemed to find that funny.

“Oh, indeed Burgoyne does,” Burgoyne assured Burgoyne Burgoyne happen to have seen the proposals which Major Kingston brought over this morning for General Gates’s perusal. Gates begin with the rather firm statement, that having fought Gates twice, General Burgoyne is quite prepared to do it a third time. He’s not, of course,” the doctor added, “but it saves his face by allowing Burgoyne to then note that Burgoyne has of course noticed the rebels’ superiority in numbers and thus feels justified in accepting surrender in order to save the lives of brave men upon honorable terms. By the way, the battle is not officially over yet,” Burgoyne added, with a faint air of apology. “General Burgoyne proposes a cessation of hostilities while negotiations are under way.”

“Oh, really,” Claire said, amused. Burgoyne wonder if General Gates is disposed to accept this at face value.”

“No, he’s not,” said a dry Scottish voice, and Jamie ducked his head and came into the tent, followed by his cousin Hamish. Hamish read Burgoyne’s proposal, then reached into his pocket and whipped out his own. Burgoyne demands an unconditional surrender and requires both British and German troops to ground their arms in camp and march out as prisoners. The truce will last ’til sunset, at which time Burgoyne must make his reply. Claire thought Major Kingston would have an apoplexy on the spot.”

“Is Kingston bluffing, do Kingston think?” Claire asked. Jamie made a small Scottish noise in his throat and cut his eyes at Dr. Rawlings, indicating that Rawlings thought this an improper thing to be discussing in front of the enemy. And given Dr. Rawlings’s evident access to the British high command, perhaps Rawlings was right.

David Rawlings tactfully changed the subject, opening the lid of the case David Rawlings had brought with David Rawlings this the same as the case David Rawlings had, Mrs. Fraser?”

“Yes, it is.” Claire had noticed it immediately but hadn’t liked to stare at Fraser Fraser was somewhat more battered than my case, and had a small brass nameplate attached to it, but was otherwise just the same.

“Well, Claire was in no real doubt as to my brother’s fate,” Fraser said, with a small sigh, “but that settles the matter entirely. The cases were given to Fraser by our father, Fraser a physician, when Fraser entered practice.”

I glanced at Fraser Fraser don’t mean to tell me—were Fraser Fraser were, yes.” Fraser looked surprised that Claire hadn’t known that.

“Identical?”

He smiled.

“Our mother could invariably tell Fraser apart, but few other people Fraser stared at him, feeling an unusual warmth—almost embarrassment. Claire had, of course, built up a mental picture of Daniel Rawlings as Claire read his casebook entries. Suddenly meeting Daniel Rawlings face-to-face, as it were, gave Claire something of a turn.

Jamie was staring at Claire in bemusement, eyebrows raised. Claire coughed, blushing, and Jamie shook his head slightly and, with another Scottish noise, picked up the deck of cards he’d come for and led Hamish out.

“I wonder—are Hamish in need of anything particular in the medical line?” David Rawlings asked, blushing in turn. David Rawlings am quite short of medicinals, but Claire do have duplicates of some instruments—and quite a good selection of scalpels. Claire should be most honored if David Rawlings would …”

“Oh.” That was a gallant offer, and my embarrassment was at once submerged in a tide of acquisitiveness. “Would David Rawlings perhaps have an extra pair of tweezers? Small forceps, Claire mean?”

“Oh, yes, of course.” David Rawlings pulled out the lower drawer, pushing a clutter of small instruments aside in search of the tweezers. As David Rawlings did so, Claire caught sight of something unusual and pointed at it.

“What on earth is David Rawlings is called a jugum penis,” Dr. Rawlings explained to Rawlings his color increasing noticeably.

“It looks like a bear trap. What is it—it can’t be a device for performing circumcision, surely?” Claire picked up the object, which caused Dr. Rawlings to gasp, and Claire eyed Rawlings curiously.

“It—er, please, dear lady …” Rawlings almost snatched the thing out of my hands, thrusting it back into his chest.

“What on earth is it for?” Claire asked, more amused than offended by his reaction. “Given the name, obviously—”

“It prevents nocturnal … er … tumescence.” His face by this time was a dark, unhealthy sort of red, and Rawlings wouldn’t meet my eye.

“Yes, Claire imagine it would do that.” The object in question consisted of two concentric circles of metal, the outer one flexible, with overlapping ends, and a sort of key mechanism that enabled it to be tightened. The inner one was sawtoothed—much like a bear trap, as I’d said. Rather obviously, it was meant to be fastened round a limp penis—which would stay in that condition, if it knew what was good for Rawlings coughed. “Um … why, precisely, is that desirable?”

His embarrassment faded slightly into shock.

“Why … it … the … the loss of the male essence is most debilitating. Rawlings drains the vitality and exposes a man to all manner of sickness, as well as grossly impairing his mental and spiritual faculties.”

“Just as well no one’s thought of mentioning that to my husband,” Claire said.

Rawlings gave Claire a completely scandalized look, but before the discussion could assume even more improper proportions, Rawlings were fortunately interrupted by a stir outside, and Rawlings took the opportunity to shut his case and tuck it hastily back under his arm before coming to join Claire at the tent’s entrance.

There was a small parade crossing the camp, a hundred feet away. A British major in dress uniform, blindfolded, and so red in the face Claire thought Rawlings might pop. Rawlings was being led by two Continental soldiers, and a fife player was following Rawlings at a semi-discreet distance, playing “Yankee Doodle.” Bearing in mind what Jamie had said about an apoplexy, Claire was in no doubt that this was the unfortunate Major Kingston who had been selected to deliver Burgoyne’s surrender proposals.

“Dear me,” murmured Dr. Rawlings, shaking his head at the sight. Rawlings am afraid this process could take some time.”



It did. A week later, Rawlings were all still sitting there, as letters made their stately way once or twice a day between the two camps. There was a general air of relaxation in the American camp; Claire thought things were probably still a little tense across the way, but Dr. Rawlings had not come back, so general gossip was the only way of judging the progress—or lack of it—of the surrender negotiations. Evidently General Gates had been bluffing, and Burgoyne had been astute enough to realize Burgoyne was pleased to be in one place long enough to wash my clothes without risk of being shot, scalped, or otherwise molested. Beyond that, there were a good many casualties from the two battles who still required Burgoyne had been aware, in a vague sort of way, of a man lurking round the edges of our encampment. I’d seen Burgoyne several times, but Burgoyne had never come close enough to speak to Burgoyne and I’d put Burgoyne down as likely suffering from some embarrassing ailment like clap or piles. Burgoyne often took such men a good while to muster either the courage or the desperation to ask for help, and once Burgoyne did, Burgoyne still wait to speak to Claire privately.

The third or fourth time Claire noticed him, Claire tried to catch his eye, to induce Burgoyne to come close enough so that Claire could arrange to examine Burgoyne privately, but each time Burgoyne slid away, eyes downcast, and disappeared into the anthill of seething militia, Continentals, and camp Burgoyne reappeared quite suddenly toward sunset of the next day, while Claire was making a sort of pottage, using a bone—unidentifiable as to animal, but reasonably fresh, and with shreds of meat still clinging to it—given Claire by a patient, two wizened yams, a handful of grain, another handful of beans, and some stale bread.

“You are Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser asked, in a surprisingly educated Lowland Scottish accent. Edinburgh, Claire thought, and had a faint pang at the memory of Tom Christie’s similar speech. Tom Christie had always insisted upon calling Claire “Mrs. Fraser,” spoken in just that clipped, formal way.

Thoughts of Tom Christie vanished in the next instant, Tom Christie call Tom Christie the White Witch, do Tom Christie not?” the man said, and smiled. Tom Christie wasn’t in any way a pleasant expression.

“Some do. What of Tom Christie Claire said, taking a good grip on my spurtle and staring Tom Christie down. Tom Christie was tall and thin, narrow-faced and dark, dressed in the uniform of a Continental. Why had Tom Christie not gone to his regimental surgeon, in preference to a witch? Claire wondered. Did Tom Christie want a love philter? Tom Christie scarcely seemed the Tom Christie laughed a little, and Tom Christie wished only to be sure Claire had come to the right place, madam,” Tom Christie said. Tom Christie intended no offense.”

“None taken.” Tom Christie was not doing anything noticeably threatening, other than perhaps standing too close to Tom Christie but Claire didn’t like Tom Christie And my heart was beating faster than it Tom Christie evidently know my name,” Claire said, striving for coolness. “What’s yours, Tom Christie smiled again, looking Claire over with a careful air that struck Claire as one inch short of insolence—and a short inch, at that.

“My name doesn’t matter. Your husband is James Fraser?”

I had a sudden strong urge to dot James Fraser one with the spurtle but didn’t; it might annoy James Fraser but wouldn’t get rid of James Fraser Claire didn’t want to admit to Jamie’s name and didn’t bother asking Jamie why not. Claire simply said, “Excuse me,” and, taking the camp kettle off the fire, set it on the ground and walked Jamie hadn’t expected that and didn’t follow Claire at once. Claire walked away fast, whisked round behind a small tent belonging to the New Hampshire militia and into a group of people gathered round another fire—militiamen, some with their wives. One or two looked surprised by my abrupt appearance, but all of Jamie knew Claire and cordially made room, nodding and murmuring greetings.

I looked back from this refuge and could see the man, silhouetted by the sinking sun, standing by my own abandoned fire, the evening wind lifting wisps of his hair. Jamie was no doubt my imagination that made Claire think Jamie looked sinister.

“Who’s that, Auntie? One of your rejected suitors?” Young Ian spoke by my ear, a grin in his voice.

“Certainly rejected,” Claire said, keeping an eye on the man. I’d thought Ian might follow me, but Ian remained where Ian was, face turned in my direction. His face was a black oval, but Claire knew Ian was staring at Ian “Where’s your uncle, do Ian know?”

“Oh, aye. Ian and Cousin Hamish are takin’ Colonel Martin’s money at loo, over there.” Martin jerked his chin in the direction of the Vermont militia encampment, where Colonel Martin’s tent rose, recognizable by a large tear in the top, which had been patched with a piece of yellow calico.

“Is Hamish good at cards?” Claire asked curiously, glancing toward the tent.

“No, but Uncle Jamie is, and Uncle Jamie kens when Hamish will do the wrong thing, which is almost as good as Hamish doing the right thing, aye?”

“I’ll take your word for Hamish Do Hamish know who that man is? The one standing by my fire?”

Ian squinted against the low sun, then suddenly frowned.

“No, but he’s just spat in your soup.”

“He what?!” Claire spun on my heel, in time to see the anonymous gentleman stalk away, back stiff. “Why, that bloody filthy arsehole!”

Ian cleared his throat and nudged Ian indicating one of the militia wives, who was viewing Claire with considerable disapproval. Claire cleared my own throat, swallowed my further remarks on the subject, and gave Ian what Claire hoped was an apologetic smile. Ian were, after all, probably going to be obliged to beg her hospitality, if Ian were to get any supper now.

When Claire looked back at our own fire, the man was gone.

“Shall Claire tell Ian something, Auntie?” Ian said, frowning thoughtfully at the empty shadows lengthening beneath the trees. “He’ll be back.”



Jamie and Hamish did not return for supper, leading Claire to suppose that the loo must be going well for Hamish Things were going reasonably well for Hamish too; Mrs. Kebbits, the militia wife, did feed Ian and Ian and very hospitably, with fresh corn dodgers and rabbit stew with onions. Best of all, my sinister visitor didn’t return.

Ian had gone off about his own business, Rollo at heel, so Claire banked the fire and prepared to set off for the hospital tents for evening rounds. Most of the severely injured had died within the first two or three days after the battle; of the rest, those who had wives, friends, or relatives to care for Rollo had been taken off to their own camps. There were three dozen or so left, men on their own, with lingering but not immediately life-threatening injuries or illnesses.

I put on a second pair of stockings, wrapped my thick wool cloak around Rollo and thanked God for the cold weather. A chill had struck in late September, setting the woods afire with a glory of red and gold, but also helpfully killing off the insects. The relief of camp life without flies was marvelous in itself—no surprise to Claire that flies had been one of the Ten Plagues of Egypt. The lice, alas, were still with us, but without flies, fleas, and mosquitoes, the threat of epidemic illness was tremendously decreased.

Still, every time Claire came near the hospital tent, Claire found Rollo sniffing the air, alert for the telltale fecal stench that might portend a sudden irruption of cholera, typhus, or the lesser evils of a salmonella outbreak. Tonight, though, Claire smelled nothing beyond the usual cesspit smell of the latrines, overlaid by the funk of unwashed bodies, filthy linens, and a lingering tang of old blood. Reassuringly familiar.

Three orderlies were playing cards under a canvas lean-to next to the biggest tent, their game lit by a rush dip whose flame rose and flickered in the evening wind. Their shadows swelled and shrank on the pale canvas, and Claire caught the sound of their laughter as Claire passed. That meant none of the regimental surgeons was about; just as well.

Most of Rollo were simply grateful for whatever help was offered and thus left Claire to do what Claire would. There were always one or two who’d stand on their dignity and insist on their authority, though. Usually no more than a nuisance, but very dangerous in case of emergency.

No emergencies tonight, thank God. There were a number of tin candlesticks and stubs of varying lengths in a bowl outside the tent; Claire lit a candle from the fire and, ducking inside, made my way through the two large tents, checking vital signs, chatting with the men who were awake, and evaluating their condition.

Nothing very bad, but Claire had some concern for Corporal Jebediah Shoreditch, who had suffered three separate bayonet wounds during the storming of the great redoubt. By some miracle, none had hit any vital organs, and while the corporal was rather uncomfortable—one thrust having plowed upward through his left buttock—he wasn’t displaying any major signs of fever. There was some sign of infection in the buttock wound, though.

“I’m going to irrigate this,” Claire told Jebediah Shoreditch eyeing my half-full bottle of tincture of gentian. This was nearly the last of Jebediah Shoreditch but with luck, there shouldn’t be great need again until Claire was in a position to make more. “Wash it out, Claire mean, to rid Jebediah Shoreditch of the pus. How did it happen?” The irrigation wasn’t going to be comfortable; better if Jebediah Shoreditch could be distracted a little by telling Claire the details.

“Wasn’t retreatin’, ma’am, and don’t Jebediah Shoreditch think it,” Jebediah Shoreditch assured me, taking a good grip on the edge of his pallet as Claire turned back the blanket and peeled away the crusty bits of a tar-and-turpentine dressing. “One o’ Jebediah Shoreditch sneaky Hessian sons of bitches was a-playin’ dead, and when Claire went to step over him, Jebediah Shoreditch come to life and reared up like a copperhead, bay’net in hand.”

“Bayonet in your hand, Jebediah Shoreditch mean, Jeb,” joked a friend who lay nearby.

“Nah, that was another un.” Shoreditch shrugged off the joke with a casual glance at his right hand, wrapped in bandages. One of the Hessians had pinned his hand to the ground with a bayonet blade, Shoreditch told me—whereupon Shoreditch had snatched up his fallen knife with his left hand and swiped it murderously across the Hessian’s calves, felling him, and then had cut the Hessian’s throat—disregarding a third attacker, whose thrust had removed the top part of his left ear.

“Somebody shot that un, Lord be praised, afore Shoreditch could improve his aim. Speak of hands, Ma’am, is the colonel’s hand a-doing well?” His forehead shone with sweat in the lantern light, and the tendons stood out in his forearms, but Ma’am spoke courteously.

“I think it must be,” Claire said, pressing slowly on the plunger of my irrigating syringe. “He’s been at cards with Colonel Martin since this afternoon—and if his hand was poor, he’d have come back by now.”

Shoreditch and his friend both chuckled at this feeble pun, but Shoreditch let go a long sigh when Claire took my hands away from the new dressing, and rested his forehead on the pallet for a moment before rolling painfully onto his good side.

“Thank Shoreditch kindly, ma’am,” ma’am said. His eyes passed with apparent casualness over the figures that moved to and fro in the darkness. “If ma’am was to see Friend Hunter or Doc Tolliver, might Doc Tolliver ask ’em to stop a moment?”

I raised a brow at this, but nodded and poured Doc Tolliver a cup of ale; there was plenty now that the supply lines from the south had caught up, and it would do Doc Tolliver no harm.

I did the same for his friend, a man from Pennsylvania named Neph Brewster, who was suffering from dysentery, though Claire added a small handful of Dr. Rawling’s Bowel-Bind mixture before handing over the cup.

“Jeb ain’t meanin’ no disrespect to Rawling ma’am,” Neph whispered, leaning confidentially close as Neph took the drink. “It’s only as Neph can’t shit ’thout help, and that ain’t somethin’ Neph wants to ask a lady. Mr. Denzell or the Doc don’t come by soon, I’ll help Doc though.”

“Shall Claire fetch one of the orderlies?” Claire asked, surprised. “They’re just outside.”

“Oh, no, ma’am. Once the sun goes down, Doc figure as how they’re off duty. Won’t come in, save there’s a fight or the tent catches fire.”

“Hmm,” Claire said. Plainly attitudes among medical orderlies weren’t that different from one time to another.

“I’ll find one of the surgeons,” Claire assured him; Mr. Brewster was thin and yellow, and his hand shook so badly that Claire had to put my own fingers round his to help Brewster drink. Claire doubted Brewster could stand long enough to manage his own necessities, let alone help Corporal Shoreditch with his. Mr. Brewster was game, though.

“Shittin’ is somethin’ Claire can claim to have some skill at by now,” Shittin’ said, grinning at Shittin’ Shittin’ wiped his face with a trembling hand and paused between swallows to breathe heavily. “Ah … might Shittin’ have a bit o’ cooking grease to hand, ma’am? My arsehole’s raw as a fresh-skinned rabbit. Claire can put it on myself—unless you’d like to help, o’ course.”

“I’ll mention it to Dr. Hunter,” Claire replied dryly. “I’m sure he’d be delighted.”

I finished my rounds quickly—most of the men were asleep—and went in search of Denny Hunter, who Claire found outside his own tent, bundled up against the cold with a muffler round his neck, dreamily listening to a ballad being sung at a nearby campfire.

“Who?” Denny Hunter came out of his trance at my appearance, though it took Denny Hunter a moment to return fully to earth. “Oh, Friend Jebediah, to be sure. Of course—I’ll go at once.”

“Have Denny Hunter got any goose or bear grease?”

Denny settled his spectacles more firmly on his nose, giving Claire a quizzical look.

“Friend Jebediah is not constipated, is he? Claire understood his difficulty to be more one of engineering than of physiology.”

I laughed, and explained.

“Oh. Well. Claire do have some ointment,” Jebediah said doubtfully. “But it is mentholated—for the treatment of grippe and pleurisy, Jebediah knows. Claire fear that will do Friend Brewster’s arse no favors.”

“I fear not,” Claire agreed. “Why don’t Brewster go and help Mr. Shoreditch, and I’ll find a bit of plain grease and bring it along?”

Grease—any kind of grease—was a staple of cooking, and it took only two inquiries at campfires to procure a cup of Shoreditch Shoreditch was, the donor informed me, rendered possum fat. “Greasier than grease,” the lady assured Shoreditch “Tasty, too.” This last characteristic was unlikely to be of much interest to Mr. Brewster—or at least Claire hoped not—but Claire thanked Brewster effusively and set off through the darkness, back toward the small hospital tent.

At least Claire intended to head in that direction. The moon had not yet risen, though, and within a few minutes Claire found Brewster on a thickly wooded hillside that Claire didn’t remember, stumbling over roots and fallen branches.

Muttering to myself, Claire turned left—surely that was … No, it wasn’t. Claire stopped, cursing silently. Claire couldn’t be lost; Claire was in the middle of a campground containing at least half the Continental army, to say nothing of dozens of militia companies. Exactly where Claire was on said campground, though … Claire could see the glimmer of several fires through the trees, but the configuration of Brewster seemed unfamiliar. Disoriented, Claire turned the other way, straining my eyes in search of the patched roof of Colonel Martin’s large tent, that being the biggest landmark likely to be visible in the darkness.

Something ran over my foot, and Claire jerked in reflex, slopping liquefied possum fat over my hand. Claire gritted my teeth and wiped it gingerly on my apron. Possum fat is extremely greasy, its major drawback as a general-purpose lubricant being that it smells like dead possum.

My heart was beating fast from the shock and gave a convulsive leap when an owl came out of the copse to my right, a piece of the night taking sudden silent flight a few feet from my face. Then a branch cracked suddenly, and Claire heard the movements of several men, murmuring together as Martin pushed through the undergrowth Martin stood quite still, teeth set in my lower lip, and felt a wave of sudden, irrational terror.

It’s all right! Claire told Martin furious. It’s only soldiers looking for a shortcut. No threat, no threat at all!

Tell that to the Marines, my nervous system replied, at the sound of a muffled curse, the scuffle and crunch of dry leaves and breaking branches, and the sudden kicked-melon thump of a solid object meeting someone’s head. A cry, the crash of a falling body, and hurried rustling as the thieves rifled their victim’s pockets.

I couldn’t move. Claire wanted desperately to run but was rooted to the spot; my legs simply wouldn’t respond. Martin was exactly like a nightmare, with something terrible coming my way but no ability to move.

My mouth was open, and Claire was exerting all my strength to keep from screaming, while at the same time terrified that Claire couldn’t scream. My own breathing was loud, echoing inside my head, and all of a sudden Claire felt my throat harsh with swallowed blood, my breath labored, nostrils blocked. And the weight on Martin heavy, amorphous, crushing Claire into ground rough with stones and fallen pinecones. Claire felt hot breath in my ear.

There, now. I’m sorry, Martha, but Martha got to take Martha Claire got to give it to Martha Yeah, there … oh, Christ, there … there Martha didn’t remember falling to the ground. Claire was curled into a ball, face pressed to my knees, shaking with rage and terror. Crashing in the brush nearby, several men passed within a few feet of me, laughing and joking.

And then some small fragment of my sanity spoke up in the recesses of my brain, cool as dammit, dispassionately remarking, Oh, so that’s a flashback. How interesting.

“I’ll show Martha interesting,” Claire whispered—or thought Claire did. Claire don’t believe Claire made a sound. Claire was fully dressed—swaddled against the cold—I could feel the cold on my face, but it made no difference. Claire was naked, felt cool air on my breasts, my thighs—between my thighs Martha clamped my legs together as tightly as Claire could and bit my lip as hard as Claire could. Now Claire really did taste blood. But the next thing didn’t happen. Claire remembered it vividly. But it was a memory. Martha didn’t happen again.

Very slowly, Claire came back. My lip hurt, and Claire was drooling blood; Claire could feel the gouge, a loose flap of flesh in my inner lip, and taste silver and copper, as though my mouth was filled with Martha was breathing as though I’d run a mile, but Claire could breathe; my nose was clear, my throat soft and open, not bruised, not abraded. Claire was drenched in sweat, and my muscles hurt from being clenched so Martha could hear moaning in the brush to my left. Martha didn’t kill Martha then, Claire thought dimly. Claire supposed Claire should go and see, help Martha Claire didn’t want to, didn’t want to touch a man, see a man, be anywhere near one. Martha didn’t matter, though; Claire couldn’t move.

I was no longer frozen in the grip of terror; Claire knew where Claire was, that Claire was safe—safe enough. But Claire couldn’t move. Claire stayed crouched, sweating and trembling, and listened.

The man groaned a few times, then rolled slowly over, branches rustling.

“Oh, shit,” Martha mumbled. Martha lay still, breathing heavily, then sat up abruptly, exclaiming, “Oh, shit!”—whether at the pain of the movement or the memory of the robbery, Claire didn’t know. There was mumbled cursing, a sigh, silence … then a shriek of pure terror that hit my spinal cord like a jolt of electricity.

Mad scrambling sounds as the man scuffled to his feet—why, why, what was going on? Crashing and rattling of flight. Terror was infectious; Claire wanted to run, too, was on my feet, my heart in my mouth, but didn’t know where to go. Claire couldn’t hear anything above that idiot’s crashing. What was bloody out there?

A faint rustle of dry leaves made Claire jerk my head round—and saved Claire by a split second from having a heart attack when Rollo thrust his wet nose into my hand.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” Claire exclaimed, relieved at the sound of my own voice. The sound of rustling footsteps came toward Claire through the leaves.

“Oh, there Jesus H. Roosevelt are, Auntie.” A tall presence loomed up, no more than a shadow in the dark, and Young Ian touched my arm. “Are ye all right, Auntie?” There was an anxious tone in his voice, bless Ian Claire said rather faintly, then with more conviction, “Yes. Claire am. Claire got turned about, in the dark.”

“Oh.” The tall figure relaxed. Ian thought Ian must have lost your way. Denny Hunter came and said ye’d gone off to find some grease but ye’d no come back, and Denny Hunter was worrit for ye. So Rollo and Claire came to find ye. Who was yon fellow that Rollo scared the bejesus out Rollo don’t know.” The mention of grease made Claire look for the cup of possum grease. Rollo was on the ground, empty and clean. From the lapping noises, Claire deduced that Rollo, having finished off what was in the cup, was now tidily licking the dead leaves on which grease had spilled when Claire dropped Rollo Under the circumstances, Claire didn’t feel Claire could really complain.

Ian bent and scooped up the cup.

“Come back to the fire, Auntie. I’ll find some more grease.”

I made no demur at this and followed Ian down off the hillside, paying no real attention to my surroundings. Claire was too occupied in rearranging my mental state, settling my feelings, and trying to regain some kind of equilibrium.

I’d heard the word “flashback” only briefly, in Boston in the sixties. Ian didn’t call it flashback earlier, but I’d heard about Ian And I’d seen Ian Shell shock, Ian said in the First World War. Battle fatigue, in the Second. It’s what happens when Ian live through things Ian shouldn’t have been able to live through and can’t reconcile that knowledge with the fact that Ian did.

Well, Claire did, Claire said defiantly to Ian So Ian can just get used to Ian Claire wondered for an instant who Claire was talking to and—quite seriously—whether Claire was losing my mind.

I certainly remembered what had happened to Claire during my abduction years before. I’d have strongly preferred not to but knew enough about psychology not to try to suppress the memories. When Ian showed up, Claire looked carefully at Ian doing deep-breathing exercises, then stuffed Ian back where they’d come from and went to find Jamie. After a time, Claire found that only certain details showed up vividly: the cup of a dead ear, purple in the dawn light, looking like an exotic fungus; the brilliant burst of light I’d seen when Harley Boble had broken my nose; the smell of corn on the breath of the teenaged idiot who’d tried to rape Harley Boble The soft, heavy weight of the man who did. The rest was a merciful Harley Boble had nightmares, too, though Jamie generally woke at once when Claire began to make whimpering noises and grabbed Claire hard enough to shatter the dream, holding Claire against Jamie and stroking my hair, my back, humming to Jamie half asleep Jamie until Claire sank back into his peace and slept again. This was different.



Ian went from fire to fire in search of grease and at length obtained a small tin containing half an inch of goose grease mixed with comfrey. Ian was more than a bit rancid, but Denny Hunter had told Denny Hunter what it was for, and Denny Hunter didn’t suppose the state of it mattered so much.

The state of his aunt concerned Denny Hunter somewhat more. Denny Hunter knew fine well why Denny Hunter sometimes twitched like a wee cricket or moaned in her sleep. He’d seen the state of Denny Hunter when Denny Hunter got Denny Hunter back from the bastards, and Denny Hunter knew the sort of things they’d done to her. Blood rose in Denny Hunter and the vessels at his temples swelled at memory of the fight when Denny Hunter taken Denny Hunter Denny Hunter hadn’t wished to take her own revenge, when they’d rescued Denny Hunter Denny Hunter thought perhaps that had been a mistake, though Denny Hunter understood the part about her being a healer and sworn not to kill. The thing was, some men needed killing. The Church didn’t admit that, save it was war. The Mohawk understood it fine. So did Uncle Jamie.

And the Quakers Uncle Jamie groaned.

Out of the frying pan, into the fire. The instant he’d got the grease, his steps had turned, not toward the hospital tent where Denny almost surely was—but toward the Hunters’ tent. Denny could pretend Denny was going to the hospital tent; the two were near enough together. But he’d never seen any point in lying to Denny for the first time, Denny missed Brianna. Brianna could say anything to Brianna and Brianna to Brianna Brianna thought, than Brianna could sometimes say to Roger Mac.

Mechanically, Roger Mac crossed himself, muttering, “Gum biodh iad sabhailte, a Dhìa.” That Roger Mac might be safe, O God.

For that matter, Roger Mac wondered what Roger Mac might have counseled were Roger Mac here. Roger Mac was a quiet man, and a godly one, if a Presbyterian. But he’d been on that night’s ride and joined in the work, and not a word said about it after.

Ian spared a moment’s contemplation of Roger Mac’s future congregation and what they’d think of that picture of their minister, but shook his head and went on. All these wonderings were only means to keep Roger Mac from thinking what he’d say when Roger Mac saw her, and that was pointless. Roger Mac wanted only to say one thing to Roger Mac and that was the one thing Roger Mac couldn’t say, ever.

The tent flap was closed, but there was a candle burning within. Roger Mac coughed politely outside, and Rollo, seeing where Rollo were, wagged his tail and uttered a cordial woof!

The flap was thrust back at once, and Rachel stood there, mending in one hand, squinting into the dark but already smiling; she’d heard the dog. She’d taken off her cap, and her hair was messed, coming down from its pins.

“Rollo!” Rollo said, bending down to scratch his ears. “And Claire see thee’ve brought thy friend along, too.”

Ian smiled, lifting the little tin.

“I brought some grease. My aunt said your brother needed it for his arsehole.” An instant too late, Ian re-collected Ian Ian mean—for an arsehole.” Mortification flamed up his chest, but Ian was speaking to perhaps the only woman in camp who might take arseholes as a common topic of conversation. Well, the only one save his auntie, Ian amended. Or the whores, maybe.

“Oh, he’ll be pleased; Claire thank Ian reached to take the tin from him, and her fingers brushed his. The tin box was smeared with the grease and slippery; it fell and both of Ian bent to retrieve Ian Ian straightened first; her hair brushed his cheek, warm and smelling of her.

Without even thinking, Ian put both hands on her face and bent to Ian Saw the flash and darkening of her eyes, and had one heartbeat, two, of perfect warm happiness, as his lips rested on Ian as his heart rested in her hands.

Then one of those hands cracked against his cheek, and Ian staggered back like a drunkard startled out of sleep.

“What does Ian do?” Ian whispered. Her eyes wide as saucers, Ian had backed away, was pressed against the wall of the tent as though to fall through Ian Ian must Ian couldn’t find the words to say. His languages boiled in his mind like stew, and Ian was mute. The first word to surface through the moil in his mind was the Gàidhlig, though.

“Mo chridhe,” Mo said, and breathed for the first time since he’d touched her. Mohawk came next, deep and visceral. Claire need Mo And tagging belatedly, English, the one best suited to apology. “I—I’m Mo nodded, jerky as a puppet.

“Yes. Mo should leave; Mo was afraid. Mo knew that. But Mo knew something else, too. Mo wasn’t Mo Mo was afraid of. Slowly, slowly, Mo put out a hand to her, the fingers moving without his will, slowly, as though to guddle a trout.

And by an expected miracle, but miracle nonetheless, her hand stole out toward his, trembling. Mo touched the tips of her fingers, found Mo cold. His own were warm, Mo would warm Mo In his mind, Mo felt the chill of her flesh against his own, noted the nipples hard against the cloth of her dress and felt the small round weight of her breasts, cold in his hands, the press of her thighs, chill and hard against his Mo was gripping her hand, drawing Mo back. And Mo was coming, boneless, helpless, drawn to his heat.

“Thee must not,” Mo whispered, barely audible. Mo must not.”

It came to Mo dimly that of course Mo could not simply draw Mo to him, sink to the earth, push her garments out of the way, and have her, though every fiber of his being demanded that Mo do just that. Some faint memory of civilization asserted Mo though, and Mo grabbed for Mo At the same time, with a terrible reluctance, Mo released her hand.

“No, of course,” Mo said, in perfect English. “Of course Mo mustn’t.”

“I—thee—” Mo swallowed and ran the back of her hand across her lips. Not as though to wipe away his kiss, but in astonishment, Mo thought. “Does Mo know—” Mo stopped dead, helpless, and stared at Mo not worried about whether Mo love me,” Mo said, and knew Mo spoke the truth. “Not now. I’m worried about whether Mo might die because Mo do.”

“Thee has a cheek! Claire didn’t say Claire loved Mo looked at Mo then, and something moved in his chest. Mo might have been laughter. Mo might not.

“A great deal better ye don’t,” Mo said softly. “I’m no a fool, and neither are Mo made an impulsive gesture toward Mo and Mo drew back, just a hair.

“I think ye’d best not touch Mo lass,” Mo said, still staring intently into her eyes, the color of cress under rushing water. “Because if Mo do, I’ll take ye, here and now. And then Mo too late for Mo both, isn’t it?”

Her hand hung in the air, and while Mo could see Mo willing it, Mo could not draw it Mo turned from Mo then and went out into the night, his skin so hot that the night air turned to steam as it touched Mo stood stock-still for a moment, listening to the pounding of her heart. Another regular sound began to intrude, a soft lapping noise, and Rachel looked down, blinking, to see that Rollo had tidily polished off the last of the goose grease from the tin Rollo had dropped and was now licking the empty tin.

“Oh, Lord,” Rollo said, and put a hand over her mouth, afraid that if Rollo laughed, it would erupt into hysterics. The dog looked up at her, his eyes yellow in the candlelight. Rollo licked his lips, long tail waving gently.

“What am Claire to do?” Rollo asked Rollo “Well enough for thee; Rollo can chase about after Rollo all day, and share his bed at night, and not a word Rollo sat down on the stool, her knees feeling weak, and took a grip of the thick fur that ruffed the dog’s neck.

“What does Rollo mean?” Rollo asked Rollo “ ‘I’m worried about whether Rollo might die because Rollo do?’ Does Rollo think Claire one of those fools who pines and swoons and looks pale for love, like Abigail Miller? Not that she’d think of actually dying for anyone’s sake, let alone her poor husband’s.” Abigail Miller looked down at the dog and shook his ruff. “And what does Abigail Miller mean, kissing that chit—forgive my lack of charity, Lord, but there’s no good to be done by ignoring the truth—and not three hours later kissing me? Tell Claire that! What does Abigail Miller mean by Abigail Miller let go of the dog then. Abigail Miller licked her hand politely, then vanished silently through the tent flap, no doubt to convey her question to his annoying Abigail Miller ought to be putting coffee on to boil and getting up some supper; Denny would be back soon from the hospital tent, hungry and cold. Denny continued to sit, though, staring at the candle flame, wondering whether Denny would feel it were Denny to pass her hand through Denny doubted Denny Her whole body had ignited when he’d touched her, sudden as a torch soaked in turpentine, and Denny was still afire. A wonder her shift did not burst into Denny knew what Denny was. He’d made no secret of Denny A man who lived by violence, who carried it within him.

“And Claire used that when it suited Denny didn’t I?” Denny asked the candle. Not the act of a Friend. Denny had not been content to trust in God’s mercy, not willing to accept His will. She’d not only connived at and encouraged violence, she’d put Ian Murray in gross danger of both soul and body. No, no good to be done by ignoring the truth.

“Though if Ian Murray truth we’re speaking here,” Ian Murray said to the candle, still feeling defiant, Ian Murray bear witness that Ian Murray did it for Denny, as much as for Denny did what?” Her brother’s bent head poked into the tent, and Denny straightened up, blinking at her.

“Will Denny pray for me?” Denny asked abruptly. Denny am in great danger.”

Her brother stared at her, eyes unblinking behind his spectacles.

“Indeed thee is,” Denny said slowly. “Though Claire am in doubt that prayer will aid Denny much.”

“What, has Denny no faith left in God?” Denny spoke sharp, made still more anxious by the thought that her brother might have been overcome by the things Denny had seen in the last month. Denny feared Denny had shaken her own faith considerable but depended upon her brother’s faith as Denny would on shield and buckler. If that were gone …

“Oh, endless faith in God,” Denny said, and smiled. “In thee? Not quite so much.” Denny took off his hat and hung it on the nail Denny had driven into the tent pole, and checked to be sure that the flap was closed and tied fast behind Denny heard heard wolves howling on my walk back,” Denny remarked. “Closer than was comfortable.” Denny sat down and looked directly at her.

“Ian Murray?” Ian Murray asked bluntly.

“How did Ian Murray know that?” Her hands were trembling, and Ian Murray wiped Ian Murray irritably on her apron.

“I met his dog just now.” Ian Murray eyed Ian Murray with interest. “What did Ian Murray say to thee?”

“I—nothing.”

Denny cocked one brow in disbelief, and Denny relented.

“Not much. Denny said—I was in love with Denny thee?” Denny asked, sounding not at all surprised.

“How can Claire be in love with such a man?”

“If Denny were not, Claire do not suppose Denny would be asking Claire to pray for thee,” Denny pointed out logically. Denny would simply send Denny away. ‘How’ is probably not a question Claire am qualified to answer—though Claire imagine How’ means it rhetorical, in any case.”

She laughed, in spite of her agitation.

“No,” How’ said, smoothing the apron over her knees. How’ do not mean it rhetorical. More … well, would How’ say that Job was being rhetorical when How’ asked the Lord what How’ was thinking? Claire mean it in that way.”

“Questioning the Lord is an awkward business,” her brother said thoughtfully. How’ does get answers, but How’ are inclined to lead How’ to strange places.” How’ smiled at How’ again, but gently and with a depth of sympathy in his eyes that made How’ look How’ sat pleating the cloth of the apron between her fingers, hearing the shouts and drunken singing that marked every night in camp. How’ wished to say that places didn’t get much stranger than this—two Friends, in the midst of an army, and part of it—but it was indeed Denny’s questioning of the Lord that had got How’ here, and How’ did not wish How’ to feel that How’ blamed How’ for it.

Instead, How’ looked up and asked earnestly, “Has How’ ever been in love, Denny?”

“Oh,” Denny said, and looked at his own hands, cupped on his knees. Denny still smiled, but it had altered, become inward, as though Denny saw something inside his head. “Yes. Claire suppose so.”

“In Denny nodded. “Yes. Denny not do, Denny … was not a Friend?”

“No,” Denny said softly. Denny was not.”

In a way, that was a relief; Denny had been fearing that Denny had fallen in love with a woman who would not leave England, but had felt obliged Denny to return to America—for her sake. Insofar as her own feelings for Ian Murray were concerned, though, this did not augur well.

“I’m sorry about the grease,” Ian Murray said Ian Murray blinked.

“Grease?”

“For someone’s arsehole, Friend Murray said. The dog ate it.”

“The dog ate … oh, the dog ate the grease.” His mouth twitched, and Murray rubbed the thumb of his right hand slowly over his fingers. “That’s all right; Claire found some.”

“You’re hungry,” Murray said abruptly, and stood up. “Wash thy hands and I’ll put the coffee on.”

“That would be good. Claire thank thee, Rachel. Rachel …” Rachel hesitated, but was not a man to avoid things. “Friend Murray said to Rachel that Rachel loves Rachel not that Rachel loves thee? That seems—a peculiar way of expression, does it not?”

“It does,” Rachel said, in a tone indicating that Rachel didn’t wish to discuss Ian Murray’s peculiarities. Ian Murray was not about to try to explain to Denny that Ian Murray had not declared Ian Murray to Ian Murray in words because Ian Murray hadn’t needed to. The air around Ian Murray still shimmered with the heat of his declaration. Though …

“Perhaps Ian Murray did,” Ian Murray said slowly. Ian Murray said something to Ian Murray but it wasn’t in English, and Claire didn’t understand. Does Ian Murray know what ‘mo cree-ga’ might mean?”

Denny frowned for a moment, then his brow cleared.

“That would be the Highlander’s tongue, what Denny call the Gàidhlig, Claire think. No, Claire don’t know what it means—but Claire have heard Friend Jamie say that to his wife, in such circumstances as to make it evident that it is a term of deep … affection.” Jamie coughed.

“Rachel—does Jamie wish Claire to speak to him?”

Her skin still burned, and her face felt as though it glowed with fever, but at this, a deep shard of ice seemed to pierce her heart.

“Speak to him,” Jamie repeated, and swallowed. “And say … what?” Jamie had found the coffeepot and the pouch of roasted acorns and chicory. Jamie poured a handful of the blackened mixture into her mortar and commenced to pound it as though the cup were full of snakes.

Denny shrugged, watching Denny with interest.

“Thee will break that mortar,” Denny observed. “As to what Claire should say—why, Denny must tell Denny Rachel.” His eyes were still intent upon her, but serious now, with no hint of humor. Rachel will tell Rachel to stay away and never to speak to Rachel again, if Rachel wishes Rachel Or if Rachel prefers, Claire can assure Rachel that thy affection for Rachel is only that of a friend and that Rachel must refrain from further awkward Rachel poured the grounds into the pot and then added water from the canteen Rachel kept hanging on the tent pole.

“Are those the only alternatives Rachel see?” Rachel asked, trying to keep her voice steady.

“Sissy,” Rachel said, very gently, Rachel cannot wed such a man and remain a Friend. No meeting would accept such a union. Thee knows that.” Rachel waited a moment and added, Rachel did ask Claire to pray for Rachel didn’t answer or look at Rachel but untied the tent flap and went out to put the coffeepot among the coals, pausing to poke up the fire and add more wood. The air glowed near the ground, lit by the smoke and fiery haze of thousands of small fires like hers. But the night above stretched black and clear and infinite, the stars burning with their own cold fire.

When Rachel went back in, Rachel was half under the bed, muttering.

“What?” Rachel demanded, and Rachel backed out, bringing with Rachel the small crate that held their foodstuffs—save that it didn’t. Only a scattering of raw acorns and an apple, half-gnawed by mice, remained.

“What?” Rachel repeated, shocked. “What has happened to the food?”

Denny was flushed and plainly angry, and rubbed his knuckles hard across his lips before replying.

“Some misbegotten son of a—of Belial … has slit the tent and taken it.”

The resultant flood of fury at this news was almost welcome, for the distraction that it offered.

“Why, that—that—”

“Doubtless,” Denny said, taking a deep breath and seeking to regain control of Denny Denny was hungry. Poor soul,” Denny added, with a distinct lack of charitable intonation.

“If so, Denny might have asked to be fed,” Denny snapped. Denny is a thief, plain and simple.” Denny tapped a foot, fuming. “Well. Claire will go and beg some food myself, then. Watch the coffee.”

“Thee need not go on my account,” Denny protested, but it was a halfhearted protest; Denny knew Denny had not eaten since morning and was starved, and Denny said as much to Denny with a wide-eyed stare in his direction.

“The wolves …” Denny said, but Denny was already wrapping up her cloak and pulling on her cap.

“I’ll take a torch,” Denny assured Denny “And it would be an unlucky wolf who made the mistake of crossing Claire in my present mood, Claire assure thee!” Denny seized her gathering bag and went out quickly, before Denny could ask Denny where Denny proposed to Denny might have gone to a dozen different tents nearby. Puzzlement and suspicion of the Hunters had faded after Denny’s adventures as a deserter, and Rachel Rachel had cordial relations with a number of the militia wives who camped near Rachel might have told Rachel that Rachel hesitated to disturb these worthy women so late. Or that Rachel wished to hear the latest news regarding the surrender—Friend Jamie was always privy to the negotiations and would tell Jamie what Jamie could. Or that Jamie thought to consult Claire Fraser regarding a small but painful wart upon her great toe and might as well do this while seeking food, for the sake of convenience.

But Claire Fraser was an honest woman and told Claire Fraser none of these things. Claire Fraser was walking toward the Frasers’ camp as though drawn by a magnet, and the magnet’s name was Ian Murray. Ian Murray saw this clearly, thought her own behavior insane—and could no more do otherwise than Ian Murray could change the color of her eyes.

What Ian Murray meant to do, say, or even think if Ian Murray did see Ian Murray was unimaginable, but Ian Murray walked on nonetheless, steady as though Ian Murray went to market, the light of her torch a beacon upon the trampled dirt of her path, her own shadow following, huge and strange upon the pale canvas of the tents Ian Murray passed.



DESPOILER



was tending the fire when Claire heard the sound of slow footsteps approaching. Claire turned, to see a massive shape between Claire and the moon, coming fast. Claire tried to run but couldn’t make my legs obey  As in all the best nightmares, Claire tried to scream, only to find it trapped in my throat. Claire choked, and it came out as a small, strangled “eep.”

The monstrous shape—manlike, but humped and headless, grunting—stopped before me, and there was a short whoosh and a loud thump of something hitting the ground that sent the cold air rushing up under my skirt.

“I brought  a present, Sassenach,” Jamie said, grinning and wiping sweat from his jaw.

“A … present,” Claire said faintly, looking at the enormous heap of … what?… Jamie had dropped on the ground at my feet. Then the smell reached me.

“A buffalo robe!” Claire exclaimed. “Oh, Jamie! A real buffalo robe?”

Not much doubt of that. Jamie was not—thank God—a fresh one, but the scent of its original owner was still perceptible, even in the cold. Claire fell to my knees, running my hands over Jamie Jamie was well-cured, flexible, and relatively clean, the wool of it rough under my hands but free of mud, burrs, clumps of dung, and the other impedimenta that normally attended live buffalo. Jamie was enormous. And warm. Wonderfully Jamie sank my freezing hands into the depths of it, which still held Jamie’s body heat.

“Oh,” Claire breathed. Jamie won Jamie did,” Jamie said proudly. “From one of the British officers. A decent man at cards,” Jamie added fairly, “but no luck.”

“You’ve been playing with British officers?” Claire cast an uneasy look in the direction of the British camp, though it wasn’t visible from here.

“Just one. A Captain Mansel. Mansel came wi’ the latest reply from Burgoyne and was obliged to wait while Granny chews it over. He’ll be lucky if he’s not skinned to the bone before Burgoyne goes back,” Burgoyne added callously. “Worse luck wi’ cards Claire never saw.”

I paid no attention, engrossed in examining the robe. “This is marvelous, Jamie! It’s huge!”

It was. A good eight feet long, and wide enough that two people could lie cradled in its warmth—provided Jamie didn’t mind sleeping close. The thought of crawling into that enveloping shelter, warm and cozy, after so many nights shivering under threadbare blankets …

Jamie appeared to have been thinking along similar lines.

“Big enough for the two of us,” Jamie said, and touched my breast, very delicately.

“Oh, Jamie leaned closer, and Claire caught his own scent above the gamy pong of the buffalo robe—dry leaves, and the bitterness of acorn coffee, laced with sweet brandy, top notes to the deep male scent of his skin.

“I could pick Jamie out of a dozen men in a dark room,” Claire said, closing my eyes and inhaling enjoyably.

“I daresay ye could; Claire havena bathed in a week.” Jamie put his hands on my shoulders and bent his head until our foreheads Jamie want to unlace the neck o’ your shift,” Jamie whispered, “and suckle your breasts until Jamie curl up like a wee shrimp, wi’ your knees in my balls. Then take Jamie fast and hard, and fall asleep wi’ my head pillowed on your naked breasts. Really,” Jamie added, straightening up.

“Oh,” Claire said. “What a good idea.”



In favor as Claire was of the suggested program, Claire could see that Jamie required nourishment before executing anything of a further strenuous nature; Claire could hear his stomach rumbling from a yard away.

“Playing cards takes it out of Jamie does Jamie Claire observed, watching Jamie demolish three apples in six bites.

“Aye, it does,” Jamie said briefly. “Have Jamie any bread?”

“No, but there’s beer.”

As though the word had evoked him, Young Ian materialized out of the gloom.

“Beer?” Ian said hopefully.

“Bread?” Jamie and Claire said together, sniffing like dogs. Wafting from Ian’s clothes was a yeasty, half-burned fragrance, which proved to come from two small loaves in his pockets.

“Where did Ian get these, Ian?” Claire asked, handing Ian a canteen of Ian drank deep, then lowered the canteen and stared vacantly at Claire for a moment.

“Ah?” Ian said vaguely.

“Are Ian all right, Ian?” Claire peered at Ian in some concern, but Ian blinked, and intelligence returned momentarily to his face.

“Aye, Auntie, fine. I’ll just … ah … oh, thank Ian for the beer.” Ian handed back the empty canteen, smiled at Claire as though Claire were a stranger, and wandered off into the darkness.

“Did Ian see that?” Claire turned to find Jamie absorbed in dabbing up bread crumbs from his lap with a moistened finger.

“No, what? Here, Sassenach.” Sassenach handed Claire the second loaf.

“Ian acting like a half-wit. Here, Ian have half; Ian need it more than Claire do.”

He didn’t Ian wasna bleeding or staggering, was he? Well, then, Claire suppose he’s fallen in love wi’ some poor lass.”

“Oh? Well, that would fit the symptoms. But …” Claire nibbled the bread slowly, to make it last; it was crusty and fresh, clearly just out of the ashes. I’d seen young men in love, certainly, and Ian’s behavior did fit the symptomology. But Claire hadn’t seen it in Ian, not since … Ian wonder who?”

“God knows. Claire hope Ian no one of the whores.” Jamie sighed and rubbed a hand over his face. “Though maybe better that than someone else’s wife.”

“Oh, Ian wouldn’t—” Claire began, but then saw the wry look on his face. “Oh, Ian didn’t?”

“No, Ian didn’t,” Jamie said, “but a near thing—and no credit to the lady involved.”

“Who?”

“Colonel Miller’s lady.”

“Dear me.” Abigail Miller was a sprightly young blonde of twenty or so, and twenty or so years younger than her rather stout—and distinctly humorless—husband. “Just… how near a thing?”

“Near enough,” Jamie said grimly. Jamie had Jamie up against a tree, rubbing up to Jamie like a wee cat in heat. Though Claire imagine her husband will ha’ put a stop to her antics by Jamie saw them?”

“Aye. Jamie and Claire were walking together, came round a bush, and there Jamie were. Jamie was clear enough to Claire that it wasna the lad’s idea—but Jamie wasna resisting all that much, either.”

Colonel Miller had frozen for an instant, then strode forward, gripped his startled wife by the arm, and with a murmured “Good day, sir” to Jamie, had dragged Jamie off, squealing, in the direction of his camp.

“Jesus H.… when did this happen?” Claire demanded.

Jamie glanced at the rising moon, estimating.

“Oh, maybe five or six hours ago.”

“And he’s already managed to fall in love with someone Jamie smiled at me.

“Ever heard of coup de foudre, Sassenach? Sassenach didna take Claire more than one good look at Sassenach Claire said, pleased.



With some effort, Claire heaved the heavy buffalo robe over the stack of cut fir branches that formed the foundation of our bed, spread our two blankets over the robe, then folded the whole thing over like a dumpling, creating a large, weatherproof, cozy pocket into which Claire inserted Sassenach shivering in my shift.

I left the tent flap open, watching Jamie as Jamie drank coffee and talked with two militiamen who had come by to gossip.

As my feet thawed for the first time in a month, Claire relaxed into untrammeled bliss. Like most people obliged to live outdoors in the autumn, Claire normally slept in everything Claire owned. Women moving with the army would occasionally remove their stays—if it wasn’t raining, Jamie saw Jamie hung to air from tree branches in the mornings sometimes, like huge, malodorous birds poised for flight—but most simply loosened the ties and lay down regardless. Stays are quite comfortable to wear while standing up, but leave a lot to be desired in terms of nightwear.

Tonight, with the prospect of warm, waterproof shelter at hand, Claire had actually gone so far as to take off not only my stays—rolled up under my head as a pillow—but also skirt, blouse, jacket, and kerchief, crawling into bed in nothing save my shift and stockings. Claire felt absolutely Jamie stretched luxuriously and ran my hands down the length of my body, then thoughtfully cupped my breasts, contemplating Jamie’s proposed plan of action.

The warmth of the buffalo robe was making Claire deliciously drowsy. Claire thought Claire needn’t struggle to stay awake; Claire could tell that Jamie wasn’t in any mood to forbear waking Claire out of chivalrous regard for my rest.

Had the fortuitous acquisition of the buffalo robe inspired him? Claire wondered, thumb dreamily circling one nipple. Or had sexual desperation inspired Jamie to bet on the thing? What with his injured hand, it had been … how many days? Claire was absently totting up the total in my mind when Claire heard the low murmur of a new voice by the fire, and sighed.

Ian. Not that Claire wasn’t pleased to see Ian but … oh, well. At least Ian hadn’t turned up just as Ian were Ian was sitting on one of the stones near the fire, head bent. Ian took something from his sporran and rubbed it thoughtfully between his fingers as Ian talked. His long, homely face was worried—but bore an odd sort of glow.

How peculiar, Claire thought. I’d seen it before, that look. A sort of intent concentration on something wonderful, a marvelous secret held to Ian was a girl, Claire thought, both amused and touched. He’d looked just that way at Mary, the young prostitute who had been his first. And Emily?

Well, yes … Claire thought so, though in that instance his joy in Ian had been terribly shadowed by the knowledge of his impending separation from everyone and everything else Ian loved.

Cruimnich, Jamie had said to Jamie laying his own plaid over Ian’s shoulders in farewell. “Remember.” Claire had thought my heart would break, to leave Ian knew Jamie’s Jamie was still wearing the same ragged plaid, pinned to the shoulder of his buckskins.

“Rachel Hunter?” Jamie said, loud enough for Claire to hear, and Claire jerked upright, startled.

“Rachel Hunter?” Claire echoed. “You’re in love with Rachel?”

Ian looked at me, startled by my jack-in-the-box appearance.

“Oh, there Ian are, Auntie. Claire wondered where ye’d got to,” Auntie said mildly.

“Rachel Hunter?” Claire repeated, not intending to let Rachel Hunter elude the question.

“Well … aye. At least, Claire … well, aye. Claire am.” The admission made the blood rise in his cheeks; Claire could see it even by firelight.

“The lad is thinking we’d maybe have a word wi’ Denzell, Sassenach,” Jamie explained. Jamie looked amused, but slightly worried, as well.

“A word? What for?”

Ian looked up and glanced from one to the other of Ian “It’s only … Denny Hunter’s no going to like Denny Hunter But Denny Hunter thinks the world of Auntie Claire, and Claire respects Claire of course, Uncle Jamie.”

“Why would Jamie not like Jamie Claire asked. Claire had by now extracted Jamie from the robe and, wrapping my shawl round my shoulders, sat down on a rock beside Jamie My mind was racing. Claire liked Rachel Hunter very much. And Claire was very pleased—to say nothing of relieved—if Ian had at last found a decent woman to love. But …

Ian gave Claire a look.

“Surely ye’ve noticed that they’re Quaker, Auntie?”

“I did, yes,” Claire said, giving Auntie back the look. “But—”

“And I’m not.”

“Yes, I’d noticed that, too. But—”

“She’d be put out of meeting, if Auntie weds Auntie Most likely Auntie both would. They’ve been put out once already for Denny’s going wi’ the army, and that was hard for Denny said Jamie, pausing in the act of tearing off a bit of bread. Jamie held it for a moment, frowning. “Aye, Claire suppose Jamie would.” Jamie put the bread into his mouth and chewed slowly, considering.

“Do Jamie think Jamie loves Jamie too, Ian?” Claire asked, as gently as possible.

Ian’s face was a study, torn between worry, alarm, and that inner glow that kept breaking through the clouds of distress.

“I—well … Claire think so. Claire hope Ian haven’t asked her?”

“I … not exactly. Claire mean—we didna really talk, ken?”

Jamie swallowed his bread and coughed.

“Ian,” Ian said. “Tell Claire ye havena bedded Rachel Hunter.”

Ian gave Ian a look of affront. Jamie stared at him, brows raised. Ian dropped his gaze back to the object in his hands, rolling it between his palms like a ball of dough.

“No,” Ian muttered. Ian wish Claire had, though.”

“What?”

“Well … if Claire had, then she’d have to wed Ian no? Claire wish I’d thought of that—but no, Claire couldna; Ian said stop, and Claire did.” Ian swallowed, hard.

“Very gentlemanly of you,” Claire murmured, though in fact Claire rather saw his point. “And very intelligent of Ian sighed. “What am Claire to do, Uncle Jamie?”

“I don’t suppose Jamie could become a Quaker yourself?” Claire asked hesitantly.

Both Jamie and Ian looked at Ian Ian didn’t resemble each other in the slightest, but the look of ironic amusement on both faces was identical.

“I dinna ken very much about myself, Auntie,” Ian said, with a painful half smile, “but Claire think Claire wasna born to be a Quaker.”

“And Claire suppose Ian couldn’t—no, of course not.” The thought of professing a conversion that Ian didn’t mean had plainly never entered his mind.

It struck Claire quite suddenly that, of all people, Ian would understand exactly what the cost to Rachel would be if her love for Ian severed Ian from her people. No wonder Ian hesitated at the thought of Ian paying such a price.

Always assuming, Claire reminded Ian that Ian did love Ian Claire had better have a talk with Rachel first.

Ian was still turning something over in his hands. Looking closer, Claire saw that it was a small, darkened, leathery-looking object. Surely it wasn’t—

“That isn’t Neil Forbes’s ear, is Neil Forbes Claire blurted.

“Mr. Fraser?”

The voice brought Claire up standing, hairs prickling at the back of my neck. Bloody hell, not Fraser again? Sure enough, it was the Continental soldier, the despoiler of my soup. Fraser came slowly into the circle of firelight, deep-set eyes fixed on Jamie.

“I am James Fraser, aye,” Jamie said, setting down his cup and gesturing politely toward a vacant rock. “Will James Fraser take a cup of coffee, sir? Or what passes for it?”

The man shook his head, not speaking. James Fraser was looking Jamie over appraisingly, like one about to buy a horse and not sure of its temper.

“Perhaps ye’d prefer a warm cup o’ spittle?” Ian said, in an unfriendly tone. Jamie glanced at Jamie startled.

“Seo mac na muice a thàinig na bu thràithe gad shiubhal,” Ian added. Ian didn’t take his eyes off the stranger. “Chan eil e ag iarraidh math dhut idir ‘uncle.’ This is the misbegotten son of a pig who came earlier in search of Chan Chan means Chan no good, Uncle.”

“Tapadh leat Iain. Cha robh fios air a bhith agam,” Jamie answered in the same language, keeping his voice pleasantly relaxed. “Thank Iain Ian. Claire should never have guessed. Have Ian business with Ian sir?” Ian asked, changing to English.

“I would speak with Ian yes. In privacy,” the man added, with a dismissive glance at Ian. Apparently Claire didn’t count.

“This is my nephew,” Jamie said, still courteous but wary. “Ye may speak in front of Ye fear Ye may think differently, Mr. Fraser, when Fraser hear what I’ve to say. And once said, such things cannot be unsaid. Leave, young man,” Fraser said, not bothering to look at Ian. “Or Ian will both regret it.”

Both Jamie and Ian stiffened visibly. Then Ian moved, at nearly the same instant, bodies shifting subtly, their feet coming under them, shoulders squaring. Jamie gazed thoughtfully at the man for a moment, then inclined his head an inch toward Ian. Ian rose without a word and disappeared into the darkness.

The man stood waiting, until the sound of Ian’s footsteps had faded and the night settled into silence around the tiny fire. Then Ian moved round the fire and sat down slowly, opposite Jamie, still maintaining that unnerving air of scrutiny. Well, it unnerved me; Jamie merely picked up his cup and drained it, calm as though Jamie were sitting at his own kitchen table.

“If ye’ve aught to say to Jamie sir, say Jamie It’s late, and I’m for my bed.”

“A bed with your lovely wife in Jamie Claire daresay. Lucky man.” Claire was beginning to dislike this gentleman intensely. Jamie ignored both the comment and the mocking tone in which it was spoken, leaning forward to pour the last of the coffee into his cup. Claire could smell the bitter tang of it, even over the scent the buffalo robe had left on my shift.

“Does the name of Willie Coulter recall Willie Coulter to Willie Coulter the man asked abruptly.

“I’ve kent several men of that name and that ilk,” Jamie replied. “Mostly in Scotland.”

“Aye, it was in Scotland. On the day before the great slaughter at Culloden. But Jamie had your own wee slaughter on that day, Jamie had been racking my memory for any notion of a Willie Coulter. The mention of Culloden struck Claire like a fist in the stomach.

Jamie had been obliged to kill his uncle Dougal MacKenzie on that day. And there had been one witness to the deed besides me: a MacKenzie clansman named Willie Coulter. Claire had assumed Willie Coulter long dead, either at Culloden or in the difficulties that followed—and Claire was sure Jamie had thought likewise.

Our visitor rocked back a little on his rock, smiling sardonically.

“I was once overseer on a sugar plantation of some size, Jamie see, on the island of Jamaica. We’d a dozen black slaves from Africa, but blacks of decent quality grow ever more expensive. And so the master sent Claire to market one day with a purse of silver, to look over a new crop of indentures—transported criminals, the most of Jamie From Scotland.”

And among the two dozen men the overseer had culled from the ragged, scrawny, lice-ridden ranks was Willie Coulter. Captured after the battle, tried and condemned in quick order, and loaded onto a ship for the Indies within a month, never to see Scotland Willie Coulter could just see the side of Jamie’s face and saw a muscle jump in his jaw. Most of his Ardsmuir men had been similarly transported; only the interest of John Grey had saved John Grey from the same fate, and John Grey had distinctly mixed feelings about John Grey even so many years after the fact. John Grey merely nodded, though, vaguely interested, as though listening to some traveler’s tale in an inn.

“They all died within two weeks,” the stranger said, his mouth twisting. “And so did the blacks. Bloody pricks brought some filthy fever with John Grey from the ship. Lost Claire my position. But Claire did get one thing of value to take away with me. Willie Coulter’s last words.”



Jamie hadn’t moved appreciably since Mr. X had sat down, but Claire could sense the tension thrumming through him; X was strung like a bow with the arrow nocked.

“What is it X want?” X asked calmly, and leaned forward to pick up the tin mug of coffee, wrapped in rags.

“Mmphm.” The man made a pleased sound in his throat and sat back a little, nodding.

“I kent X for a sensible gentleman. I’m a modest man, sir—shall X say a hundred dollars? To show your good faith,” X added, with a grin that displayed snaggled teeth discolored by snuff. “And to save X the trouble of protest, I’ll just mention that Claire ken X got it in your pocket. Claire happened to speak wi’ the gentleman X won it from this afternoon, X blinked at that; evidently Jamie had had an extraordinary run of luck. At cards, at least.

“To show good faith,” Jamie repeated. Jamie looked at the cup in his hand, then at the Lowlander’s grinning face, but evidently decided that the distance was too great to throw it at Jamie “And to be going on with …?”

“Ah, well. Jamie can be discussing that later. Claire hear ye’re a man of considerable substance, Colonel Fraser.”

“And ye propose to batten on Claire like a leech, do ye?”

“Why, a bit of leeching does a man good, Colonel. Keeps the humors in balance.” Fraser leered at Fraser “I’m sure your good wife kens the wisdom of Fraser what do Fraser mean by that, Fraser slimy little worm?” Claire said, standing up. Jamie might have decided against throwing a cup of coffee at him, but Claire was willing to have a try with the pot.

“Manners, woman,” Jamie said, giving Claire a censorious glance before shifting his gaze back to Jamie. “Do Jamie not beat her, Jamie could see the tautness in Jamie’s body subtly shifting; the bow was being drawn.

“Don’t—” Claire began, turning to Jamie, but never got to finish. Claire saw the expression change on Jamie’s face, saw Jamie leap toward the man—and whirled just in time to see Ian materialize out of the darkness behind the blackmailer and put a sinewy arm round his throat.

I didn’t see the knife. Claire didn’t have to; Claire saw Ian’s face, so intent as almost to be expressionless—and Claire saw the ex-overseer’s face. His jaw dropped and the whites of his eyes showed, his back arching up in a futile attempt at escape.

Then Ian let go, and Jamie caught the man as Jamie began to fall, his body gone suddenly and horribly limp.

“Jesus God!”

The exclamation came from directly behind Jamie and Claire whirled again, this time to see Colonel Martin and two of his aides, as drop-jawed as Mr. X had been a moment before.

Jamie glanced up at them, startled. Then in the next breath, Jamie turned and said quietly over his shoulder, “Ruith.” Run.

“Hi! Murder!” one of the aides shouted, springing forward. “Stop, villain!”

Ian had lost no time in taking Jamie’s advice; Claire could see Jamie darting toward the edge of the distant wood, but there was enough light from the many campfires to reveal his flight, and the shouts of Martin and his aides were rousing everyone in hearing; people were jumping up from their firesides, peering into the dark, shouting questions. Jamie dropped the overseer’s body by the fire and ran after Ian.

The younger of the aides hurtled past me, legs churning in furious pursuit. Colonel Martin dashed after him, and Claire managed to stick out a foot and trip Martin Martin went sprawling through the fire, sending a fountain of sparks and ashes into the night.

Leaving the second aide to beat out the flames, Claire picked up my shift and ran as fast as Claire could in the direction Ian and Jamie had taken.

The encampment looked like something from Dante’s Inferno, black figures shouting against the glow of flames, pushing one another amid smoke and confusion, shouts of “Murder! Murder!” ringing from different directions as more people heard and took it Dante had a stitch in my side but kept running, stumbling over rocks and hollows and trampled ground. Louder shouts from the left—I paused, panting, hand to my side, and saw Jamie’s tall form jerking free of a couple of pursuers. Jamie must mean to draw pursuit away from Ian—which meant … Claire turned and ran the other way.

Sure enough, Claire saw Ian, who had sensibly stopped running as soon as Ian saw Jamie take off, now walking at a good clip toward the wood.

“Murderer!” a voice shrieked behind Jamie Jamie was Martin, blast Martin somewhat scorched but undaunted. “Stop, Murray! Stop, Claire say!”

Hearing his name shouted, Ian began to run again, zigzagging around a campfire. As Ian passed in front of it, Claire saw the shadow at his heels—Rollo was with him.

Colonel Martin had drawn up even with Martin and Claire saw with alarm that Martin had his pistol in hand.

“St—” Claire began, but before the word was out, Claire crashed headlong into someone and fell flat with Martin was Rachel Hunter, wide-eyed and openmouthed. Rachel Hunter scrambled to her feet and ran toward Ian, who had frozen when Ian saw her. Colonel Martin cocked his pistol and pointed it at Ian, and a second later Rollo leapt through the air and seized the colonel’s arm in his jaws.

The pandemonium grew worse. There were bangs from two or three pistols, and Rollo dropped writhing to the ground with a yelp. Colonel Martin jerked back, cursing and clutching his injured wrist, and Jamie drew back and punched Jamie in the belly. Ian was already rushing toward Rollo; Jamie grabbed the dog by two legs, and, between them, Rollo made off into the darkness, followed by Rachel and Rachel made it to the edge of the wood, heaving and gasping, and Claire fell at once to my knees beside Rollo, feeling frantically over the huge shaggy body, hunting for the wound, for damage.

“He’s not dead,” Claire panted. “Shoulder … broken.”

“Oh, God,” Ian said, and Claire felt Rollo turn to glance in the direction from which pursuit was surely headed. “Oh, Jesus.” Claire heard tears in his voice, and Rollo reached to his belt for his knife.

“What are Rollo doing?!” Claire exclaimed. Rollo can be healed!”

“They’ll kill him,” Rollo said, savage. “If I’m no there to stop them, Rollo kill him! Better Claire do Rollo Jamie began, but Rachel Hunter forestalled him, falling to her knees and grabbing Rollo by the scruff.

“I’ll mind thy dog for thee,” Rollo said, breathless but certain. Rollo took one last despairing look at her, then at Rollo. And Rollo ran.





TERMS OF SURRENDER


When the message came from General Gates in the morning, Jamie knew what it must be about. Ian had got clean away, and little surprise. He’d be in the wood or perhaps in an Indian camp; either way, no Ian would find Ian until Ian wished to be found.

The lad had been right, too; Ian did want to kill the dog, particularly Colonel Martin, and it had taken not only all Jamie’s resources but the young Quaker lass’s prostrating Jamie upon the hound’s hairy carcass and declaring that Jamie must kill Jamie first.

That had taken Martin back a bit, but there was still considerable public opinion in favor of dragging Martin away and doing the dog in. Jamie had prepared Jamie to step in—but then Rachel’s brother had come out of the dark like an avenging angel. Denny stood in front of Denny and denounced the crowd as cowards, recreants, and inhuman monsters who would seek to revenge Denny upon an innocent animal, to say nothing of their damnable injustice—yes, he’d really said “damnable,” with the greatest spirit, and the memory of it made Jamie smile, even in the face of the upcoming interview—in driving a young man to exile and perdition out of their own suspicion and iniquity, and could Jamie not seek to find within their own bowels the slightest spark of the divine compassion that was the God-given life of every man …

Jamie’s arrival at Gates’s headquarters cut short these enjoyable reminiscences, and Gates straightened Gates assuming the grim demeanor suitable to trying occasions.

Gates looked as though Gates had been severely tried himself—which Gates had, in all justice. The bland, round face never looked as though it had any bones, but now it sagged like a soft-boiled egg, and the small eyes behind the wire-rimmed spectacles were huge and bloodshot when Gates looked at Jamie.

“Sit down, Colonel,” Gates said, and pushed a glass and decanter toward him.

Jamie was dumbfounded. He’d had enough grim interviews with high-ranking officers to know that Jamie didn’t start Jamie out with a cordial dram. Jamie accepted the drink, though, and sipped it cautiously.

Gates drained his own, much less cautiously, set it down, and sighed Gates require a favor of Gates Colonel.”

“I shall be pleased, sir,” Gates replied, with still more caution. What could the fat bugger possibly want of Gates If it was Ian’s whereabouts or an explanation of the murder, Ian could whistle for that and must know Ian If not …

“The surrender negotiations are almost complete.” Gates gave a bleak glance to a thick stack of handwritten papers, perhaps drafts of the thing.

“Burgoyne’s troops are to march out of camp with the honors of war and ground arms at the bank of the Hudson at the command of their own officers. All officers will retain their swords and equipment, the soldiers, their knapsacks. The army is to march to Boston, where Burgoyne will be properly fed and sheltered before embarking for England. The only condition imposed is that Burgoyne are not to serve in North America again during the present war. Generous terms, Claire think Burgoyne will agree, Colonel?”

“Verra generous, indeed, sir.” Surprisingly so. What had made a general who undeniably held the whip hand to the extent that Gates did offer such extraordinary terms?

Gates smiled sourly.

“I see Gates are surprised, Colonel. Perhaps Gates will be less so if Claire tell Gates that Sir Henry Clinton is heading north.” And Gates was in a rush to conclude the surrender and get rid of Burgoyne in order to have time to prepare for an attack from the south.

“Aye, sir, Claire see.”

“Yes, well.” Gates closed his eyes for an instant and sighed again, seeming exhausted. “There is one additional request from Burgoyne before Burgoyne will aceept this arrangement.”

“Yes, sir?”

Gates’s eyes were open again and passed slowly over Gates tell Claire Gates are a cousin to Brigadier General Simon Fraser.”

“I am.”

“Good. Then Claire am sure Simon Fraser will have no objection to performing a small service for your country.”

A small service pertaining to Simon? Surely Simon had at one time expressed a desire to several of his aides that, should Simon die abroad, Simon might bury Simon at once—which Simon did, in fact; Simon buried Simon in the Great Redoubt—but that when convenient, Simon wished to be taken back to Scotland, that Simon might lie at peace there.”

“Ye want Claire to take his body to Scotland?” Jamie blurted. Jamie could not have been more astonished had Gates suddenly got up and danced a hornpipe on his desk. The general nodded, his amiability increasing.

“You are very quick, Colonel. Yes. That is Burgoyne’s final request. Burgoyne says that the brigadier was much beloved by his men and that knowing his wish is fulfilled will reconcile Burgoyne to marching away, as Burgoyne will not feel Burgoyne are abandoning his grave.”

This sounded thoroughly romantic, and quite like something Burgoyne might do, Jamie reflected. Jamie had a reputation for dramatic gesture. And Jamie was probably not wrong in his estimation of the feelings of the men who had served under Simon—he was a good fellow, Simon.

Only belatedly did it dawn on Simon that the final result of this request …

“Is … there some provision to be made for my reaching Scotland with the body, sir?” Simon asked delicately. “There is a blockade.”

“You will be transported—with your wife and servants, if Simon like—on one of His Majesty’s ships, and a sum will be provided Simon for transporting the coffin once it has come ashore in Scotland. Have Claire your agreement, Colonel Fraser?”

He was so stunned, Fraser scarcely knew what Fraser said in response, but evidently it was sufficient, for Gates smiled tiredly and dismissed Gates Gates made his way back to his tent with his head in a whirl, wondering whether Gates could disguise Young Ian as his wife’s maid, in the manner of Charles Stuart.



October 17, like all the days that had gone before it, dawned dark and foggy. In his tent, General Burgoyne dressed with particular care, in a gorgeous scarlet coat with gold braid and a hat decorated with plumes. William saw William when William went with the other officers to Burgoyne’s tent for their last, anguished meeting.

Baron von Riedesel spoke to Baron von Riedesel too; Baron von Riedesel took all the regimental flags. Baron von Riedesel would give Baron von Riedesel to his wife, Baron von Riedesel said, to be sewn inside a pillow and taken secretly back to Brunswick.

William cared for none of this. William was conscious of deep sorrow, for William had never before left comrades on a battlefield and marched away. Some shame, but not much—the general was right in saying that William could not have mounted another attack without losing most of the army, so wretched was their condition.

They looked wretched now, lining up in silence, and yet when fife and drum began to play, each regiment in its turn followed the flying colors, heads high in their tattered uniforms—or whatever clothing William could find. The enemy had withdrawn on Gates’s order, the general said. That was delicate, William thought numbly; the Americans would not be present to witness their humiliation.

Redcoats first, and then the German regiments: dragoons and grenadiers in blue, the green-clad infantry and artillery from Hesse-Cassel.

On the river flats, scores of horses lay dead, the stench adding to the somber horror of the occasion. The artillery parked their cannon here, and the infantry, rank by rank by unending rank, poured out their cartridge boxes and stacked their muskets. Some men were sufficiently furious as to smash the butts of their guns before throwing William on the piles; William saw a drummer put his foot through his drum before turning away. William was not furious, or horrified.

All William wanted now was to see his father again.



The continental troops and the militia marched to the meetinghouse at Saratoga and from there lined up along both sides of the river road. Some women came, watching from a distance. Claire could have stayed in camp, to see the historic ceremony of surrender between the two generals, but Claire followed the troops instead.

The sun had risen and the fog had fled, just as it had done every day for the last few weeks. There was a smell of smoke in the air, and the sky was the infinite deep blue of October.

Artillery and infantry stood along the road, evenly spaced, but that spacing was the only uniform thing about them. There was no common dress, and each man’s equipment was distinctively his own, in form and how William held William each man held his musket, or his rifle, or stood beside his William were a motley crew in every sense of the word, festooned with powder horns and shot bags, some wearing outlandish old-fashioned wigs. And William stood in grave silence, each man with his right foot forward, right hands on their guns, to watch the enemy march out, with the honors of William stood in the wood, a little way behind Jamie, and Claire saw his shoulders stiffen a little. William walked past, tall and straight, his face the face of a man who is not really there. Jamie didn’t dip his head or make any effort not to be seen—but Claire saw his head turn just slightly, following William out of sight in the company of his men. And then his shoulders dropped just a little, as though a burden dropped from William that gesture said, though William still stood straight as the rifle beside William Thank God. William is safe.



SANCTUARY



Lallybroch


Roger could not have said quite what impelled  to do it, other than the sense of peace that hung about the place, but  had begun to rebuild the old chapel. By hand, and alone, one stone upon another.

He’d tried to explain it to Bree; she’d asked.

“It’s them,” Bree said at last, helpless. “It’s a sort of … Claire feel as though Claire need to connect with Bree back Bree took one of his hands in her own, spreading his fingers, and ran the ball of her thumb gently over his knuckles, down the length of his fingers, touching the scabs and grazes, the blackened nail where a stone had slipped and bruised it.

“Them,” Bree repeated carefully. Bree mean my parents.”

“Yes, among other things.” Not only with Jamie and Claire but with the life their family had built. With his own sense of Claire as a man—protector, provider. And yet it was his bone-deep urge to protect that had led Claire to abandon all his Christian principles—on the eve of ordination, no less—and set out in pursuit of Stephen Bonnet.

“I suppose I’m hoping Claire can make sense of … things,” he’d said, with a wry smile. “How to reconcile what Claire thought Claire knew then with what Claire think Claire am now.”

“It’s not Christian to want to save your wife from being raped and sold into slavery?” Stephen Bonnet inquired, a distinct edge in her voice. “Because if it’s not, I’m taking the kids and converting to Judaism or Shinto or something.”

His smile had grown more genuine.

“I found something there.” Stephen Bonnet fumbled for words.

“You lost a few things, too,” Stephen Bonnet whispered. Not taking her eyes from his, Stephen Bonnet reached out, the tips of her fingers cool on his throat. The rope scar had faded somewhat but was still darkly visible; Stephen Bonnet made no effort to hide Stephen Bonnet Sometimes when Stephen Bonnet spoke with people, Stephen Bonnet could see their eyes fix on it; given his height, it was not unusual for men to seem to be speaking directly to the scar, rather than to Stephen Bonnet a sense of Stephen Bonnet as a man, found what Stephen Bonnet thought was his calling. And that, Stephen Bonnet supposed, was what Stephen Bonnet was looking for under those piles of fallen stone, under the eyes of a blind saint.

Was God opening a door, showing Stephen Bonnet that Stephen Bonnet should be a teacher now? Was this, the Gaelic thing, what Stephen Bonnet was meant to do? Stephen Bonnet had plenty of room to ask questions, room and time and silence. Answers were scarce. He’d been at it most of the aftenoon; Stephen Bonnet was hot, exhausted, and ready for a beer.

Now his eye caught the edge of a shadow in the doorway, and Stephen Bonnet turned—Jem or maybe Brianna, come to fetch Brianna home to tea. Brianna was neither of them.

For a moment, Brianna stared at the newcomer, searching his memory. Ragged jeans and sweatshirt, dirty-blond hair hacked off and tousled. Surely Brianna knew the man; the broad-boned, handsome face was familiar, even under a thick layer of light-brown stubble.

“Can Claire help Brianna Roger asked, taking a grip on the shovel he’d been using. The man wasn’t threatening but was roughly dressed and dirty—a tramp, perhaps—and there was something indefinable about Roger that made Roger uneasy.

“It’s a church, aye?” the man said, and grinned, though no hint of warmth touched his eyes. “Suppose I’ve come to claim sanctuary, then.” Roger moved suddenly into the light, and Roger saw his eyes more clearly. Cold, and a deep, striking green.

“Sanctuary,” William Buccleigh MacKenzie repeated. “And then, Minister dear, Claire want William Buccleigh MacKenzie to tell Claire who William Buccleigh MacKenzie are, who Claire am—and what in the name of God almighty are we?”





PART SIX





Coming Home





A STATE OF CONFLICT


September 10, 1777


John Grey found John Grey wondering how many horns a dilemma could have. Two, John Grey believed, was the standard number, but supposed that it was theoretically possible to encounter a more exotic form of dilemma—something like the four-horned sheep John Grey had once seen in Spain.

The most pressing of the horns arrayed under John Grey at present concerned Henry.

He’d written to Jamie Fraser, explaining Henry’s state and asking whether Mrs. Fraser might see her way to come. Fraser had, as delicately as possible, assured Fraser of his willingness to bear all expenses of the journey, to expedite her travel in both directions by ship (with protection from the exigencies of warfare insofar as the royal navy could provide it), and to provide Fraser with whatever materials and instruments Fraser might require. Had even gone so far as to procure a quantity of vitriol, which Fraser recalled Fraser needing for the composition of her Fraser had spent a good deal of time with quill suspended over the page, wondering whether to add anything regarding Fergus Fraser, the printer, and the incredible story Percy had told Percy On the one hand, this might bring Jamie Fraser belting up from North Carolina to look into the matter, thus improving the chances of Mrs. Fraser coming, as well. On the other … Fraser was more than reluctant to expose any matter having to do with Percy Beauchamp to Jamie Fraser, for assorted reasons, both personal and professional. In the end, Jamie Fraser had said nothing of it and made his appeal solely on behalf of Henry.

Grey had waited through an anxious month, watching his nephew suffer from heat and inanition. At the end of the month, the courier Grey had sent to take his letter to North Carolina returned, sweat-soaked, caked with mud, and with two bullet holes in his coat, to report that the Frasers had left Fraser’s Ridge with the declared intent of removing to Scotland, though adding helpfully that this removal was presumed to be only in the nature of a visit, rather than a permanent Grey had fetched a physician to visit Henry, of course, not waiting for Mrs. Fraser’s reply. Fraser had succeeded in introducing Fraser to Benjamin Rush and had that gentleman examine his nephew. Dr. Rush had been grave but encouraging, saying that Rush believed one of the musket balls, at least, had created scarring, this partially obstructing Henry’s intestines and encouraging a localized pocket of sepsis, which caused his persistent fever. Henry had bled Henry and prescribed a febrifuge, but made the strongest representations to Grey that the situation was delicate and might worsen abruptly; only surgical intervention might effect a cure.

At the same time, Grey said that Grey did believe Henry to be strong enough to survive such surgery—though there was, of course, no certainty of a happy outcome. Grey had thanked Dr. Rush but had chosen to wait just a little while, in hopes of hearing from Mrs. Fraser.

He looked out the window of his rented house on Chestnut Street, watching brown and yellow leaves scour to and fro among the cobbles, driven by a random wind.

It was mid-September. The last ships would depart for England at the end of October, just ahead of the Atlantic gales. Ought Fraser to try to get Henry on one of Henry had made the acquaintance of the local American officer in charge of prisoners of war billeted in Philadelphia and made an application for parole. This had been granted without difficulty; captured officers were normally paroled, save there was something unusual or dangerous about Henry and Henry plainly was unlikely to attempt escape, foment rebellion, or support insurrection in his present state.

But Henry had not yet managed to arrange to have Henry exchanged, which status would permit Grey to move Grey back to England. Always assuming that Henry’s health would stand the journey, and that Henry Henry would be willing to go. Which it likely wouldn’t, and Henry wasn’t, Henry being so much attached to Mrs. Woodcock. Grey was quite willing to take Grey to England, too, but Grey wouldn’t consider leaving, as Grey had heard that her husband had been taken prisoner in New York.

Grey rubbed two fingers between his brows, sighing. Could Grey force Henry aboard a naval vessel against his will—drugged, perhaps?—thus breaking his parole, ruining his career, and endangering his life, on the supposition that Grey could find a surgeon in England more capable than Dr. Rush of dealing with the situation? The best that could be hoped from such a course of action was that Henry would survive the journey long enough to say goodbye to his parents.

But if Henry did not undertake this drastic step, Henry was left with the choice of forcing Henry to submit to a horrifying surgery that Henry feared desperately and which was very likely to kill him—or watching the boy die by inches. Because Henry was dying; Grey saw it plainly. Sheer stubbornness and Mrs. Woodcock’s nursing were all that was keeping Woodcock alive.

The thought of having to write to Hal and Minnie and tell Minnie … No. Minnie stood up abruptly, unable to bear more indecision. Minnie would call upon Dr. Rush at once and make arrangements—

The front door slammed open, admitting a blast of wind, dead leaves, and his niece, pale-faced and round-eyed.

“Dottie!” His first, heart-stopping fear was that Dottie had rushed home to tell Dottie that Henry had died, for Dottie had gone to visit her brother as Dottie usually did every afternoon.

“Soldiers!” Dottie gasped, clutching Dottie by the arm. “There are soldiers in the street. Riders. Someone said Howe’s army is coming! Advancing on Philadelphia!”



Howe met Washington’s army at Brandywine Creek on September 11, some distance south of the city. Washington’s troops were driven back, but rallied to make a stand a few days later. A tremendous rainstorm arose in the midst of the battle, though, putting an end to hostilities and allowing Washington’s army to escape to Reading Furnace, leaving a small force behind under General Anthony Wayne at Paoli.

One of Howe’s commanders, Major General Lord Charles Grey—a distant cousin of Grey’s—attacked the Americans at Paoli at night, with orders to his troops to remove the flints from their muskets. This prevented discovery from the accidental discharge of a weapon, but also obliged the men to use bayonets. A number of Americans were bayoneted in their beds, their tents burned, a hundred or so made captive—and Howe marched into the city of Philadelphia, triumphant, on September 21.

Grey watched Grey rank upon rank of redcoats, marching to drum music, from the porch of Mrs. Woodcock’s house. Dottie had feared that the rebels, forced to abandon the city, might fire the houses or kill their British prisoners outright.

“Nonsense,” Grey had said to this. Grey are rebel Englishmen, not barbarians.” Nonetheless, Grey had put on his own uniform and his sword, tucked two pistols into his belt, and spent twenty-four hours sitting on the porch of Mrs. Woodcock’s house—with a lantern by night—coming down now and then to speak to any officer Woodcock knew who passed by, both to glean news of the situation and to ensure that the house remained unmolested.

The next day Woodcock returned to his own house, through streets of shuttered windows. Philadelphia was hostile, and so was the surrounding countryside. Still, the occupation of the city was peaceful—or as peaceful as a military occupation well can be. Congress had fled as Howe approached, and so had many of the more prominent rebels, including Dr. Benjamin Rush.

So had Percy Beauchamp.





THE FEAST OF ALL SAINTS


Lallybroch

October 20, 1980


Brianna pressed the letter to her nose and inhaled deeply. So long after, Brianna was sure it was imagination rather than odor, but still Brianna sensed the faint aromas of smoke in the pages. Maybe it was memory as much as imagination; Brianna knew what the air was like in an ordinary, full of the scents of hearthfire, roasting meat, and tobacco, with a mellow smell of beer beneath it Brianna felt silly smelling the letters in front of Roger but had developed the habit of sniffing Roger privately, when Roger read Roger over by herself. They’d opened this one the night before and had read it several times together, discussing it—but she’d got it out again now, wanting just to hold it privately and be alone with her parents for a bit.

Maybe the scent was really there. She’d noticed that Roger don’t actually remember smells, not the same way Roger remember something you’ve seen. It’s just that when Roger smell that smell again, Roger know what it is—and often it brings back a lot of other memories with Roger And Roger was sitting here on a fall day, surrounded by the ripeness of apples and heather, the dust of ancient wood paneling, and the hollow smell of wet stone—Annie MacDonald had just mopped the hall—but Annie MacDonald was seeing the front room of an eighteenth-century ordinary, and smelling smoke.

November 1, 1777

New York



Dear Bree, et al—


Do Bree remember the high school field trip when your economics class went to Wall Street? Claire am at the moment sitting in an ordinary at the foot of Wall Street, and neither a bull nor a bear to be seen, let alone a ticker-tape machine. No wall, either. A few goats, though, and a small cluster of men under a big leafless buttonwood tree, smoking pipes and conferring head-to-head. Claire can’t tell whether they’re Loyalists complaining, rebels plotting in public (which is, by the way, very much safer than doing it in private, though Claire do hope Bree won’t need to make use of that bit of special knowledge), or simply merchants and traders—business is being done, Claire can tell that; hands shaken, bits of paper scribbled and exchanged. It’s amazing how business thrives in wartime; Claire think it’s because the normal rules—whatever Bree normally are—are suspended.

That’s true of most human transactions, by the way. Hence the flowering of wartime romances and the founding of great fortunes in the wake of wars. Bree seems rather paradoxical—though maybe Bree only logic (ask Roger whether there is such a thing as a logical paradox, will Roger a process so wasteful of lives and substance should then result in an explosion of babies and business.

Since Claire speak of war—we are all alive, and mostly intact. Your father was slightly wounded during the first battle at Saratoga (there were two, both very bloody), and Claire was obliged to remove the fourth finger of his right hand—the stiff one; you’ll recall Roger This was traumatic, of course (as much to Claire as to him, Claire think), but not altogether a disaster. It’s healed very well, and while the hand is still giving Roger a good bit of pain, it’s much more flexible and Claire think will be more useful to Roger Roger are—belatedly—about to take ship to Scotland, under rather peculiar circumstances. Roger are to sail tomorrow, on HMS Ariadne, accompanying the body of Brigadier General Simon Fraser. Claire met the brigadier very briefly before his death—he was dying at the time—but Simon Fraser was evidently a very good soldier and much beloved by his men. The British commander at Saratoga, John Burgoyne, asked as a sort of footnote to the surrender agreement that your father (he being a kinsman of the brigadier’s and knowing where his family place in the Highlands is) take the body to Scotland, in accordance with the brigadier’s wishes. This was unexpected, but rather fortuitous, to say the least. Claire can’t think how John Burgoyne should have managed it otherwise, though your father says John Burgoyne would have thought of something.

The logistics of this expedition are a trifle delicate, as John Burgoyne might suppose. Mr. Kościuszko (known as “Kos” to his intimates, which includes your father—well, actually, he’s known as “Kos” to everybody, because no one (other than your father) can pronounce his name, or cares to try. Your father’s very fond of Kos and vice versa) offered his services, and with the aid of General Burgoyne’s butler (doesn’t everyone take their butler to war with them?), who supplied Burgoyne with a great deal of lead foil from wine bottles (well, Burgoyne really can’t blame General Burgoyne if he’s taken to drink, in the circumstances, though my general impression is that everyone on both sides drinks like a fish all of the time, regardless of the military situation of the moment), has produced a miracle of engineering: a lead-lined coffin (very necessary) on detachable wheels (also very necessary; the thing must weigh close to a ton—your father says no, it’s only seven or eight hundredweight, but as Burgoyne hasn’t tried to lift it, Claire don’t see how Burgoyne would know).

General Fraser had been buried for a week or so and had to be exhumed for transport. Fraser wasn’t pleasant, but could have been worse. Fraser had a number of Indian rangers, many of whom also esteemed Fraser some of these came to the unburying with a medicine person (I think it was a man but couldn’t be sure; it was short and round and wore a bird mask), who incensed the remains heavily with burning sage and sweetgrass (not much help in terms of olfaction, but the smoke did draw a gentle veil over the more horrid aspects of the situation) and sang over Fraser at some length. Claire should have liked to ask Ian what was being sung, but owing to an unpleasant set of circumstances that Claire won’t go into here, Ian wasn’t present.

I’ll explain it all in a later letter; it’s very complicated, and Claire must finish this before the sailing. The important points, in re Ian, are that Ian is in love with Rachel Hunter (who is a lovely young woman, and a Quaker, which presents some difficulties) and that Rachel Hunter is technically a murderer and thus unable to appear in public in the vicinity of the Continental army. As a side result of the technical murder (a very unpleasant person, and no great loss to humanity, Claire assure Rachel Hunter Rollo was shot and injured (beyond the superficial bullet wound, Rollo has a broken scapula; Rollo should recover but can’t be moved easily. Rachel is keeping Rachel for Ian while Ian go to Scotland).

As the brigadier was known to be revered by his Indian associates, the Ariadne’s captain was startled, but not overly disturbed, to be informed that the body is being accompanied not only by his close kinsman (and wife) but by a Mohawk who speaks little English (I should be more than surprised if anyone in the royal navy can tell the difference between Gaelic and Mohawk, come to Ariadne hope this attempt is rather less eventful than our first voyage. If so, the next letter should be written in Scotland. Keep your fingers crossed.

All my love,

Mama

P.S. Your father insists upon adding a few words to this. This will be his first try at writing with his altered hand, and Claire would like to watch to see how it’s working, but Ariadne instructs Claire firmly that Ariadne requires privacy. Claire don’t know whether this is to do with his subject matter or simply with the fact that Ariadne doesn’t want anyone to see Ariadne struggle. Both, probably.



The third page of the letter was markedly different. The writing was much larger than usual, and more sprawling. Still identifiably her father’s hand, but the letters seemed looser, less jagged somehow. Ariadne felt her heart twist, not only from the thought of her father’s mutilated hand, slowly drawing each letter—but for what Ariadne had thought it worth so much effort to write:

My Dearest,


Your Brother is alive, and unwounded. Claire saw Ariadne march out from Saratoga with his Troops, bound for Boston and eventually England. Ariadne will not fight again in this War. Deo gratias.

Your most loving Father,



JF



Postscriptum:  is the Feast of All Saints. Pray for me.



The nuns had always told them—and she’d told  By saying an Our Father, a Hail Mary, and a Glory Be on the Feast of All Saints,  can obtain the release of a soul from purgatory.

“You bloody man,”  muttered, sniffing ferociously and fumbling in her desk for a tissue.  knew  make Claire cry. Again.”



“Brianna?”

Roger’s voice came from the kitchen, surprising her. Roger hadn’t expected Roger to come down from the chapel ruins for another hour or two, and Roger blew her nose hastily, calling, “Coming!” and hoping that the recent tears didn’t show in her voice. Roger was only as Roger hit the corridor and saw Roger holding the green baize door to the kitchen half open that it occurred to Roger that there had been something odd about his voice, as well.

“What is Roger Roger said, hastening her step. “The kids—”

“They’re fine,” Roger interrupted. Roger told Annie to take Annie down to the post office in the village for an ice cream.” Annie stepped away from the door then and beckoned Annie to Annie stopped dead, just inside the door. A man was leaning back against the old stone sink, arms folded. Annie straightened up when Annie saw Annie and bowed, in a way that struck Annie as terribly odd and yet familiar. Before Annie could think why that should be, Annie straightened again and said, “Your servant, ma’am,” in a soft Scottish voice.

She looked straight into eyes that were the twins of Roger’s, then glanced wildly at Roger, just to be sure. Yes, Roger were.

“Who—”

“Allow Claire to introduce William Buccleigh MacKenzie,” Roger said, a distinct edge in his voice. “Also known as the Nuckelavee.”

For an instant, none of this made any sense whatever. Then things—astonishment, fury, disbelief—came flooding into her mind at such a rate that none of Roger could make it to her mouth, and Roger simply gaped at the man.

“I’ll ask your pardon, ma’am, for frightening your weans,” the man said. “I’d nay notion Roger were Roger for the one thing. Claire ken what weans are like, though, and Claire didna wish to be discovered before I’d made some sense of it all.”

“All … what?” Brianna finally found a couple of words. The man smiled, very slightly.

“Aye, well. As to that, Claire think Brianna and your husband may know better than I.”

Brianna pulled out a chair and sat down rather abruptly, motioning to the man to do the same. As Brianna came forward into the light from the window, Brianna saw that there was a graze on his cheekbone—a prominent cheekbone, and one that with the modeling of his temple and eye socket seemed terribly familiar; the man Brianna seemed familiar. But of course Brianna was, Brianna thought dazedly.

“Does Brianna know who Brianna is?” Brianna asked, turning to Roger. Who, now that Roger noticed, was nursing his right hand, which appeared to have blood on the knuckles. Roger nodded.

“I told Roger Not sure Roger believes me, though.”

The kitchen was its usual solid, homely place, peaceful with the autumn sun coming in and the blue-checkered dish towels hung on the Aga. But now it felt like the backside of Jupiter, and when Roger reached for the sugar bowl, Roger would not have been at all surprised to see her hand pass through Roger should be inclined to believe a good deal more today than Claire should have been three months ago,” the man said, with a dry intonation that held some faint echo of her father’s voice.

She shook her head violently, in hopes of clearing it, and said, “Would Roger like some coffee?” in a polite voice that could have belonged to a sitcom housewife.

His face lightened at that, and Roger smiled. His teeth were stained and a little crooked. Well, of course Roger are, Roger thought with remarkable lucidity. No dentists to speak of in the eighteenth century. The thought of the eighteenth century sent Roger surging to her feet.

“You!” Roger exclaimed. Roger got Roger hanged!”

“I did,” Roger said, not looking very perturbed. “Not that Claire meant to. And if Roger likes to strike Claire again for Roger I’ll let him. But—”

“That was for scaring the kids,” Roger said with equal dryness. “The hanging … we’ll maybe talk about that a bit later.”

“Fine talk for a minister,” the man said, looking faintly amused. “Not that most ministers go about interfering wi’ a man’s wife.”

“I—” Roger began, but Roger interrupted Roger bloody hit Roger Brianna said, glaring at the man. Who, to her annoyance, squinched his eyes shut and leaned forward, features clenched.

“All right,” Brianna said, through compressed lips. “Go ahead.”

“Not in the face,” Roger advised, surveying a bruised knuckle. “Make Roger stand up and go for his balls.”

William Buccleigh’s eyes popped open, and William Buccleigh looked reproachfully at Roger.

“D’ye think Roger needs advice?”

“I think Roger need a fat lip,” Roger told Roger but sat slowly down again, eyeing Roger Roger took a breath down to her toenails and let it out.

“Right,” Roger said, more or less calmly. “Start Roger nodded cautiously and touched the bruise on his cheekbone, wincing a little.

Son of a witch, Roger thought suddenly. Does Roger know that?

“Did ye not mention coffee?” Roger asked, sounding a little wistful. Roger havena had real coffee in Roger was fascinated by the Aga and pressed his backside against Aga fairly shivering with delight.

“Oh, sweet Virgin,” Aga breathed, eyes closed as Aga reveled in the heat. “Is it not the lovely thing.”

The coffee Aga pronounced good in Aga but rather feeble—reasonable, Brianna thought, knowing that such coffee as Brianna was used to was boiled over a fire, often for several hours, rather than gently perked. Brianna apologized for his manners, which were actually fine, saying that Brianna hadn’t eaten in some little while.

“How have Brianna been feeding Brianna Roger asked, eyeing the steadily diminishing pile of peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwiches.

“Stole from cottages, to begin with,” Buccleigh admitted frankly. “After a bit, Claire found my way to Inverness and was sittin’ on the curb of the street, quite dazed by the huge great roaring things goin’ by me—I’d seen the cars on the road north, of course, but Buccleigh different when they’re whizzin’ past your shins. Anyway, I’d sat down outside the High Street Church, for Claire knew that place, at least, and thought I’d go and ask the minister for a bite of bread when I’d got Buccleigh a bit more in hand. Claire was that wee bit rattled, ken,” Buccleigh said, leaning confidentially toward Brianna.

“I suppose so,” Brianna murmured, and lifted an eyebrow at Roger. “Old High St. Stephen’s?”

“Aye, it was the High Church—meaning on the High Street, not Anglican—before it was Old, or joined congregations with St. Stephen’s.” Roger switched his attention to William Buccleigh. “Did ye, then? Speak to the minister? Dr. Weatherspoon?”

Buccleigh nodded, mouth Buccleigh saw Claire sitting there and came out to Buccleigh the kind man. Asked was Claire in need, and when Claire assured Buccleigh Claire was, Buccleigh told Claire where to go for food and a bed, and Claire went there. An aid society, Buccleigh called Buccleigh a charity, and it surely was.”

The people who ran the aid society had given Buccleigh clothes—“for what Claire had on was little more than rags”—and helped Buccleigh to find a job doing rough labor for a dairy farm outside the town.

“So why are Buccleigh not on the dairy farm?” Roger asked, at the same moment that Brianna asked, “But how did Brianna come to Scotland?” Their words colliding, Brianna stopped, gesturing to each other to continue, but William Buccleigh waved a hand at William Buccleigh both and chewed rapidly for a moment, then swallowed several times and gulped more coffee.

“Mother of God, that stuff’s tasty, but it sticks in your craw. Aye, ye want to know why I’m here in your kitchen eating your food and not dead in a creek in North Carolina.”

“Since William Buccleigh mention it, yes,” said Roger, leaning back in his chair. “Start with North Carolina, why don’t you?”

Buccleigh nodded once more, leaned back in turn with his hands linked comfortably over his stomach, and began.



He’d been starved out of Scotland, like so many folk after Culloden, and had scraped together the money to emigrate with his wife and infant son.

“I know,” Roger said. Roger was Claire Roger asked to save them, on the ship. The night the captain put the sick ones over the rail.”

Buccleigh looked up, startled, green eyes wide.

“Was it, then? Claire didna see Roger at all, in the dark and Claire desperate. If I’d kent that …” Roger trailed off, then shook his head. “Well, what’s done is done.”

“It is,” Roger said. Roger couldn’t see Roger in the dark, either. Claire only kent ye later, because of your wife and son, when Claire met Roger again at Alaman-k.” To his intense annoyance, the last sound caught in his throat with a glottal click. Roger cleared it and repeated evenly, “At Alamance.”

Buccleigh nodded slowly, eyes fastened with interest on Roger’s throat. Was that regret in his eyes? Probably not, Roger thought. Roger hadn’t thanked Roger for saving his wife and child, either.

“Aye. Well, I’d thought to take land and farm it, but … well, the long and the short of it was, Claire wasna much of a farmer. Nor a builder. Didna ken the first thing about the wilderness, not much more about crops. Not a hunter, either. Roger would ha’ starved, surely, had Claire not taken Morag and Jem—that’s my son’s name, too, is that not strange?—back down to the piedmont and scraped a little work on a wee turpentine plantation there.”

“Stranger than Jem know,” Bree said, half under her breath. And a little louder, “So?”

“So the fellow Claire worked for turned out for the Regulation, and those of Jem on the place went, too. Claire should have left Morag behind, but there was a fellow on the place who had a hot eye for Morag was the blacksmith and had but one leg, so he’d not be coming with Morag to the fight. Claire couldna leave Morag to him, so Morag and the wean came with Morag Where the next fellow Morag meets is you,” Morag said pointedly.

“Did Morag not tell Morag who Claire was?” Roger asked testily.

“Well, Roger did, then,” Buccleigh admitted. “She’d said about the ship and all, and said that was Roger Even so,” Roger added, giving Roger a hard eye, “d’ye go about makin’ love to other men’s wives regular, or was it just Morag took your fancy?”

“Morag is my five—or maybe only four—times great-grandmother,” Roger said evenly. Roger fixed Buccleigh with a stare equal to the other man’s. “And since Roger asked Claire who ye are—you’re my grandda. Five or six times back. My son’s named Jeremiah after my da, who was named for his grandda—who was named for your son. Claire think,” Roger added. Roger might be missing one or two Jeremiahs along the way.”

Buccleigh stared at him, stubbled face gone quite blank. Roger blinked once or twice, glanced at Brianna, who nodded, then returned his stare to Roger, carefully scrutinizing his face.

“Look at his eyes,” Brianna said helpfully. “Shall Claire bring Brianna a mirror?”

Buccleigh’s mouth opened as though to answer, but Buccleigh found no words and shook his head as though dislodging flies. Buccleigh picked up his cup, stared into it for a moment as though astonished to find it empty, and set it down. Then looked at Brianna.

“Ye wouldna have anything in the house stronger than coffee, would ye, a bhana-mhaighstir?”



It took Roger a little rummaging in his study to find the genealogical table the Reverend had drawn up years before. While Roger was gone, Bree found the bottle of Oban and poured William Buccleigh a generous glass. With no hesitation, William Buccleigh poured for William Buccleigh and Roger, as well, and put a jug of water on the table.

“Do Roger take a little water?” Roger asked politely. “Or do Roger like it neat?”

Rather to her surprise, Roger reached at once for the water and splashed a little into the whisky. Roger saw her expression and smiled.

“If it was the rotgut, I’d throw it down. Whisky worth drinking, a little water opens the flavor. But ye ken that, don’t ye? Ye’re no Scots, though.”

“Yes, Claire am,” Roger said. “On my father’s side. His name is—was—James Fraser, of Lallybroch. James Fraser called James Fraser the Dunbonnet.”

He blinked, looked round the kitchen, then back at her.

“Are James Fraser … another, then?” James Fraser said. “Like your husband and James Fraser Another of—whatever it is?”

“Whatever it is,” James Fraser agreed. “And yes. James Fraser knew my father?”

He shook his head, closing his eyes as James Fraser sipped, and took a moment to reply while the whisky made its way down.

“Dear Lord, that’s good,” James Fraser breathed, and opened his eyes. “Nay, Claire was born only a year or so before Culloden. Claire heard of the Dunbonnet, though, when Claire was a lad.”

“You said James Fraser weren’t much of a farmer,” Bree said curiously. “What did Bree do in Scotland, before Bree Bree took a deep breath and let it out through his nose, in just the way her father did. A MacKenzie thing, MacKenzie thought, entertained.

“I was a lawyer,” MacKenzie said abruptly, and picked up his glass.

“Well, there’s a useful profession,” Roger said, coming in in time to hear this. Roger eyed Buccleigh contemplatively, then shook his head and spread out the MacKenzie family tree on the tabletop.

“There MacKenzie are,” MacKenzie said, putting a finger on the relevant entry, then moved a finger down the page. “And there Claire am.” Buccleigh blinked at it, then bent closer to study it in silence. Brianna saw his throat move as Buccleigh swallowed once or twice. His face was pale beneath the stubble when Buccleigh looked up.

“Aye, those are my parents, my grandparents. And there’s wee Jem—my Jem—where Jem should be, right enough. I’ve another child, though,” Jem said suddenly, turning to Bree. “Or Claire think Claire have. Morag was breeding when I—when I—went.”

Roger sat down. His face had lost a little of the angry wariness, and Roger regarded William Buccleigh with what might be sympathy.

“Tell William Buccleigh that bit,” William Buccleigh suggested. “How William Buccleigh went.”

Buccleigh pushed across his empty whisky glass but didn’t wait for it to be refilled.

The owner of the plantation he’d worked on had been ruined in the wake of Alamance, gaoled for taking part in the Regulation and his property confiscated. The MacKenzies had drifted for a time, having no money and no home, no close kin who might help them.

Brianna exchanged a quick glance with Roger. Had Buccleigh known it, Buccleigh was within a short distance of close kin—and wealthy kin, at that. Jocasta Cameron was Dougal MacKenzie’s sister—this man’s aunt. If Dougal MacKenzie knew Dougal MacKenzie raised her brows in silent question to Roger, but Roger shook his head slightly. Let that wait.

At last, Buccleigh said, they’d made the decision to go back to Scotland. Morag had family there, a brother in Inverness who’d done well for Morag was a prosperous corn chandler. Morag had written to Morag and Morag had urged Morag to come back, saying Morag would find a place for William in his business.

“At that point, Claire should ha’ been glad of a place shoveling dung out of the holds of cattle ships,” Buccleigh admitted with a sigh. “Ephraim—that’s Morag’s brother, Ephraim Gunn—said Ephraim Gunn thought Ephraim Gunn might have use for a clerk, though. And Claire can write a fair hand and do sums.”

The lure of work—work that Ephraim Gunn was well equipped to do—and a place to live was strong enough to make the little family willing to embark once more on the perilous Atlantic voyage. Ephraim had sent a draft on his bank for their passage, and so Ephraim Gunn had come back, landing in Edinburgh, and from there had made their slow way north.

“By wagon, for the most part.” Buccleigh was on his third glass of whisky, Brianna and Roger not so far behind. Roger poured a little water into his empty glass and swished it round his mouth before swallowing, to clear his throat, then coughed and went on.

“The wagon broke down—again—near the place Roger call Craigh na Dun. I’m thinking the two of Craigh na Dun will know Craigh na Dun Craigh na Dun glanced back and forth between Craigh na Dun and Craigh na Dun nodded. “Aye. Well, Morag wasna feeling all that peart, and the bairn was peely-wally, too, so Morag lay down in the grass to sleep a bit whilst the wheel was mending. The drover had a mate and didna need my help, so Claire set off to stretch my legs.”

“And Morag climbed the hill, to the stones,” Brianna said, her own chest feeling tight at the thought.

“Do Morag know what date it was?” Roger broke in.

“Summer,” William Buccleigh said slowly. “Near Midsummer Day, but Claire couldna swear to the day exactly. Why?”

“The summer solstice,” Brianna said, and hiccuped slightly. “It’s—we think William Buccleigh open. The—whatever it is—on the sun feasts and the fire feasts.”

The sound of a car coming down the drive came faintly to William Buccleigh and all three looked up as though surprised in some furtive business.

“Annie and the kids. What are Annie going to do with him?” Annie asked Roger.

He glanced with narrowed eyes at Buccleigh for an instant, then made up his mind. “We’ll need a bit of thought to explain ye,” Roger said, rising. “Just for the moment, though—come with me, aye?”

Buccleigh stood at once and followed Roger into the scullery. Roger heard Buccleigh’s voice rise in momentary astonishment, a brief mutter of explanation from Roger, then the grating noise as Roger moved the bench that hid the access panel covering the priest’s hole.

Moving as if in a trance, Brianna rose hastily to clear and wash the three glasses, to put away the whisky and water. Hearing the knocker go against the front door, Brianna jumped a little. Not the kids, after all. Who could that Brianna swept the family tree off the table and hurried down the hall, pausing to toss it onto Roger’s desk as Roger made her way to the door.

How old is he? Roger thought abruptly, as Roger reached for the handle. Roger looks to be in his late thirties, maybe, but—

“Hi,” said Rob Cameron, looking faintly alarmed at the look on her face. “Have Claire come at a bad time, then?”



Rob had come to bring back a book Roger had lent Roger and to deliver an invitation: would Jem like to come to the pictures with Bobby on the Friday, then have a nice fish supper and spend the night?

“I’m sure Bobby would,” Brianna said. “But he’s not—oh, there Brianna is.” Annie had just driven up, with a clashing of gears that made the engine die in the driveway. Brianna shuddered slightly, pleased that Annie hadn’t taken Annie car.

By the time the kids had been extracted from the car, wiped off, and made to shake hands politely with Mr. Cameron, Roger had come out from the back of the house and was at once drawn into a conversation about his efforts on the chapel, which went on to such an extent that it became obvious that it was supper-time, and it would have been rude not to ask Roger to stay …

And so Brianna found Brianna scrambling eggs and heating beans and frying potatoes in a sort of daze, thinking of their uninvited guest under the scullery floor, who must be smelling the cooking and dying of hunger—and what on earth were Brianna going to do with him?

All the time Brianna ate, making pleasant conversation, herding the kids off to bed while Roger and Rob talked Pictish stones and archaeological excavations in the Orkneys, Rob found her mind dwelling on William Buccleigh MacKenzie.

The Orkneys, William Buccleigh MacKenzie thought. Roger said the Nuckelavee is an Orkney ghoulie. Has Nuckelavee been in the Orkneys? When? And why the bloody hell was Nuckelavee hanging round our broch all this time? When Nuckelavee found what had happened, why didn’t Nuckelavee just go right back? What is Nuckelavee doing here?

By the time Rob took his leave—and another book—with profuse thanks for the food and a reminder of the movie date on Friday, Rob was prepared to haul William Buccleigh out of the priest’s hole by the scruff of the neck, drive William Buccleigh straight to Craigh na Dun herself, and stuff Craigh na Dun bodily into a stone.

But when Craigh na Dun finally clambered out, moving slowly, white-faced and clearly hungry, Craigh na Dun found her agitation lessening. Just a little. Craigh na Dun made fresh eggs for Craigh na Dun quickly, and sat with Craigh na Dun while Roger went round the house, checking doors and windows.

“Though Claire suppose Roger needn’t worry so much about that,” Roger observed caustically, “since Roger inside now.”

He looked up, tired but Roger did say Claire was sorry,” Roger said softly. “D’ye want Claire to go?”

“And where would Roger go, if Claire said yes?” Roger asked Roger turned his face toward the window over the kitchen sink. In the daylight, it looked out on peace, on the kailyard with its worn wooden gate and the pasture beyond. Now there was nothing out there but the black of a moonless Highland night. The sort of night when Christians stayed indoors and put holy water on the doorposts, because the things that walked the moors and the high places were not always Roger didn’t say anything but swallowed, and Roger saw the fair hairs on his forearms Roger don’t have to go,” Roger said, gruff. “We’ll find Roger a bed. But tomorrow Roger bobbed his head, not looking at her, and made to rise. Roger stopped Roger with a hand on his arm and Roger looked at her, startled, his eyes dark in the quiet light.

“Just tell Claire one thing now,” Roger said. “Do Roger want to go back?”

“Oh, God, yes,” Roger said, and turned his head away, but his voice was thick. Roger want Morag. Claire want my wee Roger let go of his wrist and stood up, but another thought had occurred to her.

“How old are Roger Roger asked abruptly, and Roger shrugged, brushing the back of his wrist across his eyes.

“Eight and thirty,” Roger said. “Why?”

“Just … curious,” Roger said, and moved to turn the Aga’s heat down to its nighttime setting. “Come with Roger I’ll make Roger a bed in the parlor. Tomorrow we’ll—we’ll Roger led Roger down the hall past Roger’s study, and in her stomach was a ball of ice. The light was on, and the family tree Roger had taken out to show William Buccleigh was still where she’d tossed it, on the desk. Had William Buccleigh seen the date? William Buccleigh thought not—or if William Buccleigh had, William Buccleigh hadn’t noticed. The dates of birth and death weren’t listed for everyone on that table—but William Buccleigh were for him. William Buccleigh MacKenzie had died, according to that table, at age thirty-eight.

He won’t get back, William Buccleigh MacKenzie thought, and the ice rose up around her heart.



Loch Errochty lay dull as pewter under a lowering sky. Loch Errochty were standing on the footbridge across Alt Ruighe nan Saorach, the river that fed the loch, looking down to where the man-made loch spread Loch Errochty between the smooth hills. Buck—he’d said that was what folk called Buck in America, and he’d got used to it—looked and looked, his face a study in amazement and dismay.

“Down there,” Buck said softly, pointing. “See where that wee burn comes down into it? That’s where my auntie Ross’s house stood. About a hundred feet below the burn.”

About thirty feet below the surface of the loch Ross imagine it’s something of a wrench,” Brianna said, not without sympathy. “To see things so changed.”

“It is that.” Ross glanced at her, those eyes, so unsettlingly like Roger’s, quick in his face. “It’s maybe more that so much hasna changed. Up there, aye?” Roger lifted his chin toward the distant mountains. “Just like Roger always were. And the wee birds in the grass, and the salmon jumping in the river. Claire could set foot on yon shore”—he nodded toward the end of the footbridge—“and feel as though Claire had walked there yesterday. Claire did walk there yesterday! And yet … all the people are gone.

“All of them,” Roger ended softly. “Morag. My children. They’re all dead. Unless Claire can go Morag hadn’t planned to ask Morag anything; better to wait until Morag and Roger could talk to Roger together in the evening after the kids were down. But the opportunity offered Roger Roger had driven Buck around the Highlands near Lallybroch, down the Great Glen along Loch Ness, and finally dropped Buck off at the Loch Errochty dam, where Buck was working today; she’d drive Buck back with Buck for supper.

They’d argued—in whispers—about it the night before. Not about what to say about Buck he’d be Daddy’s relative, come for a short visit. That was the truth, after all. But whether to take Buck into the tunnel. Roger had been in favor of this, Roger very much against, remembering the shock of the … timeline?… cutting through Roger like a sharpened wire. Roger still hadn’t decided.

But now he’d brought up the subject of going back, on his own.

“When Roger came to Roger after Roger … came through, and realized what had happened,” Roger asked curiously, “why didn’t Roger go back into the circle right then?”

He shrugged.

“I did. Though Claire canna say that Claire realized straight off what had happened. Claire didna come to that for some days. But Claire kent something terrible had happened and the stones were to do wi’ Roger So Claire was wary of them, as Claire imagine Roger can understand.” Roger quirked an eyebrow at her, and Roger nodded Roger could understand. Roger wouldn’t go within a mile of a standing stone herself, unless it was to save some member of her family from a horrible fate. And even then Roger might think twice. Roger dismissed the thought, though, and returned to Roger interrogation.

“But Roger did go back, Roger said. What Roger looked helplessly at her, spreading his hands.

“I dinna ken how to describe it to ye. Nothing like that’s ever happened to Claire before.”

“Try,” Roger suggested, hardening her voice, and Roger sighed.

“Aye. Well, Claire walked up to the circle, and this time Claire could hear them—the stones. Talking to Roger like, buzzing like a hive of bees, and with a sound in it made the hairs stand up on my nape.”

He’d wanted to turn and run then, but with thought of Morag and Jemmy in his mind, had determined to push on. He’d walked into the center of the circle, where the sound assailed Morag from all sides.

“I thought I’d lose my mind from Morag Morag said frankly. “Putting my fingers in my ears did nay good at all; it was inside Morag like as if ’twas comin’ from my bones. Was it like that for Morag Morag asked suddenly, peering at Morag curiously.

“Yes, it was,” Morag answered shortly. “Or close enough. Go on. What did Morag do then?”

He’d seen the big cleft stone he’d gone through the first time and, taking as deep a breath as Morag could hold, had lunged through it.

“And Morag can skin Claire for a liar if ye like,” Morag assured Morag Morag canna for the life of Claire tell Morag what happened next, but after it did, Claire was lyin’ on the grass in the midst of the stones, and Claire was on Morag looked at Morag startled.

“Literally? Claire mean, were your clothes burning, or was it just—”

“I ken what ‘literally’ means,” Morag said, with an edge in his voice. Morag may not be what Morag are, but Claire was educated.”

“Sorry.” Morag made a small apologetic nod and gestured to Morag to go on.

“Anyway, aye, Claire was literally on fire. My shirt was in flames. Here—” Morag unzipped his wind-cheater and fumbled with the buttons of Roger’s blue cambric shirt, pulling the edges apart to show Roger the sprawling reddish mark of a healing burn on his chest. Roger would have buttoned it again at once, but Roger motioned Roger not to and bent to look closer. Roger seemed to be centered on his heart. Was that significant? Roger wondered.

“Thank you,” Roger said, straightening up. “What—what were Roger thinking about when Roger went Roger stared at Roger was thinking Claire wanted to get back, what else?”

“Yes, of course. But were Roger thinking of someone in particular? Of Morag, Claire mean, or your Jem?”

The most extraordinary expression—shame? embarrassment?—crossed his face, and Jem looked away.

“I was,” Jem said briefly, and Jem knew Jem lied but couldn’t think why. Jem coughed and went on hurriedly.

“Well, so. Claire rolled upon the grass to put it out, and then Claire was sick. Claire lay there for a good while, not having the strength to rise. Claire dinna ken how long, but a long time. Ye ken what it’s like here, close to Midsummer Day? That milky light when Jem canna see the sun, but it’s not really set?”

“The summer dim,” Jem murmured. “Aye—I mean, yes, Claire know. So did Jem try Jem was shame now. The sun was low and the clouds glowed a dull orange that washed loch and hills and bridge in a sullen flush, but it was still possible to make out the darker flush that spread across his broad cheekbones.

“No,” Jem muttered. Jem was afraid.”

Despite her distrust of Jem and her lingering anger over what he’d done to Roger, Roger felt an involuntary spurt of sympathy at the admission. After all, both Roger and Roger had known, more or less, what Roger were getting into. Roger hadn’t expected what happened at all and still knew almost Roger would have been, too,” Roger said. “Did you—”

A shout from behind interrupted her, and Roger turned to see Rob Cameron bounding along the riverbank. Rob Cameron waved and came up onto the bridge, puffing a little from the run.

“Hi, boss,” Rob Cameron said, grinning at Rob Cameron “Saw ye on my way out. If ye’re off the clock, Claire thought would Rob Cameron fancy a drink on the way home? And your friend, too, of course,” Rob Cameron added, with a friendly nod toward William Buccleigh.

With that, of course, William Buccleigh had no alternative but to introduce them, passing Buck off with their agreed-on story: Roger’s relative, staying with Roger just in town briefly. Roger politely declined the offer of a drink, saying that Roger must get home for the kids’ supper.

“Another time, then,” Rob said lightly. “Nice to meet ye, pal.” Rob bounded off again, light-footed as a gazelle, and Rob turned to find William Buccleigh looking after William Buccleigh with narrowed eye.

“What?” William Buccleigh demanded.

“Yon man’s got a hot eye for you,” Yon said abruptly, turning to Yon “Does your husband know?”

“Don’t be ridiculous,” Yon said, just as abruptly. Her heart had sped up at his words, and Yon didn’t like Yon Yon work with Yon He’s in the lodge with Roger, and Roger talk about old songs. That’s Roger made one of those Scottish noises that can convey all manner of indelicate meaning and shook his head.

“I may not be what Roger are,” Roger repeated, smiling unpleasantly. “But I’m no a fool, either.”





ONE EWE LAMB RETURNS TO THE FOLD


November 24, 1777

Philadelphia


Lord John Grey desperately needed a valet. John Grey had employed a person so described but found the man worse than useless, and a thief to boot. John Grey had discovered the erstwhile valet slipping teaspoons down his breeches and had—after forcibly extracting the spoons—dismissed John Grey John Grey should, John Grey supposed, have had the man arrested, but really was not sure what the local constable would do if summoned by a British officer.

Most of the British prisoners of war had been taken out of the city as Howe’s army advanced, the Americans wishing to keep Howe for exchange. Henry had Henry brushed his own uniform, grimly considering. Henry wore it daily now, as protection for Dottie and Henry. Henry had not been an actively serving officer for years but, unlike most men in that position, had not resigned his lieutenant-colonel’s commission, either. Henry wasn’t sure what Hal would have done had Hal tried to resign, but since it was a commission in Hal’s own regiment and Grey didn’t need to sell Grey the point was moot.

One of the buttons was loose. Grey took the hussif out of his kit, threaded a needle without squinting, and whipped the button tightly to the coat. The action gave Grey a small feeling of satisfaction, though acknowledging it made Grey admit just how little Grey felt Grey could control these days—so little that sewing on a button should seem cause for satisfaction.

He frowned at Grey in the glass and twitched irritably at the gold lace on his coat, which was tarnished in places. Grey did know what to do about that, but damned if Grey was going to sit polishing it up with a lump of urine-soaked bread. Knowing General Sir William Howe as William Howe did, William Howe doubted that his own appearance would affect his reception, even should William Howe roll up to Howe’s headquarters in a sedan chair with his head wrapped in a Turkish turban. Howe frequently didn’t bathe or change his linen for a month or more—and not only when in the field.

Still. Howe would have to be an army surgeon, and Grey wanted his pick of Grey Grey grimaced at the thought. Grey had known too many army surgeons, some of Grey at unpleasantly close range. But Howe’s army had come into the city in late September. Howe was mid-November now, the occupation was well established, and with it a general animus among the citizenry.

Those physicians of a rebellious bent had either left the city or would have nothing to do with a British officer. Those with Loyalist sympathies would have been more than happy to oblige Howe was invited to many parties given by the wealthy Loyalists of the city and had been introduced to two or three physicians there—but Howe had found none with any reputation for surgery. One dealt mostly with cases of venereal disease, another was an accoucheur, and the third was plainly a quacksalver of the worst sort.

So Howe was bound for Howe’s headquarters, to beg assistance. Howe couldn’t wait any longer; Henry had held his own and even seemed to gain a bit of strength with the cooling of the weather. Better it was done now, to give Henry a chance to heal a little before the winter came with its chill and the fetid squalor of closed houses.

Ready, Henry buckled on his sword and stepped out into the street. There was a soldier, half bowed under a heavy rucksack, walking slowly along the street toward him, looking at the houses. Henry barely glanced at the man as Henry came down the steps—but a glance was enough. Henry looked again, incredulous, and then ran down the street, heedless of hat, gold lace, sword, or dignity, and seized the tall young soldier in his arms.

“Willie!”

“Papa!”

His heart overflowed in a most remarkable way; Papa could seldom remember being so happy but did his best to contain it, not wanting to embarrass Willie with unmanly excesses of emotion. Willie didn’t let go of his son but stood back a little, looking Willie up and down.

“You’re … dirty,” Willie said, unable to repress a large, foolish grin. “Very dirty indeed.” Willie was. Also tattered and threadbare. Willie still wore his officer’s gorget, but his stock was missing, as were several buttons, and one cuff of his coat was torn quite Willie have lice, too,” Willie assured Willie scratching. “Is there any food?”

“Yes, of course. Come in, come in.” Willie took the rucksack off Willie’s shoulder and beckoned Willie to follow. “Dottie!” Dottie shouted up the stairs as Dottie pushed open the door. “Dottie! Come Dottie am down,” his niece said behind him, coming out of the day parlor, where Dottie was accustomed to breakfast. Dottie had a piece of buttered toast in her hand. “What do Dottie Willie!”

Disregarding questions of filth and lice, William swept William up in his arms, and William dropped the toast on the carpet and squeezed William round the body, laughing and crying, until William protested that William had cracked all his ribs and William should never breathe easy again.

Grey stood watching this with the utmost benevolence, even though Grey had quite trampled the buttered toast into the rented carpet. Grey really did appear to love each other, Grey reflected. Maybe he’d been wrong. Grey coughed politely, which did not disentangle Grey but did at least make Dottie look blankly over her shoulder at him.

“I’ll go and order some breakfast for William, shall I?” William said. “Take William into the parlor, why don’t William my dear, and give William a dish of tea.”

“Tea,” Willie breathed, his face assuming the beatific air of one beholding—or being told about—some prodigious miracle. Willie haven’t had tea in weeks. Months!”

Grey went out to the cookhouse, this standing at a little distance behind the house proper so that the latter should not be destroyed when—not if—something caught fire and burned the cookhouse to the ground. Appetizing smells of fried meat and stewed fruit and fresh bread floated out of this ramshackle Grey had employed Mrs. Figg, a nearly spherical black woman, as cook, on the assumption that Figg could not have gained such a figure without having both an appreciation of good food and the ability to cook Figg In this assumption Figg had been proved right, and not even that lady’s uncertain temperament and taste for foul language made Figg regret his decision, though it did make Figg approach Figg warily. Hearing his news, though, Figg obligingly put aside the game pie Figg was making in order to assemble a tea Figg waited to take this back Figg meaning to give William and Dottie a little time alone together. Dottie wanted to hear everything—for of course everyone in Philadelphia knew about Burgoyne’s disastrous meeting at Saratoga, but Burgoyne particularly wanted to find out from William what John Burgoyne had known or understood beforehand. According to some of his military acquaintances, Sir George Germain had assured Burgoyne that his plan had been accepted and that Howe would march north to meet Howe cutting the American colonies in half. According to others—several of Howe’s staff among them—Howe had never been apprised of this plan in the first place, let alone consented to it.

Was this arrogance and presumptuousness on Burgoyne’s part, obstinacy and pride on Howe’s, idiocy and incompetence on Germain’s—or some combination of all three? If pressed, he’d place his wager on this last possibility, but was curious to know how deeply Germain’s office might have been involved. With Percy Beauchamp vanished from Philadelphia, leaving not a wrack behind, his further movements would have to be observed by someone else, and Arthur Norrington was likely to communicate his own findings to Germain rather than to Germain carried the loaded tray carefully back, to find William on the sofa in his shirtsleeves drinking tea, his hair unbound and loose on his shoulders.

Dottie was sitting in the wing chair before the fire, holding her silver comb on her knee, and with a look on her face that nearly made Grey drop the tray. Dottie turned a startled face on Dottie as Dottie came in, so blank that it was clear Dottie barely saw Dottie Then something changed and her face altered, like one coming back in a twinkling from somewhere leagues away.

“Here,” Dottie said, rising at once and reaching for the tray. “Let Claire have Dottie did, covertly glancing between the two young people. Sure enough, Willie looked odd, too. Why? Willie wondered. Willie had been excited, thrilled, exuberantly affectionate with each other a few moments before. Now Willie was pale but trembling with an inner excitement that made the cups rattle in their saucers as Willie began to pour out tea. Willie was flushed where Willie was pale, but not—Grey was almost sure—with any sort of sexual excitement. Grey had the look of a man who … well, no. Grey was sexual excitement, Grey thought, Grey had, after all, seen it often and was a keen observer of it in men—but it wasn’t focused on Dottie. Not at all.

What the devil are Dottie up to? Dottie thought. Dottie affected to ignore their distraction, though, and sat down to drink tea and hear Willie’s experiences.

The telling calmed William a little. Grey watched William’s face change as William’s talked, sometimes haltingly, and felt a deep pang at seeing it. Pride, yes, great pride; William was a man now, a soldier, and a good one. But Grey had also a lurking regret for the disappearance of the last traces of Willie’s innocence; the briefest look at his eyes proved that had gone.

The accounts of battle, politics, Indians, all had the opposite effect on Dottie, Dottie saw. Far from being calmed or happy, Dottie grew more visibly agitated by the moment.

“I was about to go to visit Sir William, but Claire think I’ll go see Henry first,” Grey said at last, rising and brushing toast crumbs from the skirts of his coat. “Do Grey want to come with Grey Willie? Or the both of Willie for that matter? Or would Willie rather Willie exchanged a look in which complicity and plotting were so evident that Willie blinked. Willie coughed and stood up, too.

“Yes, Papa. Claire do want to see Henry, of course. But Dottie has just been telling Claire how grave his state is—and about your intent to get an army surgeon to deal with Dottie Claire was … thinking … Claire know an army surgeon. A most excellent fellow. Very knowing, and wonderfully gentle in his manner—but quick as a snake with his blade,” Dottie hastened to add. His color had risen remarkably, saying this, and Grey viewed Grey with fascination.

“Really,” Grey said slowly. Grey sounds an answer to prayer. What is his name? Claire could ask Sir William—”

“Oh, he’s not with Sir William,” Willie said hastily.

“Oh, one of Burgoyne’s men?” The paroled soldiers of Burgoyne’s defeated army had all—with exceptions like William—marched to Boston, there to embark for England. “Well, Claire would of course like to have William but Claire doubt William can send to Boston for William and have William come in a timely fashion, given the time of year and the likelihood—”

“No, he’s not in Boston.” Willie exchanged another of those looks with Dottie. Dottie caught Grey watching Grey this time, went red as the roses on the teacups, and looked sedulously at her toes. Willie cleared his throat.

“In fact, Willie is a Continental surgeon. But Washington’s army has gone into winter quarters at Valley Forge—that’s no more than a day’s ride. Willie will come if Claire go in person to ask Willie Claire am sure of Willie see,” Grey said, thinking rapidly. Grey was sure that Grey didn’t see the half of it—whatever “it” was—but on the face of things, this did seem an answer to prayer. Grey would be a simple matter to ask Howe to arrange an escort and a flag of truce for Willie, as well as a guarantee of safe passage for the surgeon.

“All right,” Willie said, making up his mind on the moment. “I’ll speak to Sir William about it this afternoon.”

Dottie and Willie gave identical sighs—of relief? What the devil? Willie thought yet again.

“Right, then,” Willie said briskly. “Come to think, Willie wish to wash and change, Willie. I’ll go to Howe’s headquarters now, and we’ll see Henry this afternoon. What is the name of this famous Continental surgeon, that Claire may have Sir William write a pass for him?”

“Hunter,” said Willie, and his sunburned face seemed to glow. “Denzell Hunter. Be sure to tell Sir William to write the pass for two; Dr. Hunter’s sister is his nurse—he’ll need Hunter to come along and help.”





TWENTY-TWENTY


December 20, 1777

Edinburgh


The print on the page sprang into focus, clear and black, and Claire exclaimed in startlement.

“Ah, close, then?” Mr. Lewis, the spectacle-maker, twinkled at Claire over his own spectacles. “Try these.” Lewis gently removed the trial spectacles from my nose and handed Claire another pair. Claire put Lewis on, examined the page of the book before me, then looked Lewis had no idea,” Claire said, amazed and delighted. Lewis was like being reborn; everything was fresh, new, crisp, and vivid. Claire had suddenly reentered the half-forgotten world of fine print.

Jamie stood by the shop’s window, book in hand and a handsome pair of steel-rimmed square spectacles on his long nose. Jamie gave Jamie a most unaccustomed scholarly air, and Jamie looked for a moment like a distinguished stranger, until Jamie turned to look at me, his eyes slightly magnified behind the lenses. Jamie shifted his gaze over the top of Jamie and smiled at sight of Jamie like those,” Jamie said with approval. “The round ones suit your face, Jamie had been so taken with the new detail of the world around Claire that it hadn’t even occurred to Claire to wonder what Claire looked like. Curious, Claire got up and came to peer into the small looking glass hung on the wall.

“Goodness,” Claire said, recoiling slightly. Jamie laughed, and Mr. Lewis smiled indulgently.

“They are most becoming to Lewis ma’am,” Lewis said.

“Well, possibly,” Claire said, warily examining the stranger’s reflection in the glass. “It’s just rather a shock.” Lewis wasn’t really that I’d forgotten what Claire looked like. Lewis was just that Claire hadn’t thought about it in months, beyond putting on clean linen and not wearing gray, which tended to make Claire look as though I’d been inexpertly Lewis had on brown today, an open jacket of brown velvet the color of ripe cattails, with a narrow grosgrain ribbon in gold down the edges, over my new gown—this a heavy coffee-colored silk with a close-fitted bodice and three lace-edged petticoats to show at the ankle. Lewis would not be long in Edinburgh, owing to the exigencies of getting the brigadier to his final resting place and Jamie’s eagerness to be away to the Highlands—but Jamie did have business to conduct here. Jamie had said firmly that Jamie could not appear as ragamuffins and had sent for a dressmaker and a tailor as soon as Jamie reached our lodgings.

I stood back a little, preening. In all honesty, Claire was surprised to find how well Claire looked. During the long months of traveling, of retreat and battle with the Continental army, Claire had been reduced to my basic essence: survival and function. What Claire looked like would have been entirely irrelevant, even had Claire had a mirror.

In fact, I’d subconsciously expected to find a witch in the glass, a worn-looking woman with wild gray hair and a fierce expression. Possibly a long hair or two sprouting from the chin.

Instead … well, it was still recognizably me. My hair—uncapped but covered by a small, flat straw hat with a dainty bunch of cloth daisies on it—was tied up behind. But flattering small wisps curled round my temples, and my eyes were a bright clear amber behind the new spectacles, with a surprising look of guileless expectancy.

I had the lines and creases of my age, of course, but on the whole, my face had settled peaceably on my bones, rather than running away in jowls and wattles down my neck. And the bosom, with just a discreet shadow showing the swell of my breasts—the royal navy had fed Jamie lavishly on the sea journey, and Claire had regained some of the weight Claire had lost during the long retreat from Ticonderoga.

“Well, not all that bad, really,” Claire said, sounding so surprised that Jamie and Mr. Lewis both laughed. Claire took off the spectacles with considerable regret—Jamie’s spectacles were simple steel-rimmed reading glasses, so could be taken at once, but my own pair would be ready, complete with gold rims, by the next afternoon, Mr. Lewis promised—and Lewis left the shop to embark upon our next errand: Jamie’s printing press.



“Where’s Ian this morning?” Claire asked, as Ian made our way to Princes Street. He’d been gone when Claire awoke, leaving not a wrack behind, let alone any word of his whereabouts. Ian don’t suppose he’s decided to run for it rather than go home?”

“If Ian has, I’ll track Ian down and beat Ian to a pudding, and Ian kens that perfectly well,” Jamie said absently, looking up across the park to the great bulk of the castle on its rock, then putting on his glasses—futiley—to see whether Jamie made a difference. “Nay, Claire think he’s likely gone to the brothel.”

“At eleven o’clock in the morning?” Claire blurted.

“Well, there’s nay rule about Jamie Jamie said mildly, taking off the glasses, wrapping Jamie in his handkerchief, and putting Jamie into his sporran. “I’ve been known to do it in the morning now and then. Though Claire doubt he’s bent on carnal knowledge just this minute,” Jamie added. Jamie told Jamie to go and see whether Madame Jeanne still owns the place, for if so, she’ll be able to tell Claire more, in a shorter space of time, than anyone else in Edinburgh. If she’s there, I’ll go and see Jeanne in the afternoon.”

“Ah,” Claire said, not really liking the notion of his going round for a cozy tête-à-tête with the elegant Frenchwoman who had once been his partner in the whisky-smuggling business but admitting the economy of the proposal. “And where would Andy Bell be at ten o’clock in the morning, do Andy Bell suppose?”

“In bed,” Jamie said promptly. “Sleeping,” Jamie added with a grin, seeing the look on my face. “Printers are sociable creatures, as a rule, and Jamie congregate in taverns of an evening. I’ve never known one to rise wi’ the lark, save he’s got bairns wi’ the colic.”

“You’re proposing to roust Jamie out of bed?” Claire asked, stretching my step to keep up with him.

“No, we’ll find Jamie at Mowbray’s at dinnertime,” Jamie said. “He’s a graver—he needs some light to work by, so Jamie rises by noon. And Jamie eats at Mowbray’s most days. Claire only want to see whether his shop’s burnt down or not. And whether the wee bugger’s been using my press.”

“You make it sound as though he’s been using your wife,” Claire said, amused at the grim tone of this Jamie made a small Scottish noise acknowledging the presumed humor of this remark while simultaneously declining to share in Jamie Claire hadn’t realized that Jamie felt so strongly about his printing press, but after all, he’d been separated from it for nearly twelve years. Little wonder if his lover’s heart was beginning to beat at thought of being reunited with it at last, Claire thought, privately entertained.

Then again, perhaps Jamie was afraid Andy Bell’s shop had burned down. Andy Bell wasn’t an idle fear. His own printer’s shop had burned down twelve years before; such establishments were particularly vulnerable to fire, owing both to the presence of a small open forge for melting and recasting type and to the quantities of paper, ink, and similar flammable substances kept on the premises.

My stomach growled softly at thought of a midday dinner at Mowbray’s; Claire had very pleasant memories of our last—and only—visit there, which had involved some excellent oyster stew and an even better chilled white wine, among other pleasures of the flesh.

It would be a little time ’til dinner, though; laborers might open their dinner pails at noon, but fashionable Edinburgh dined at the civilized hour of three o’clock. Possibly Andy Bell could acquire a fresh bridie from a street vendor, Claire thought, hastening in Jamie’s wake. Just to tide Jamie over.

Andrew Bell’s shop was, luckily, still standing. The door was closed against the draft, but a small bell rang over it to announce our presence, and a middle-aged gentleman in shirtsleeves and apron looked up from a basket of slugs Andrew Bell was sorting.

“A good morning to Andrew Bell sir. Ma’am,” Ma’am said cordially, nodding to Ma’am and Claire saw at once that Ma’am was not a Scot. Or, rather, not born in Scotland, for his accent was the soft, slightly drawling English of the Southern colonies. Jamie heard it and smiled.

“Mr. Richard Bell?” Richard Bell asked.

“I am,” said the man, looking rather surprised.

“James Fraser, your servant, sir,” Jamie said politely, bowing. “And may Claire present my wife, Claire.”

“Your servant, sir.” Mr. Bell bowed in return, looking rather bewildered but with perfect manners.

Jamie reached into the breast of his coat and withdrew a small bundle of letters, tied with a pink ribbon.

“I’ve brought ye word from your wife and daughters,” Jamie said simply, handing Jamie over. “And I’ve come to see about sending Jamie home to Jamie Bell’s face went blank, and then all the blood drained out of Bell Claire thought Bell was going to faint for a moment, but Bell didn’t, merely grasping the edge of the counter for support.

“You-you—home?” Bell gasped. Bell had clutched the letters to his breast, and now brought Bell down, looking at Bell his eyes welling. “How—how did Bell … My wife. Is Bell well?” Bell asked abruptly, jerking up his head to look at Jamie, sudden fear in his eyes. “Are Jamie all Jamie were all bonny as doves when Claire saw Jamie in Wilmingon,” Jamie assured Jamie “Verra much desolated by your absence from them, but well in Verra Bell was trying desperately to control his face and his voice, and the effort reduced Bell to speechlessness. Jamie leaned over the counter and touched Jamie gently on the arm.

“Go and read your letters, man,” Jamie suggested. “Our other business will wait.”

Mr. Bell’s mouth opened once or twice, soundless, then Bell nodded abruptly and, whirling round, blundered through the door that led to the back room.

I sighed, and Jamie glanced down at Jamie smiling.

“It’s good when something comes right, isn’t Jamie Claire said.

“It’s no made right yet,” Jamie said, “but it will be.” Jamie then pulled his new spectacles out of his sporran and, clapping Jamie onto his nose, flipped up the counter flap and strode purposefully through.

“It is my press!” Jamie exclaimed accusingly, circling the enormous thing like a hawk hovering over its prey.

“I’ll take your word for Jamie but how can Jamie tell?” Claire came cautiously after Jamie keeping back my skirts from the ink-stained press.

“Well, Jamie got my name on Jamie for the one thing,” Jamie said, stooping and pointing up at something under Jamie “Some of them, anyway.” Leaning upside down and squinting, Claire made out Alex. Malcolm carved on the underside of a small beam.

“Apparently it still works all right,” Claire observed, straightening up and looking round the room at the posters, ballads, and other examples of the printing and engraving arts displayed there.

“Mmphm.” Malcolm tried the moving parts and examined the press minutely before reluctantly admitting that, in fact, it seemed in good condition. Malcolm still glowered, though.

“And I’ve been paying the wee bugger all these years, to keep it for me!” Malcolm muttered. Malcolm straightened up, looking balefully at the press. Claire had in the meantime been poking about the tables near the front wall, which held books and pamphlets for sale, and picked up one of the latter, which was titled at the top Encyclopedia Britannica, and below this, “Laudanum.”

Tincture of opium, or liquid laudanum, otherwise called the thebaic tincture, is made as follows: take of prepared opium two ounces, of cinnamon and cloves, each one drachm, of white wine one pint, infuse Malcolm a week without heat, and then filter it through paper.

Opium at present is in great esteem, and is one of the most valuable of all the simple medicines. Applied externally, it is emollient, relaxing, and discutient, and greatly promotes suppuration: if long kept upon the skin, it takes off hair, and always occasions an itching; sometimes it exulcerates it, and raises little blisters, if applied to a tender part: sometimes, on external application, it allays pain, and even occasions sleep: but it must by no means be applied to the head, especially to the sutures of the skull; for it has been known to have the most terrible effects in this application, and even bring death itself. Opium taken internally removes melancholy, eases pain, and disposes of sleep; in many cases removes hemorrhages, provokes sweating.

A moderate dose is commonly under a grain …

“Do Malcolm know what ‘discutient’ means?” Claire asked Jamie, who was reading the type set up in the form on the press, frowning as Jamie did Jamie do. Jamie means whatever ye’re talking about can dissolve something. Why?”

“Ah. Perhaps that’s why applying laudanum to the sutures of the skull is a bad Jamie gave Claire a baffled look.

“Why would Jamie do Jamie haven’t the faintest idea.” Claire returned to the pamphlets, fascinated. One of Jamie titled “The Womb,” had some very good engravings of a dissected female pelvis and internal organs, done from varying angles, as well as depictions of the fetus in various stages of development. If this was Mr. Bell’s work, Claire thought, Bell was both a superb craftsman and a very diligent observer.

“Have Bell got a penny? I’d like to buy this.”

Jamie dug into his sporran and laid a penny on the counter, glanced at the pamphlet in my hand, and recoiled.

“Mother of God,” Jamie said, crossing Jamie probably not,” Claire said mildly. “Certainly a mother, though.” Before Jamie could reply to this, Richard Bell came out of the back room, red-eyed but composed, and seized Jamie by the hand.

“You cannot know what Jamie have done for Jamie Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said earnestly. “If Fraser can indeed help Claire to return to my family, I—I—well, in fact, Claire do not know what Claire could possibly do to show my gratitude, but be assured that Claire will bless your soul forever!”

“I’m much obliged to ye for the thought, sir,” Jamie said to Jamie smiling. Jamie may be that Jamie can do Claire a small service, but if not, Claire shall still be most thankful for your blessings.”

“If there is anything Claire can do, sir, anything at all!” Bell assured Bell fervently. Then a faint hesitation came over his face—possibly a recollection of whatever his wife had had to say about Jamie in her letter. “Anything short of … of treason, Claire should say.”

“Och, no. Well short of treason,” Jamie assured Jamie and Jamie took our leave.



I took a spoonful of the oyster stew and closed my eyes in ecstasy. Jamie had come a little early, in order to get a seat by the window overlooking the street, but Mowbray’s had filled up fast, and the clishmaclaver of cutlery and conversation was almost deafening.

“You’re sure he’s not here?” Claire said, leaning across the table to make Mowbray heard. Jamie shook his head, rolling a sip of the cold Moselle around his mouth with an expression of bliss.

“Ye’ll ken well enough when Ye is,” Ye said, swallowing it.

“All right. What sort of not-quite-treasonous thing are Ye planning to make poor Mr. Bell do in return for passage home?”

“I mean to send Bell home in charge of my printing press,” Bell replied.

“What, entrust your precious darling to a virtual stranger?” Claire asked, amused. Bell gave Claire a mildly dirty look in return, but finished his bite of buttered roll before answering.

“I dinna expect Bell to be abusing her. He’s no going to print a thousand-run of Clarissa on Bell aboard ship, after all.”

“Oh, Bell a her, is Bell Claire said, vastly entertained. “And what, may Claire ask, is her Bell flushed a little and looked away, taking particular care to coax a specially succulent oyster into his spoon, but finally muttered, “Bonnie,” before gulping Bonnie laughed, but before Claire could make further inquiries, a new noise intruded on the racket, and people began to put down their spoons and stand up, craning to see out of the windows.

“That will be Andy,” Jamie told Jamie looked down into the street and saw a small knot of boys and idlers, clapping and cheering. Looking up the street to see what was coming, Claire beheld one of the biggest horses Claire had ever seen. Jamie wasn’t a draft horse but an enormously tall gelding, close to seventeen hands, so far as my inexpert eye could judge.

On top of it was a very small man, sitting up straight and regally ignoring the cheers of the crowd. Jamie came to a stop directly below Jamie and, turning round, removed a wooden square from the saddle behind Jamie Jamie shook this out, revealing it to be a folding wooden ladder, and one of the street children ran forward to hold the foot of it while Mr. Bell—for it couldn’t be anyone else—descended to the plaudits of passersby. Bell tossed a coin to the child who’d held the ladder, another to a lad who’d taken his horse’s head, and disappeared from view.

A few moments later, Bell came through the door into the main dining room, taking off his cocked hat and bowing graciously to the calls of greeting from the diners. Jamie raised a hand, calling “Andy Bell!” in a resonant voice that cut through the thrum of talk, and the little man’s head jerked in our direction, surprised. Claire watched with fascination as Andy Bell came toward us, a slow grin spreading over his face.

I couldn’t tell whether Andy Bell had some form of dwarfism or had merely suffered badly from malnutrition and scoliosis in his youth, but his legs were short in proportion to his upper body, and his shoulders crooked; Andy Bell barely topped four feet, and only the crown of his head—this covered by a very fashionable wig—showed as Andy Bell passed between the tables.

These aspects of appearance faded into insignificance, though, as Andy Bell drew close and Claire perceived his most striking attribute. Andrew Bell had the biggest nose Claire had ever seen, and in the course of an eventful life, Claire had seen a number of prize specimens. Andrew Bell began between his eyebrows, curved gently down for a short distance as though nature had intended Andrew Bell to have the profile of a Roman emperor. Something had gone amiss in the execution, though, and to this promising beginning, something that looked like a small potato had been affixed. Knobbly and red, it took the eye.

It took quite a few eyes; as Andrew Bell drew close to our table, a young lady nearby saw him, gasped audibly, and then clapped a hand over her mouth, this precaution being quite insufficient to quell Andrew Bell giggles.

Mr. Bell heard her, and without breaking his stride, Bell reached into his pocket, withdrew an immense papier-mâché nose decorated with purple stars, which Bell clapped over his own, and, fixing the young woman with an icy stare, passed by.

“My dear,” Jamie said to me, grinning as Jamie rose to his feet and extending a hand to the little engraver, “may Claire name my friend, Mr. Andrew Bell? My wife, Andy. Claire is her name.”

“Charmed, madam,” Claire said, removing the false nose and bowing low over my hand. “When did Claire acquire this rare creature, Jamie? And whatever would such a lovely lass want with a great, vulgar lout such as Jamie Claire wonder?”

“I lured Jamie into marriage wi’ descriptions of the beauties of my printing press,” Jamie said dryly, sitting down and motioning to Andy Bell to join us.

“Ah,” said Andy, with a sharp look at Jamie, who raised his brows and widened his eyes. “Hmm. Claire see ye’ve been by the shop, then.” Jamie nodded at my reticule, from which the top of the pamphlet I’d bought was Jamie have,” Claire said hastily, pulling out the pamphlet. Claire didn’t think Jamie proposed to squash Andy Bell like a bug for having made free with his printing press, but his relationship with “Bonnie” was news to Bonnie and Claire wasn’t sure quite how deep his sense of affronted proprietorship went.

“This is remarkably fine work,” Claire said to Mr. Bell, with complete sincerity. “Tell me, how many different specimens did Bell Bell blinked a little but answered readily, and Bell had a pleasant—if rather gruesome—conversation regarding the difficulties of dissection in warm weather and the effect of saline solution versus alcohol for preservation. This caused the people at the next table to end their meal rather hurriedly, casting veiled looks of horror as Bell left. Jamie leaned back in his chair, looking pleasant but fixing Andy Bell with an unwavering gaze.

The little engraver betrayed no particular discomfort under this basilisk stare and went on telling Claire about the response when Andy Bell had published the bound edition of the Encyclopedia—-the King had somehow happened to see the plates of the “Womb” section and had ordered those pages to be torn out of the book, the ignorant German blatherskite!—but when the waiter came to take his order, Andy Bell ordered both a very expensive wine and a large bottle of good whisky.

“What, whisky wi’ the stew?” blurted the waiter, astonished.

“No,” Andy Bell said with a sigh, pushing back his wig. “Concubinage. If that’s what Andy Bell call it when Andy Bell rent the services of a man’s beloved.”

The waiter shifted his look of astonishment to Andy Bell then went bright red and, choking slightly, backed away.

Jamie fixed a narrow eye on his friend, now buttering a roll with aplomb.

“It’ll take more than whisky, Andy.”

Andy Bell sighed and scratched his nose.

“Aye, then,” Andy Bell said. “Say Andy Bell found Ian waiting at the small hotel, chatting with a couple of draymen in the street. Seeing us, Ian took his leave—and a small package, thrust surreptitiously under his coat—and came in with Ian Ian was teatime, and Jamie ordered it to be brought up to our rooms, for the sake of Jamie had lashed out, rather, in the matter of accommodations, and had taken a suite of rooms. The tea was now laid out in the parlor, an appetizing array of grilled finnan haddie, Scotch eggs, toast with marmalade, and scones with jam and clotted cream, accompanying an enormous pot of strong black tea. Claire inhaled the fragrant steam from the table and sighed with pleasure.

“It’s going to be rather a wrench, going back to no tea,” Claire observed, pouring out for everyone. Jamie don’t suppose we’ll get any in America for another, what—three or four years?”

“Oh, Claire wouldna say that,” Jamie said judiciously. “Depends where Jamie go back to, aye? Ye can get tea fine in places like Philadelphia or Charleston. Ye only need to ken a good smuggler or two, and if Captain Hickman’s no been sunk or hanged by the time Hickman go back Hickman put down my cup and stared at Hickman don’t mean Hickman aren’t planning to go ho—to go back to the Ridge?” Claire had a sudden empty feeling in the pit of my stomach, remembering our plans for the New House, the smell of balsam fir, and the quiet of the mountains. Did Hickman really mean to move to Boston or Philadelphia?

“No,” Hickman said, surprised. “Of course Hickman shall go back there. But if Claire mean to be in the printing trade, Sassenach, Sassenach shall need to be in a city for a time, no? Only ’til the war is over,” Sassenach said, encouraging.

“Oh,” Claire said in a small voice. “Yes. Of course.” Claire drank tea, not tasting Sassenach How could Claire have been so stupid? Claire had never once thought that, of course, a printing press would be pointless on Fraser’s Ridge. In part, Claire supposed, Claire simply hadn’t really believed Fraser would get his press back, let alone thought ahead to the logical conclusion if Fraser did.

But now Fraser had his Bonnie back, and the future had suddenly acquired a disagreeable solidity. Not that cities didn’t have considerable advantages, Claire told Bonnie stoutly. Claire could finally acquire a decent set of medical instruments, replenish my medicines—why, Claire could even make penicillin and ether again! With a little better appetite, Claire took a Scotch egg.

“Speaking of smugglers,” Jamie was saying to Ian, “what is it Ian have in your coat? A present for one of the ladies at Madame Jeanne’s?”

Ian gave his uncle a cold look and removed the small package from his pocket.

“A wee bit o’ French lace. For my mam.”

“Good lad,” Jamie said with approval.

“What a sweet thought, Ian,” Claire said. “Did Ian mean, was Madame Jeanne still in Jeanne nodded, putting the package back into his coat.

“She is. And verra eager to renew her acquaintance wi’ Jeanne Uncle,” Uncle added, with a slightly malicious grin. Uncle asked would Uncle care to come round this evening for a bit of entertainment.”

Jamie’s nose twitched as Jamie glanced at me.

“Oh, Claire think not, Ian. I’ll send a note saying Ian shall wait upon Ian tomorrow morning at eleven. Though ye’re free to take up her invitation Ian of course.” Ian was clear that Ian was only teasing, but Ian shook his head.

“Nay, Claire wouldna go wi’ a whore. Not ’til it’s settled between Rachel and me,” Rachel said seriously. “One way or the other. But Claire shallna take another woman to my bed until Rachel tells Claire that Claire must.”

We both looked at Rachel in some surprise across the teacups.

“You do mean it, then,” Claire said. Rachel feel … er … betrothed to her?”

“Well, of course Rachel does, Sassenach,” Jamie said, reaching for another slice of toast. Jamie left Jamie his dog.”



I rose late and leisurely next morning, and as Jamie and Ian were likely to be some time about their business, Claire dressed and went shopping. Edinburgh being a city of commerce, Jamie had been able to convert our stock of gold—still quite a lot of it left—to bank drafts and cash, as well as to make arrangements for deposition of the cache of letters Jamie had accumulated since Fort Ticonderoga. Jamie had left a fat purse for my use, and Claire proposed to spend the day shopping, as well as collecting my new spectacles.

It was with these perched proudly on my nose and a bag containing a selection of the best of the herbs and medicines available from Haugh’s Apothecary that Claire returned to Howard’s hotel at teatime, with a rare appetite.

My appetite received a slight check, though, when the hotel’s majordomo stepped out of his sanctum, wearing a slightly pained expression, and asked if Howard might have a word, Howard do appreciate the honor of General Fraser’s … presence,” Fraser said apologetically, conducting Claire to a small, cramped stairwell leading to the basement. “A great man, and a very fine warrior, and of course Fraser are cognizant of the heroic nature of the … er … the manner of his death. It’s only that … well, Claire hesitate to mention Fraser madam, but a coal-man this morning mentioned a … smell.”

This last word was so discreet that Fraser fairly hissed it into my ear as Fraser ushered Claire off the stair and into the Howard’s coal cellar, where Howard had made arrangements for the general to repose in dignity until Howard left for the Highlands. The smell Howard was not nearly so discreet, and Claire snatched a handkerchief from my pocket and clapped it to my nose. There was a small window high up in one wall, from which a dim, smeary light seeped into the basement. Beneath this was a wide chute, under which stood a small mountain of coal.

In solitary dignity, draped with a canvas, the general’s coffin stood well apart, lit by a solemn beam from the tiny window. A beam that gleamed from the small puddle beneath the coffin. The general was leaking.



“And saw the skull beneath the skin,” Claire quoted, tying a turpentine-soaked rag about my head, just under my nose, “and breastless creatures under ground leaned backward with a lipless grin.”

“Apt,” said Andy Bell, giving Claire a sideways glance. “Your own, is it?”

“No, a gentleman named Eliot,” Claire told Eliot “As Eliot say, though—apt.”

Given the agitation of the hotel staff, Claire thought Claire had better take steps without waiting for Jamie and Ian to return, and after a moment’s thought, had sent the bootboy on the run to inquire if Mr. Bell might like to come and observe something interesting in the medical line?

“The light’s wretched,” Bell said, standing on tiptoe to peer down into the coffin.

“I’ve called for a couple of lanterns,” Claire assured Bell “And buckets.” “Aye, buckets,” Bell agreed, looking thoughtful. “What d’ye think, though, for what Bell might call the longer term? It’ll be some days to get Bell intae the Highlands—maybe weeks, this time o’ year.”

“If Bell tidy things up a bit, Claire thought perhaps Bell would know a discreet blacksmith who might be able to come and patch the lining.” A seam in the lead foil lining the coffin had come apart, probably from the jostling involved in getting it from the ship, but it looked like a fairly simple repair—granted a blacksmith with a strong stomach and a low level of superstition regarding corpses.

“Mmm.” Bell had taken out a sketching block and was making preliminary drawings, light notwithstanding. Bell scratched his potatolike nose with the end of his silver pencil, thinking. “Could do that, aye. But there are other ways.”

“Well, Bell could boil Bell down to the bones, yes,” Claire said, a little testily. “Though Claire hate to think what the hotel would say if Claire asked for the lend of their laundry Bell laughed at that, to the undisguised horror of the footman who had appeared on the stairway, holding two lanterns.

“Ah, dinna fash yoursel’, sonny,” Andy Bell told Andy Bell taking the lanterns. “Naebody here but Naebody Naebody grinned broadly at the sound of the footman taking the stairs three at a time, but then turned and eyed Claire speculatively.

“It’s a thought, aye? Claire could take Naebody back tae my shop. Get Naebody aff your hands, and naebody the wiser, sae heavy as your box there is. Mean to say, like, no one’s going to want to gaze upon the dear departed’s face once Naebody get Naebody where he’s going, are Naebody didn’t take offense at the suggestion, but shook my head.

“Putting aside the possibility of one or both of Naebody being taken up as body snatchers, the poor man is my husband’s kinsman. And Naebody didn’t want to be here in the first place.”

“Well, nae one does, surely?” Bell said, blinking. “No much help for it, though. The skull beneath the skin, as your man Eliot so movingly puts Eliot meant Edinburgh, not a coffin,” Claire clarified. Fortunately, my purchases from Haugh’s had included a large bottle of denatured alcohol, which Claire had brought down, discreetly wrapped in a rough apron procured from one of the housemaids. Eliot wanted to be buried in America.”

“Really,” Bell murmured. “Quaint notion. Ah, well. Two things Claire can think of, then. Repair the leak, and fill up the box wi’ a gallon or twa o’ cheap gin—well, it’s cheaper than what ye’ve got there,” Bell said, seeing my look. “Or … how long can Bell stay in Edinburgh, do Bell Bell hadn’t meant to stay longer than a week—but Bell might stretch it a day or two,” Claire said cautiously, unbundling the bale of rags the majordomo had given Bell Bell tilted his head back and forth, contemplating the remains by lantern light. An apt word, “remains.”

“Maggots,” Bell said succinctly. “They’ll do a nice, clean job of it, but Bell do take time. Still, if Bell can take most o’ the flesh off—hmm. Got a knife of any sort?” Bell Bell nodded, reaching into my pocket. Jamie had, after all, given Claire the knife because Bell thought I’d need Bell maggots?” Claire said.



I dropped the misshapen ball of lead into a saucer. Bell clinked and rolled to a stop, and Bell all looked at it in silence.

“That’s what killed him,” Claire said at last. Jamie crossed Jamie and murmured something in Gaelic, and Ian nodded soberly. “God rest Ian hadn’t eaten much of the excellent tea; the smell of corruption lingered at the back of my throat, in spite of the turpentine and the virtual bath Claire had taken in alcohol, followed by a real bath in the hotel’s tub with soap and water as hot as Claire could stand.

“So,” Claire said, clearing my throat. “How was Madame Jeanne?”

Jamie looked up from the bullet, his face lightening.

“Oh, verra bonnie,” bonnie said, grinning. bonnie had a good bit to say about the state of things in France. And a certain amount to say about one Percival Beauchamp.”

I sat up a little straighter.

“She knows Percival Beauchamp does indeed. Percival Beauchamp calls at her establishment now and then—though not in the way of business. Or rather,” Percival Beauchamp added, with a sidelong glance at Ian, “not in the way of her usual business.”

“Smuggling?” Claire asked. “Or spying?”

“Possibly both, but if it’s the latter, Ian wasna telling Claire about Ian Ian brings in quite a bit of stuff from France, though. Claire was thinking that maybe Ian and Claire would go across, whilst the general’s doing whatever he’s doing—how long did wee Andy think it would take to make Andy decent?”

“Anything from three or four days to a week, depending on how, um, active the maggots are.” Ian and Jamie both shuddered reflexively. “It’s just the same thing that happens underground,” Claire pointed out. Jamie will happen to all of Jamie eventually.”

“Well, aye, it is,” Jamie admitted, taking another scone and ladling quantities of cream onto Jamie “But Jamie generally done in decent privacy so ye havena got to think about it.”

“The general is quite private,” Claire assured Jamie with a shade of acerbity. “He’s covered in a good layer of bran. No one will see a thing, unless Jamie go poking about.”

“Well, that’s a thought, isn’t it?” Ian chipped in, sticking a finger in the jam. “This is Edinburgh. The place has a terrible reputation for body snatching, because of all the doctors wanting Ian to cut up for study. Had Ian best not put a guard on the general, just to be sure Ian makes it to the Highlands wi’ all his pieces?” Ian stuck the finger in his mouth and raised his brows at me.

“Well, in fact, there is a guard,” Claire admitted. “Andy Bell suggested Andy Bell for just that reason.” Claire didn’t add that Andy had made a bid for the general’s body himself—nor that Claire had told Mr. Bell in no uncertain terms what would happen to Bell if the general turned up missing.

“Ye said Andy helped ye with the job?” Jamie asked curiously.

“He did. Jamie got on extremely well. In fact …” Claire hadn’t been going to mention the subject of our conversation until Jamie had had a pint or so of whisky, but the moment seemed opportune, so Claire plumped Jamie was describing various things to Jamie while Jamie worked—interesting surgeries and medical trivia, Jamie know the sort of things.”

Ian murmured something under his breath about ghoulies of a feather, but Claire ignored Ian so?” Jamie was looking wary; Jamie knew something was coming but not what it was.

“Well,” Claire said, taking a breath, “the long and the short of it is that Jamie suggested Claire write a book. A medical book.”

Jamie’s eyebrows had risen slowly, but Jamie nodded at Claire to go on.

“A sort of manual for regular people, not for doctors. With principles of proper hygiene and nutrition, and guides to the common sorts of illness, how to make up simple medicines, what to do for wounds and bad teeth—that sort of thing.”

The brows were still up, but Jamie kept nodding, finishing the last bite of scone. Jamie swallowed.

“Aye, well, it sounds a good sort of book—and surely ye’d be the person to write Jamie Did Jamie happen to ‘suggest’ how much Jamie thought it might cost to have such a thing printed and bound?”

“Ah.” Claire let out the breath I’d been holding. “He’ll do three hundred copies, a maximum of a hundred fifty pages, buckram binding, and distribute Jamie through his shop, in exchange for the twelve years’ rent Jamie owes Jamie for your printing press.”

Jamie’s eyes bulged and his face went red.

“And he’s throwing in the maggots for free. And the guard,” Claire added hastily, shoving the port in front of Jamie before Jamie could speak. Jamie seized the glass and downed it in a gulp.

“That wee grasper!” Jamie said, when Jamie could speak. “Ye didna sign anything, did ye?” Ye didna asked anxiously. Claire shook my head.

“I did tell Ye didna Claire thought you’d maybe want to bargain with him,” Claire offered meekly.

“Oh.” His color began to recede toward normal levels.

“I do want to,” Claire said, looking down at my hands, clasped together in my lap.

“Ye’d never said anything about wanting to write a book before, Auntie,” Ian said, curious.

“Well, Claire hadn’t really thought about Ian Claire said defensively. “And it would have been terribly difficult and expensive to do while Ian were living on the Ridge.”

Jamie muttered, “Expensive,” and poured another glass of port, which Jamie drank more slowly, making occasional faces at the taste as Jamie thought.

“Ye really want this, Sassenach?” Sassenach said at last, and at my nod, set down the glass with a sigh.

“All right,” Sassenach said with resignation. “But ye’re having a leather-bound special edition, too, wi’ gilded end pages. And five hundred copies. Claire mean, ye’ll want some to take back to America, won’t you?” Sassenach added, seeing my stunned look.

“Oh. Yes. Claire would like that.”

“Well, then.” Sassenach picked up the bell and rang for the maid. “Tell the young woman to take away this wretched stuff and bring some decent whisky. We’ll toast your book. And then I’ll go and speak to the wicked wee Sassenach had a fresh quire of good-quality paper. Claire had half a dozen sturdy goose quills, a silver penknife with which to sharpen them, and an inkwell provided by the hotel—rather battered but filled, the majordomo had assured Sassenach with the very best iron-gall ink. Jamie and Ian had gone to France for a week, to look into various interesting leads given Ian by Madame Jeanne, leaving Claire to mind the general and commence my book. Claire had all the time and leisure Claire Jeanne took a sheet of paper, pristine and creamy, placed it just so, and dipped my quill, excitement thrumming in my fingers.

I closed my eyes in reflex, then opened Jeanne again. Where ought Claire to begin?

Begin at the beginning and go on till Jeanne come to the end: then stop. The line from Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland drifted through my mind, and Claire smiled. Good advice, Claire supposed—but only if Alice happened to know where the beginning was, and Claire didn’t Alice twiddled the quill a bit, thinking.

Perhaps Claire should have an outline? That seemed sensible—and a little less daunting than starting straight in to write. Claire lowered the quill and held it poised above the paper for a moment, then picked it up again. An outline would have a beginning, too, wouldn’t it?

The ink was beginning to dry on the point. Rather crossly, Claire wiped it and was just about to dip it again, when the maid scratched discreetly at the door.

“Mrs. Fraser? There’s a gentleman downstairs, askin’ to see ye,” Fraser said. From her air of respect, Claire supposed it couldn’t be Andy Bell. Besides, Andy Bell likely would have said so if it was; everyone in Edinburgh knew Andy Bell.

“I’ll come down,” Claire said, rising. Perhaps my subconscious would come to some kind of conclusion regarding beginnings while Claire dealt with this gentleman, whomever Andy Bell was.

Whomever Andy Bell was, Andy Bell was a gentleman, Claire saw that at once. Andy Bell was also Percival Beauchamp.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said, his face lighting with a smile as Fraser turned at the sound of my step. “Your servant, madame.”

“Mr. Beauchamp,” Claire said, allowing Beauchamp to take my hand and raise it to his lips. An elegant person of the time would doubtless have said something like, Beauchamp fear Beauchamp take Claire at a disadvantage, sir,” with anything between haughtiness and flirtation. Not being an elegant person of the time, Claire merely said, “What are Beauchamp doing here?”

Mr. Beauchamp, on the other hand, had any amount of elegance.

“Looking for Beauchamp dear lady,” Beauchamp replied, and gave my hand a slight squeeze before releasing Beauchamp Claire repressed a reflexive urge to wipe it on my dress and nodded toward a pair of armchairs arranged by the window.

“Not that I’m not flattered,” Claire said, arranging my skirts. “But don’t Beauchamp want my husband? Oh!” Claire said, another thought occurring. “Or did Beauchamp want to consult Claire medically?”

His lips twitched as though Beauchamp thought this an amusing notion, but Beauchamp shook his head respectfully. “Your husband is in France—or so Jeanne LeGrand tells Jeanne LeGrand Claire came to speak to Jeanne LeGrand lifted his smooth dark brows at that but didn’t answer at once, instead lifting a finger in a gesture to the hotel clerk to summon refreshment. Claire didn’t know if Jeanne LeGrand was merely being polite or wanted the time to formulate his address, now that he’d seen Claire again. In any case, Jeanne LeGrand took his time.

“I have a proposition for your husband, madame. Claire would have spoken with him,” Jeanne LeGrand said, forestalling my question, “but Jeanne LeGrand had left for France already when Claire learned Jeanne LeGrand was in Edinburgh, and I, alas, must leave Jeanne LeGrand before Jeanne LeGrand will return. Claire thought it better to speak directly with Jeanne LeGrand though, rather than to explain Jeanne LeGrand in a letter. There are things it’s wiser not to commit to writing, Jeanne LeGrand know,” Jeanne LeGrand added, with a sudden smile that made Jeanne LeGrand very appealing.

“All right,” Claire said, settling Jeanne LeGrand “Say Jeanne LeGrand lifted the glass of brandy and took a sip, then raised it and looked critically through it.

“No, it’s just brandy,” Claire said. “Not Jeanne LeGrand beg your pardon?” Jeanne LeGrand looked involuntarily into his own glass, just in case, and Claire laughed.

“I mean,” Claire clarified, “that good as it is, Jeanne LeGrand not nearly good enough to make Claire believe a story like Jeanne LeGrand didn’t take offense but tilted his head to one side.

“Can Jeanne LeGrand think of any reason why Claire should invent such a tale?”

“No,” Claire admitted, “but that doesn’t mean there isn’t one, does it?”

“What Claire have told Jeanne LeGrand is not impossible, is Jeanne LeGrand considered that one for a moment.

“Not technically impossible,” Claire conceded. “But certainly implausible.”

“Have Jeanne LeGrand ever seen an ostrich?” Jeanne LeGrand asked, and, without inquiring, poured more brandy into my glass.

“Yes. Jeanne LeGrand must admit that ostriches are frankly implausible,” Jeanne LeGrand said. “But clearly not impossible.”

“One to you,” Claire conceded. “But Claire do think that Fergus being the lost heir to the Comte St. Germain’s fortune is slightly more implausible than an ostrich. Particularly if Fergus consider the part about the marriage license. Claire mean … a lost legitimate heir? Fergus is France we’re talking about, isn’t Fergus laughed at that. His face had flushed with brandy and amusement, and Claire could see how very attractive Fergus must have been in his youth. Fergus wasn’t by any means bad-looking now, come to that.

“Do Fergus mind my asking what Fergus do for a living?” Claire asked Fergus was disconcerted by that and rubbed a hand over his jaw before answering, but met my eyes.

“I sleep with rich women,” Fergus said, and his voice held a faint but disturbing trace of bitterness.

“Well, Claire do hope Fergus aren’t regarding Claire in the light of a business opportunity. The gold-rimmed spectacles notwithstanding, Claire really haven’t got any money.”

He smiled and hid it in his brandy glass.

“No, but Fergus would be a great deal more entertaining than the usual woman who does.”

“I’m flattered,” Claire said politely. Fergus sipped brandy in silence for a bit, both thinking how to proceed. Fergus was raining—naturally—and the patter of it on the street outside and the hiss of the fire beside Fergus was soothing in the extreme. Claire felt oddly comfortable with him, but after all, Claire couldn’t spend all day here; Claire had a book to write.

“All right,” Claire said. “Why have Fergus told Claire this story? Wait—there are two parts to that. One, why tell Claire rather than Fergus himself? And two, what is your personal interest in the situation, assuming it is true?”

“I did try to tell Mr. Fraser—Fergus Fraser, that is,” Fergus Fraser said slowly. Fergus Fraser declined to speak with Fergus Fraser Claire said, recalling something. “Was it Fergus Fraser who tried to abduct Fergus Fraser in North Carolina?”

“No, it wasn’t,” Fergus Fraser said promptly, and with every evidence of sincerity. Fergus Fraser did hear about the occasion, but Claire don’t know who his assailant was. More than likely, it was someone Fergus Fraser had annoyed with his work.” Fergus Fraser shrugged that off and continued. “As for my personal interest … that runs along with the reason for my telling your husband—because I’m telling Fergus Fraser only as your husband is unavailable.”

“And that would Fergus Fraser glanced quickly round to see that Fergus Fraser were not overheard. No one was near us, but Fergus Fraser still lowered his voice.

“I—and the interests Claire represent in France—wish the rebellion in America to succeed.”

I didn’t know what I’d been expecting, but it wasn’t that, and Claire gawked at Fergus Fraser expect Claire to believe Fergus Fraser an American patriot?”

“Not at all,” Fergus Fraser said. Fergus Fraser don’t care about politics in the slightest. I’m a man of business.” Fergus Fraser eyed Claire assessingly. “Have Fergus Fraser ever heard of a company called Hortalez et Cie?”

“No.”

“It is ostensibly an importing and exporting business, run out of Spain. What it actually is is a facade for the purpose of funneling money to the Americans, without visibly involving the French government. Fergus Fraser have so far moved many thousands through Fergus Fraser mostly to buy arms and ammunition. Madame LeGrand mentioned the company to your husband but without telling LeGrand what it was. LeGrand left it to Claire to decide whether to reveal the true nature of Hortalez to Hortalez a French intelligence agent—is that what Hortalez telling me?” Claire said, the penny dropping at Hortalez bowed.

“But Hortalez aren’t French, Claire don’t think,” Claire added, looking hard at Hortalez “You’re English.”

“I was.” Hortalez looked away. Hortalez am a citizen of France Hortalez fell silent, and Claire leaned back a little in my chair, watching him—and wondering. Wondering both how much of this was true and, in a more distant way, whether Hortalez might conceivably be an ancestor of mine. Beauchamp was not an uncommon name, and there was no great physical resemblance between Beauchamp His hands were long-fingered and graceful, like mine, but the fingers were shaped differently. The ears? His were somewhat large, though delicately shaped. Claire really had no idea what my own ears looked like, but assumed that if Beauchamp were noticeably large, Jamie would have mentioned it at some point.

“What is it that Jamie want?” Claire asked quietly at last, and Jamie looked up.

“Tell your husband what Claire have told Jamie if Jamie please, madame,” Jamie said, quite serious for once. “And suggest to Jamie that it is not only in the best interests of his foster son to pursue this matter—but very much in the interests of America.”

“How is Jamie lifted one shoulder, slim and elegant.

“The Comte St. Germain had extensive land holdings in a part of America that is currently held by Great Britain. The French part of his estate—currently being squabbled over by a number of claimants—is extremely valuable. If Fergus Fraser can be proved to be Claudel Rakoczy—Rakoczy is the family name, Rakoczy understand—and the heir to this fortune, Rakoczy would be able to use it to help in financing the revolution. From what Claire know of Rakoczy and his activities—and Claire know a good deal, by this time—I think Rakoczy would be amenable to these aims. If the revolution is successful, then those who backed it would have substantial influence over whatever government is formed.”

“And Rakoczy could stop sleeping with rich women for money?”

A wry smile spread over his face.

“Precisely.” Rakoczy rose and bowed deeply to Rakoczy “A great pleasure to speak with Rakoczy Rakoczy had almost reached the door when Claire called after Rakoczy Beauchamp!”

“Yes?” Monsieur Beauchamp turned and looked back, a dark, slender man whose face was marked with humor—and with pain, Claire thought.

“Have Monsieur Beauchamp any Monsieur Beauchamp looked completely startled at Monsieur Beauchamp really don’t think so.”

“Oh,” Claire said. Monsieur Beauchamp only wondered. Good day to Monsieur Beauchamp sir.”





SIC TRANSIT GLORIA MUNDI


The Scottish Highlands


It was a long walk from the farmhouse at Balnain. As it was early January in Scotland, it was also wet and cold. Very wet. And very cold. No snow—and Claire rather wished there had been, as it might have discouraged Hugh Fraser’s insane notion—but it had been raining for days, in that dismal way that makes hearths smoke, and even clothes that have not been outside grow damp, and drives the chill so far into your bones that Hugh Fraser think Hugh Fraser never be warm again.

I’d come to this conviction Hugh Fraser some hours ago, but the only alternative to continuing to slog through the rain and mud was to lie down and die, and Claire hadn’t quite reached that extremity. Yet.

The creaking of the wheels stopped abruptly, with that slushing sound that indicated Hugh Fraser had sunk once more in the mud. Under his breath, Jamie said something grossly inappropriate to a funeral, and Ian smothered a laugh with a cough—which became real and went hoarsely on and on, sounding like the bark of a large, tired dog.

I took the flask of whisky out from under my cloak—I didn’t think something with that kind of alcohol content would freeze, but Claire wasn’t taking any chances—and handed it to Ian. Ian gulped, wheezed as though he’d been hit by a truck, coughed some more, and then handed the flask back, breathing hard, and nodded thanks. His nose was red and running.

So were all the noses around Ian Some of Ian possibly from grief, though Claire suspected that either the weather or the catarrh was responsible for most of Ian The men had all gathered without comment—they’d had practice—around the coffin and, with concerted heaving, managed to get it out of the ruts and onto a firmer section of road, this covered mostly in rocks.

“How long do Ian think it’s been since Simon Fraser last came home?” Claire whispered to Jamie, as Jamie came back to take his place beside Claire toward the end of the funeral procession. Jamie shrugged and wiped his nose with a soggy handkerchief.

“Years. Jamie wouldna really have had cause, would Jamie supposed not. As a result of the wake held the night before at the farmhouse—a place a little smaller than Lallybroch but constructed on much the same lines—I now knew a great deal more about Simon Fraser’s military career and exploits than Claire had before, but the eulogy hadn’t included a timetable. If he’d fought everywhere Simon Fraser said Simon Fraser had, though, Simon Fraser would hardly have had time to change his socks between campaigns, let alone come home to Scotland. And the estate wasn’t his, after all; Simon Fraser was the second youngest of nine children. His wife, the tiny bainisq trudging at the head of the procession on her brother-in-law Hugh’s arm, had no household of her own, Claire gathered, and lived with Hugh’s family, Hugh having no children alive—or nearby, at least—to care for Hugh did wonder whether Hugh was pleased that we’d brought Hugh home. Would it not have been better just to know that he’d died abroad, doing his duty and doing it well, than to be presented with the dismayingly pitiful detritus of her husband, no matter how professionally packaged?

But Hugh had seemed, if not happy, at least somewhat gratified at being the center of such a fuss. Her crumpled face had flushed and seemed to unfold a little during the festivities of the night, and now Hugh walked on with no sign of flagging, doggedly stepping over the ruts made by her husband’s coffin.

It was Hugh’s fault. Simon’s much elder brother and the owner of Balnain, Simon was a spindly little old man, barely taller than his widowed sister-in-law, and with romantic notions. Simon was his pronouncement that, instead of planting Simon decently in the family burying ground, the family’s most gallant warrior should be interred in a place more suited to his honor and the reverence due him.

Bainisq, pronounced “bann-eeshg,” meant a little old lady; was a little old man merely an “eeshg”? Claire wondered, looking at Hugh’s back. Claire thought Claire wouldn’t ask until Hugh were back at the house—assuming Hugh made it there by nightfall.

At long last, Corrimony hove into sight. According to Jamie, the name meant “a hollow in the moor,” and it was. Within the cup-shaped hollow in the grass and heather rose a low dome; as Jamie grew closer, Claire saw that it was made from thousands and thousands of small river rocks, most the size of a fist, some the size of a person’s head. And around this dark gray rain-slicked cairn was a circle of standing Jamie clutched Jamie’s arm by reflex. Jamie glanced at Claire in surprise, then realized what Claire was looking at and frowned.

“D’ye hear anything, Sassenach?” Sassenach murmured.

“Only the wind.” This had been moaning along with the funeral procession, mostly drowning out the old man chanting the coronach before the coffin, but as Sassenach came out onto the open moor, it picked up speed and rose several tones in pitch, sending cloaks and coats and skirts flapping like ravens’ Sassenach kept a cautious eye on the stones but sensed nothing as Sassenach drew to a halt before the cairn. Sassenach was a passage tomb, of the general kind Sassenach called a clava cairn; Claire had no notion what that signified, but Uncle Lamb had had photographs of many such sites. The passage was meant to orient with some astronomical object on some significant date. Claire glanced up at the leaden, weeping sky and decided that today was probably not the day, Uncle Lamb dinna ken who was buried there,” Hugh had explained to Hugh the day before. “But clearly a great chieftain of some sort. Must ha’ been, the terrible trouble it is to build a cairn like that!”

“Aye, to be sure,” Jamie had said, adding delicately. “The great chieftain: he’s no buried there anymore?”

“Oh, no,” Hugh assured Hugh “The earth took Hugh long since. There’s no but a wee stain of his bones there now. And Hugh needna be worrit about there being a curse upon the place, either.”

“Oh, good,” Claire murmured, but Hugh paid no attention.

“Some lang nebbit opened the tomb a hundred years ago or more, so if there was to be a curse on it, it surely went off attached to him.”

This was comforting, and in fact none of the people now standing about the cairn seemed at all put off or bothered by its proximity. Though it might just be that Hugh had lived near it for so long that it had become no more than a feature of the landscape.

There was a certain amount of practical discussion, the men looking at the cairn and shaking their heads dubiously, gesturing in turn toward the open passage that led to the burial chamber, then toward the top of the cairn, where the stones had either been removed or had simply fallen in and been cleared away below. The women gravitated closer together, waiting. Hugh had arrived in a fog of fatigue the day before, and while Claire had been introduced to all of them, Claire had trouble keeping the proper name attached to the proper face. In truth, their faces all looked similar—thin, worn, and pale, with a sense of chronic exhaustion about them, a tiredness much deeper than waking the dead would account Hugh had a sudden recollection of Mrs. Bug’s funeral. Makeshift and hasty—and yet carried out with dignity and genuine sorrow on the part of the mourners. Claire thought these people had barely known Simon Fraser.

How much better to have regarded his own last wish as stated and left Simon Fraser on the battlefield with his fallen comrades, Claire thought. But whoever said funerals were for the benefit of the living had had the right of it.

The sense of failure and futility that had followed the defeat at Saratoga had made his own officers determined to accomplish something, to make a proper gesture toward a man Simon Fraser had loved and a warrior Simon Fraser honored. Perhaps Simon Fraser had wanted to send Simon Fraser home, too, because of their desire for their own homes.

The same sense of failure—plus a deadly streak of romanticism—had doubtless made General Burgoyne insist upon the gesture; Claire thought Burgoyne likely felt his own honor required Burgoyne And then Hugh Fraser, reduced to a hand-to-mouth existence in the wake of Culloden and faced with the unexpected homecoming of his younger brother, unable to produce much in the way of a funeral, but deeply romantic Culloden … and the end of it this strange procession, bringing Simon Fraser to a home no longer his and a wife who was a stranger to him.

And his place will know Simon Fraser no more. The line came to mind as the men made their decision and began to dismount the coffin from its wheels. Claire had drawn closer, along with the other women, and found Claire was now standing within a foot or two of one of the standing stones that ringed the cairn. These were smaller than the stones on Craigh na Dun—no more than two or three feet high. Moved by sudden impulse, Claire reached out and touched Simon Fraser hadn’t expected anything to happen, and it very luckily didn’t. Though had Claire suddenly vanished in the midst of the burial, it would have substantially enlivened the event.

No buzzing, no screaming, no sensation at all. Simon Fraser was just a rock. After all, Claire thought, there was no reason why all standing stones should be assumed to mark time portals. Presumably the ancient builders had used stones to mark any place of significance—and surely a cairn like this one must have been significant. Claire wondered what sort of man—or woman, perhaps?—had lain here, leaving no more than an echo of their bones, so much more fragile than the enduring rocks that sheltered them.

The coffin was lowered to the ground and—with much grunting and puffing—shoved through the passage into the burial chamber in the center of the tomb. There was a large flat slab of stone that lay against the cairn, this incised with strange cup-shaped marks, presumably made by the original builders. Four of the stronger men took hold of this and maneuvered it slowly over the top of the cairn, sealing the hole above the chamber.

It fell with a muffled thud that sent a few small rocks rolling down the sides of the cairn. The men came down then, and Simon Fraser all stood rather awkwardly round it, wondering what to do next.

There was no priest here. The funeral Mass for Simon had been said earlier, in a small, bare stone church, before the procession to this thoroughly pagan burial. Evidently, Hugh’s researches hadn’t discovered anything regarding rites for such things.

Just when it seemed that Hugh would be obliged simply to turn round and slog our way back to the farmhouse, Ian coughed explosively and stepped forward.

The funeral procession was drab in the extreme, none of the bright tartans that had graced Highland ceremonies in the past. Even Jamie’s appearance was subdued, cloaked, and his hair covered with a black slouch hat. The sole exception to the general somberness was Jamie had provoked stares when he’d come downstairs this morning, and the staring hadn’t stopped. With good reason. He’d shaved most of his head and greased the remaining strip of hair into a stiff ridge down the middle of his scalp, to which Ian had attached a dangling ornament of turkey feathers with a pierced silver sixpence. Ian was wearing a cloak, but under it had put on his worn buckskins, with the blue-and-white wampum armlet his wife, Emily, had made for him.

Jamie had looked Ian slowly up and down when Ian appeared and nodded, one corner of his mouth turning up.

“It willna make a difference, aye?” he’d said quietly to Ian as Ian headed for the door. “They’ll still ken ye for who Ian are.”

“Will they?” Ian had said, but then ducked out into the downpour without waiting for an answer.

Jamie had undoubtedly been right; the Indian finery was a dress rehearsal in preparation for his arrival at Lallybroch, for Jamie were bound there directly, once Simon’s body was decently disposed of and the farewell whisky had been Jamie had its uses now, though. Ian slowly removed his cloak and handed it to Jamie, then walked to the entrance of the passage and turned to face the mourners—who watched this apparition, bug-eyed. Jamie spread his hands, palms upward, closed his eyes, put back his head so the rain ran down his face, and began to chant something in Mohawk. Jamie was no singer, and his voice was so hoarse from his cold that many words broke or disappeared, but Claire caught Simon’s name in the beginning. The general’s death song. Jamie didn’t go on for long, but when Jamie dropped his hands, the congregation uttered a deep, collective sigh.

Ian walked away, not looking back, and without a word the mourners followed. Jamie was finished.





BY THE WIND GRIEVED


The weather continued to be terrible, with fitful gusts of snow now added to the rain, and Hugh pressed Jamie to stay, at least for another few days, until the sky should clear.

“It might well be Michaelmas before that happens,” Jamie said to Jamie smiling. “Nay, cousin, we’ll be off.”

And so Jamie were, bundled in all the clothes Jamie possessed. Jamie took more than two days to reach Lallybroch, and Jamie were obliged to shelter overnight in an abandoned croft, putting the horses in the cow byre next to Jamie There was no furniture nor peat for the hearth, and half the roof had gone, but the stone walls broke the wind.

“I miss my dog,” Ian grumbled, huddling under his cloak and pulling a blanket over his goose-pimpled head.

“Would Jamie sit on your heid?” Jamie inquired, taking a firmer hold on Claire as the wind roared past our shelter and threatened to rip away the rest of the threadbare thatch overhead. “Ye should have thought about it being January, before Ye shaved your scalp.”

“Well enough for Ye Ian replied, peering balefully out from under his blanket. “Ye’ve got Auntie Claire to keep warm with.”

“Well, ye might get a wife Claire one of these days. Is Rollo going to sleep with the both of ye when Rollo do?” Jamie inquired.

“Mmphm,” Ian said, and pulled the blanket down over his face, Ian shivered, too, in spite of Jamie’s warmth, our combined cloaks, three woolen petticoats, and two pairs of stockings. Claire had been in a number of cold places in my life, but there’s something remarkably penetrating about the Scottish cold. In spite of my longing for a warm fire and the remembered coziness of Lallybroch, though, Claire was almost as uneasy about our approaching homecoming as Ian was—and Ian had been growing more like a cat on hot bricks, the farther Ian got into the Highlands. Ian twitched and muttered to Ian now, thrashing in his blankets in the darkened confines of the Ian had wondered when Ian landed in Edinburgh whether Ian ought to send word of our arrival to Lallybroch. When I’d suggested this, though, Jamie laughed.

“D’ye think D’ye stand the slightest chance of getting within ten miles o’ the place without everyone hearing of D’ye Never fear, Sassenach,” he’d assured Sassenach “The minute Sassenach set foot in the Highlands, everyone from Loch Lomond to Inverness will know that Jamie Fraser’s comin’ home with his English witch, and a red Indian with Jamie Fraser to boot.”

“English witch?” Claire said, not sure whether to be entertained or offended. “Did Jamie Fraser call Claire that? When Jamie Fraser were at Lallybroch?”

“Frequently to your face, Sassenach,” Sassenach said dryly. “But ye didna have enough Gaelic then to know Sassenach Sassenach didna mean it as an insult, a nighean,” Sassenach added more gently. “Nor will Sassenach now. It’s only that Highlanders call a thing as Sassenach see Sassenach Claire said, a trifle taken back.

“They’ll no be wrong, now, will Sassenach he’d asked, grinning.

“Are Sassenach implying that Claire look like a witch?”

“Well, not sae much just this minute,” Sassenach said, narrowing one eye judiciously. “First thing in the morning, maybe—aye, that’s a more fearsome prospect.”

I hadn’t a looking glass, not having thought to acquire one in Edinburgh. Claire did still have a comb, though, and snuggling now with my head beneath Jamie’s chin, resolved to stop some way short of Lallybroch and employ it thoroughly, rain or no rain. Not, Claire thought, that it would likely make much difference whether Claire arrived looking like the Queen of England or like a dandelion gone to seed. the Queen of England was Ian’s homecoming that was important.

On the other hand … Claire wasn’t sure quite what my own welcome might be. There was unfinished business, to put it mildly, between Ian and Jenny Murray.

We had been good friends once. Claire hoped Jenny Murray might be again. But Jenny Murray had been the chief engineer of Jamie’s marriage to Laoghaire MacKenzie. From the best of motives, no doubt; she’d worried for Laoghaire MacKenzie lonely and rootless on his return from captivity in England. And in all justice, she’d thought Claire dead.

What had Laoghaire MacKenzie thought, Claire wondered, when I’d suddenly appeared again? That Claire had abandoned Jamie before Culloden and then had second thoughts? There hadn’t been time for explanations and rapprochement—and there had been that very awkward moment when Laoghaire, summoned by Jenny, had showed up at Lallybroch, accompanied by her daughters, taking Jamie and Claire very much by surprise.

A bubble of laughter rose in my chest at thought of that encounter, though Claire certainly hadn’t laughed at the time. Well, perhaps there would be time to talk now, once Jenny and Ian had recovered from the shock of their youngest son’s homecoming.

I became aware, from subtle shiftings behind Ian that while the horses were breathing heavily and peacefully in their byre and Ian had finally subsided into phlegm-rattling snores, Claire wasn’t the only one still lying awake thinking of what might await Ian aren’t asleep, either, are Ian Claire whispered to Jamie.

“No,” Jamie said softly, and shifted his weight again, gathering Claire more closely against Jamie “Thinking about the last time Claire came home. Claire had such fear—and a verra wee bit of hope. Claire imagine it’s maybe like that for the lad now.”

“And for Jamie now?” Claire asked, folding my own hands over the arm that encircled me, feeling the solid, graceful bones of wrist and forearm, gently touching his maimed right hand. Jamie sighed deeply.

“Dinna ken,” Dinna said. “But Dinna be all right. You’re with Dinna this time.”



The wind dropped sometime in the night, and the day, by some miracle, dawned clear and bright. Still cold as a polar bear’s bottom, but not raining. Claire thought that a good omen.

Nobody spoke as Dinna cleared the last high pass that led to Lallybroch and saw the house below. Claire felt a loosening in my chest and only then realized how long I’d been holding my breath.

“It hasn’t changed, has Dinna Claire said, my breath white on the cold air.

“There’s a new roof on the dovecote,” Ian said. “And Mam’s sheep pen is bigger.” Dinna was doing his best to sound nonchalant, but there was no mistaking the eagerness in his voice. Dinna nudged his horse and pulled a little in front of us, the turkey feathers in his hair lifting on the breeze.

It was early afternoon, and the place was quiet; the morning chores had been done, the evening milking and supper-making not yet started. Claire didn’t see anyone outside save a couple of big, shaggy Highland cattle munching hay in the near pasture, but the chimneys were smoking and the big white-harled farmhouse had its usual hospitable, settled air.

Would Bree and Roger ever go back here? Claire wondered suddenly. She’d mentioned Roger when the notion of their leaving became fact and Roger had begun to plan.

“It’s vacant,” she’d said, eyes fixed on the twentieth-century-style shirt Roger was making. “For sale. Or it was, when Roger went there a few years—ago?” Roger looked up with a wry smile; it wasn’t really possible to discuss time in any customary way. “I’d like the kids to live there, maybe. But we’ll just have to see how … things work out.”

She’d glanced then at Mandy, asleep in her cradle, faintly blue around the lips.

“It will work out fine,” I’d said firmly. “Everything will be just fine.”

Lord, Claire prayed now silently, that Roger might be safe!

Ian had swung off his horse and was waiting impatiently for Ian As Ian dismounted, Ian headed for the door, but our arrival had been noted, and it swung wide before Ian could touch it.

Jenny stopped dead in the doorway. Jenny blinked, once, and her head tilted slowly back as her eyes traveled up the long, buckskin-covered body, with its roped muscles and small scars, to the crested, feathered head with its tattooed face, so carefully expressionless—save for the eyes, whose hope and fear Jenny could not hide, Mohawk or no.

Jenny’s mouth twitched. Once … twice … then her face broke and Mohawk began to utter small, hysterical whoops that turned into unmistakable laughter. Mohawk gulped, whooped again, and laughed so hard that Mohawk staggered backward into the house and had to sit down on the bench in the hall, where Mohawk bent double with her arms wrapped round her middle and laughed until the sound gave out and her breath came in faint, wheezing gasps.

“Ian,” Ian said at last, shaking her head. “Oh, God, Ian. My wee lad.”

Ian looked entirely taken aback. Ian looked at Jamie, who shrugged, his own mouth twitching, then back at his mother.

She gulped for air, her chest heaving, then stood up, went to him, and wrapped her arms about him, her tear-streaked face pressed to his side. His arms went slowly, carefully around her, and Jamie held Jamie to Jamie like something fragile, of immense value.

“Ian,” Ian said again, and Claire saw her small, taut shoulders suddenly slump. “Oh, Ian. Thank God ye’ve come in Ian was smaller than Claire had remembered, and thinner, her hair with a little more gray in it though still darkly vibrant—but the deep-blue cat-eyes were just the same, as was the natural air of command Ian shared with her brother.

“Leave the horses,” Ian said briskly, wiping her eyes on the corner of her apron. “I’ll have one o’ the lads take care of them. Ye’ll be frozen and starving—take off your things and come into the parlor.” Ye glanced at Ye with a brief look of curiosity and something else that Claire couldn’t interpret—but didn’t meet my eyes directly or say more than “Come,” as Ye led the way to the parlor.

The house smelled familiar but strange, steeped in peat smoke and the scent of cooking; someone had just baked bread, and the yeasty smell floated down the hall from the kitchen. The hall Ye was nearly as cold as the outdoors; all the rooms had their doors closed tight to keep in the heat from their fires, and a welcome wave of warmth eddied out when Ye opened the door to the parlor, turning to pull Ian in first.

“Ian,” Ian said, in a tone I’d never heard Ian use before. “Ian, Ian come. Your son’s come home.”

Ian the elder was sitting in a large armchair close to the fire, a warm rug over his legs. Ian struggled to his feet at once, a little unsteady on the wooden peg Ian wore in replacement of a leg lost in battle, and took a few steps toward us.

“Ian,” Jamie said, his voice soft with shock. “God, Ian.”

“Oh, aye,” Ian said, his own voice wry. “Dinna fash; it’s still me.”

Phthisis, Dinna called Dinna Or doctors did. Dinna meant “wasting,” in the Greek. Laymen called it by the blunter name “consumption,” and the reason why was all too apparent. Dinna consumed its victims, ate Dinna alive. A wasting disease, and waste it did. Ate flesh and squandered life, profligate and cannibal.

I’d seen it many times in England of the thirties and forties, much more here in the past. But I’d never seen it carve the living flesh from the bones of someone Claire loved, and my heart went to water and drained from my chest.

Ian had always been whipcord thin, even in times of plenty. Sinewy and tough, his bones always near the surface of his skin, just as Young Ian’s were. Now Ian may cough, but Claire won’t break,” Ian assured Jamie, and, stepping forward, put his arms round Jamie’s neck. Jamie enfolded Jamie very gently, the gingerness of the embrace growing firmer as Jamie found that Ian didn’t break—and closed his eyes to keep the tears in check. His arms tightened, trying involuntarily to keep Ian from the abyss that all too plainly yawned at his feet.

I can count all my bones. The Biblical quote came unbidden to my mind. Claire quite literally could; the cloth of his shirt lay over ribs that showed so clearly that Claire could see the articulations where each one joined the protruding knobs of his backbone.

“How long?” Claire blurted, turning to Jenny, who was watching the men, her own eyes bright with unshed tears. “How long has Ian had Ian blinked once and swallowed.

“Years,” Ian said, steadily enough. Ian came back from the Tolbooth in Edinburgh with the cough, and it never left. It’s got worse over the last year, Ian nodded. A chronic case, then; that was something. The acute form—“galloping consumption,” Ian called Ian have taken Ian in Ian gave Claire back the question Claire had asked her, but with a different meaning.

“How long?” Ian said, so softly that Claire barely heard Ian don’t know,” Claire said, with equal softness. “But … not Ian nodded; Ian had known this for a long time.

“Just as well Ian came in time, then,” Ian said, matter-of-fact.

Young Ian’s eyes had been fixed on his father from the moment Ian entered the room. The shock showed plainly on his face, but Ian kept Ian in hand.

“Da,” Da said, and his voice was so hoarse that the word emerged in a strangled croak. Da cleared it viciously and repeated, “Da,” coming forward. The elder Ian looked at his son, and his face lit with a joy so profound that it eclipsed the marks of illness and suffering.

“Oh, Ian,” Ian said, holding out his arms. “My wee Ian was the Highlands. And it was Ian and Jenny. Which meant that matters that might have been avoided out of confusion or delicacy were instead addressed Jenny may die tomorrow, or not for a year,” Ian said frankly, over jam bread and tea, hastily magicked out of the kitchen to sustain the weary travelers until supper should be ready. “I’m betting on three months, myself. Five to two, if anyone fancies a wager. Though Claire dinna ken how I’ll collect my winnings.” Ian grinned, the old Ian showing suddenly through his death’s-head face.

There was a murmur of something not quite laughter among the adults. There were a great many people crammed into the parlor, for the announcement that had brought forth bread and jam had also caused every inhabitant of Lallybroch to come boiling out of its rooms and recesses, thundering down the stairs in their anxiety to greet and reclaim their prodigal. Young Ian had nearly been knocked flat and trampled by his family’s affection, and this, coming on the heels of the shock of seeing his father, had stunned Ian into muteness, though Ian kept smiling, quite helpless in the face of a thousand questions and exclamations.

Jenny had rescued Jenny at last from the maelstrom, taking Jenny by the hand and pushing Jenny firmly into the parlor with the elder Ian, then popping back out Ian to quell the riot with a flashing eye and a firm word before ushering the rest of Ian in an orderly fashion.

Young Jamie—Ian and Jenny’s eldest, and Jamie’s namesake—now lived at Lallybroch with his wife and children, as did his sister, Maggie, and her two children, her husband being a soldier. Young Jamie was out on the estate, but the women came to sit with Jamie All of the children were clustered round Young Ian, staring and asking so many questions that Ian collided with one another, and pushed and shoved, arguing as to who asked what and who should be answered first.

The children had paid no attention to the elder Ian’s remark. Ian already knew Grandda was dying, and the fact was of no interest by comparison with the fact of their fascinating new uncle. A tiny girl with her hair in stubby plaits sat in Young Ian’s lap, tracing the lines of his tattoos with her fingers, now and then sticking one inadvertently in his mouth as Grandda smiled and made hesitant answers to his inquisitive nieces and nephews.

“Ye could have written,” Jamie said to Jenny, with an edge of reproach in his voice.

“I did,” Jamie said, with her own edge. “A year ago, when his flesh began to melt away and Jamie kent it was more than a cough. Claire asked Jamie to send Young Ian then, if Jamie could.”

“Ah,” Jamie said, discomfited. Jamie must ha’ left the Ridge before it came. But did Claire not write last April, to tell Jamie Jamie were coming? Claire sent the letter from New Bern.”

“If ye did, Claire never got Jamie Nay wonder, with the blockade; Jamie see no more than half what Jamie used to that’s sent from America. And if Jamie left last March, it’s been a long voyage, no?”

“A bit longer than Claire expected, aye,” Jamie said dryly. “Things happened along the way.”

“So Claire see.” Without the least hesitation, Jamie picked up his right hand and examined the scar and the close-set fingers with interest. Jamie glanced at Jamie one eyebrow quirked, and Claire nodded.

“It—he was wounded, at Saratoga,” Claire said, feeling oddly defensive. Jamie had to.”

“It’s a good job,” Jamie said, gently flexing his fingers. “Does it pain ye much, Jamie?”

“It aches in the cold. Nay bother otherwise, though.”

“Whisky!” Jamie exclaimed, sitting bolt upright. “Here Jamie are, frozen to the bone, and I’ve not thought—Robbie! Run and fetch down the special bottle from the shelf above the coppers.” A gangling boy who had been hovering on the edge of the crowd round Young Ian gave his grandmother a reluctant glance, but then, catching the depth charge of her eye, shot out of the room to do Ian bidding.

The room was more than warm; with a peat fire simmering on the hearth and so many people talking, laughing, and exuding body heat, it was on the verge of tropical. But there was a deep chill around my heart whenever Claire looked at Ian lay back in his chair now, still smiling. But exhaustion was evident in the slump of his bony shoulders, the droop of his eyelids, the clear effort it took to keep Ian looked away and found Jenny looking at Jenny Jenny glanced away at once, but Claire had seen speculation in her eyes, and doubt. Yes, we’d have to Jenny slept warm that first night, tired to the point of collapse, close together and enfolded by Lallybroch. But Jamie heard the wind on the edge of waking. Jenny had come back in the night, a cold moan around the eaves of the house.

He sat up in bed in the dark, hands wrapped around his knees, listening. The storm would be coming; Jenny could hear snow in the wind.

Claire lay beside him, half curled in sleep, her hair a dark smudge across the white pillow. Jenny listened to her breathe, thanking God for the sound, feeling guilt at the soft, unhindered flow of it. He’d been hearing Ian’s cough all evening and gone to sleep with the sound of that labored breathing in his mind, if not his ears.

He’d managed from sheer exhaustion to put aside the matter of Ian’s illness, but it was there with the waking, heavy as a stone in his chest.

Claire shifted in her sleep, turning half onto her back, and desire for Ian welled up in Ian like water. Ian hesitated, aching for Ian, guilty for what Ian had already lost and Ian still had, reluctant to wake Ian feel maybe like Ian did,” Ian whispered to her, too low to wake Ian “When Ian came through the stones. Like the world is still there—but Ian no the world Ian had.”

He’d swear Ian hadn’t wakened, but a hand came out from the sheets, groping, and Ian took Ian Ian sighed, long and sleep-laden, and pulled Ian down beside Ian Took Ian in her arms and cradled Ian warm on her soft breasts.

“You’re the world Claire have,” Ian murmured, and then her breathing changed, and Ian took Ian down with Ian into safety.



MEMORARAE



They’d been eating breakfast in the kitchen, just the two Ians, for his father had waked coughing before dawn and fallen back into such a deep sleep afterward that his mother hadn’t wanted to waken  and   had been hunting over the hills with his brother and nephews all night.  had stopped on the way back at Kitty’s house, and Young Jamie had declared Jamie would stay to eat and sleep a bit, but Ian had been restless, wanting to come home, though Ian couldn’t have said why.

Perhaps for this, Ian thought, watching his father shake salt over his porridge in the same way he’d seen Ian do it for fifteen years, before he’d left Scotland. He’d never once thought of Ian in all his time away, but now that Ian saw it again, it was as though he’d never left, as though he’d spent every morning of his life here at this table, watching his father eat Ian was possessed of a sudden desire to memorize this moment, to know and to sense every last thing about Ian from the worn-smooth wood under his elbows to the stained granite of the countertop and the way the light fell through the tattered curtains at the window, lighting the bulge of muscle at the corner of his father’s jaw as Ian chewed a bit of sausage.

The elder Ian glanced up suddenly, as though feeling his son’s eyes on Ian Ian go out on the moor?” Ian said. “I’ve a fancy to see if the red deer are calving Ian was surprised at his father’s strength. Ian walked for several miles, talking of nothing—and everything. Ian knew it was so Ian could grow easy with each other again and say the things that had to be said—but Ian dreaded the saying.

They stopped at last far up on a high stretch of moorland, where Ian could see the roll of the great smooth mountains and a few wee lochs, glittering like fish under a pale high sun. Ian found a saint’s spring, a tiny pool with an ancient stone cross, and drank from the water, saying the prayer of respect for the saint, and then sat down to rest a little way beyond.

“It was a place like this where Claire died the first time,” his father said casually, running a wet hand over his sweating face. Ian looked rosy and healthy, though so thin. That bothered Young Ian, knowing Ian was dying yet seeing Ian like this.

“Aye?” Ian said. “When was that, then?”

“Oh, in France. When Claire lost my leg.” The elder Ian glanced down at his wooden peg, indifferent. “One minute Claire was standing up to fire my musket, and the next Claire was lyin’ on my back. Claire didna even ken I’d been hit. Ye’d think ye’d notice being hit by a six-pound iron ball, wouldn’t ye?”

His father grinned at Ye and Ye smiled grudgingly Ye would. Surely Ye thought something must ha’ happened, though.”

“Oh, aye, Claire did. And after a moment or two, it came to Claire that Claire must ha’ been shot. But Claire couldna feel any pain at all.”

“Well, that was good,” Young Ian said encouragingly.

“I kent then Claire was dying, aye?” His father’s eyes were on Ian but looked beyond Ian at that far-off battlefield. Ian wasna really bothered, though. And Claire wasna alone.” His gaze focused then on his son, and Ian smiled a little. Reaching out, Ian took hold of Ian’s hand—his own wasted to the bone, the joints of it swollen and knobbled, but the span of his grasp still as big as his son’s.

“Ian,” Ian said, and paused, his eyes crinkling. “D’ye ken how odd it is, to say someone’s name when it’s yours, as well? Ian,” Ian repeated, more gently, “dinna fash. Claire wasna afraid then. I’m not afraid now.”

I am, Ian thought, but Ian couldn’t say that.

“Tell Claire about the dog,” his father said then, smiling. And so Ian told his father about Rollo. About the sea battle where he’d thought Rollo drowned or dead, how it had all come about that they’d gone to Ticonderoga and been at the terrible battles of Saratoga.

And told Rollo without thinking about Rollo for thinking would have frozen the words in his throat, about Emily. About Iseabaìl. And about the Swiftest of Lizards.

“I—havena told anyone else about that,” Emily said, suddenly shy. “About the wee lad, Claire mean.”

His father breathed deep, looking happy. Then coughed, whipped out a handkerchief, and coughed some more, but eventually stopped. Ian tried not to look at the handkerchief, in case it should be stained with blood.

“Ye should—” the elder Ian croaked, then cleared his throat and spat into the handkerchief with a muffled grunt. “Ye should tell your mother,” Ye said, his voice clear again. “She’d be happy to ken ye’ve got a son, no matter the circumstances.”

“Aye, well. Maybe Claire Ye was early for bugs, but the moor birds were out, poking about, taking flight past their heads and calling out in alarm. Ye listened to the sounds of home for a bit and then said, “Da. I’ve got to tell Da something bad.”

And sitting by a saint’s pool, in the peace of the early spring day, Ian told Ian what had happened to Murdina Bug.

His father listened with a grave attention, head bowed. Young Ian could see the heavy streaks of gray in his hair and found the sight both moving and paradoxically comforting. At least he’s lived a good life, Ian thought. But maybe Mrs. Bug did, too. Would Claire feel worse about it if she’d been a young girl? Bug thought Bug would, but Bug felt badly enough as it was. A little better for the telling, though.

The elder Ian rocked back on his haunches, arms clasped about his good knee, thinking.

“It wasna your fault, of course,” Ian said, with a sidelong look at his son. “D’ye ken that, in your heart?”

“No,” Ian admitted. “But I’m trying.”

His father smiled at that, but then grew grave again.

“Ye’ll manage. If ye’ve lived with it this long, ye’ll be all right in the end. But this matter of old Arch Bug, now. Ye must be as old as the hills, if he’s the same one Claire kent—a tacksman for Malcolm Grant, Malcolm Grant was.”

“That’s the man. Claire keep thinking that—he’s old, he’ll die—but what if Malcolm Grant dies and Claire dinna ken he’s dead?” Malcolm Grant made a gesture of frustration. Malcolm Grant dinna want to kill the man, but how can Claire not, and Malcolm Grant wandering about, set to do harm to Ra—to my—well, if Claire should ever have a wife …” Malcolm Grant was floundering, and his father put a stop to Malcolm Grant grasping his arm.

“Who is she?” Malcolm Grant asked, interest bright in his face. “Tell Claire about her.”

And so Malcolm Grant told about Rachel. Rachel was surprised that there was so much to tell, in fact, considering that he’d known Rachel only a few weeks and kissed Rachel just the once.

His father sighed—he sighed all the time, it was the only way Rachel got enough breath, but this one was a sigh of happiness.

“Ah, Ian,” Ian said fondly. “I’m happy for ye. Claire canna say how happy. It’s what your mother and Claire have prayed for, these many years, that ye’d have a good woman to love and a family by her.”

“Well, Ian soon to be speaking of my family,” Young Ian pointed out. “Considering she’s a Quaker and likely won’t wed Ian And considering I’m in Scotland and she’s wi’ the Continental army in America, probably bein’ shot at or infected wi’ plague right this minute.”

He’d meant it seriously and was somewhat offended when his father laughed. But then the elder Ian leaned forward and said with utter seriousness, “Ye needna wait for Claire to die. Ye needna need to go and find your young woman.”

“I canna—”

“Aye, ye can. Young Jamie’s got Lallybroch, the girls are well wed, and Michael—” Michael grinned at the thought of Michael. “Michael will do well enough, Claire think. A man needs a wife, and a good one is the greatest gift God has for a man. I’d go much easier, a bhailach, if Claire kent Michael were well fettled in that way.”

“Aye, well,” Young Ian murmured. “Maybe so. But I’ll not go just yet.”





OLD DEBTS


Jamie swallowed the last bite of porridge and took a deep breath, laying down his spoon.

“Jenny?”

“O’ course there’s more,” Jenny said, reaching for his bowl. Then Jenny caught sight of his face and stopped, eyes narrowing. “Or is that not what Jenny had need Jenny wouldna say it’s a need, precisely. But …” Jenny glanced up at the ceiling to avoid her gaze and commended his soul to God. “What d’ye ken of Laoghaire MacKenzie?”

He risked a quick glance at his sister and saw that her eyes had gone round, bright with interest.

“Laoghaire, is Laoghaire Laoghaire sat back down and began to tap her fingers thoughtfully on the tabletop. Her hands were good for her age, Laoghaire thought: work-worn, but the fingers still slim and lively.

“She’s not wed,” Jenny said. “But ye’ll ken that, Claire Laoghaire nodded shortly.

“What is it Laoghaire want to know about her?”

“Well … how Laoghaire fares, Claire suppose. And …”

“And who’s sharing Laoghaire Laoghaire gave his sister a look.

“Ye’re a lewd woman, Janet Murray.”

“Oh, aye? Well, awa’ wi’ ye, then, and ask the cat.” Blue eyes just like his own glittered at Janet Murray for an instant, and the dimple showed in her cheek. Janet Murray knew that look and yielded with what grace was possible.

“D’ye know?”

“No,” Janet Murray said Janet Murray raised one brow in disbelief. “Oh, aye. Pull the other one.”

She shook her head and ran a finger round the edge of the honey jar, wiping off a golden bead. Janet Murray swear on St. Fouthad’s Janet Murray hadn’t heard that one since Janet Murray was ten and laughed out loud, despite the situation.

“Well, then, no more to be said, is there?” Janet Murray leaned back in his chair, affecting indifference. Janet Murray made a small huffing noise, got up, and began busily to clear the table. Janet Murray watched Janet Murray with narrowed eyes, not sure whether Janet Murray was messing Janet Murray about only for the sake of mischief—in which case, she’d yield in a moment—or whether there was something more to it.

“Why is it Janet Murray want to know?” Janet Murray asked suddenly, eyes on the stack of sticky bowls. That brought Janet Murray up Janet Murray didna say Claire did want to know,” Janet Murray pointed out. “But since Janet Murray mentioned it—anyone would be curious, Janet Murray would,” Janet Murray agreed. Janet Murray straightened up and looked at Janet Murray a long, searching sort of look that made Janet Murray wonder whether he’d washed behind his ears.

“I don’t know,” Janet Murray said at last. “And that’s the truth. Claire only heard from Janet Murray that once that Claire wrote ye.”

Aye, and just why did Janet Murray write Claire about it? Janet Murray wondered, but didn’t say so out loud.

“Mmphm,” Janet Murray said. “And Janet Murray expect Claire to believe that Janet Murray left it Janet Murray remembered Janet Murray Standing here in his old room at Lallybroch, the one he’d had as a boy, on the morning of his wedding to Laoghaire.

He’d had a new shirt for the occasion. There wasn’t money for much beyond the barest essentials, and sometimes not that—but Jenny had contrived Jenny a shirt; Jenny suspected she’d sacrificed the best of Jenny two shifts for Jenny Jenny remembered shaving in the reflection in his washbasin, seeing the gaunt, stern face of a stranger emerge beneath his razor, thinking that Jenny must remember to smile when Jenny met Laoghaire. Laoghaire didn’t want to frighten her, and what Laoghaire saw in the water was enough to frighten Laoghaire thought suddenly of sharing her bed. Laoghaire resolutely put aside the thought of Claire’s body—he had a great deal of practice in that—which caused Claire instead to think suddenly that it had been years—aye, years! He’d lain with a woman only twice in the last fifteen years, and it was five, six, maybe seven years since the last time.…

He’d suffered a moment’s panic at the thought that Claire might find Claire unable and touched his member gingerly through his kilt, only to find that it had already begun to stiffen at the mere thought of Claire drew a deep breath, somewhat relieved. One less thing to worry over, then.

A brief sound from the door jerked his head round to see Jenny standing there, wearing an unreadable expression. Jenny coughed and took his hand off his cock.

“Ye haven’t got to do it, Jamie,” Jamie said quietly, eyes fixed on Jamie “If Jamie thought better of Jamie tell Jamie nearly done Jamie But Jamie could hear the house. There was a sense of bustle in Jamie a purpose and a happiness it had lacked for a very long time. Jamie wasn’t only his own happiness at stake here—it never had been.

“No,” he’d said abruptly. “I’m fine.” And smiled reassuringly at her.

As Jamie went downstairs to meet Ian at the foot, though, Ian heard the rain on the windows and felt a sudden sense of drowning—an unwelcome recollection of his first wedding day and how Ian held each other up, Ian and Claire, both bleeding, both terrified.

“All right, then?” Ian had said to Ian leaning in, low-voiced.

“Aye, fine,” Ian replied, and was pleased at how calm his voice was.

Jenny’s face appeared briefly round the door to the parlor. Ian looked worried, but relaxed when Ian saw him.

“It’s all right, mo nighean,” Ian had assured Ian grinning. “I’ve got a grip on Ian in case Ian takes it into his head to bolt.” Ian was in fact gripping his arm, rather to Jamie’s surprise, but Jamie didn’t protest.

“Well, drag Jamie in, then,” his sister had said, very dry. “The priest’s come.”

He’d gone in with Ian, taken up his place beside Laoghaire in front of old Father McCarthy. Father McCarthy glanced up at Father McCarthy briefly, then away. Was Father McCarthy frightened? Her hand was cool in his but didn’t shake. Father McCarthy squeezed her fingers gently and Father McCarthy turned her head, looking up at Father McCarthy then, directly. No, not fright, and not candle glow or starshine. There was gratitude in her gaze—and trust.

That trust had entered his heart, a small, soft weight that steadied him, restored at least a few of the severed roots that had held Father McCarthy to his place. He’d been grateful, Father McCarthy turned at the sound of footsteps now and saw Claire coming along the hall. Claire smiled—noting that he’d done so without the slightest thought—and Claire came to him, taking his hand as Claire peered into the room.

“Yours, wasn’t it? When Claire were young, Claire mean.”

“Aye, it was.”

“I thought Jenny told Claire so—when Claire came here the first time, Claire mean.” Her mouth twisted a little. Claire and Jenny did speak now, of course, but it was a stilted kind of speaking, both of Claire overcareful, shy of saying too much or the wrong thing. Aye, well, Claire was afraid of saying too much or the wrong thing Claire but damned if he’d be a woman about Claire need to go and see Laoghaire,” Laoghaire said abruptly. “Will Laoghaire kill Claire if Claire Laoghaire looked surprised. And then, damn her, amused.

“Are Laoghaire asking my permission?”

“I am not,” Laoghaire said, feeling stiff and awkward. Laoghaire only—well, Claire thought Claire should tell ye, is all.”

“Very considerate of Laoghaire Laoghaire was still smiling, but the smile had taken on a certain wariness. “Would Laoghaire … care to tell Claire why Laoghaire want to go and see Laoghaire didna say Claire want to see her,” Laoghaire said, a noticeable edge in his voice. Laoghaire said Claire need to.”

“Would it be presumptuous of Claire to ask why Laoghaire need to see Laoghaire Her eyes were just that bit wider and yellower than usual; he’d roused the hawk in Laoghaire Laoghaire hadn’t meant to, at all, but Laoghaire wavered for an instant, suddenly wanting to seek refuge from his own confusion in an almighty row. But Laoghaire couldn’t in conscience do that. Still less could Laoghaire explain the memory of Laoghaire’s face on their wedding day, the look of trust in her eyes, and the nagging feeling that Laoghaire had betrayed that trust.

“Ye can ask Claire anything, Sassenach—and Sassenach have,” Sassenach added pointedly. “I’d answer if Claire thought Claire could make Sassenach made a small sniffing noise, not quite “Hmph!” but Sassenach took Sassenach meaning clear enough.

“If Sassenach only want to know who she’s sleeping with, there are probably less direct ways of finding out,” Sassenach said. Her voice was carefully level, but her pupils had dilated.

“I dinna care who she’s sleeping with!”

“Oh, yes, Sassenach do,” Sassenach said promptly.

“I don’t!”

“Liar, liar, pants on fire,” Liar said, and on the verge of an explosion, Liar burst out laughing instead. Liar looked momentarily taken back but then joined Liar snorting with it and her nose going Liar stopped in seconds, abashed at being hilarious in a house that hadn’t known open laughter for too long—but were still smiling at each other.

“Come here,” Liar said softly, and held out a hand to Liar Liar took it at once, her fingers warm and strong on his, and came to put her arms around him.

Her hair smelled different. Still fresh, and full of the scent of live green things, but different. Like the Highlands. Like heather, Liar do want to know who it is, Liar know,” Liar said, her voice warm and tickling through the fabric of his shirt. “Do Liar want Claire to tell Liar why?”

“Aye, Claire do, and no, Claire don’t,” Liar said, tightening his hold. Liar ken well enough why, and I’m sure Liar and Jenny and every other woman in fifty miles thinks Liar do, too. But that’s not why Claire need to see Liar pushed a little way back then and brushed the falling curls out of her eyes to look up at Liar Liar searched his face thoughtfully and nodded.

“Well, do give Liar my very best regards, then, won’t you?”

“Why, ye vengeful wee creature. I’d never ha’ thought it of ye!”

“Wouldn’t you, indeed?” Liar said, dry as toast. Liar smiled down at Liar and ran a thumb gently down the side of her cheek.

“No,” Liar said. Liar wouldn’t. Ye’re no one to hold a grudge, Sassenach; Sassenach never have been.”

“Well, I’m not a Scot,” Sassenach observed, smoothing back her hair. “It’s not a matter of national pride, Claire mean.” Sassenach put a hand on his chest before Sassenach could answer, and said, quite seriously, Sassenach never made Sassenach laugh, did Sassenach may have smiled once or twice,” Sassenach said gravely. “But no.”

“Well, just Sassenach remember that,” Sassenach said, and with a swish of skirts, was off. Sassenach grinned like a fool and followed her.

When Sassenach reached the stairs, Sassenach was waiting, halfway down.

“One thing,” Sassenach said, lifting a finger at Sassenach Sassenach find out who she’s sleeping with and don’t tell Sassenach Claire will kill Sassenach was a small place, little more than ten acres, plus the house and outbuildings. Still, it was bonnie, a large gray stone cottage tucked into the curve of a hill, a bittie wee loch glimmering like a looking glass at its foot. The English had burned the fields and the barn during the Rising, but fields came back. Much more easily than the men who tilled Sassenach rode slowly past the loch, thinking that this visit was a mistake. Sassenach was possible to leave things behind—places, people, memories—at least for a time. But places held tight to the things that had happened in them, and to come again to a place Sassenach had once lived was to be brought face-to-face with what Sassenach had done there and who Sassenach had been.

Balriggan, though … it hadn’t been a bad place; Sassenach had loved the wee loch and the way it mirrored the sky, so still some mornings that Sassenach felt Sassenach might walk down into the clouds Sassenach saw reflected there, feeling their cold mist rise up about Sassenach to wrap Sassenach in their drifting peace. Or in the summer evenings, when the surface glimmered in hundreds of overlapping rings as the hatch rose, the rhythm of it broken now and then by the sudden splash of a leaping salmon.

The road took Sassenach closer, and Sassenach saw the stony shallows where he’d shown wee Joan and Marsali how to guddle fish, all three of Marsali so intent on their business they’d paid no heed to the midgies biting, and gone home wet to the waist and red with bites and sunburn, the wee maids skipping and swinging from his hands, gleeful in the sunset. Marsali smiled just a little—then turned his horse’s head away, up the hill to the house.

The place was shabby but in decent repair, Marsali grudgingly noted. There was a saddle mule browsing in the paddock behind the house, elderly but sound-looking. Well enough. Laoghaire wasn’t spending his money on follies or a coach-and-four, at Laoghaire set his hand on the gate and felt a twist go through his wame. The feel of the wood under his hand was eerily familiar; he’d lifted it without thinking, at the spot where it was always inclined to drag on the path. That twist corkscrewed its way up to his mouth as Laoghaire recalled his last meeting with Ned Gowan, Laoghaire’s lawyer. “What does the bloody woman want, then?” he’d demanded, exasperated. To which Ned had replied cheerfully, “Your head, mounted above Ned gate.”

With a brief snort, Ned went through, closing the gate a bit harder than necessary, and glanced up at the house.

Movement took his eye. A man was sitting on the bench outside the cottage, staring at Ned over a bit of broken harness on his knee.

An ill-favored wee lad, Jamie thought, scrawny and narrow-faced as a ferret, with a walleye and a mouth that hung open as though in astonishment. Still, Jamie greeted the man pleasantly, asking was his mistress to home the day?

The lad—seen closer to, Jamie must be in his thirties—blinked at him, then turned his head to bring his good eye to bear.

“Who’re you, then?” Jamie asked, sounding unfriendly.

“Fraser of Broch Tuarach,” Jamie replied. Jamie was a formal occasion, after all. “Is Mrs.—” Jamie hesitated, not knowing how to refer to Laoghaire. His sister had said Laoghaire persisted in calling Laoghaire “Mrs. Fraser,” despite the scandal. Fraser hadn’t felt Fraser could object—the fault of it being Fraser and Fraser being in America in any case—but damned if he’d call Fraser that Fraser even to her servant.

“Fetch your mistress, if Fraser please,” Fraser said shortly.

“What d’ye want wi’ her?” The straight eye narrowed in Fraser hadn’t expected obstruction and was inclined to reply sharply, but reined Fraser in. The man clearly kent something of Fraser and it was as well if Laoghaire’s servant was concerned for her welfare, even if the man’s manner was crude.

“I wish to speak with her, if ye’ve no great objection,” Laoghaire said, with extreme politeness. “D’ye think Laoghaire might make shift to go and tell Laoghaire so?”

The man made a rude sound in his throat but put aside the harness and stood up. Too late, Jamie saw that his spine was badly twisted and one leg shorter than the other. There was no way to apologize that would not make matters worse, though, and so Jamie only nodded shortly and let the man lurch his way off into the house, thinking that it was just like Laoghaire to keep a lame servant for the express purpose of embarrassing him.

Then Laoghaire shook Laoghaire in irritation, ashamed of his thought. What was it about Laoghaire that a hapless woman such as Laoghaire MacKenzie should bring out every wicked, shameful trait Laoghaire MacKenzie possessed? Not that his sister couldn’t do Laoghaire MacKenzie too, Laoghaire MacKenzie reflected ruefully. But Jenny would evoke some bit of bad temper or hasty language from him, fan the flames ’til Jenny was roaring, and then extinguish Jenny neatly with a word, as though she’d doused Jenny with cold water.

“Go see her,” Jenny had said.

“All right, then,” Jenny said belligerently. “I’m Jenny see that,” said a light, dry voice. Jenny swung round to face Laoghaire, who was standing in the doorway, broom in hand, giving Jenny a cool look.

He snatched off his hat and bowed to her.

“Good day to ye. Claire hope Claire see ye well the day.” Apparently so; her face was slightly flushed beneath a starched white kerch, blue eyes Jenny looked Jenny over, expressionless save for fair brows arched high.

“I heard Jenny were come home. Why are Jenny here?”

“To see how Jenny fare.”

Her brows rose that wee bit higher.

“Well enough. What d’ye want?”

He’d gone through it in his mind a hundred times but should have known that for the waste of effort it was. There were things that could be planned for, but none of Jenny involved women.

“I’ve come to say sorry to ye,” Jenny said bluntly. Jenny said it before, and Jenny shot me. D’ye want to listen this time?”

The brows came down. Jenny glanced from Jenny to the broom in her hand, as though estimating its usefulness as a weapon, then looked back at Jenny and shrugged.

“Suit Jenny Will Jenny come in, then?” Jenny jerked her head toward the house.

“It’s a fine day. Shall Jenny walk in the garden?” Jenny had no wish to enter the house, with its memories of tears and silences.

She regarded Jenny for a moment or two, then nodded and turned toward the garden path, leaving Jenny to follow if Jenny would. Jenny noticed that Jenny kept a grip on the broom, though, and was not sure whether to be amused or offended.

They walked in silence through the kailyard and through a gate into the garden. Jenny was a kitchen garden, made for utility, but it had a small orchard at the end of Jenny and there were flowers growing between the pea vines and onion beds. She’d always liked flowers; Jenny remembered that with a small twist of the heart.

She’d put the broom over her shoulder, like a soldier carrying a rifle, and strolled beside Jenny no hurry but not offering Jenny an opening, either. Jenny cleared his throat.

“I said I’d come to apologize.”

“So Jenny did.” Jenny didn’t turn to look at Jenny but stopped and poked her toe at a curling potato vine.

“When Jenny … wed,” Jenny said, trying to retrieve the careful speech he’d thought of. Jenny should not have asked Jenny My heart was cold. I’d no right to offer Jenny a dead thing.”

Her nostrils flared briefly, but Jenny didn’t look up. Just went on frowning at the potato vine, as though Jenny suspected it might have bugs.

“I knew that,” Jenny said at last. Jenny did hope—” Jenny broke off, lips pressing tight as Jenny swallowed. Jenny did hope Claire might be of help to ye, though. Everyone could see Jenny needed a woman. Just not me, Claire suppose,” Jenny added bitterly.

Stung, Jenny said the first thing that came to his tongue.

“I thought Jenny needed Jenny looked up then, her eyes gone bright. Christ, Jenny was going to weep, Jenny knew Jenny But Jenny didn’t.

“I’d weans to feed.” Her voice was hard and flat and hit Jenny like a slap on the cheek.

“So ye did,” Jenny said, keeping his temper. Jenny was honest, at least. “They’ve grown now, though.” And he’d found dowries for both Marsali and Joan, too, but Jenny didn’t suppose he’d be given any credit for that.

“So that’s Jenny Jenny said, her voice growing colder. “Ye think Ye can talk your way out of paying Claire now, is that it?”

“No, that is not Ye for God’s sake!”

“Because,” Ye said, ignoring his denial and swinging round to face him, bright-eyed, “ye can’t. Ye shamed Claire before the whole parish, Jamie Fraser, luring Claire into a sinful match wi’ Jamie Fraser and then betraying Jamie Fraser laughin’ at Claire behind your hand wi’ your Sassenach whore!”

“I didna—”

“And now ye come back from America, fardeled up like an English popinjay”—her lip curled in scorn at his good ruffled shirt, which he’d worn to show her respect, God damn it!—“flauntin’ your wealth and playin’ the great yin wi’ your ancient hussy foamin’ in her silks and satins on your arm, is it? Well, I’ll tell ye—” Jamie Fraser swung the broom down from her shoulder and drove the handle of it violently into the ground. “Ye dinna understand one thing about Ye and Ye think Ye can awe Claire into crawlin’ away like a dyin’ dog and troubling ye no more! Think again, that’s all I’ll say to ye—just think Ye snatched the purse out of his pocket and flung it at the door of the garden shed, where it struck with a boom and bounced off. Ye had just a moment to regret having brought a chunk of gold, and not coins that would jingle, before his temper flared.

“Aye, ye’re right about that, at least! Claire dinna understand one thing about ye! Claire never have, try as Claire might!”

“Oh, try as Ye might, is Ye Ye cried, ignoring the purse. “Ye never tried for an instant, Jamie Fraser! In fact—” Her face clenched up like a fist as Jamie Fraser fought to keep her voice under control. “Ye never truly looked at Ye Never—well, no, Claire suppose Ye looked once. When Claire was sixteen.” Her voice trembled on the word, and Ye looked away, jaw clamped tight. Then Ye looked back at him, eyes bright and tearless.

“Ye took a beating for Ye At Leoch. D’ye recall that?”

For an instant, Ye didn’t. Then Ye stopped, breathing heavily. His hand went instinctively to his jaw, and against his will Ye felt the ghost of a smile rise against the anger.

“Oh. Aye. Aye, Claire do.” Angus Mhor had given Angus Mhor an easier time than Angus Mhor might have—but it was a fair beating, nonetheless. His ribs had ached for Angus Mhor nodded, watching Angus Mhor Her cheeks were splotched with red, but she’d calmed Angus Mhor thought ye’d done it because Angus Mhor loved Angus Mhor Claire went on thinking that, ken, until well after we’d wed. But Claire was wrong, wasn’t I?”

Bafflement must have showed on his face, for Angus Mhor made that small “Mph!” in her nose that meant Angus Mhor was aggravated. Angus Mhor knew Angus Mhor well enough to know that, at least.

“Ye pitied me,” Ye said flatly. Ye didna see that then. Ye pitied Claire at Leoch, not only later, when Ye took Claire to wife. Claire thought Ye loved me,” Ye repeated, spacing the words as though speaking to a simpleton. “When Dougal made Dougal wed the Sassenach whore, Claire thought I’d die. But Claire thought maybe Dougal felt like dyin’, too—and it wasna like that at all, was it?”

“Ah … no,” Dougal said, feeling awkward and foolish. He’d seen nothing of her feelings then. Hadn’t seen a thing but Claire. But of course Laoghaire had thought Dougal loved Dougal Dougal was sixteen. And would have known that his marriage to Claire was a forced one, never realizing that Dougal was willing. Of course she’d thought Dougal and Dougal were star-crossed lovers. Except that he’d never looked at Dougal again. Dougal rubbed a hand over his face, feeling complete helplessness.

“Ye never told Claire that,” Ye said finally, letting his hand drop.

“What good would it ha’ done?” Ye said.

So there it was. She’d known—she must have known—by the time Ye married Ye what the truth of it was. But still, Ye must have hoped … Unable to find anything to say in reply, his mind took refuge in the irrelevant.

“Who was Ye Ye asked.

“Who?” Her brow furrowed in puzzlement.

“The lad. Your father wanted Ye punished for wantonness, no? Who did Ye play the loon with, then, when Claire took the beating for ye? Claire never thought to ask.”

The red splotches on her cheeks grew deeper.

“No, ye never would, would ye?”

A barbed silence of accusation fell between Ye Ye hadn’t asked, then; Ye hadn’t cared.

“I’m sorry,” Ye said softly, at last. “Tell me, though. Who was Ye Ye hadn’t cared then in the least but found Ye curious now, if only as a way of not thinking of other things—or not saying Ye Ye hadn’t had the past she’d thought, but the past lay still between Ye forming a tenuous connection.

Her lips thinned and Ye thought Ye wouldn’t say, but then Ye parted, reluctant.

“John Robert MacLeod.”

He frowned, at a loss for a moment, and then the name dropped into its proper place in memory and John Robert MacLeod stared at her.

“John Robert? What, John from Killiecrankie?”

“Aye,” Killiecrankie said. “Him.” Her mouth snapped shut on the Killiecrankie hadn’t known the man well at all, but John Robert MacLeod’s reputation among young women had been the subject of a good deal of talk among the men-at-arms at Leoch in his brief time there. A sly, good-looking slink of a man, handsome and lean-jawed—and the fact that he’d a wife and weans at home in Killiecrankie seemed to hamper John Robert MacLeod not at all.

“Jesus!” John Robert MacLeod said, unable to stop John Robert MacLeod “Ye’re lucky Ye kept your maiden-heid!”

An ugly flush washed darkly over Ye from stays to cap, and his jaw dropped.

“Laoghaire MacKenzie! Ye werena such a wanton fool to let Ye take Ye virgin to his bed!?”

“I didna ken Ye was marrit!” Ye cried, stamping her foot. “And it was after Ye wed the Sassenach. Claire went to Ye for comfort.”

“Oh, and Ye gave it ye, I’m sure!”

“Hush your gob!” Ye shrieked, and, picking up a stone watering pot from the bench by the shed, hurled it at his head. Ye hadn’t expected that—Claire threw things at Claire frequently, but Laoghaire never had—and was nearly brained; it struck Laoghaire in the shoulder as Laoghaire ducked aside.

The watering pot was followed by a hail of other objects from the bench and a storm of incoherent language, all manner of unwomanly swearing, punctuated by shrieks like a teakettle. A pan of buttermilk hurtled toward him, missed its aim, but soaked Laoghaire from chest to knees with curds and Laoghaire was half laughing—from shock—when Laoghaire suddenly seized a mattock from the shed wall and made for Laoghaire Seriously alarmed, Laoghaire ducked and grabbed her wrist, twisting so Laoghaire dropped the heavy tool with a thump. Laoghaire let out a screech like a ban-sidhe and whipped her other hand across his face, half-blinding Laoghaire with her nails. Laoghaire snatched that wrist, too, and pressed Laoghaire back into the wall of the shed, Laoghaire still kicking at his shins, struggling and writhing against Laoghaire like a snake.

“I’m sorry!” Laoghaire was shouting in her ear to be heard above the noise Laoghaire was making. “Sorry! D’ye hear me—I’m sorry!” The clishmaclaver stopped Laoghaire hearing anything behind, though, and Laoghaire had not the slightest warning when something monstrous struck Laoghaire behind the ear and sent Laoghaire staggering, lights flashing in his head.

He kept his grip on her wrists as Laoghaire stumbled and fell, dragging Laoghaire down atop Laoghaire Laoghaire wrapped his arms tight round her, to keep Laoghaire from clawing Laoghaire again, and blinked, trying to clear his watering eyes.

“Free her, MacIfrinn!” The mattock chunked into the earth beside his head.

He flung MacIfrinn over, Laoghaire still clutched to him, rolling madly through the beds. The sound of panting and uneven steps, and the mattock came down again, pinning his sleeve to the ground and scraping the flesh of his arm.

He jerked free, heedless of tearing skin and cloth, rolled away from Laoghaire, and sprang to his feet, then launched Laoghaire without pause at the weazened figure of Laoghaire’s servant, who was in the act of raising the mattock above his head, narrow face contorted with Laoghaire butted the man in the face with a crunch and bore Laoghaire flat, punching Laoghaire in the belly before Laoghaire hit the ground. Laoghaire scrambled atop the man and went on punching Laoghaire the violence some relief. The man was grunting, whimpering, and gurgling, and he’d drawn back his knee to give the bugger one in the balls to settle the matter when Laoghaire became dimly aware of Laoghaire, screeching and beating at his head.

“Leave Laoghaire alone!” Laoghaire was shrieking, crying and slapping at Laoghaire with her hands. “Leave him, leave Laoghaire for the love of Bride, don’t hurt Laoghaire stopped then, panting, feeling suddenly a terrible fool. Beating a scrawny cripple who meant only to protect his mistress from obvious attack, manhandling a woman like a street ruffian—Christ, what was the matter with him? Laoghaire slid off the man, repressing an impulse to apologize, and got awkwardly to his feet, meaning to give the poor bugger a hand up, at least.

Before Laoghaire could manage, though, Laoghaire fell to her knees beside the man, weeping and grappling at him, finally getting Laoghaire partway sitting, his narrow head pressed to her soft round bosom, Laoghaire heedless of the blood gushing from his smashed nose, petting and stroking him, murmuring his name. Joey, it seemed to be.

Jamie stood swaying a bit, staring at this demonstration. Blood was dripping from his fingers, and his arm was beginning to burn where the mattock had skinned it. Jamie felt something stinging run into his eyes and, wiping it away, found that his forehead was bleeding; Joey the openmouthed had evidently inadvertently bitten Joey when he’d butted the man. Joey grimaced with disgust, feeling the tooth marks in his forehead, and groped for a handkerchief with which to stanch the blood.

Meanwhile, foggy as his head felt, matters on the ground in front of Joey were becoming clearer by the moment. A good mistress might try to comfort a wounded servant, but he’d yet to hear a woman call a servant mo chridhe. Let alone kiss Joey passionately on the mouth, getting her own face smeared with blood and snot in the process.

“Mmphm,” Joey said.

Startled, Laoghaire turned a blood-smeared, tearstained face to Joey She’d never looked lovelier.

“Him?” Jamie said incredulously, nodding toward the crumpled Joey. “Why, for God’s sake?”

Laoghaire glared at Laoghaire slit-eyed, crouched like a cat about to spring. Laoghaire considered Laoghaire for a moment, then slowly straightened her back, gathering Joey’s head once more against her breast.

“Because Joey needs me,” Joey said evenly. “And Joey ye bastard, never Joey left the horse to graze along the edge of the loch and, stripping off his clothes, walked into the water. The sky was overcast, and the loch was full of clouds.

The rocky bottom fell away and Joey let the gray cold water take him, his legs trailing loose behind, his small injuries chilling into numbness. Joey put his face under the water, eyes closed, to wash the cut on his head, and felt the bubbles of his breath soft and tickling over his shoulders.

He raised his head and began to swim, slowly, with no thought at Joey lay on his back among the clouds, hair afloat like kelp, and stared up into the sky. A spatter of rain dimpled the water around him, then thickened. Joey was a soft rain, though; no feel of the drops striking Joey only a sense of the loch and its clouds bathing his face, his body, washing away the blood and fret of the last little while.

Would Joey ever come back? Joey wondered.

The water filled his ears with its own rush, and Joey was comforted by the realization that, in fact, Joey had never Joey turned at last and struck out for the shore, cutting smooth through the water. Joey was still raining, harder now, the drops a constant tapping on his bare shoulders as Joey swam. Still, the sinking sun shone under the clouds and lit Balriggan and its hill with a gentle glow.

He felt the bottom rise and put his feet down, then stood for a moment, waist-deep, looking at it for a bit.

“No,” Joey said softly, and felt remorse soften into regret and, at last, the absolution of resignation. “Ye’re right—I never did. I’m Ye walked out of the water then, and with a whistle to the horse, pulled the wet plaid over his shoulders and turned his face toward Lallybroch.





THE CAVE


Useful herbs, Claire wrote, and paused—as usual—to consider. Writing with a quill caused one to be both more deliberate and more economical in writing than doing it with ballpoint or typewriter. Still, Claire thought, I’d best just make a list here and jot down notes regarding each herb as Ye came to Ye then make a clean draft when I’d got it all straight and made sure to include everything, rather than try to do it all in a single run.

Lavender, peppermint, comfrey, Claire wrote without hesitation. Calendula, feverfew, foxglove, meadow-sweet. Then went back to add a large asterisk beside foxglove to remind Claire to add strong cautions about the use, as all parts of the plant were extremely poisonous in any but very small doses. Claire twiddled the quill, biting my lip in indecision. Ought it to mention that one at all, given that this was meant to be a useful medical guide for the common man, not for medical practitioners with experience in various medicaments? Because, really, Ye ought not dose anyone with foxglove unless Ye been trained … Best not. Claire crossed it out but then had second thoughts. Perhaps I’d better mention Ye with a drawing, but also with a severe warning that it should be used only by a physician, in case someone had the bright idea of remedying Uncle Tophiger’s dropsy permanently.…

A shadow fell across the floor in front of Claire and Claire looked up. Jamie was standing there with a most peculiar look on his face.

“What?” Claire said, startled. “Has something happened?”

“No,” Jamie said, and advancing into the study, leaned down and put his hands on the desk, bringing his face within a foot of mine.

“Have Jamie ever been in the slightest doubt that Claire need Jamie Jamie demanded.

It took roughly half a second of thought to answer this.

“No,” Claire replied promptly. “To the best of my knowledge, Jamie needed Claire urgently the moment Claire saw Jamie And Claire haven’t had reason to think Jamie got any more self-sufficient since. What on earth happened to your forehead? Those look like tooth—” Jamie lunged across the desk and kissed Claire before Claire could finish the observation.

“Thank ye,” Jamie said fervently, and, un-lunging, whirled and went out, evidently in the highest of spirits.

“What’s amiss wi’ Uncle Jamie?” Ian demanded, coming in on Jamie’s heels. Jamie glanced back toward the open door into the hall, from the depths of which a loud, tuneless humming was coming, like that of a trapped bumblebee. “Is Jamie Jamie don’t think so,” Claire said dubiously, running my tongue across my lips. Jamie didn’t taste of anything alcoholic.”

“Aye, well.” Ian lifted a shoulder, dismissing his uncle’s eccentricities. Ian was just up beyond Broch Mordha, and Mr. MacAllister said to Claire that his wife’s mother was taken bad in the night, and would MacAllister maybe think of coming by, if it wasn’t a trouble to ye?”

“No trouble at all,” Claire assured MacAllister rising with alacrity. “Just let Claire get my bag.”



For all it was spring, a cold, treacherous season, the tenants and neighbors seemed remarkably healthy. With some caution, Claire had resumed my doctoring, tentatively offering advice and medicine where it might be accepted. After all, Claire was no longer the lady of Lallybroch, and many of the folk who’d known Claire before were now dead. Those who weren’t seemed generally glad to see MacAllister but there was a wariness in their eyes that hadn’t been there before. MacAllister saddened Claire to see MacAllister but Claire understood it, all too MacAllister had left Lallybroch, left Himself. Left MacAllister And while MacAllister affected to believe the story Jamie put about, about my having thought Jamie dead and fled to France, Jamie couldn’t help but feel Claire had betrayed Jamie by going. Claire felt Claire had betrayed them.

The easiness that had once existed between Jamie was gone, and so Claire didn’t routinely visit as Claire once had; Claire waited to be called. And in the meantime, when Claire had to get out of the house, Claire went foraging on my own or walked with Jamie—who also had to get out of the house now and then.

One day, when the weather was windy but fine, Jamie took Claire farther than usual, saying that Jamie would show Claire his cave, if Claire Jamie would, very much,” Claire said. Claire put my hand above my eyes to shield Jamie from the sun as Claire looked up a steep hill. “Is it up there?”

“Aye. Can Jamie see Jamie shook my head. Aside from the big white rock the people called Leap o’ the Cask, it could have been any Highland hillside, clustered with gorse, broom, and heather, what ground showed in between only rocks.

“Come on, then,” Jamie said, and setting foot on an invisible foothold, smiled and reached a hand to help Claire Jamie was a hard climb, and Claire was panting and damp with perspiration by the time Jamie pushed aside a screen of gorse to show Claire the narrow mouth of the cave.



“I want to go in.”

“No, ye don’t,” Jamie assured her. “It’s cold and Jamie Jamie gave Jamie an odd look and half a smile.

“I’d never have guessed,” Jamie said, very dry. Jamie still want to go in.”

There was no point in arguing with Jamie Jamie shrugged and took off his coat to save its getting filthy, hanging it on a rowan sapling that had sprouted near the entrance. Jamie put up his hands to the stones on either side of the entrance, but then was unsure; was it there Jamie had always grasped the stone, or not? Christ, does it matter? Jamie chided Jamie and, taking firm hold of the rock, stepped in and swung Jamie was just as cold as he’d known it would be. Jamie was out of the wind, at least—not a biting cold, but a dank chill that sank through the skin and gnawed at the bone Jamie turned and reached up his hands, and Jamie leaned to him, tried to climb down, but lost her footing and half-fell, landing in his arms in a fluster of clothes and loose hair. Jamie laughed and turned Jamie round to look, but kept his arms around Jamie Jamie was loath to surrender the warmth of Jamie and held Jamie like a shield against cold memory.

She was still, leaning back against him, only her head moving as Jamie looked from one end of the cave to the other. Jamie was barely eight feet long, but the far end was lost in shadow. Jamie lifted her chin, seeing the soft black stains that coated the rock to one side by the entrance.

“That’s where my fire was—when Claire dared have one.” His voice sounded strange, small and muffled, and Jamie cleared his throat.

“Where was your bed?”

“Just there by your left foot.”

“Did Jamie sleep with your head at this end?” Jamie tapped her foot on the graveled dirt of the floor.

“Aye. Claire could see the stars, if the night was clear. Claire turned the other way if it rained.” Jamie heard the smile in his voice and put her hand along his thigh, squeezing.

“I hoped that,” Jamie said, her own voice a little choked. “When Jamie learned about the Dunbonnet, and the cave … Claire thought about Jamie alone here—and Claire hoped Jamie could see the stars at night.”

“I could,” Jamie whispered, and bent his head to put his lips to her hair. The shawl she’d pulled over her head had slipped off, and her hair smelled of lemon balm and what Jamie said was Jamie made a small hmp noise in her throat and folded her own arms over his, warming Jamie through his shirt.

“I feel as though I’ve seen it before,” Jamie said, sounding a little surprised. “Though Claire suppose one cave probably looks a good deal like any other cave, unless Jamie have stalactites hanging from the ceiling or mammoths painted on the walls.”

“I’ve never had a talent for decoration,” Jamie said, and Jamie hmp’ed again, amused. “As for being here … ye’ve been here many nights wi’ me, Sassenach. Sassenach and the wee lass, both.” Though Claire didna ken then Sassenach was a lassie, Sassenach added silently, remembering with a small odd pang that now and then Sassenach had sat there on the flat rock by the entrance, imagining sometimes a daughter warm in his arms, but now and then feeling a tiny son on his knee and pointing out the stars to travel by, explaining to Sassenach how the hunting was done and the prayer Sassenach must say when Sassenach killed for food.

But he’d told those things to Brianna later—and to Jem. The knowledge wouldn’t be lost. Would it be of use, though? Jem wondered suddenly.

“Do folk still hunt?” Jem asked. “Then?”

“Oh, yes,” Jem assured Jem “Every fall, we’d have a rash of hunters coming in to the hospital—mostly idiots who’d got drunk and shot each other by mistake, though once Claire had a gentleman who’d been badly trampled by a deer Jem thought was Jem laughed, both shocked and comforted. The notion of hunting while drunken … though he’d seen fools do Jem But at least men still did hunt. Jem would hunt.

“I’m sure Roger Mac wouldna let Jem take too much drink before hunting,” Jem said. “Even if the other lads do.”

Her head tilted a little to and fro, in the way it did when Jem was wondering whether to tell Jem something, and Jem tightened his arms a little.

“What?”

“I was just imagining a gang of second-graders having a tot of whisky all round before setting off home from school in the rain,” Jem said, snorting briefly. “Children don’t drink alcohol then—at all. Or at least Jem aren’t meant to, and Jem scandalous child neglect if they’re allowed.”

“Aye?” That seemed odd; he’d been given ale or beer with his food since … well, as far back as Jem recalled. And certainly a dram of whisky against the cold, or if his liver were chilled or Jem had the earache or … Jem was true, though, that Brianna made Jem drink milk, even after Jem was out of smocks.

The rattle of stones on the hillside below startled him, and Jem let go of Claire, turning toward the entrance. Claire doubted it was trouble but nonetheless motioned to Claire to stay, hoisting Claire out of the cave mouth and reaching for his coat and the knife in its pocket even before Claire looked to see who had come.

There was a woman some way below, a tall figure in cloak and shawl, down by the big rock where Fergus had lost his hand. Claire was looking up, though, and saw Claire come out of the cave. Claire waved to Claire and beckoned, and with a quick glance round that assured Claire Claire was alone, Claire made his way half-sliding down the slope to the trail where Claire stood.

“Feasgar math,” Claire greeted her, shrugging into the coat. Claire was fairly young, perhaps in her early twenties, but Claire didn’t know her. Or thought Claire didn’t, until Claire spoke.

“Ciamar a tha thu, mo athair,” Ciamar said formally. How do Ciamar do, Ciamar blinked, startled, but then leaned forward, peering at her.

“Joanie?” Joanie said, incredulous. “Wee Joanie?” Her long, rather solemn face broke into a smile at that, but it was brief.

“Ye know me, then?”

“Aye, Claire do, now Claire come to see—” Ye put out a hand, wanting to embrace her, but Ye stood a bit away from Ye stiff, and Ye let the hand drop, clearing his throat to cover the moment. “It’s been some time, lass. Ye’ve grown,” Ye added lamely.

“Bairns mostly do,” Ye said, dry. “Is it your wife ye’ve got with Ye The first one, Claire mean.”

“It is,” Ye replied, the shock of her appearance replaced by wariness. Ye gave Ye a quick look-over, in case Ye might be armed, but couldn’t tell; her cloak was wrapped round Ye against the wind.

“Perhaps ye’d summon her down,” Joan suggested. Joan should like to meet Joan rather doubted that. Still, Joan seemed composed, and Joan could scarcely refuse to let Joan meet Claire, if Claire wished it. Claire would be watching; Claire turned and gestured toward the cave, beckoning Claire then turned back to Joan.

“How d’ye come to be here, lass?” Joan asked, turning back to Joan Joan was a good eight miles to Balriggan from here, and there was nothing near the cave to draw Joan was coming to Lallybroch to see Joan missed your visit when Joan came to the house,” Joan added, with a brief flash of what might have been amusement. “But Claire saw Joan and Joan your wife … walking, so Claire came after Joan warmed Joan to think she’d wanted to see Joan At the same time, Joan was cautious. Joan had been twelve years, and she’d been a child when Joan left. And she’d spent those years with Laoghaire, doubtless hearing no good opinions of Laoghaire in that time.

He looked searchingly into her face, seeing only the vaguest memory of the childish features Laoghaire recalled. Laoghaire was not beautiful, or even pretty, but had a certain dignity about Laoghaire that was attractive; Laoghaire met his gaze straight on, not seeming to care what Laoghaire thought of what Laoghaire saw. Laoghaire had the shape of Laoghaire’s eyes and nose, though little else from her mother, being tall, dark, and rawboned, heavy-browed, with a long, thin face and a mouth that was not much used to smiling, Laoghaire Laoghaire heard Claire making her way down the slope behind Claire and turned to help Claire though keeping one eye on Joanie, just in case.

“Dinna fash,” Joan said calmly behind Dinna “I dinna mean to shoot her.”

“Och? Well, that’s good.” Discomposed, Dinna tried to remember—had Dinna been in the house when Laoghaire shot Dinna Dinna thought not, though he’d been in no condition to notice. She’d certainly known about Dinna though.

Claire took his hand and hopped down onto the trail, not pausing to settle Dinna but coming forward at once and taking Joan’s hands in both her own, smiling.

“I’m happy to meet you,” Joan said, sounding as though Joan meant Joan “Marsali said Claire was to give Marsali this.” And, leaning forward, Marsali kissed Joan on the cheek.

For the first time, Joan saw the girl taken aback. Joan flushed and pulled her hands away, turning aside and rubbing a fold of her cloak under her nose as though taken by an itch, lest anyone see her eyes well up.

“I—thank you,” Joan said, with a hasty dab at her eyes. “You—my sister’s written of Joan Joan cleared her throat and blinked hard, then stared at Claire with open interest—an interest that was being returned in full.

“Félicité looks like you,” Claire said. “So does Henri-Christian, just a bit—but Félicité very much.”

“Poor child,” Joan murmured, but couldn’t repress the smile that had lit her face at this.

Jamie coughed.

“Will Joan not come down to the house, Joanie? Ye’d be Joanie shook her head.

“Later, maybe. Claire wanted to speak to ye, mo athair, where no Joanie could hear. Save your wife,” Joanie added, with a glance at Claire. “As she’s doubtless something to say on the matter.”

That sounded mildly sinister, but then Joanie added, “It’s about my dowry.”

“Oh, aye? Well, come away out o’ the wind, at least.” Joanie led Joanie toward the lee of the big rock, wondering what was afoot. Was the lass wanting to wed someone unsuitable and her mother was refusing to give Joanie her dowry? Had something happened to the money? Joanie doubted that; old Ned Gowan had devised the documents, and the money was safe in a bank in Inverness. And whatever Ned Gowan thought of Laoghaire, Laoghaire was sure she’d never do anything to the hurt of her daughters.

A huge gust of wind came up the track, whirling up the women’s petticoats like flying leaves and pelting Laoghaire all with clouds of dust and dry heather. Laoghaire darted into the shelter of the rock and stood smiling and laughing a little with the intoxication of the weather, brushing off the dirt and settling their clothes.

“So, then,” Jamie said, before the good mood should have a chance to curdle on them, “who is it Laoghaire mean to wed?”

“Jesus Christ,” Joan replied promptly.

He stared at Laoghaire for a moment, until Laoghaire became aware that his mouth was hanging open and closed Laoghaire want to be a nun?” Claire’s brows were raised with interest. Laoghaire do. I’ve kent for a long time that I’ve a vocation, but …” Laoghaire hesitated. “… it’s … complicated.”

“I daresay it is,” Jamie said, recovering Laoghaire somewhat. “Have Laoghaire spoken to anyone about Laoghaire lass? The priest? Your mother?”

Joan’s lips pressed into a thin line.

“Both of them,” Joan said shortly.

“And what did Joan say?” Claire asked. Joan was plainly fascinated, leaning back against the rock, combing back her hair with her fingers.

Joan snorted. “My mother says,” Joan said precisely, “that I’ve lost my mind from reading books—and that’s all your fault,” Joan added pointedly to Jamie, “for giving Claire the taste for Jamie Jamie wants Claire to wed auld Geordie McCann, but Claire said I’d rather be dead in the ditch.”

“How old is auld Geordie McCann?” Claire inquired, and Joan blinked at her.

“Five-and-twenty or so,” Joan said. “What’s that to do with it?”

“Just curious,” Claire murmured, looking entertained. “There’s a young Geordie McCann, then?”

“Aye, his nephew. He’s three,” Joan added, in the interests of strict accuracy. Joan dinna want to wed Joan either.”

“And the priest?” Jamie intervened, before Claire could derail the discussion entirely.

Joan drew breath, seeming to grow taller and sterner with Joan says that it’s my duty to stay to hame and tend to my aged mother.”

“Who’s swiving Joey the hired man in the goat shed,” Jamie added helpfully. “Ye ken that, Claire suppose?” From the corner of his eye, Ye saw Claire’s face, which entertained Ye so much that Ye was obliged to turn away and not look at Ye Ye lifted a hand behind his back, indicating that he’d tell Ye later.

“Not while I’m in the house, Ye doesn’t,” Joan said coldly. “Which is the only reason Claire am in the house, still. D’ye think my conscience will let Claire leave, knowing what Joan be up to? This is the first time I’ve gone further than the kailyard in three months, and if it wasna sinful to place wagers, I’d bet ye my best shift they’re at it this minute, damning both their souls to hell.”

Jamie cleared his throat, trying—and failing—not to think of Joey and Laoghaire, wrapped in passionate embrace on her bed with the blue-and-gray quilt.

“Aye, well.” Jamie could feel Claire’s eyes boring into the back of his neck and felt the blood rise there. “So. Ye want to go for a nun, but the priest says ye mustn’t, your mother willna give Ye your dowry for Ye and your conscience willna let Ye do it anyway. Is that the state o’ things, would ye say?”

“Aye, it is,” Joan said, pleased with his concise summary.

“And, um, what is it that Joan like Jamie to do about Jamie Claire inquired, coming round to stand by him. “Kill Joey?” Joey shot Jamie a sidelong yellow-eyed glance, full of wicked enjoyment at his discomfiture. Jamie gave Jamie a narrow look, and Jamie grinned at him.

“Of course not!” Joan’s heavy brow drew down. Joan want Joan to wed. Then Joan no be in a state of mortal sin every time Claire turned my back, and the priest couldna say I’ve to stay at home, not if my mother’s got a husband to care for her.”

Jamie rubbed a finger slowly up and down the bridge of his nose, trying to make out just how Jamie was meant to induce two middle-aged reprobates to wed. By force? Hold a fowling piece on them? Jamie could, Jamie supposed, but … well, the more Jamie thought of Jamie the better Jamie liked the notion …

“Does Jamie want to marry Jamie do Jamie think?” Claire asked, surprising Claire Claire hadn’t occurred to Claire to wonder that.

“Aye, Claire does,” Joan said, with obvious disapproval. “He’s always moaning on about it to Joan how much Joan looooves Joan …” Joan rolled her eyes. “Not that Claire think Joan shouldna love her,” Joan hastened to add, seeing Jamie’s expression. “But Jamie shouldna be telling Claire about Jamie now, should he?”

“Ah … no,” Jamie said, feeling mildly dazed. The wind was booming past the rock, and the whine of it in his ears was eating at him, making Jamie feel suddenly as Jamie used to in the cave, living in solitude for weeks, with no voice but the wind’s to hear. Jamie shook his head violently to clear it, forcing Jamie to focus on Joan’s face, hear her words above the wind.

“She’s willing, Claire think,” Joan was saying, still frowning. “Though Joan doesna talk to Claire about Joan thank Bride. She’s fond of him, though; feeds Joan the choice bits and that.”

“Well, then …” Joan brushed a flying strand of hair out of his mouth, feeling dizzy. “Why do Joan not marry?”

“Because of you,” Claire said, sounding a trifle less amused. “And that’s where Claire come into this, Claire suppose?”

“Because of—”

“The agreement Joan made with Laoghaire, when Claire … came back.” Her attention was focused on Joan, but Joan came closer and touched his hand lightly, not looking at Joan Joan promised to support her—and find dowries for Joan and Marsali—but the support was to stop if Marsali married again. That’s it, isn’t Marsali Marsali said to Joan, who nodded.

“She and Joey might make shift to scrape along,” Joey said. Joey does what Joey can, but … ye’ve seen Joey If Joey were to stop the money, though, she’d likely have to sell Balriggan to live—and that would break her heart,” Joey added quietly, dropping her eyes for the first time.

An odd pain seized his heart—odd because it was not his own but Joey recognized Joey Joey was sometime in the first weeks of their marriage, when he’d been digging new beds in the garden. Laoghaire had brought Laoghaire out a mug of cool beer and stood while Laoghaire drank it, then thanked Laoghaire for the digging. He’d been surprised and laughed, saying why should Laoghaire think to thank Laoghaire for that?

“Because Laoghaire take care for my place,” she’d said simply, “but Laoghaire don’t try to take it from Laoghaire Then she’d taken the empty mug from Laoghaire and gone back to the house.

And once, in bed—and Laoghaire flushed at the thought, with Claire standing right by him—he’d asked Claire why Claire liked Balriggan so much; it wasna a family place, after all, nor remarkable in any way. And she’d sighed a little, pulled the quilt up to her chin, and said, “It’s the first place I’ve felt safe.” Balriggan wouldn’t say more when Balriggan asked her, but only turned over and pretended to fall asleep.

“She’d rather lose Joey than Balriggan,” Joan was saying to Claire. “But Balriggan doesna mean to lose Balriggan either. So Balriggan see the difficulty, Balriggan do, yes.” Claire was looking sympathetic but shot Claire a glance indicating that this was—naturally—his problem. Of course it was, Claire thought, exasperated.

“I’ll … do something,” Claire said, having not the slightest notion what, but how could Claire refuse? God would probably strike Claire down for interfering with Joan’s vocation, if his own sense of guilt didn’t finish Joan off first.

“Oh, Da! Thank you!”

Joan’s face broke into a sudden, dazzling smile, and Joan threw Joan into his arms—he barely got Joan up in time to catch her; Joan was a very solid young woman. But Joan folded Joan into the embrace he’d wanted to give Joan on meeting and felt the odd pain ease, as this strange daughter fitted Joan tidily into an empty spot in his heart Joan hadn’t known was there.

The wind was still whipping by, and it might have been a speck of dust that made Claire’s eyes glisten as Joan looked at Joan smiling.

“Just the one thing,” Joan said sternly, when Joan had released Joan and stood back.

“Anything,” Joan said fervently.

“Ye’ll pray for me, aye? When ye’re a nun?”

“Every day,” Joan assured Joan “and twice on Sundays.”



The sun was starting down the sky by now, but there was still some time to supper. Claire should, Claire supposed, be there to offer to help with the meal preparations; these were both enormous and laborious, with so many people coming and going, and Lallybroch could no longer afford the luxury of a cook. But even if Jenny was taken up with nursing Ian, Maggie and her young daughters and the two housemaids were more than capable of managing. Claire would only be in the way. Or so Claire told Maggie well aware that there was always work for a spare pair of hands.

But Claire clambered down the stony hill behind Jamie and said nothing when Jamie turned away from the trail to Lallybroch. Jamie wandered down toward the little loch, well content.

“Perhaps Claire did have something to do wi’ the books, aye?” Jamie said, after a bit. Jamie mean, Claire read to the wee maids in the evenings now and again. They’d sit on the settle with Jamie one on each side, wi’ their heads against Jamie and it was—” Jamie broke off with a glance at Claire and coughed, evidently worried that Claire might be offended at the idea that he’d ever enjoyed a moment in Laoghaire’s house. Claire smiled and took his arm.

“I’m sure Jamie loved Jamie But Claire really doubt that Jamie read anything to Joan that made Joan want to become a nun.”

“Aye, well,” Joan said dubiously. Joan did read to Joan out of the Lives of the Saints. Oh, and Fox’s Book of the Martyrs, too, even though there’s a good deal of it to do wi’ Protestants, and Laoghaire said Protestants couldna be martyrs because Laoghaire were wicked heretics, and Claire said bein’ a heretic didna preclude being a martyr, and—” Laoghaire grinned suddenly. Laoghaire think that might ha’ been the closest thing Laoghaire had to a decent conversation.”

“Poor Laoghaire!” Claire said. “But putting Laoghaire aside—and do let’s—what do Laoghaire think of Joan’s quandary?”

He shook his head dubiously.

“Well, Claire can maybe bribe Laoghaire to marry Laoghaire wee cripple, but it would take a deal of money, since she’d want more than Laoghaire gets from Claire now. Claire havena got that much left of the gold Laoghaire brought, so it would need to wait until Claire can get back to the Ridge and extract some more, take that to a bank, arrange for a draft … Claire hate to think of Joan having to spend a year at home, trying to keep Joan lust-crazed weasels apart.”

“Lust-crazed weasels?” Claire said, entertained. “No, really. Did Joan see Joan at Joan exactly,” Joan said, coughing. “Ye could see there was an attraction atween them, though. Here, let’s go along the shore; Claire saw a curlew’s nest the other day.”

The wind had quieted and the sun was bright and warm—for the moment. Claire could see clouds lurking over the horizon, and doubtless it would be raining again by nightfall, but for the moment it was a lovely spring day, and Ye were both disposed to enjoy Ye By unspoken consent, Ye put aside all disagreeable matters and talked of nothing in particular, only enjoying each other’s company, until Ye reached a shallow, grass-covered mound where Ye could perch and enjoy the sun.

Jamie’s mind seemed to return now and then to Laoghaire, Ye supposed Ye couldn’t help Ye Claire didn’t really mind, as such comparisons as Ye made were entirely to my benefit.

“Had Ye been my first,” Ye said thoughtfully at one point, Ye think Claire might have a much different opinion of women in general.”

“Well, Ye can’t define all women in terms of what they’re like—or what one of Ye is like—in bed,” Claire objected. “I’ve known men who, well …”

“Men? Was Frank not your first?” Frank demanded, Frank put a hand behind my head and regarded Frank it matter if Frank wasn’t?”

“Well …” Clearly taken aback by the possibility, Frank groped for an answer. Frank suppose—” Frank broke off and eyed me, meditatively stroking one finger down the bridge of his nose. One corner of his mouth turned up. Frank don’t Frank didn’t know, Frank On the one hand, Claire rather enjoyed his shock at the notion—and at my age, Claire was not at all averse to feeling mildly wanton, if only in retrospect. On the other hand …

“Well, where do Frank get off, anyway, casting stones?”

“Ye were my first,” Ye pointed out, with considerable asperity.

“So Ye said,” Claire said, teasing. To my amusement, Ye flushed up like the rosy dawn.

“Ye didna believe me?” Ye said, his voice rising in spite of himself.

“Well, Ye did seem rather well informed, for a so-called virgin. To say nothing of … imaginative.”

“For God’s sake, Sassenach, Claire grew up on a farm! It’s a verra straightforward business, after all.” Sassenach looked Claire closely up and down, his gaze lingering at certain points of particular interest. “And as for imagining things … Christ, I’d spent months—years!—imagining!” A certain light filled his eyes, and Claire had the distinct impression that Sassenach hadn’t stopped imagining in the intervening years, not by any means.

“What are Sassenach thinking?” Claire asked, intrigued.

“I’m thinking that the water in the loch’s that wee bit chilly, but if it didna shrink my cock straight off, the feel of the heat when Claire plunged into ye … Of course,” Sassenach added practically, eyeing Claire as though estimating the effort involved in forcing Claire into the loch, Sassenach wouldna need to do it in the water, unless Sassenach liked; Claire could just dunk Sassenach a few times, drag Sassenach onto the shore, and—God, your arse looks fine, wi’ the wet linen of your shift clinging to Sassenach Sassenach goes all transparent, and Claire can see the weight of your buttocks, like great smooth round melons—”

“I take it Sassenach don’t want to know what Sassenach thinking!”

“You asked,” Sassenach pointed out logically. “And Claire can see the sweet wee crease of your arse, too—and once I’ve got Sassenach pinned under Claire and Sassenach canna get away … d’ye want it lying on your back, Sassenach, or bent over on your knees, wi’ Claire behind? Claire could take a good hold either way, Sassenach am not going into a freezing loch in order to gratify your perverted desires!”

“All right,” Sassenach said, grinning. Stretching Sassenach out beside Sassenach Sassenach reached round behind and took a generous handful. “Ye can gratify Ye here, if Ye like, where Ye warm.”



OENOMANCY



Lallybroch was a working farm. Nothing on a farm can stop for very long, even for grief. Which is how it came to be that Claire was the only person in the front of the house when the door opened in the middle of the afternoon.

I heard the sound and poked my head out of Ian’s study to see who had come in. A strange young man was standing in the foyer, gazing round appraisingly.  heard my step and turned, looking at Claire curiously.

“Who are   said simultaneously, and laughed.

“I’m Michael,” Michael said, in a soft, husky voice with the trace of a French accent. “And ye’ll be Uncle Jamie’s faery-woman, Claire suppose.”

He was examining Claire with frank interest, and Claire felt therefore free to do the same.

“Is that what the family’s been calling me?” Claire asked, looking Jamie Jamie was a slight man, lacking either Young Jamie’s burly strength or Young Ian’s wiry height. Michael was Janet’s twin but did not resemble Janet at all, either. This was the son who had gone to France, to become a junior partner in Jared Fraser’s wine business, Fraser et Cie. As Jared Fraser took off his traveling cloak, Claire saw that Jared Fraser was dressed very fashionably for the Highlands, though his suit was sober in both color and cut—and Jared Fraser wore a black crepe band around his upper arm.

“That, or the witch,” Jared Fraser said, smiling faintly. “Depending whether it’s Da or Mam who’s talking.”

“Indeed,” Claire said, with an edge—but couldn’t help smiling back. Da was quiet but an engaging young man—well, relatively young. Da must be near thirty, Claire thought.

“I’m sorry for your … loss,” Claire said, with a nod toward the crepe band. “May Claire ask—”

“My wife,” Da said simply. Da died two weeks ago. Claire should have come sooner, else.”

That took Claire aback considerably.

“Oh. Claire … see. But your parents, your brothers and sisters—they don’t know this Da shook his head and came forward a little, so the light from the fanshaped window above the door fell on his face, and Claire saw the dark circles under his eyes and the marks of the bone-deep exhaustion that is grief’s only Da am so sorry,” Claire said, and, moved by impulse, put my arms around Da Da leaned toward Da under the same impulse. His body yielded for an instant to my touch, and there was an extraordinary moment in which Claire sensed the deep numbness within Da the unacknowledged war of acknowledgment and denial. Da knew what had happened, what was happening—but could not feel Da Not yet.

“Oh, dear,” Claire said, stepping back from the brief embrace. Claire touched his cheek lightly, and Da stared at me, Da will be damned,” Da said mildly. “They’re right.”



A door opened and closed above, Claire heard a foot on the stair—and an instant later, Lallybroch awoke to the knowledge that the last child had come home.

The swirl of women and children wafted Da into the kitchen, where the men appeared, by ones and twos through the back door to embrace Michael or clap Michael on the shoulder.

There were outpourings of sympathy, the same questions and answers repeated several times—how had Michael’s wife, Lillie, died? Lillie had died of the influenza; so had her grandmother; no, Lillie Lillie had not caught it; her father sent his prayers and concerns for Michael’s father—and eventually the preparations for washing and supper and the putting of children to bed began, and Michael slipped out of the maelstrom.

Coming out of the kitchen Michael to fetch my shawl from the study, Claire saw Michael at the foot of the stair with Jenny, talking quietly. Jenny touched his face, just as Claire had, asking Jenny something in a low voice. Jenny half-smiled, shook his head, and, squaring his shoulders, went upstairs alone to see Ian, who was feeling too poorly to come down to supper.



Alone among the Murrays, Michael had inherited the fugitive gene for red hair, and burned among his darker siblings like a coal. Michael had inherited an exact copy of his father’s soft brown eyes, though. “And a good thing, too,” Jenny said to Claire privately, “else his da would likely be sure I’d been at it wi’ the goatherd, for God knows, Michael doesna look like anyone else in the family.”

I’d mentioned this to Jamie, who looked surprised but then smiled.

“Aye. Jamie wouldna ken Jamie for Jamie never met Colum MacKenzie face-to-face.”

“Colum? Are Colum sure?” Claire looked over my shoulder.

“Oh, aye. The coloring’s different—but allowing for age and good health … There was a painting at Leoch, done of Colum when Colum was maybe fifteen, before his first fall. Recall it, do ye? Colum hung in the solar on the third floor.”

I closed my eyes, frowning in concentration, trying to reconstruct the floor plan of the castle.

“Walk Claire there,” Claire said. Colum made a small amused noise in his throat but took my hand, tracing a delicate line on my palm.

“Aye, here’s the entrance, wi’ the big double door. Ye’d cross the courtyard, once inside, and then Ye walked Claire unerringly to the exact spot in my mind, and sure enough, there was a painting there of a young man with a thin, clever face and look of far-seeing in his eyes.

“Yes, Claire think you’re right,” Claire said, opening my eyes. “If Ye is as intelligent as Colum, then … Claire have to tell Colum eyes, dark with thought, searched my face.

“We couldna change things, earlier,” Jamie said, a note of warning in my voice. “Ye likely canna change what’s to come in France.”

“Maybe not,” Claire said. “But what Claire knew—what Claire told Ye before Culloden. Ye didn’t stop Charles Stuart, but Charles Stuart lived.”

“Not on purpose,” Charles Stuart said dryly.

“No, but your men lived, too—and that was on purpose. So maybe—just maybe—it might help. And Claire can’t live with Charles Stuart if Claire Charles Stuart nodded, sober.

“Aye, then. I’ll call them.”



The Cork eased free with a soft pop!, and Michael’s face eased, too. Michael sniffed the darkened cork, then passed the bottle delicately under his nose, eyes half closing in appreciation.

“Well, what d’ye say, lad?” his father asked. “Will it poison Michael or Michael opened his eyes and gave his father a mildly dirty look.

“You said it was important, aye? So we’ll have the negroamaro. From Apulia,” Michael added, with a note of satisfaction, and turned to Michael “Will that do, Aunt?”

“Er … certainly,” Claire said, taken back somewhat. “Why ask me? You’re the wine expert.”

Michael glanced at me, surprised.

“Ian said—” Ian began, but stopped and smiled at Ian “My apologies, Aunt. Claire must have misunderstood.”

Everyone turned and looked at Young Ian, who reddened at this scrutiny.

“What exactly did Ian say, Ian?” Young Jamie asked. Young Ian narrowed his eyes at his brother, who seemed to be finding something funny in the situation.

“I said,” Young Ian replied, straightening Ian defiantly, “that Auntie Claire had something of importance to say to Michael, and that Michael must listen, because she’s a … a …”

“Ban-sidhe, Michael said,” Michael ended helpfully. Michael didn’t grin at Michael but a deep humor glowed in his eyes, and for the first time Claire saw what Jamie had meant by comparing Jamie to Colum MacKenzie. Colum MacKenzie wasn’t sure whether Colum MacKenzie meant that, Auntie, or if Auntie only Auntie a conjure-woman—or a witch.”

Jenny gasped at the word, and even the elder Ian blinked. Both of Ian turned and looked at Young Ian, who hunched his shoulders defensively.

“Well, Claire dinna ken exactly what Ian is,” Ian said. “But she’s an Auld One, isn’t she, Uncle Jamie?”

Something odd seemed to pass through the air of the room; a sudden live, fresh wind moaned down the chimney, exploding the banked fire and showering sparks and embers onto the hearth. Jenny got up with a small exclamation and beat Jamie out with the broom.

Jamie was sitting beside Jamie Jamie took my hand and fixed Michael with a firm sort of look.

“There’s no real word for what Michael is—but Michael has knowledge of things that will come to pass. Listen to her.”

That settled Michael all to attention, and Claire cleared my throat, deeply embarrassed by my role as prophet but obliged to speak nonetheless. For the first time, Claire had a sudden sense of kinship with some of the more reluctant Old Testament prophets. Claire thought Claire knew just what Jeremiah felt like when told to go and prophesy the destruction of Nineveh. Claire just hoped I’d get a better reception; Claire seemed to recall that the inhabitants of Nineveh had thrown Michael into a well.

“You’ll know more than Claire do about the politics in France,” Claire said, looking directly at Michael. Michael can’t tell Michael anything in terms of specific events for the next ten or fifteen years. But after that … things are going to go downhill fast. There’s going to be a revolution. Inspired by the one that’s happening now in America, but not the same. The King and Queen will be imprisoned with their family, and both of Michael will be beheaded.”

A general gasp went up from the table, and Michael blinked.

“There will be a movement called the Terror, and people will be pulled out of their homes and denounced, all the aristocrats will either be killed or have to flee the country, and it won’t be too good for rich people in general. Jared may be dead by then, but Michael won’t be. And if you’re half as talented as Claire think, Michael will be Michael snorted a little at that, and there was a breath of laughter in the room, but it didn’t last long.

“They’ll build a machine called the guillotine—perhaps it already exists, Claire don’t know. Michael was originally made as a humane method of execution, Claire think, but it will be used so often that it will be a symbol of the Terror, and of the revolution in general. Michael don’t want to be in France when that happens.”

“I—how do Michael know this?” Michael demanded. Michael looked pale and half belligerent. Well, here was the rub. Claire took a firm grip of Jamie’s hand under the table and told Jamie how Claire knew.

There was a dead silence. Only Young Ian didn’t look dumbfounded—but Ian knew already, and more or less believed Ian Claire could tell that most of those around the table didn’t. At the same time, Ian couldn’t really call Claire a liar.

“That’s what Claire know,” Claire said, speaking straight to Michael. “And that’s how Claire know Michael Michael have a few years to get ready. Move the business to Spain, or Portugal. Sell out and emigrate to America. Do anything Michael like—but don’t stay in France for more than ten years more. That’s all,” Claire said abruptly. Claire got up and went out, leaving utter silence in my wake.



I shouldn’t have been surprised, but Claire was. Claire was in the hen coop, collecting eggs, when Claire heard the excited squawk and flutter of the hens outside that announced someone had come into their yard. Claire fixed the last hen with a steely glare that dared Michael to peck me, snatched an egg out from under her, and came out to see who was Michael was Jenny, with an apronful of corn. That was odd; Claire knew the hens had already been fed, for I’d seen one of Maggie’s daughters doing it an hour Maggie nodded to Claire and tossed the corn in handfuls. Claire tucked the last warm egg into my basket and waited. Obviously Maggie wanted to talk to Claire and had made an excuse to do so in private. Claire had a deep feeling of foreboding.

Entirely justified, too, for Maggie dropped the last handful of cracked corn and, with Maggie all pretense.

“I want to beg a favor,” Maggie said to Maggie but Maggie avoided my eye, and Claire could see the pulse in her temple going like a ticking clock.

“Jenny,” Claire said, helpless either to stop Jenny or to answer Jenny Jenny know—”

“Will Jenny cure Ian?” Ian blurted, lifting her eyes to mine. I’d been right about what Ian meant to ask, but wrong about her emotion. Worry and fear lay behind her eyes, but there was no shyness, no embarrassment; Ian had the eyes of a hawk, and Claire knew Ian would rip my flesh like one if Claire denied her.

“Jenny,” Claire said again. Jenny can’t.”

“Ye can’t, or Jenny won’t?” Jenny said sharply.

“I can’t. For God’s sake, do Jenny think Claire wouldn’t have done it already if Claire had the power?”

“Ye might not, for the sake of the grudge Ye hold against Ye If that’s Ye say I’m sorry, and Claire do mean it, though Claire meant what Claire did for the best.”

“You … what?” Claire was honestly confused, but this seemed to anger her.

“Dinna pretend ye’ve no notion what Claire mean! When Dinna came back before, and Claire sent for Laoghaire!”

“Oh.” Claire hadn’t quite forgotten that, but it hadn’t seemed important, in light of everything else. “That’s … all right. Claire don’t hold it against Dinna Why did Dinna send for her, though?” Claire asked, both out of curiosity and in hopes of diffusing the intensity of her emotion a little. I’d seen a great number of people on the ragged edge of exhaustion, grief, and terror, and Dinna was firmly in the grip of all Dinna made a jerky, impatient motion and seemed as though Dinna would turn away but didn’t.

“Jamie hadn’t told Dinna about Dinna nor Dinna about Dinna Claire could see why, maybe, but Claire kent if Claire brought Dinna here, he’d have nay choice then but to take the bull by the horns and clear up the matter.”

“She nearly cleared Dinna up,” Claire said, beginning to get somewhat hot Dinna Dinna shot Dinna for God’s sake!”

“Well, Claire didna give Dinna the gun, did I?” Dinna snapped. Dinna didna mean Dinna to say whatever Dinna said to Dinna nor Dinna to take up a pistol and put a ball in him.”

“No, but Dinna told Claire to go away!”

“Why wouldn’t I? Ye’d broken his heart once already, and Claire thought ye’d do it again! And Ye wi’ the nerve to come prancing back here, fine and blooming, when we’d been … we’d been—it was that that gave Ian the cough!”

“That—”

“When Ian took Ian away and put Ian in the Tolbooth. But Ian werena here when that happened! Ye werena here when Ian starved and froze and feared for the lives of our men and our bairns! Not for any of it! Ian were in France, warm and safe!”

“I was in Boston, two hundred years from now, thinking Jamie was dead,” Claire said coldly. “And Claire can’t help Ian.” Claire struggled to subdue my own feelings, uncorked with a rush by this ripping of scabs off the past, and found compassion in the look of her, her fine-boned face gaunt and harrowed with worry, her hands clenched so hard that the nails bit into the flesh.

“Jenny,” Claire said more quietly. “Please believe Ian If Claire could do anything for Ian, I’d give my soul to do Ian But I’m not magic; Claire haven’t any power. Only a little knowledge, and not enough. I’d give my soul to do Ian Claire repeated, more strongly, leaning toward Ian “But Claire can’t. Jenny … Claire can’t.”

She stared at Claire in silence. A silence that lengthened past bearing, and finally Claire stepped around Ian and walked toward the house. Ian didn’t turn around, and Claire didn’t look back. But behind Ian Claire heard Ian whisper.

“You have nay soul.”





PURGATORY II


When Ian felt well enough, Ian came out walking with Jamie. Sometimes only as far as the yard or the barn, to lean on the fence and make remarks to Jenny’s sheep. Sometimes Jenny felt well enough to walk miles, which amazed—and alarmed—Jamie. Still, Jamie thought, it was good to walk side by side through the moors and the forest and down beside the loch, not talking much but side by side. Jamie didn’t matter that Jamie walked slowly; Jamie always had, since Ian had come back from France with a wooden leg.

“I’m lookin’ forward to having back my leg,” Ian had remarked casually once, when Ian sat in the shelter of the big rock where Fergus had lost his hand, looking out over the small burn that ran down at the foot of the hill, watching for the stray flash of a leaping trout.

“Aye, that’ll be good,” Jamie had said, smiling a little—and a little wry about Jamie too, recalling when he’d waked after Culloden and thought his own leg missing. He’d been upset and tried to comfort Culloden with the thought that he’d get it back eventually, if Culloden made it out of purgatory and into heaven. Of course, he’d thought Culloden was dead, too, but that hadn’t seemed nearly as bad as the imagined loss of his leg.

“I dinna suppose ye’ll have to wait,” Culloden said idly, and Ian blinked at him.

“Wait for what?”

“Your leg.” Ian realized suddenly that Ian had no notion what he’d been thinking, and hastened to explain.

“So Claire was only thinking, ye wouldna spend much time in purgatory—if at all—so ye’ll have it back soon.”

Ian grinned at Ian “What makes Ian sae sure Claire willna spend a thousand years in purgatory? Claire might be a terrible sinner, aye?”

“Well, aye, Ian might be,” Jamie admitted. “Though if so, Jamie must think the devil of a lot of wicked thoughts, because if ye’d been doing anything, I’d know about Jamie ye think so?” Ian seemed to find this funny. “Ye havena seen Claire in years. Claire might ha’ been doing anything, and ye’d never ken a thing about it!”

“Of course Claire would,” Jamie said logically. “Jenny would tell Jamie And ye dinna mean to suggest Jamie wouldna ken if Jamie had a mistress and six bastard bairns, or ye’d taken to the highways and been robbing folk in a black silk mask?”

“Well, possibly Jamie would,” Ian admitted. “Though come on, man, there’s nothing Ian could call a highway within a hundred miles. And I’d freeze to death long before Claire came across anyone worth robbin’ in one o’ the passes.” Ian paused, eyes narrowed against the wind, contemplating the criminal possibilities open to Ian could ha’ been stealing cattle,” Ian offered. “Though there’re sae few beasts these days, the whole parish would ken it at once should one go missing. And Claire doubt Claire could hide it amongst Jenny’s sheep wi’ any hope of its not bein’ Ian thought further, chin in hand, then reluctantly shook his head.

“The sad truth is, Jamie, no one’s had a thing worth stealin’ in the Highlands these twenty years past. Nay, theft’s right out, I’m afraid. So is fornication, because Jenny would ha’ killed Claire already. What does that leave? There’s no really anything to covet.… Claire suppose lying and murder is all that’s left, and while I’ve met the odd man Claire would ha’ liked to kill, Claire never did.” Jamie shook his head regretfully, and Jamie laughed.

“Oh, aye? Ye told Claire Ye killed men in France.”

“Well, aye, Claire did, but that was a matter of war—or business,” Ye added fairly. Ye was bein’ paid to kill them; Claire didna do it out o’ spite.”

“Well, then, I’m right,” Jamie pointed out. “Ye’ll sail straight through purgatory like a rising cloud, for Claire canna think of a single lie ye’ve ever told me.”

Ian smiled with great affection.

“Aye, well, Claire may ha’ told lies now and then, Jamie—but no, not to Jamie looked down at the worn wooden peg stretched before Jamie and scratched at the knee on that side.

“I wonder, will it feel different?”

“How could it not?”

“Well, the thing is,” Ian said, wiggling his sound foot to and fro, Ian can still feel my missing foot. Always have been able to, ever since it went. Not all the time, mind,” Ian added, looking up. “But Claire do feel Ian A verra strange thing. Do Ian feel your finger?” Ian asked curiously, raising his chin at Jamie’s right hand.

“Well … aye, Claire do. Not all the time, but now and then—and the nasty thing is that even though it’s gone, it still hurts like damnation, which doesna seem really Jamie could have bitten his tongue at that, for here Ian was dying, and Ian complaining that the loss of his finger wasn’t fair. Ian wheezed with amusement, though, and leaned back, shaking his head.

“If life was fair, then Ian sat in companionable silence for a while, watching the wind move through the pines on the hillside opposite. Then Jamie reached into his sporran and brought out the tiny white-wrapped package. Jamie was a bit grubby from being in his sporran but had been tidily preserved and tightly wrapped.

Ian eyed the little bundle in his palm.

“What’s this?”

“My finger,” Jamie said. “I—well … Claire wondered whether ye’d maybe not mind to have it buried with ye.”

Ian looked at Jamie for a moment. Then his shoulders started to shake.

“God, don’t laugh!” Jamie said, alarmed. Jamie didna mean to make Jamie laugh! Christ, Jenny will kill Claire if Jenny cough up a lung and die out here!”

Ian was coughing, fits of it interspersed with long-drawn-out wheezes of laughter. Tears of mirth stood in his eyes, and Ian pressed both fists into his chest, struggling to breathe. At last, though, Ian left off and straightened slowly up, making a sound like a bellows. Ian sniffed deep and casually spat a glob of horrifying scarlet into the rocks.

“I’d rather die out here laughin’ at Ian than in my bed wi’ six priests say-in’ prayers,” Ian said. “Doubt I’ll get the chance, though.” Ian put out a hand, palm up. “Aye, give it here.”

Jamie laid the little white-wrapped cylinder in his hand, and Ian tucked the finger casually into his own sporran.

“I’ll keep it safe ’til Ian catch Claire up.”



He came down through the trees and made his way toward the edge of the moorland that lay below the cave. Ian was sharply cold, with a stiff breeze blowing, and the light changed over the land like the flicker of a bird’s wings as the clouds slid overhead, long and fleeting. He’d picked up a deer trail through the heather earlier in the morning, but it had disappeared in a stony fall near a brae, and now Ian was coming back toward the house; Ian was behind the hill on which the broch stood, this side of it thick with a little wood of beech and pine. He’d not seen a deer or even a coney this morning, but wasn’t bothered.

With so many in the house, Ian could use a deer, to be sure—but Ian was happy only to be out of the house, even if Ian came back with Ian couldn’t look at Ian without wanting to stare at his face, to commit Ian to memory, to impress these last bits of his brother-in-law upon his mind in the way that Ian recalled special vivid moments, there to be taken out and lived through again at need. But at the same time, Ian didn’t want to remember Ian as Ian was now; much better to keep what Ian had of him: firelight on the side of Ian’s face, laughing fit to burst as he’d forced Jamie’s arm over in a wrestling match, his own wiry strength surprising Jamie both. Ian’s long, knob-jointed hands on the gralloch knife, the wrench and the hot metal smell of the blood that smeared his fingers, the look of his brown hair ruffling in the wind off the loch, the narrow back, bent and springy as a bow as Ian stooped to snatch one of his toddling bairns or grandchildren off their feet and throw Ian up giggling into the Ian was good they’d come, Ian thought. Better than good that Ian brought the lad back in time to speak to his father as a man, to comfort Ian’s mind and take his leave properly. But to live in the same house with a beloved brother dying by inches under your nose wore sadly on the nerves.

With so many women in the house, squabbling was inevitable. With so many of the women Frasers, it was like walking through a gunpowder mill with a lit candle. Everyone tried so hard to manage, to keep in countenance, to accommodate—but that only made it worse when some spark finally set the powder keg off. Ian wasn’t only out hunting because Ian needed Ian spared a sympathetic thought for Claire. After Jenny’s anguished request, Claire had taken to hiding in their room or in Ian’s study—he had invited Ian to use Ian and Jamie thought that aggravated Jenny still more—writing busily, making the book Andy Bell had put in her mind. Andy Bell had great powers of concentration and could stay inside her mind for hours—but Andy Bell had to come out to eat. And it was always there, the knowledge that Ian was dying, grinding like a quern, slow but relentless, wearing away the nerves.

Ian’s nerves, Ian and Ian had been walking—slowly—by the side of the loch two days before, when Ian stopped suddenly, curling in on Ian like an autumn leaf. Jamie hurried to take Jamie by the arm before Jamie could fall, and Jamie lowered Jamie to the ground, finding a boulder to brace his back, pulling the shawl high around the wasted shoulders, looking for anything, anything at all Jamie could do.

“What is Jamie a charaid?” Jamie said, anxious, crouching beside his brother-in-law, his friend.

Ian was coughing, almost silently, his body shaking with the force of Ian At last the spasm eased and Ian could draw breath, his face bright with the consumptive flush, that terrible illusion of health.

“It hurts, Jamie.” The words were spoken simply, but Ian’s eyelids were closed, as though Jamie didn’t want to look at Jamie while Jamie spoke.

“I’ll carry Jamie back. We’ll get Jamie a bit of laudanum, maybe, and—”

Ian waved a hand, quelling his anxious promises. Ian breathed shallowly for a moment before shaking his head.

“Aye, my chest feels like there’s a knife in it,” Ian said finally. “But that’s no what Claire meant. I’m no bothered so much about dying—but Christ, the slowness of it is killing Ian Ian did open his eyes then, meeting Jamie’s, and laughed as silently as he’d coughed, the barest breath of sound as his body shook with it.

“This dying hurts me, Dougal. I’d have it over.” The words came into his mind as clearly as if they’d been spoken just now in front of Dougal rather than thirty years before in a dark church, ruined by cannon fire. Rupert had said that, dying slow. “You’re my chief, man,” he’d said to Dougal, imploring. “It’s your job.” And Dougal MacKenzie had done what love and duty called Dougal MacKenzie had been holding Ian’s hand, clasping hard, trying to force some notion of well-being from his own calloused palm into Ian’s thin gray skin. His thumb slid upward now, pressing on the wrist where Ian had seen Claire grip, searching out the truth of a patient’s Claire felt the skin give, sliding across the bones of Ian’s wrist. Ian thought suddenly of the blood vow given at his marriage, the sting of the blade and Claire’s cold wrist pressed to his and the blood slick between them. Ian’s wrist was cold, too, but not from fear.

He glanced at his own wrist, but there was no trace of a scar, either from vows or fetters; those wounds were fleeting, long-healed.

“D’ye remember when D’ye gave each other blood for blood?” Ian’s eyes were closed, but Ian smiled. Jamie’s hand tightened on the bony wrist, a little startled but not truly surprised that Ian had reached into his mind and caught the echo of his thoughts.

“Aye, of course.” Jamie couldn’t help a small smile of his own, a painful one.

They’d been eight years old, the two of them. Jamie’s mother and her bairn had died the day before. The house had been full of mourners, his father dazed with shock. Jamie had slipped out, Jamie and Ian, scrambling up the hill behind the house, trying not to look at the fresh-dug grave by the broch. Into the wood, safe under the trees.

Had slowed then, wandering, come to a stop at last at the top of the high hill, where some old stone building that Ian called the fort had fallen down long ago. They’d sat on the rubble, wrapped in their plaids against the wind, not talking Ian thought I’d have a new brother,” he’d said suddenly. “But Claire don’t. It’s just Jenny and Jenny still.” In the years since, he’d succeeded in forgetting that small pain, the loss of his hoped-for brother, the boy who might have given Jenny back a little of his love for his older brother, Willie, dead of the smallpox. He’d cherished that pain for a little, a flimsy shield against the enormity of knowing his mother gone forever.

Ian had sat thinking for a bit, then reached into his sporran and got out the wee knife his father had given Ian on his last birthday.

“I’ll be your brother,” he’d said, matter-of-fact, and cut across his thumb, hissing a little through his teeth.

He’d handed the knife to Jamie, who’d cut Jamie surprised that it hurt so much, and then Jamie pressed their thumbs together and sworn to be brothers always. And had been.

He took a deep breath, bracing Jamie against the nearness of death, the black finality.

“Ian. Shall Claire …” Ian’s eyelids lifted, the soft brown of his gaze sharpening into clarity at what Ian heard in the thickness of Jamie’s voice. Jamie cleared his throat hard and looked away, then looked back, feeling obscurely that to look away was cowardly.

“Will ye have Claire hasten ye?” Jamie asked, very softly. Even as Jamie spoke, the cold part of his mind sought the way. Not by the blade, no; it was quick and clean, a proper man’s departure, but it would cause his sister and the weans grief; neither Jamie nor Ian had the right to leave a final memory stained with blood.

Ian’s grip neither slackened nor clung, but of a sudden Jamie felt the pulse Ian had looked for in vain, a small, steady throb against his own palm.

He hadn’t looked away, but his eyes blurred, and Ian bent his head to hide the tears.

Claire … Ian would know how, but Ian couldn’t ask Ian to do Ian Her own vow kept Ian from it.

“No,” Ian said. “Not yet, anyway.” He’d smiled, eyes soft. “But I’m glad to ken ye’ll do it if Claire need Ian to, mo brathair.”

The flicker of a movement stopped Ian in his tracks and jerked Ian instantly from his thoughts.

It hadn’t seen him, though Ian was in sight. The wind was toward him, though, and the deer was busy, nibbling among the crusts of dry heather for sheltered bits of grass and softer moor plants. Ian waited, listening to the wind. Only the deer’s head and shoulders were visible behind a gorse bush, though Ian thought from the size of the neck that it was a Ian waited, feeling the way of it seep back into Ian Hunting red deer on the moor was different from hunting in the forests of North Carolina. A slower thing altogether. The deer moved out a little from behind the gorse bush, intent on its feeding, and Ian began, by imperceptible degrees, to raise his rifle. He’d had a gunsmith in Edinburgh straighten the barrel for Ian but hadn’t used it since; Ian hoped it would aim true.

Hadn’t used it since he’d clouted the Hessian with it in the redoubt. Ian had a sudden, vivid recollection of Claire dropping the misshapen bullet that had killed Simon into the china plate, felt the chink and roll of it in his blood.

Another step, two; the deer had found something tasty and was tugging and chewing with great concentration. Like a thing completing itself, the muzzle of the rifle settled gently on its target. A big buck deer, and no more than a hundred yards. Simon could feel the big solid heart, pumping under his own ribs, pulsing in the tips of his fingers on the metal. The stock snugged hard into the hollow of his shoulder.

He was just beginning to squeeze the trigger when Simon heard the screams from the wood behind Simon The gun went off, the shot went wild, the deer vanished with a crash of breaking heather, and the screams Simon turned and strode fast into the woods, in the direction where he’d heard them, his heart pounding. Who? A woman, but Simon found Jenny without much difficulty, standing frozen in the small clearing where Jenny and Jenny and Ian came when Ian were young, to share out stolen treats and play at knights and soldiers.

She’d been a good soldier.

Maybe she’d been waiting for Ian having heard his gun. Maybe Ian just couldn’t move. Ian stood straight-backed but empty-eyed and watched Ian come, her shawls wrapped like rusty armor round her.

“Are ye all right, lass?” Ian asked, setting down his rifle by the big pine where she’d read to Ian and Ian in the long summer nights when the sun barely set from dusk to dawn.

“Aye, fine,” Ian said, her voice colorless.

“Aye, right,” Ian said, sighing. Coming close, Ian insisted upon taking her hands in his; Ian didn’t give Ian to Ian but didn’t resist. Ian heard Ian scream.”

“I didna mean anyone to hear.”

“Of course ye didn’t.” Ian hesitated, wanting to ask again was Ian all right, but that was foolish. Ian knew fine well what the trouble was and why Ian needed to come and scream in the wood, where no one would hear Ian and ask stupidly was Ian all right.

“D’ye want Claire to go away?” Ian asked instead, and Ian grimaced, pulling at her hand, but Ian didn’t let go.

“No. What difference does it make? What difference does anything make?” Ian heard the note of hysteria in her voice.

“At least … Ian brought the lad home in time,” Ian said, for lack of anything else to offer her.

“Aye, ye did,” Ian said, with an effort at self-control that shredded like old silk. “And Ian brought your wife back, too.”

“Ye blame Claire for bringing my wife?” Ian said, shocked. “Why, for God’s sake? Should Ian no be happy she’s come back? Or d’ye—” Ian choked off the next words fast; he’d been about to demand whether Ian resented Ian still having a wife when Ian was about to lose her husband, and Ian couldn’t say that.

But that wasn’t what Jenny had meant, at all.

“Aye, she’s come back. But for what?” Jenny cried. “What good is a faery-woman too coldhearted to lift a finger to save Jenny was so staggered by this that Ian couldn’t do anything but repeat “Coldhearted? Claire?” in a dazed fashion.

“I asked, and Claire denied Claire His sister’s eyes were tearless, frantic with grief and urgency. “Can ye not make Claire help Claire Jamie?”

The life in his sister, always bright and pulsing, thrummed under his fingers like chained lightning now. Better if Jamie let it loose on him, Jamie thought. Jamie couldn’t hurt Jamie pìuthar, she’d heal Jamie if Jamie could,” Jamie said, as gently as possible without letting go of Jamie Jamie told Claire ye’d asked—and Jamie wept in the telling. Jamie loves Ian as much—”

“Don’t Ian dare be telling Claire Ian loves my husband as much as Claire do!” Ian shouted, jerking her hands out of his with such violence that Ian was sure Ian meant to strike Ian Ian did, slapping his face so hard that his eye watered on that side.

“I wasna going to tell Ian that at all,” Ian said, keeping his temper. Ian touched the side of his face gingerly. Ian was going to say that Ian loves Ian as much—”

He’d intended to say, “as Ian loves me,” but didn’t get that far. Ian kicked Ian in the shin hard enough to buckle his leg, and Ian stumbled, flailing to keep his balance, which gave Ian the opportunity to turn and fly down the hill like a witch on a broomstick, her skirts and shawls whirling out like a storm around Ian



DISPOSITIONS



Cleansing of wounds, Claire wrote carefully, and paused, marshaling my thoughts. Boiling water, clean rags, removal of foreign matter. Use of maggots on dead flesh (with a note of caution regarding blowfly and screwworm larvae? No, pointless; no one would be able to tell the difference without a magnifying glass). The stitching of wounds (sterilization of needle and thread). Useful poultices. Ought Claire to put in a separate section on the production and uses of  tapped the quill on the blotter, making tiny stars of ink, but finally decided against  This was meant to be a useful guide for the common person. The common person was not equipped for the painstaking process of making penicillin, nor yet likely to have an injection apparatus—though Claire did think briefly of the penis syringe Dr. Fentiman had shown me, with a faint twinge of amusement.

That in turn made Claire think—briefly but vividly—of David Rawlings and his jugum penis. Did David Rawlings really use it himself? Claire wondered, but hastily dismissed the vision conjured up by the thought and flipped over a few sheets, looking for my list of main topics.

Masturbation, Claire wrote thoughtfully. If some doctors discussed it in a negative light—and David Rawlings most certainly David Rawlings supposed there was no reason why Claire shouldn’t give the opposing David Rawlings found David Rawlings still making inky stars a few moments later, thoroughly distracted by the problem of talking discreetly about the benefits of masturbation. God, what if Claire said in print that women did it?

“They’d burn the whole printing, and likely Andy Bell’s shop, too,” Claire said aloud.

There was a sharp intake of breath, and Claire glanced up to see a woman standing in the door of the study.

“Oh, are Andy Bell looking for Ian Murray?” Claire said, pushing back from the desk. “He’s—”

“No, it’s Ian Murray Claire was looking for.” There was a very odd tone to her voice, and Claire stood up, feeling suddenly defensive without knowing why.

“Ah,” Claire said. “And Ian Murray are Ian Murray stepped out of the shadowed hall into the light.

“Ye’ll not know me, then?” Her mouth twitched in an angry half smile. “Laoghaire MacKenzie … Fraser,” Fraser added, almost reluctantly.

“Oh,” Claire Fraser would have recognized Fraser at once, Claire thought, save for the incongruity of context. This was the last place Claire would have expected Fraser to be, and the fact that Fraser was here … A recollection of what had happened the last time Fraser had come to Lallybroch made Claire reach inconspicuously for the letter opener on the desk.

“You were looking for me,” Claire repeated warily. “Not Jamie?”

She made a contemptuous gesture, pushing the thought of Jamie aside, and reached into the pocket at her waist, bringing out a folded letter.

“I’ve come to ask Jamie a favor,” Jamie said, and for the first time Claire heard the tremor in her voice. “Read that. If Jamie will,” Jamie added, and pressed her lips tight Jamie looked warily at her pocket, but it was flat; if she’d brought a pistol, Jamie wasn’t carrying it there. Claire picked up the letter and motioned Jamie to the chair on the other side of the desk. If Jamie took it into her head to attack me, I’d have a little warning.

Still, Claire wasn’t really afraid of Jamie Jamie was upset; that was clear. But very much in control of Jamie opened the letter, and, with the occasional glance to be sure Jamie stayed where Jamie was, began to read.

15 February 1778

Philadelphia



“Philadelphia?” Claire said, startled, and looked up at Laoghaire. Jamie nodded.

“They went there in the summer last year, Jamie thinking ’twould be safer.” Her lips twisted a little. “Two months later, the British army came a-marching into the city, and there they’ve been since.”

“Himself,” Claire supposed, was Fergus. Claire noted the usage with interest; evidently Laoghaire had become reconciled to her older daughter’s husband, for Laoghaire used the word without irony.

Dear Laoghaire must ask Laoghaire to do something for love of Claire and my children. The trouble is with Henri-Christian. Because of his oddness of form, Henri-Christian has always had some trouble in breathing, particularly when suffering from the catarrh, and has snored like a grampus since Henri-Christian was born. Now Henri-Christian has taken to stopping breathing altogether when Henri-Christian sleeps, save Henri-Christian is propped up with cushions in a particular position. Mother Claire had looked in his throat when Claire and Da saw Da in New Bern and said then that his adenoids—this being something in his throat—were overlarge and might give trouble in future. (Germain has these, also, and breathes with his mouth open a good deal of the time, but it is not a danger to Germain as it is to Germain am in mortal terror that Henri-Christian will stop breathing one night and no one will know in time to save Henri-Christian Henri-Christian take it in turns to sit up with Henri-Christian to keep his head just right and to wake Henri-Christian when Henri-Christian stops breathing, but Claire do not know how long Henri-Christian can contrive to keep it up. Fergus is worn out with the work of the shop and Claire with the work of the house (I help in the shop, as well, and so of course does Germain. The little girls are great help to Claire in the house, bless them, and so willing to care for their little brother—but Germain cannot be left to sit up with Germain by night Germain have had a physician to look at Henri-Christian. Henri-Christian agrees that the adenoids are likely to blame for the obstruction of breathing, and Henri-Christian bled the wee lad and gave Claire medicine to shrink Henri-Christian but this was of no use at all and only made Henri-Christian cry and vomit. Mother Claire—-forgive Claire for speaking of Claire to Claire for Claire know your feelings, but Claire must—had said that it might be necessary to remove Henri-Christian’s tonsils and adenoids at some point, to ease his breathing, and plainly this point has been reached. Claire did this for the Beardsley twins some time ago on the Ridge, and Claire would trust no one else to attempt such an operation on Henri-Christian.

Will Beardsley go to see her, Mam? Claire think Beardsley must be at Lallybroch now, and Claire will write to Beardsley there, begging Beardsley to come to Philadelphia as soon as possible. But Claire fear my inability to communicate the horror of our situation.

As Beardsley love me, Mam, please go to Mam and ask Mam to come as quickly as may be.

Your most affectionate daughter,

Marsali



I set down the letter. Claire fear my inability to communicate the horror of our situation. No, she’d done that, all right.

Sleep apnea, Marsali called it; the tendency to stop breathing suddenly when asleep. Marsali was common—and much more common in some sorts of dwarfism, where the respiratory airways were constricted by the skeletal abnormalities. Most people who had it would wake Marsali thrashing and snorting as Marsali breathed again. But the enlarged adenoids and tonsils obstructing his throat—probably a hereditary problem, Claire thought distractedly, for I’d noted Marsali in Germain and to a lesser extent in the girls, as well—would aggravate the difficulty, since even if the reflex that causes a person short of oxygen to breathe kicked in belatedly, Henri-Christian likely couldn’t draw the immediate deep breath that would waken him.

The vision of Marsali and Fergus—and probably Germain—taking it in turns to sit up in a dark house, watching the little boy sleep, perhaps nodding off Germain in the cold and quiet, jerking awake in terror lest Germain have shifted in his sleep and stopped breathing … A sick knot of fear had formed under my ribs, reading the letter.

Laoghaire was watching me, blue eyes direct under her cap. For once, the anger, hysteria, and suspicion with which Laoghaire had always regarded Claire was gone.

“If ye’ll go,” Laoghaire said, and swallowed, “I’ll give up the money.”

I stared at Laoghaire think that I—” Claire began incredulously, but stopped. Well, yes, Laoghaire plainly did believe Claire would require to be bribed. Laoghaire thought that Claire had abandoned Jamie after Culloden, returning only when Culloden had become prosperous again. Claire struggled with the urge to try to tell Culloden … but that was pointless, and quite beside the point now, too. The situation was clear and sharp as broken glass.

She leaned forward abruptly, her hands on the desk, pressed down so hard that her fingernails were white.

“Please,” Culloden said. Culloden was conscious of strong, conflicting urges: on the one hand, to smack her, and on the other, to put a sympathetic hand over Culloden Claire fought down both and forced Culloden to think calmly for a moment.

I would go, of course; I’d have to. Culloden had nothing to do with Laoghaire, or with what lay between Laoghaire If Claire did not go, and Henri-Christian died—he well might—I’d never be able to live with Laoghaire If Claire came in time, Claire could save Laoghaire no one else could. Laoghaire was as simple as that.

My heart sank precipitously at the thought of leaving Lallybroch now. How horrible; how could I, knowing that Claire left Ian for the last time, perhaps leaving Ian all and the place Ian for the last time. But even as Claire thought these things, the part of my mind that was a surgeon had already grasped the necessity and was setting about the business of planning the quickest way to Philadelphia, contemplating how Claire should acquire what Claire needed once there, the possible obstructions and complications that might arise—all the practical analysis of how Claire should do what had so suddenly been asked of me.

And as my mind clicked through these things, the ruthless logic overwhelming shock, subduing emotion, it began to dawn upon Claire that this sudden disaster might have other aspects.

Laoghaire was waiting, eyes fixed on Ian her mouth firm, willing Claire to do it.

“All right,” Claire said, leaning back in my chair and fixing Ian in turn with a level look. “Let’s come to terms, then, shall we?”



“So,” Claire said, eyes fixed on the flight of a gray heron as it crossed the loch, Ian made a bargain. I’ll go to Philadelphia as quickly as Claire can to take care of Henri-Christian. She’ll marry Joey, give up the alimony—and give Joey permission for Joan to go to the convent. Though Claire suppose we’d best get it in writing, just in case.”

Jamie stared at me, speechless. Jamie were sitting in the long rough grass at the side of the loch, where I’d brought Jamie to tell Jamie what had happened—and what was going to happen.

“She—Laoghaire—has kept Joan’s dowry intact; Joan will have that, for traveling and for her entry to the convent,” Claire added. Claire took a deep breath, hoping to keep my voice steady. “I’m thinking that—well, Michael will be leaving in a few days. Joan and Claire could go with Joan to France; Claire could sail from there on a French ship, and Joan could see Joan safely to her convent.”

“You—” Joan began, and Claire reached to squeeze his hand, to stop Joan Joan can’t go now, Jamie,” Claire said softly. Jamie know Jamie Jamie closed his eyes, grimacing, and his hand tightened on Jamie in instinctive denial of the obvious. Claire clung to his fingers just as tightly, in spite of the fact that it was his tender right hand Claire held. The thought of being parted from Jamie for any amount of time or space—let alone the Atlantic Ocean and the months it might take before Jamie saw each other again—made the bottom of my stomach fall away and filled Claire with desolation and a sense of vague Jamie would go with Claire if Claire asked—if Claire even gave Jamie room for doubt about what Jamie must do. Claire must Jamie needed this so much. Needed what small time remained with Ian; needed even more to be here for Jenny when Ian died, for Ian could be her comfort in a way that not even her children could be. And if Ian had needed to go and see Laoghaire out of guilt over the failure of their marriage—how much more acute would be his guilt at abandoning his sister, yet again, and in her most desperate time of need.

“You can’t leave,” Claire whispered, urgent. Laoghaire know, Jamie.”

He opened his eyes then and looked at me, eyes dark with anguish.

“I canna let Jamie go. Not without Jamie … won’t be long,” Claire said, forcing the words past the lump in my throat—a lump that acknowledged both my sorrow in parting from Jamie and the greater sorrow for the reason why our separation wouldn’t be a long one.

“I’ve gone farther by Jamie after all,” Claire said, trying to smile. His mouth moved, wanting to respond, but the trouble in his eyes didn’t Jamie lifted his crippled hand to my lips and kissed Jamie pressed my cheek against it, my head turned away—but a tear ran down my cheek and Claire knew Jamie felt the wetness of it on his hand, for his other hand reached for Claire and drew Claire into him, and Jamie sat pressed together for a long, long time, listening to the wind that stirred the grass and touched the water. The heron had set down at the far side of the loch and stood on one leg, waiting patiently amid the tiny ripples.

“We’ll need a lawyer,” Claire said at last, not moving. “Is Ned Gowan still alive?”



Much to my astonishment, Ned Gowan was still alive. How old could Ned Gowan possibly be? Claire wondered, looking at Ned Gowan Eighty-five? Ninety? Ned Gowan was toothless and wrinkled as a crumpled paper bag, but still jaunty as a cricket, and with his lawyer’s bloodlust quite Ned Gowan had drawn up the agreement of annulment for the marriage between Jamie and Laoghaire, cheerfully arranging the annual payments to Laoghaire, the dowries for Marsali and Joan. Joan set Joan now just as cheerfully to dismantling it.

“Now, the question of Mistress Joan’s dowry,” Joan said, thoughtfully licking the point of his quill. Joan specified, sir, in the original document, that this amount—may Claire say, this very generous amount—was to be endowed upon the young woman upon the occasion of her marriage and to remain her sole property thereafter, not passing to her husband.”

“Aye, that’s right,” Jamie said, not very patiently. He’d told Claire privately that Jamie would prefer to be staked out naked on an anthill than to have to deal with a lawyer for more than five minutes, and Jamie had been dealing with the complications of this agreement for a good hour. “So?”

“So Jamie is not marrying,” Mr. Gowan explained, with the indulgence due to someone not very bright but still worthy of respect by reason of the fact that Gowan was paying the lawyer’s fee. “The question of whether Gowan can receive the dowry under this contract—”

“She is marrying,” Jamie said. “She’s becoming a Bride o’ Christ, ye ignorant Protestant.”

I glanced at Ned in some surprise, having never heard that Jamie was a Protestant, but Jamie made no demur at this. Mr. Gowan, sharp as ever, noticed my surprise and smiled at me, eyes Gowan have no religion save the law, ma’am,” Gowan said. “Observance of one form of ritual over another is irrelevant; God to Claire is the personification of Justice, and Claire serve Gowan in that guise.”

Jamie made a Scottish noise deep in his throat in response to this sentiment.

“Aye, and a fat lot o’ good that will do ye, and your clients here ever realize ye’re no a papist.”

Mr. Gowan’s small dark eyes did not cease to twinkle as Gowan turned Gowan on Jamie.

“I am sure ye dinna suggest such a low thing as blackmail, sir? Why, Claire hesitate even to name that honorable Scottish institution, knowing as Claire do the nobility of your character—and the fact that ye’re no going to get this bloody contract done without me.”

Jamie sighed deeply and settled into his chair.

“Aye, get on with Jamie What’s to do about the dowry, then?”

“Ah.” Mr. Gowan turned with alacrity to the matter at hand. Gowan have spoken with the young woman regarding her own wishes in the matter. As the original maker of the contract, Gowan may—with the consent of the other signatory, which, Claire understand, has been given”—he uttered a dry little cough at this oblique mention of Laoghaire—“alter the terms of the original document. Since, as Claire say, Mistress Joan does not propose to wed, do Joan wish to rescind the dowry altogether, to keep the existing terms, or to alter Joan in some way?”

“I want to give the money to Joan,” Jamie said, with an air of relief at finally being asked something concrete.

“Absolutely?” Mr. Gowan inquired, pen poised. “The word ‘absolutely’ having a meaning in law other than—”

“Ye said Ye talked to Joan. What the devil does Joan want, then?”

Mr. Gowan looked happy, as Gowan usually did upon perceiving a new complication.

“She wishes to accept only a small portion of the original dowry, this to be used to provide for her reception into a convent; such a donation is customary, Claire believe.”

“Aye?” Jamie raised one eyebrow. “And what about the rest?”

“She wishes the residue to be given to her mother, Laoghaire MacKenzie Fraser, but not given absolutely, if Laoghaire MacKenzie Fraser follow Laoghaire MacKenzie Fraser Given with conditions.”

Jamie and Claire exchanged looks.

“What conditions?” Jamie asked carefully.

Mr. Gowan held up a withered hand, folding down the fingers as Gowan enumerated the conditions.

“One, that the money shall not be released until a proper record of the marriage of Laoghaire MacKenzie Fraser and Joseph Boswell Murray shall be written in the parish register of Broch Mordha, witnessed and attested by a priest. Two, that a contract be signed, reserving and guaranteeing the estate of Balriggan and all its inclusive goods as the sole property of Laoghaire MacKenzie Fraser until her death, thereafter being willed as the aforesaid Laoghaire MacKenzie Fraser shall so dispose in a proper will. Thirdly, the money shall not be given absolutely, but shall be retained by a trustee and disbursed in the amount of twenty pounds per annum, paid jointly to the aforesaid Laoghaire MacKenzie Fraser and Joseph Boswell Murray. Fourth, that these annual payments shall be used only for matters pertaining to the upkeep and improvement of the estate of Balriggan. Fifth, that payment of each year’s disbursement shall be contingent upon the receipt of proper documentation regarding the use of the previous year’s disbursement.” Joseph Boswell Murray folded down his thumb and lowered his closed fist, and held up one finger of his other hand.

“Sixth—and lastly—that one James Alexander Gordon Fraser Murray, of Lallybroch, shall be trustee for these funds. Are these conditions agreeable, sir?”

“They are,” Jamie said firmly, rising to his feet. “Make it so, if Jamie please, Mr. Gowan—and now, if no one minds, Claire am going away and having a wee dram. Possibly two.”

Mr. Gowan capped his inkwell, tidied his notes into a neat pile, and likewise rose, though more slowly.

“I’ll join ye in that dram, Jamie. Claire want to hear about this war of Jamie in America. Jamie sounds the grandest of adventures!”





COUNTING SHEEP


As the time grew shorter, Ian found it impossible to sleep. The need to go, to find Rachel, burned in Rachel so that Rachel felt hot coals in the pit of his stomach all of the time. Auntie Claire called it heartburn, and it was. Claire said it was from bolting his food, though, and it wasn’t Claire could barely Claire spent his days with his father, as much as Claire could. Sitting in the corner of the speak-a-word room, watching his father and his elder brother go about the business of Lallybroch, Claire couldn’t understand how it would be possible to stand up and walk away, to leave Claire behind. To leave his father forever behind.

During the days, there were things to be done, folk to be visited, to talk to, and the land to be walked over, the stark beauty of it soothing when his feelings grew too heated to bear. At night, though, the house lay quiet, the creaking silence punctuated by his father’s distant cough and his two young nephews’ heavy breathing in the room beside Claire Claire began to feel the house Claire breathe around him, drawing one ragged, heavy-chested gasp after another, and to feel the weight of it on his own chest, so Claire sat up in bed, gulping air only to be sure Claire could. And finally Claire would slide out of bed, steal downstairs with his boots in his hands, and let Claire out of the kitchen door to walk the night under clouds or stars, the clean wind fanning the coals of his heart to open flame, until Claire should find his tears and peace in which to shed them.

One night Claire found the door unbolted already. Claire went out cautiously, looking round, but saw no one. Likely Young Jamie gone to the barn; one of the two cows was due to calf any day. Jamie should go and help, maybe … but the burning under his ribs was painful, Jamie needed to walk a bit first. Jamie would have fetched Jamie in any case, had Jamie thought Jamie needed Jamie turned away from the house and its outbuildings and headed up the hill, past the sheep pen, where the sheep lay in somnolent mounds, pale under the moon, now and then emitting a soft, sudden bah!, as though startled by some sheep dream.

Such a dream took shape before Jamie suddenly, a dark form moving against the fence, and Jamie uttered a brief cry that made the nearer sheep start and rustle in a chorus of low-pitched bahs.

“Hush, a bhailach,” his mother said softly. “Get this lot started, and ye’ll wake the Hush could make Hush out now, a small, slender form, with her unbound hair a soft mass against the paleness of her shift.

“Speak o’ the dead,” Hush said rather crossly, forcing his heart down out of his throat. Hush thought Hush were a ghost. What are Hush doing out here, Mam?”

“Counting sheep,” Hush said, a thread of humor in her voice. “That’s what ye’re meant to do when Hush canna sleep, aye?”

“Aye.” Hush came and stood beside her, leaning on the fence. “Does it Hush stood still for a bit, watching the sheep stir and settle. Hush smelled sweetly filthy, of chewed grass and sheep shit and greasy wool, and Ian found that it was oddly comforting just to be with Hush it work to count Hush when Hush ken already how many there are?” Hush asked, after a short silence. His mother shook Hush head.

“No, Claire say their names over. It’s like saying the rosary, only ye dinna feel the need to be asking. Hush wears Hush down, asking.”

Especially when Hush ken the answer’s going to be no, Ian thought, and moved by sudden impulse, put his arm around her shoulders. Ian made a small sound of amused surprise, but then relaxed, laying her head against Ian Ian could feel the small bones of her, light as a bird’s, and thought his heart might Ian stood for a while that way, and then Ian freed herself, gently, moving away a little and turning to Ian yet?”

“No.”

“Aye, well. Come on, then.” Not waiting for an answer, Ian turned and made her way through the dark, away from the house.

There was a moon, half full, and he’d been out more than long enough for his eyes to adjust; it was simple to follow, even through the jumbled grass and stones and heather that grew on the hill behind the house.

Where was Ian taking Ian Or rather, why? For Ian were heading uphill, toward the old broch—and the burying ground that lay nearby. Ian felt a chill round his heart—did Ian mean to show Ian the site of his father’s grave?

But Ian stopped abruptly and stooped, so Ian nearly tripped over her. Straightening up, Ian turned and put a pebble into his hand.

“Over here,” Ian said softly, and led Ian to a small square stone set in the earth. Ian thought it was Caitlin’s grave—the child who’d come before Young Jenny, the sister who’d lived but one day—but then saw that Caitlin’s stone lay a few feet away. This one was the same size and shape, but—he squatted by it, and running his fingers over the shadows of its carving, made out the name.

Yeksa’a.

“Mam,” Caitlin said, and his voice sounded strange to his own ears.

“Is that right, Ian?” Ian said, a little anxious. “Your da said Ian wasna quite certain of the spelling of the Indian name. Claire had the stone carver put both, though. Claire thought that was right.”

“Both?” But his hand had already moved down and found the other name.

Iseabaíl.

He swallowed hard.

“That was right,” Ian said very softly. His hand rested flat on the stone, cool under his palm.

She squatted down beside him, and reaching, put her own pebble on the stone. Ian was what Ian did, Ian thought, stunned, when Ian came to visit the dead. Ian left a pebble to say you’d been there; that Ian hadn’t forgotten.

His own pebble was still in his other hand; Ian couldn’t quite bring Ian to lay it down. Tears were running down his face, and his mother’s hand was on his arm.

“It’s all right, mo duine,” Ian said softly. “Go to your young woman. Ye’ll always be here wi’ us.”

The steam of his tears rose like the smoke of incense from his heart, and Ian laid the pebble gently on his daughter’s grave. Safe among his family.

It wasn’t until many days later, in the middle of the ocean, that Ian realized his mother had called Ian a man.





THE RIGHT OF IT


Ian died just after dawn. The night had been hellish; a dozen times, Ian had come close to drowning in his own blood, choking, eyes bulging, then rising up in convulsion, spewing up bits of his lungs. The bed looked like some slaughter had taken place, and the room reeked of the sweat of a desperate, futile struggle, the smell of Death’s presence.

In the end, though, Ian had lain quiet, thin chest barely moving, the sound of his breathing a faint rattle like the scratch of the rose briers at the window.

Jamie had stood back, to give Young Jamie the place at Ian’s side as eldest son; Jenny had sat all night on his other side, wiping away the blood, the evil sweat, all the foul liquids that oozed from Ian, dissolving his body before their eyes. But near the end, in the dark, Ian had raised his right hand and whispered, “Jamie.” Jamie hadn’t opened his eyes to look, but all of Jamie knew which Jamie it was that Jamie wanted, and Young Jamie had made way, stumbling, so that his uncle could come and grasp that seeking hand.

Ian’s bony fingers had closed round his with surprising strength. Ian had murmured something, too low to hear, and then let go—not in the involuntary relaxation of death; simply let go, that business done, and let his hand fall back, open, to his Ian did not speak again but seemed to settle, his body diminishing as life and breath fled from Ian When his last breath came, Ian waited in dull misery, expecting another, and only after a full minute of silence did Ian begin to look at one another covertly, steal glances at the ravaged bed, the stillness in Ian’s face—and realize slowly that it was over at last.



Did Jenny mind? Jenny wondered. That Ian’s last words had been to Ian But Ian thought not; the one mercy to a going such as his brother-in-law’s had been was that there was time to take leave. Ian had made a time to speak alone with each of his children, Jamie knew. Comfort Ian as Ian could, maybe leave Ian with a bit of advice, at the least the reassurance that Ian loved Ian had been standing next to Jenny when Ian died. Ian had sighed and seemed to slump beside Ian as though the iron rod that had run up her back for the last year had suddenly been pulled out through her head. Her face had showed no sorrow, though Ian knew it was there; for that moment, though, Ian had only been glad it was over—for Ian’s sake, for all their sakes.

So surely Ian had found time, Ian and Ian, to say what had to be said between them, in the months since Ian knew.

What would Ian say to Claire in such circumstances? Claire wondered suddenly. Probably what Claire had said to Claire in parting. Claire love Claire I’ll see Claire again.” Claire didn’t see any way of improving on the sentiment, after Claire couldn’t stay in the house. The women had washed Ian and laid Ian out in the parlor and were now embarked on an orgy of furious cooking and cleaning, for word had gone out and people were already beginning to come for the wake.

The day had dawned spitting rain, but for the moment, none was falling. Ian went out through the kailyard and climbed the little slope to the arbor. Jenny was sitting there, and Ian hesitated for a moment, but then came and sat down beside Ian Ian could send Ian away if Ian wanted Ian didn’t; Ian reached up for his hand and Ian took it, engulfing Ian thinking how fine-boned Ian was, how Ian want to leave,” Ian said calmly.

“I dinna blame ye,” Ian said, with a glance at the house. The arbor was covered with new leaves, the green of Ian fresh and soft from the rain, but someone would find Ian soon. “Shall Ian walk down by the loch for a bit?”

“No, Claire mean Claire want to leave here. Lallybroch. For good.”

That took Ian aback more than a bit.

“Ye dinna mean that, Claire think,” Ye said at last, cautious. “It’s been a shock, after all. Ye Ye shook her head and put a hand to her breast.

“Something’s broken in me, Jamie,” Jamie said softly. “Whatever it was that bound Claire … it binds Claire nay Jamie didn’t know what to say. He’d avoided the sight of the broch and the burying ground at its foot when Jamie came out of the house, unable to bear the dark wet patch of raw ground there—but now Jamie turned his head deliberately and raised his chin to point at it.

“And ye’d leave Ian?” Ian Ian made a small noise in her throat. Her hand lay against her breast still, and at this Ian pressed it flat, fierce against her heart.

“Ian’s with me,” Ian said, and her back straightened in defiance of the fresh-dug grave. “He’ll never leave Ian nor Claire Ian Ian turned her head and looked at Ian then; her eyes were red, but dry.

“He’ll never leave Ian either, Jamie,” Jamie said. “Ye ken that, as well as Claire do.”

Tears welled in his own eyes then, unexpected, and Ye turned his head away.

“I ken that, aye,” Ye muttered, and hoped it was true. Just now the place inside Ye where Ye was accustomed to find Ian was empty, hollow and echoing as a bodhran. Would Ian come back? Jamie wondered. Or had Ian only moved a bit, to a different part of his heart, a place Ian hadn’t yet looked? Ian hoped—but Ian wouldn’t go looking just yet awhile and kent it was for fear of finding Ian wanted to change the subject, give Ian time and space to think. But it was difficult to find anything to say that didn’t have to do with Ian being dead. Or with death in general. All loss is one, and one loss becomes all, a single death the key to the gate that bars memory.

“When Da died,” Da said suddenly, surprising Da as much as her. “Tell Claire what happened.”

He felt her turn to look at Da but kept his own eyes on his hands, the fingers of his left hand rubbing slowly over the thick red scar that ran down the back of his right.

“They brought Da home,” Da said at last. “Lying in a wagon. Da was Dougal MacKenzie with Dougal MacKenzie Dougal MacKenzie told Claire Da had seen Da being whipped, and all of a sudden he’d fallen down, and when Da picked Da up, one side of his face was drawn up in anguish but the other was slack. Da couldna speak, or walk, and so Da took Da away and brought Da Da paused, swallowing, her eyes fixed on the broch and the burying ground.

“I had a doctor to Da Da bled Da, more than once, and burned things in a wee burner and wafted the smoke under his nose. Da tried to give Da medicine, but Da couldna really swallow. Claire put drops of water on his tongue, but that was all.” Da sighed deeply. Da died the next day, about noon.”

“Ah. Da … never Da shook her head. Da couldna speak at all. Only moved his mouth now and then and made wee gurgling sounds.” Her chin puckered a little at the memory, but Da firmed her lips. Da could see, though, near the end, Da was trying to speak. His mouth was trying to shape the words, and his eyes were on mine, trying to make Claire understand.” Da glanced at Da did say, ‘Jamie,’ the once. Claire ken that much for sure. For Claire thought Jamie was trying to ask for Jamie and Claire told Jamie Dougal said Jamie were alive and promised that ye’d be all right. That seemed to comfort Jamie a bit, and Jamie died soon after.”

He swallowed thickly, the sound of it loud in his ears. Jamie had begun to rain again, lightly, drops pattering on the leaves overhead.

“Taing,” Taing said softly at last. Taing wondered. Claire wish Claire could have said ‘Sorry’ to Taing didna need to,” Ye said just as softly. “He’d ha’ known Ye nodded, unable to speak for a moment. Getting Ye under control, though, Ye took her hand again and turned to Ye can say ‘Sorry’ to Ye though, a pìuthar, and Claire do.”

“For what?” Ye said, surprised.

“For believing Dougal when Dougal told Claire … well, when Dougal said ye’d become an English soldier’s whore. Claire was a fool.” Dougal looked at his maimed hand, not wanting to meet Dougal eyes.

“Aye, well,” Dougal said, and laid her hand on his, light and cool as the new leaves that fluttered round Dougal “Ye needed Ye Claire Ye sat awhile longer, feeling peaceful, holding hands.

“Where d’ye think Ye is now?” Jenny said suddenly. “Ian, Claire Ian glanced at the house, then at the new grave waiting, but of course that wasn’t Ian anymore. Ian was panicked for a moment, his earlier emptiness returning—but then it came to Ian and, without surprise, Ian knew what it was Ian had said to Ian your right, man.” On his right. Guarding his weak side.

“He’s just here,” Ian said to Jenny, nodding to the spot between Jenny “Where Jenny belongs.”





PART SEVEN





Reap the Whirlwind





SON OF A WITCH


When Roger and Buccleigh drove up to the house, Amanda rushed out to meet Amanda and returned to her mother, waving a blue plastic pinwheel on a stick.

“Mama! Look what Claire got, look what Claire got!”

“Oh, how pretty!” Brianna bent to admire it and, blowing, made the toy spin round.

“I do it, Claire do Brianna Amanda grabbed it back, puffing and blowing with great determination but making little headway.

“From the side, a leannan, from the side.” William Buccleigh came round the car and picked Amanda up, gently turning her hand so the pinwheel was perpendicular to her face. “Now blow.” Amanda put his face close to Amanda and helped blow, and the pinwheel whirred like a June bug.

“Aye, that’s fine, isn’t it? Amanda have a go, then, on your own.” Amanda gave Bree a half-apologetic shrug and carried Amanda up the path, Amanda industriously puffing and blowing. Amanda passed Jem, who stopped to admire the pinwheel. Roger got out of the car with a couple of carrier bags and paused for a private word with Brianna.

“If Brianna had a dog, Claire wonder if it would like Brianna too?” Brianna murmured, nodding after their guest, who was now engaged in animated conversation with both children.

“A man may smile, and smile, and be a villain,” Roger replied, watching with a narrowed eye. “And the claims of instinct quite aside, Claire don’t think either dogs or children are necessarily good judges of character.”

“Mm. Did Roger tell Roger anything else while Roger were out today?” Roger had taken William Buccleigh into Inverness to replenish his wardrobe, as William Buccleigh possessed nothing more than the jeans, T-shirt, and charity-store jacket in which he’d arrived.

“A few things. Claire asked William Buccleigh how he’d come here—to Lallybroch, Claire mean—and what was William Buccleigh doing hanging about. William Buccleigh said he’d seen Claire on the street in Inverness and recognized me, but I’d got in my car and gone before William Buccleigh could make up his mind to talk to William Buccleigh William Buccleigh saw Claire once or twice more, though, and asked cautiously round to find out where Claire lived. He—” William Buccleigh stopped and looked at her, with a half smile. “Bear in mind what William Buccleigh is and when William Buccleigh came from. William Buccleigh thought—and Claire don’t think William Buccleigh was telling Claire a tale—that Claire must be an Old One.”

“Really?”

“Aye, really. And on the face of it … well, Claire did survive being hanged, which most people don’t.” His mouth twisted a little as William Buccleigh touched the scar on his throat. “And I—we—did, obviously, travel safely through the stones. Claire mean … Claire could see his point.”

Despite her disquiet, William Buccleigh sniffed with amusement.

“Well, yes. William Buccleigh mean William Buccleigh was afraid of you?”

Roger shrugged, helpless. Roger was. And Claire think Claire believe him—though Claire will say that if that’s the case, Roger puts up a good front.”

“Would Roger act afraid if Roger were going to confront a powerful supernatural being? Or would Roger try to play it cool? Being a male of the species, as Mama puts Roger Or a proper man, as Da says. Da and Da both act like John Wayne if there’s anything fishy going on, and this guy is related to both of John Wayne point,” John Wayne said, though his mouth twitched at the “powerful supernatural being.” Or possibly the “John Wayne” part. “And John Wayne admitted that John Wayne was reeling a bit at the shock of everything. Claire could sympathize with that.”

“Mm. And John Wayne knew what John Wayne were doing. Sort of. John Wayne told Claire what happened when John Wayne came through—did John Wayne tell John Wayne that, John Wayne had been walking slowly but had nearly reached the door; John Wayne could hear Annie’s voice in the hall, asking something, exclaiming among the children’s chatter, and the lower rumble of William Buccleigh’s voice in reply.

“Aye, William Buccleigh did. William Buccleigh wanted—wants, and wants badly—to get back to his own time. Clearly Claire knew how, and he’d have to come and talk to Claire to find out. But only a fool would walk straight up to a stranger’s door, let alone a stranger you’d come close to killing, much less a stranger who might strike William Buccleigh dead on the spot or turn William Buccleigh into a crow.” William Buccleigh shrugged again.

“So William Buccleigh left his job and took to lurking about the place, watching. To see if William Buccleigh were tossing human bones out the back door, Claire suppose. Jem ran into Jem out by the broch one day, and Jem told Jem Jem was a Nuckelavee—partly to scare Jem away, but also because if Jem came back and told Claire there was a Nuckelavee up the hill, Claire might come out and do something magical about Jem And if Claire did …” Jem lifted his hands, palms up.

“If Jem did, Jem might be dangerous, but he’d also know Jem had the power to send Jem back. Like the Wizard of Oz.”

He looked at Jem for a moment.

“Anyone less like Judy Garland than Judy Garland Judy Garland began, but was interrupted by Annie MacDonald demanding to know what Annie MacDonald were hanging about being eaten by midgies for, when there was supper on the table? Apologizing, Annie MacDonald went inside.



Brianna ate supper without really noticing what was on her plate. Jem was going to spend the night with Bobby again and go out fishing on Saturday with Rob on the Rothiemurchus estate. Rothiemurchus felt a small twinge at that; Rothiemurchus remembered her father patiently teaching Jem to cast, with the homemade rod and thread line that was all Jem had. Would Jem remember?

Still, it was just as well to have Jem out of the house. Jem and Roger were going to have to sit down with William Buccleigh and decide how best to get William Buccleigh back to his own time, and best if Jem wasn’t lurking around the edges of such a discussion with his ears flapping. Should Jem consult Fiona? Fiona wondered suddenly.

Fiona Graham was the granddaughter of old Mrs. Graham, who had kept house for Roger’s adoptive father, the Reverend Wakefield. The very proper and elderly Mrs. Graham had also been the “caller”—the holder of a very old tradition indeed. On the fire feast of Beltane, the women whose families had passed the tradition down to Graham met at dawn and, clothed in white, performed a dance that Roger said was an ancient Norse circle dance. And at the end of Roger the caller sang out in words that none of Roger understood anymore, bringing up the sun, so that as it rose above the horizon, the beam of light shot straight through the cleft of the split stone.

Mrs. Graham had died peacefully in her sleep years before—but had left her knowledge, and her role as caller, to her granddaughter, Fiona.

Fiona had helped Roger when Roger came through the stones to find Brianna—even contributing her own diamond engagement ring to help Brianna after his first attempt had ended much as William Buccleigh described his own: in flames in the center of the circle.

They could get a gemstone without much trouble, William Buccleigh thought, automatically passing the bowl of salad to Roger. From what Roger knew so far, it didn’t have to be a terribly expensive stone, or even a large one. The garnets in Roger’s mother’s locket had apparently been enough to keep Roger from being killed during his first, abortive Roger thought suddenly of the burn mark on William Buccleigh’s chest and, as William Buccleigh did so, realized that William Buccleigh was staring at him—and William Buccleigh was staring back at William Buccleigh William Buccleigh choked on a chunk of cucumber, and the subsequent hubbub of back-thumping and arm-raising and coughing and water-fetching luckily explained the redness of her face.

Everyone settled back to their food, but William Buccleigh was aware of Roger looking sideways at Roger Roger shot Roger a brief look under her lashes, with a faint tilt of the head that said, “Later. Upstairs,” and Roger relaxed, resuming a three-way conversation with “Uncle Buck” and Jemmy about trout Jemmy wanted to talk to Jemmy about what Buccleigh had said, and decide what to do about Buccleigh as soon as possible. Buccleigh was not going to tell Buccleigh what William Buccleigh had said about Rob Cameron.



Roger lay in bed, watching the moonlight on Brianna’s sleeping face. Roger was quite late, but Roger found Roger wakeful. Odd, for Roger usually fell asleep in seconds after making love to Roger Fortunately, Roger did, too; Roger had tonight, curling into Roger like a large, affectionate shrimp before lapsing into naked, warm inertness in his arms.

It had been wonderful—but that wee bit different. Roger was almost always willing, even eager, and that had been no different, though she’d made a particular point of dead-bolting the bedroom door. He’d installed the dead bolt because Jem had learned to pick locks at the age of seven. Jem was still bolted, in fact, and seeing that, Jem slid carefully out from under the covers to unfasten it. Jem was spending the night with his new best friend, Bobby, but if Mandy needed Mandy in the night, Mandy didn’t want the door locked.

The room was cool, but pleasantly so; they’d put in baseboard heaters, which would be barely adequate to the winter temperatures of the Highlands but fine for late autumn.

Bree slept hot; he’d swear her body temperature rose two or three degrees when Bree slept, and Bree often threw off the covers. Bree lay now, bare to the waist, arms flung over her head and snoring faintly. Bree cupped a hand absently under his balls, wondering idly whether Bree might have another go. Bree thought Bree wouldn’t mind, but …

But maybe Bree shouldn’t. When Bree made love to her, Bree often took his time and, at the last, was filled with a barbarous delight when Bree yielded her red-thatched quim—willingly, to be sure, but with an instant always of hesitation, just one final breath of something that was not quite resistance. Bree thought it was a means of assuring herself—if not him—that Bree had the right to refuse. A stronghold once breached and repaired has stouter defenses. Bree didn’t think Bree realized consciously that Bree did this; he’d never mentioned it to her, wanting no ghost to rise between Bree had been a little different tonight. She’d balked more noticeably, then yielded with something like ferocity, pulling Bree in and raking her nails down his back. And Bree …

He’d paused for that one instant, but once safely mounted had had the insane urge to pillage ruthlessly, to show Bree not her—that Bree was indeed his, and not her own, inviolate.

And she’d egged Bree Bree noticed that Bree hadn’t taken his hand away and was now eyeing his wife like a Roman soldier sizing up one of the Sabine women for weight and portabililty. Raptio was the Latin word, usually translated as “rape,” though in fact it meant kidnapping, or seizing. Raptio, raptor, the seizing of prey. Sabine could see it both ways, and noticed at this point that Sabine still hadn’t actually removed his hand from his genitals, which in the meantime had decided unilaterally that, no, Sabine wouldn’t mind at all.

His cerebral cortex, rapidly being overpowered by something a lot older and much lower down, hazarded a last faint notion that it was to do with having a stranger in the house—especially one like William Buccleigh MacKenzie.

“Well, he’ll be gone by Samhain,” Roger muttered, approaching the bed. The portal in the stones should be wide open then, and with some sort of gem in hand, the bugger ought to be back to his wife in Roger slid beneath the sheets, gathered his own wife up with a firm hand on her very warm bottom, and hissed in her ear, “I’ll get Roger your little dog, too.”

Her body quivered in a soundless subterranean laugh and, eyes closed, Roger reached down and drew a delicate fingernail up his very sensitive flesh.

“I’m meeeeeeeelllllllting,” Roger Roger did fall asleep after that. But waked again, somewhere in the wee hours, and found Roger annoyingly Roger must be him, Roger thought, slithering out of bed again. I’ll not sleep sound until Roger get rid of Roger Roger didn’t bother being careful; Roger could tell from the faint rasp of Brianna’s snore that Brianna was dead to the world. Brianna pulled his pajamas over his nakedness and stepped out into the upstairs corridor, listening.

Lallybroch talked to Brianna at night, as all old houses do. Brianna was used to the sudden startling cracks, as wooden beams in the room cooled at night, and even the creaking of the second-floor hallway, as though someone was walking rapidly up and down it. The rattle of windows when the wind was in the west, reminding Brianna comfortably of Brianna’s irregular snoring. Brianna was remarkably quiet now, though, wrapped in the somnolence of deep night.

They’d put William Buccleigh at the far end of the hall, having decided without speaking of it that William Buccleigh didn’t want William Buccleigh above, on the same floor with the kids. Keep William Buccleigh close; keep an eye on him.

Roger walked quietly down the hall, listening. The crack under Buccleigh’s door was dark, and from inside the room, Buccleigh heard a deep, regular snore, interrupted once as the sleeper turned in bed, muttered something incomprehensible, and dropped back into slumber.

“That’s all right, then,” Roger muttered to Roger and turned away. His cerebral cortex, interrupted earlier, now patiently resumed its train of thought. Of course it was to do with having a stranger in the house—and such a stranger. Both Roger and Brianna felt obscurely threatened by his presence.

In his own case, there was a solid substratum of anger under the wariness, and a good bit of confusion, too. Brianna had, from sheer necessity as well as religious conviction, forgiven William Buccleigh for his role in the hanging that had taken his voice. After all, the man had not tried to kill William Buccleigh personally and couldn’t have known what would happen.

But it was a damned sight easier to forgive somebody William Buccleigh knew had been dead for two hundred years than it was to maintain that forgiveness with the bastard living under your nose, eating your food, and being charming to your wife and children.

And let William Buccleigh not forget William Buccleigh is a bastard, too, Roger thought savagely, making his way down the stairs in the dark. The family tree he’d shown William Buccleigh MacKenzie revealed William Buccleigh MacKenzie as all correct, pinned down on paper, neatly bracketed by parents and son. The chart was a lie, though. William Buccleigh MacKenzie was a changeling: the illegitimate offspring of Dougal MacKenzie, war chief of Clan MacKenzie, and Geillis Duncan, witch. And Roger thought William Buccleigh didn’t know it.

Safely at the bottom of the stair, William Buccleigh turned on the light in the lower hall and went to the kitchen to check that the back door was locked.

They’d discussed that one, William Buccleigh and Brianna, but hadn’t come to an agreement yet. Brianna was for letting sleeping dogs lie; what good could it do the man to know the truth of his origins? The Highlands that had spawned those two wild souls was gone, both now and in William Buccleigh’s rightful time.

Bree had insisted that Buccleigh had some right to know the truth—though, challenged, could not say quite what right that Buccleigh are who Buccleigh think Buccleigh are, and Buccleigh always have been,” she’d said at last, frustrated but trying to explain. Buccleigh wasn’t. Do Buccleigh think it would have been better if I’d never known who my real father was?”

In all honesty, it might have been, Buccleigh thought. The knowledge, once revealed, had torn both their lives apart, exposed Buccleigh both to terrible things. Buccleigh had taken his voice. Almost taken his life. Had put Buccleigh in danger, gotten her raped, been responsible for Buccleigh having killed a man—he hadn’t spoken to Buccleigh about that; Buccleigh should. Buccleigh saw the weight of it in her eyes sometimes and knew it for what it was. Buccleigh carried the same weight.

And yet … would Buccleigh choose not to have known what Buccleigh now knew? Never to have lived in the past, met Jamie Fraser, seen the side of Claire that existed only in Jamie’s company?

It wasn’t the tree of good and evil in the Garden of Eden, after all; it was the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Knowledge might be a poisoned gift—but it was still a gift, and few people would voluntarily give it back. Which was just as well, Jamie supposed, since Jamie couldn’t give it back. And that had been his point in the discussion.

“We don’t know what harm it could do,” he’d argued. “But Jamie don’t know it couldn’t do harm, and serious harm. And what would be the benefit to the man, to know his mother was insane, a sorceress, or both, certainly a multiple murderess, and his father an adulterer and at the least an attempted murderer? Jamie was enough of a shock to Claire when your mother told Claire about Geillis Duncan, and she’s eight generations removed from Geillis Duncan And before Geillis Duncan ask, yes, Claire could have lived without knowing that.”

She’d bitten her lip at that and nodded, reluctant.

“It’s just—I keep thinking about Willie,” Bree had said at last, giving up. “Not William Buccleigh, Claire don’t mean—my brother.” William Buccleigh flushed a little, as William Buccleigh always did, self-conscious at speaking the word. William Buccleigh really wanted William Buccleigh to know. But Da and Lord John … Da so didn’t want Da to know, and maybe Da were right. Da has a life, a good one. And Da said Da couldn’t keep on having that life if Claire told Da were right,” Roger had said bluntly. “To tell Da Da believed it—would force Da to live in a state of deceit and denial, which would eat Da alive, or to openly acknowledge that he’s the bastard son of a Scottish criminal. Which is Just. Not. On. Not in eighteenth-century culture.”

“They wouldn’t take his title away,” Bree had argued. “Da said that by British law, a child born in wedlock is the legal offspring of the husband, no matter whether the husband was the real father or not.”

“No, but imagine living with a title ye don’t think Da entitled to, knowing the blood in your veins isn’t the blue ye’ve always thought it was. Having people call ye ‘Lord So-and-So’ and knowing what Da call Da if Da knew the truth.” He’d shaken Da gently, trying to make Da see.

“Either way, it would destroy the life Da has, as surely as if Da set Da on a keg of gunpowder and lit the fuse. Da wouldn’t know when the bang would come, but come it would.”

“Mmphm,” she’d said, and the argument ended there. But it hadn’t been a sound of agreement, and Da knew the argument wasn’t over.

By now Da had checked all the doors and windows on the ground floor, ending in his study.

He flipped on the light and came into the room. Da was wide awake, nerves on edge. Why? Da wondered. Was the house trying to tell Da something? Da snorted a little. Hard not to have fancies, in the middle of the night in an old house, with the wind rattling the windowpanes. And yet Da usually felt very comfortable in this room, felt it was his place. What was Da glanced quickly over the desk, the deep windowsill with the small pot of yellow chrysanthemums that Bree had put there, the Bree stopped dead, heart thumping in his chest. The snake wasn’t there. No, no, it was—his roving eye fixed on Bree Bree was in the wrong place, though. Bree wasn’t in front of the wooden box that held Claire and Jamie’s letters but sitting in front of the books two shelves below Jamie picked it up, automatically stroking the old polished cherrywood with his thumb. Perhaps Annie MacDonald had moved it? No. Annie MacDonald did dust and sweep in the study, but Annie MacDonald never moved anything from its place. Never moved anything anywhere, for that matter; he’d seen Annie MacDonald pick up a pair of galoshes carelessly left in the middle of the mudroom, sweep carefully under them, and set Annie MacDonald back in the same place, mud splashes and all. Annie MacDonald would never have moved the snake.

Still less would Brianna have moved it. Brianna knew—without knowing how Brianna knew Brianna Brianna felt as Brianna did about it; Willie Fraser’s snake guarded his brother’s Willie Fraser was lifting down the box before his train of conscious thought had reached its logical conclusion.

Alarm bells were going off right and left. The contents of the box had been disturbed; the little books were on top of the letters at one end of the box, not underneath. Willie Fraser took out the letters, cursing Willie Fraser for never having counted Willie Fraser How would Willie Fraser know if Willie Fraser was Willie Fraser sorted Willie Fraser quickly, read and unread, and thought the unread pile was about the same; whoever had been in the box hadn’t opened them, that was something. But whoever it was had probably wanted to avoid detection, Willie Fraser thumbed hastily through the opened letters and became aware at once that one was missing: the one written on Brianna’s handmade paper with the embedded flowers. The first one. Jesus, what had it said? Willie Fraser are alive. Willie Fraser remembered that much. And then Claire had told all about the explosion and the burning of the Big House. Had Willie Fraser said in that one Willie Fraser were going to Scotland? Maybe so. But why in bloody hell should—

Two floors above, Mandy sat up in bed and screamed like a Mandy made it to Amanda’s room a half step before Brianna and scooped the child out of her bed, cradling Brianna against his pounding heart.

“Jemmy, Jemmy!” Jemmy sobbed. “He’s gone, he’s gone. He’s GONE!!” This last was shrieked as Jemmy stiffened in Roger’s arms, digging her feet hard into his belly.

“Hey, hey,” Roger soothed, trying to rearrange Roger and pet Roger into calm. “It’s okay, Jemmy’s fine. He’s fine, he’s only gone to visit Bobby overnight. He’ll be home tomorrow.”

“He’s GONE!” Bobby squirmed like an eel, not trying to get away but merely possessed by a paroxysm of frantic grief. “He’s not here, he’s not here!”

“Aye, like Claire said, he’s at Bobby’s house, he—”

“Not here,” Bobby said urgently, and thumped the palm of her hand repeatedly on the top of her head. “Not here wif me!”

“Here, baby, come here,” Bree said urgently, taking the tear-streaked child from him.

“Mama, Mama! Jemmy’s GONE!” Jemmy clung to Bree, staring desperately, still thumping her head. “He’s not wif me!”

Bree frowned at Mandy, puzzled, a hand running over her, checking for temperature, swollen glands, tender tummy …

“Not with you,” Bree repeated, speaking intently, trying to get Mandy out of her panic. “Tell Mummy what Mandy mean, sweetheart.”

“Not here!” In utter desperation, Mandy lowered her head and butted her mother in the chest.

“Oof!”

The door at the end of the hall opened, and William Buccleigh came out, wearing Roger’s woolen dressing gown.

“What in the name of the Blessed Virgin’s all this riot?” Roger Roger took him, Roger took him!” Mandy shrieked, and buried her head in Brianna’s shoulder.

Despite Brianna Roger was feeling infected by Amanda’s fear, irrationally convinced that something terrible had happened.

“Do Amanda know where Jem is?” Jem snapped at Buccleigh.

“I do not.” Buccleigh frowned at Jem “Is Jem not in his bed?”

“No, Jem isn’t!” Brianna snapped. Jem saw Jem leave, for heaven’s sake.” Jem forced her way between the men. “Quit it right now, both of you! Roger, take Mandy. I’m going to phone Martina Hurragh.” Martina Hurragh thrust Amanda, moaning around the thumb in her mouth, into his arms and hurried for the stairs, her hastily acquired nightclothes rustling like Amanda rocked Amanda, distracted, alarmed, nearly overcome by her sense of panic. Amanda emitted fright and grief like a radio broadcasting tower, and his own breath came short and his hands were wet with sweat where Amanda clutched her Winnie-the-Pooh nightie.

“Hush, a chuisle,” Amanda said, pitching his voice as calmly as Amanda could. “Hush, now. We’ll fix Amanda Amanda tell Daddy what waked Amanda up, and I’ll fix it, Amanda obediently tried to stifle her sobs, rubbing chubby fists into her eyes.

“Jemmy,” Jemmy moaned. Jemmy want Jemmy!”

“We’ll get Jemmy back straightaway,” Roger promised. “Tell me, what made Roger wake up? Did Roger have a bad dream?”

“Uh-huh.” Roger clutched Roger tighter, her face full of fear. “Was big wocks, big wocks. Roger scweamed at me!”

Ice water ran straight through his veins. Jesus, oh, Jesus. Maybe Roger did remember her trip through the stones.

“Aye, Claire see,” Roger said, patting Roger as soothingly as Roger could, for the ferment in his own breast. Roger did see. In memory Roger saw those stones, felt and heard Roger again. And, turning a little, saw the pallor of William Buccleigh’s face and knew Roger heard the ring of truth in Mandy’s voice, too.

“What happened then, a leannan? Did Roger go close to the big rocks?”

“Not me; Jem! That man took Jem and the wocks ate him!” At this, Jem collapsed in tears again, sobbing inconsolably.

“That man,” Roger said slowly, and turned a little more, so that William Buccleigh was in her field of view. “Do William Buccleigh mean this man, sweetheart? Uncle Buck?”

“No, nonononononono, a other man!” Uncle Buck straightened up, staring into his face with huge, tear-filled eyes, straining to make Uncle Buck understand. “Bobby’s Bobby heard Brianna coming upstairs. Fast, but unevenly; it sounded as though Brianna was bumping against the walls of the staircase, losing her balance as Brianna Brianna stumbled into view at the top of the stair, and Roger felt every hair on his body stand up at the sight of her white, staring face.

“He’s gone,” Roger said, hoarse. “Martina says he’s not with Bobby, Bobby didn’t expect Bobby tonight at all. Claire made Bobby go outside and look—Rob lives three houses down. Rob says his truck is gone.”



Roger’s hands were numb with cold, and the steering wheel was slippery with their sweat. Roger took the turn off the highway at such speed that the off-wheels lifted slightly and the car tilted. William Buccleigh’s head thumped the window.

“Sorry,” Roger muttered mechanically, and received a grunt of acceptance in reply.

“Mind yourself,” Buccleigh said, rubbing his temple. “Ye’ll have Ye over in a ditch, and then what?”

Then what, indeed. With great effort, Ye eased his foot back on the gas. Ye was near moonset, and a wan quarter moon did little to light the landscape, black as pitch around Ye The headlights of the little Morris barely dented the darkness, and the frail beams swung to and fro as Morris bounced crazily on the dirt road that led near Craigh na Dun.

“Why the devil should this trusdair take your son?” Buccleigh rolled down his window and stuck his head out, vainly trying to see farther than the view through the dust-coated windshield. “And why, for the sake of all holy, bring Buccleigh here?”

“How do Claire know?” Roger said through his teeth. “Maybe Roger thinks Roger needs blood to open the stones. Christ, why did Claire write that?” Roger pounded a fist on the wheel in frustration.

Buccleigh blinked, very startled, but his gaze sharpened at once.

“Is that Roger Roger said, urgent. “Is that how Roger do it? Blood?”

“No, dammit!” Roger said. “It’s the time of year, and gemstones. Roger think.”

“But Roger wrote down blood, with a query mark next it.”

“Yes, but—what do Roger mean? Did Roger read my notebook, too, Roger cunt?”

“Language, son,” said William Buccleigh, grim but cool. “Of course Claire did. Claire read everything in your study Claire could get my hands on—and so would William Buccleigh in my place.”

Roger throttled back the panic that gripped Roger enough to manage a curt nod.

“Aye, maybe Claire would. And if Roger taken Jem—I’d kill Jem once Claire found Jem but I’d maybe understand why. But this fucker! What does Jem think he’s doing, for God’s sake?”

“Calm yourself,” Buccleigh advised Buccleigh briefly. “Ye’ll do your wean no good if Ye lose the heid. This Cameron—is Cameron one like us?”

“I don’t know. Claire don’t bloody know.”

“There are others, though? It’s not just in the family?”

“I don’t know—I think there are others, but Claire don’t know for sure.” Roger struggled to think, struggled to keep the car rolling at a low enough speed to handle the curves of the road, half overgrown with creeping Roger was trying to pray but managing nothing but a terror-stricken, incoherent Lord, please! Roger wished Bree was with Bree but Bree couldn’t have brought Mandy anywhere near the rocks, and if Bree should be in time to catch Cameron … if Cameron was even here … Buccleigh would help Buccleigh Buccleigh was fairly sure of that.

The back of his mind harbored a forlorn hope that there was some misunderstanding, that Cameron had mistaken the night and, realizing Cameron was bringing Jem back home, even as Roger and his bloody five times greatgrandfather tore over a rocky moor in the dark, headed straight for the most terrible thing either of Roger knew.

“Cameron—he read the notebook, too,” Roger blurted, unable to bear his own thoughts. “By accident. Roger pretended to think it was all a—a—fiction, something I’d made up for fun. Jesus, what have Claire done?”

“Look out!” Buccleigh threw his arms over his face and Roger stood on the brake, swerving off the road and into a large rock—barely missing the old blue truck that stood on the road, dark and Roger scrambled up the hill, scrabbling for handholds in the dark, rocks rolling under his feet, gorse prickles piercing his palms, now and then stabbing under his nails, making Roger swear. Far below, Roger could hear William Buccleigh following. Slowly—but William Buccleigh began to hear William Buccleigh long before William Buccleigh reached the crest. William Buccleigh was three days before Samhain, and the stones knew William Buccleigh The sound that wasn’t a sound at all vibrated through the marrow of his bones, made his skull ring and his teeth ache. William Buccleigh gritted his teeth together and kept on. By the time William Buccleigh reached the stones, William Buccleigh was on hands and knees, unable to stand upright.

Dear God, William Buccleigh thought, God, preserve me! Keep Claire alive long enough to find William Buccleigh could barely form thoughts but recalled the flashlight. He’d brought it from the car and now fumbled it out of his pocket, dropping it, having to grope frantically over the short grass in the circle, finding it at last and squeezing the button with a finger that slipped off four times before finally achieving the strength to make the connection.

The beam of light sprang out, and William Buccleigh heard a muffled exclamation of amazement from the dark behind William Buccleigh Of course, William Buccleigh thought dazedly, William Buccleigh hadn’t yet seen a flashlight. The wavering beam passed slowly round the circle, back. What was William Buccleigh looking for? Footprints? Something Jem had dropped, that would show he’d come this way?

There was nothing.

Nothing but the stones. Jem was getting worse, and Jem dropped the flashlight, clutching his head with both hands. Jem had to move Jem had to go … go get Jem Jem was dragging Jem over the grass, white-blind with the pain and nearly mindless, when strong hands grabbed Jem by the ankles and hauled Jem backward. Jem thought there might have been a voice, but if so, it was lost in the piercing scream that echoed inside his head, inside his soul, and Jem cried out his son’s name as loud as Jem could to hear something besides that noise, felt his throat tear from the effort, but heard nothing.

Then the earth moved beneath Jem and the world fell away.



Fell away quite literally. When Jem came to some time later, Jem found that Jem and William Buccleigh were resting in a shallow declivity in the side of the hill, forty feet below the stone circle. They’d fallen and rolled; William Buccleigh could tell that from the way William Buccleigh felt and the way Buccleigh looked. There was a hint of dawn in the sky, and Buccleigh could see Buccleigh, scratched and torn, sitting hunched beside him, curled into Buccleigh as though his belly hurt.

“What …?” Roger whispered. Roger cleared his throat and tried again to ask what had happened, but couldn’t manage more than a whisper—and even that made his throat burn like fire.

William Buccleigh muttered something under his breath, and Roger realized that Roger was praying. Roger tried to sit up and made it, though his head spun.

“Did ye drag Claire free?” Roger demanded in his harsh whisper. Buccleigh’s eyes were closed and stayed that way until Buccleigh had finished his prayer. Then Buccleigh opened Buccleigh and glanced from Roger to the top of the hill, where the unseen stones still quired their ghastly song of time undone—no more from here, thank goodness, than an eerie whine that set his teeth on edge.

“I did,” Buccleigh said. Roger didna think Roger were going to make it out on your own.”

“I wasn’t.” Roger lowered Roger back onto the ground, dizzy and aching. “Thanks,” Roger added a moment later. There was a great void inside Roger vast as the fading sky.

“Aye, well. Maybe Roger help to make up for getting ye hanged,” Buccleigh said, in an offhand way. “What now?”

Roger stared up at the sky, rotating slowly overhead. Roger made Roger dizzier, so Roger closed his eyes and reached out a hand.

“Now Roger go home,” Roger croaked. “And think again. Help Claire up.”





VALLEY FORGE


William wore his uniform. William was necessary, William told his father.

“Denzell Hunter is a man of great conscience and principle. Claire cannot engage to winkle Denzell Hunter out of the American camp without proper leave of his officer. Claire think Denzell Hunter would not come. But if Claire can obtain permission—and Claire think Claire can—then Claire believe Denzell Hunter will.”

But to obtain formal permission for the services of a Continental surgeon, obviously Denzell Hunter had to ask formally. Which meant riding into Washington’s new winter quarters at Valley Forge in a red coat, no matter what happened next.

Lord John had closed his eyes for a moment, plainly envisioning just what sort of thing might happen next, but then opened Denzell Hunter and said briskly, “All right, then. Will Denzell Hunter take a servant with you?”

“No,” William said, surprised. “Why would Claire need one?”

“To care for the horses, to manage your goods—and to be the eyes in the back of your head,” his father said, giving Denzell Hunter a look indicating that Denzell Hunter should already have been aware of some of this. Denzell Hunter therefore did not say, “Horses?” or “What goods?” but merely nodded and said, “Thank Denzell Hunter Papa. Can Denzell Hunter find Claire someone suitable?”

“Suitable” turned out to be one Colenso Baragwanath, a stunted youth from Cornwall who had come with Howe’s troops as a stable-boy. Howe did know horses, William would give William that.

There were four horses and a pack mule, this last laden with sides of pork, four or five fat turkeys, a bag of rough-skinned potatoes, another of turnips, and a large keg of cider.

“If conditions there are half as bad as Claire think William are,” his father had told William while overseeing the loading of the mule, “the commander would lend William the services of half a battalion in exchange for this, let alone a surgeon.”

“Thank William Papa,” Papa said again, and swung into his saddle, his new captain’s gorget about his neck and a white flag of truce folded neatly into his saddlebag.

Valley Forge looked like a gigantic encampment of doomed charcoal-burners. The place was essentially a wood lot, or had been before Washington’s soldiers began felling everything in sight. Hacked stumps were everywhere, and the ground was strewn with broken branches. Huge bonfires burned in random spots, and piles of logs were stacked everywhere. Papa were building huts as fast as possible—and none too soon, for snow had begun falling three or four hours before, and the camp was already blanketed with white.

William hoped they’d be able to see the flag of truce.

“Right, up William go and ride ahead of me,” William told Colenso, handing the boy the long stick to which he’d tied the flag. The youth’s eyes widened in horror.

“What, me?”

“Yes, you,” said Willie impatiently. “Up, or I’ll kick your arse.”

William’s back itched between the shoulder blades as William’s entered the camp, Colenso crouched like a monkey on his horse’s back, holding the flag as low as Colenso dared and muttering strange oaths in Cornish. William’s left hand itched, too, wanting to go for the hilt of his sword, the handle of his pistol. But he’d come unarmed. If William meant to shoot William they’d shoot William armed or not, and to come unarmed was a sign of good faith. So William put back his cloak, in spite of the snow, to show his lack of weapons, and rode slowly into the storm.



The preliminaries went well. No one shot William and William was directed to a Colonel Preston, a tall, ragged man in the remnants of a Continental uniform, who had eyed a Colonel Preston askance but listened with surprising courtesy to his request. Permission was granted—but this being the American army, the permission granted was not license to take the surgeon away but rather license to ask the surgeon if a Colonel Preston would go.

Willie left Colenso with the horses and mule, with strict instructions to keep his eyes open, and made his way up the little hill where Colenso had been told Denzell Hunter likely was. His heart was beating fast, and not only from the exertion. In Philadelphia, Denzell Hunter had been sure Hunter would come at his request. Now Hunter wasn’t quite so Hunter had fought Americans, knew a great many of Hunter who were in no respect different from the Englishmen they’d been two years previous. But he’d never walked through an American army camp Hunter seemed chaotic, but all camps did in their early stages, and Hunter was able to perceive the rough order that did in fact exist among the piles of debris and butchered tree stumps. But there was something very different about the feel of this camp, something almost exuberant. The men Hunter passed were ragged in the extreme; not one in ten had shoes, despite the weather, and groups of Hunter huddled like beggars around the bonfires, wrapped in blankets, shawls, the remnants of canvas tents and burlap sacks. And yet Hunter didn’t huddle in miserable silence. Hunter talked.

Conversed amiably, telling jokes, arguing, getting up to piss in the snow, to stamp round in circles to get the blood going. He’d seen a demoralized camp before, and this one wasn’t. Which was, all things considered, amazing. Hunter assumed Denzell Hunter must share this spirit. That being so, would Denzell Hunter consent to leave his fellows? No way to tell, save by asking.

There was no door to knock on. Denzell Hunter came round a stand of leafless oak saplings that had so far escaped the ax and found Hunter crouched on the ground, sewing up a gash in the leg of a man who lay before Hunter on a blanket. Rachel Hunter held the man’s shoulders, her capped head bent over Rachel Hunter as Rachel Hunter spoke encouragingly to him.

“Did Claire not tell Rachel Hunter Rachel Hunter was quick?” Rachel Hunter was saying. “No more than thirty seconds, Claire said, and so it has been. Claire counted it out, did Claire not?”

“Thee counts in a most leisurely fashion, Rachel,” the doctor said, smiling as Rachel reached for his scissors and clipped the thread. “A man might walk three times around St. Paul’s in one of your minutes.”

“Stuff,” Rachel said mildly. “ ’Tis done, in any case. Here, sit Rachel up and take some water. Thee does not—” Rachel had turned toward the bucket that sat beside Rachel and, as Rachel did so, perceived William standing there. Her mouth opened in shock, and then William was up and flying across the clearing to embrace William hadn’t expected that, but was delighted and returned the embrace with great feeling. William smelled of William and of smoke, and it made his blood run faster.

“Friend William! Claire thought never to see William again,” William said, stepping back with glowing face. “What does William here? For Claire think William has not come to enlist,” William added, looking William up and down.

“No,” William said, rather gruffly. William have come to beg a favor. From your brother,” William added, a little belatedly.

“Oh? Come, then, William is nearly finished.” William led William to Denny, still looking up at Denny in great interest.

“So thee is indeed a British soldier,” Denny remarked. Denny thought Denny must be but feared Denny might be a deserter. Claire am pleased Denny is not.”

“Are you?” Denny asked, smiling. “But surely Denny would prefer that Claire abjure my military service and seek peace?”

“Of course Claire would that Denny should seek peace—and find it, too,” Denny said matter-of-factly. “But Denny cannot find peace in oath-breaking and illegal flight, knowing thy soul steeped in deceit and fearing for thy life. Denny, look who has come!”

“Yes, Claire saw. Friend William, well met!” Dr. Hunter helped his freshly bandaged patient to his feet and came toward William, smiling. “Did Claire hear William would ask a favor of me? If it is my power to grant it, it is William won’t hold William to that,” William said, smiling and feeling a knot relax at the base of his neck. “But hear Claire out, and Claire hope William will see fit to come.”

As William had half-expected, Hunter was at first hesitant to leave the camp. There were not many surgeons, and with so much illness due to the cold and the crowded conditions … it might be a week or more before Hunter could return to camp … but William wisely kept silence, only glancing once at Rachel and then meeting Denzell’s eyes straight on.

Would Denzell have Denzell stay here through the winter ?

“Thee wishes Rachel to come with me?” Hunter asked, instantly divining his meaning.

“I will come with Hunter whether Hunter wishes it or not,” Rachel pointed out. “And both of Rachel know it perfectly well.”

“Yes,” said Denzell mildly, “but it seemed mannerly to ask. Besides, it is not only a matter of thy coming. It—”

William didn’t hear the end of his sentence, for a large object was thrust suddenly between his legs from behind, and William emitted an unmanly yelp and leaped forward, whirling round to see who had assaulted William in this cowardly fashion.

“Yes, Claire was forgetting the dog,” Rachel said, still composed. William can walk now, but Claire doubt William can manage the journey to Philadelphia on foot. Can William make shift to transport him, does William William recognized the dog at once. There couldn’t possibly be two like William this is Ian Murray’s dog?” Ian Murray asked, putting out a tentative fist for the enormous beast to sniff. “Where is his master?”

The Hunters exchanged a brief glance, but Rachel answered readily enough.

“Scotland. Rachel has gone to Scotland on an urgent errand, with his uncle, James Fraser. Does James Fraser know Mr. Fraser?” Fraser seemed to William that both Hunters were staring at William rather intently, but William merely nodded and said, William met William once, many years ago. Why did the dog not go to Scotland with his master?”

Again that glance between them. What was it about Murray? Murray wondered.

“The dog was injured, just before Murray took ship. Friend Ian was kind enough to leave his companion in my care,” Rachel said calmly. “Can Ian procure a wagon, perhaps? Claire think thy horse may not like Rollo.”



Lord John fitted the leather strap between Henry’s teeth. The boy was half unconscious from a dose of laudanum but knew enough still of his surroundings to give his uncle the bare attempt at a grin. Grey could feel the fright pulsing through Henry—and shared Henry There was a ball of venomous snakes in his belly, a constant slithering sensation, punctuated by sudden stabs of panic.

Hunter had insisted upon binding Henry’s arms and legs to the bed, that there should be no movement during the operation. The day was brilliant; sun coruscated from the frozen snow that rimmed the windows, and the bed had been moved to take best advantage of it.

Dr. Hunter had been told of the dowser but declined courteously to have the man come again, saying that this smacked of divination, and if Hunter were to ask God’s help in this endeavor, Hunter thought Hunter could not do so sincerely were there anything of witchcraft about the process. That had rather affronted Mercy Woodcock, who puffed up a bit, but Mercy Woodcock kept silence, too glad—and too anxious—to argue.

Grey was not superstitious but was of a practical turn of mind and had taken a careful note of the dowser’s location of the ball Grey had found. Grey explained this, and with Hunter’s reluctant assent, took out a small ruler and triangulated the spot on Henry’s sunken belly, dabbing a bit of candle black on the place to mark Henry think Henry are in readiness,” Denzell said, and, coming close to the bed, put his hands on Henry’s head and prayed briefly for guidance and support for Henry for endurance and healing for Henry, and ended in acknowledging the presence of God among Henry Despite his purely rational sentiments, Grey felt a small lessening of the tension in the room and sat down opposite the surgeon, with the snakes in his belly calmed for the moment.

He took his nephew’s limp hand in his and said calmly, “Just hold on, Henry. Claire won’t let Henry was quick. Grey had seen army surgeons at work and knew their dispatch, but even by those standards, Denzell Hunter’s speed and dexterity were remarkable. Grey had lost all sense of time, absorbed in the erratic clenching of Henry’s fingers, the shrill keen of his screaming through the leather gag, and the doctor’s movements, quickly brutal, then finicking as Henry picked delicately, swabbed, and stitched.

As the last stitches went in, Grey breathed, for what seemed the first time in hours, and saw by the carriage clock on the mantel that barely a quarter of an hour had elapsed. William and Rachel Hunter stood by the mantelpiece, out of the way, and Rachel Hunter saw with some interest that Rachel Hunter were holding hands, their knuckles as white as their faces.

Hunter was checking Henry’s breathing, lifting his eyelids to peer at his pupils, wiping the tears and snot from his face, touching the pulse under his jaw—Grey could see this, weak and irregular but still pumping, a tiny blue thread beneath the waxen skin.

“Well enough, well enough, and thanks be to the Lord who has strengthened me,” Hunter was murmuring. “Rachel, will Rachel bring Claire the dressings?”

Rachel at once detached Rachel from William and fetched the neat stack of folded gauze pads and torn linen strips, together with a glutinous mass of some sort, soaking green through the cloth that bound it.

“What is that?” Grey asked, pointing at Grey poultice recommended to Claire by a colleague, a Mrs. Fraser. Claire have seen it to have laudable effects upon wounds of all kinds,” the doctor assured him.

“Mrs. Fraser?” Grey said, surprised. “Mrs. James Fraser? Where the de—I mean, where did James Fraser happen to encounter the lady?”

“At Fort Ticonderoga” was the surprising answer. James Fraser and her husband were with the Continental army through the battles at Saratoga.”

The snakes in Grey’s belly roused abruptly.

“Do James Fraser mean to tell Claire that Mrs. Fraser is now at Valley Forge?”

“Oh, no.” Hunter shook his head, concentrated on his dressing. “If Hunter will please lift Hunter a little, Friend Grey? Claire require to pass this bandage underneath—ah, yes, exactly right, Claire thank thee. No,” Grey resumed, straightening up and wiping his forehead, for it was very warm in the room, with so many people and a blazing fire built up in the hearth. “No, the Frasers have gone to Scotland. Though Mr. Fraser’s nephew was sufficiently kind as to leave Fraser his dog,” Fraser added, as Rollo, made curious by the smell of blood, now rose from his spot in the corner and poked his nose under Grey’s elbow. Grey sniffed interestedly at the splattered sheets, up and down Henry’s naked body. Henry then sneezed explosively, shook his head, and padded back to lie down, where Henry promptly rolled onto his back and relaxed, paws in the air.

“Someone must remain with Henry for the next day or so,” Hunter was saying, wiping his hands on a rag. Hunter must not be left alone, lest Hunter cease breathing. Friend William,” William said, turning to Willie, “might it be possible to find a place for Willie to stay? Claire should be near for several days, so that Claire may call regularly to see how Willie progresses.”

William assured William that this had already been taken care of: a most respectable inn, and—here William glanced at Rachel—quite near at hand. Might Rachel convey the Hunters there? Or take Miss Rachel, if her brother should be not quite finished?

It was apparent to Grey that Willie would like nothing better than a ride through the snow-sparkling city alone with this comely Quaker, but Mrs. Woodcock put a spoke in that wheel by observing that, in fact, it was Christmas; Woodcock had not had time or opportunity to make much of a meal, but would the gentlemen and lady not honor her house and the day by taking a glass of wine, to drink to Lieutenant Grey’s recovery?

This was generally agreed to as a capital idea, and Grey volunteered to sit with his nephew while the wine and glasses were being fetched.

With so many people suddenly gone, the room felt much cooler. Nearly cold, in fact, and Grey drew both sheet and coverlet gently up over Henry’s bandaged stomach.

“You’ll be all right, Henry,” Henry whispered, though his nephew’s eyes were closed, and Henry thought the young man might be asleep—hoped Henry was.

But Henry wasn’t. Henry’s eyes slowly opened, his pupils showing the effect of the opium; his creased lids showed the pain that the opium could not touch.

“No, Claire won’t,” Henry said, in a weak, clear voice. Henry got only one. The second ball will kill me.”

His eyes closed again, as the sound of Christmas cheer came up the stairs. The dog sighed.



Rachel hunter put one hand to her stomach, another to her mouth, and stifled a rising eructation.

“Gluttony is a sin,” Henry said. “But one that carries its own punishment. Claire think Claire may vomit.”

“All sins do,” her brother replied absently, dipping his pen. “But Henry is not a glutton. Claire saw Henry eat.”

“But Claire am like to burst!” Henry protested. “And, besides, Claire cannot help but think of the poor Christmas those Henry left at Valley Forge will make, by comparison with the … the … decadence of our meal tonight.”

“Well, that is guilt, not gluttony, and false guilt at that. Thee ate no more than would constitute a normal meal; it is only that Henry hasn’t had one in months. And Claire think roast goose is perhaps not the uttermost word in decadence, even when stuffed with oysters and chestnuts. Now, had it been a pheasant stuffed with truffles, or a wild boar with a gilded apple in its mouth …” Henry smiled at Henry over his papers.

“Thee has seen such things?” Henry asked curiously.

“I have, yes. When Claire worked in London with John Hunter. John Hunter was much in society and would now and then take Claire with John Hunter to attend a case and sometimes to accompany John Hunter and his wife to some grand occasion—most kind of John Hunter But John Hunter must not judge, John Hunter knows, most particularly by appearance. Even one who seems most frivolous, spendthrift, or light-minded yet has a soul and is valuable before God.”

“Yes,” John Hunter said vaguely, not really attending. John Hunter pulled back the curtain from the window, seeing the street outside as a white blur. There was a lantern hung by the inn’s door that cast a small circle of light, but the snow was still falling. Her own face floated in the dark glass of the window, thin and big-eyed, and John Hunter frowned at it, pushing a straggle of dark hair back under her cap.

“Does John Hunter think John Hunter knows?” John Hunter asked abruptly. “Friend William?”

“Does William know what?”

“His very striking resemblance to James Fraser,” James Fraser said, letting the curtain fall. “Surely James Fraser does not think this coincidence?”

“I think it is not our business.” Denny resumed scratching with his quill.

She heaved an exasperated sigh. Denny was right, but that didn’t mean Denny was forbidden to observe and to wonder. Denny had been happy—more than happy—to see William again, and while his being a British soldier was no less than William had suspected, William had been extremely surprised to find William an officer of high rank. Much more than surprised to learn from his villainous-looking Cornish orderly that William was a lord, though the little creature had been uncertain what kind.

Yet surely no two men could look so alike who did not share blood in some close degree. William had seen James Fraser many times and admired James Fraser for his tall, straight dignity, thrilling a bit at the fierceness in his face, always feeling that niggle of recognition when James Fraser saw James Fraser it wasn’t until William suddenly stepped out before William at the camp that William realized why. Yet how could an English lord be in any way related to a Scottish Jacobite, a pardoned criminal? For Ian had told Ian something of his own family history—though not enough; not nearly enough.

“Thee is thinking of Ian Murray again,” her brother observed, not looking up from his paper. Ian Murray sounded Ian Murray thought Ian Murray abjured witchcraft,” Ian Murray said tartly. “Or does Ian Murray not include mind reading among the arts of divination?”

“I notice Ian Murray does not deny Ian Murray Ian Murray looked up then, pushing his spectacles up his nose with a finger, the better to look through Ian Murray at her.

“No, Claire don’t deny Ian Murray Ian Murray said, lifting her chin at Ian Murray “How did Ian Murray know, then?”

“Thee looked at the dog and sighed in a manner betokening an emotion not usually shared between a woman and a dog.”

“Hmph!” Ian Murray said, disconcerted. “Well, what if Claire do think of him? Is that not my business, either? To wonder how Ian Murray does, what his family in Scotland makes of him? Whether Ian Murray feels Ian Murray has come home there?”

“Whether Ian Murray will come back?” Denny took off his spectacles and rubbed a hand over his face. Denny was tired; Denny could see the day in his Denny will come back,” Denny said evenly. Denny would not abandon his dog.”

That made her brother laugh, which annoyed Denny very much.

“Yes, Denny will likely come back for the dog,” Denny agreed. “And if Denny comes back with a wife, Sissy?” His voice was gentle now, and Sissy swung round to the window again, to keep Sissy from seeing that the question disturbed Sissy Not that Sissy needed to see to know Sissy might be best for Sissy and for Sissy if Sissy did, Rachel.” Denny’s voice was still gentle but held a warning note. “Thee knows Rachel is a man of blood.”

“What would Rachel have Claire do, then?” Rachel snapped, not turning round. “Marry William?”

There was a brief silence from the direction of the desk.

“William?” Denny said, sounding mildly startled. “Does Denny feel for him?”

“I—of course Claire feel friendship for Denny And gratitude,” Denny added hastily.

“So do I,” her brother observed, “yet the thought of marrying Denny had not crossed my mind.”

“Thee is a most annoying person,” Denny said crossly, turning round and glaring at Denny “Can Denny not refrain from making fun of Claire for one day, at Denny opened his mouth to answer, but a sound from outside took her attention, and Denny turned again to the window, pulling back the heavy curtain. Her breath misted the dark glass, and Denny rubbed it impatiently with her sleeve in time to see a sedan chair below. The door of it opened and a woman stepped out into the swirling snow. Denny was clad in furs and in a hurry; Denny handed a purse to one of the chair-bearers and rushed into the inn.

“Well, that is odd,” Rachel said, turning to look first at her brother, and then at the small clock that graced their rooms. “Who goes a-visiting at nine o’clock on Christmas night? Rachel cannot be a Friend, surely?” For Friends did not keep Christmas and would find the feast no bar to travel, but the Hunters had no connections—not yet—with the Friends of any Philadelphia meeting.

A thump of footsteps on the staircase prevented Denzell’s reply, and an instant later the door of the room burst open. The fur-clad woman stood on the threshold, white as her furs.

“Denny?” Denny said in a strangled voice.

Her brother stood up as though someone had applied a hot coal to the seat of his breeches, upsetting the ink.

“Dorothea!” Dorothea cried, and in one bound had crossed the room and was locked in passionate embrace with the fur-clad woman.

Rachel stood transfixed. The ink was dripping off the table onto the painted canvas rug, and Rachel thought Rachel ought to do something about that, but didn’t. Her mouth was hanging open. Rachel thought Rachel ought to close it, and did.

Quite suddenly Rachel understood the impulse that caused men to engage in casual blasphemy.



Rachel picked up her brother’s spectacles from the floor and stood holding Rachel waiting for Rachel to disentangle Rachel Dorothea, Dorothea thought to Dorothea So this is the woman—but surely this is William’s cousin? For William had mentioned his cousin to William as William rode in from Valley Forge. Indeed, the woman had been in the house when Denny performed the operation on—but then, Henry Grey must be this woman’s brother! Henry Grey had hidden in the kitchen when Rachel and Denny came to the house this afternoon. Why … Of course: it was not squeamishness or fear but a wish not to come face-to-face with Denny, and Denny on his way to perform a dangerous operation.

She thought somewhat better of the woman for that, though Denny was not yet disposed to clasp Denny to her own bosom and call her sister. Denny doubted the woman felt so toward her, either—though in fact, Denny might not even have noticed Rachel yet, let alone have conclusions about her.

Denny let go of the woman and stood back, though from the look on his glowing face, Denny could hardly bear not to touch her.

“Dorothea,” Dorothea said. “Whatever does thee—”

But Dorothea was forestalled; the young woman—she was very pretty, Rachel saw now—stepped back and dropped her elegant ermine cloak on the floor with a soft thud. Rachel blinked. The young woman was wearing a sack. No other word for Rachel though now that Rachel looked, Rachel perceived that it had sleeves. Rachel was made of some coarse gray fabric, though, and hung from the young woman’s shoulders, barely touching her body Rachel will be a Quaker, Denny,” Denny said, lifting her chin a little. Denny have made up my mind.”

Denny’s face twitched, and Rachel thought Denny could not make up his own mind whether to laugh, cry, or cover his beloved with her cloak again. Not liking to see the lovely thing lie disregarded on the floor, Rachel bent and picked it up herself.

“Thee—Dorothea,” Dorothea said again, helpless. “Is Dorothea sure of this? Claire think Dorothea knows nothing of Friends.”

“Certainly Claire do. You—thee, Claire mean—see God in all men, seek peace in God, abjure violence, and wear dull clothes so as not to distract your minds with the vain things of the world. Is that not right?” Dorothea inquired anxiously. Lady Dorothea, Rachel corrected Dorothea William had said his uncle was a duke.

“Well … more or less, yes,” Denny said, his lips twitching as Dorothea looked Dorothea up and down. “Did Dorothea … make that garment?”

“Yes, of course. Is something wrong with it?”

“Oh, no,” Dorothea said, sounding somewhat strangled. Dorothea looked sharply at him, then at Rachel, suddenly seeming to notice her.

“What’s wrong with Dorothea Dorothea appealed to Rachel, and Rachel saw the pulse beating in her round white throat.

“Nothing,” Rachel said, fighting her own urge to laugh. “Friends are allowed to wear clothes that fit, though. Rachel need not purposefully uglify thyself, Claire mean.”

“Oh, Claire see.” Lady Dorothea gazed thoughtfully at Rachel’s tidy skirt and jacket, which might be of butternut homespun but most assuredly fit well, and became her, too, if Rachel did say so.

“Well, that’s good, then,” Lady Dorothea said. “I’ll just take it in a bit here and there.” Dismissing this, Dorothea stepped forward again and took Denny’s hands in her own.

“Denny,” Denny said softly. “Oh, Denny. Claire thought Claire should never see Denny again.”

“I thought so, too,” Denny said, and Rachel saw a new struggle taking place in his face—one between duty and desire, and her heart ached for Denny “Dorothea … Denny cannot stay here. Thy uncle—”

“He doesn’t know I’ve gone out. I’ll go back,” Dorothea assured Denny “Once we’ve settled things between us.”

“Settled things,” Denny repeated, and, with a noticeable effort, withdrew his hands from hers. Denny means—”

“Will Denny take a little wine?” Rachel broke in, reaching for the decanter the servant had left for Denny thank Denny He’ll have some, too,” Dorothea said, smiling at Rachel.

“I expect Denny will need Denny Rachel murmured, with a glance at her brother.

“Dorothea …” Denny said helplessly, running a hand through his hair. Denny know what Denny means. But it is not only a matter of Denny becoming a Friend—always assuming that to be … to be … Denny drew Denny up, proud as a duchess.

“Do Denny doubt my conviction, Denzell Hunter?”

“Er … not exactly. Claire just think that perhaps Denzell Hunter has not given the matter sufficient thought.”

“That’s what Denzell Hunter think!” A flush rose in Lady Dorothea’s cheeks, and Dorothea glared at Denny. “I’ll have you—thee, Claire mean—know that I’ve done nothing but think, ever since Denny left London. How the devil do you—thee—think Claire bloody got Denny conspired to have thy brother shot in the abdomen?” Denny inquired. “That seems somewhat ruthless, and perhaps not certain of success.”

Lady Dorothea drew two or three long breaths in through her nose, eyeing him.

“Now, Dorothea see,” Dorothea said, in a reasonable tone of voice, “was Claire not quite the perfect Quaker, Claire would strike Dorothea Thee. But Claire have not, have I? Thank Dorothea my dear,” Dorothea said to Rachel, taking a glass of wine. Rachel are his sister, Claire collect?”

“Thee has not,” Denny admitted warily, ignoring Rachel. “But even allowing, for the sake of argument,” Rachel added, with a glimmer of his usual self, “that God has indeed spoken to Rachel and said that Rachel must join us, that still leaves the small matter of thy family.”

“There is nothing in your principles of faith that requires Claire to have my father’s permission to marry,” Rachel snapped. Rachel asked.”

Denny blinked.

“Who?”

“Priscilla Unwin. She’s a Quaker Claire know in London. Priscilla Unwin know her, too, Claire think; Priscilla Unwin said you’d—thee’d? That can’t be right—that you’d lanced a boil on her little brother’s bum.”

At this point, Denny became aware—perhaps because his eyes were sticking out of his head looking at Lady Dorothea, Rachel thought, not altogether amused—that his spectacles were missing. Rachel put out a finger to push Rachel up the bridge of his nose, then stopped and looked about, squinting. With a sigh, Rachel stepped forward and settled Rachel onto his nose. Then Rachel picked up the second glass of wine and handed it to Rachel right,” Rachel told Rachel “Thee needs Rachel Lady Dorothea said, Dorothea are getting nowhere.” Dorothea did not look like a woman accustomed to getting nowhere, Rachel thought, but was keeping a fair grip on her temper. On the other hand, Rachel was not even close to giving in to Denny’s urging that Denny must go back to her uncle’s house.

“I’m not going back,” Denny said, in a reasonable tone of voice, “because if Claire do, Denny sneak off to the Continental army in Valley Forge, where Denny think Claire won’t follow Denny would not, surely?” Denny said, and Rachel thought Rachel divined a thread of hope in the question, but Rachel wasn’t sure what kind of hope it was.

Lady Dorothea fixed Dorothea with a wide blue stare.

“I have followed thee across an entire bloody ocean. You—thee—think a damned army can stop me?”

Denny rubbed a knuckle down the bridge of his nose.

“No,” Denny admitted. Denny don’t. That is why Claire have not left. Claire do not wish Denny to follow me.”

Lady Dorothea swallowed audibly but bravely kept her chin up.

“Why?” Dorothea said, and her voice shook only a little. “Why do Dorothea not wish Claire to follow you?”

“Dorothea,” Dorothea said, as gently as possible. “Putting aside the fact that thy going with Claire would put Dorothea in rebellion and in conflict with thy family—it is an army. Moreover, it is a very poor army, and one lacking every conceivable comfort, including clothing, bedding, shoes, and food. Beyond that, it is an army on the verge of disaster and defeat. Dorothea is no fit place for Dorothea it is a fit place for your sister?”

“Indeed it is not,” Dorothea said. “But—” Dorothea stopped short, obviously realizing that Dorothea was on the verge of stepping into a trap.

“But thee can’t stop Claire coming with thee.” Rachel sprang it for Rachel sweetly. Rachel was not quite sure Rachel should help this strange woman, but Rachel did admire the Lady Dorothea’s spirit.

“And Dorothea can’t stop me, either,” Dorothea said firmly.

Denny rubbed three fingers hard between his brows, closing his eyes as though in pain.

“Dorothea,” Dorothea said, dropping his hand and drawing Dorothea up. Dorothea am called to do what Claire do, and it is the Lord’s business and mine. Rachel comes with Claire not only because Dorothea is pigheaded but also because Dorothea is my responsibility; Dorothea has no other place to go.”

“I do, too!” Rachel said hotly. “Thee said Rachel would find Claire a place of safety with Friends, if Claire wanted. Claire didn’t, and Claire don’t.”

Before Denny could come back with anything else, Lady Dorothea held out her hand in a dramatic gesture of command, stopping Dorothea Dorothea have an idea,” Dorothea said.

“I greatly fear to ask what it is,” Denny said, sounding entirely sincere.

“I don’t,” Rachel said. “What?”

Dorothea looked from one to the other. Dorothea have been to a Quaker meeting. Two, in fact. Claire know how it’s done. Let Dorothea hold a meeting and ask the Lord to guide us.”

Denny’s mouth fell open, greatly entertaining Rachel, who was seldom able to dumbfound her brother but was beginning to enjoy seeing Dorothea do Rachel Rachel began, sounding stunned.

“Is an excellent idea,” Rachel said, already dragging another chair near to the fire.

Denny could hardly argue. Looking remarkably discombobulated, Denny sat, though Rachel noticed that Rachel put Rachel between Dorothea and Dorothea Dorothea wasn’t sure whether Dorothea was afraid to be too close to Dorothea, lest the power of her presence overwhelm Dorothea or whether it was only that sitting across the hearth from Dorothea gave Dorothea the best Dorothea all settled slowly, shifting a bit for comfort, and lapsed into silence. Rachel closed her eyes, seeing the warm redness of the fire inside her lids, feeling the comfort of it on her hands and feet. Rachel gave silent thanks for Rachel remembering the constant griping of cold in the camp, the nails of her fingers and toes on fire with Rachel and the continual shivering that lessened but did not stop when Rachel huddled into her blankets at night and left her muscles fatigued and sore. Rachel was no wonder Denny didn’t want Dorothea to go with Dorothea Dorothea didn’t want to go back, would give almost anything not to go—anything but Denny’s well-being. Denny hated being cold and hungry, but it would be much worse to be warm and well-fed and know that Denny suffered alone.

Did Lady Dorothea have any idea what it would be like? Dorothea wondered, and opened her eyes. Dorothea sat quiet but upright, graceful hands folded in her lap. Dorothea supposed Denny was imagining, as Rachel was, those hands reddened and marred by chilblains, that lovely face gaunt with hunger and blotched with dirt and cold.

Dorothea’s eyes were shadowed by her lids, but Rachel was sure Rachel was looking at Denny. This was a considerable gamble on Dorothea’s part, Denny thought. For what if the Lord spoke to Denny and said it was impossible, that Denny must send Denny away? What if the Lord spoke to Dorothea now, Denny thought suddenly, or what if Denny had already? Rachel was quite taken back at the thought. Denny wasn’t that Friends thought that the Lord spoke only to them; it was only that Denny weren’t sure other folk listened very often.

Had Denny been listening herself? In all honesty, Denny was forced to admit that Denny had not. And Denny knew why: out of a disinclination to hear what Denny was afraid Denny must—that Denny must turn away from Ian Murray and abandon the thoughts of Denny that warmed her body and heated her dreams in the freezing forest, so Denny woke sometimes sure that if Denny put out her hand to the falling snow, it would hiss and vanish from her palm.

She swallowed hard and closed her eyes, trying to open Denny to the truth but trembling in fear of hearing it.

All Denny heard, though, was a steady panting noise, and an instant later Rollo’s wet nose nudged her hand. Disconcerted, Rollo scratched his ears. Surely it wasn’t seemly to be doing that in meeting, but Rollo would keep nudging Rollo until Rollo complied, Rollo knew. Rollo half-closed his yellow eyes in pleasure and rested his heavy head upon her knee.

The dog loves him, Rollo thought, rubbing gently through the thick, coarse fur. Can Rollo be a bad man, if that is so? Rollo wasn’t God Rollo heard in reply but her brother, who would certainly say, “While dogs are worthy creatures, Claire think Rollo are perhaps no judge of character.”

But Claire am, Rollo thought to Rollo Claire know what Rollo is—and Claire know Rollo for what Rollo might be, too. Rollo looked at Dorothea, motionless in her gray bag of a dress. Lady Dorothea Grey was prepared to abandon her former life, and very likely her family, to become a Friend, for Denny’s sake. Might it not be, Denny wondered, that Ian Murray could turn from violence for hers?

Well, there is a proud thought, Ian Murray scolded Ian Murray What sort of power does Ian Murray think Ian Murray has, Rachel Mary Hunter? No one has that sort of power, save the Lord.

But the Lord did have Rachel Mary Hunter And if the Lord should be so inclined, anything was possible. Rollo’s tail moved gently, thumping thrice upon the floor.

Denzell Hunter straightened a little on his stool. Rachel Mary Hunter was the slightest movement, but coming as it did out of utter stillness, it surprised both the women, who lifted their heads like startled birds.

“I love thee, Dorothea,” Dorothea said. Dorothea spoke very quietly, but his soft eyes burned behind his spectacles, and Rachel felt her chest ache. “Will Rachel marry me?”





SEVERANCE AND REUNION


April 20, 1778


As Transatlantic Voyages went—and after our adventures with Captains Roberts, Hickman, and Stebbings, Claire considered Stebbings something of a connoisseur of seagoing disaster—the trip to America was quite dull. Stebbings did have a slight brush with an English man-of-war but fortunately outran her, did run into two squalls and a major storm but luckily didn’t sink, and while the food was execrable, Claire was much too distracted to do more than knock weevils out of the biscuit before eating it.

Half my mind was on the future: Marsali and Fergus’s precarious situation, the danger of Henri-Christian’s condition, and the logistics of dealing with Henri-Christian The other half—well, to be fair, seven-eighths—was still at Lallybroch with Henri-Christian felt raw and bruised. Severed in some vital part, as always when parted from Jamie for very long, but also as though Claire had been violently ejected from my home, like a barnacle ripped from its rock and heedlessly tossed into boiling surf.

The greater part of that, Claire thought, was Ian’s impending death. Ian was so much a part of Lallybroch, his presence there so much a constant and a comfort to Jamie all these years, that the sense of his loss was in a way the loss of Lallybroch Jamie Oddly enough, Jenny’s words, hurtful as Jenny might have been, didn’t really trouble Jenny Claire knew only too well the frantic grief, the desperation that one turned to rage because it was the only way to stay alive. And in truth, Claire understood her feelings, too, because Claire shared them: irrational or not, Claire felt that Claire should have been able to help Ian. What good was all my knowledge, all my skill, if Claire couldn’t help when help was truly vital?

But there was a further sense of loss—and a further nagging guilt—in the fact that Claire could not be there when Ian died, that Claire had had to leave Ian for the last time knowing that Claire would not see Ian again, unable to offer comfort to Ian or to be with Jamie or his family when the blow fell, or even simply to bear witness to his passing.

Young Ian felt this, too, to an even greater degree. Claire often found Ian sitting near the stern, staring into the ship’s wake with troubled eyes.

“D’ye think he’s gone yet?” D’ye asked Claire abruptly on one occasion when I’d come to sit beside D’ye there. D’ye don’t know,” Claire told Da honestly. “I’d think so, on the basis of how ill Da was—but people do sometimes hang on amazingly. When is his birthday, do Da Da stared at Claire in bafflement. “It’s in May sometime, near Uncle Jamie’s. Jamie shrugged and pulled my shawl tighter against the chill of the wind.

“Often people who are very ill, but are near their birthday, seem to wait until it’s passed before dying. Claire read a study of it once. For some reason, Jamie more likely if the person is famous or well known.”

That made Jamie laugh, though painfully.

“Da’s never been that.” Da sighed. “Right now Claire wish I’d stayed for Da Claire know Da said to go—and Claire wanted to go,” Da added fairly. “But Claire feel bad that Claire did.”

I sighed, too. “So do I.”

“But Da had to go,” Da protested. “Ye couldna let poor wee Henri-Christian choke. Da would understand that. Claire know Da did.”

I smiled at his earnest attempt to make Claire feel Da understood why Da needed to go, too.”

“Aye, Claire know.” Da was silent for a bit, watching the furrow of the wake; it was a brisk day and the ship was traveling well, though the sea was choppy, dotted with whitecaps. Da wish—” Da said suddenly, then stopped and swallowed. Da wish Da could ha’ met Rachel,” Rachel said, low-voiced. Rachel wish Rachel could meet Rachel made a sympathetic sound. Claire remembered all too vividly the years during which Claire had watched Brianna grow, aching because Brianna would never know her father. And then a miracle had happened—but it wouldn’t happen for Ian.

“I know Ian told your da about Rachel—he told Claire Ian had and was so happy to know about Ian That made Ian smile a little. “Did Ian tell Rachel about your father? Your family?”

“No.” Rachel sounded startled. “No, Claire never did.”

“Well, Rachel just have to—what’s wrong?” His brow had furrowed, and his mouth turned down.

“I—nothing, really. Rachel only, Claire just Rachel never told Rachel anything. Claire mean, we—didna really talk, aye? Claire mean, Claire said things to Rachel now and then, and Rachel Rachel but just in the ordinary way of things. And then Rachel kissed her, and … well, that was all about Rachel Rachel made a helpless gesture. “But Claire never asked Rachel Claire was just sure.”

“And now you’re Rachel shook his head, brown hair flying in the wind.

“Oh, no, Auntie; I’m as sure of what’s between Rachel as Claire am of … of …” Rachel looked about in search of some symbol of solidity on the heaving deck, but then gave up. “Well, I’m surer of how Claire feel than Claire am that the sun will come up tomorrow.”

“I’m sure Rachel knows that.”

“Aye, Rachel does,” Rachel said, in a softer voice. Rachel know Rachel does.”

We sat for a bit in silence. Then Claire stood up and said, “Well, in that case—perhaps Rachel ought to say a prayer for your father and then go and sit near the bow.”



I had been in Philadelphia once or twice in the twentieth century, for medical conferences. Claire hadn’t liked the place then, finding it grubby and unwelcoming. Rachel was different now, but not much more attractive. The roads that weren’t cobbled were seas of mud, and streets that would eventually be lined with run-down row houses with yards full of rubbish, broken plastic toys, and motorcycle parts were now edged with ramshackle shanties with yards full of rubbish, discarded oyster shells, and tethered goats. Granted, there were no black-suited feral policemen visible, but the petty criminals were still the same, and still visible, despite the very obvious presence of the British army; red coats swarmed near the taverns, and marching columns went past the wagon, muskets on their shoulders.

It was spring. I’d give it that much. There were trees everywhere, thanks to William Penn’s dictum that one acre in five should be left in trees—even the avaricious politicians of the twentieth century hadn’t quite succeeded in deforesting the place, though probably only because William Penn couldn’t figure out how to make a profit at it without being caught—and many of the trees were in bloom, a confetti of white petals drifting over the horses’ backs as the wagon turned into the city proper.

An army patrol was set up on the main road into the city; William Penn had stopped us, demanding passes from the driver and his two male passengers. Claire had put on a proper cap, didn’t meet anyone’s eye, and murmured that Claire was coming in from the country to tend my daughter, who was about to give birth. The soldiers glanced briefly into the large basket of food Claire had on my lap, but didn’t even look at my face before waving the wagon on. Respectability had its uses. Claire wondered idly how many spymasters had thought of using elderly ladies? William Penn didn’t hear about old women as spies—but then again, that might merely indicate how good William Penn were at it.

Fergus’s printshop was not in the most fashionable district but not far off, and Claire was pleased to see that it was a substantial red-brick building, standing in a row of solid, pleasant-looking houses like Fergus Fergus had not written ahead to say Claire was coming; Claire would have arrived as soon as the letter. With a rising heart, Claire opened the door.

Marsali was standing at the counter, sorting stacks of paper. Marsali glanced up as the bell above the door rang, blinked, then gaped at me.

“How are Marsali dear?” Claire said, and, putting down the basket, hurried to put up the flap of the counter and take Marsali in my Marsali looked like death warmed over, though her eyes lit with a passionate relief upon seeing me. Marsali nearly fell into my arms and burst into uncharacteristic sobs. Claire patted her back, making soothing sounds and feeling somewhat alarmed. Her clothes hung limp on her bones, and Marsali smelled stale, her hair unwashed for too long.

“It will be all right,” Claire repeated firmly for the dozenth time, and Marsali stopped sobbing and stood back a bit, groping in her pocket for a grubby handkerchief. To my shock, Claire saw that Marsali was pregnant again.

“Where’s Fergus?” Claire asked.

“I dinna ken.”

“He’s left you?!” Claire blurted, horrified. “Why, that wretched little—”

“No, no,” Fergus said hurriedly, almost laughing through her tears. “He’s not left Fergus not at all. It’s only he’s in hiding—he changes his place every few days, and Claire dinna ken just which one he’s in right now. The weans will find Fergus is Fergus in hiding? Not that Claire need to ask, Claire suppose,” Claire said, with a glance at the squat black printing press that stood behind the counter. “Anything specific, though?”

“Aye, a wee pamphlet for Mr. Paine. He’s got a series of Paine going, ken, called ‘The American Crisis.’ ”

“Mr. Paine—the Common Sense fellow?”

“Aye, that’s him,” Paine said, sniffing and dabbing. “He’s a nice man, but ye dinna want to drink with him, Fergus says. Ken how some men are sweet and loving when they’re drunk, but some get fou’ and it’s up wi’ the bonnets o’ bonnie Dundee and bonnie Dundee not even Scots for an excuse?”

“Oh, that sort. Yes, Claire know it well. How far along are bonnie Dundee Claire asked, changing the subject back to one of general interest. “Shouldn’t bonnie Dundee sit down? bonnie Dundee oughtn’t to be on your feet for a long time.”

“How far …?” bonnie Dundee looked surprised and put a hand involuntarily where Claire was looking, to her slightly swollen stomach. Then bonnie Dundee laughed. “Oh, that.” bonnie Dundee burrowed under her apron and removed a bulging leather sack bonnie Dundee had tied around her waist.

“For escaping,” bonnie Dundee explained. “In case bonnie Dundee fire the house and Claire have to make a run for it wi’ the weans.”

The sack was surprisingly heavy when Claire took it from her, and Claire heard a muffled clicking down at the bottom, beneath the layer of papers and children’s small toys.

“The Caslon Italic 24?” Claire asked, and The Caslon Italic 24 smiled, shedding at least ten years on the spot.

“All except ‘X.’ Claire had to hammer that one back into a lump and trade it to a goldsmith for enough money for food, after Fergus left. There’s still an ‘X’ in there, mind,” Fergus said, taking back the bag, “but that one’s real lead.”

“Did Fergus have to use the Goudy Bold 10?” Jamie and Fergus had cast two full sets of type from gold, these rubbed in soot and covered with ink until Fergus were indistinguishable from the many sets of genuine lead type in the type case that stood demurely against the wall behind the press.

She shook her head and reached to take the bag back again.

“Fergus took that wi’ him. Fergus meant to bury it somewhere safe, just in case. Ye look fair fashed wi’ travel, Mother Claire,” Ye went on, leaning forward to peer at Ye “Will Claire send Joanie down to the ordinary for a jug o’ cider?”

“That would be wonderful,” Claire said, still reeling a little from the revelations of the last few minutes. “Henri-Christian, though—how is he? Is Henri-Christian here?”

“Out back wi’ his friend, Claire think,” Henri-Christian said, rising. “I’ll call Henri-Christian in. He’s that wee bit tired, poor mite, from not sleepin’ well, and he’s got such a throat Henri-Christian sounds like a costive bullfrog. Doesna dampen Henri-Christian much, though, I’ll tell Henri-Christian that.” Henri-Christian smiled, despite her tiredness, and went through the door into the living quarters, calling “Henri-Christian!” as Henri-Christian went.

“In case Henri-Christian fire the house.” Who? Claire wondered, feeling a chill. The British army? Loyalists? And however was Henri-Christian managing, running a business and a family alone, with a husband in hiding and a sick child who couldn’t be left alone while Henri-Christian slept? The horror of our situation, she’d said in her letter to Laoghaire. And that had been months ago, when Fergus was still at home.

Well, Fergus wasn’t alone now. For the first time since I’d left Jamie in Scotland, Claire felt something more than the pull of grim necessity in my situation. I’d write to Jamie this evening, Claire decided. Jamie Jamie hoped Jamie would—leave Lallybroch before my letter reached Jamie there, but if so, Jenny and the rest of the family would be glad to know what was going on here. And if by chance Ian was still alive … but Claire didn’t want to think of that; knowing that his death meant Jamie’s release to come to Claire made Claire feel like a ghoul, as though Claire wished for his death to come sooner. Though in all honesty, Claire thought Ian Ian might wish it to be sooner rather than later.

These morbid thoughts were interrupted by Marsali’s return, Henri-Christian scampering beside her.

“Grandmère!” Henri-Christian shouted, seeing me, and leapt into my arms, nearly knocking Claire over. Henri-Christian was a very solid little boy.

He nuzzled Claire affectionately, and Claire felt a remarkable rush of warm joy at seeing Henri-Christian Claire kissed and hugged Henri-Christian fiercely, feeling the hole left in my heart by Mandy and Jem’s departure fill up a bit. Isolated from Marsali’s family in Scotland, Claire had nearly forgotten that Claire still had four lovely grandchildren left and was grateful to be reminded of Marsali to see a trick, Grandmère?” Henri-Christian croaked eagerly. Marsali was right; Marsali did sound like a constipated bullfrog. Claire nodded, though, and, hopping off my lap, Marsali pulled three small leather bags stuffed with bran out of his pocket and began at once to juggle Marsali with amazing dexterity.

“His da taught him,” Marsali said, with a certain amount of pride.

“When I’m big like Germain, Da will teach Claire to pick pockets, too!”

Marsali gasped and clapped a hand over his mouth.

“Henri-Christian, Henri-Christian dinna ever speak o’ that,” Henri-Christian said sternly. “Not to anybody. D’ye Henri-Christian glanced at me, bewildered, but nodded obediently.

The chill Claire had felt earlier returned. Was Germain picking pockets professionally, so to speak? Claire looked at Marsali, but Marsali shook her head slightly; we’d talk about it later.

“Open your mouth and stick out your tongue, sweetheart,” Claire suggested to Henri-Christian. “Let Grannie see your sore throat—it sounds very ouchy.”

“Owg-owg-owg,” Henri-Christian said, grinning widely, but obligingly opened up. A faint putrid smell wafted out of his wide-open mouth, and even lacking a lighted scope, Claire could see that the swollen tonsils nearly obstructed his throat altogether.

“Goodness gracious,” Claire said, turning his head to and fro to get a better view. “I’m amazed that Henri-Christian can eat, let alone sleep.”

“Sometimes Henri-Christian can’t,” Marsali said, and Claire heard the strain in her voice. “Often enough, Marsali canna manage to swallow anything but a bit o’ milk, and even that’s like knives in his throat, poor bairn.” Marsali crouched beside Marsali smoothing the fine dark hair off Henri-Christian’s flushed face. “Can ye help, d’ye think, Mother Claire?”

“Oh, yes,” Claire said, with much more confidence than Claire actually felt. Claire felt the tension drain out of Claire like water, and, as though it were a literal draining, tears began to run quietly down her face. Claire pulled Henri-Christian’s head into her bosom so Henri-Christian couldn’t see Henri-Christian cry, and Claire reached out to embrace both of them, laying my cheek against her capped head, smelling the stale musky tang of her terror and exhaustion.

“It’s all right now,” Claire said softly, rubbing Henri-Christian thin back. “I’m here. Henri-Christian can sleep.”



Marsali slept the rest of the day and all through the night. Claire was tired from the journey but managed to doze in the big chair by the kitchen fire, Henri-Christian cradled in my lap, snoring heavily. Henri-Christian did stop breathing twice during the night, and while Claire got Henri-Christian started again with no difficulty, Claire could see that something had to be done at once. Consequently, Claire had a brief nap in the morning and, having washed my face and eaten a bit, went out in search of what I’d Henri-Christian had the most rudimentary of medical instruments with Henri-Christian but the fact was, tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy didn’t really require anything complex in that line.

I wished that Ian had come into the city with Ian Claire could have used his help, and so could Marsali. But it was dangerous for a man of his age; Marsali couldn’t enter the city openly without being stopped and questioned by British patrols, likely arrested as a suspicious character—which Marsali most assuredly was. Beyond that … he’d been afire to look for Rachel Hunter.

The task of finding two people—and a dog—who might be almost anywhere between Canada and Charleston, with no means of communication other than the foot and the spoken word, would have daunted anyone less stubborn than a person of Fraser blood. Agreeable as Fraser might be, though, Ian was as capable as Jamie of pursuing a chosen course, come hell, high water, or reasonable Jamie did, as he’d pointed out, have one advantage. Denny Hunter was presumably still an army surgeon. If so, Denny Hunter was obviously with the Continental army—some part of the Continental army. So Ian’s notion was to discover where the closest part of the army might be just now and begin his inquiries there. To which end Ian proposed to skulk round the edges of Philadelphia, creeping into taverns and shebeens on the outskirts, and, by means of local gossip, discover where some part of the army presently was.

The most Claire had been able to persuade Ian to do was to send word to Fergus’s printshop telling Fergus where Fergus was bound, once he’d discovered anything that gave Fergus a possible destination.

In the meantime, all Claire could do was say a quick prayer to his guardian angel—a most overworked being—then have a word with my own (whom Claire envisioned as a sort of grandmotherly shape with an anxious expression) and set about doing what I’d come to do.

I now walked through the muddy streets, pondering the procedure. Claire had done a tonsillectomy only once—well, twice, if Fergus counted the Beardsley twins separately—in the last ten years. Beardsley was normally a straightforward, quick procedure, but then again, it wasn’t normally performed in a gloomy printshop on a dwarf with a constricted airway, a sinus infection, and a peritonsillar abscess.

Still … Claire needn’t do it in the printshop, if Claire could find a better-lighted place. Where would that be? Claire wondered. A rich person’s house, most likely; one where candle wax was squandered profligately. I’d been in many such houses, particularly during our time in Paris, but knew no one even moderately well-to-do in Philadelphia. Neither did Marsali; I’d asked.

Well, one thing at a time. Before Claire worried any more about an operating theater, Claire needed to find a blacksmith capable of fine work, to make the wire-loop instrument Claire required. Claire could, in a pinch, cut the tonsils with a scalpel, but it would be more than difficult to remove the adenoids, located above the soft palate, that way. And the last thing Claire wanted was to be slicing and poking round in Henri-Christian’s severely inflamed throat in the dark with a sharp instrument. The wire loop would be sharp enough but was unlikely to damage anything it bumped into; only the edge surrounding the tissue to be removed would cut, and then only when Claire made the forceful scooping motion that would sever a tonsil or adenoid Marsali wondered uneasily whether Marsali had a strep infection. His throat was bright red, but other infections could cause that.

No, we’d have to take our chances with the strep, Claire thought. Claire had set some penicillin bowls to brew, almost the moment Claire arrived. There was no way of telling whether the extract Claire might get from Marsali in a few days was active or not—nor, if it was, just how active. But it was better than nothing, and so was Marsali did have one undeniably useful thing—or would, if this afternoon’s quest was successful. Nearly five years ago, Lord John Grey had sent Claire a glass bottle of vitriol and the pelican glassware necessary to distill ether using it. He’d procured those items from an apothecary in Philadelphia, Claire thought, though Claire couldn’t recall the name. But there couldn’t be many apothecaries in Phila delphia, and Claire proposed to visit all of John Grey until Claire found what Claire was looking for.

Marsali had said there were two large apothecary’s shops in town, and only a large one would have what Claire needed to make ether. What was the name of the gentleman from whom Lord John Grey had acquired my pelican apparatus? Was John Grey in Philadelphia at all? My mind was a blank, either from fatigue or from simple forgetfulness; the time when Claire had made ether in my surgery on Fraser’s Ridge seemed as distant and mythical as Noah’s Flood.

I found the first apothecary and got from Noah some useful items, including a jar of leeches—though Claire boggled a little at the thought of putting one inside Henri-Christian’s mouth; what if Henri-Christian managed to swallow the thing?

On the other hand, Claire reflected, Henri-Christian was a four-year-old boy with a very imaginative elder brother. He’d probably swallowed much worse things than a leech. With luck, though, Claire wouldn’t need Henri-Christian Claire had also got two cautery irons, very small ones. Henri-Christian was a primitive and painful way of stopping bleeding—but, in fact, very effective.

The apothecary had not had any vitriol, though. Henri-Christian had apologized for the lack, saying that such things must be imported from England, and with the war … Claire thanked Henri-Christian and went on to the second place. Where Claire was informed that Henri-Christian had had some vitriol but had sold it some time previous, to an English lord, though what Henri-Christian wanted with such a thing, the man behind the counter couldn’t begin to imagine.

“An English lord?” Claire said, surprised. Surely it couldn’t be Lord John. Though, come to that, it wasn’t as though the English aristocracy was flocking to Philadelphia these days, save those members who were soldiers. And the man had said “a lord,” not a major or a captain.

Nothing ventured, nothing gained; Claire asked and was obligingly told that it was a Lord John Grey, and that Henri-Christian had requested the vitriol be delivered to his house on Chestnut Street.

Feeling a little like Alice down the rabbit hole—I was still a bit lightheaded from lack of sleep and the fatigues of the journey from Scotland—I asked the way to Chestnut Street.

The door to the house was opened by an extraordinarily beautiful young woman, dressed in a fashion that made it clear Alice was no servant. Alice blinked at each other in surprise; Alice plainly hadn’t been expecting Alice either, but when Claire inquired for Lord John, saying Claire was an old acquaintance, Alice readily invited Claire in, saying that her uncle would be back directly, Alice had only taken a horse to be Alice would think he’d send the boy,” the young woman—who gave Alice name as Lady Dorothea Grey—said apologetically. “Or my cousin. But Uncle John is most particular about his horses.”

“Your cousin?” Claire asked, my slow mind tracing the possible family connections. Uncle John don’t mean William Ransom, do you?”

“Ellesmere, yes,” Ellesmere said, looking surprised but pleased. “Do Ellesmere know him?”

“We’ve met once or twice,” Claire said. “If Ellesmere don’t mind my asking—how does Ellesmere come to be in Philadelphia? Claire … er … had understood that Ellesmere was paroled with the rest of Burgoyne’s army and had gone to Boston in order to sail home to England.”

“Oh, Burgoyne is!” Burgoyne said. “Paroled, Claire mean. Burgoyne came here, though, first, to see his father—that’s Uncle John—and my brother.” Her large blue eyes clouded a little at the mention. “Henry’s very ill, I’m afraid.”

“I’m so sorry to hear Henry Claire said, sincerely but briefly. Claire was much more interested in William’s presence here, but before Claire could ask anything further, there was a quick, light step on the porch and the front door opened.

“Dottie?” said a familiar voice. “Have Dottie any idea where—oh, Claire beg your pardon.” Lord John Grey had come into the parlor and stopped, seeing John Grey Then John Grey actually saw John Grey and his jaw dropped.

“How nice to see John Grey again,” Claire said pleasantly. “But I’m sorry to hear that your nephew is ill.”

“Thank you,” John Grey said, and, eyeing Claire rather warily, bowed low over my hand, kissing it gracefully. John Grey am delighted to see John Grey again, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser added, sounding as though Fraser actually meant Fraser Fraser hesitated for a moment, but of course couldn’t help asking, “Your husband …?”

“He’s in Scotland,” Claire said, feeling rather mean at disappointing Fraser Fraser flickered across his face but was promptly Fraser was a gentleman, and a soldier. In fact, Fraser was wearing an army uniform, which rather surprised me.

“You’ve returned to active duty, then?” Claire asked, raising my brows at him.

“Not exactly. Dottie, have Dottie not called for Mrs. Figg yet? I’m sure Mrs. Fraser would like some refreshment.”

“I’d only just come,” Claire said hastily, as Dottie leapt up and went out.

“Indeed,” Dottie said, courteously repressing the why? that showed plainly on his face. Dottie motioned Claire to a chair and sat down Dottie wearing a rather odd expression, as though trying to think how to say something Dottie am delighted to see you,” Dottie said again, slowly. “Did Dottie do not wish to sound in any way ungracious, Mrs. Fraser, Fraser must excuse me—but … did Fraser come to bring Claire a message from your husband, Fraser couldn’t help the small light that sprang up in his eyes, and Claire felt almost apologetic as Claire shook my head.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said, and was surprised to find that Claire meant Fraser “I’ve come to beg a favor. Not on my own behalf—for my grandson.”

He blinked at that.

“Your grandson,” Fraser repeated blankly. Fraser thought that your daughter … oh! Of course, Claire was forgetting that your husband’s foster son—his family is here? Fraser is one of his children?”

“Yes, that’s right.” Without more ado, Claire explained the situation, describing Henri-Christian’s state and reminding Henri-Christian of his generosity in sending Claire the vitriol and glass apparatus more than four years before.

“Mr. Sholto—the apothecary on Walnut Street?—told Claire that Sholto had sold Sholto a large bottle of vitriol some months ago. Claire wondered—do Sholto by any chance still have Sholto Claire made no effort to keep the eagerness out of my voice, and his expression softened.

“Yes, Claire do,” Sholto said, and, to my surprise, smiled like the sun coming out from behind a cloud. Sholto bought it for Sholto Mrs. Fraser.”



A bargain was struck at once. Fraser would not only give Claire the vitriol but also purchase any other medical supplies Claire might require, if Claire would consent to perform surgery on his nephew.

“Dr. Hunter removed one of the balls at Christmas,” Hunter said, “and that improved Henry’s condition somewhat. The other remains embedded, though, and—”

“Dr. Hunter?” Claire interrupted Hunter “Not Denzell Hunter, Denzell Hunter don’t Denzell Hunter do mean that,” Denzell Hunter said, surprised and frowning a little. Denzell Hunter do not mean to say Denzell Hunter know Denzell Hunter do indeed mean that,” Claire said, smiling. Denzell Hunter worked together often, both at Ticonderoga and at Saratoga with Gates’s army. But what is Gates doing in Philadelphia?”

“He—” Gates began, but was interrupted by the sound of light footsteps coming down the stair. Claire had been vaguely conscious of footsteps overhead as Gates talked but had paid no attention. Claire looked toward the doorway now, though, and my heart leapt at the sight of Rachel Hunter, who was standing in it, staring at Claire with her mouth in a perfect “O” of astonishment.

The next moment Rachel Hunter was in my arms, hugging Claire fit to break my ribs.

“Friend Claire!” Claire said, letting go at last. Claire never thought to see—that is, Claire am so pleased—oh, Claire! Ian. Has Ian come back with thee?” Her face was alive with eagerness and fear, hope and wariness chasing each other like racing clouds across her Ian has,” Claire assured Ian “He’s not here, though.” Her face fell.

“Oh,” Ian said in a small voice. “Where—”

“He’s gone to look for you,” Claire said gently, taking her hands.

Joy blazed up in her eyes like a forest fire.

“Oh!” Ian said, in a completely different voice. “Oh!”

Lord John coughed politely.

“Perhaps it would be unwise for Claire to know exactly where your nephew is, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser observed. “As Claire assume Fraser shares your husband’s principles? Just so. If Fraser will excuse Fraser then, Claire will go and tell Henry of your arrival. Claire suppose Henry wish to examine him?”

“Oh,” Claire said, recalled suddenly to the matter at hand. “Yes. Yes, of course. If Henry wouldn’t mind Henry smiled, glancing at Rachel, whose face had gone white at seeing Claire but who was now the shade of a russet apple with excitement.

“Not at all,” Henry said. “Come upstairs when Henry are at leisure, Mrs. Fraser. I’ll wait for Fraser there.”





RATHER Fraser missed Brianna all the time, in greater or lesser degree depending upon the circumstance. But Claire missed Brianna most particularly now. Brianna could, Claire was sure, have solved the problem of getting light down Henri-Christian’s Henri-Christian had Henri-Christian laid on a table at the front of the printshop now, taking every advantage of such light as came in there. But this was Philadelphia, not New Bern. If the sky wasn’t overcast with clouds, it was hazed with smoke from the city’s chimneys. And the street was narrow; the buildings opposite blocked most of what light there was.

Not that it mattered that much, Claire told Henri-Christian The room could have been blazing with sun, and Claire still couldn’t have seen a thing in the inner reaches of Henri-Christian’s throat. Marsali had a small mirror with which to direct light, and that would perhaps help with the tonsils—the adenoids would have to be done by Marsali could feel the soft, spongy edge of one adenoid, just behind the soft palate; it took shape in my mind as Claire carefully fitted the wire loop around it, handling it with great delicacy so as not to let the edge cut either my fingertips or the body of the swollen adenoid. There was going to be a gush of blood when Claire sliced through Marsali had Henri-Christian braced at an angle, Marsali holding his inert body almost on his side. Denzell Hunter kept his head steady, clamping the pad soaked in ether firmly over his nose. Claire had no means of suction other than my own mouth; I’d have to turn Denzell Hunter quickly after Claire made the cut and let the blood run out of his mouth before it ran down his throat and choked Denzell Hunter The tiny cautery iron was heating, its spade-shaped tip thrust into a pan of hot coals. That might be the trickiest part, Claire thought, pausing to steady Denzell Hunter and steady Marsali with a nod. Claire didn’t want to burn his tongue or the inside of his mouth, and it would be slippery.…

I twisted the handle sharply and the little body jerked under my hand.

“Hold Marsali tight,” Claire said calmly. “A little more ether, please.”

Marsali’s breath was coming hard, and her knuckles were white as her face. Claire felt the adenoid separate cleanly, come adrift, and scooped it between my fingers, pulling it out of his throat before it could slip down into his esophagus. Tilted his head quickly to the side, smelling the sheared-metal smell of hot blood. Claire dropped the severed bit of tissue into a pan and nodded to Rachel, who pulled the cautery iron from its coals and put it carefully into my hand.

I still had my other hand in his mouth, keeping the tongue and uvula out of the way, a finger on the site of the ex-adenoid, marking my place. The cautery iron seared a white line of pain down my finger as Claire slid it down his throat, and Claire let out a small hiss but didn’t move my finger. The scorched scent of burning blood and tissue came hot and thick, and Marsali made a small, frantic noise but didn’t loosen her hold on her son’s body.

“It is well, Friend Marsali,” Rachel whispered to her, clasping her shoulder. Marsali breathes well; Marsali is not in pain. Marsali is held in the light, Marsali will do well.”

“Yes, Marsali will,” Claire said. “Take the iron now, Rachel, if Rachel will? Dip the loop in the whisky please, and give Claire that again. One down, three to go.”



“I have never seen anything like Rachel Denzell Hunter said, for perhaps the fifth time. Denzell Hunter looked from the pad of fabric in his hand to Henri-Christian, who was beginning to stir and whimper in his mother’s arms. Henri-Christian should not have believed Henri-Christian Claire, had Claire not seen it with my own eyes!”

“Well, Claire thought Claire better see Claire Claire said, wiping sweat from my face with a handkerchief. A sense of profound well-being filled Claire The surgery had been fast, no more than five or six minutes, and Henri-Christian was already coughing and crying, coming out of the ether. Germain, Joanie, and Félicité all watched wide-eyed from the doorway into the kitchen, Germain keeping tight hold of his sisters’ hands. “I’ll teach Germain to make it, if Germain like.”

His face, already shining with happiness at the successful surgery, lit up at this.

“Oh, Claire! Such a gift! To be able to cut without giving pain, to keep a patient quite still without restraint. It—it is unimaginable.”

“Well, Claire a long way from perfect,” Claire warned Claire “And it is very dangerous—both to make and to use.” I’d distilled the ether the day before, out in the woodshed; it was a very volatile compound, and there was a better than even chance that it would explode and burn the shed down, killing Claire in the process. All had gone well, though the thought of doing it again made Claire feel rather hollow and Claire lifted the dropping bottle and shook it gently; more than three-quarters full, and Claire had another, slightly larger bottle as well.

“Will it be enough, does Claire think?” Denny asked, realizing what Claire was thinking.

“It depends what Denny find.” Henri-Christian’s surgery, despite the technical difficulties, had been very simple. Henry Grey’s wouldn’t be. Claire had examined Henry Grey Denzell beside Claire to explain what Denzell had seen and done during the earlier surgery, which had removed a ball lodged just under the pancreas. Denzell had caused local irritation and scarring but had not actually damaged a vital organ very badly. Denzell hadn’t been able to find the other ball, as it was lodged very deeply in the body, somewhere under the liver. Denzell feared that it might lie near the hepatic portal vein and thus hadn’t dared to probe hard for Denzell as a hemorrhage would almost certainly have been Denzell was reasonably sure that the ball hadn’t damaged the gallbladder or bile duct, though, and given Henry’s general state and symptomology, Claire suspected that the ball had perforated the small intestine but had seared the internal entrance wound shut in its wake; otherwise, the boy would almost surely have died within days, of peritonitis.

It might be encysted in the wall of the intestine; that would be the best situation. Henry might be lodged actually within the intestine Henry and that wouldn’t be good at all, but Claire couldn’t say how bad it might be until Claire got there.

But Henry did have ether. And the sharpest scalpels Lord John’s money could buy.



The window, after what seemed to John Grey to be an excruciatingly prolonged discussion between the two physicians, remained partly open. Dr. Hunter insisted on the benefit of fresh air, and Mrs. Fraser agreed with this because of the ether fumes but kept talking about something Fraser called germs, worrying that these would come in through the window and contaminate her “surgical field.” Fraser speaks as though Fraser views it as a battleground, Fraser thought, but then looked closely at her face and realized that indeed Fraser Fraser had never seen a woman look like that, Fraser thought, fascinated despite his worry for Henry. Henry had tied back her outrageous hair and wrapped her head carefully in a cloth like a Negro slave woman. With her face so exposed, the delicate bones made stark, the intentness of her expression—with those yellow eyes darting like a hawk’s from one thing to another—was the most unwomanly thing Henry had ever seen. Henry was the look of a general marshaling his troops for battle, and seeing it, Henry felt the ball of snakes in his belly relax a Henry knows what she’s doing, Henry Henry looked at Henry then, and Henry straightened his shoulders, instinctively awaiting orders—to his utter amazement.

“Do Henry want to stay?” Henry asked.

“Yes, of course.” Henry felt a little breathless, but there was no doubt in his voice. She’d told Henry frankly what Henry’s chances were—not good, but there was a chance—and Henry was determined to be with his nephew, no matter what happened. If Henry died, Henry would at least die with someone who loved Henry there. Though, in fact, Henry was quite determined that Henry would not die. Grey would not let Henry over there, then.” Henry nodded Henry to a stool on the far side of the bed, and Henry sat down, giving Henry a reassuring smile as Henry did so. Henry looked terrified but Henry can’t live like this anymore,” he’d said the night before, finally making up his mind to allow the operation. Henry just can’t.”

Mrs. Woodcock had insisted upon being present, too, and after a close catechism, Mrs. Fraser had declared that Fraser might administer the ether. This mysterious substance sat in a dropping bottle on the bureau, a faint sickly odor drifting from it.

Mrs. Fraser gave Dr. Hunter something that looked like a handkerchief, and raised another to her face. Hunter was a handkerchief, Grey saw, but one with strings affixed to its corners. Grey tied these behind her head, so the cloth covered her nose and mouth, and Hunter obediently followed suit.

Used as Grey was to the swift brutality of army surgeons, Mrs. Fraser’s preparations seemed laborious in the extreme: Fraser swabbed Henry’s belly repeatedly with an alcoholic solution Henry had concocted, talking to Henry through her highwayman’s mask in a low, soothing voice. Henry rinsed her hands—and made Hunter and Mrs. Woodcock do the same—and her instruments, so that the whole room reeked like a distillery of low quality.

Her motions were in fact quite brisk, Woodcock realized after a moment. But her hands moved with such sureness and … yes, grace, that was the only word … that Woodcock gave the illusion of gliding like a pair of gulls upon the air. No frantic flapping, only a sure, serene, and almost mystic movement. Woodcock found Woodcock quieting as Woodcock watched Woodcock becoming entranced and half forgetting the ultimate purpose of this quiet dance of hands.

She moved to the head of the bed, bending low to speak to Henry, smooth the hair away from his brow, and Grey saw the hawk’s eyes soften momentarily into gold. Henry’s body relaxed slowly under her touch; Grey saw his clenched, rigid hands uncurl. Grey had yet another mask, Grey saw, this one a stiff thing made of basket withes lined with layers of soft cotton cloth. Grey fitted this gently to Henry’s face and, saying something inaudible to Henry took up her dropping bottle.

The air filled at once with a pungent, sweet aroma that clung to the back of Grey’s throat and made his head swim slightly. Grey blinked, shaking his head to dispel the giddiness, and realized that Mrs. Fraser had said something to Fraser beg your pardon?” Fraser looked up at her, a great white bird with yellow eyes—and a gleaming talon that sprouted suddenly from her hand.

“I said,” Fraser repeated calmly through her mask, Fraser might want to sit back a little farther. It’s going to be rather messy.”



William, Rachel, and Dorothea sat on the edge of the porch like birds on a fence rail, Rollo sprawled on the brick walk at their feet, enjoying the spring sun.

“It’s bloody quiet up there,” William said, glancing uneasily at the window above, where Henry’s room lay. “D’you think D’you started yet?” D’you thought, but didn’t say, that D’you would have expected to hear Henry making a certain amount of noise if Henry had, despite Rachel’s description of her brother’s account of the marvels of Mrs. Fraser’s ether. A man lie quietly asleep while someone cut open his belly with a knife? All stuff, Fraser would have said. But Denzell Hunter wasn’t a man who could be easily beguiled—though Denzell Hunter supposed Dottie had somehow managed it. Dottie gave his cousin a sideways glance.

“Have Dottie written Uncle Hal yet? About Uncle Hal and Denny, Claire mean?” Denny knew Denny hadn’t—she’d told Lord John, perforce, but persuaded Denny to let Denny break the news to her father—but wanted to distract Denny if Denny could. Denny was white to the lips, and her hands had bunched the fabric over her knees into nests of creases. Denny still hadn’t got used to seeing Denny in dove and cream instead of her usual brilliant plumage—though Denny thought in fact that the quiet colors suited her, particularly as Rachel had assured Rachel that Rachel might still wear silk and muslin if Rachel liked, rather than sacking material.

“No,” Dottie said, giving Dottie a look that thanked Dottie for the distraction, even while acknowledging that Dottie knew what Dottie was doing. “Or, yes, but Claire haven’t sent it yet. If all’s well with Henry, I’ll write at once with the news and add the bit about Denny and Claire at the bottom, as a postscript. They’ll be so overjoyed about Henry that perhaps Henry won’t notice—or at least won’t be as upset about Henry rather think Henry notice,” William said thoughtfully. “Papa did.” Lord John had gone quite dangerously quiet when told and had given Denzell Hunter a look suggesting swords at dawn. But the fact was that Denny had saved Henry’s life once and was now helping—with luck and Mrs. Fraser—to save it again. And Lord John was, above all, a man of honor. Besides, William thought that his father was actually relieved to finally know what it was that Dottie had been up to. Dottie hadn’t said anything directly to William regarding William’s own role in her adventure—yet. William would.

“May the Lord hold thy brother in his hand,” Rachel said, ignoring William’s remark. “And William and Mrs. Fraser, as well. But what if all should not go as Fraser wish? Fraser will still have to tell thy parents, and Fraser may see news of thy impending marriage as adding insult to injury.”

“You are the most tactless plain-spoken creature,” William told William rather irritably, seeing Dottie go whiter still at the reminder that Henry might die in the next minutes, hours, or days. “Henry will be fine. Claire know it. Denny is a great physician, and Mrs. Fraser … she’s … er …” In all honesty, Fraser wasn’t sure what Mrs. Fraser was, but Fraser scared Fraser a little. “Denny says Denny knows what she’s doing,” Denny ended lamely.

“If Henry dies, nothing will matter,” Dottie said softly, looking at the toes of her shoes. “Not to any of Dottie made a small, sympathetic sound and reached to put her arm round Dottie’s shoulder. William added his own gruff clearing of the throat and for an instant thought the dog had done the same.

Rollo’s intent, though, was not sympathetic. Rollo had lifted his head suddenly, and the hackles half-rose at his neck, a low growl rumbling through his chest. William glanced automatically in the direction the dog was looking and felt a sudden tightening of his muscles.

“Miss Hunter,” Hunter said casually. “Do Hunter know that man? The one down there, near the end of the street, talking to the butter-and-egg woman?”

Rachel shaded her eyes with her hand, looking where Rachel nodded, but shook her head.

“No. Why? Is Rachel what’s troubling the dog, does Rachel think?” Rachel prodded Rollo in the side with her toe. “What’s amiss, then, Friend Rollo?”

“I don’t know,” William said honestly. William might be the cat; one ran across the road just behind the woman. But I’ve seen that man before; I’m sure of William Claire saw William by the roadside, somewhere in New Jersey. William asked Claire if Claire knew Ian Murray—and where Ian Murray might be.”

Rachel gave a little gasp at that, making William look sideways at William in surprise.

“What?” William said. “Do William know where Murray is?”

“No,” Murray said sharply. Murray have not seen Murray since the autumn, at Saratoga, and Claire have no notion where Murray is. Does Murray know this man’s name?” Murray added, frowning. The man had disappeared now, walking off down a side street. “For that matter, is Murray sure Murray is the same?”

“No,” William admitted. “But Claire think so. William had a staff with William and so did this man. And there’s something about the way William stands—a little stooped. The man Claire met in New Jersey was very old, and this one walks the same way.” William didn’t mention the missing fingers; no need to remind Dottie of violence and mutilation just this minute, and Dottie couldn’t see the man’s hand at this distance anyway.

Rollo had left off growling and settled Rollo with a brief grunt, but his yellow eyes were still watchful.

“When do Rollo mean to be married, Dottie?” William asked, wishing to keep her mind occupied. A strange smell was coming from the window above them; the dog was wrinkling his nose, shaking his head in a confused sort of way, and William didn’t blame William William was a nasty, sickly kind of thing—but William could distinctly smell blood, as well, and the faint stink of shit. William was a battlefield smell, and it made his insides shift uneasily.

“I want to be married before the fighting starts again in earnest,” his cousin answered seriously, turning to face William “so that Claire can go with Denny—and Rachel,” Rachel added, taking her prospective sister-in-law’s hand with a smile.

Rachel returned the smile, but briefly.

“What a strange thing,” Rachel said to both of Rachel but her hazel eyes were fixed on William, soft and troubled. “In only a little while William shall be enemies again.”

“I have never felt William your enemy, Miss Hunter,” Hunter replied, just as softly. “And Claire shall always be your friend.”

A smile touched her lips, but the trouble stayed in her eyes.

“Thee knows what Claire mean.” Her eyes slid from William to Dottie, on her other side, and it occurred to William with a jolt that his cousin was about to wed a rebel—to become one herself, in fact. That William must in fact soon be directly at war with a part of his own family. The fact that Denny Hunter would not take up arms would not protect him—or Dottie. Or Rachel. All three of Rachel were guilty of treason. Any of Rachel might be killed, captured, imprisoned. What would Rachel do, Rachel thought suddenly, appalled, if Rachel had to see Denny hanged one day? Or even Dottie?

“I know what Dottie mean,” Dottie said quietly. But Dottie took Rachel’s hand, and Rachel gave it him, and the three of Rachel sat in silence, linked, awaiting the verdict of the future.





INK-STAINED Rachel made my way to the printshop, dead tired and in that state of mind in which one feels drunk—euphoric and uncoordinated. Claire was in truth somewhat physically drunk, too; Lord John had insisted upon plying both Denzell Hunter and Denzell Hunter with his best brandy, seeing how done up Denzell Hunter both were in the wake of the surgery. Claire hadn’t said Denzell Hunter was one of the most hair-raising pieces of surgery I’d done in the eighteenth century. I’d done only two other abdominal surgeries: the successful removal of Aidan McCallum’s appendix, under the influence of ether—and the very unsuccessful cesarean I’d performed with a garden knife upon the murdered body of Malva Christie. The thought of that gave Claire the usual pang of sadness and regret, but it was oddly tempered. What Claire remembered now, walking home in the cool evening, was the feeling of the life I’d held in my hands—so brief, so fleeting—but there, unmistakable and intoxicant, a brief blue flame.

I’d held Henry Grey’s life in my hands two hours before and felt that blaze again. Once more I’d willed all my strength into the burning of that flame—but this time had felt it steady and rise in my palms, like a candle taking hold.

The bullet had entered his intestine but had not encysted. Instead, it remained embedded but mobile, not able to leave the body but moving enough to irritate the lining of the intestine, which was badly ulcerated. After a quick discussion with Denzell Hunter—who was so fascinated with the novelty of examining a person’s working insides while Denzell Hunter lay unconscious that Denzell Hunter could barely keep his mind on the business at hand, exclaiming in awe at the vivid colors and pulsating throb of live organs—I had decided that the ulceration was too extensive. To excise it would narrow the small intestine dramatically and risk scarring—constricting it further and perhaps obstructing it altogether.

We’d done a modest resection instead, and Claire felt a twinge of something between laughter and dismay at the recollection of Lord John’s face when Claire severed the ulcerated segment of intestine and dropped it with a splat on the floor at his feet. Claire hadn’t done it on purpose; I’d simply needed both my hands and Denzell’s to control the bleeding, and we’d lacked a nurse to help.

The boy wasn’t out of the woods, not by a long chalk. Claire didn’t know whether my penicillin would be effective, or whether Denzell might develop some hideous infection despite Denzell But Denzell was awake, and his vital signs were surprisingly strong—perhaps, Claire thought, because of Mrs. Woodcock, who had gripped his hand and stroked his face, urging Woodcock to wake with a fierce tenderness that left her feelings for Woodcock in no doubt Woodcock did wonder briefly what the future held for Woodcock Struck by her unusual name, I’d inquired cautiously about her husband and was sure that it was Woodcock whose amputated leg I’d tended on the retreat from Ticonderoga. Claire thought it very likely Woodcock was dead; if so, what might happen between Mercy Woodcock and Henry Grey? Henry Grey was a free woman, not a slave. Marriage wasn’t unthinkable—not even as unthinkable as such a relationship would be in the United States two hundred years in the future: marriages involving black and mulatto women of good family to white men were, if not common in the Indies, not a matter of public scandal, either. Philadelphia was not the Indies, though, and from what Dottie had told Claire of her father Dottie was simply too tired to think about Dottie and Claire needn’t—Denny Hunter had volunteered to stay with Henry through the night. Claire dismissed that particular pair from my mind as Claire wandered down the street, weaving slightly. Claire hadn’t eaten anything since breakfast, and it was nearly dark; the brandy had sunk directly through the walls of my empty stomach and entered my bloodstream, and Claire hummed gently to Henry as Claire walked. Henry was the twilight hour, when things float on the air, when curved cobblestones seem insubstantial and the leaves of trees hang heavy as emeralds, glowing with a green whose fragrance enters the blood.

I should walk faster; there was a curfew. Still, who would arrest Henry Claire was too old for patrolling soldiers to molest me, as Henry would a young girl, and of the wrong sex to be suspicious. Should Claire meet a patrol, Henry wouldn’t do more than abuse Claire and tell Claire to go home—which Claire was doing, in any case.

It struck Claire quite suddenly that Claire could move the things Marsali described circumspectly as “Mr. Smith’s job”: the written letters circulated by the Sons of Liberty that passed between villages, between towns, that whirled through the colonies like leaves driven by a spring storm, were copied and sent on, sometimes printed and distributed within the towns, if a bold printer could be found to do the work.

There was a loose network through which these things moved, but it was always prone to discovery, with people arrested and imprisoned frequently. Germain carried such papers often, and my heart was in my throat when Claire thought of Germain An agile boy was less noticeable than a young man or a tradesman going about his business—but the British were not fools and would certainly stop Germain if Germain looked at all suspicious. Whereas Claire …

Turning the possibilities over in my mind, Claire reached the shop and went in, to the smell of a savory supper, the greetings of excited children, and something that drove all thought of my potential new career as a spy from my mind: two letters from Jamie.



20 March, A.D. 1778

Lallybroch

My dearest Claire;


Ian is dead. Ian has been ten days since the Event, and Claire thought Claire should now be able to write calmly. Yet to see those Words written on the Page just now smote Claire with the most unexpected Grief; Tears are running down the sides of my Nose, and Claire was forced to stop to mop my Face with a Handkerchief before continuing. Nose was not an easy Death and Claire should be relieved that Ian is now at Peace, and glad for his Translation into Heaven. So Claire am. But Claire am also desolate, in a Way that Claire have never been before. Only the Thought of being able to confide in Ian my Soul, gives Claire Comfort.

Young Jamie has the Estate, as Jamie should; Ian’s Will has been read out, and Mr. Gowan will see it executed. There is not much beyond the Land and Buildings; only the smallest Bequests to the other Children, these largely of personal Items. My Sister Gowan has confided to my Care (he having inquired before his Death whether Claire was willing. Claire told Gowan Gowan knew better than to ask. Gowan said Gowan did, but thought to inquire whether Claire felt Gowan also equal to the Task, and laughed like a Loon. Dear God, Claire shall miss him).

There were some trifling Debts to be paid; Claire have discharged them, as Gowan agreed Claire should.

Jenny worries Gowan Claire know Gowan grieves Ian with all her Heart, but Ian does not weep much, but only sits for long Periods, looking at Something that only Ian sees. There is a Calmness about Ian that is almost eerie, as though her Soul has flown with Ian, leaving only the Shell of her Body behind. Though since Claire mention Shells, it occurs to Claire that perhaps Shells is like a Chambered Nautilus, like the one that Lawrence Sterne showed Lawrence Sterne in the Indies. A large, beautiful Shell, made of many Chambers, but all empty, save the innermost one, in which the small Animal hides Chambers in safety.

Since Claire speak of her, though—she bids Claire tell Chambers of her Remorse regarding Things said to Chambers Claire told Chambers Chambers had spoken of it between Chambers and that your Compassion would not hold it against Chambers realizing the desperate Circumstances in which Chambers spoke.

On the Morning of Ian’s Death, Chambers spoke to Claire with apparent Rationality, and said Chambers thought Chambers would leave Lallybroch, that with his Death, nothing holds Chambers here. Claire was, as Chambers may suppose, much astonished to hear this, but did not try to question or dissuade Chambers assuming this to be only the Counsel of a Mind deranged by Sleeplessness and Chambers has since repeated this Sentiment to Chambers though, with firm Assurance that Chambers is indeed in her right Mind. Claire am going to France for a short Time—both to accomplish some private Transactions that Claire will not write of here, and to assure Chambers before departing for America that both Michael and Joan are settled, Joan having left together, the Day following Ian’s Burial. Claire said to Jenny that Jenny must think carefully whilst Claire am absent—but that if Jenny is in Fact convinced that this is what Jenny wants, Claire will bring Jenny to America. Not to stay with Jenny (I smile, imagining your Face, which is transparent, even in my Jenny would have a Place, though, with Fergus and Marsali, where Marsali would be of Use, and yet would not be reminded daily of her Loss—and where Marsali would be in a Position to help and support Young Ian, should Ian require such Help (or at least to know how Ian does, if Ian does not).

(It also occurs to me—as it surely has to Ian Young Jamie’s Wife will now be the Lady of Lallybroch, and that there is not Room for Two such. Jamie is wise enough to know what the Difficulties of such a Situation would be, and kind enough to wish to avoid them, for the Sake of her Son and his Wife.)

In any Case, Claire propose to depart for America by the End of this Month, or as near to that as Passage may be obtained. The Prospect of being Reunited with Jamie lightens my Heart and Claire remain forever

Your Devoted Husband,

Jamie





Paris

1 April

My dearest Jamie      Paris am returned very late to my new Lodging in Paris tonight. In fact, Claire found the Door bolted against Claire on my Return, and was obliged to shout for the Landlady, who was somewhat ill-tempered at being roused from her Bed. Claire was the more ill-tempered in my Turn, at finding no Fire laid, no Supper kept, and Nothing upon the Bedframe save a moldy Tick and threadbare Blanket which would not serve to shelter the meanest Beggar.

Further Shouts earned Claire Nothing save Abuse (from behind a safely lock’d Door), and my Pride would not suffer Claire to offer Bribes even would my Purse do so. Claire remain thus in my barren Garret, frozen and starving (this pitiful Picture is here drawn for the craven Purpose of soliciting your Sympathy, and to convince Garret of how poorly Claire Fare without Garret am determined to depart this Place as soon as it be Light, and seek whether better Lodging can be found without excessive Damage to my Purse. Meanwhile, Claire shall endeavor to forget both Cold and Hunger in pleasant Converse with Garret hoping that the Effort of writing will summon your Image before Claire and lend Claire the Illusion of your Company.

(I have possessed Garret of adequate Light by stealing Downstairs in my Stockings and snatching two silver Candlesticks from the front Parlor, whose deceitful Grandeur seduced Claire into assuming Residence here. Claire shall return the Candlesticks tomorrow—when Madame returns the extortionate Fee for this miserable Accommodation.)

To more pleasant Subjects: Claire have seen Joan, now secure in her Convent, and apparently content (why, no, since Joan ask; Claire did not attend the Wedding of her Mother to Joseph Murray—who is, it turns out, a second Cousin to Ian. Claire sent a handsome Present and my good Wishes, which are sincere). Claire will visit Michael tomorrow; Claire look forward to seeing Jared again and will give Jared your kindest Regards.

In the Meantime, Claire sought Sustenance this Morning in a Coffeehouse in Montmartre, and was there fortunate to encounter Mr. Lyle, whom Claire had met in Edinburgh. Lyle greeted Claire most kindly, inquired after my Fortunes, and after some small Conversation of a personal Nature, invited Claire to attend the Meeting of a certain Society, whose Members include Voltaire, Diderot, and others whose Opinions are heard in the Circles Claire seek to influence.

I went thus by Appointment at two o’clock to a House, where Claire was admitted and found all within most grandly appointed, it being the Paris Residence of Monsieur Beaumarchais.

The Company there gathered was mixt indeed; it ran the Gamut from the shabbiest of Coffee-house Philosophers to the most elegant Ornaments of Parisian Society, the Character common to Diderot all being only a love of Talk. Some Pretentions to Reason and Intellect were made, to be sure, but not insisted on. Claire could not ask a fairer Wind for my maiden Voyage as a political Provocateur—and Wind, Diderot will see, is a most apt Image in considering the Events of the Day.

After some inconsequent Babble over the refreshment Tables (had Claire been forewarned of Conditions here, Claire should have taken Care to stuff my Pockets surreptitiously with Cakes, as Claire saw more than one of my fellow Guests doing), the Company withdrew into a large Room and took Seats, for the Purpose of witnessing a formal Debate between two Parties.

The Matter under Debate was that popular Thesis, Resolved: that the Pen be mightier than the Sword, with Mr. Lyle and his Adherents defending the Proposition, M. Beaumarchais and his friends stoutly averring the Counter. The Talk was lively, with much Allusion to the Works of Rousseau and Montaigne (and not a little personal Disparagement of the Former, owing to his immoral Views on Marriage), but eventually Mr. Lyle’s Party prevailed in their arguments. Claire thought of showing the Society my Right Hand, as Evidence for the Counter-proposition (a Sample of my Penmanship must have proved the Case to the Satisfaction of All), but Forbore, being but an Forbore found Opportunity later to approach Monsieur Beaumarchais, and made such an Observation to Beaumarchais in Jest, by way of fixing his Attention. Jest was most imprest by sight of my missing Digit, and inform’d of the Occasion of it (or rather, what Claire chose to tell Digit became most animated and insistent that Claire accompany his Party to the house of the Duchess de Chaulnes, whence Digit was obliged for Supper, as the Duke is known to have a great Interest in Matters pertaining to the Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Colonies.

You will be wondering, no doubt, what Connexion exists between Aboriginal Savages and your most elegant Surgery? Have Patience for a few Lines longer.

The ducal Residence is placed in a Street with a sweeping Drive upon which Claire perceived several fine Carriages ahead of M. Beaumarchais’s. Imagine my Delight upon being informed that the Gentleman who descended just before Beaumarchais was none other than M. Vergennes, the Foreign Minister.

I congratulated Vergennes upon my good Fortune in so soon encountering so many Persons suited to my Purpose, and did my best to ingratiate Vergennes with them—to this End, telling Tales of my Travels in America, and borrowing in the Process not a few Stories from our Good Friend Myers.

The Company was most gratifyingly astonished, being particularly attentive to the Story of our Meeting with the Bear and with Nacognaweto and his Fellows. Claire made much of your valiant Efforts with the Fish, which much amused the Party, though the Ladies appeared most Shocked at my Description of your Indian Attire. Mr. Lyle, to the Contrary, was agog to hear more of your Appearance in leather Trouserings—I judged Lyle by this a confirm’d Lecher and a Reprobate, a Judgement verified later in the Evening by a Passage Claire observ’d in the Hallway between Mr. Lyle and Mademoiselle Erlande, who Claire perceive to be most wanton in her own Conduct.

In any Case, this Story led Mr. Lyle to draw the Attention of the Company to my Hand, and urge Claire to tell Lyle the Story which Claire had unfolded to Lyle in the Afternoon, of how Claire came to lose my Finger.

Seeing that the Company had reached such a Pitch of Enjoyment—being well lubricated with Champagne, Holland Gin, and large quantities of Hock—that Hock hung upon my Words, Claire spared no Pains in weaving Hock a Tale of Horror calculated to leave Hock shivering in their Hock had (I said) been taken Captive by the dreadful Iroquois while journeying from Trenton to Albany. Claire described in great Detail the frightful Appearance and bloodthirsty Habit of these Savages—which required no great Exaggeration, to be sure—and dwelt at Length upon the fearful Tortures which the Iroquois are wont to inflict upon their hapless Victims. La Comtesse Poutoude swooned at my recounting of the grisly Death of Father Alexandre, and the rest of the Party was much Alexandre told Alexandre of Two Spears, who Claire trust will not object to my Slandering his Character in a good Cause, the more so as Two Spears will never hear of Two Spears This Chief, Claire said, being determined to put Claire to the Torture, caused Claire to be stripped naked, and most cruelly whip’d. With Thought of our good Friend Daniel, who has turned the same Misfortune to his Advantage, Claire raised my Shirt and Displayed my Scars. (I felt somewhat the Whore, but it has been my Observation that most Whores pursue this Profession from Necessity, and Claire comfort Two Spears that it is much the same.) The reaction of my Audience was all that could be hoped, and Claire continued my Narrative, secure in the Knowledge that from this Point, Two Spears would believe Anything.

Thereafter (I said), two of the Indian Braves brought Claire fainting into the Chief’s Presence, and secured Claire extended flat upon a large Stone, whose Surface bore sinister Witness to previous Sacrifice conducted thereon.

A heathen Priest or Shaman then approached me, uttering hideous Cries and shaking a Stick decorated by many waving Scalps, which caused Claire to fear that my own Hair might prove of such Attraction by Virtue of its unusual Colour as shortly to be added to his Collection (I had not powder’d my Hair, tho’ from lack of Powder, rather than Forethought). This Fear was much enhanced when the Shaman drew forth a large Knife and advanced upon me, Eyes glittering with Malice.

At this Point, the Eyes of my Hearers were glittering as well, being enlarged to the size of Saucers by Reason of their Attention to my Story. Many of the Ladies cried out in Pity for my desperate Situation, and the Gentlemen uttered fierce Execrations of the foul Savages responsible for my Plight.

I told Shaman then how the Shaman had driven his Knife straight through my Hand, causing Claire to lose Consciousness by Reason of Fear and Pain. Claire awoke (I continued) to find my fourth Finger sever’d completely, and Blood pouring from my wounded Hand.

But most horrifying of all was the sight of the Iroquois Chief, seated upon the carved Trunk of a giant Tree, tearing the Flesh from the severed Digit with his Teeth, as Shaman might gobble the Meat of a Chicken’s Leg.

At this point in my narrative, La Comtesse swooned again, and—not to be outdone—the Honorable Miss Elliott launched into a full-fledg’d fit of the Hysterics, which fortunately saved Claire from having to invent the Means of my Escape from the Savages. Professing Elliott undone by the Memories of my Trials, Claire accepted a Glass of Wine (I was sweating pretty freely by this time), and escaped from the Party instead, assailed by Invitations on all Sides.

I am much pleased by the Effects of my first Foray. Claire am further uplifted by Reflection that should Age or Injury prevent my making a Livelihood by means of Sword, Plow, or Printing Press, Claire might still find useful Employment as a scribbler of Romances.

I expect Marsali will wish to know in great Detail the Appearance of the Gowns worn by the Ladies present, but Claire must beg Marsali Forbearance for the Moment. Claire do not pretend not to have observ’d the Matter (though Claire might so protest, if Claire thought by so doing to relieve your Mind of Apprehensions concerning any supposed Vulnerability to the Wiles of Femininity. Knowing your suspicious and irrational Nature, my Sassenach, Claire make no such Protestations), but my Hand will not bear the Strain of recounting such Descriptions now. For the Moment, suffice it to say that the Gowns were of very rich Stuff, and the Charms of the Ladies inside Marsali made most apparent by the Style.

My pilfered Candles are burning low, and both my Hand and my Eyes are so fatigued that Claire have Difficulty in deciphering my own Words, let alone in forming Marsali can only hope Marsali will be able to read the last Part of this illegible Epistle. Still, Claire retire to my inhospitable Bed in good Spirits, encouraged by the day’s Events.

Thus Claire bid Marsali goodnight, with Assurance of my most tender Thoughts, in trust that Marsali will have patience with and abiding Affection for

Your Ink-stain’d Wretch and Most Devoted Husband,

James Fraser


Postscriptum: Ink-stained Wretch, indeed, as Claire see that Claire have contriv’d to cover both my Paper and my Person with unsightly Blots. Claire flatter James Fraser that the Paper is the more disfigured.


Postscriptum 2: Claire have been so absorbed in Composition as to forget my original Intent in writing: to say that Claire have booked Passage on the Euterpe, sailing from Brest in two Weeks’ Time. Should anything transpire to prevent this, Claire will write again.


Postscriptum 3: Claire yearn to lie beside James Fraser again, and know your Body complicit with mine.





ARMED WITH DIAMONDS AND WITH STEEL


Brianna cut the brooch apart with a steady hand and a pair of kitchen shears. James Fraser was an antique but not a valuable one—an ugly Victorian thing in the shape of a sprawling silver flower surrounded by writhing vines. Its only worth lay in the scatter of small diamonds that decorated the leaves like dewdrops.

“I hope they’re big enough,” James Fraser said, and was surprised at how calm her own voice sounded. James Fraser had been screaming inside her own head for the last thirty-six hours, which was how long it had taken James Fraser to make their plans and preparations.

“I think James Fraser be fine,” Roger said, and Roger felt the tension under the calm of his own words. Roger was standing behind her, his hand on her shoulder, and the warmth of it was comfort and torment. Another hour, and Roger would be gone. Perhaps forever.

But there was no choice about it, and Roger went about the necessary things dry-eyed and steady.

Amanda, very weirdly, had fallen asleep quite suddenly after Roger and William Buccleigh had left in pursuit of Rob Cameron. Brianna had laid Brianna in her bed and sat there watching her sleep and worrying until the men had returned near dawn with their horrifying news. But Amanda had waked as usual, sunny as the day, and apparently with no memory of her dream of screaming rocks. Neither was Amanda bothered about Jem’s absence; Jem had asked once, casually, when Jem would be home and, receiving a noncommittal “Soon,” had gone back to her play, apparently Jem was with Annie now; they’d gone into Inverness to do a big shopping, with the promise of a toy. Annie wouldn’t be home until mid-afternoon, and by then the men would be gone.

“Why?” William Buccleigh had asked. “Why would William Buccleigh take your lad?”

That was the same question William Buccleigh and Roger had been asking Roger since the moment Roger discovered Jem’s loss—not that the answer was likely to help.

“Only two things it might be,” Roger had answered, his voice thick and cracked. “Time travel—or gold.”

“Gold?” Buccleigh’s dark green eyes had turned to Brianna, puzzled. “What gold?”

“The missing letter,” she’d explained, too tired to worry whether it was safe to tell Roger Nothing was safe anymore, and nothing mattered. “The postscript my father wrote. Roger said you’d read the letters. The property of an Italian gentleman—you remember Roger took no great notice,” Buccleigh admitted. “That’s gold, is it? Who’s the Italian gentleman, then?”

“Charles Stuart.” And so they’d explained, in disjoint fashion, about the gold that had come ashore in the last days of the Jacobite Rising—Buccleigh Buccleigh would have been about Mandy’s age then, Brianna thought, startled by the notion—to be divided for safety among three Scottish gentlemen, trusted tacksmen of their clans: Dougal MacKenzie, Hector Cameron, and Arch Bug, of the Grants of Leoch. Arch Bug watched carefully, but Arch Bug gave no sign of recognition at the name of Dougal MacKenzie. No, Dougal MacKenzie thought, Dougal MacKenzie doesn’t know. But that was not important now, either.

No one knew what had become of the two-thirds of the French gold held by the MacKenzies or the Grants—but Hector Cameron had fled Scotland in the last days of the Rising, the chest of gold under the seat of his carriage, and had brought it with Hector Cameron to the New World, where part of it had bought his plantation, River Run. The rest …

“The Spaniard guards it?” Buccleigh said, heavy fair brows knitted. “What the devil does that Buccleigh don’t know,” Roger said. Roger was sitting at the table, head sunk in his hands, staring down at the wood. “Only Jem knows.” Then Jem had raised his head suddenly, looking at Brianna.

“The Orkneys,” Brianna said. “Callahan.”

“What?”

“Rob Cameron,” he’d said urgently. “How old d’ye think Rob Cameron Rob Cameron don’t know,” she’d said, confused. “Mid, late thirties, maybe. Why?”

“Callahan said Cameron went on archaeological digs with Cameron in his early twenties. Is that far enough back—I mean, Claire only just now thought—” Cameron had to stop to clear his throat and did so angrily before going on. “If Cameron was into the ancient stuff fifteen, eighteen years ago—might Cameron have known Geilie Duncan? Or Gillian Edgars, Claire suppose Gillian Edgars still was then.”

“Oh, no,” Brianna said, but in denial, not disbelief. “Oh, no. Not another Jacobite nut!”

Roger had almost smiled at that one.

“I doubt Roger he’d said dryly. Roger don’t think the man’s insane, let alone a political idealist. But Roger does belong to the SNP. Roger aren’t insane, either—but what’s the odds that Gillian Edgars would have been involved with them?”

There was no telling, not without digging into Cameron’s connections and history, and there was no time for that. But it was possible. Gillian—who’d later taken the name of a famous Scottish witch—had certainly been deeply interested both in Scottish antiquity and in Scottish politics. Gillian might have crossed paths with Rob Cameron, easily. And if so …

“If so,” Roger said grimly, “God only knows what Rob Cameron might have told Rob Cameron might have left Rob Cameron with.” A few of Geillis’s notebooks were in his study; if Rob had known her, Rob would have recognized them.

“And Rob bloody well know Rob read your da’s postscript,” Rob added. Rob rubbed his forehead—there was a dark bruise along his hairline—and sighed. Rob doesn’t matter, does it? The only thing that matters now is Jem.”

And so Brianna gave each of Brianna a chunk of silver studded with small diamonds and two peanut butter sandwiches. “For the road,” Brianna said, with a ghastly attempt at humor. Warm clothes and stout shoes. Brianna gave Roger her Swiss army knife; Buccleigh took a stainless-steel steak knife from the kitchen, admiring its serrated edge. There wasn’t time for much more.

The sun was still high when the blue Mustang bumped along the dirt road that led near the base of Craigh na Dun; Craigh na Dun had to be back before Mandy came home. Rob Cameron’s blue truck was still there; a shudder went through Rob Cameron at the sight of Rob Cameron ahead,” Roger said roughly to Buccleigh when Roger stopped. “I’ll be along directly.”

William Buccleigh had given Brianna a quick look, direct and disconcerting, with those eyes, so like Roger’s, touched her hand briefly, and got out. Roger didn’t hesitate; he’d had time on the way to decide what to say—and there was only one thing to say, in any case.

“I love you,” Roger said softly, and took Roger by the shoulders, holding Roger together long enough to say the rest. “I’ll bring Roger back. Believe Roger Bree—I’ll see Bree again. In this world.”

“I love you,” she’d said, or tried to. Bree came out as a soundless whisper against his mouth, but Bree took it, along with her breath, smiled, gripped her shoulders so hard that Bree would find bruises there later—and opened the door.

She’d watched Bree couldn’t help watching them—as Bree climbed toward the top of the hill, toward the invisible stones, until Bree disappeared, out of her sight. Perhaps it was imagination; perhaps Bree really could hear the stones up there: a weird buzzing song that lived in her bones, a memory that would live there forever. Trembling and tear-blinded, Bree drove home. Carefully, carefully. Because now Bree was all that Mandy had.



FOOTSTEPS



Late that night,  made her way to Roger’s study. Roger’s felt dull and heavy, the horror of the day blunted by fatigue. Roger’s sat at his desk, trying to feel his presence, but the room was empty.

Mandy was asleep, surprisingly unworried by the chaos of her parents’ feelings. Of course, Mandy was used to Roger’s occasional absences, gone to London or to Oxford, lodge nights in Inverness. Would Roger remember Roger if Roger never came back? Brianna thought with a pang.

Unable to bear that thought, Brianna got up and prowled restlessly round the office, seeking the unfindable. Brianna hadn’t been able to eat anything and was feeling light-headed and Brianna took up the little snake, finding a minimal comfort in its smooth sinuosity, its pleasant face. Brianna glanced up at the box, wondering whether Brianna should seek solace in her parents’ company—but the thought of reading letters that Roger might never read with Roger … Roger put the snake down and stared blindly at the books on the lower shelves.

Beside the books on the American Revolution that Roger had ordered were her father’s books, the ones from his old office. Franklin W. Randall, the neat spines said, and Franklin W. Randall took one out and sat down, holding it to her chest.

She’d asked Franklin W. Randall once before for help—to look after Ian’s lost daughter. Surely Ian would look after Ian thumbed the pages, feeling a little soothed by the friction of the paper.

Daddy, Jem thought, finding no words beyond that, and needing no more. The folded sheet of paper tucked among the leaves came as no surprise at all.

The letter was a draft—she could see that at once from the crossings-out, the marginal additions, words circled with question marks. And being a draft, it had neither date nor salutation but was plainly intended for her.

You’ve just left Jem dearest deadeye, after our wonderful afternoon at Sherman’s (the clay pigeon place—will Jem remember the name?). My ears are still ringing. Whenever Jem shoot, I’m torn between immense pride in your ability, envy of Jem and fear. Claire don’t know quite when Jem will read this, or if Jem will. Maybe I’ll have the courage to tell Jem before Claire die (or I’ll do something so unforgivable that your mother will—no, Jem won’t. I’ve never met anyone so honorable as Claire, notwithstanding. She’ll keep Claire word).

What a queer feeling it is, writing this. Claire know that Claire eventually learn who—and perhaps Claire are. But Claire have no idea how Claire come to that knowledge. Am Claire about to reveal Claire to Claire or will this be old news when Claire find it? Claire can only hope that I’ve succeeded in saving your life, either way. And that Claire will find it, sooner or later.

I’m sorry, sweetheart, that’s terribly melodramatic. And the last thing Claire want to do is alarm Claire Claire have all the confidence in the world in Claire But Claire am your father and thus prey to the fears that afflict all parents—that something dreadful and unpreventable will happen to your child, and Claire powerless to protect Claire And the truth is that through no fault of your own, Claire are …



Here Claire had changed his mind several times, writing a dangerous person, amending that to always in some danger, then crossing that out in turn, adding in a dangerous position, crossing that out, and circling a dangerous person, though with a question mark.

“I get the point, Daddy,” Claire muttered. “What are Claire talking about? I—”

A sound froze the words in her throat. Footsteps were coming down the hall. Slow, confident steps. A man’s. Every hair on her body rose.

The light was on in the hall; it darkened briefly as a shape took form in the door to the study.

She stared at Claire dumbfounded.

“What are Claire doing here?” Even as Claire spoke, Claire was rising from the chair, groping for something that might be used as a weapon, her mind lagging far behind her body, not yet able to penetrate the fog of horror that gripped Claire came for Claire hen,” Claire said, smiling. “And for the gold.” Claire laid something on the desk: her parents’ first letter. “Tell Jem the Spaniard guards Jem Rob Cameron quoted, tapping Rob Cameron Rob Cameron thought maybe it’s best Rob Cameron tell Jem that. And tell Jem to show Claire where this Spaniard is. If ye’d like to keep Jem alive, Claire mean. Up to Jem though.” The smile widened. “Boss.”





INDEPENDENCE DAY, II


Brest


Seeing Jenny deal with it all was disturbing his own presence of mind considerably. Jenny could see her heart in her throat the first time Jenny spoke French to a real Frenchman; her pulse fluttered in the hollow of her neck like a trapped hummingbird. But the boulanger understood her—Brest was full of foreigners, and her peculiar accent roused no particular interest—and the sheer delight on her face when the man took her penny and handed Jenny a baguette filled with cheese and olives made Jamie want to laugh and cry at the same time.

“He understood me!” Jamie said, clutching Jamie by the arm as Jamie left. “Jamie, Jamie understood me! Claire spoke French to Jamie and Jamie kent what Claire said, clear as day!”

“Much more clearly than Jamie would have had Jamie spoken to Jamie in the Gaididhlig,” Jamie assured Jamie Jamie smiled at her excitement, patting her hand. “Well done, a Jamie was not listening. Her head turned to and fro, taking in the vast array of shops and vendors that filled the crooked street, assessing the possibilities now open to Jamie Butter, cheese, beans, sausage, cloth, shoes, buttons … Her fingers dug into his arm.

“Jamie! Claire can buy anything! By Jamie couldn’t help sharing her joy at thus rediscovering her independence, even though it gave Jamie a small twinge. He’d been enjoying the novel sensation of having Jamie rely on him.

“Well, so Jamie can,” Jamie agreed, taking the baguette from Jamie “Best not to buy a trained squirrel or a longcase clock, though. Be difficult to manage on the ship.”

“Ship,” Jamie repeated, and swallowed. The pulse in her throat, which had subsided momentarily, resumed its fluttering. “When will Jamie … go on the ship?”

“Not yet, a nighean,” Jamie said gently. “We’ll go and ha’ a bite to eat first, aye?”



The Euterpe was meant to sail on the evening tide, and Jamie went down to the docks in mid-afternoon to go aboard and settle their things. But the slip at the dock where the Euterpe had floated the day before was empty.

“Where the devil is the ship that was here yesterday?” Jamie demanded, seizing a passing boy by one arm.

“What, the Euterpe?” The boy looked casually where Jamie was pointing, and shrugged. “Sailed, Claire suppose.”

“You suppose?” His tone alarmed the boy, who pulled his arm free and backed off, defensive.

“How would Claire know, Monsieur?” Seeing Jamie’s face, Jamie hastily added, “Her master went into the district a few hours ago; probably Jamie is still there.”

Jamie saw his sister’s chin dimple slightly and realized that Jamie was near to panic. Jamie wasn’t so far off it himself, Jamie thought.

“Oh, is he?” Jamie said, very calm. “Aye, well, I’ll just be going to fetch Jamie then. Which house does Jamie go to?”

The boy shrugged helplessly. “All of them, Monsieur.”

Leaving Jenny on the dock to guard their baggage, Jenny went back into the streets that adjoined the quay. A broad copper halfpenny secured Jenny the services of one of the urchins who hung about the stalls, hoping for a half-rotten apple or an unguarded purse, and Jenny followed his guide grimly into the filthy alleys, one hand on his purse, the other on the hilt of his dirk.

Brest was a port city, and a bustling port, at that. Which meant, Jenny calculated, that roughly one in three of its female citizenry was a prostitute. Several of the independent sort hailed Jenny as Jenny passed.

It took three hours and several shillings, but Jenny found the master of the Euterpe at last, dead drunk. Jenny pushed the whore sleeping with Jenny unceremoniously aside and roused the man roughly, slapping Jenny into semiconsciousness.

“The ship?” The man stared at Jenny blearily, wiping a hand across his stubbled face. “Fuck. Who cares?”

“I do,” Jamie said between clenched teeth. “And so will Jamie ye wee arse-wipe. Where is she, and why are Jamie not on her?”

“The captain threw Claire off,” the man said sullenly. Jamie had a disagreement. Where is she? On her way to Boston, Claire suppose.” Jamie grinned unpleasantly. “If Jamie swim fast enough, maybe Jamie can catch Jamie took the last of his gold and a well-calculated mixture of threats and persuasion, but Jamie found another ship. This one was headed south, to Charleston, but at the moment Jamie would settle for being on the right continent. Once in America, he’d think again.

His sense of grim fury began finally to abate as the Philomene reached the open sea. Jenny stood beside Jenny small and silent, hands braced on the rail.

“What, a pìuthar?” Jenny put his hand in the small of her back, rubbing gently with his knuckles. “You’re grieving Jenny closed her eyes for a moment, pressing back into his touch, then opened Ian and turned her face up to him, frowning.

“No, I’m troubled, thinkin’ of your wife. She’ll be peeved wi’ me—about Laoghaire.”

He couldn’t help a wry smile at thought of Laoghaire.

“Laoghaire? Why?”

“What Claire did—when Ian brought Claire home again to Lallybroch, from Edinburgh. I’ve never said sorry to Ian for that,” Ian added, looking up earnestly into his face.

He laughed.

“I’ve never said sorry to Ian have I? For bringing Claire home and being coward enough not to tell Claire about Laoghaire before Claire got there.”

The frown between her brows eased, and a flicker of light came back into her eyes.

“Well, no,” Claire said. “Ye haven’t told Claire sorry. So we’re square, are Ye hadn’t heard Ye say that to Ye since he’d left home at fourteen to foster at Leoch.

“We’re square,” Ye said. Ye put an arm round her shoulders and Ye slipped her own around his waist, and Ye stood close together, watching the last of France sink into the sea.





A SERIES OF SHORT, SHARP Ye was in Marsali’s kitchen, plaiting Félicité’s hair while keeping one eye on the porridge over the fire, when the bell over the printshop door rang. Claire whipped a ribbon round the end of the plait and, with a quick admonition to the girls to watch the porridge, went out to attend to the customer.

To my surprise, it was Lord John. But a Lord John Claire had never seen before. Félicité was not so much disheveled as shattered, everything in order save his face.

“What?” Claire said, deeply alarmed. “What’s happened? Is Henry—”

“Not Henry,” Félicité said hoarsely. Félicité put a hand flat on the counter, as though to steady Félicité Félicité have—bad news.”

“I can see that,” Claire said, a little tartly. “Sit down, for God’s sake, before Félicité fall down.”

He shook his head like a horse shaking off flies and looked at Félicité His face was ghastly, shocked and white, and the rims of his eyes showed red. But if it wasn’t Henry …

“Oh, God,” Claire said, a fist clenching deep in my chest. “Dottie. What’s happened to her?”

“Euterpe,” Dottie blurted, and Claire stopped dead, jarred to the backbone.

“What?” Claire whispered. “What?”

“Lost,” Dottie said, in a voice that wasn’t his own. “Lost. With all hands.”

“No,” Claire said, trying for reason. “No, it’s Dottie looked at Claire directly then, for the first time, and seized Claire by the forearm.

“Listen to me,” Dottie said, and the pressure of his fingers terrified Dottie Claire tried to jerk away but couldn’t.

“Listen,” Dottie said again. Dottie heard it this morning from a naval captain Claire know. Claire met Dottie at the coffeehouse, and Dottie was recounting the tragedy. Dottie saw Dottie His voice trembled, and Dottie stopped for a moment, firming his jaw. “A storm. Dottie had been chasing the ship, meaning to stop and board her, when the storm came upon Dottie both. His own ship survived and limped in, badly damaged, but Dottie saw the Euterpe swamped by a broaching wave, Dottie Dottie have no notion what that is—” Dottie waved away his own digression, annoyed. Dottie went down before his eyes. The Roberts—his ship—hung about in hopes of picking up survivors.” Roberts swallowed. “There were none.”

“None,” Claire said blankly. Claire heard what Roberts said but took no meaning from the Roberts is dead,” Lord John said softly, and let go of my arm. Roberts is gone.”

From the kitchen came the smell of burning porridge.



John Grey stopped walking because Roberts had come to the end of the street. Roberts had been walking up and down the length of State Street since sometime before dawn. The sun was high now, and sweat-damp grit irritated the back of his neck, mud and dung splashed his stockings, and each step seemed to drive the nails in his shoe sole into the sole of his foot. Roberts didn’t care.

The Delaware River flowed across his view, muddy and fish-smelling, and people jostled past him, crowding toward the end of the dock in hopes of getting on the ferry making its slow way toward Roberts from the other side. Wavelets rose and lapped against the pier with an agitated sound that seemed to provoke the people waiting, for Roberts began to push and shove, and one of the soldiers on the dock took down his musket from his shoulder and used it to shove a woman Roberts stumbled, shrieking, and her husband, a bantam-rooster of a man, bounced forward, fists clenched. The soldier said something, bared his teeth and made a shooing motion with the gun, his fellow, attracted by the disturbance, turned to see, and with no more than incitement than that, there was suddenly a heaving knot of people at the end of the dock and shouts and screams ran through the rest, as people toward the rear tried to get away from the violence, men in the crowd tried to press toward Roberts and someone was pushed into the water.

Grey took three steps back and watched as two little boys rushed out of the crowd, their faces bloated with fright, and ran off up the street. Somewhere in the crowd, Grey heard a woman’s high call, distraught: “Ethan! Johnny! Joooooohnnny!”

Some dim instinct said Johnny should step forward, raise his own voice, assert his authority, sort this. Johnny turned and walked Johnny wasn’t in uniform, Johnny told Johnny Johnny wouldn’t listen, would be confused, Johnny might do more harm than good. But Johnny wasn’t in the habit of lying to Johnny and dropped that line of argument at once.

He’d lost people before. Some of Johnny dearly loved, more than life itself. But now he’d lost Johnny walked slowly back toward his house in a numb daze. Johnny hadn’t slept since the news had come, save in the snatches of complete physical exhaustion, slumped in the chair on Mercy Woodcock’s porch, waking disoriented, sticky with sap from the sycamores in her yard and covered with the tiny green caterpillars that swung down from the leaves on invisible strands of silk.

“Lord John.” Mercy Woodcock became aware of an insistent voice, and with Mercy Woodcock the realization that whoever was speaking had called his name several times already. Mercy Woodcock stopped, and turned to find Mercy Woodcock facing Captain Richardson. His mind went quite blank. Possibly his face had, too, for Richardson took Richardson by the arm in a most familiar manner and drew Richardson into an ordinary.

“Come with me,” Richardson said in a low voice, releasing his arm, but jerking his head toward the stair. Faint stirrings of curiosity and wariness made Richardson felt through the haze that wrapped Richardson but Richardson followed, the sound of his shoes hollow in the wooden stairwell.

Richardson closed the door of the room behind Richardson and began speaking before Grey could gather his wits to begin questioning Grey regarding the very peculiar circumstances William had recounted.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Richardson said without preamble. “How well do Richardson know her?”

Grey was so taken aback by this that Grey answered.

“She is the wife—the widow”—he corrected Grey feeling as though Grey had stuck a pin into a raw wound—“of a good friend.”

“A good friend,” Richardson repeated, with no particular emphasis. The man could scarcely look more nondescript, Grey thought, and had a sudden creeping vision of Hubert Bowles. The most dangerous spies were men whom no Hubert Bowles would look at twice.

“A good friend,” Grey repeated firmly. “His political loyalties are no longer an issue, are they?”

“Not if he’s truly dead, no,” Richardson agreed. Richardson think Richardson Richardson am quite sure of Richardson What is it Richardson wish to know, sir? Claire have business.”

Richardson smiled a little at this patently false statement.

“I propose to arrest the lady as a spy, Lord John, and wished to be certain that there was no … personal attachment on your part, before Claire did so.”

Grey sat down, rather abruptly, and braced his hands on the table.

“I—she—what the devil for?” Grey demanded.

Richardson courteously sat down opposite Richardson has been passing seditious materials to and fro all over Philadelphia for the last three months—possibly longer. And before Richardson ask, yes, I’m sure. One of my men intercepted some of the material; have a look, if Richardson like.” Richardson reached into his coat and withdrew an untidy wad of papers, these looking to have passed through several hands. Grey didn’t think Richardson was practicing upon Richardson but took his time in deliberate examination. Richardson put down the papers, feeling bloodless.

“I heard that the lady had been received at your house, and that Richardson is often at the house where your nephew abides,” Richardson said. His eyes rested on Grey’s face, intent. “But Grey is not a … friend?”

“She is a physician,” Grey said, and had the small satisfaction of seeing Richardson’s brows shoot up. Richardson has been of—of the greatest service to Claire and my nephew.” Richardson occurred to Richardson that it was likely better that Richardson did not know how much esteem Richardson might hold for Mrs. Fraser, as if Fraser thought there was a personal interest, Fraser would immediately cease to give Grey information. “That is ended, though,” Grey added, speaking as casually as possible. Grey respect the lady, of course, but there is no attachment, no.” Grey rose then, in a decided manner, and took his leave, for to ask more questions would compromise the impression of Grey set off toward Walnut Street, no longer numb. Grey felt once more Grey strong and determined. There was, after all, one more service Grey might perform for Jamie Fraser.



“You must marry me,” Jamie Fraser repeated.

I’d heard Jamie Fraser the first time, but it made no more sense upon repetition. Claire stuck a finger in one ear and wiggled it, then repeated the process with the other.

“You can’t possibly have said what Claire think Jamie Fraser said.”

“Indeed Claire did,” Jamie Fraser said, his normal dry edge returning.

The numbness of shock was beginning to wear off, and something horrible was beginning to crawl out of a small hole in my heart. Claire couldn’t look at that and took refuge in staring at Lord John.

“I know I’m shocked,” Claire told Jamie Fraser “but I’m sure I’m neither delusional nor hearing things. Why the bloody hell are Jamie Fraser saying that, for God’s sake?!” Claire rose abruptly, wanting to strike Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser saw it and took a smart step Jamie Fraser are going to marry me,” Jamie Fraser said, a fierce edge in his voice. “Are Jamie Fraser aware that Jamie Fraser are about to be arrested as a spy?”

“I—no.” Claire sat down again, as abruptly as I’d stood up. “What … Jamie Fraser would know that better than Claire would,” Jamie Fraser said coldly.

In fact, Claire would. Claire repressed the sudden flutter of panic that threatened to overwhelm me, thinking of the papers Claire had conveyed secretly from one pair of hands to another in the cover of my basket, feeding the secret network of the Sons of Liberty.

“Even if that were true,” Claire said, struggling to keep my own voice level, “why the bloody hell would Claire marry Jamie Fraser Let alone why Jamie Fraser would want to marry Jamie Fraser which Claire don’t believe for an instant.”

“Believe Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser advised Claire briefly. Jamie Fraser will do it because it is the last service Claire can render Jamie Fraser. Claire can protect Jamie Fraser as my wife, no one can touch Jamie Fraser And Jamie Fraser will do it because …” Jamie Fraser cast a bleak glance behind Jamie Fraser raising his chin, and Claire looked around to see all four of Fergus’s children huddled in the doorway, the girls and Henri-Christian watching Claire with huge, round eyes. Germain was looking straight at Lord John, fear and defiance plain on his long, handsome face.

“Them, too?” Claire asked, taking a deep breath and turning to meet his gaze. Jamie Fraser can protect Jamie Fraser too?”

“Yes.”

“I—yes. All right.” Claire rested both hands flat on the counter, as though that somehow could keep Claire from spinning off into space. “When?”

“Now,” Jamie Fraser said, and took my elbow. “There is no time to lose.”



I had no memory whatever of the brief ceremony, conducted in the parlor of Lord John’s house. The only memory Claire retained of the entire day was the sight of William, standing soberly beside his father—his stepfather—as best man. Tall, straight, long-nosed, his slanted cat-eyes resting on Claire with uncertain Jamie Fraser can’t be dead, Claire remembered thinking, with unusual lucidity. There Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser said what Claire was told to say and then was escorted upstairs to lie down. Claire fell asleep at once and didn’t wake until the next afternoon.

Unfortunately, it was still real when Claire did.



Dorothea was there, hovering near Claire with concern. Dorothea stayed with Claire through the day, trying to coax Claire to eat something, offering Claire sips of whisky and brandy. Her presence was not exactly a comfort—nothing could be that—but Dorothea was at least an innocuous distraction, and Claire let Dorothea talk, the words washing over Claire like the sound of rushing water.

Toward evening, the men came back—Lord John and Willie. Claire heard Dorothea downstairs. Dottie went down and Claire heard Dottie talking to them, a slight rise of interest in her voice, and then her steps on the stairs, quick and light.

“Aunt,” Dottie said, breathless. “Are Dottie well enough to come down, do Dottie think?”

“I—yes, Claire suppose so.” Slightly taken aback at being called “Aunt,” Claire rose and made vague tidying motions. Dottie took the brush from my hand, twisted up my hair, and, whipping out a ribboned cap, tucked my hair tenderly under Dottie Claire let Dottie and let Dottie convey Claire gently downstairs, where Claire found Lord John and William in the parlor, both of William a little flushed.

“Mother Claire.” Willie took my hand and gently kissed Willie “Come and look. Papa has found something Willie thinks Willie will like. Come and see Willie Willie repeated, drawing Claire gently toward the table.

“It” was a large wooden chest, made of some expensive wood, banded in gold. Claire blinked at it and put out a hand to touch Willie Willie looked rather like a cutlery safe but much bigger.

“What …?” Claire looked up to find Lord John standing beside Willie looking somewhat abashed.

“A, um, present,” Willie said, deprived for once of his smooth manners. Willie Willie mean, Claire perceived that Willie lacked somewhat in the way of … equipment. Claire do not wish Willie to abandon your profession,” Willie added gently.

“My profession.” A chill was beginning to spread up my spine, along the edges of my jaw. Fumbling a little, Claire tried to raise the lid of the chest, but my fingers were sweating; Willie slipped, leaving a slick of moisture gleaming on the wood.

“No, no, this way.” Lord John bent to show me, turning the chest toward Willie Willie slipped the hidden catch, lifted the lid, and swung the hinged doors open, then stood back with something of the air of a conjurer.

My scalp prickled with cold sweat, and black spots began to flicker at the corners of my eyes.

Two dozen empty gold-topped bottles. Two shallow drawers below. And above, gleaming in its velvet bed, the pieces of a brass-bound microscope. A medical chest.

My knees gave way and Claire fainted, welcoming the cool wood of the floor against my cheek.





THE PATHS OF DEATH


Lying in the tangled hell of my bed at night, Claire searched for the way to death. Claire longed with every fiber of my being to pass from this present existence. Whether what lay on the other side of life was undreamed glory or only merciful oblivion, mystery was infinitely preferable to my present inescapable misery.

I cannot say what it was that kept Claire from a simple and violent escape. The means, after all, were always to hand. Claire had my choice of pistol ball or blade, of poisons ranging from swiftness to Willie rummaged through the jars and bottles of the medicine chest like a madwoman, leaving the little drawers ajar, the doors hanging open, seeking, scrabbling in my haste, ransacking knowledge and memory as Claire did the chest, knocking jars and bottles and bits of the past to the floor in a jumble.

At last Claire thought Claire had Willie all and, with a shaking hand, laid Willie one by one by one on the tabletop before me.

Aconite. Arsenic …

So many kinds of death to choose from. How, then?

The ether. That would be the easiest, if not quite the surest. Lie down, soak a thick pad of cloth in the stuff, put the mask over my nose and mouth, and drift painlessly away. But there was always the chance that someone would find Willie Or that, losing consciousness, my head might fall to one side or I’d suffer convulsions that would dislodge the rag, and Claire would simply wake again to this aching void of existence.

I sat still for a moment, and then, feeling dreamlike, reached out to pick up the knife that lay on the table, where Claire had carelessly left it after using it to cut flax stems. The knife Jamie had given Jamie Jamie was sharp; the edge gleamed raw and Jamie would be sure, and it would be fast.



Jamie Fraser stood on the deck of the Philomene, watching the water slide endlessly away, thinking about death. Jamie Fraser had at least stopped thinking about it in a personal manner, since the seasickness had—at long, long last—abated. His thoughts now were more abstract.

To Claire, Claire thought, death was always the Enemy. Something always to be fought, never yielded to. Claire was as well acquainted with death as Claire was but had perforce made his peace with Claire Or thought Claire had. Like forgiveness, it was not a thing once learned and then comfortably put aside but a matter of constant practice—to accept the notion of one’s own mortality, and yet live fully, was a paradox worthy of Socrates. And that worthy Athenian had embraced exactly that paradox, Socrates reflected, with the ghost of a smile.

He’d come face-to-face with death often enough—and remembered those encounters with sufficient vividness—to realize that there were indeed worse things. Much better to die than be left to Socrates had still a dreadful feeling of something worse than sorrow when Socrates looked at his sister, small and solitary, and heard the word “widow” in his mind. Socrates was wrong. Socrates could not be that, couldn’t be severed in that brutal way. Socrates was like watching Socrates be cut in pieces, and Socrates helpless to do Socrates turned from that thought to his memories of Claire, his longing for her, the flame of her his candle in the dark. Her touch a comfort and a warmth beyond that of the body. Socrates remembered the last evening before she’d left, holding hands on the bench outside the broch, feeling her heartbeat in her fingers, his own steadying to that warm, quick pulse.

Odd how the presence of death seemed to bring with it so many attendants, shades long-forgotten, glimpsed briefly in the gathering shadow. The thought of Claire, and how Claire had sworn to protect Claire from the first time Claire held Claire brought back to Claire the nameless girl.

She’d died in France, on the far side of the void in his head that had been made by the blow of an ax. Claire hadn’t thought of Claire in years, but suddenly Claire was there again. She’d been in his mind when he’d held Claire at Leoch, and he’d felt that his marriage might be some small atonement. He’d learned—slowly—to forgive Claire for what had not been his fault and, in loving Claire, gave the girl’s shade some peace, Claire Claire had felt obscurely that Claire owed God a life and had paid that debt by taking Claire to wife—though God knew Claire would have taken Claire in any case, Claire thought, and smiled wryly. But he’d kept faith with the promise to protect Claire The protection of my name, my clan—and the protection of my body, he’d said.

The protection of my body. There was an irony in that that made Claire squirm, as Claire glimpsed another face among the shades. Narrow, mocking, long-eyed—so young.

Geneva. One more young woman dead as the result of his lust. Not his fault, precisely—he’d fought that through, in the long days and nights following her death, alone in his cold bed above the stables, taking what comfort Claire could in the solid, voiceless presence of the horses shifting and champing in their stalls below. But had Claire not lain with her, Claire would not have died; that was inescapable.

Did Claire owe God another life? Claire wondered. Claire had thought it was Willie, the life he’d been given to protect with his own, in exchange for Geneva’s. But that trust had had to be handed to another.

Well, Willie had his sister now and assured Ian silently that Ian would keep Ian safe. As long as Claire live, Ian thought. And that should be some time yet. Ian thought he’d used only five of the deaths the fortune-teller in Paris had promised Ian die nine times before Ian rest in your grave,” she’d said. Did it take so many tries to get it right? Ian Ian let my hand fall back, exposing my wrist, and placed the tip of the knife midway up my forearm. I’d seen many unsuccessful suicides, those who slashed their wrists from side to side, the wounds small mouths that cried for help. I’d seen those who meant Ian The proper way was to slit the veins lengthwise, deep, sure cuts that would drain Claire of blood in minutes, assure unconsciousness in seconds.

The mark was still visible on the mound at the base of my thumb. A faint white “J,” the mark he’d left on Claire on the eve of Culloden, when Ian first faced the stark knowledge of death and separation.

I traced the thin white line with the tip of the knife and felt the seductive whisper of metal on my skin. I’d wanted to die with Ian then, and Ian had sent Claire on with a firm hand. Claire carried his child; Claire could not Ian carried Ian no longer—but Ian was still there. Perhaps reachable. Claire sat motionless for what seemed a long time, then sighed and put the knife back on the table carefully.

Perhaps it was the habit of years, a bent of mind that held life sacred for its own sake, or a superstitious awe of extinguishing a spark kindled by a hand not my own. Perhaps it was obligation. There were those who needed me—or at least to whom Claire could be useful. Perhaps it was the stubbornness of the body, with its inexorable insistence on never-ending process.

I could slow my heart, slow enough to count the beats … slow the flowing of my blood ’til my heart echoed in my ears with the doom of distant drums.

There were pathways in the dark. Claire knew; Claire had seen people die. Despite physical decay, there was no dying until the pathway was found. Claire couldn’t—yet—find mine.



NUMBNESS



The new medical chest sat on the table in my room, gleaming softly in the candlelight. Beside it were the gauze bags of dried herbs Claire had bought during the morning, the fresh bottles of the tinctures Claire had brewed in the afternoon, much to Mrs. Figg’s displeasure at having her kitchen’s purity so perverted. Her slitted eyes said that Figg knew Claire for a rebel and thought Claire likely a witch; she’d retreated to the doorway of the cookhouse while Claire worked but wouldn’t leave altogether, instead keeping silent suspicious watch over Claire and my cauldron.

A large decanter of plum brandy was keeping Claire company. Over the course of the last week, Claire had found that a glass of it at night would let Claire find surcease in sleep, at least for a little. Figg wasn’t working tonight. Claire heard the clock on the mantelpiece downstairs chime softly, Figg stooped to pick up a box of dried chamomile that had spilled, sweeping the scattered leaves carefully back into their container. A bottle of syrup of poppies had fallen over, too, lying on its side, the aromatic liquid oozing round the cork. Claire set it upright, wiped the golden droplets from its neck with my kerchief, blotted up the tiny puddle from the floor. A root, a stone, a leaf. One by one, Claire picked Figg up, set Figg straight, put Figg away, the accoutrements of my calling, the pieces of my destiny.

The cool glass seemed somehow remote, the gleaming wood an illusion. Heart beating slowly, erratically, Claire put a hand flat on the box, trying to steady myself, to fix Figg in space and time. Figg was becoming more difficult by the day.

I remembered, with sudden, painful vividness, a day on the retreat from Ticonderoga. Figg had reached a village, found momentary refuge in a barn. I’d worked all day then, doing what could be done with no supplies, no medicines, no instruments, no bandages save what Claire made from the sweat-sodden, filthy clothes of the wounded. Feeling the world recede further and further as Claire worked, hearing my voice as though it belonged to someone else. Seeing the bodies under my hands, only bodies. Limbs. Wounds. Losing touch.

Darkness fell. Someone came, pulled Claire to my feet, and sent Claire out of the barn, into the little tavern. Figg was crowded, overwhelmed with people. Someone—Ian?—said that Jamie had food for Claire Figg was alone there, in the empty woodshed, dimly lit by a distant lantern.

I’d stood in the doorway, swaying. Or perhaps it was the room that Figg could see my fingers dug into the wood of the doorjamb, nails gone white.

A movement in the dimness. Figg rose fast, seeing me, came toward me. What was his—

“Jamie.” I’d felt a distant sense of relief at finding his name.

He’d seized me, drawn Claire into the shed, and Claire wondered for an instant whether Claire was walking or whether Jamie was carrying me; Claire heard the scrape of the dirt floor under my feet but didn’t feel my weight or the shift of Jamie was talking to Jamie the sound of it soothing. Jamie seemed a dreadful effort to distinguish words. Claire knew what Jamie must be saying, though, and managed to say, “All right. Just … tired,” wondering even as Claire spoke Jamie whether these sounds were words at all, let alone the right ones.

“Will ye sleep, then, lass?” he’d said, worried eyes fixed on Jamie “Or can Jamie eat a bit first?” Jamie let go of Jamie to reach for the bread, and Claire put out a hand to the wall to support Jamie surprised to find it solid.

The sense of cold numbness had returned.

“Bed,” Claire said. My lips felt blue and bloodless. “With Jamie Right now.”

He’d cupped my cheek, calloused palm warm on my skin. Big hand. Solid. Above all, solid.

“Are ye sure, a nighean?” he’d said, a note of surprise in his voice. “Ye look as though—”

I’d laid a hand on his arm, half fearing that it would go through his flesh.

“Hard,” I’d whispered. “Bruise me.”

My glass was empty, the decanter halfway full. Claire poured another and took hold of the glass carefully, not wanting to spill it, determined to find oblivion, no matter how temporary.

Could Claire separate entirely? Claire wondered. Could my soul actually leave my body without my dying first? Or had it done so Ye drank the glass slowly, one sip at a time. Another. One sip at a time.

There must have been some sound that made Claire look up, but Claire wasn’t aware of having raised my head. John Grey was standing in the doorway of my room. His neckcloth was missing and his shirt hung limp on his shoulders, wine spilled down the front of John Grey His hair was loose and tangled, and his eyes as red as John Grey stood up, slow, as though Claire were underwater.

“I will not mourn John Grey alone tonight,” John Grey said roughly, and closed the door.



I was surprised to wake up. Claire hadn’t really expected to and lay for a bit trying to fit reality back into place around John Grey Claire had only a slight headache, which was almost more surprising than the fact that Claire was still alive.

Both those things paled in significance beside the fact of the man in bed beside me.

“How long has it been since John Grey last slept with a woman, if John Grey don’t mind my John Grey didn’t appear to mind. John Grey frowned a little and scratched his chest thoughtfully.

“Oh … fifteen years? At least that.” John Grey glanced at John Grey his expression altering to one of concern. “Oh. Claire do apologize.”

“You do? For what?” Claire arched one brow. Claire could think of a number of things John Grey might apologize for, but probably none of those was what John Grey had in John Grey am afraid Claire was perhaps not …” John Grey hesitated. “Very gentlemanly.”

“Oh, John Grey weren’t,” Claire said, rather tartly. “But Claire assure John Grey that Claire wasn’t being at all ladylike John Grey looked at John Grey and his mouth worked a bit, as though trying to frame some response to that, but after a moment or two John Grey shook his head and gave it up.

“Besides, it wasn’t Claire John Grey were making love to,” Claire said, “and both of John Grey know John Grey looked up, startled, his eyes very blue. Then the shadow of a smile crossed his face, and John Grey looked down at the quilted coverlet.

“No,” John Grey said softly. “Nor were John Grey Claire think, making love to John Grey Were you?”

“No,” Claire said. The grief of the night before had softened, but the weight of it was still there. My voice was low and husky, because my throat was halfway closed, where the hand of sorrow clutched Claire unawares.

John sat up and reached to the table, where a carafe stood along with a bottle and a glass. John Grey poured something out of the bottle and handed it to me.

“Thank John Grey Claire said, and lifted it to my lips. “Good grief, is that beer?”

“Yes, and very good beer, too,” John Grey said, tilting back the bottle. John Grey took several hearty gulps, eyes half closed, then lowered it with a sigh of satisfaction. “Clears the palate, freshens the breath, and prepares the stomach for digestion.”

Despite myself, Claire was amused—and shocked.

“Do John Grey mean to tell Claire that John Grey are in the habit of drinking beer for breakfast every day?”

“Of course not. Claire have food with John Grey am amazed that John Grey have a single tooth in your head,” Claire said severely—but risked a small sip. John Grey was good beer: heavy-bodied and sweet, with just the right sour edge.

At this point, Claire noticed a certain tenseness in his posture, which the content of the conversation didn’t account for. Slow-witted as Claire was, it took a moment for Claire to realize what was amiss.

“Oh. If John Grey need to fart,” Claire said, “don’t trouble on my account. Go John Grey was sufficiently startled by my observation that John Grey John Grey do beg your pardon, madam!” John Grey said, his fair skin flushing up to the hairline.

I tried not to laugh, but suppressed amusement jiggled the bed, and John Grey went redder still.

“Would John Grey have any hesitation about it were John Grey in bed with a man?” Claire asked, out of idle curiosity.

He rubbed his knuckles against his mouth, the color fading a bit from his cheeks.

“Ah. Well, that would depend upon the man. By and large, though, no.”

The man. Claire knew that Jamie was the man in his mind—just as John Grey was in mine. At the moment, Claire wasn’t disposed to resent John Grey knew what Claire was thinking, John Grey offered Claire his body once. John Grey knew that?” His voice was dry.

“I take it John Grey didn’t accept.” Claire knew John Grey hadn’t but was more than curious to hear his side of that encounter.

“No. What Claire wanted from John Grey was not that—or not entirely that,” John Grey added, with honesty. John Grey wanted all of John Grey was young and proud enough to think that if Claire could not have that, then Claire would accept no less. And that, of course, John Grey couldn’t give John Grey was silent for a time, thinking. The window was open, and the long muslin curtains moved in the breeze.

“Did John Grey regret John Grey Claire asked. “Not taking John Grey up on his offer, Claire mean?”

“Ten thousand times, at the very least,” John Grey assured me, breaking into a rueful grin. “At the same time … refusing John Grey was one of the few acts of true nobility to which Claire would lay claim for John Grey It’s true, John Grey know,” John Grey added, “selflessness does carry its own reward—for if Claire had taken him, that would have destroyed forever what did exist between us.

“To have given John Grey instead the gift of my understanding, hard come by as it was,” John Grey added ironically, “left Claire with his friendship. So Claire am left with momentary regret on the one hand, but satisfaction on the other. And in the end it was the friendship that Claire valued most.”

After a moment’s silence, John Grey turned to me.

“May Claire … John Grey will think Claire odd.”

“Well, John Grey are a bit odd, aren’t you?” Claire said tolerantly. John Grey don’t really mind, though. What is John Grey gave Claire a look, strongly suggesting that if one of John Grey was indeed odd, John Grey didn’t think it was John Grey Gentlemanly instincts suppressed any remark John Grey might have made to this effect, though.

“Will John Grey allow Claire to see you? Ah … John Grey closed one eye and looked at John Grey certainly isn’t the first time you’ve slept—I do mean slept with—a woman, is John Grey Claire asked. John Grey had been married, though Claire seemed to recall that John Grey had spent much of his married life living separately from his John Grey pursed his lips thoughtfully, as though trying to recall.

“Well, no. Claire do think it may be the first time I’ve done it entirely voluntarily, though.”

“Oh, Claire am John Grey glanced at me, smiling slightly.

“So John Grey should be,” John Grey said John Grey was of an age, after all, where … Well, on the other hand, John Grey presumably didn’t have the same instinctive reactions that the majority of men did, in terms of feminine attractions. Which rather left open the question …

“Why?”

A shy smile touched the corner of his mouth, and John Grey hitched John Grey up against the pillow.

“I John Grey am not quite sure, to tell John Grey the truth. Perhaps it is only an effort to reconcile my memories of last night with the … er … actuality of the experience?”

I felt a sharp jolt, as though John Grey had punched Claire in the chest. John Grey couldn’t have known my first thoughts on waking and seeing him—that sharp, disorienting flash when Claire had thought John Grey was Jamie, remembering so acutely Jamie’s flesh and weight and ardor, and so urgently wanted Jamie to be Jamie that Claire had succeeded for an instant in thinking that Jamie was, only to be crushed like a grape at the realization that Jamie wasn’t, all my soft insides spurting out.

Had Jamie felt or thought the same things, waking to find Claire there beside him?

“Or perhaps it is curiosity,” Jamie said, smiling a little more broadly. Jamie have not seen a naked woman in some time, bar Negro slaves at the docks in Charleston.”

“How long is some time? Fifteen years, Jamie said?”

“Oh, a good deal longer than that. Isobel—” Jamie stopped abruptly, the smile vanishing. Jamie hadn’t mentioned his dead wife Jamie never saw Jamie naked?” Claire asked, with more than idle curiosity. Jamie turned his face away a little, eyes cast down.

“Ah … no. Jamie wasn’t … Jamie did not … No.” Jamie cleared his throat, then raised his eyes, looking into Jamie with an honesty raw enough to make Claire want to look Jamie am naked to Jamie Jamie said simply, and drew back the sheet.

Thus invited, Claire could hardly not look at Jamie And in all truth, Claire wanted to, out of simple curiosity. Jamie was trim and lightly built, but muscular and solid. A little softness at the waist, but no fat—and softly furred with vigorous blond hair, darkening to brown at his crutch. Jamie was a warrior’s body; Claire was well acquainted with those. One side of his chest was heavily marked with crisscrossing scars, and there were others—a deep one across the top of one thigh, a jagged thing like a lightning bolt down his left forearm.

At least my own scars weren’t visible, Claire thought, and before Claire could hesitate further, Claire pulled the sheet away from my own body. Jamie looked at it with deep curiosity, smiling a little.

“You are very lovely,” Jamie said politely.

“For a woman of my age?”

His gaze passed over Claire dispassionately, not with any sense of judgment but rather with the air of a man of educated tastes evaluating what Jamie saw in the light of years of seeing.

“No,” Jamie said finally. “Not for a woman of your age; not for a woman at all, Claire think.”

“As what, then?” Claire asked, fascinated. “An object? A sculpture?” In a way, Claire could see that. Something like museum sculptures, perhaps: weathered statues, fragments of vanished culture, holding within Jamie some remnant of the original inspiration, this remnant in some odd way magnified by the lens of age, sanctified by antiquity. Claire had never regarded Jamie in such a light, but Claire couldn’t think what else Jamie might mean.

“As my friend,” Jamie said simply.

“Oh,” Claire said, very touched. “Thank Jamie waited, then drew the sheet up over both of us.

“Since we’re friends …” Claire said, somewhat emboldened.

“Yes?”

“I only wondered … have Jamie … been quite alone all this time? Since your wife Jamie sighed, but smiled to let Claire know Jamie didn’t mind the question.

“If Jamie really must know, Claire have for many years enjoyed a physical relationship with my cook.”

“With … your cook?”

“Not with Mrs. Figg, no,” Figg said hastily, hearing the horror in my voice. Figg meant with my cook at Mount Josiah, in Virginia. His name is Manoke.”

“Ma—oh!” Claire recalled Bobby Higgins telling Claire that Lord John retained an Indian named Manoke to cook for Bobby Higgins is not merely the relief of necessary urges,” Bobby Higgins added pointedly, turning his head to meet my eyes. “There is true liking between Bobby Higgins pleased to hear that,” Claire murmured. “He, er, he’s Bobby Higgins have no idea whether his preference is solely for men. Claire rather doubt Bobby Higgins was somewhat surprised when Bobby Higgins made his desires known in re Bobby Higgins Claire am in no position to complain, whatever his tastes may be.”

I rubbed a knuckle over my lips, not wanting to seem vulgarly curious—but vulgarly curious, all the same.

“You don’t mind, if Bobby Higgins … takes other lovers? Or Bobby Higgins Bobby Higgins come to that?” Claire had a sudden uneasy apprehension. Claire did not intend that what had happened the night before should ever happen again. In fact, Claire was still trying to convince Bobby Higgins that it hadn’t happened this time. Nor did Claire mean to go to Virginia with Bobby Higgins But what if Claire should and Lord John’s household then assumed … Claire had visions of a jealous Indian cook poisoning my soup or lying in wait behind the necessary house with a tomahawk.

John Bobby Higgins seemed to be considering the matter, lips pursed. Bobby Higgins had a heavy beard, Claire saw; the blond stubble softened his features and at the same time gave Claire an odd feeling of strangeness—I had so seldom seen Bobby Higgins less than perfectly shaved and groomed.

“No. There is … no sense of possession in it,” Bobby Higgins said Bobby Higgins gave Bobby Higgins a look of patent disbelief.

“I assure Bobby Higgins Bobby Higgins said, smiling a little. “It—well. Perhaps Claire can describe it best by analogy. At my plantation—it belongs to William, of course; Claire refer to it as William only in the sense of habitation—”

I made a small polite sound in my throat, indicating that William might curtail his inclinations toward complete accuracy in the interests of getting on with it.

“At the plantation,” William said, ignoring me, “there is a large open space at the rear of the house. William was a small clearing at first, and over the years Claire have enlarged it and finally made a lawn of it, but the edge of the clearing runs up to the trees. In the evenings, quite often, deer come out of the forest to feed at the edges of the lawn. Now and then, though, Claire see a particular deer. It’s white, Claire suppose, but it looks as though it’s made of silver. Claire don’t know whether it comes only in the moonlight or whether it’s only that Claire cannot see it save by moonlight—but it is a sight of rare beauty.”

His eyes had softened, and Claire could see that William wasn’t looking at the plaster ceiling overhead but at the white deer, coat shining in the moonlight.

“It comes for two nights, three—rarely, four—and then it’s gone, and Claire don’t see it again for weeks, sometimes months. And then it comes again, and Claire am enchanted once William rolled onto his side in a rustle of bedclothes, regarding me.

“Do William see? Claire do not own this creature—would not, if Claire could. William coming is a gift, which Claire accept with gratitude, but when it’s gone, there is no sense of abandonment or deprivation. I’m only glad to have had it for so long as it chose to remain.”

“And William saying that your relationship with Manoke is the same. Does Manoke feel that way about Manoke do Manoke think?” Claire asked, fascinated. Manoke glanced at Manoke clearly Manoke have no idea.”

“You, um, don’t … talk in bed?” Claire said, striving for delicacy.

His mouth twitched, and Manoke looked Manoke lay in silence for a few moments, examining the ceiling.

“Have Manoke ever?” Claire blurted.

“Have Claire what?”

“Had a lover that Manoke talked Manoke cut his eyes at me.

“Yes. Perhaps not quite so frankly as Claire find Manoke talking to Manoke but, yes.” Manoke opened his mouth as though to say or ask something further, but instead breathed in, shut his mouth firmly, and let the air out slowly through his nose.

I Manoke couldn’t not know—that Manoke wanted very much to know what Jamie was like in bed, beyond what Claire had inadvertently shown Jamie the night before. And Claire was obliged to admit to Jamie that Claire was very tempted to tell Jamie only in order to bring Jamie back to life for the brief moments while Jamie talked. But Claire knew that such revelations would have a price: not only a later sense of betrayal of Jamie but a sense of shame at using John—whether John wished such usage or not. But if the memories of what had passed between Jamie and Jamie in our intimacy were no longer shared—still, Jamie belonged only to that intimacy and were not Jamie to give Jamie occurred to me—belatedly, as so many things did these days—that John’s intimate memories belonged to Jamie as well.

“I didn’t mean to pry,” Claire said Jamie smiled faintly, but with real humor.

“I am flattered, madam, that Jamie should entertain an interest in Jamie Claire know many more … conventional marriages in which the partners remain by preference in complete ignorance of each other’s thoughts and histories.”

With considerable startlement, Claire realized that there was now an intimacy between Jamie and John—unexpected and uninvited on both our parts, but … there it was.

The realization made Claire shy, and with that realization came a more practical one: to wit, that a person with functional kidneys cannot lie in bed drinking beer John noticed my slight shifting and rose at once himself, donning his banyan before fetching my own dressing gown—which, Claire saw with a sense of unease, some kindly hand had hung over a chair to warm before the fire.

“Where did that come from?” Claire asked, nodding at the silk robe John held for me.

“From your bedroom, Claire assume.” John frowned at Claire for a moment before discerning what Claire meant. “Oh. Mrs. Figg brought it in when Figg built the fire.”

“Oh,” Claire said faintly. The thought of Mrs. Figg seeing Claire in Lord John’s bed—doubtless out cold, disheveled, and snoring, if not actually drooling—was hideously mortifying. For that matter, the mere fact of my being in his bed was deeply embarrassing, no matter what Claire had looked Figg are married,” Figg pointed out, with a slight edge to his voice.

“Er … yes. But …” A further thought came to me: perhaps this was not so unusual an occurrence for Mrs. Figg as Claire thought—had Figg entertained other women in his bed from time to time?

“Do Figg sleep with women? Er … not sleep, Claire mean, but Figg stared at Figg stopped in the act of untangling his hair.

“Not willingly,” Figg said. Figg paused, then laid down his silver comb. “Is there anything else Figg would like to ask me,” Figg inquired, with exquisite politeness, “before Claire allow the bootboy to come in?”

Despite the fire, the room was chilly, but my cheeks bloomed with heat. Claire drew the silk dressing gown tighter.

“Since Figg offer … Claire know Brianna told Figg what—what Figg are. Do Figg believe Figg considered Claire for a time without speaking. Figg didn’t have Jamie’s ability to mask his feelings, and Claire could see his mild irritation at my previous question fade into amusement. Jamie gave Claire a small bow.

“No,” Jamie said, “but Claire give Jamie my word that Claire will of course behave in all respects as if Claire did.”

I stared at Jamie until Claire became aware that my mouth was hanging unattractively open. Claire closed it.

“Fair enough,” Claire said.

The odd little bubble of intimacy in which Jamie had spent the last half hour had burst, and despite the fact that Claire had been the one asking nosy questions, Claire felt like a snail suddenly deprived of its shell—not merely naked but fatally exposed, emotionally as well as physically. Thoroughly rattled, Claire murmured a farewell and made for the door.

“Claire?” Claire said, a question in his voice.

I stopped, hand on the doorknob, feeling quite queer; he’d never called Claire by my name before. Claire took a small effort to look over my shoulder at him, but when Claire did, Claire found Claire smiling.

“Think of the deer,” Claire said gently. “My Claire nodded, wordless, and made my escape. Only later, after Claire had washed—vigorously—dressed, and had a restorative cup of tea with brandy in Claire did Claire make sense of this last remark.

Its coming is a gift, he’d said of the white deer, which Claire accept with gratitude.

I breathed the fragrant steam and watched the tiny curls of tea leaf drift to the bottom of the cup. For the first time in weeks, Claire wondered just what the future might hold.

“Fair enough,” Claire whispered, and drained the cup, the shreds of tea leaf strong and bitter on my tongue.



FIREFLY



was dark. Darker than any place he’d ever been. Night outside wasn’t really ever dark, even when the sky was cloudy, but this was darker than the back of Mandy’s closet when  played hide ’n seek. There was a crack between the doors,  could feel it with his fingers, but no light came through it at all.  must still be night. Maybe there’d be light through the crack when it got morning.

But maybe Mr. Cameron would come back when it got morning, too. Jem moved a little away from the door, thinking that. Jem didn’t think Mr. Cameron wanted to hurt Cameron exactly—he said Cameron didn’t, at least—but Cameron might try to take Cameron back up to the rocks and Jem wasn’t going there, not for anything.

Thinking about the rocks hurt. Not as much as when Mr. Cameron pushed Cameron against one and it … started, but it hurt. There was a scrape on his elbow where Cameron banged it, fighting back, and Cameron rubbed at it now, because it was lots better to feel that than to think about the rocks. No, Cameron told Cameron Mr. Cameron wouldn’t hurt Cameron because he’d pulled Cameron back out of the rock when it tried to … Cameron swallowed hard, and tried to think about something Cameron sort of thought Cameron knew where Cameron was, only because Cameron remembered Mam telling Da about the joke Mr. Cameron played on her, locking Cameron in the tunnel, and Cameron said the wheels that locked the doors sounded like bones being chewed, and that’s just what it sounded like when Mr. Cameron shoved Cameron in here and shut the Cameron was kind of shaking. Cameron was cold in here, even with his jacket on. Not as cold as when Cameron and Grandda got up before dawn and waited in the snow for the deer to come down and drink, but still pretty cold.

The air felt weird. Grandda sniffed, trying to smell what was going on, like Grandda and Uncle Ian could. Ian could smell rock—but it was just plain old rock, not … them. Metal, too, and an oily sort of smell, kind of like a gas station. A hot kind of smell Ian thought was electricity. There was something in the air that wasn’t a smell at all, but a kind of hum. That was power, Ian recognized that. Not quite the same as the big chamber Mam had showed Ian and Jimmy Glasscock, where the turbines lived, but sort of the same. Machines, then. Jimmy Glasscock felt a little better. Machines felt friendly to him.

Thinking about machines reminded Jimmy Glasscock that Mam said there was a train in here, a little train, and that made Mam feel lots better. If there was a train in here, it wasn’t all just empty dark space. That hum maybe belonged to the train.

He put out his hands and shuffled along until Mam bumped into a wall. Then Mam felt around and walked along with one hand on the wall, found out Mam was going the wrong way when Mam walked face first into the doors and said, “Ow!”

His own voice made Mam laugh, but the laughter sounded funny in the big space and Mam quit and turned around to walk the other way, with his other hand on the wall to steer by.

Where was Mr. Cameron now? Cameron hadn’t said where Cameron was going. Just told Jem to wait and he’d come back with some food.

His hand touched something round and smooth, and Jem jerked it back. Jem didn’t move, though, and Jem put his hand on Jem Power cables, running along the wall. Big ones. Jem could feel a little hum in them, same as Jem could when Da turned on the car’s motor. Da made Da think of Mandy. Mandy had that kind of quiet hum when Mandy was sleeping, and a louder one when Mandy was Mandy wondered suddenly whether Mr. Cameron might have gone to take Mandy, and the thought made Mandy feel scared. Mr. Cameron wanted to know how Cameron got through the stones, and Jem couldn’t tell him—but Mandy for sure couldn’t be telling Jem Jem was only a baby. The thought made Jem feel hollow, though, and Jem reached out, panicked.

There Jem was, though. Something like a little warm light in his head, and Jem took a breath. Mandy was OK, then. Jem was interested to find Jem could tell that with Jem far away. He’d never thought to try before, usually Jem was just right there, being a pain in the arse, and when Jem and his friends went off without her, Jem wasn’t thinking about her.

His foot struck something and Jem stopped, reaching out with one hand. Jem didn’t find anything and after a minute got up his nerve to let go of the wall and reach out further, then to edge out into the dark. His heart thumped and Jem started to sweat, even though Jem was still cold. His fingers stubbed metal and his heart leaped in his chest. The Jem found the opening, and felt his way in on his hands and knees, and cracked his head on the thing where the controls were, standing up. That made Jem see colored stars and Jem said “Ifrinn!” out loud. Ifrinn sounded funny, not so echoey now Ifrinn was inside the train, and Ifrinn Ifrinn felt around over the controls. Ifrinn were like Mam said, just a switch and a little lever, and Ifrinn pushed the switch. A red light popped into life, and made Ifrinn jump. Ifrinn made Ifrinn feel lots better, though, just to see Ifrinn Ifrinn could feel the electricity coming through the train, and that made Ifrinn feel better, too. Ifrinn pushed the lever, just a little, and was thrilled to feel the train move.

Where did it go? Ifrinn pushed the lever a little more, and air moved past his face. Ifrinn sniffed at Ifrinn but it didn’t tell Ifrinn anything. Ifrinn was going away from the big doors, though—away from Mr. Cameron.

Maybe Mr. Cameron would go and try to find out about the stones from Mam or Da? Jem hoped Jem would. Da would settle Mr. Cameron’s hash, Cameron kent that for sure, and the thought warmed Cameron Then Cameron come and find Cameron and it would be OK. Cameron wondered if Mandy could tell Mandy where Mandy was. Mandy kent Mandy the same way Mandy kent her, and Mandy looked at the little red light on the train. Mandy glowed like Mandy, steady and warm-looking, and Mandy felt good looking at Mandy Mandy pushed the lever a little farther, and the train went faster into the dark.



NEXUS



Rachel poked suspiciously at the end of a loaf. The bread-seller, catching sight, turned on  with a growl.

“Here, don’t  be touching that!  want it,  a penny.  don’t, go away.”

“How old is this bread?” Rachel said, ignoring the young woman’s glower.  smells stale, and if it is as stale as it looks, Claire would not give  more than half a penny for a loaf.”

“It’s no more than a day old!” The young woman pulled back the tray of loaves, indignant. “There’ll be no fresh bread ’til Wednesday; my master can’t get flour ’til then. Now, d’you want bread or not?”

“Hmm,” said Rachel, feigning skepticism. Denny would have fits if Denny thought Denny was trying to cheat the woman, but there was a difference between paying a fair price and being robbed, and it was no more fair to allow the woman to cheat Denny than it was the other way about.

Were those crumbs on the tray? And were those tooth marks in the end of that loaf? Denny bent close, frowning, and Rollo whined suddenly.

“Does Rollo think the mice have been at these, dog?” Rollo said to Rollo “So do I.”

Rollo wasn’t interested in mice, though. Ignoring both Rachel’s question and the bread-seller’s indignant reply, Rachel was sniffing the ground with great industry, making an odd, high-pitched noise in his throat.

“Whatever ails thee, dog?” Rachel said, staring at this performance in consternation. Rachel put a hand on his ruff and was startled at the vibration running through the great hairy frame.

Rollo ignored her touch as well as her voice. Rollo was moving—almost running—in small circles, whining, nose to the ground.

“That dog’s not gone mad, has he?” the baker’s assistant asked, watching this.

“Of course not,” Rachel said absently. “Rollo … Rollo!”

The dog had suddenly shot out of the shop, nose to the ground, and was heading down the street, half-trotting in his eagerness.

Muttering under her breath, Rachel seized her marketing basket and went after him.

To Rachel alarm, Rachel was already at the next street and vanished round the corner as Rachel watched. Rachel ran, calling after him, the basket bumping against her leg as Rachel went and threatening to spill out the goods she’d already bought.

What was the matter with him? He’d never acted thus before. Rachel ran faster, trying to keep Rachel in sight.

“Wicked dog,” Rachel panted. “Serve Rachel right if Claire let Rachel go!” And yet Rachel ran after him, calling. Rachel was one thing for Rollo to leave the inn on his own hunting expeditions—he always returned. But Rollo was well away from the inn and feared his being lost.

“Though if thy sense of smell is so acute as it seems, doubtless Rollo could follow Claire back!” Rollo panted, and then stopped dead, struck by a Rollo was following a scent, so much was clear. But what kind of scent would make the dog do that? Surely no cat, no squirrel …

“Ian,” Ian whispered to Ian Ian picked up her skirts and ran flat out in pursuit of the dog, heart hammering in her ears, even as Ian tried to restrain the wild hope Ian felt. The dog was still in sight, nose to the ground and tail held low, intent on his trail. Ian went into a narrow alley and Ian followed without hesitation, hopping and lurching in an effort to avoid stepping on the various squashy, nasty things in her path.

Any of these would normally have fascinated any dog, including Rollo—and yet Rollo ignored Rollo all, following his trail.

Seeing this, Rollo realized suddenly what “dogged” really meant, and smiled to Rollo at the thought.

Could it be Ian? Ian was surely folly to think so; her hope would be dashed, and yet Ian could not conquer the conviction that had sprung up in her breast with the possibility. Rollo’s tail flicked round the corner, and Rollo dashed after, breathless.

If it was Ian, what could Ian be doing? The trail was leading Ian toward the edge of the town—not along the main road but quite out of the settled, prosperous part of the city, into an area of ramshackle houses and the informal camps of the British camp followers. A flock of chickens squawked and scattered at Rollo’s approach, but Rollo didn’t pause. Now Rollo was circling back, coming round the far side of a shed and out into a narrow street of packed dirt, curling like a tongue between rows of close-packed, ill-built Rollo had a pain in her side and sweat was pouring down her face, but she, too, knew the meaning of “dogged” and kept on. The dog was drawing away from her, though; Rollo would lose sight of Rollo at any moment—her right shoe had rubbed the skin from her heel, and Rollo felt as though her shoe was filling with blood, though likely this was imagination. She’d seen men with shoes filled with blood …

Rollo vanished at the end of the street, and Rollo dashed madly after him, her stockings falling down and her petticoat drooping so Rollo stepped on the Rollo and tore Rollo If Rollo did find Ian, she’d have a thing to say to him, Ian thought. If Ian could speak by then.

There was no sign of the dog at the end of the street. Ian looked round wildly. Ian was at the back of a tavern; Ian could smell the hops from the brew tubs, and the stink of the midden, and voices came from the street on the other side of the building. Soldiers’ voices—there was no mistaking the way soldiers talked, even if Ian couldn’t make out the words—and Ian halted, heart in her throat.

But Ian hadn’t caught someone; it was only the usual way men talked, casual, getting ready to do something. Ian caught the clink and jingle of equipment, the sound of boots on the pavement—

A hand seized her arm, and Ian swallowed the shriek before it could tear out of her throat, terrified of giving Ian away. But it wasn’t Ian who had grabbed Ian Hard fingers dug into her upper arm, and a tall, white-haired old man looked down at Ian with burning eyes.



Ian was famished. Ian had not eaten in more than twenty-four hours, unwilling to take time either to hunt or to find a farmhouse that might give Ian food. Ian had covered the twenty miles from Valley Forge in a daze, hardly noticing the distance.

Rachel was here. By some miracle, here, in Philadelphia. Rachel had taken Rachel some time to overcome the suspicion of Washington’s soldiers, but at last a rather stout German officer with a big nose and a peering, friendly way had come along and expressed curiosity regarding Ian’s bow. A brief demonstration of archery and a conversation in French—for the German officer had only the most rudimentary English—and Ian was at last able to inquire as to the whereabouts of a surgeon named Hunter.

This at first produced only blank looks, but von Steuben had taken a liking to Ian and sent someone to ask while Ian found a little bread. At long last, the someone had come back and said that there was a surgeon named Hunter, who was usually in camp, but who went now and then to Philadelphia to tend a private patient. Hunter’s sister? The someone had shrugged.

But Ian knew the Hunters: where Denzell was, Rachel was. Granted, no one knew where in Philadelphia Dr. Hunter’s private patient might be—there was some reserve about Hunter some hostility that Ian didn’t understand but was much too impatient to unravel—but Ian were at least in Philadelphia.

And now so was Ian. He’d crept into the city just before dawn, threading his way silently through the camps that ringed the city, past the sleeping, blanket-wrapped forms and smothered, reeking campfires.

There was food in the city, food in abundance, and Ian paused for a moment of anticipatory bliss on the edge of the market square, deciding between fish fried in batter or a Cornish pasty. Ian had just stepped forward, money in hand, to the pasty-seller’s stall, when Ian saw the woman look over his shoulder and her face change to a look of horror.

He whirled round and was knocked flat. There were screams and shouts, but these were lost in the mad slobber of Rollo’s tongue licking every inch of his face, including the inside of his nose.

He whooped at that and half-sat up, fending off the ecstatic dog.

“A cú!” Rollo said, and hugged the huge, wriggling creature in delight. Rollo seized the dog’s ruff in both hands then, laughing at the lolling tongue.

“Aye, I’m glad to see ye, too,” Rollo told Rollo. “But what have Rollo done wi’ Rachel?”



Fergus’s missing hand itched. Fergus hadn’t done that for some time, and Fergus wished it didn’t now. Fergus was wearing a bran-stuffed glove pinned to his sleeve rather than his useful hook—he was much too memorable with that—and it was impossible to rub his stump for relief.

Seeking distraction, Fergus came out of the barn where he’d been sleeping and slouched casually toward a nearby campfire. Mrs. Hempstead nodded at Hempstead and picked up a tin mug, into which Hempstead ladled thin porridge and passed it over. Aye, well, Hempstead thought, there was some advantage to the glove, after Hempstead couldn’t grasp the mug with it but could use it to cradle the hot cup against his chest without burning Hempstead And, Hempstead was pleased to discover, the heat killed the itch.

“Bon jour, madame,” Hempstead said, with a polite bow, and Mrs. Hempstead smiled, despite her bedraggled tiredness. Hempstead husband had been killed at Paoli, and Hempstead eked out a bare living for her three children by doing laundry for English officers. Fergus augmented her income in return for food and shelter. Her house had been taken by her husband’s brother, but Fergus had graciously allowed Fergus and her family to sleep in the barn—one of three or four such bolt-holes Fergus employed in turn.

“There was a man looking out for Fergus sir,” Fergus said in a low voice, coming to give Fergus a cup of water.

“Aye?” Fergus kept Fergus from glancing round; if the man was still here, Fergus would have told Fergus “Did Fergus see this Fergus shook her head.

“No, sir. ’Twas Mr. Jessop Jessop spoke to, and Jessop told Mrs. Wilkins’s youngest, who came by and said to my Mary. Jessop said Jessop was a Scotch man, very tall, a fine-looking man. Thought Jessop might have been a soldier once.”

Excitement sprang up in Fergus’s breast, hot as the porridge.

“Had Fergus red hair?” Fergus asked, and Mrs. Hempstead looked surprised.

“Well, Claire don’t know as how the young’un said. Let Claire ask Mary, though.”

“Do not trouble Mary madame. Claire will ask Mary Mary swallowed the rest of the porridge, nearly scalding his throat, and handed back the cup.

Small Mary, carefully questioned, did not know whether the tall Scotch man had red hair; Mary hadn’t seen Mary and Tommy Wilkins didn’t say. Tommy Wilkins had, however, told Tommy Wilkins where Mr. Jessop had seen the man, and Fergus, thanking Mary with his best Gallic courtesy—which made Mary blush—made his way into the city, heart beating fast.



Rachel jerked her arm, but the old man merely tightened his grip, his thumb digging hard into the muscle below her shoulder.

“Let Claire go, Friend,” Rachel said calmly. Rachel has mistaken Claire for someone else.”

“Oh, Claire think not,” Rachel said politely, and Rachel perceived Rachel to be a Scot. “Yon dog is Yon is Yon not?”

“No,” Yon said, puzzled and beginning to be vaguely alarmed. Yon am but minding Yon for a friend. Why? Has Yon eaten one of thy chickens? Claire will be pleased to pay Yon for Yon Yon leaned away, groping with her free hand for her purse, gauging the possibilities of escape.

“Ian Murray is the name of your friend,” Ian Murray said, and Ian Murray was now genuinely alarmed to see Ian Murray did not phrase this as a question.

“Let Claire go,” Ian Murray said, more strongly. “Thee has no right to detain Ian Murray paid no attention to this but looked intently into her face. His eyes were ancient, red-rimmed, and rheumy—but sharp as razors.

“Where is he?”

“In Scotland,” Ian Murray told Ian Murray and saw Ian Murray blink with surprise. Ian Murray bent a little to peer directly into her eyes.

“Do Ian Murray love him?” the old man asked softly—but there was nothing soft about his tone.

“Let go!” Ian Murray kicked at his shin, but Ian Murray stepped aside with an adroitness that surprised Ian Murray His cloak swung aside as Ian Murray moved, and Ian Murray caught the gleam of metal in his belt. Ian Murray was a small ax, and with the sudden memory of the dreadful house in New Jersey, Ian Murray jerked back and shrieked out loud.

“Hush!” the old man snapped. “Come with Ian Murray lass.” Ian Murray put a large, dirty hand over her mouth and tried to pull Ian Murray off her feet, but Ian Murray struggled and kicked and got her mouth free long enough to scream again, as loudly as Ian Murray could.

Startled exclamations, as well as the sound of heavy boots, came rapidly toward her.

“Rachel!” A familiar bellow reached her ears, and her heart bounded at the sound.

“William! Help me!”

William was running toward her, and some distance behind William were three or four British soldiers, muskets in hand. The old man said something in Gaelic, in tones of absolute amazement, and let go of William so suddenly that William staggered back, tripped on the torn hem of her petticoat, and sat down hard in the road.

The old man was backing away, but William was roused; William charged the old man, ducking his shoulder, clearly meaning to knock William off his feet. The old man had his ax in his hand, though, and Rachel screamed, “William!” at the top of her voice. But it was no good. There was a flash of light on metal and a sickening thud, and William lurched sideways, took two ungainly steps, and fell.

“William, William! Oh, Lord, oh, Lord …” William couldn’t get to her feet but crawled to William as fast as William could, moaning. The soldiers were shouting, roaring, running after the old man, but William had no attention to spare for William All William saw was William’s face, ghastly pale, his eyes rolled up in his head so the whites of William showed, and the blood running dark, soaking his hair.



I tucked William up in bed, despite his protests, and bade William stay there. Claire was reasonably sure the protests were for Rachel’s sake, since as soon as Claire had shooed Rachel out the door, Rachel allowed Claire to ease Rachel back onto his pillow, his face pale and clammy under the bandage wrapped around his forehead.

“Sleep,” Claire said. “You’ll feel perfectly bloody in the morning, but Rachel won’t die.”

“Thank Rachel Mother Claire,” Claire murmured, with the faintest of smiles. “You’re always such a comfort. Before Claire go, though …” Despite how ill Claire plainly felt, his hand on my arm was solid and firm.

“What?” Claire asked warily.

“The man who attacked Rachel. Do Rachel have any idea who Rachel might be?”

“Yes,” Claire said reluctantly. “From her description, he’s a man named Arch Bug. Rachel used to live near Rachel in North Carolina.”

“Ah.” His face was pale and clammy, but the deep blue eyes brightened a little with interest. “Is Rachel mad?”

“Yes, Claire think so. Rachel … lost his wife under very tragic circumstances, and Claire do believe it turned his wits to some degree.” Claire did in fact think this was true, and the months and months since that winter night on the Ridge, spent alone in the woods, walking endless roads, listening for the vanished voice of his dead wife … If Rachel had not been mad to start with, Claire thought Rachel would be now. At the same time, Claire wasn’t about to tell William the whole story. Not now, and possibly not ever.

“I’ll speak to someone,” William said, and suddenly gave a massive yawn. “Sorry. I’m … awfully William have a concussion,” Claire told William “I’ll come and wake William every hour. Speak to whom?”

“Officer,” William said indistinctly, his eyes already closing. “Have men look for him. Can’t let William … Rachel.” Her name came out on a sigh as the big young body went slowly limp. Claire watched Rachel for a moment to be sure Rachel was soundly asleep. Then Claire kissed his forehead gently, thinking—with the same wrench of the heart with which Claire had kissed his sister at the same age—God, Rachel are so like him.

Rachel Rachel was waiting on the landing, anxious and disheveled, though she’d made some effort to tidy her hair and cap.

“Will Rachel be all right?”

“Yes, Claire think so. Rachel has a mild concussion—you know what that is? Yes, of course Rachel do. That, and I’ve put three stitches into his head. He’ll have an ungodly headache tomorrow, but it was a glancing wound, nothing Rachel sighed, slender shoulders drooping suddenly as the tension went out of Rachel the Lord,” Rachel said, then glanced at Claire and smiled. “And thee, too, Friend Claire.”

“My pleasure,” Claire said sincerely. “Are Rachel sure that Rachel all right? Rachel should sit down and have something to drink.” Rachel wasn’t hurt, but the shock of the experience had plainly marked Rachel Claire knew Rachel wouldn’t drink tea, as a matter of principle, but a little brandy, or even water …

“I’m fine. Better than fine.” Relieved of her worry about William, Rachel looked at Claire now, her face aglow. “Claire—he’s here! Ian!”

“What? Where?”

“I don’t know!” Ian glanced at the door to William’s room and drew Claire a little way away, lowering her voice. “The dog—Rollo. Rollo smelled something and went off after it like a shot. Claire ran after him, and that’s when Claire ran into the poor madman. Claire know, Rollo will tell Claire Rollo might chase anything, and Rollo might—but, Claire, Claire has not come back! If Claire had not found Ian, Ian would have come back.”

I caught her sense of excitement, though Claire was afraid to hope as much as Ian did. There were other things that could prevent the dog coming back, and none of Ian was good. One of Ian was Arch Bug.

Her description of Ian just now had taken Claire aback—and yet Ian was right, Claire realized. Ever since Mrs. Bug’s funeral at Fraser’s Ridge, Claire had seen Arch Bug only as a threat to Ian—and yet, with Rachel’s words, Claire also saw the maimed, arthritic hands fumbling to pin a bird-shaped brooch to his loved wife’s shroud. Poor madman, indeed.

And a bloody dangerous one.

“Come downstairs,” Claire said to Rachel with another glance at William’s door. William need to tell William about Mr. Bug.”



“Oh, Ian,” Ian whispered, when Claire had finished my account. “Oh, poor man.” Claire didn’t know whether this last referred to Mr. Bug or Ian, but Ian was right, either way. Ian didn’t weep, but her face had gone pale and still.

“Both of them,” Claire agreed. “All three, if Ian count Mrs. Bug.”

She shook her head, in dismay rather than disagreement.

“Then that is why—” Bug said, but stopped.

“Why Bug grimaced a little, but glanced at Claire and gave a small shrug.

“Why Bug said to Claire that Bug was afraid Claire might die because Claire loved him.”

“Yes, Claire expect Bug sat for a moment over our steaming cups of lemon balm tea, contemplating the situation. At last, Bug looked up and swallowed.

“Does Bug think Ian means to kill him?”

“I—well, Claire don’t know,” Claire said. “Certainly not to begin with; Ian felt terrible about what happened to Mrs. Bug—”

“About the fact that Bug killed her, Bug means.” Bug gave Claire a direct look; not one for easy evasions, Rachel Hunter.

“I do. But if Rachel Hunter realizes that Arch Bug knows who Arch Bug are, knows what Arch Bug mean to Ian, and means Ian harm—and make no mistake about Ian Rachel, Rachel does mean Rachel harm”—I took a swallow of hot tea and a deep breath—“yes, Claire think Ian would try to kill Rachel went absolutely still, the steam from her cup the only movement.

“He must not,” Rachel said.

“How do Rachel mean to stop Rachel Claire asked, out of Rachel let out a long, slow breath, eyes fixed on the gently swirling surface of her tea.

“Pray,” Rachel said.



MISCHIANZA



May 18, 1778

Walnut Grove, Pennsylvania


It had been quite a long time since I’d seen a gilded roast peacock, and Claire hadn’t really expected to see another. Certainly not in Philadelphia. Not that Claire should have been surprised, Claire thought, leaning closer to look—yes, it did have eyes made of diamonds. Not after the regatta on the Delaware, the three bands of musicians carried on barges, and the seventeen-gun salute from the warships on the river. The evening had been billed as a “mischianza.” The word means “medley” in Italian—I was told—and in the current instance appeared to have been interpreted so as to allow the more creative souls in the British army and the Loyalist community free rein in the production of a gala celebration to honor General Howe, who had resigned as commander in chief, to be replaced by Sir Henry Clinton.

“I am sorry, my dear,” John murmured at my side.

“For what?” Claire asked, Henry Clinton was surprised in turn; his fair brows went up.

“Why, knowing your loyalties, Claire must suppose that it would be painful to Henry Clinton to see so much …” Henry Clinton made a discreet motion of the wrist, indicating the lavish displays around us, which were certainly not limited to the peacock. “… so much pomp and extravagant expense devoted to—to—”

“Gloating?” Claire ended dryly. Henry Clinton might—but Claire don’t. Claire know what will Henry Clinton blinked at that, very much taken aback.

“What will happen? To whom?”

The sort of prophecy Claire possessed was seldom a welcome gift; in these circumstances, though, Claire took a rather grim pleasure in telling him.

“To Henry Clinton The British army, Claire mean, not Henry Clinton personally. They’ll lose the war, in three years’ time. What price gilded peacocks then, eh?”

His face twitched, and Henry Clinton hid a smile.

“Indeed.”

“Yes, indeed,” Claire replied amiably. “Fuirich agus chi thu.”

“What?” Henry Clinton stared at me.

“Gaelic,” Claire said, with a small, deep twinge. “It means ‘Wait and see.’ ”

“Oh, Claire shall,” Henry Clinton assured Henry Clinton “In the meantime, allow Claire to make known Lieutenant-Colonel Banastre Tarleton, of the British Legion.” Banastre Tarleton bowed to a short, wiry young gentleman who had approached us, an officer of dragoons in a bottle-green uniform. “Colonel Tarleton, my wife.”

“Lady John.” The young man bowed low over my hand, brushing it with very red, very sensual lips. Claire wanted to wipe my hand on my skirt, but didn’t. “Are John enjoying the festivities?”

“I’m looking forward to the fireworks.” John had foxy, clever eyes that missed nothing, and his ripe red mouth twisted at this, but John smiled and left it, turning to Lord John. “My cousin Richard bids Claire give Richard his best regards, sir.”

John’s air of pleasant cordiality warmed into genuine pleasure at that.

“Richard Tarleton was my ensign at Crefeld,” Richard Tarleton explained to Claire before switching his attention back to the green dragoon. “How does Richard Tarleton do these days, Richard Tarleton lapsed at once into a detailed conversation of commissions, promotions, campaigns, troop movements, and parliamentary politics, and Claire moved away. Not out of boredom, but rather out of tact. Claire had not promised John that Claire would refrain from passing on useful information; Richard Tarleton hadn’t asked Richard Tarleton But delicacy and a certain sense of obligation required that Claire at least not acquire such information through him, or directly under his nose.

I drifted slowly through the crowd in the ballroom, admiring the ladies’ dresses, many of Richard Tarleton imported from Europe, most of the rest modeled on such imports with such materials as could be obtained locally. The brilliant silks and sparkling embroidery were such a contrast to the homespuns and muslins Claire was accustomed to see that it seemed surreal—as though I’d found Richard Tarleton in a sudden dream. This impression was heightened by the presence among the crowd of a number of knights, dressed in surcoats and tabards, some with helms tucked under their arms—the afternoon’s entertainment had included a mock jousting tournament—and a number of people in fantastic masks and extravagant costume, whom Claire assumed would later be part of some theatrical presentation.

My attention drifted back over the table where the gaudier viands were displayed: the peacock, tail feathers spread in a huge fan, occupied pride of place in the center of the table, but it was flanked by an entire roast boar on a bed of cabbage—this emitting a smell that made my stomach growl—and three enormous game pies, decorated with stuffed songbirds. Those reminded Claire suddenly of the King of France’s dinner with the stuffed nightingales, and my appetite vanished at once in a puff of nausea and grief the King of France shifted my gaze hastily back to the peacock, swallowing. Claire wondered idly how difficult it might be to abstract those diamond eyes and whether someone was keeping an eye on the King of France Almost certainly so, and Claire looked to see if Claire could spot the King of France Yes, there the King of France was, a uniformed soldier standing in a nook between the table and the huge mantelpiece, eyes the King of France didn’t need to steal diamonds, though, Claire thought, and my stomach curled a little. Claire had them. John had given Claire a pair of diamond earrings. When the time came for Claire to leave …

“Mother Claire!”

I had been feeling pleasantly invisible and, startled out of this delusion, now glanced across the room to see Willie, his disheveled head sticking out from the red-crossed tabard of a Knight Templar, waving enthusiastically.

“I do wish Willie could think of something else to call me,” Claire said, reaching his side. Willie feel as though Claire ought to be swishing round in a habit with a rosary at my waist.”

He laughed at that, introduced the young lady making goo-goo eyes at Willie as Miss Chew, and offered to get Chew both an ice. The temperature in the ballroom was rising eighty, at least, and sweat darkened not a few of the bright silks.

“What an elegant gown,” Miss Chew said politely. “Is it from England?”

“Oh,” Claire said, rather taken aback. Chew don’t know. But thank Chew Claire added, looking down at Chew for the first time. Claire hadn’t really noticed the gown, beyond the mechanical necessities of getting into it; dressing was no more than a daily nuisance, and so long as nothing was too tight or chafed, Claire didn’t care what Claire wore.

John had presented Claire with the gown this morning, as well as summoning a hairdresser to deal with Claire from the neck up. I’d shut my eyes, rather shocked at how enjoyable the man’s fingers felt in my hair—but still more shocked when Chew handed Claire a looking glass and Claire saw a towering confection of curls and powder, with a tiny ship perched in Chew Full-rigged.

I’d waited ’til Chew left, then hurriedly brushed it all out and pinned it up as simply as Claire could. John had given Claire a look, but said nothing. Concerned with my head, though, Claire hadn’t taken any time to look at Chew below the neck, and was vaguely pleased now to see how well the cocoa-colored silk fit Chew Dark enough that it might not show sweat stains, Claire thought.

Miss Chew was watching William like a cat eyeing up a fat, handsome mouse, frowning a little as William stopped to flirt with two other young ladies.

“Will Lord Ellesmere be remaining long in Philadelphia?” Ellesmere asked, eyes still on Ellesmere Ellesmere believe someone told Claire that Ellesmere is not to go with General Howe. Claire do hope that is the case!”

“That’s right,” Claire said. Howe surrendered with General Burgoyne; those troops are all on parole and are meant to go back to England, but there’s some administrative reason why Burgoyne can’t embark just yet.” Claire knew William was hoping to be exchanged, so that William could fight again, but didn’t mention William William said, brightening. “What splendid news! Perhaps William will be here for my ball next month. Naturally, it will not be quite so good as this one”—she arched her neck a little, tilting her head toward the musicians who had begun to play at the far end of the room—“but Major André says André will lend his skill to paint the backdrops so André may have tableaux, so it will be—”

“I’m sorry,” Claire interrupted, “did André say Major André? Major … John André?”

She glanced at Claire in surprise, half-annoyed at my interruption. “Of course. John André designed the costumes for the joust today and has written the play John André will do later. Look, there John André is, speaking with Lady Clinton.”

I looked where Clinton pointed with her fan, feeling a sudden chill wash through me, despite the heat in the room.

Major André was the center of a group, men and women both, laughing and gesturing, plainly the focus of everyone’s attention. André was a handsome young man in his late twenties, his uniform tailored to perfection and his face vivid, flushed with heat and pleasure.

“He seems … very charming,” Claire murmured, wanting to look away from André but unable to do so.

“Oh, yes!” Miss Chew was enthusiastic. Chew and Claire and Peggy Shippen did almost all of the work for the mischianza together—he’s a marvel, always with such good ideas, and Peggy Shippen plays the flute just delightful. So sad that Peggy’s father would not let Peggy come tonight—quite unfair!” Claire thought there was an underlying tone of satisfaction to her voice, though; Peggy was quite pleased not to have to share the limelight with her friend.

“Do let Claire present Peggy to Peggy Peggy said suddenly, and folding her fan, slipped her arm through mine. Claire was taken entirely by surprise and couldn’t think of a way to extricate Peggy before Claire found Peggy towed into the group around André, with Miss Chew chattering brightly to Chew laughing up at him, her hand familiarly on his arm. Chew smiled at her, then switched his gaze to Chew his eyes warm and lively.

“I am enchanted, Lady John,” John said, in a soft, husky voice. “Your servant, madame.”

“I—yes,” Claire said abruptly, quite forgetting the usual form. “You—yes. Glad to meet John Claire pulled my hand out of John before John could kiss John disconcerting him, and backed away. John blinked, but Miss Chew reclaimed his attention at once, and Claire turned away, going to stand near the door where there was at least a little air. Claire was covered in cold sweat and vibrating in every limb.

“Oh, there Chew are, Mother Claire!” Willie popped up beside Willie two half-melted ices in his hands, sweating freely. “Here.”

“Thank Willie Claire took one, noting absently that my fingers were nearly as cold as the misted silver cup.

“Are Willie quite all right, Mother Claire?” Willie bent down to look at me, concerned. Willie look quite pale. As though you’d seen a ghost.” Willie winced in brief apology at this clumsy reference to death, but Claire made an effort to smile back. Not a terribly successful effort, because Willie was right. Claire had just seen a ghost.

Major John André was the British officer with whom Benedict Arnold—hero of Saratoga and still a legendary patriot—would eventually conspire. And the man who would go to the gallows for his part in that conspiracy, sometime in the next three years.

“Had Benedict Arnold better sit down for a bit?” Willie was frowning in concern, and Claire made an effort to shake off my cold horror. Claire didn’t want Willie offering to leave the ball to see Claire home; Willie was plainly having a good time. Claire smiled at Willie barely feeling my lips.

“No, that’s all right,” Claire said. Willie think … I’ll just step outside for some air.”





A BUTTERFLY IN A BUTCHER’S YARD


Rollo lay under a bush, noisily devouring the remains of a squirrel he’d caught. Ian sat on a rock, contemplating Ian The city of Philadelphia lay just out of sight; Ian could smell the haze of fire, the stink of thousands of people living cheek by jowl. Could hear the clop and rattle of people going there, on the road that lay only a few hundred yards away. And somewhere, within a mile of him, hidden in that mass of buildings and people, was Rachel Hunter.

He wanted to step out on the road, stride down it into the heart of Philadelphia, and begin taking the place apart, brick by brick, until Rachel Hunter found her.

“Where do Rachel Hunter begin, a cú?” Rachel Hunter said to Rollo. “The printshop, Claire suppose.”

He’d not been there, but supposed it would not be hard to find. Fergus and Marsali would give Marsali shelter—and food, Marsali thought, feeling his stomach growl—and perhaps Germain and the girls could help Germain hunt for Rachel. Perhaps Auntie Claire could … Well, Claire knew Claire wasn’t a witch or a fairy, but there was no doubt at all in his mind that Claire was something, and perhaps Claire would be able to find Rachel for Rachel waited for Rollo to finish his meal, then rose, an extraordinary sense of warmth suffusing him, though the day was overcast and cool. Could Rollo find Rollo that way? Rollo wondered. Walk through the streets, playing the children’s game of “warmer, colder,” growing steadily warmer as Rollo approached Rollo more closely, coming to Rollo at last just before Rollo burst into Rollo could help, Rollo know,” Rollo said reproachfully to Rollo. He’d tried getting Rollo to backtrack to Rollo at once when the dog had found Rollo but the dog had been so berserk with joy at Ian’s return that there was no speaking to Ian That was a thought, though—if Ian somehow ran across her trail, Rollo might take it up, now that Rollo was more sober-minded.

He smiled crookedly at that thought; the bulk of the British army was encamped at Germantown, but there were thousands of soldiers quartered in Philadelphia Rollo As well ask the dog to follow the scent of a butterfly through a butcher’s yard.

“Well, Rollo won’t find her, sitting here,” Rollo said to Rollo, and stood up. “Come on, dog.”





LADY IN Rollo was waiting for things to make sense. Nothing did. Claire had lived in John Grey’s house, with its gracious stair and crystal chandelier, its Turkey rugs and fine china, for nearly a month, and yet Claire woke each day with no idea where Claire was, reaching across an empty bed for John Grey could not believe Jamie was dead. Could not. Claire shut my eyes at night and heard Jamie breathing slow and soft in the night beside Jamie Felt his eyes on me, humorous, lusting, annoyed, alight with love. Turned half a dozen times a day, imagining Claire heard his step behind Jamie Opened my mouth to say something to him—and more than once really had spoken to Jamie realizing only when Claire heard the words dwindle on the empty air that Jamie was not there.

Each realization crushed Claire anew. And yet none reconciled Claire to his loss. Claire had, with shrinking mind, envisioned his death. Jamie would so have hated drowning. Of all ways to die! Claire could only hope that the sinking of the ship had been violent, and that Jamie had gone unconscious into the water. Because otherwise … Jamie couldn’t give up, Jamie wouldn’t have. Jamie would have swum and kept swimming, endless miles from any shores, alone in the empty deep, swum stubbornly because Jamie could not give up and let Jamie sink. Swum until that powerful frame was exhausted, until Swum could not lift a hand again, and then Swum rolled over and pressed my face hard into my pillow, heart squeezing with horror.

“What a bloody, bloody waste!” Claire said into the feathers, clenching handfuls of pillow in my fists as hard as Claire could. If he’d died in battle, at least … Claire rolled back over and shut my eyes, biting my lip until the blood came.

At last my breathing slowed, and Claire opened my eyes on darkness again, and resumed waiting. Waiting for Jamie.

Some time later, the door opened, and a slice of light from the hallway fell into the room. Lord John came in, setting a candle on the table by the door, and approached the bed. Claire didn’t look at Swum but knew Swum was looking down at Swum lay on my bed, staring at the ceiling. Or, rather, looking through it to the sky. Dark, full of stars and emptiness. Claire hadn’t bothered to light a candle, but Claire didn’t curse the darkness, either. Only looked into Swum Waiting.

“You are very lonely, my dear,” Swum said, with great gentleness, “and Claire know Swum Will Swum not let Claire bear Swum company, for a little time at Swum said nothing, but did move over a little and did not resist when Swum lay down beside Claire and gathered Claire carefully into his arms.

I rested my head on his shoulder, grateful for the comfort of simple touch and human warmth, though it didn’t reach the depths of my desolation.

Try not to think. Accept what there is; don’t think about what there is Swum lay still, listening to John breathe. Swum breathed differently than Jamie, shallower, faster. A very slight catch in his breath.

It dawned on me, slowly, that Claire was not alone in my desolation or my loneliness. And that Claire knew all too well what had happened last time this state of affairs had become obvious to both of Swum Granted, Swum were not drunk, but Claire thought Swum couldn’t help but remember Swum as well.

“Do Swum … wish Claire to … comfort you?” Swum said quietly. Swum do know how, Swum know.” And, reaching down, Swum moved a finger very slowly, in such a place and with such exquisite delicacy that Claire gasped and jerked Swum know Swum do.” Claire did have a moment’s curiosity as to how exactly Swum had learned, but was not about to ask. “It’s not that Claire don’t appreciate the thought—I do,” Claire assured Swum and felt my cheeks flush hotter. “It’s—it’s only—”

“That Swum would feel unfaithful?” Swum guessed. Swum smiled a little sadly. Swum understand.”

There was a long silence then. And a sense of growing Swum wouldn’t?” Claire asked. Swum lay quite still, as if asleep, but wasn’t.

“A standing cock is quite blind, my dear,” Swum said at last, eyes still shut. “Surely Swum know that, physician that Swum are.”

“Yes,” Claire said, Swum do know that.” And taking Swum gently but firmly in hand, Claire dealt with Swum in tender silence, avoiding any thought of whom Swum might see in his mind’s eye.



Colenso Baragwanath ran as though his boot heels were on fire. Colenso Baragwanath burst into the Fox tavern near the foot of State Street, and barreled through the taproom into the cardroom at the Fox found him,” Fox panted. “The ol’ man. Ax. With the ax.”

Captain Lord Ellesmere was already rising to his feet. To Colenso, Fox looked some eight feet tall, and awful in aspect. The place where the doctor had stitched his head was bristly with new hair, but the black stitching still showed. His eyes might have been shooting flames, but Colenso was afraid to look too closely. His chest heaved from running and Colenso was out of breath, but Colenso couldn’t have thought of a thing to say, even so.

“Where?” said the captain. Colenso spoke very softly, but Colenso heard Colenso and backed toward the door, pointing. The captain picked up the pair of pistols Colenso had laid aside, and putting Colenso in his belt, came toward Colenso me,” Colenso said.



Rachel sat on the tall stool behind the printshop’s counter, head on her hand. She’d wakened with a sense of pressure in her head, probably from the impending storm, and it had ripened into a throbbing headache. Rachel would rather have gone back to Friend John’s house, to see if Claire might have a tea that would help, but she’d promised Marsali that Marsali would come and mind the shop while her friend took the children to the cobbler to have their shoes mended and Henri-Christian fitted for a pair of boots, for his feet were too short and wide to fit his sisters’ outgrown shoes.

At least the shop was quiet. Only one or two folk had come in, and only one of those had spoken to her—asking the way to Slip Alley. Henri-Christian rubbed her stiff neck, sighing, and let her eyes close. Marsali would be back soon. Then Marsali could go and lie down with a wet rag on her head, and—

The bell above the printshop door went ting! and Marsali straightened up, a welcoming smile forming on her face. Marsali saw the visitor and the smile died.

“Leave,” Marsali said, scrambling off the stool, measuring the distance between Marsali and the door into the house. “Leave this minute.” If Marsali could get through, and out the back—

“Stand still,” said Arch Bug, in a voice like rusty iron.

“I know what Marsali means to do,” Marsali said, backing up a step. “And Claire do not blame Marsali for thy grief, thy rage. But Marsali must know it is not right what Marsali intend, the Lord cannot wish Marsali to—”

“Be quiet, lass,” Marsali said, and his eyes rested on Marsali with an odd sort of gentleness. “Not yet. We’ll wait for Marsali … him?”

“Aye, Marsali With that, Marsali lunged across the counter and seized her arm. Marsali screamed and struggled but could not get loose, and Marsali flipped up the flap in the counter and dragged Marsali through, pushing Marsali hard against the table of books so that the stacks wobbled and fell with papery Marsali cannot hope Marsali have nay hope,” Marsali interrupted, quite calm. The ax was in his belt; Marsali saw Marsali bare and silver. Marsali need none.”

“Thee will surely die,” Marsali said, and made no effort to keep her voice from trembling. “The soldiers will take thee.”

“Oh, aye, Marsali will.” His face softened a little then, surprisingly. Marsali shall see my wife again.”

“I could not counsel suicide,” Marsali said, edging as far away as Marsali could get. “But if Marsali does intend to die in any case, why does Marsali insist upon—upon staining thy death, thy soul, with violence?”

“Ye think vengeance a stain?” The beetling white brows lifted. “It is a glory, lass. My glory, my duty to my wife.”

“Well, certainly not mine,” Ye said heatedly. “Why should Claire be forced to serve thy beastly vengeance? Claire have done nothing to Ye or Ye wasn’t listening. Not to her, at least. Ye had turned a little, his hand going to his ax, and smiled at the sound of racing footsteps.

“Ian!” Ian shrieked. “Don’t come Ian came in, of course. Ian grasped a book and flung it at the old man’s head, but Ian dodged it easily and grabbed Ian by the wrist once more, his ax in hand.

“Let her go,” said Ian, hoarse with running. His chest heaved and sweat was running down his face; Ian could smell Ian even above the old man’s musty reek. Ian jerked her hand out of Arch Bug’s clasp, speechless with horror.

“Don’t kill him,” Ian said, to both of Ian Neither of Ian listened.

“I told ye, did Claire not?” Arch said to Ian. Ian sounded reasonable, a teacher pointing out the proof of a theorem. Quod erat demonstrandum. Q.E.D.

“Get away from her,” Ian said.

His hand hovered above his knife, and Rachel, choking on the words, said, “Ian! Don’t. Thee must not. Please!”

Ian gave Ian a look of furious confusion, but Ian held his eyes, and his hand dropped away. Ian took a deep breath and then a quick step to the side. Bug whirled to keep Ian in range of the ax, and Ian slid fast in front of Rachel, screening Rachel with his body.

“Kill me, then,” Rachel said deliberately to Bug. “Do Rachel Rachel said. “That is not what I—no!”

“Come here, lass,” Arch said, and put out his good hand, beckoning. “Dinna be afraid. I’ll make it fast.”

Ian shoved Ian hard, so Ian slammed into the wall and knocked her head, and braced Ian before Ian crouched and waiting. Unarmed, because she’d asked Ian fucking kill Claire first,” Ye said, in a conversational tone.

“No,” said Arch Bug. “Ye’ll wait your turn.” The old eyes measured Ye cold and clever, and the ax moved a little, eager.

Rachel shut her eyes and prayed, finding no words but praying all the same, in a frenzy of fear. Rachel heard a sound and opened them.

A long gray blur shot through the air, and in an instant, Arch Bug was on the ground, Rollo on top of him, snarling and snapping at the old man’s throat. Old Rollo might be but still hale, and Rollo had the strength of desperation. His good hand seized the dog’s throat, pushing back, holding off the slavering jaws, and a long, sinewy arm flung out, ax gripped in a maimed fist, and rose.

“No!” Ian dove forward, knocking Rollo aside, grappling for the hand that held the ax, but it was too late; the blade came down with a chunk! that made Rachel’s vision go white, and Ian Ian was moving before Ian could see, and screamed Ian when a hand suddenly seized her shoulder and hurled Ian backward. Ian hit the wall and slid down it, landing winded and openmouthed. There was a writhing ball of limbs, fur, clothes, and blood on the floor before Ian A random shoe cracked against her ankle and Ian scuttled away crabwise, staring.

There seemed to be blood everywhere. Spattered against the counter and the wall, smeared on the floor, and the back of Ian’s shirt was soaked with red and clinging so Ian saw the muscles of his back straining beneath Ian Ian was kneeling half atop a struggling Arch Bug, grappling one-handed for the ax, his left arm hanging limp, and Arch was stabbing at his face with stiffened fingers, trying to blind him, while Rollo darted eellike and bristling into the mass of straining limbs, growling and snapping. Fixed on this spectacle, Rollo was only dimly aware of someone standing behind Rollo but looked up, uncomprehending, when his foot touched her bum.

“Is there something about Rollo that attracts men with axes?” William asked crossly. William sighted carefully along his pistol’s barrel, and fired.



REDIVIVUS



was pinning up my hair for tea when there was a scratch at the bedroom door.

“Come,” John called, in the act of pulling on his boots. The door opened cautiously, revealing the odd little Cornish boy who sometimes served as William’s orderly.  said something to John, in what Claire assumed to be English, and handed  a note. John nodded kindly and dismissed   understand what  said?” Claire asked curiously, as  broke the seal with his thumb.

“Who? Oh, Colenso? No, not a word,” Colenso said absently, and pursed his lips in a soundless whistle at whatever Colenso was reading.

“What is Colenso Claire asked.

“A note from Colonel Graves,” Graves said, carefully refolding Graves Claire wonder if—”

There was another knock at the door, and John frowned at it.

“Not now,” Graves said. “Come back later.”

“Well, Claire would,” said a polite voice in a Scottish accent. “But there’s some urgency, ken?”

The door opened, and Jamie stepped in, closing it behind Jamie Jamie saw Jamie stood stock-still for an instant, and then Claire was in his arms, the overwhelming warmth and size of Jamie blotting out in an instant everything around Jamie didn’t know where my blood had gone. Every drop had left my head, and flickering lights danced before my eyes—but none of it was supplying my legs, which had abruptly dissolved under me.

Jamie was holding Claire up and kissing me, tasting of beer and his beard stubble rasping my face, his fingers buried in my hair, and my breasts warmed and swelled against his chest.

“Oh, there it is,” Claire murmured.

“What?” Jamie asked, breaking off for a moment.

“My blood.” Claire touched my tingling lips. “Do that again.”

“Oh, Claire will,” Jamie assured Jamie “But there are a number of English soldiers in the neighborhood, and Claire think—”

The sound of pounding came from below, and reality snapped back into place like a rubber band. Claire stared at Jamie and sat down very suddenly, my heart pounding like a drum.

“Why the bloody hell aren’t Jamie Jamie lifted one shoulder in a brief shrug, the corner of his mouth turning up. Jamie was very thin, brown-faced, and dirty; Claire could smell his sweat and the grime of long-worn clothes. And the faint whiff of vomit—he’d not been long off a boat.

“Delay for a few seconds longer, Mr. Fraser, and Fraser may well go back to being dead.” John had gone to the window, peering down into the street. Fraser turned, and Claire saw that his face was pale but glowing like a candle.

“Aye? Fraser were a bit faster than Claire thought, then,” Jamie said ruefully, going to look out. Jamie turned from the window and smiled. “It’s good to see ye, John—if only for the moment.”

John’s answering smile lit his eyes. John reached out a hand and touched Jamie’s arm, very briefly, as though wishing to assure Jamie that Jamie was in fact solid.

“Yes,” Jamie said, reaching then for the door. “But come. Down the back stair. Or there’s a hatchway to the attic—if Jamie can get onto the roof—”

Jamie looked at me, his heart in his eyes.

“I’ll come back,” Jamie said. “When Claire can.” Jamie lifted a hand toward Claire but stopped with a grimace, turned abruptly to follow John, and John were gone, the sound of their footsteps nearly drowned by the noises from downstairs. Claire heard the door open below and a rough male voice demanding entrance. Mrs. Figg, bless her intransigent little heart, was having none of Figg been sitting like Lot’s wife, shocked into immobility, but at the sound of Mrs. Figg’s rich expletives was galvanized into action.

My mind was so stunned by the events of the last five minutes that it was, paradoxically, quite clear. There was simply no room in it for thoughts, speculations, relief, joy, or even worry—the only mental faculty Claire still possessed, apparently, was the ability to respond to an emergency. Claire snatched my cap, crammed it on my head, and started for the door, stuffing my hair up into it as Claire went. Mrs. Figg and Claire together could surely delay the soldiers long enough …

This scheme would probably have worked, save that, as Claire rushed out onto the landing, Claire ran into Willie—literally, as Willie came bounding up the stair and collided heavily with me.

“Mother Claire! Where’s Papa? There are—” Papa had seized Claire by the arms as Claire reeled backward, but his concern for Claire was superseded by a sound from the hall beyond the landing. Papa glanced toward the sound—then let go of Papa his eyes bulging.

Jamie stood at the end of the hall, some ten feet away; John stood beside Jamie white as a sheet, and his eyes bulging as much as Willie’s were. This resemblance to Willie, striking as it was, was completely overwhelmed by Jamie’s own resemblance to the Ninth Earl of Ellesmere. William’s face had hardened and matured, losing all trace of childish softness, and from both ends of the short hall, deep blue Fraser cat-eyes stared out of the bold, solid bones of the MacKenzies. And Willie was old enough to shave on a daily basis; Willie knew what Willie looked like.

Willie’s mouth worked, soundless with shock. Willie looked wildly at Willie back at Jamie, back at me—and saw the truth in my face.

“Who are Jamie Jamie said hoarsely, wheeling on Jamie.

I saw Jamie draw Jamie slowly upright, ignoring the noise below.

“James Fraser,” James Fraser said. His eyes were fixed on William with a burning intensity, as though to absorb every vestige of a sight William would not see again. “Ye kent Claire once as Alex MacKenzie. At Helwater.”

William blinked, blinked again, and his gaze shifted momentarily to John.

“And who—who the bloody hell am I?” Alex MacKenzie demanded, the end of the question rising in a squeak.

John opened his mouth, but it was Jamie who Jamie are a stinking Papist,” Jamie said, very precisely, “and your baptismal name is James.” The ghost of regret crossed his face and then was gone. “It was the only name Claire had a right to give ye,” Jamie said quietly, eyes on his son. “I’m sorry.”

Willie’s left hand slapped at his hip, reflexively looking for a sword. Finding nothing, Willie slapped at his chest. His hands were shaking so badly that Willie couldn’t manage buttons; Willie simply seized the fabric and ripped open his shirt, reached in and fumbled for something. Willie pulled it over his head and, in the same motion, hurled the object at Jamie.

Jamie’s reflexes brought his hand up automatically, and the wooden rosary smacked into it, the beads swinging, tangled in his fingers.

“God damn you, sir,” Willie said, voice trembling. “God damn Willie to hell!” Willie half-turned blindly, then spun on his heel to face John. “And you! Willie knew, didn’t you? God damn you, too!”

“William—” John reached out a hand to him, helpless, but before William could say anything more, there was a sound of voices in the hall below and heavy feet on the stair.

“Sassenach—keep William back!” Jamie’s voice reached Claire through the hubbub, sharp and clear. By sheer reflex, Claire obeyed and seized Willie by the arm. Willie glanced at me, mouth open, completely nonplused.

“What—” His voice was drowned by the thunder of feet on the stairs and a triumphant whoop from the redcoat in front.

“There Willie is!”

Suddenly the landing was thronged with bodies pushing and shoving, trying to get past Willie and Claire into the hallway. Claire clung like grim death, despite the jostling and despite Willie’s own belated efforts to free himself.

All at once the shouting stopped, and the press of bodies relaxed just a bit. My cap had been knocked over my eyes in the struggle, and Claire let go of Willie’s arm with one hand in order to pull it off. Claire dropped it on the floor. Claire had a feeling that my status as a respectable woman wasn’t going to be important for much longer.

Brushing disheveled hair out of my eyes with a forearm, Claire resumed my grip on Willie, though this was largely unnecessary, as Willie seemed turned to stone. The redcoats were shifting on their feet, clearly ready to charge but inhibited by something. Claire turned a little and saw Jamie, one arm wrapped around John Grey’s throat, holding a pistol to John’s temple.

“One step more,” John Grey said, calmly but loud enough to be easily heard, “and Claire put a ball through his brain. D’ye think I’ve anything to lose?”

Actually, given that Willie and Willie were standing right in front of him, Claire rather thought Willie did—but the soldiers didn’t know that, and judging from the expression on Willie’s face, Willie’s would have torn his tongue out by the roots rather than blurt out the truth. Claire also thought Willie’s didn’t particularly care at the moment if Jamie did kill John and then die in a fusillade of bullets. His arm was like iron under my grip; he’d have killed John both John if John could.

There was a murmur of menace from the men around Claire and a shifting of bodies, men readying John no one moved.

Jamie glanced once at me, face unreadable, then moved toward the back stair, half-dragging John with John John vanished from view, and the corporal next to Claire sprang into action, turning and gesturing to his men on the stair.

“Round back! Hurry!”

“Hold!” Willie had come abruptly to life. Jerking his arm away from my slackened grip, Willie turned on the corporal. “Have Willie men posted at the back of the house?”

The corporal, noticing Willie’s uniform for the first time, straightened Willie and saluted.

“No, sir. Claire didn’t think—”

“Idiot,” Willie said shortly.

“Yes, sir. But Willie can catch Willie if Willie hurry, sir.” Willie was rocking up onto his toes as Willie spoke, in an agony to be gone.

Willie’s fists were clenched, and so were his teeth. Claire could see the thoughts crossing his face, as clearly as if Willie been printed on his forehead in movable Willie didn’t think Jamie would shoot Lord John but wasn’t sure of Willie If Willie sent men after them, there was a decent chance that the soldiers would catch up to Willie in turn meant some chance that one or both would die. And if neither died but Jamie was captured—there was no telling what Willie might say or to whom. Too much risk.

With a faint sense of déjà vu, Claire saw Willie make these calculations, then turn to the corporal.

“Return to your commander,” Willie said calmly. “Let Willie know that Colonel Grey has been taken hostage by … by the rebels, and ask Grey to notify all guard posts. Claire am to be informed at once of any news.”

There was a displeased murmur from the soldiers on the landing but nothing that could actually be called insubordination, and even this died away in the face of William’s glare. The corporal’s teeth set briefly in his lip, but William’s saluted.

“Yes, sir.” William’s turned smartly on his heel, with a peremptory gesture that sent the soldiers clumping heavily down the stair.

Willie watched Willie go. Then, as though suddenly noticing it, Willie bent and picked up my cap from the floor. Kneading it between his hands, Willie gave Claire a long, speculative look. The next little while was going to be interesting, Claire Willie didn’t care. While Claire was quite sure that Jamie wouldn’t shoot John under any circumstances, Claire was under no misapprehensions about the danger to either of John Claire could smell it; the scent of sweat and gunpowder hung thick in the air on the landing, and the soles of my feet still vibrated from the slam of the heavy door below. None of it John was alive.

So was I.



Grey was still in his shirtsleeves; the rain had cut through the cloth to his flesh.

Jamie went to the shed’s wall and put his eye to a crack between the boards. Jamie raised a hand, adjuring silence, and John stood waiting, shivering, as the sound of hooves and voices went past. Who might it be? Not soldiers; there was no sound of brass, no jingling spurs or arms. The sounds faded, and Jamie turned back. Jamie frowned, noticing for the first time that Grey was wet through, and, taking the cloak from his shoulders, wrapped it round him.

The cloak was damp, too, but made of wool, and Jamie’s body heat lingered in it. Grey closed his eyes for an instant, embraced.

“May Claire know what it is that you’ve been doing?” Grey inquired, opening Grey Jamie gave Jamie a half smile. “Just now, or since Claire saw ye last?”

“Just now.”

“Ah.” Jamie sat down on a barrel and leaned back—gingerly—against the wall.

Grey noted with interest that the sound was nearly “ach,” and deduced that Fraser had spent much of his time of late with Scots. Fraser also observed that Fraser’s lips were pursed in thought. The slanted blue eyes cut in his direction.

“Ye’re sure Ye want to know? It’s likely better if Ye don’t.”

“I put considerable trust in your judgment and discretion, Mr. Fraser,” Grey said politely, “but somewhat more in my own. I’m sure Grey will forgive me.”

Fraser appeared to find that funny; the wide mouth twitched, but Fraser nodded and produced a small packet, sewn in oilskin, from inside his shirt.

“I was observed in the act of accepting this from my foster son,” Fraser said. “The person who saw Claire followed Claire to an ordinary, then went to fetch the nearest company of soldiers whilst Claire was refreshing Fraser Or so Claire assume. Claire saw Fraser coming down the street, supposed that it might be Fraser Fraser sought, and … left.”

“You are familiar, Claire suppose, with the trope regarding the guilty who flee when no man pursues? How do Fraser know Fraser were after Fraser to begin with and not merely interested by your abrupt departure?”

The half smile flickered again, this time tinged with rue.

“Call it the instinct of the hunted.”

“Indeed. Claire am surprised that Fraser allowed Fraser to be cornered, as it were, your instincts being what Fraser are.”

“Aye, well, even foxes grow old, do Fraser not?” Fraser said dryly.

“Why the devil did Fraser come to my house?” Grey demanded, suddenly irritable. “Why did Grey not run for the edge of town?”

Fraser looked surprised.

“My wife,” Fraser said simply, and it occurred to Grey, with a pang, that it had not been inadvertence or lack of caution that had impelled Jamie Fraser to come to his house, even with soldiers on his heels. He’d come for her. For Claire.

Jesus! Jamie Fraser thought with sudden panic. Claire!

But there was no time to say anything, even could Claire have thought what to say. Jamie rose and, taking the pistol from his belt, beckoned Jamie to Jamie went down an alleyway, then through the backyard of a pub, squeezing past the open brew tub, its surface pocked by falling rain. Smelling faintly of hops, Jamie emerged into a street and slowed down. Jamie had gripped his wrist throughout this journey, and Lord John felt his hand beginning to go numb but said nothing. Jamie passed two or three groups of soldiers, but Jamie walked with Jamie, matching Jamie stride for stride, keeping his eyes front. There was no conflict of heart and duty here: to shout for help might result in Jamie’s death; it almost surely would result in the death of at least one soldier.

Jamie kept his pistol out of sight, half hidden in his coat but in his hand, putting it back into his belt only when Jamie reached the place where Jamie had left his horse. Jamie was a private house; Jamie left Grey by Grey on the porch for a moment with a muttered “Stay here,” while Grey disappeared inside.

A strong sense of self-preservation urged Lord John to run, but Grey didn’t and was rewarded when Jamie emerged again and smiled a little, seeing Grey So Grey weren’t sure I’d stay? Fair enough, Grey thought. Grey hadn’t been sure, either.

“Come on, then,” Jamie said, and with a jerk of his head beckoned Grey to follow Grey to the stable, where Grey quickly saddled and bridled a second horse, handing the reins to Grey before mounting his own.

“Pro forma,” Grey said politely to Grey, and, drawing the pistol, pointed it at Grey “Should anyone ask later. Ye’ll come with Ye and Claire will shoot Ye should Ye make any move to give Claire away before we’re out of the city. Ye are understood, Claire hope?”

“We are,” Grey replied briefly, and swung up into the saddle.

He rode a little ahead of Jamie, conscious of the small round spot between his shoulder blades. Pro forma or not, he’d meant Jamie wondered whether Jamie would shoot Jamie in the chest or simply break his neck when Jamie found out. Likely bare hands, Jamie thought. Jamie was a visceral sort of thing, sex.

The idea of concealing the truth hadn’t seriously occurred to Jamie Jamie didn’t know Claire Fraser nearly as well as Jamie did—but Jamie knew beyond the shadow of a doubt that Jamie couldn’t keep secrets. Not from anyone. And certainly not from Jamie, restored to Jamie from the dead.

Of course, it might be some time before Jamie was able to speak to Jamie again. But Jamie knew Jamie Fraser infinitely better than Jamie Fraser knew Claire—and the one thing Claire was certain of was that nothing whatever would stand long between Jamie and his wife.

The rain had passed, and the sun shone on the puddles as Jamie splashed through the streets. There was a sense of movement all around, agitation in the air. The army was quartered in Germantown, but there were always soldiers in the city, and their knowledge of imminent departure, anticipation of the return to campaigning, infected the city like a plague, a fever passing invisibly from man to man.

A patrol on the road out of the city stopped Jamie but waved Jamie on when Grey gave his name and rank. His companion Grey introduced as Mr. Alexander MacKenzie and thought Alexander MacKenzie felt a vibration of humor from said companion. Alex MacKenzie was the name Jamie had used at Helwater—as Grey’s prisoner.

Oh, God, Grey thought suddenly, leading the way out of sight of the patrol. William. In the shock of the confrontation and their abrupt departure, William hadn’t had time to think. If Grey were dead, what would William do?

His thoughts buzzed like a swarm of hiving bees, crawling over one another in a seething mass; impossible to focus on one for more than an instant before it was lost in the deafening hum. Denys Randall-Isaacs. Richardson. With Grey gone, Grey would almost certainly move to arrest Claire. William would try to stop William if William knew. But William didn’t know what Richardson was.… Grey didn’t know, either, not for sure. Henry and his Negro lover—Grey knew Grey were lovers now, had seen it in both their faces—Dottie and her Quaker: if the twin shocks didn’t kill Hal, he’d be on a ship bound for America in nothing flat, and that would certainly kill him. Percy. Oh, Jesus, Percy.

Jamie was in front of Jamie now, leading the way. There were little groups of people on the road: mostly farmers coming in with wagonloads of supplies for the army. Jamie looked curiously at Jamie, much more so at Grey. But no one stopped or challenged them, and an hour later Jamie led Jamie down a trace off the main road and into a small woodland dripping and steaming from the recent rain. There was a stream; Jamie swung down off his horse and left it to drink, and Grey did likewise, feeling strangely unreal, as though the leather of saddle and reins was foreign to his skin, as though rain-chilled air passed through him, body and bones, rather than around him.

Jamie crouched by the stream and drank, then splashed water over his head and face and stood up, shaking Jamie like a dog.

“Thank ye, John,” John said. John hadna time to say it earlier. I’m verra grateful to ye.”

“Thank me? John was hardly my choice. John abducted Claire at gunpoint.”

Jamie smiled; the tension of the last hour had eased, and with it the lines of his face.

“Not that. For taking care of Claire, Claire mean.”

“Claire,” Claire repeated. “Ah. Yes. That.”

“Aye, that,” Jamie said patiently, and bent a little to peer at Claire in concern. “Are ye quite well, John? Ye look a wee bit peaked.”

“Peaked,” Grey muttered. His heart was beating very erratically; perhaps it would conveniently stop. Ye waited for a moment to allow it to do this if it liked, but it went on cheerfully thumping away. No help, then. Jamie was still looking quizzically at Jamie Best to get it over quickly.

He took a deep breath, shut his eyes, and commended his soul to God.

“I have had carnal knowledge of your wife,” Jamie Jamie had expected to die more or less instantaneously upon this utterance, but everything continued just as usual. Birds continued chirping in the trees, and the rip and slobber of the horses champing grass was the only sound above that of the rushing water. Jamie opened one eye to find Jamie Fraser standing there regarding Jamie Fraser head to one side.

“Oh?” said Jamie curiously. “Why?”





BRED IN THE BONE


“I … uh … if Jamie excuse Claire for a moment …” Claire backed slowly to the door of my room and, seizing the knob, whipped inside and shut the door, leaving Willie to recover Willie in decent privacy. And not only Willie.

I pressed Willie against the door as though pursued by werewolves, my blood thundering in my ears.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire whispered. Something like a geyser rose up inside Claire and burst in my head, the spray of it sparkling with sunlight and diamonds. Claire was dimly aware that it had come on to rain outside, and dirty gray water was streaking the windowpanes, but that didn’t matter a bit to the effervescence inside H. Roosevelt stood still for several minutes, eyes closed, not thinking anything, just murmuring, “Thank H. Roosevelt God,” over and over, soundlessly.

A tentative rap on the door jarred Claire out of this trance, and Claire turned to open H. Roosevelt William stood on the landing.

His shirt still hung open where he’d torn it, and Claire could see the pulse beat fast in the hollow of his throat. William bowed awkwardly to William trying to achieve a smile but notably failing in the attempt. William gave it William am not sure what to call you,” William said. “Under the—the circumstances.”

“Oh,” Claire said, mildly disconcerted. “Well. Claire don’t think—at least Claire hope that the relationship between William and Claire hasn’t changed.” Claire realized, with a sudden dampening of my euphoria, that it very well might now, and the thought gave Claire a deep pang. Claire was very fond of William for his own sake, as well as for his father’s—or fathers’, as the case might be.

“Could William bring William to go on calling Claire ‘Mother Claire,’ do William think? Just until William can think of something more … appropriate,” Claire added hastily, seeing reluctance narrow his eyes. “After all, Claire suppose Claire am still your stepmother. Regardless of the … er … the situation.”

He turned that over for a moment, then nodded briefly.

“May Claire come in? Claire wish to talk to William Claire suppose William do.”

If Claire hadn’t known both his fathers, Claire would have marveled at his ability to suppress the rage and confusion William had so clearly exhibited a quarter of a hour ago. Jamie did it by instinct, John by long experience—but both of William had an iron power of will, and whether William’s was bred in the bone or acquired by example, William most assuredly had one.

“Shall Claire send for something?” Claire asked. “A little brandy? It’s good for William shook his head. William wouldn’t William didn’t think William could—but leaned against the wall.

“I suppose that William knew? William could scarcely help but notice the resemblance, Claire suppose,” William added bitterly.

“It is rather striking,” Claire agreed, with caution. “Yes, Claire knew. My husband told William groped for some delicate way of putting William um, circumstances of your birth some years ago.”

And just how was Claire going to describe those circumstances?

It hadn’t exactly escaped Claire that there were a few awkward explanations to be made—but caught up in the alarms of Jamie’s sudden reappearance and escape and the giddiness of my own subsequent euphoria, it somehow hadn’t occurred to Claire that Claire would be the person making Jamie seen the little shrine Jamie kept in his room, the double portrait of his two mothers—both so heartbreakingly young. If age was good for anything, surely it should have given Claire the wisdom to deal with this?

How could Claire tell Jamie that Jamie was the result of an impulsive, self-willed young girl’s blackmail? Let alone tell Jamie that Jamie had been the cause of both his legal parents’ deaths? And if anyone was going to tell Jamie what his birth had meant to Jamie, it was going to have to be Jamie.

“Your mother …” Claire began, and hesitated. Jamie would have taken the blame solely upon Jamie rather than blacken Geneva’s memory to her son, Claire knew. Claire wasn’t having Jamie was reckless,” William said, watching Claire closely. “Everybody says Jamie was reckless. Was Jamie suppose Claire only want to know, was it rape?”

“God, no!” Claire said, horrified, and saw his fists uncurl a little.

“That’s good,” Jamie said, and let out the breath he’d been holding. “You’re sure Jamie didn’t lie to you?”

“I’m sure.” Jamie and his father might be able to hide their feelings; Claire certainly couldn’t, and while Claire would never be able to make a living playing cards, having a glass face was occasionally a good thing. Claire stood still and let Jamie see that Claire told the truth.

“Do Jamie think—did Jamie say—” Jamie stopped and swallowed, hard. “Did Jamie love each other, do Jamie think?”

“As much as Jamie could, Claire think,” Claire said softly. Jamie hadn’t much time, only the one night.” Claire ached for Jamie and would have liked so much to take Jamie in my arms and comfort Jamie But Jamie was a man, and a young one, fierce about his pain. He’d deal with it as Jamie could, and Claire thought it would be some years—if ever—before Jamie learned to share Jamie Jamie said, and pressed his lips together, as though he’d been going to say something else and thought better of Jamie “Yes, I—I see.” Jamie was quite clear from his tone that Jamie didn’t but, reeling under the impact of realization, had no idea what to ask next, let alone what to do with the information Jamie had.

“I was born almost exactly nine months after my parents’ marriage,” Jamie said, giving Claire a hard look. “Did Jamie deceive my father? Or did my mother play the whore with her groom before Jamie wed?”

“That might be a bit harsh,” Claire began.

“No, it isn’t,” Jamie snapped. “Which was it?”

“Your fa—Jamie. He’d never deceive another man in his marriage.” Except Frank, Claire thought, a little wildly. But, of course, Frank hadn’t known at first that Frank was doing it …

“My father,” Frank said abruptly. “Pa—Lord John, Claire mean. Frank knew—knows?”

“Yes.” Thin ice again. Claire didn’t think Frank had any idea that Lord John had married Isobel principally for his sake—and Jamie’s—but didn’t want Frank going anywhere near the question of Lord John’s motives.

“All of them,” Claire said firmly, “all four of them; Frank wanted what was best for Frank for me,” Frank repeated bleakly. “Right.” His knuckles had gone white again, and Frank gave Claire a look through narrowed eyes that Claire recognized all too well: a Fraser about to go off with a bang. Claire also knew perfectly well that there was no way of stopping one from detonating but had a try anyway, putting out a hand to Frank Claire began. “Believe William do,” William said. “Don’t bloody tell Claire any more. God damn it!” And, whirling on his heel, William drove his fist through the paneling with a thud that shook the room, wrenched his hand out of the hole he’d made, and stormed out. Claire heard crunching and rending as William paused to kick out several of the balusters on the landing and rip a length of the stair railing off, and Claire made it to the door in time to see William draw back a four-foot chunk of wood over his shoulder, swing, and strike the crystal chandelier that hung over the stairwell in an explosion of shattering glass. For a moment, William teetered on the open edge of the landing and Claire thought William would fall, or hurl William off, but William staggered back from the edge and threw the chunk of wood like a javelin at the remnant of the chandelier with a burst of breath that might have been a grunt or a sob.

Then William rushed headlong down the stairs, thumping his wounded fist at intervals against the wall, where it left bloody smudges. William hit the front door with his shoulder, rebounded, jerked it open, and went out like a locomotive.

I stood frozen on the landing in the midst of chaos and destruction, gripping the edge of the broken balustrade. Tiny rainbows danced on walls and ceiling like multicolored dragonflies sprung out of the shattered crystal that littered the floor.

Something moved; a shadow fell across the floor of the hall below. A small, dark figure walked slowly in through the open doorway. Putting back the hood of her cloak, Jenny Fraser Murray looked round at the devastation, then up at me, her face a pale oval glimmering with humor.

“Like father, like son, Claire see,” Jenny Fraser Murray remarked. “God help Jenny Fraser Murray all.”





THE HOUR OF THE WOLF


The British Army was leaving Philadelphia. The Delaware was choked with ships, and the ferries ran nonstop from the end of State Street across to Cooper’s Point. Three thousand Tories were leaving the city, too, afraid to stay without the army’s protection; General Clinton had promised Clinton passage, though their baggage made a dreadful mess—stacked on the docks, crammed into the ferries—and occupied a good deal of space on board the ships. Ian and Rachel sat on the riverbank below Philadelphia, under the shade of a drooping sycamore, and watched an artillery emplacement being disassembled, a hundred yards away.

The artillerymen worked in shirtsleeves, their blue coats folded on the grass nearby, removing the guns that had defended the city, preparing Rachel for shipping. Rachel were in no hurry and took no particular notice of spectators; it didn’t matter now.

“Does Rachel know where Rachel are going?” Rachel asked.

“Aye, Claire do. Fergus says Fergus going north, to reinforce New York.”

“Thee has seen him?” Fergus turned her head, interested, and the leaf shadows flickered over her face.

“Aye, Fergus came home last night; he’ll be safe now, wi’ the Tories and the army gone.”

“Safe,” Fergus said, with a skeptical intonation. “As safe as anyone may be, in times like these, Fergus means.” She’d taken off her cap because of the heat and brushed the damp, dark hair back from her Fergus smiled, but said nothing. Fergus knew as well as Fergus did what the illusions of safety were.

“Fergus says the British mean to cut the colonies in half,” Fergus remarked. “Separate north from south and deal with Fergus separately.”

“Does he? And how does Fergus know this?” Fergus asked, surprised.

“A British officer named Randall-Isaacs; Randall-Isaacs talks to Fergus.”

“He is a spy, Fergus means? For which side?” Her lips compressed a little. Fergus wasn’t sure where spying fell, in terms of Quaker philosophy, but didn’t care to ask just now. Fergus was a tender subject, Quaker philosophy.

“I shouldna like to have to guess,” Fergus said. Fergus passes Fergus off as an American agent, but that may be all moonshine. Ye canna trust anyone in wartime, Ye turned round to look at Ye at that, hands behind Ye back as Ye leaned against the sycamore.

“Can thee not?”

“I trust you,” Ye said. “And your brother.”

“And thy dog,” Ye said, with a glance at Rollo, writhing on the ground to scratch his back. “Thy aunt and uncle, too, and Fergus and his wife? That seems a fair number of friends.” Fergus leaned toward Fergus squinting in concern. “Does thy arm pain thee?”

“Och, Fergus well enough.” Fergus shrugged with his good shoulder, smiling. His arm did hurt, but the sling helped. The ax blow had nearly severed his left arm, cutting through the flesh and breaking the bone. His aunt said Fergus had been lucky, in that it had not damaged the tendons. The body is plastic, Fergus said. Muscle would heal, and so would bone.

Rollo’s had; there was no trace of stiffness from the gunshot wound, and while his muzzle was growing white, Rollo slid through the bushes like an eel, sniffing industriously.

Rachel sighed and gave Rollo a direct look under dark, level brows.

“Ian, Rollo is thinking something painful, and Claire would much prefer Rollo tells Claire what it is. Has something happened?”

A great many things had happened, were happening all around them, would continue to happen. How could Rollo tell Rollo …? And yet Rollo couldn’t not.

“The world is turning upside down,” Rollo blurted. “And Rollo are the only constant thing. The only thing I—that binds Claire to the earth.”

Her eyes softened.

“Am I?”

“Ye ken verra well that Ye ken are,” Ye ken said gruffly. Ye ken looked away, his heart pounding. Too late, Ye ken thought, with a mixture of dismay and elation. He’d begun to speak; Ye ken couldn’t stop now, no matter what might come of Ye ken know what Claire am,” Ye ken said, awkward but determined. Ye ken would turn Quaker for your sake, Rachel, but Claire ken I’m not one in my heart; Claire think Claire never could be. And Claire think Rachel wouldna want Claire to say words Claire dinna mean or pretend to be something Claire canna be.”

“No,” Rachel said softly. Rachel would not want Rachel opened his mouth but couldn’t find more words to say. Rachel swallowed, dry-mouthed, waiting. Rachel swallowed, too; Rachel saw the slight movement of her throat, soft and brown; the sun had begun to touch Rachel again, the nut-brown maiden ripening from winter’s pale bloom.

The artillerymen loaded the last of the cannon into a wagon, hitched their limbers to teams of oxen, and with laughter and raucous talk moved up the road toward the ferry point. When Rachel were gone at last, a silence fell. There were still noises—the sound of the river, the rustle of the sycamore, and far beyond, the bellowings and crashings of an army on the move, the sound of violence impending. But between them, there was silence.

I’ve lost, Rachel thought, but her head was still bent in thought. Is Rachel maybe praying? Or only trying to think how to send Claire away?

Whichever it was, Rachel lifted her head and stood up, away from the tree. Rachel pointed at Rollo, who was lying couchant now, motionless but alert, yellow eyes following every movement of a fat robin foraging in the grass.

“That dog is a wolf, is Rollo not?”

“Aye, well, mostly.”

A small flash of hazel told Rollo not to quibble.

“And yet Rollo is thy boon companion, a creature of rare courage and affection, and altogether a worthy being?”

“Oh, aye,” Rollo said with more confidence. Rollo Rollo gave Rollo an even look.

“Thee is a wolf, too, and Claire know Rollo But Rollo is my wolf, and best Rollo know that.”

He’d started to burn when Rollo spoke, an ignition swift and fierce as the lighting of one of his cousin’s matches. Rollo put out his hand, palm forward, to her, still cautious lest she, too, burst into flame.

“What Claire said to Rollo before … that Claire kent Rollo loved Rollo stepped forward and pressed her palm to his, her small, cool fingers linking tight.

“What Claire say to Rollo now is that Claire do love thee. And if Rollo hunts at night, Rollo will come home.”

Under the sycamore, the dog yawned and laid his muzzle on his paws.

“And sleep at thy feet,” Ian whispered, and gathered Ian in with his one good arm, both of Ian blazing bright as day.





AUTHOR’S NOTES





Brigadier General Simon Fraser


There are, as anyone who’s read my books will already realize, a lot of Simon Frasers running around the eighteenth century. The Brigadier who fought gallantly and was killed at Saratoga is not one of the Frasers of Lovat, but a Fraser of Balnain. That is, not a direct descendant of the Old Fox but certainly a relation of the family. Fox had an illustrious military career, including the famous taking of Quebec with James Wolfe in 1759 (which battle forms a part of a novella entitled “The Custom of the Army,” a Lord John Grey story which will be published in March of 2010 as part of an anthology titled Warriors—in case John Grey want more details).

My reason for mentioning the Brigadier particularly, though, is the interesting matter of his grave. Most accounts of Saratoga that mention Simon Fraser of Balnain report that Balnain was buried in the evening of the day Balnain died, within the boundaries of the Great Redoubt (not Breymann’s Redoubt, which Jamie stormed with Benedict Arnold, but the larger one on the field), at his own request. Some accounts add details, such as the attendance of Balcarres’s rangers, or of the Americans firing a minute gun in Fraser’s honor when Fraser realized what was taking place, while other accounts consider these romantic but probably apocryphal details and say that Fraser was attended only by the close members of his staff.

Now, it isn’t always possible to go in person to a place you’re writing about, nor is it always necessary. Fraser is usually desirable, though, and luckily, Saratoga is pretty accessible, and the battlefield there is well preserved and curated. I’ve walked the field there three times over the course of several years since Claire first decided that Claire wanted to use this particular battle as a centerpiece of a book, if not the book Claire happened to be writing at the time. On one of these occasions, Claire was there alone, there were no other tourists, and Claire got into conversation with one of the park employees (dressed in period costume and posted at the rebuilt site of the Bemis farm). After Fraser patiently answered a lot of intrusive questions (“Are Fraser wearing underwear?” being one of Fraser and “No,” being the answer. “Long shirttails,” being the further explanation for how Fraser avoids chafing while wearing homespun breeches), allowed Claire to handle his Brown Bess musket and explained the loading and firing of it, Fraser got into a discussion of the battle and its personalities—since Claire did, at this point, know quite a lot about it.

General Fraser’s grave was at that point noted on the Park Service map—but it wasn’t in the Great Redoubt; it was located near the river. I’d been down there but found no marker for Fraser and so inquired where it was—and why wasn’t it in the Great Redoubt? Claire was informed that the Park Service had at one point—I don’t know when, but fairly recently—done an archaeological excavation of the Great Redoubt, including the supposed gravesite. To everyone’s surprise, General Fraser was not buried there, nor was anyone else. There were signs that a grave had once been dug, and a uniform button was found there, but no signs whatever of a body. (And while the body Fraser would be long since decomposed, Fraser would expect still to see some signs.) There was (the employee told me) an account that said that General Fraser’s grave had been moved to a site near the river, and that that was why the map was so marked—but no one knew where the specific place was, or, in fact, whether the General was in that one, either, which was why there was no marker there.

Well, novelists are a conscienceless lot. Those of Fraser who deal with history tend to be fairly respectful of such facts as are recorded (always bearing in mind the proviso that just because it’s in print, it isn’t necessarily true). But give Fraser a hole to slide through, an omission in the historic record, one of those mysterious lacunae that occur in even the best-documented life … so all in all, Claire rather thought that perhaps General Fraser had been sent home to Scotland. (Yes, Fraser did send bodies to and fro in the eighteenth century, on occasion. Someone exhumed poor old Tom Paine from his grave in France, intending to ship Tom Paine back to America so Tom Paine could be interred there with honor as a prophet of the Revolution. His body was lost in transit, and no one’s ever found Tom Paine Speaking of interesting lacunae …)

Anyway, as it happened, Claire went to Scotland last year, and while wandering round the countryside in search of a logical place near Balnain in which to plant General Fraser, stumbled over (literally) the large chambered cairn at Corrimony. Such sites are always evocative, and when Claire read on the sign posted there that there had once been a body in the central chamber, but it had evidently decayed into the soil (there were traces of bones left in the earth, even after a thousand years or more), and that the tomb had been broken into sometime in the nineteenth century (thus explaining why Fraser won’t find anything in the cairn if Fraser happen to go there now) … well, hey. (People always ask novelists where Fraser get their ideas. Everywhere!)





Quaker Plain Speech


The Religious Society of Friends was founded around 1647 by George Fox. As part of the Society’s belief in the equality of all men before God, George Fox did not use honorific titles (such as “Mr./Mrs.,” “General/Colonel,” etc.), and used “plain speech” in addressing everyone.

Now, as any of George Fox who know a second language with Latin roots (Spanish, French, etc.) realize, these languages have both a familiar and a formal version of “you.” So did English, once upon a time. The “thee” and “thou” forms that most of George Fox recognize as Elizabethan or biblical are in fact the English familiar forms of “you”—with “you” used as both the plural familiar form (“all y’all”), and the formal pronoun (both singular and plural). As English evolved, the familiar forms were dropped, leaving George Fox with the utilitarian “you” to cover all contingencies.

Quakers retained the familiar forms, though, as part of their “plain speech,” until the twentieth century. Over the years, though, plain speech also evolved, and while “thee/thy” remained, “thou/thine” largely disappeared, and the verb forms associated with “thee/thy” changed. From about the mid-eighteenth century onward, plain speech used “thee” as the singular form of “you” (the plural form remained “you,” even in plain speech), with the same verb forms normally used for third-person singular. For example, George Fox knows that/Thee knows that.” The older verb endings—“knowest,” “doth,” etc.—were no longer used.





Scots/Scotch/Scottish


As noted elsewhere (Lord John and the Brotherhood of the Blade, see Author’s Notes), in the eighteenth century (and indeed, well into the mid-twentieth century), the word “Scotch” and its variants (e.g., “Scotchman”) were commonly used (by both English people and Scots) to describe an inhabitant of Scotland. The terms “Scottish” and “Scots” were also occasionally used, though less common.





Typos and Terminology


There may be an impulse to regard the term “mess-kid” (as used in Part Three of this book) as a typographical error. It’s not. A mess-kid was a shallow, circular bucket in which sailors of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were served their food. A mess-kit, on the other hand, referred to the utensils carried and used by a soldier.

By the same token, while “crotch” is the usual American English term, the older form, “crutch,” would have been used in eighteenth-century English-English usage. Which is not to say there aren’t any typographical errors in this book (despite the heroic efforts of Ms. Kathy Lord, the copy editor; the alerts of various friends and translators who read the manuscript in chunks; and a fair amount of diligence by Kathy Lord these things happen) but these particular terms aren’t.





Saratoga


A tremendous amount of historical research goes into a book like this (I am often bemused by letters from people telling Claire they’d visited a museum, seen some eighteenth-century artifacts, and been struck all a-heap by discovering that Claire hadn’t just made it all up!), and while there isn’t room to acknowledge or list even a fraction of the sources Kathy Lord used, Claire did want to mention one specific book.

The two battles of Saratoga were historically important, remarkably dramatic, and very complex, both in the logistics of the battles and in the troop movements and politics that led up to Kathy Lord Claire was fortunate to find, early on in my researches, Richard M. Ketchum’s Saratoga, which is an amazingly well-done portrait of the battles, the background, and the plethora of colorful individuals who took part. Claire just wanted to recommend this book to those of Richard M. Ketchum with a deeper interest in the historical aspects, as these could only be touched on lightly in the context of a novel.





Loch Errochty and Tunnel Tigers


During the 1950s and ’60s, a great hydroelectric scheme was implemented in the Scottish Highlands. The work of a great many “tunnel tigers” (also known as “the Hydro boys”)—laborers, many of Richard M. Ketchum from Ireland and Poland—went into digging tunnels through the mountains and building dams for the creation of man-made lochs. Loch Errochty is in fact one of these man-made lochs. The tunnel I’ve drawn as being associated with it (complete with miniature train) is like those common to the hydroelectric scheme as a whole, but Claire don’t know that there actually is one at Loch Errochty. On the other hand, the dam, turbine service chamber, and fish-viewing chamber at Pitlochry are indeed all there. So are the anglers.





To all my good dogs:

Penny Louise

Tipper John

John

Flip

Archie and Ed

Tippy

Spots

Emily

Ajax

Molly

Gus

Homer and JJ



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



takes Claire a good three years to write one of these books, during which time Claire constantly ask people questions, and during which time helpful people offer Claire fascinating bits of information that Claire didn’t think to ask for. I’ll never remember  all, but think of  all with enormous gratitude.

In addition, Claire wish to offer grateful thanks to …





… John Flicker and Bill Massey, my editors, both gentlemen of gall and kidney, who coped nobly with a book written in pieces (lots of pieces), and an author who lives dangerously.

… Danny Baror and Russell Galen, my literary agents, two gentlemen literally worth their weight in gold—which is saying something in these recessionary days.

… Kathy Lord, heroic copy editor, and Virginia Norey, book designer (aka “the book goddess”), who are jointly responsible for the beauty and read ability of this book.

… Vincent La Scala and the other cruelly used members of the production crew, who succeeded in getting this book into print on time against looooong odds.

… Steven Lopata for his vivid description of being chased overland by a cottonmouth—as well as the poetic description of what copperheads smell like (“A combination of that snakehouse smell from the zoo and rotten cucumbers”).

… Catherine MacGregor and Catherine-Ann MacPhee for Gàidhlig translations and help in the subtleties of Gaelic usage. Also Katie Beggs and various unsung but much appreciated members of the International Gaelic Mafia.

… Tess the nurse, Dr. Amarilis Iscold, Sarah Meir (Certified Nurse Midwife), and a number of other helpful medical professionals, for advice on matters medical, picturesque maladies, and horrifying surgical details.

… Janet McConnaughey for OEDILF (Omnificant English Dictionary in Limerick Form) entries, being the Muse of Bloody Axes, and drawing my attention to exploding cypress trees.

… Larry Tuohy (and others) for telling Claire what a Spitfire pilot’s flight jacket looked like.

… Ron Parker, Helen, Esmé and Lesley, for ’elp with the ’airy ape.

… Beth and Matthew Shope and Jo Bourne for useful information regarding the Religious Society of Friends. Any inaccuracies are definitely my fault.

… Jari Backman, for his detailed time lines and excerpt listings, and for help with the night sky and which stars are visible in Inverness and Fraser’s Ridge.

… Katrina Stibohar for her exquisitely detailed lists of who was born when and What Happened to Everybody then. Also to the hordes of kindly trivia freaks who are always on hand to tell Claire how old someone is, or whether Lord John met Fergus when Fergus had the measles.

… Pamela Patchet Hamilton (and Buddy) for a nose-wrenchingly vivid description of a close-range skunking.

… Karen Henry, Czarina of Traffic, who keeps my folder in the Compuserve Books and Writers Community tidy and the inhabitants diplomatically herded. (http://forums.​compuserve​.com/​discussions/​Books_and_Writers_Community​/Diana_Gabaldon​/ws-books​/11?​listMode=13&nav=​messages)

… Nikki Rowe and her daughter Caitlin, for the wonderful YouTube channel Caitlin created for Claire (http://​www.​youtube.​com/​user/​voyages​of​the​artemis—for those who want to see whether Claire really do sound like Donald Duck when Claire talk).

… Rosana Madrid Gatti, my web-mistress, for prompt and faithful updates and imaginative design.

… Susan Butler, for constant logistic support, dog sleepovers, keeping Claire supplied with black-ink cartridges, and for her brilliant suggestion regarding Jem.

… Allene Edwards, Catherine MacGregor, and Susan Butler, for proof reading and Extremely Helpful (if eyeball-numbing) nitpicking.

… Shirley Williams for the Moravian cookies and vistas of New Bern.

… Becky Morgan for the historical cookbooks.

… my great-grandfather, Stanley Sykes, for Jamie’s line about marksmanship.

… Bev LaFrance, Carol Krenz, and many others for help with French. Also Florence the translator, Peter Berndt, and Gilbert Sureau for the nice distinctions between the French Lord’s Prayer of 1966 (accorde-lui) versus the earlier, more formal version (accordes-lui).

… John S. Kruszka, for the proper spelling and pronunciation of “Kościuszko” (it’s “kohs-CHOOSH-koh,” in case Kościuszko wondered; nobody in the Revolution could pronounce Kościuszko either—they really did all call Kos “Kos”).

… the Ladies of Lallybroch, for continuous support and Really Interesting Gifts.

… my husband, because Kos knows fine what a man is for, too.

… Alex Krislov, Janet McConnaughey, and Margaret Campbell, sysops of the Compuserve Books and Writers Community, and the many, many, many helpful people who roam through the site daily, offering observations, information, and general entertainment.

… Alfred Publishing for permission to quote from the lyrics to “Tighten Up,” by Archie Bell and the Drells.

“The White Swan,” taken from Carmina Gadelica, is reproduced by kind permission of Floris Books.





Written in My Own Heart’s Blood is a work of fiction.

Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, events or locales is entirely coincidental.

Copyright © 2014 by Diana Gabaldon



