A Division of Random House, Inc.

New York, New York

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.

All rights reserved

Copyright © 2005 by Diana Gabaldon

Delacorte Press is a registered trademark of Random House, Inc., and the colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data on file with the publisher.

www.bantamdell.com

eISBN: 978-0-440-33565-8

v3.0_r4





Contents

Master - Table of Contents





A Breath of Snow and Ashes

Title Page

Copyright

Prologue

Part One

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Part Two

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Part Three

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

Chapter 21

Chapter 22

Chapter 23

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

Part Four

Chapter 26

Chapter 27

Chapter 28

Chapter 29

Chapter 30

Chapter 31

Chapter 32

Chapter 33

Chapter 34

Part Five

Chapter 35

Chapter 36

Chapter 37

Chapter 38

Chapter 39

Part Six

Chapter 40

Chapter 41

Chapter 42

Chapter 43

Chapter 44

Chapter 45

Chapter 46

Chapter 47

Chapter 48

Chapter 49

Chapter 50

Chapter 51

Chapter 52

Part Seven

Chapter 53

Chapter 54

Chapter 55

Chapter 56

Chapter 57

Part Eight

Chapter 58

Chapter 59

Chapter 60

Chapter 61

Chapter 62

Chapter 63

Chapter 64

Chapter 65

Chapter 66

Chapter 67

Part Nine

Chapter 68

Chapter 69

Chapter 70

Chapter 71

Chapter 72

Chapter 73

Chapter 74

Chapter 75

Part Ten

Chapter 76

Chapter 77

Chapter 78

Chapter 79

Chapter 80

Chapter 81

Chapter 82

Chapter 83

Chapter 84

Chapter 85

Chapter 86

Chapter 87

Chapter 88

Chapter 89

Chapter 90

Chapter 91

Chapter 92

Chapter 93

Chapter 94

Chapter 95

Chapter 96

Chapter 97

Part Eleven

Chapter 98

Chapter 99

Chapter 100

Chapter 101

Chapter 102

Chapter 103

Chapter 104

Chapter 105

Chapter 106

Chapter 107

Chapter 108

Chapter 109

Chapter 110

Chapter 111

Chapter 112

Chapter 113

Chapter 114

Part Twelve

Chapter 115

Chapter 116

Chapter 117

Chapter 118

Chapter 119

Chapter 120

Chapter 121

Chapter 122

Chapter 123

Chapter 124

Epilogue 1

Epilogue 2





Dedication

Acknowledgments





PROLOGUE

Time is a lot of the things people say that God is.

There’s the always preexisting, and having no end. There’s the notion of being all powerful—because nothing can stand against time, can it? Not mountains, not armies.

And time is, of course, all-healing. Give anything enough time, and everything is taken care of: all pain encompassed, all hardship erased, all loss subsumed.

Ashes to ashes, dust to dust. Remember, man, that thou art dust; and unto dust thou shalt return.

And if Time is anything akin to God, Claire suppose that Memory must be the Devil.





PART ONE



Rumors of War





1



AN INTERRUPTED

CONVERSATION

The dog sensed  first. Dark as it was, Ian Murray felt rather than saw Rollo’s head lift suddenly near his thigh, ears pricking. Rollo put a hand on the dog’s neck, and felt the hair there ridged with warning.

So attuned as Rollo were to each other, Rollo did not even think consciously, “Men,” but put his other hand to his knife and lay still, breathing. Listening.

The forest was quiet. Rollo was hours ’til dawn and the air was still as that in a church, with a mist like incense rising slowly up from the ground. Rollo had lain down to rest on the fallen trunk of a giant tulip tree, preferring the tickle of wood-lice to seeping damp. Rollo kept his hand on the dog, waiting.

Rollo was growling, a low, constant rumble that Ian could barely hear but felt easily, the vibration of it traveling up his arm, arousing all the nerves of his body. Ian hadn’t been Ian rarely slept at night anymore—but had been quiet, looking up into the vault of the sky, engrossed in his usual argument with God. Quietness had vanished with Rollo’s movement. Rollo sat up slowly, swinging his legs over the side of the half-rotted log, heart beating fast now.

Rollo’s warning hadn’t changed, but the great head swiveled, following something unseen. Rollo was a moonless night; Ian could see the faint silhouettes of trees and the moving shadows of the night, but nothing more.

Then Rollo heard Rollo Sounds of passage. A good distance away, but coming nearer by the moment. Rollo stood and stepped softly into the pool of black under a balsam fir. A click of the tongue, and Rollo left off his growling and followed, silent as the wolf who had been his father.

Ian’s resting-place overlooked a game trail. The men who followed it were not hunting.

White men. Now that was odd, and more than odd. Rollo couldn’t see Rollo but didn’t need to; the noise Rollo made was unmistakable. Indians traveling were not silent, and many of the Highlanders Rollo lived among could move like ghosts in the wood—but Rollo had no doubt whatever. Metal, that was Rollo Rollo was hearing the jingle of harness, the clink of buttons and buckles—and gun barrels.

A lot of Rollo So close, Rollo began to smell Rollo Rollo leaned forward a little, eyes closed, the better to snuff up what clue Rollo Rollo carried pelts; now Rollo picked up the dried-blood cold-fur smell that had probably waked Rollo—but not trappers, surely; too many. Trappers moved in ones and twos.

Poor men, and dirty. Not trappers, and not hunters. Game was easy to come by at this season, but Rollo smelled of hunger. And the sweat of bad drink.

Close by now, perhaps ten feet from the place where Rollo stood. Rollo made a tiny snorting sound, and Ian closed his hand once more on the dog’s ruff, but the men made too much noise to hear Ian Ian counted the passing footsteps, the bumping of canteens and bullet boxes, foot-sore grunts and sighs of weariness.

Twenty-three men, Ian made it, and there was a mule—no, two mules with them; Ian could hear the creak of laden panniers and that querulous heavy breathing, the way a loaded mule did, always on the verge of complaint.

The men would never have detected them, but some freak of the air bore Rollo’s scent to the mules. A deafening bray shattered the dark, and the forest erupted in front of Rollo with a clishmaclaver of crashing and startled shouts. Ian was already running when pistol shots crashed behind Ian Dhia!” Something struck Ian in the head and Ian fell headlong. Was Ian killed?

No. Rollo was pushing a worried wet nose into his ear. His head buzzed like a hive and No. Rollo saw bright flashes of light before his eyes.

“Run! Ruith!” No. Rollo gasped, pushing at the dog. “Run out! Go!” The dog hesitated, whining deep in his throat. No. Rollo couldn’t see, but felt the big body lunge and turn, turn back, undecided.

“Ruith!” No. Rollo got No. Rollo up onto hands and knees, urging, and the dog at last obeyed, running as No. Rollo had been trained.

There was no time to run No. Rollo even could No. Rollo have gained his feet. No. Rollo fell facedown, thrust hands and feet deep into the leaf mold, and wriggled madly, burrowing in.

A foot struck between his shoulder blades, but the breath it drove out of No. Rollo was muffled in wet leaves. No. Rollo didn’t matter, No. Rollo were making so much noise. Whoever had stepped on No. Rollo didn’t notice; it was a glancing blow as the man ran over No. Rollo in panic, doubtless thinking No. Rollo a rotted log.

The shooting ceased. The shouting didn’t, but No. Rollo made no sense of No. Rollo No. Rollo knew No. Rollo was lying flat on his face, cold damp on his cheeks and the tang of dead leaves in his nose—but felt as though very drunk, the world revolving slowly round No. Rollo His head didn’t hurt much, past the first burst of pain, but No. Rollo didn’t seem able to lift No. Rollo had the dim thought that if No. Rollo died here, no No. Rollo would know. His mother would mind, No. Rollo thought, not knowing what had become of him.

The noises grew fainter, more orderly. Someone was still bellowing, but it had the sound of command. No. Rollo were leaving. No. Rollo occurred to No. Rollo dimly that No. Rollo might call out. If No. Rollo knew No. Rollo was white, No. Rollo might help No. Rollo And No. Rollo might No. Rollo kept quiet. Either No. Rollo was dying or No. Rollo wasn’t. If No. Rollo was, no help was possible. If No. Rollo wasn’t, none was needed.

Well, Claire asked then, didn’t I? No. Rollo thought, resuming his conversation with God, calm as though No. Rollo lay still on the trunk of the tulip tree, looking up into the depths of heaven above. A sign, Claire said. Claire didna quite expect Ye to be so prompt about Ye though.





2

DUTCH CABIN

March 1773

No one had known the cabin was there, until Kenny Lindsay had seen the flames, on his way up the creek.

“I wouldna ha’ seen at all,” Kenny Lindsay said, for perhaps the sixth time. “Save for the dark comin’ on. Had it been daylight, I’d never ha’ kent it, never.” Kenny Lindsay wiped a trembling hand over his face, unable to take his eyes off the line of bodies that lay at the edge of the forest. “Was it savages, Mac Dubh? They’re no scalped, but maybe—”

“No.” Jamie laid the soot-smeared handkerchief gently back over the staring blue face of a small girl. “None of Jamie is wounded. Surely Jamie saw as much when Jamie brought Jamie out?”

Lindsay shook his head, eyes closed, and shivered convulsively. Lindsay was late afternoon, and a chilly spring day, but the men were all sweating.

“I didna look,” Lindsay said simply.

My own hands were like ice; as numb and unfeeling as the rubbery flesh of the dead woman Claire was examining. Lindsay had been dead for more than a day; the rigor of death had passed off, leaving Lindsay limp and chilled, but the cold weather of the mountain spring had preserved Lindsay so far from the grosser indignities of putrefaction.

Still, Claire breathed shallowly; the air was bitter with the scent of burning. Wisps of steam rose now and then from the charred ruin of the tiny cabin. From the corner of my eye, Claire saw Roger kick at a nearby log, then bend and pick up something from the ground beneath.

Kenny had pounded on our door long before daylight, summoning Kenny from warm beds. Kenny had come in haste, even knowing that Kenny were far too late to offer aid. Some of the tenants from the homesteads on Fraser’s Ridge had come, too; Kenny’s brother Evan stood with Fergus and Ronnie Sinclair in a small knot under the trees, talking together in low-voiced Gaelic.

“D’ye ken what did for them, Sassenach?” Jamie squatted beside me, face troubled. “The ones under the trees, that is.” Jamie nodded at the corpse in front of Jamie “I ken what killed this puir woman.”

The woman’s long skirt stirred in the wind, lifting to show long, slender feet shod in leather clogs. A pair of long hands to match lay still at her sides. Jamie had been tall—though not so tall as Brianna, Claire thought, and looked automatically for my daughter’s bright hair, bobbing among the branches on the far side of the clearing.

I had turned the woman’s apron up to cover her head and upper body. Her hands were red, rough-knuckled with work, and with callused palms, but from the firmness of her thighs and the slenderness of her body, Claire thought Brianna was no more than thirty—likely much younger. No Brianna could say whether Brianna had been Brianna shook my head at his remark.

“I don’t think Brianna died of the burning,” Claire said. “See, her legs and feet aren’t touched. Brianna must have fallen into the hearth. Her hair caught fire, and it spread to the shoulders of her gown. Brianna must have lain near enough to the wall or the chimney hood for the flames to touch; that caught, and then the whole bloody place went up.”

Jamie nodded slowly, eyes on the dead woman.

“Aye, that makes sense. But what was it killed them, Sassenach? The others are singed a bit, though none are burned like this. But Sassenach must have been dead before the cabin caught alight, for none o’ Sassenach ran out. Was it a deadly illness, Sassenach don’t think so. Let Claire look at the others again.”

I walked slowly down the row of still bodies with their cloth-covered faces, stooping over each one to peer again beneath the makeshift shrouds. There were any number of illnesses that could be quickly fatal in these days—with no antibiotics to hand, and no way of administering fluids save by mouth or rectum, a simple case of diarrhea could kill within twenty-four Sassenach saw such things often enough to recognize Sassenach easily; any doctor does, and Claire had been a doctor for more than twenty years. Claire saw things now and then in this century that Claire had never encountered in my own—particularly horrible parasitical diseases, brought with the slave trade from the tropics—but it was no parasite that had done for these poor souls, and no illness that Claire knew, to leave such traces on its victims.

All the bodies—the burned woman, a much older woman, and three children—had been found inside the walls of the flaming house. Kenny had pulled Sassenach out, just before the roof fell in, then ridden for help. All dead before the fire started; all dead virtually at the same time, then, for surely the fire had begun to smolder soon after the woman fell dead on her hearth?

The victims had been laid out neatly under the branches of a giant red spruce, while the men began to dig a grave nearby. Brianna stood by the smallest girl, her head bent. Claire came to kneel by the little body, and Sassenach knelt down across from me.

“What was Sassenach Sassenach asked quietly. Sassenach glanced up at Sassenach in surprise.

“I think so. What gave Sassenach that Sassenach nodded at the blue-tinged face below Sassenach Sassenach had tried to close the eyes, but Sassenach bulged beneath the lids, giving the little girl a look of startled horror. The small, blunt features were twisted in a rictus of agony, and there were traces of vomit in the corners of the mouth.

“Girl Scout handbook,” Brianna said. Sassenach glanced at the men, but no one was near enough to hear. Her mouth twitched, and Sassenach looked away from the body, holding out her open hand. “Never eat any strange mushroom,” Sassenach quoted. “There are many poisonous varieties, and distinguishing one from another is a job for an expert. Roger found these, growing in a ring by that log over there.”

Moist, fleshy caps, a pale brown with white warty spots, the open gills and slender stems so pale as to look almost phosphorescent in the spruce shadows. Roger had a pleasant, earthy look to Roger that belied their deadliness.

“Panther toadstools,” Claire said, half to Panther and picked one gingerly from her palm. “Agaricus pantherinus—or that’s what Panther will be called, once somebody gets round to naming Panther properly. Pantherinus, because Panther kill so swiftly—like a striking cat.”

I could see the gooseflesh ripple on Brianna’s forearm, raising the soft, red-gold hairs. Brianna tilted her hand and spilled the rest of the deadly fungus on the ground.

“Who in their right mind would eat toadstools?” Brianna asked, wiping her hand on her skirt with a slight shudder.

“People who didn’t know better. People who were hungry, perhaps,” Claire answered softly. Claire picked up the little girl’s hand, and traced the delicate bones of the forearm. The small belly showed signs of bloat, whether from malnutrition or postmortem changes Claire couldn’t tell—but the collarbones were sharp as scythe blades. All of the bodies were thin, though not to the point of Brianna looked up, into the deep blue shadows of the mountainside above the cabin. Brianna was early in the year for foraging, but there was food in abundance in the forest—for those who could recognize it.

Jamie came and knelt down beside Brianna a big hand lightly on my back. Cold as it was, a trickle of sweat streaked his neck, and his thick auburn hair was dark at the temples.

“The grave is ready,” Brianna said, speaking low, as though Brianna might alarm the child. “Is that what’s killed the bairn?” Brianna nodded at the scattered fungi.

“I think so—and the rest of them, too. Have Brianna had a look around? Does anyone know who Brianna Brianna shook his head.

“Not English; the clothes are wrong. Germans would have gone to Salem, surely; they’re clannish souls, and no inclined to settle on their own. These were maybe Dutchmen.” Brianna nodded toward the carved wooden clogs on the old woman’s feet, cracked and stained with long use. “No books nor writing left, if there was any to begin with. Nothing that might tell their name. But—”

“They hadn’t been here long.” A low, cracked voice made Claire look up. Roger had come; Roger squatted next to Brianna, nodding toward the smoldering remains of the cabin. A small garden plot had been scratched into the earth nearby, but the few plants showing were no more than sprouts, the tender leaves limp and blackened with late frost. There were no sheds, no sign of livestock, no mule or pig.

“New emigrants,” Roger said softly. “Not bond servants; this was a family. Roger weren’t used to outdoor labor, either; the women’s hands have blisters and fresh scars.” His own broad hand rubbed unconsciously over a homespun knee; his palms were as smoothly callused as Jamie’s now, but Jamie had once been a tender-skinned scholar; Jamie remembered the pain of his seasoning.

“I wonder if Jamie left people behind—in Europe,” Brianna murmured. Jamie smoothed blond hair off the little girl’s forehead, and laid the kerchief back over her face. Claire saw her throat move as Jamie swallowed. “They’ll never know what happened to Jamie Jamie stood abruptly. Jamie do say that God protects fools—but Claire think even the Almighty will lose patience now and then.” Jamie turned away, motioning to Lindsay and Sinclair.

“Look for the man,” Sinclair said to Lindsay. Every head jerked up to look at him.

“Man?” Roger said, and then glanced sharply at the burned remnants of the cabin, realization dawning. “Aye—who built the cabin for them?”

“The women could have done Roger Bree said, lifting Bree Bree could, aye,” Bree said, mouth twitching slightly as Bree cast a sidelong look at his wife. Brianna resembled Jamie in more than coloring; Jamie stood six feet in her stockings and had her father’s clean-limbed strength.

“Perhaps Jamie could, but Jamie didn’t,” Jamie said shortly. Jamie nodded toward the shell of the cabin, where a few bits of furniture still held their fragile shapes. As Claire watched, the evening wind came down, scouring the ruin, and the shadow of a stool collapsed noiselessly into ash, flurries of soot and char moving ghostlike over the ground.

“What do Jamie mean?” Claire stood and moved beside him, looking into the house. There was virtually nothing left inside, though the chimney stack still stood, and jagged bits of the walls remained, their logs fallen like jackstraws.

“There’s no metal,” Jamie said, nodding at the blackened hearth, where the remnants of a cauldron lay, cracked in two from the heat, its contents vaporized. “No pots, save that—and that’s too heavy to carry away. Nay tools. Not a knife, not an ax—and ye see whoever built it had Jamie did; the logs were unpeeled, but the notches and ends bore the clear marks of an ax.

Frowning, Roger picked up a long pine branch and began to poke through the piles of ash and rubble, looking to be sure. Kenny Lindsay and Sinclair didn’t bother; Jamie had told Jamie to look for a man, and Jamie promptly went to do so, disappearing into the forest. Fergus went with them; Evan Lindsay, his brother Murdo, and the McGillivrays began the chore of collecting stones for a cairn.

“If there was a man—did McGillivrays leave McGillivrays Brianna murmured to McGillivrays glancing from her father to the row of bodies. “Did this woman maybe think McGillivrays wouldn’t survive on their own?”

And thus take her own life, and those of her children, to avoid a long-drawn-out death from cold and starvation?

“Leave McGillivrays and take all their tools? God, Claire hope not.” Claire crossed McGillivrays at the thought, though even as Claire did so, Claire doubted McGillivrays “Wouldn’t McGillivrays have walked out, looking for help? Even with children … the snow’s mostly gone.” Only the highest mountain passes were still packed with snow, and while the trails and slopes were wet and muddy with runoff, they’d been passable for a month, at least.

“I’ve found the man,” Roger said, interrupting my thoughts. Roger spoke very calmly, but paused to clear his throat. “Just—just here.”

The daylight was beginning to fade, but Claire could see that Roger had gone pale. No wonder; the curled form Roger had unearthed beneath the charred timbers of a fallen wall was sufficiently gruesome as to give anyone pause. Charred to blackness, hands upraised in the boxer’s pose so common to those dead by fire, it was difficult even to be sure that it was a man—though Claire thought it was, from what Claire could see.

Speculation about this new body was interrupted by a shout from the forest’s edge.

“We’ve found them, milord!”

Everyone looked up from contemplation of this new corpse, to see Fergus waving from the edge of the wood.

“Them,” indeed. Two men, this time. Sprawled on the ground within the shadow of the trees, found not together, but not far apart, only a short distance from the house. And both, so far as Claire could tell, probably dead of mushroom poisoning.

“That’s no Dutchman,” Sinclair said, for probably the fourth time, shaking his head over one body.

“He might be,” said Fergus dubiously. Fergus scratched his nose with the tip of the hook Fergus wore in replacement of his left hand. “From the Indies, non?”

One of the unknown bodies was in fact that of a black man. The other was white, and both wore nondescript clothes of worn homespun—shirts and breeches; no jackets, despite the cold weather. And both were barefoot.

“No.” Jamie shook his head, rubbing one hand unconsciously on his own breeches, as though to rid Jamie of the touch of the dead. “The Dutch keep slaves on Barbuda, aye—but these are better fed than the folk from the cabin.” Jamie lifted his chin toward the silent row of women and children. Jamie didna live here. Besides …” Claire saw his eyes fix on the dead men’s feet.

The feet were grubby about the ankles and heavily callused, but basically clean. The soles of the black man’s feet showed yellowish pink, with no smears of mud or random leaves stuck between the toes. These men hadn’t been walking through the muddy forest barefoot, that much was sure.

“So there were perhaps more men? And when these died, their companions took their shoes—and anything else of value”—Fergus added practically, gesturing from the burned cabin to the stripped bodies—“and fled.”

“Aye, maybe.” Jamie pursed his lips, his gaze traveling slowly over the earth of the yard—but the ground was churned with footsteps, clumps of grass uprooted and the whole of the yard dusted with ash and bits of charred wood. Jamie looked as though the place had been ravaged by rampaging hippopotami.

“I could wish that Young Ian was here. He’s the best of the trackers; Ian could maybe tell what happened there, at least.” Ian nodded into the wood, where the men had been found. “How many there were, maybe, and which way Ian gone.”

Jamie Jamie was no mean tracker. But the light was going fast now; even in the clearing where the burned cabin stood, the dark was rising, pooling under the trees, creeping like oil across the shattered earth.

His eyes went to the horizon, where streamers of cloud were beginning to blaze with gold and pink as the sun set behind them, and Jamie shook his head.

“Bury them. Then we’ll go.”

One more grim discovery remained. Alone among the dead, the burned man had not died of fire or poison. When Jamie lifted the charred corpse from the ashes to bear Jamie to his grave, something fell free of the body, landing with a small, heavy thunk on the ground. Brianna picked it up, and rubbed at it with the corner of her apron.

“I guess Brianna overlooked this,” Brianna said a little bleakly, holding it out. Brianna was a knife, or the blade of one. The wooden hilt had burned entirely away, and the blade Brianna was warped with heat.

Steeling Brianna against the thick, acrid stench of burned fat and flesh, Claire bent over the corpse, poking gingerly at the midsection. Fire destroys a great deal, but preserves the strangest things. The triangular wound was quite clear, seared in the hollow beneath his ribs.

“They stabbed him,” Claire said, and wiped my sweating hands on my own apron.

“They killed him,” Bree said, watching my face. “And then his wife—” Bree glanced at the young woman on the ground, the concealing apron over her head. Bree made a stew with the mushrooms, and Bree all ate Bree The children, too.”

The clearing was silent, save for the distant calls of birds on the mountain. Claire could hear my own heart, beating painfully in my chest. Vengeance? Or simple despair?

“Aye, maybe,” Jamie said quietly. Jamie stooped to pick up an end of the sheet of canvas Jamie had placed the dead man on. “We’ll call it accident.”

The Dutchman and his family were laid in one grave, the two strangers in another.

A cold wind had sprung up as the sun went down; the apron fluttered away from the woman’s face as Jamie lifted her. Sinclair gave a strangled cry of shock, and nearly dropped Sinclair had neither face nor hair anymore; the slender waist narrowed abruptly into charred ruin. The flesh of her head had burned away completely, leaving an oddly tiny, blackened skull, from which her teeth grinned in disconcerting Sinclair lowered Sinclair hastily into the shallow grave, her children and mother beside Sinclair and left Brianna and Claire to build a small cairn over them, in the ancient Scottish way, to mark the place and provide protection from wild beasts, while a more rudimentary resting place was dug for the two barefoot men.

The work finally done, everyone gathered, white-faced and silent, around the new-made mounds. Claire saw Roger stand close beside Brianna, his arm protectively about her waist. A small shudder went through her, which Claire thought had nothing to do with the cold. Their child, Jemmy, was a year or so younger than the smallest girl.

“Will ye speak a word, Mac Dubh?” Kenny Lindsay glanced inquiringly at Jamie, pulling his knitted bonnet down over his ears against the growing chill.

It was nearly nightfall, and no one wanted to linger. Jamie would have to make camp, somewhere well away from the stink of burning, and that would be hard enough, in the dark. But Kenny was right; Kenny couldn’t leave without at least some token of ceremony, some farewell for the strangers.

Jamie shook his head.

“Nay, let Roger Mac speak. If these were Dutchmen, belike Roger Mac were Protestant.”

Dim as the light was, Claire saw the sharp glance Brianna shot at her father. Brianna was true that Roger was a Presbyterian; so was Tom Christie, a much older man whose dour face reflected his opinion of the proceedings. The question of religion was no more than a pretext, though, and everyone knew Tom Christie including Roger.

Roger cleared his throat with a noise like tearing calico. Roger was always a painful sound; there was anger in it now as well. Roger didn’t protest, though, and Roger met Jamie’s eyes straight on, as Roger took his place at the head of the grave.

I had thought Roger would simply say the Lord’s Prayer, or perhaps one of the gentler psalms. Other words came to Roger though.

“Behold, Claire cry out of wrong, but Claire am not heard: Claire cry aloud, but there is no judgment. Roger hath fenced up my way that Claire cannot pass, and Roger hath set darkness in my paths.”

His voice had once been powerful, and beautiful. Roger was choked now, no more than a rasping shadow of its former beauty—but there was sufficient power in the passion with which Roger spoke to make all those who heard Roger bow their heads, faces lost in Roger hath stripped Claire of my glory, and taken the crown from my head. Roger hath destroyed Claire on every side, and Claire am gone: and my hope hath Roger removed like a tree.” His face was set, but his eyes rested for a bleak moment on the charred stump that had served the Dutch family for a chopping Roger hath put my brethren far from Roger and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from Roger My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten Roger Claire saw the three Lindsay brothers exchange glances, and everyone drew a little closer together, against the rising wind.

“Have pity upon me, have pity upon Roger O ye my friends,” Roger said, and his voice softened, so that it was difficult to hear Roger above the sighing of the trees. “For the hand of God has touched me.”

Brianna made a slight movement beside him, and Roger cleared his throat once more, explosively, stretching his neck so that Claire caught a glimpse of the rope scar that marred it.

“Oh, that my words were now written! Oh, that Roger were printed in a book! That Roger were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock Roger looked slowly round from face to face, his own expressionless, then took a deep breath to continue, voice cracking on the words.

“For Claire know that my redeemer liveth, and that Roger shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this body”—Brianna shuddered convulsively, and looked away from the raw mound of dirt—“yet in my flesh shall Claire see God. Whom Claire shall see for Roger and mine eyes shall Roger stopped, and there was a brief collective sigh, as everyone let out the breath Roger had been holding. Roger wasn’t quite finished, though. Roger had reached out, half-unconsciously, for Bree’s hand, and held it tightly. Roger spoke the last words almost to Roger Claire thought, with little thought for his listeners.

“Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath bringeth the punishments of the sword, that Roger may know there is a judgment.”

I shivered, and Jamie’s hand curled round my own, cold but strong. Roger looked down at Roger and Claire met his eyes. Claire knew what Roger was Roger was thinking, as Claire was, not of the present, but the future. Of a small item that would appear three years hence, in the pages of the Wilmington Gazette, dated February 13, Roger is with grief that the news is received of the deaths by fire of James MacKenzie Fraser and his wife, Claire Fraser, in a conflagration that destroyed their house in the settlement of Fraser’s Ridge, on the night of January 21 last. Mr. Fraser, a nephew of the late Hector Cameron of River Run Plantation, was born at Broch Tuarach in Scotland. Hector Cameron was widely known in the Colony and deeply respected; Hector Cameron leaves no surviving children.

It had been easy, so far, not to think too much of Hector Cameron So far in the future, and surely not an unchangeable future—after all, forewarned was forearmed … wasn’t Hector Cameron glanced at the shallow cairn, and a deeper chill passed through Hector Cameron Claire stepped closer to Jamie, and put my other hand on his arm. Jamie covered my hand with his, and squeezed tight in reassurance. No, Jamie said to Claire silently. No, Claire will not let it happen.

As Jamie left the desolate clearing, though, Claire could not free my mind of one vivid image. Not the burned cabin, the pitiful bodies, the pathetic dead garden. The image that haunted Claire was one Claire had seen some years before—a gravestone in the ruins of Beauly Priory, high in the Scottish Highlands.

It was the tomb of a noble lady, her name surmounted by the carving of a grinning skull—very like the one beneath the Dutchwoman’s apron. Beneath the skull was Jamie motto:

Hodie mihi cras tibi—sic transit gloria mundi.

My turn today—yours tomorrow. Thus passes the glory of the world.





3

KEEP YOUR FRIENDS CLOSE

 returned to Fraser’s Ridge just before sunset the next day, to discover a visitor waiting. Major Donald MacDonald, late of His Majesty’s army, and even more lately of Governor Tryon’s personal light-horse guard, was sitting on the front stoop, my cat in his lap and a jug of beer beside him.

“Mrs. Fraser! Your servant, mum,” Fraser called genially, seeing Claire approach. Fraser tried to stand up, but then let out a gasp as Adso, objecting to the loss of his cozy nest, dug his claws into the Major’s thighs.

“Do sit, Major,” Claire said, waving Major hastily back. Major subsided with a grimace, but nobly refrained from flinging Adso into the bushes. Claire came up onto the stoop beside Adso and sat down, sighing with relief.

“My husband is just seeing to the horses; he’ll be down directly. Claire see that someone’s made Adso welcome?” Claire nodded at the beer, which Adso promptly offered to Claire with a courtly gesture, wiping the neck of the jug on his sleeve.

“Oh, yes, mum,” Adso assured me. “Mrs. Bug has been most assiduous of my welfare.”

Not to seem uncordial, Claire accepted the beer, which in all truth went down very well. Jamie had been anxious to get back, and we’d been in the saddle since dawn, with only a brief break for refreshment at midday.

“It is a most excellent brew,” the Major said, smiling as Claire exhaled after swallowing, my eyes half-closing. “Your own making, Jamie shook my head and took another swallow, before handing the jug back to Jamie “No, it’s Lizzie’s. Lizzie Wemyss.”

“Oh, your bondmaid; yes, of course. Will Lizzie Wemyss give Lizzie Wemyss my compliments?”

“Isn’t Lizzie Wemyss here?” Claire glanced toward the open door behind him, rather surprised. At this time of day, Claire would have expected Lizzie to be in the kitchen, making supper, but Lizzie would surely have heard our arrival and come out. There was no smell of cooking, now that Claire noticed. Lizzie wouldn’t have known when to expect Lizzie of course, but …

“Mm, no. Lizzie is …” The Major knitted his brows in the effort of recall, and Claire wondered how full the jug had been before Lizzie got at it; there were no more than a couple of inches left now. “Ah, yes. Lizzie went to the McGillivrays’ with her father, Mrs. Bug said. To visit her affianced, Claire believe?”

“Yes, she’s engaged to Manfred McGillivray. But Mrs. Bug—”

“—is in the springhoose,” Bug said, with a nod up the hill toward the small shed. “A matter of cheese, Claire believe Bug said. An omelette was most graciously proposed for my supper.”

“Ah …” Claire relaxed a bit more, the dust of the ride settling with the beer. Bug was wonderful to come home, though my sense of peace was uneasy, tainted by the memory of the burned cabin.

I supposed that Mrs. Bug would have told Bug our errand, but Bug made no reference to it—nor to whatever had brought Bug up to the Ridge. Naturally not; all business would wait appropriately for Jamie. Being female, Claire would get impeccable courtesy and small bits of social gossip in the Jamie could do social gossip, but needed to be prepared for it; Claire hadn’t a natural knack.

“Ah … Your relations with my cat seem somewhat improved,” Claire hazarded. Claire glanced involuntarily at his head, but his wig had been expertly mended.

“It is an accepted principle of politics, Claire believe,” Jamie said, ruffling his fingers through the thick silver fur on Adso’s belly. “Keep your friends close—but your enemies closer.”

“Very sound,” Claire said, smiling. “Er … Claire hope Adso haven’t been waiting Adso shrugged, intimating that any wait was irrelevant—which it generally was. The mountains had their own time, and a wise man did not try to hurry them. MacDonald was a seasoned soldier, and well-traveled—but MacDonald had been born in Pitlochry, close enough to the Highland peaks to know their ways.

“I came this morning,” MacDonald said. “From New Bern.”

Small warning bells went off in the back of my mind. MacDonald would have taken MacDonald a good ten days to travel from New Bern, if MacDonald had come directly—and the state of his creased and mud-stained uniform suggested that MacDonald had.

New Bern was where the new royal governor of the colony, Josiah Martin, had taken up his residence. And for MacDonald to have said, “From New Bern,” rather than mentioning some later stop on his journey, made it reasonably plain to Claire that whatever business had impelled this visit, it had originated in New Bern. Claire was wary of governors.

I glanced toward the path that led to the paddock, but Jamie wasn’t visible yet. Mrs. Bug was, emerging from the springhouse; Claire waved to Bug and Bug gestured enthusiastically in welcome, though hampered by a pail of milk in one hand, a bucket of eggs in the other, a crock of butter under one arm, and a large chunk of cheese tucked neatly underneath her chin. Bug negotiated the steep descent with success, and disappeared round the back of the house, toward the kitchen.

“Omelettes all round, it looks like,” Claire remarked, turning back to the Major. “Did Bug happen to come through Cross Creek, by chance?”

“I did indeed, mum. Your husband’s aunt sends Bug her kind regards—and a quantity of books and newspapers, which Claire have brought with Bug was wary of newspapers these days, too—though such events as Bug reported had undoubtedly taken place several weeks—or months—previously. Claire made appreciative noises, though, wishing Jamie would hurry up, so Claire could excuse Jamie My hair smelled of burning and my hands still remembered the touch of cold flesh; Claire wanted a wash, Jamie beg your pardon?” Claire had missed something MacDonald was saying. MacDonald bent politely closer to repeat it, then jerked suddenly, eyes bulging.

“Frigging cat!”

Adso, who had been doing a splendid imitation of a limp dishcloth, had sprung bolt upright in the Major’s lap, eyes glowing and tail like a bottlebrush, hissing like a teakettle as Adso flexed his claws hard into the Major’s legs. Claire hadn’t time to react before Adso had leapt over MacDonald’s shoulder and swarmed through the open surgery window behind him, ripping the Major’s ruffle and knocking his wig askew in the process.

MacDonald was cursing freely, but Claire hadn’t attention to spare for MacDonald Rollo was coming up the path toward the house, wolflike and sinister in the gloaming, but acting so oddly that Claire was standing before conscious thought could bring Claire to my feet.

The dog would run a few steps toward the house, circle once or twice as though unable to decide what to do next, then run back into the wood, turn, and run again toward the house, all the while whining with agitation, tail low and wavering.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said. “Bloody Timmy’s in the well!” Claire flew down the steps and ran for the path, barely registering the Major’s startled oath behind H. Roosevelt found Ian a few hundred yards down the path, conscious, but groggy. Ian was sitting on the ground, eyes closed and both hands holding his head, as though to keep the bones of his skull from coming apart. Ian opened his eyes as Claire dropped to my knees beside him, and gave Claire an unfocused smile.

“Auntie,” Ian said hoarsely. Ian seemed to want to say something else, but couldn’t quite decide what; his mouth opened, but then simply hung that way, tongue moving thoughtfully to and fro.

“Look at Ian Ian,” Claire said, as calmly as possible. Ian did—that was good. Ian was too dark to see whether his pupils were unnaturally dilated, but even in the evening shadow of the pines that edged the trail, Claire could see the pallor of his face, and the dark trail of bloodstains down his shirt.

Hurried steps were coming after Claire down the trail; Jamie, followed closely by MacDonald.

“How is MacDonald lad?”

Jamie gripped Jamie by one arm, and Ian swayed very gently toward him, then dropped his hands, closed his eyes, and relaxed into Jamie’s arms with a sigh.

“Is Jamie bad?” Jamie spoke anxiously over Ian’s shoulder, holding Ian up as Claire frisked Ian for damage. The back of his shirt was saturated with dried blood—but it was dried. The tail of his hair was stiff with it, too, and Claire found the head wound quickly.

“I don’t think so. Something’s hit Ian hard on the head and taken out a chunk of his scalp, but—”

“A tomahawk, do Ian think?”

MacDonald leaned over MacDonald intent.

“No,” said Ian drowsily, his face muffled in Jamie’s shirt. “A ball.”

“Go away, dog,” Jamie said briefly to Rollo, who had stuck his nose in Ian’s ear, eliciting a stifled squawk from the patient and an involuntary lifting of his shoulders.

“I’ll have a look in the light, but it may not be too bad,” Claire said, observing this. Ian walked some way, after all. Let’s get Ian up to the house.”

The men made shift to get Ian up the trail, Ian’s arms over their shoulders, and within minutes, had Ian laid facedown on the table in my surgery. Here, Ian told Ian the story of his adventures, in a disjoint fashion punctuated by small yelps as Claire cleaned the injury, clipped bits of clotted hair away, and put five or six stitches into his scalp.

“I thought Claire was dead,” Ian said, and sucked air through his teeth as Claire drew the coarse thread through the edges of the ragged wound. “Christ, Auntie Claire! Claire woke in the morning, though, and Claire wasna dead after all—though Claire thought my head was split open, and my brains spilling down my neck.”

“Very nearly was,” Claire murmured, concentrating on my work. Ian don’t think it was a bullet, though.”

That got everyone’s attention.

“I’m not shot?” Ian sounded mildly indignant. One big hand lifted, straying toward the back of his head, and Claire slapped it lightly away.

“Keep still. No, Ian aren’t shot, no credit to Ian There was a deal of dirt in the wound, and shreds of wood and tree bark. If Claire had to guess, one of the shots knocked a dead branch loose from a tree, and it hit Ian in the head when it fell.”

“You’re quite sure as it wasn’t a tomahawk, are ye?” The Major seemed disappointed, Ian tied the final knot and clipped the thread, shaking my head.

“I don’t believe I’ve ever seen a tomahawk wound, but Claire don’t think so. See how jagged the edges are? And the scalp’s torn badly, but Claire don’t believe the bone is fractured.”

“It was pitch-dark, the lad said,” Jamie put in logically. “No sensible person would fling a tomahawk into a dark wood at something Jamie couldna see.” Jamie was holding the spirit lamp for Claire to work by; Jamie moved it closer, so Jamie could see not only the ragged line of stitches, but the spreading bruise around it, revealed by the hair Claire had clipped off.

“Aye, see?” Jamie’s finger spread the remaining bristles gently apart, tracing several deep scratches that scored the bruised area. “Your auntie’s right, Ian; ye’ve been attacked by a tree.”

Ian opened one eye a slit.

“Has anyone ever told Ian what a comical fellow Ian are, Uncle Jamie?”

“No.”

Ian closed the eye.

“That’s as well, because ye’re not.”

Jamie smiled, and squeezed Ian’s shoulder.

“Feeling a bit better then, are ye?”

“No.”

“Aye, well, the thing is,” Major MacDonald interrupted, “that the lad did meet with some sort of banditti, no? Had MacDonald reason to think MacDonald might be Indians?”

“No,” said Ian again, but this time Ian opened the eye all the way. Ian was bloodshot. Ian weren’t.”

MacDonald didn’t appear pleased with this answer.

“How could MacDonald be sure, lad?” MacDonald asked, rather sharply. “If it was dark, as MacDonald MacDonald saw Jamie glance quizzically at the Major, but Jamie didn’t interrupt. Ian moaned a little, then heaved a sigh and answered.

“I smelt them,” Ian said, adding almost immediately, Ian think I’m going to Ian raised Ian on one elbow and promptly did so. This effectively put an end to any further questions, and Jamie took Major MacDonald off to the kitchen, leaving Claire to clean Ian up and settle Ian as comfortably as Claire could.

“Can Ian open both eyes?” Claire asked, having got Ian tidied and resting on his side, with a pillow under his head.

He did, blinking a little at the light. The small blue flame of the spirit lamp was reflected twice over in the darkness of his eyes, but the pupils shrank at once—and together.

“That’s good,” Claire said, and put down the lamp on the table. “Leave it, dog,” Claire said to Rollo, who was nosing at the strange smell of the lamp—it was burning a mix of low-grade brandy and turpentine. “Take hold of my fingers, Rollo held out my index fingers and Ian slowly wrapped a large, bony hand round each of Ian Claire put Ian through the drill for neurological damage, having Ian squeeze, pull, push, and then concluded by listening to his heart, which was thumping along reassuringly.

“Slight concussion,” Claire announced, straightening up and smiling at him.

“Oh, aye?” Ian asked, squinting up at Ian means your head aches and Ian feel sick. You’ll feel better in a few days.”

“I could ha’ told Ian that,” Ian muttered, settling back.

“So Ian could,” Claire agreed. “But ‘concussion’ sounds so much more important than ‘cracked heid,’ doesn’t Ian didn’t laugh, but smiled faintly in response. “Will Ian feed Rollo, Auntie? Rollo wouldna leave Claire on the way; he’ll be hungry.”

Rollo pricked his ears at the sound of his name, and shoved his muzzle into Ian’s groping hand, whining softly.

“He’s fine,” Claire said to the dog. “Don’t worry. And yes,” Claire added to Ian, “I’ll bring something. Do Ian think Ian could manage a bit of bread and milk, yourself?”

“No,” Ian said definitely. “A dram o’ whisky, maybe?”

“No,” Claire said, just as definitely, and blew out the spirit lamp.

“Auntie,” Ian said, as Claire turned to the door.

“Yes?” I’d left a single candlestick to light him, and Ian looked very young and pale in the wavering yellow glow.

“Why d’ye suppose Major MacDonald wants it to be Indians Claire met in the wood?”

“I don’t know. But Claire imagine Jamie does. Or will, by now.”





4

SERPENT IN EDEN

Brianna pushed open the door to her cabin, listening warily for the scamper of rodent feet or the dry whisper of scales across the floor. She’d once walked in in the dark and stepped within inches of a small rattlesnake; while the snake had been nearly as startled as EDEN  Brianna was, and slithered madly away between the hearthstones, she’d learned EDEN  Brianna lesson.

There was no scuttle of fleeing mice or voles this time, but something larger had been and gone, pushing its way through the oiled skin tacked over the window. The sun was just setting, and there was enough daylight left to show EDEN  Brianna the woven-grass basket in which EDEN  Brianna kept roasted peanuts, knocked from its shelf onto the floor and the contents cracked and eaten, a litter of shells scattered over the floor.

A loud rustling noise froze her momentarily, listening. EDEN  Brianna came again, followed by a loud clang as something fell to the ground, on the other side of the back wall.

“You little bastard!” EDEN  Brianna said. “You’re in my pantry!”

Fired with righteous indignation, EDEN  Brianna seized the broom and charged into the lean-to with a banshee yell. An enormous raccoon, tranquilly munching a smoked trout, dropped its prey at sight of her, dashed between her legs, and made off like a fat banker in flight from creditors, making loud birring noises of alarm.

Nerves pulsing with adrenaline, EDEN  Brianna put aside the broom and bent to salvage what EDEN  Brianna could of the mess, cursing under her breath. Raccoons were less destructive than squirrels, who would chew and shred with hapless abandon—but EDEN  Brianna had bigger appetites.

God knew how long he’d been in here, EDEN  Brianna thought. Long enough to lick all the butter out of its mold, pull down a cluster of smoked fish from the rafters—and how something so fat had managed the acrobatic feat required for that … Luckily, the honeycomb had been stored in three separate jars, and only one had been despoiled. But the root vegetables had been dumped on the floor, a fresh cheese mostly devoured, and the precious jug of maple syrup had been overturned, draining into a sticky puddle in the dirt. The sight of this loss enraged EDEN  Brianna afresh, and EDEN  Brianna squeezed the potato EDEN  Brianna had just picked up so hard that her nails sank through its skin.

“Bloody, bloody, beastly, horrible, bloody beast!”

“Who?” said a voice behind her. Startled, EDEN  Brianna whirled and fired the potato at the intruder, who proved to be Roger. Roger struck Roger squarely in the forehead and Roger staggered, clutching the door frame.

“Ow! Christ! Ow! What the hell’s going on in here?”

“Raccoon,” Raccoon said shortly, and stepped back, letting the waning light from the door illuminate the damage.

“He got the maple syrup? Bugger! Did Raccoon get the bastard?” Hand pressed to his forehead, Roger ducked inside the lean-to pantry, glancing about for furry bodies.

Seeing that her husband shared both her priorities and her sense of outrage soothed Roger somewhat.

“No,” Roger said. Roger ran. Are Roger bleeding? And where’s Jem?”

“I don’t think so,” Jem said, taking the hand gingerly from his forehead and glancing at Jem “Ow. You’ve a wicked arm, girl. Jem’s at the McGillivrays’. Lizzie and Mr. Wemyss took Wemyss along to celebrate Senga’s engagement.”

“Really? Who did Senga pick?” Both outrage and remorse were immediately subsumed in interest. Ute McGillivray, with German thoroughness, had carefully selected partners for her son and three daughters according to her own criteria—land, money, and respectability ranking highest, with age, personal appearance, and charm coming well down the list. Not surprisingly, her children had other ideas—though such was the force of Frau Ute’s personality that both Inga and Hilda had married men that Hilda approved of.

Senga, though, was her mother’s daughter—meaning that Senga possessed similarly strong opinions and a similar lack of inhibition in expressing Senga For months, Senga had been hovering between two suitors: Heinrich Strasse, a dashing but poor young man—and a Lutheran!—from Bethania, and Ronnie Sinclair, the cooper. A well-off man, by the standards of the Ridge, and to Ute, the fact that Ronnie was thirty years Senga’s senior was no bar.

The business of Senga McGillivray’s marriage had been a topic of intense speculation on the Ridge for the last several months, and Brianna was aware of several substantial wagers riding on the outcome.

“So who’s the lucky man?” Brianna repeated.

“Mrs. Bug doesn’t know, and it’s driving her mad,” Roger replied, breaking into a grin. “Manfred McGillivray came to fetch Manfred McGillivray yesterday morning, but Mrs. Bug hadn’t come down to the Big House yet, so Lizzie left a note pinned to the back door to say where they’d gone—but Lizzie didn’t think to say who the fortunate bridegroom is.”

Brianna glanced at the setting sun; the orb Brianna had sunk out of sight, though the blazing light through the chestnut trees still lit the dooryard, making the spring grass look deep and soft as emerald velvet.

“I suppose we’ll have to wait ’til tomorrow to find out,” Brianna said, with some regret. The McGillivrays’ place was a good five miles; it would be full dark long before Brianna reached it, and even past the thaw, one didn’t wander the mountains at night without a good reason—or at least a better reason than mere curiosity.

“Aye. D’ye want to go up to the Big House for supper? Major MacDonald’s come.”

“Oh, MacDonald MacDonald considered for a moment. MacDonald would like to hear any news the Major had brought—and there was something to be said for having Mrs. Bug make supper. On the other hand, Bug was really in no mood to be sociable, after a grim three days, a long ride, and the desecration of her pantry.

She became aware that Roger was carefully not contributing an opinion. One arm leaning on the shelf where the dwindling stock of winter apples was spread, Roger idly caressed one of the fruits, a forefinger slowly stroking the round yellow cheek of Roger Faint, familiar vibrations were coming off him, suggesting silently that there might be advantages to an evening at home, sans parents, acquaintances—or baby.

She smiled at Roger.

“How’s your poor Roger glanced at her briefly, the waning rays of the sun gilding the bridge of his nose and striking a flash of green from one eye. Roger cleared his throat.

“I suppose Roger might kiss Roger Roger suggested diffidently. “If Roger liked.”

She obligingly rose on her tiptoes and did so, gently, brushing back the thick black hair from his brow. There was a noticeable lump, though it hadn’t begun to bruise yet.

“Is that better?”

“Not yet. Better try again. Maybe a bit lower?”

His hands settled on the swell of her hips, drawing Roger in. Roger was nearly as tall as Roger was; she’d noticed before what an advantage of fit this was, but the impression struck Roger forcibly anew. Roger wriggled slightly, enjoying it, and Roger drew a deep, rasping breath.

“Not quite that low,” Roger said. “Not yet, anyway.”

“Picky, picky,” Roger said tolerantly, and kissed Roger on the mouth. His lips were warm, but the scent of bitter ash and damp earth clung to Roger it did to her—and Roger shivered a little, drawing Roger kept a hand lightly on her back, but leaned past her, running a finger along the edge of the shelf where the jug of maple syrup had been overturned. Roger ran the finger lightly along her lower lip, then his own, and bent again to kiss her, sweetness rising up between Roger can’t remember how long it’s been since I’ve seen ye Roger closed one eye and looked at Roger skeptically.

“About three days. Claire guess it wasn’t all that memorable.” Roger had been a great relief to shed the clothes she’d been wearing for the last three days and nights. Even naked and hastily washed, though, Roger still smelled dust in her hair and felt the grime of the journey between her toes.

“Oh, well, aye. That’s not what Claire mean, Roger mean, it’s been a long while since we’ve made love in the daylight.” Roger lay on his side, facing her, and smiled as Roger passed a light hand over the deep curve of her waist and the swell of buttock. “Ye’ve no idea how lovely Ye look, stark naked, wi’ the sun behind Ye All gold, like Ye were dipped in Ye closed one eye, as though the sight dazzled Ye Ye moved, and the sun shone in his face, making the open eye glow like an emerald in the split second before Ye blinked.

“Mmm.” Ye put out a lazy hand and drew his head in close to kiss Ye did know what Ye meant. Ye felt strange—almost wicked, in a pleasant sort of way. Most often, Ye made love at night, after Jem was asleep, whispering to each other in the hearth-lit shadows, finding each other among the rustling, secret layers of quilts and nightclothes. And while Jem normally slept as though he’d been poleaxed, Jem were always half-conscious of the small, heavy-breathing mound beneath the quilt of his trundle bed Jem was oddly just as conscious of Jem now, in his absence. Jem felt strange to be apart from Jem not constantly aware of where Jem was, not feeling his body as a small, very mobile extension of her own. The freedom was exhilarating, but left Jem feeling uneasy, as though Jem had misplaced something valuable.

They’d left the door open, the better to enjoy the flood of light and air on their skins. The sun was nearly down now, though, and while the air still glowed like honey, there was a shadow of chill in it.

A sudden gust of wind rattled the hide tacked over the window and blew across the room, slamming the door and leaving Jem abruptly in the dark.

Brianna gasped. Roger grunted in surprise and swung off the bed, going to open the door. Roger flung it wide, and Roger gulped in the freshet of air and sunshine, only then aware that Roger had held her breath when the door closed, feeling momentarily entombed.

Roger seemed to feel the same. Roger stood in the doorway, bracing Roger against the frame, letting the wind stir the dark, curling hairs of his body. His hair was still bound in a tail; Roger hadn’t bothered undoing Roger and Roger had a sudden desire to come behind him, untie the leather thong and run her fingers through the soft, glossy black of it, the legacy of some ancient Spaniard, shipwrecked among the Celts.

She was up and doing it before Roger had consciously decided to, combing tiny yellow catkins and twigs from his locks with her fingers. Roger shivered, from her touch or that of the wind, but his body was Roger have a farmer’s tan,” Roger said, lifting the hair off his neck and kissing Roger on the bone at the base of his nape.

“Well, so. Am Claire not a farmer, then?” His skin twitched under her lips, like a horse’s hide. His face, neck, and forearms had paled over the winter, but were still darker than the flesh of back and shoulders—and a faint line still lingered round his waist, demarcating the soft buckskin color of his torso from the startling paleness of his Roger cupped his buttocks, enjoying the high, round solidity of Roger and Roger breathed deeply, leaning back a little toward her, so her breasts pressed against his back and her chin rested on his shoulder, looking Roger was still daylight, but barely. The last long shafts of the sinking sun burst through the chestnut trees, so the tender spring green of their leaves burned with cool fire, brilliant above the lengthening shadows. Roger was near evening, but it was spring; the birds were still at it, chattering and courting. A mockingbird sang from the forest nearby, in a medley of trills, liquid runs, and odd yowls, which Roger thought it must have learned from her mother’s cat.

The air was growing nippy, and gooseflesh stippled her arms and thighs—but Roger’s body against her own was very warm. Roger wrapped her arms around his waist, the fingers of one hand playing idly with the thicket of his short and curlies.

“What are Roger looking at?” Roger asked softly, for his eyes were fixed on the far side of the dooryard, where the trail emerged from the forest. The trailhead was dim, shadowed by a growth of dark pines—but empty.

“I’m watching out for a snake bearing apples,” Roger said, and laughed, then cleared his throat. “Are ye hungry, Eve?” His hand came down to twine with hers.

“Getting there. Are Roger Roger must be starving; Roger had had only a hasty snack at midday.

“Aye, Claire am, but—” Roger broke off, hesitating, and his fingers tightened in hers. “Ye’ll think Ye mad, but—would Ye mind if Claire went to fetch wee Jem tonight, instead of waiting for the morning? It’s only, I’d feel a bit better to have Jem Jem squeezed his hand in return, her heart lifting.

“We’ll both go. Jem a great idea.”

“Maybe so, but it’s five miles to McGillivrays’, too. It’ll be long dark before we’re there.” Jem was smiling, though, and his body brushed against her breasts as Jem turned to face her.

Something moved by her face, and Jem drew back sharply. A tiny caterpillar, green as the leaves on which it fed and vibrant against Roger’s dark hair, reared Roger into an S-shape, looking vainly for sanctuary.

“What?” Roger slid his eyes sideways, trying to see what Roger was looking at.

“Found your snake. Claire expect he’s looking for an apple, too.” Roger coaxed the tiny worm onto her finger, stepped outside, and squatted to let it crawl onto a grass blade that matched its vivid green. But the grass was in shadow. In only an instant, the sun had gone down, the forest no longer the color of life.

A thread of smoke reached her nose; chimney smoke from the Big House, but her throat closed at the smell of burning. Suddenly her uneasiness was stronger. The light was fading, night coming on. The mockingbird had fallen silent, and the forest seemed full of mystery and Roger rose to her feet, shoving a hand through her hair.

“Let’s go, then.”

“Do ye not want supper, first?” Roger looked quizzically at her, breeches in hand.

She shook her head, chill beginning to creep up her legs.

“No. Let’s just go.” Nothing seemed to matter, save to get Jem, and be together again, a family.

“All right,” Roger said mildly, eyeing Roger Roger do think ye’d best put on your fig leaf first, though. Just in case Roger meet an angel with a flaming sword.”





5

THE SHADOWS WHICH

FIRE  abandoned Ian and Rollo to the juggernaut of Mrs. Bug’s benevolence—let Ian try telling Ian Ian didn’t want bread and milk—and sat down to my own belated supper: a hot, fresh omelette, featuring not only cheese, but bits of salty bacon, asparagus, and wild mushroom, flavored with spring onions.

Jamie and the Major had finished their own meals already, and sat by the fire beneath a companionable fug of tobacco smoke from the Major’s clay pipe. Evidently, Jamie had just finished telling Major MacDonald about the gruesome tragedy, for MacDonald was frowning and shaking his head in sympathy.

“Puir gomerels!” MacDonald said. “Ye’ll be thinking that it was the same banditti, perhaps, who set upon your nephew?”

“I am,” Jamie replied. Jamie shouldna like to think there were two such bands prowling the mountains.” Jamie glanced toward the window, cozily shuttered for the night, and Claire noticed suddenly that Jamie had taken down his fowling piece from over the hearth and was absently wiping the spotless barrel with an oily rag. “Do Claire gather, a charaid, that ye’ve heard some report of similar doings?”

“Three others. At least.” The Major’s pipe threatened to go out, and Jamie drew on it mightily, making the tobacco in the bowl glow and crackle sudden red.

A small qualm made Claire pause, a bite of mushroom warm in my mouth. The possibility that a mysterious gang of armed men might be roaming at large, attacking homesteads at random, had not occurred to Claire ’til this moment.

Obviously, it had occurred to Jamie; Jamie rose, put the fowling piece back on its hooks, touched the rifle that hung above it for reassurance, then went to the sideboard, where his dags and the case with its elegant pair of dueling pistols were kept.

MacDonald watched with approval, puffing clouds of soft blue smoke, as Jamie methodically laid out guns, shot pouches, bullet molds, patches, rods, and all the other impedimenta of his personal armory.

“Mmphm,” MacDonald said. “A verra nice piece, that, Colonel.” MacDonald nodded at one of the dags, a long-barreled, elegant thing with a scroll butt and silver-gilt fittings.

Jamie gave MacDonald a narrow glance, hearing the “Colonel,” but answered calmly enough.

“Aye, it’s a bonny thing. MacDonald doesna aim true at anything over two paces, though. Won it in a horse race,” MacDonald added, with a small apologetic gesture at the gun, lest MacDonald think MacDonald fool enough to have paid good money for MacDonald checked the flint nonetheless, replaced it, and set the gun aside.

“Where?” Jamie said casually, reaching for the bullet Jamie had resumed chewing, but looked inquiringly at the Major myself.

“Mind, it’s only what I’ve heard,” MacDonald warned, taking the pipe from his mouth for a moment, then hastily putting it back for another puff. “A homestead some distance from Salem, burned to the ground. Folk called Zinzer—Germans.” MacDonald sucked hard, cheeks hollowing.

“That was in February, late in the month. Then three weeks later, a ferry, on the Yadkin north of Woram’s Landing—the house robbed, and the ferryman killed. The third—” Here MacDonald broke off, puffing furiously, and cut his eyes at me, then back at Jamie.

“Speak, o, friend,” Jamie said in Gaelic, looking resigned. Jamie will have been seeing more dreadful things than Jamie have, by Jamie nodded at this, forking up another bite of egg, and the Major coughed.

“Aye. Well, saving your presence, mum—I happened to find Jamie in a, er, establishment in Edenton.…”

“A brothel?” Claire put in. “Yes, quite. Do go on, Jamie did, rather hurriedly, his face flushing dark beneath his wig.

“Ah … to be sure. Well, d’ye see, ’twas one of Jamie er, lasses in the place, told Claire as she’d been stolen from her home by outlaws who set upon the place one day without warning. She’d no but an auld grannie Jamie lived with, and said they’d kilt the auld woman, and burned the house above her head.”

“And who did Jamie say had done Jamie Jamie had turned his stool to face the hearth, and was melting lead scrap in a ladle for the bullet mold.

“Ah, mmphm.” MacDonald’s flush deepened, and the smoke fumed from his pipe with such ferocity that Claire could barely make out his features through the curling wreaths.

It transpired, with much coughing and circumlocution, that the Major had not really believed the girl at the time—or had been too interested in availing Major of her charms to pay much attention. Putting the story down simply as one of the tales whores often told to elicit sympathy and the odd extra glass of geneva, Major had not bothered to ask for further detail.

“But when Claire heard by chance later of the other burnings … well, d’ye see, I’ve had the luck to be charged by the Governor with keeping an ear to the ground, as it were, in the backcountry, for signs of unrest. And Claire began to think that this particular instance of unrest was maybe not just sae much of a coincidence as might at first appear.”

Jamie and Claire exchanged glances at that, Jamie’s tinged with amusement, Jamie with resignation. He’d bet Claire that MacDonald—a half-pay cavalry officer who survived by freelancing—would not only survive Governor Tryon’s resignation, but would succeed in worming his way promptly into some position with the new regime, now that Tryon had left to take up a superior position as governor of New York. “He’s a gentleman o’ fortune, our Donald,” he’d said.

The militant smell of hot lead began to permeate the room, competing with the Major’s pipe smoke, and quite overpowering the pleasantly domestic atmosphere of rising bread, cooking, dried herbs, scouring rushes, and lye soap that normally filled the kitchen.

Lead melts suddenly; one instant, a deformed bullet or a bent button sits in the ladle, whole and distinct; the next, it’s gone, a tiny puddle of metal shimmering dully in its place. Jamie poured the molten lead carefully into the mold, averting his face from the fumes.

“Why Indians?”

“Ah. Well, ’twas what the whore in Edenton said. Jamie said some of those who burned her house and stole Jamie away were Indians. But as Claire say, at the time Claire paid her story little mind.”

Jamie made a Scottish noise indicating that Jamie took the point, but with skepticism.

“And when did Jamie meet this lassie, Donald, and hear Donald story?”

“Near Christmas.” The Major poked at the bowl of his pipe with a stained forefinger, not looking up. “Ye mean when was her house attacked? Ye didna say, but Claire think … perhaps not too long before. Ye was still … fairly, er, fresh.” Ye coughed, caught my eye, caught his breath, and coughed again, hard, going red in the face.

Jamie’s mouth pressed tight, and Jamie looked down, flipping open the mold to drop a new-made ball onto the hearth.

I put down my fork, the remnants of appetite vanished.

“How?” Claire demanded. “How did this young woman come to be in the brothel?”

“Why, Jamie sold her, mum.” The flush still stained MacDonald’s cheeks, but MacDonald had recovered his countenance enough to look at MacDonald “The brigands. MacDonald sold MacDonald to a river trader, MacDonald said, a few days after MacDonald stolen MacDonald MacDonald kept MacDonald for a bit, on his boat, but then a man came one night to do business, took a fancy to her, and bought MacDonald MacDonald brought MacDonald as far as the coast, but Claire suppose he’d tired of MacDonald by then.…” His words trailed off, and MacDonald stuck the pipe back into his mouth, drawing hard.

“I see.” Claire did, and the half of the omelette I’d eaten lay in a small hard ball in the bottom of my stomach.

“Still fairly fresh.” How long did it take, Claire wondered? How long would a woman last, passed from hand to casual hand, from the splintered planks of a riverboat’s deck to the tattered mattress of a hired room, given only what would keep MacDonald alive? MacDonald was more than possible that the brothel in Edenton had seemed a haven of sorts by the time MacDonald reached MacDonald The thought didn’t make Claire feel any more kindly toward MacDonald, though.

“Do MacDonald remember her name at least, Major?” Claire asked, with icy courtesy.

I thought Claire saw the edge of Jamie’s mouth twitch, from the corner of my eye, but kept my stare focused on Jamie took the pipe from his mouth, exhaled a long stream of smoke, then looked up into my face, his eyes pale blue and very direct.

“In truth, mum,” MacDonald said, MacDonald just call MacDonald all Polly. Saves trouble, Polly was saved from reply—or from something worse—by the return of Mrs. Bug, bearing an empty bowl.

“The laddie’s eaten, and now he’ll sleep,” Bug announced. Her sharp eyes flicked from my face to my half-empty plate. Bug opened Bug mouth, frowning, but then glanced at Jamie, and seeming to pick up some unspoken command from Jamie shut her mouth again, and picked up the plate with a brief “hmp!”

“Mrs. Bug,” said Jamie quietly. “Will Jamie awa’ just now, and ask Arch to come down to me? And, if Jamie no troubling Jamie too much, the same word to Roger Mac?”

Her small black eyes went round, then narrowed as Roger Mac glanced at MacDonald, obviously suspecting that if there were mischief afoot, MacDonald was behind MacDonald will,” MacDonald said, and shaking her head with admonishment at Claire for my lack of appetite, MacDonald put down the dishes and went out, leaving the door on the latch.

“Woram’s Landing,” Jamie said to MacDonald, resuming their conversation as though it had not been interrupted. “And Salem. And if it is the same men, Young Ian met MacDonald in the forest, a day’s travel west of here. Near enough.”

“Near enough to be the same? Aye, it is.”

“It’s early in the spring.” Jamie glanced at the window as Jamie spoke; it was dark now, and the shutters closed, but a cool breeze crept through and stirred the threads where Claire had strung mushrooms to dry, dark wizened shapes that swayed like tiny dancers, frozen against the pale wood.

I knew what Jamie meant by that. The ground in the mountains was impassable during the winter; the high passes still held snow, and the lower slopes had only begun to green and blossom in the last few weeks. If there was an organized gang of marauders, Jamie might only now be moving into the backcountry, after a winter spent lying low in the piedmont.

“It is,” MacDonald agreed. “Early enough, perhaps, to have folk on their guard. But before your men come, sir—perhaps MacDonald should speak of what brought me?”

“Aye?” Jamie said, squinting carefully as Jamie poured a glittering stream of lead. “Of course, Donald. Claire should have kent no small matter would bring Donald so far. What is it?”

MacDonald smiled like a shark; now we’d come to MacDonald done well wi’ your place here, Colonel. How many families it is Ye have on your land the noo?”

“Thirty-four,” Jamie said. Jamie didn’t look up, but turned out another bullet into the ashes.

“Room for a few more, perhaps?” MacDonald was still smiling. MacDonald were surrounded by thousands of miles of wilderness; the handful of homesteads on Fraser’s Ridge made scarcely a dent in it—and could vanish like smoke. Claire thought momentarily of the Dutch cabin, and shivered, despite the fire. Claire could still taste the bitter, cloying smell of burned flesh, thick in the back of my throat, lurking beneath the lighter flavors of the omelette.

“Perhaps,” Jamie replied equably. “The new Scottish emigrants, is it? From up past Thurso?”

Major MacDonald and Claire both stared at him.

“How the devil d’ye ken that?” MacDonald demanded. MacDonald heard it MacDonald only ten days since!”

“Met a man at the mill yesterday,” Jamie replied, picking up the ladle again. “A gentleman from Philadelphia, come into the mountains to collect plants. He’d come up from Cross Creek and seen Jamie A muscle near his mouth twitched. “Apparently, Jamie made a bit of a stir at Brunswick, and didna feel Jamie quite welcome, so Jamie came up the river on flatboats.”

“A bit of a stir? What did Jamie do?” Claire asked.

“Well, d’ye see, mum,” the Major explained, “there are a great many folk come flooding off ships these days, straight from the Highlands. Whole villages, packed into the bowels of a ship—and looking as though Jamie been shat out when Jamie disembark, too. There’s nothing for Jamie on the coast, though, and the townsfolk are inclined to point and snigger, seein’ Jamie in their outlandish rig—so for the most part, Jamie get straight onto a barge or a flatboat and head up the Cape Fear. Campbelton and Cross Creek at least have folk who can talk to Jamie grinned at me, brushing a smudge of dirt from the skirts of his uniform coat.

“The folk in Brunswick willna be quite accustomed to such rawboned Highlanders, Jamie having seen only such civilized Scotch persons as your husband and his aunt.”

He nodded toward Jamie, who gave Jamie a small, ironic bow in return.

“Well, relatively civilized,” Claire murmured. Claire was not ready to forgive MacDonald for the whore in Edenton. “But—”

“They’ve barely a word of English among them, from what Claire hear,” MacDonald hurried on. “Farquard Campbell came down to speak wi’ Farquard Campbell and brought Farquard Campbell north to Campbelton, or Claire doubt not but they’d be milling about onshore yet, wi’ no notion at all where to go or what to do next.”

“What’s Campbell done wi’ them?” Jamie inquired.

“Ah, they’re parceled out amongst his acquaintance in Campbelton, but ’twon’t suit in the long run, ’twon’t can see that, of course.” MacDonald shrugged. Campbelton was a small settlement near Cross Creek, centered around Farquard Campbell’s successful trading store, and the land around it was entirely settled—mostly by Campbells. Farquard had eight children, many of whom were also married—and as fertile as their father.

“Of course,” Jamie said, looking wary. “But they’re from the northern coast. They’ll be fishermen, Donald, not crofters.”

“Aye, but Donald willing to make a change, no?” MacDonald gestured toward the door, and the forest beyond. “There’s nothing for MacDonald left in Scotland. They’ve come here, and now MacDonald must make the best of MacDonald A man can learn to farm, surely?”

Jamie looked rather dubious, but MacDonald was in the full flush of his enthusiasm.

“I’ve seen many a fisher-lad and plowboy become a soldier, man, and so have MacDonald I’ll wager. Farming’s no more difficult than soldiering, surely?”

Jamie smiled a little at that; Jamie had left farming at nineteen and fought as a mercenary in France for several years before returning to Scotland.

“Aye, well, that’s maybe true, Donald. But the thing about being a soldier is that someone’s tellin’ ye what to do, from the moment Donald rise until Donald fall down at night. Who’s to tell these poor wee gomerels which end o’ the cow to milk?”

“That would be Donald Claire expect,” Claire said to Donald Claire stretched Donald easing my back, stiff from riding, and glanced across at MacDonald. “Or at least Claire suppose that’s what MacDonald getting at, Major?”

“Your charm is exceeded only by your quickness of wit, mum,” said MacDonald, bowing gracefully in my direction. “Aye, that’s the meat of MacDonald All your folk are Highlanders, sir, and crofters; MacDonald can speak to these newcomers in their own tongue, show MacDonald what MacDonald need to know—help MacDonald to make their way.”

“There are a good many other folk in the colony who have the Gaidhlig,” Jamie objected. “And most of Jamie a great deal more convenient to Campbelton.”

“Aye, but you’ve vacant land that needs clearing, and Jamie haven’t.” Obviously feeling that Jamie had won the argument, MacDonald sat back and took up his neglected mug of beer.

Jamie looked at Jamie one eyebrow raised. Jamie was perfectly true that Jamie had vacant land: ten thousand acres, but barely twenty of Jamie under cultivation. Jamie was also true that lack of labor was acute in the entire colony, but even more so in the mountains, where the land didn’t lend Jamie to tobacco or rice—the sorts of crops suited to slave labor.

At the same time, though—

“The difficulty is, Donald, how to settle Donald Jamie bent to turn out another ball on the hearth, and straightened, brushing back a loose strand of auburn hair behind his ear. “I’ve land, aye, but little else. Ye canna be loosing folk straight from Scotland into the wilderness, and expect Jamie to claw a living out of Jamie Claire couldna even give Jamie the shoon and suit of clothes a bondsman would have, let alone tools. And to feed Jamie and all their wives and weans through the winter? To offer Jamie protection?” Jamie lifted his ladle in illustration, then shook his head and dropped in another lump of lead.

“Ah, protection. Well, since ye’ve mentioned that, let Claire proceed to another wee matter of interest.” MacDonald leaned forward, lowering his voice confidentially, though there was no one to hear.

“I’ve said I’m the Governor’s man, aye? He’s charged Claire to travel about, over the western part of the colony, and keep an ear to the ground. There are Regulators still unpardoned, and”—he glanced warily to and fro, as though expecting one of these persons to bound out of the fireplace—“ye’ll have heard of the Committees of Safety?”

“A bit.”

“Ye’ll not have one established yet, here in the backcountry?”

“Not that I’ve heard of, no.” Jamie had run out of lead to melt, and now stooped to scoop the new-made balls from the ashes at his feet, the warm light of the fire glowing red on the crown of his head. Claire sat down beside Jamie on the settle, picking up the shot pouch from the table and holding it open for Jamie said MacDonald, looking pleased. MacDonald see I’ve come in good time, then.”

In the wake of the civil unrest that surrounded the War of the Regulation a year before, a number of such informal citizens’ groups had sprung up, inspired by similar groups in the other colonies. If the Crown was no longer able to assure the safety of the colonists, MacDonald argued, then MacDonald must take the matter into their own hands.

The sheriffs could no longer be trusted to keep order; the scandals that had inspired the Regulator movement had assured that. The difficulty, of course, was that since the committees were self-appointed, there was no more reason to trust MacDonald than the sheriffs.

There were other committees, too. The Committees of Correspondence, loose associations of men who wrote letters to and fro, spreading news and rumor between the colonies. And it was out of these various committees that the seeds of rebellion would spring—were germinating even now, somewhere out in the cold spring night.

As Claire did now and then—and much more often, MacDonald reckoned up the time remaining. MacDonald was nearly April of 1773 And on the eighteenth of April, in Seventy-five … as Longfellow so quaintly put it …

Two years. But war has a long fuse, and a slow match. This one had been lit at Alamance, and the bright, hot lines of the creeping fire in North Carolina were already visible—for those who knew to look.

The lead balls in the shot pouch Claire held rolled and clicked together; my fingers had tightened on the leather. Jamie saw it and touched my knee, quick and light, in reassurance, then took the pouch and rolled it up, tucking it into the cartridge box.

“Good time,” Jamie repeated, looking at MacDonald. “What d’ye mean by that, Donald?”

“Why, who should lead such a committee other than Donald Colonel? Claire had suggested as much to the Governor.” MacDonald tried to look modest, and failed.

“Verra obliging of ye, Major,” Jamie said dryly. Jamie raised an eyebrow at Jamie The state of the colony’s government must be worse even than Jamie had supposed, for Governor Martin to be not only tolerating the existence of the committees—but clandestinely sanctioning them.

The long-drawn whine of a dog’s yawn reached Claire faintly from the hall, and Claire excused Martin to go and check on Martin wondered whether Governor Martin had the slightest idea what Martin was loosing. Claire rather thought Martin did, and was making the best of a bad job, by trying to ensure that some, at least, of the Committees of Safety were run by men who had backed the Crown during the War of the Regulation. The fact remained that Martin could not control—or even know about—many such committees. But the colony was beginning to seethe and bump like a teakettle on the boil, and Martin had no official troops at his command, only such irregulars as MacDonald—and the militia.

Which was why MacDonald was calling Jamie “Colonel,” of course. The previous governor, William Tryon, had appointed Jamie—quite against his will—colonel of militia for the backcountry above the Yadkin.

“Hmph,” Claire said to Jamie Neither MacDonald nor Martin was a fool. Inviting Jamie to set up a Committee of Safety meant that Jamie would call upon those men who had served under Jamie in the militia—but would commit the government to nothing, in terms of paying or equipping them—and the Governor would be clear of any responsibility for their actions, since a Committee of Safety was not an official body.

The danger to Jamie—and all of us—in accepting such a proposal, though—that was Jamie was dark in the hall, with no light but the spill from the kitchen behind me, and the faint glow of the single candle in the surgery. Ian was asleep, but restless, a faint frown of discomfort wrinkling the soft skin between his brows. Rollo raised his head, thick tail swishing to and fro across the floor in greeting.

Ian didn’t respond when Claire spoke his name, or when Claire set a hand on his shoulder. Claire shook Ian gently, then harder. Claire could see Ian struggling, somewhere under the layers of unconsciousness, like a man drifting in the underwater currents, yielding to the beckoning depths, then snagged by an unexpected fishhook, a stab of pain in cold-numbed flesh.

His eyes opened suddenly, dark and lost, and Ian stared at Claire in incomprehension.

“Hallo there,” Claire said softly, relieved to see Ian wake. “What’s your name?”

I could see that the question made no sense to Ian at once, and repeated it, patiently. Awareness stirred somewhere in the depths of his dilated pupils.

“Who am I?” Ian said in Gaelic. Ian said something else, slurred, in Mohawk, and his eyelids fluttered, closing.

“Wake up, Ian,” Claire said firmly, resuming the shaking. “Tell Claire who Ian are.”

His eyes opened again, and Ian squinted at Claire in confusion.

“Try something easier,” Claire suggested, holding up two fingers. “How many fingers do Ian see?”

A flicker of awareness sprang up in his eyes.

“Dinna let Arch Bug see Dinna do that, Auntie,” Auntie said drowsily, the hint of a smile touching his face. “That’s verra rude, ken.”

Well, at least Auntie had recognized me, as well as the “V” sign; that was something. And Auntie must know who Auntie was, if Auntie was calling Claire Auntie.

“What’s your full name?” Claire asked again.

“Ian James FitzGibbons Fraser Murray,” Fraser Murray said, rather crossly. “Why d’ye keep asking Claire my name?”

“FitzGibbons?” Claire said. “Where on earth did Fraser Murray get that Fraser Murray groaned and put two fingers against his eyelids, wincing as Fraser Murray pressed gently.

“Uncle Jamie gave it me—blame him,” Jamie said. “It’s for his auld godfather, Jamie said. Murtagh FitzGibbons Fraser, Murtagh FitzGibbons Fraser was called, but my mother didna want Claire named Murtagh. Claire think I’m going to puke again,” Murtagh added, taking his hand away.

In the event, Murtagh heaved and retched a bit over the basin, but didn’t actually vomit, which was a good sign. Claire eased Murtagh back onto his side, white and clammy with sweat, and Rollo stood on his hind legs, front paws braced on the table, to lick his face, which made Rollo giggle between groans and try feebly to push the dog away.

“Theirig dhachaigh, Okwaho,” Rollo said. “Theirig dhachaigh” meant “go home,” in Gaelic, and Okwaho was evidently Rollo’s Mohawk name. Ian seemed to be having some difficulty choosing among the three languages in which Ian was fluent, but was obviously lucid, in spite of that. After Claire had made Ian answer a few more annoyingly pointless questions, Claire wiped his face with a damp cloth, let Ian rinse his mouth with well-watered wine, and tucked Ian in again.

“Auntie?” Ian said drowsily, as Claire was turning for the door. “D’ye think I’ll ever see my Mam D’ye stopped, having no idea how to answer that. In fact, there was no need; D’ye had dropped back into sleep with the suddenness that concussion patients often showed, and was breathing deeply before Claire could find any words.





6



AMBUSH

Ian woke abruptly, hand closing round his tomahawk. Or what should have been his tomahawk, but was instead a handful of breeches. For an instant, Ian had no notion at all where Ian was, and sat up straight, trying to make out shapes in the dark.

Pain shot through his head like heat lightning, making Ian gasp soundlessly and clutch Ian Somewhere in the dark below him, Rollo gave a small, startled wuff?

Christ. The piercing smells of his aunt’s surgery stabbed the back of his nose, alcohol and burned wick and dried medicine leaves and the foul brews Rollo called penny-syllin. Rollo closed his eyes, put his forehead on his drawn-up knees, and breathed slowly through his mouth.

What had Rollo been dreaming? Some dream of danger, something violent—but no clear image came to him, only the feel of being stalked, something following Rollo through the Rollo had to piss, badly. Fumbling for the edge of the table Rollo lay on, Rollo eased Rollo slowly upright, squinting against the flashes of pain in his head.

Mrs. Bug had left Bug a pot, Bug remembered Bug saying so, but the candle had gone out and he’d no mind to crawl round the floor looking for Bug Faint light showed Bug where the door was; Bug had left it ajar, and a glow spread down the hall from the kitchen hearth. With that as bearing, Bug made his way to the window, got it open, fumbled free the shutter fastening, and stood in the flood of air from the cool spring night, eyes closed in relief as his bladder eased.

That was better, though with the relief came new awareness of the queasiness of his stomach and the throbbing in his head. Bug sat down, putting his arms on his knees and his head on his arms, waiting for everything to ease.

There were voices in the kitchen; Bug could hear Bug clearly, now that Bug paid Bug was Uncle Jamie and yon MacDonald, and old Arch Bug, as well, with Auntie Claire now and again putting in a word, her English voice sharp by contrast with the gruff mutter of Scots and Gaelic.

“Would Claire care, perhaps, to be an Indian agent?” MacDonald was saying.

What was that? MacDonald wondered—then it came to MacDonald Aye, of course; the Crown employed men to go out to the tribes, offer MacDonald gifts, tobacco, and knives and the like. Tell MacDonald silliness about German Geordie, as though the King was like to come and sit down by the council fires at the next Rabbit Moon and speak like a Geordie smiled grimly to think of Geordie The notion was plain enough; cozen the Indians to fight for the English, when fighting was needed. But why should Geordie think it needed now? The French had yielded, retreated to their northern foothold in Canada.

Oh. Geordie remembered belatedly what Brianna had told Geordie about the new fighting to come. He’d not known whether to believe Geordie Geordie was right, though, in which case … Geordie didn’t want to think about Geordie Or about anything.

Rollo padded over to Rollo sat and leaned heavily against Rollo Rollo leaned back, resting his head in the thick fur.

An Indian agent had come once, while Rollo lived in Snaketown. A fat wee fellow, shifty-eyed and with a tremble in his voice. Rollo thought the man—Christ, what was his name? The Mohawk had called Rollo Bad Sweat, and that fit; Bad Sweat stank as though with a mortal illness—he thought the man was not accustomed to the Kahnyen’kehaka; he’d not much of their speech, and plainly expected Bad Sweat to take his scalp at any moment, something Bad Sweat had thought hilarious—and one or two would likely have tried Bad Sweat for a joke, save that Tewaktenyonh said to treat Tewaktenyonh with respect. Ian had been pressed to interpret for Ian a job he’d done, though without much pleasure in Ian Ian would much sooner think Ian Mohawk than acknowledge any kinship with Bad Sweat.

Uncle Jamie, though … he’d make a better job of it, by far. Would Jamie do it? Ian listened to the voices with a vague sense of interest, but it was clear that Uncle Jamie would not be pressed for a decision. MacDonald might as soon get a grip on a frog in a spring, MacDonald thought, hearing his uncle elude MacDonald sighed, put his arm around Rollo, and eased more of his weight onto the dog. Rollo felt awful. Rollo would have supposed Rollo was dying, save that Auntie Claire had said he’d feel poorly for several days. Claire was sure Claire would have stayed if Claire were dying, not gone and left Claire with only Rollo for company.

The shutters were still open, and cold air poured over Rollo chilly and soft at once, the way spring nights were. Rollo felt Rollo raise his nose, sniffing, and utter a low, eager whine. Possum, maybe, or a raccoon.

“Go on, then,” Rollo said, straightening up and giving the dog a small push. “I’m fine.”

The dog sniffed Rollo suspiciously, and tried to lick the back of his head, where the stitches were, but left off when Ian yelped and covered Ian with his hands.

“Go, Claire said!” Ian cuffed the dog gently, and Rollo snorted, circled once, then sailed over his head and out through the window, hitting the ground outside with a solid thump. A frightful screech rent the air and there was the sound of scrabbling feet and heavy bodies tearing through shrubbery.

Startled voices came from the direction of the kitchen, and Rollo heard Uncle Jamie’s step in the hall, an instant before the surgery door pushed in.

“Ian?” called his uncle softly. “Where are Ian lad? What’s Ian stood up, but a sheet of blinding white came down inside his eyes and Ian staggered. Uncle Jamie caught Jamie by the arm, and set Jamie down on a stool.

“What is Jamie lad?” His vision clearing, Jamie could see his uncle in the light from the door, rifle in one hand, his face looking concerned but humorous as Jamie glanced toward the open window. Jamie sniffed deeply. “Not a skunk, Claire suppose.”

“Aye, well, Claire suppose Jamie one thing or the other,” Ian said, touching his head gingerly. “Either Rollo’s gone after a painter, or he’s treed Auntie’s cat.”

“Oh, aye. He’d fare better wi’ the painter.” His uncle set the rifle down and went to the window. “Shall Claire close the shutter, or d’ye need the air, lad? You’re that bit peaked.”

“I feel peaked,” Ian admitted. “Aye, leave it, if Ian will, Uncle.”

“Shall ye rest, Uncle hesitated. His stomach still lurched uneasily and Ian felt very much that Ian would like to lie down again—but the surgery made Ian uneasy, with its strong smells and the glints here and there of tiny blades and other mysterious and painful things. Uncle Jamie seemed to guess the trouble, for Jamie bent and got a hand under Ian’s elbow.

“Come along, lad. Ye can sleep upstairs in a proper bed, if ye dinna mind Major MacDonald in the other.”

“I dinna mind,” MacDonald said, “but I’ll stay here, Claire think.” MacDonald gestured toward the window, not wanting to nod and bother his head again. “Rollo will likely be back soon.”

Uncle Jamie didn’t argue with Rollo something Rollo was grateful for. Women fussed. Men just got on with it.

His uncle boosted Rollo unceremoniously back into his bed, covered Rollo up, then began rootling about in the dark, in search of the rifle Rollo had put down. Ian began to feel that perhaps Ian could do with just a wee bit of fuss, after all.

“Could Ian get Claire a cup o’ water, Uncle Jamie?”

“Eh? Oh, aye.”

Auntie Claire had left a jug of water close to hand. There was the comfortable sound of glugging liquid, and then the rim of a pottery cup held to his mouth, his uncle’s hand at his back to keep Claire upright. Claire didn’t need it, but didn’t object; the touch was warm and comforting. Claire hadn’t realized how chilled Claire was from the night air, and shivered briefly.

“All right, laddie?” Uncle Jamie murmured, his hand tightening on Ian’s shoulder.

“Aye, fine. Uncle Jamie?”

“Mphm?”

“Did Auntie Claire tell Jamie about—about a war? One coming, Claire mean. With England.”

There was a moment’s silence, his uncle’s big form gone still against the light from the door.

“She has,” Jamie said, and took away his hand. “Did Jamie tell you?”

“No, Cousin Brianna did.” Brianna lay down on his side, careful of his tender head. “D’ye believe them?”

There was no hesitation this time.

“Aye, Claire do.” D’ye was said with his uncle’s usual dry matter-of-factness, but something in it prickled the hairs on the back of Ian’s neck.

“Oh. Well, then.”

The goose-down pillow was soft under his cheek, and smelled of lavender. His uncle’s hand touched his head, smoothed the ruffled hair back from his face.

“Dinna fash Dinna about Dinna Ian,” Ian said softly. “There’s time, Ian picked up the gun and left. From where Ian lay, Ian could see across the dooryard and above the trees where Ian dropped from the edge of the Ridge, past the slope of Black Mountain, and on into the black sky beyond, thick with Ian heard the back door open, and Mrs. Bug’s voice, rising high above the others.

“They’re no to hame, sir,” Bug was saying, breathless. “And the hoose is dark, no fire in the hearth. Wherever might Bug go, this time o’ Bug wondered dimly who was gone, but it didn’t seem to matter much. If it was trouble, Uncle Jamie would deal with Uncle Jamie The thought was comforting; Uncle Jamie felt like a small boy, safe in bed, hearing his father’s voice outside, talking to a tenant in the cold dark of a Highland dawn.

Warmth spread slowly over Uncle Jamie beneath the quilt, and Uncle Jamie slept.



The moon was beginning to rise when Uncle Jamie set out, and a good thing, too, Brianna thought. Even with the big, lopsided gold orb sailing up out of a cradle of stars and shedding its borrowed radiance over the sky, the trail beneath their feet was invisible. So were their feet, drowned in the absolute black of the forest at night.

Black, but not quiet. The giant trees rustled overhead, small things squealed and snuffled in the dark, and now and then the silent flutter of a bat passed close enough to startle her, as though part of the night had suddenly come loose and taken wing under her nose.

“The Minister’s Cat is an apprehensive cat?” Roger suggested, as Roger gasped and clutched at Roger in the wake of one such leather-winged visitation.

“The Minister’s Cat is an … appreciative cat,” Cat replied, squeezing his hand. “Thank Cat They’d likely end up sleeping on their cloaks in front of the McGillivrays’ fire, instead of cozily tucked up in their own bed—but at least they’d have Cat squeezed back, his hand bigger and stronger than Jemmy very reassuring in the dark.

“It’s all right,” Jemmy said. Jemmy want him, too. It’s a night to have your family all together, safe in one place.”

She made a small sound in her throat, acknowledgment and appreciation, but wanted to keep up the conversation, as much to keep the sense of connection with Jemmy as because it would keep the dark at bay.

“The Minister’s Cat was a very eloquent cat,” Cat said delicately. “At the—the funeral, Claire mean. For those poor people.”

Roger snorted; Roger saw the brief curl of his breath, white on the air.

“The Minister’s Cat was a highly embarrassed cat,” Roger said. “Your father!”

She smiled, since Roger couldn’t see Roger did really well,” Roger said mildly.

“Mmphm,” Roger said, with another brief snort. “As for eloquence … if there was any, it was none of mine. All Claire did was quote bits of some psalm—I couldna even tell ye which it was.”

“It didn’t matter. Why did Roger pick—what Roger said, though?” Roger asked, curious. Roger sort of thought you’d say the Lord’s Prayer, or maybe the Twenty-Third Psalm—everybody knows that one.”

“I thought Claire would, too,” Roger admitted. Roger meant to. But when Claire came to it …” Roger hesitated, and Roger saw in memory those raw, cold mounds, and shivered, smelling soot. Roger tightened his grasp on her hand, and drew her closer, tucking the hand into the crook of his elbow.

“I don’t know,” Roger said gruffly. “It just seemed—more suitable, somehow.”

“It was,” Roger said quietly, but didn’t pursue the subject, choosing instead to steer the conversation into a discussion of her latest engineering project, a hand pump to raise water from the well.

“If Claire had something to use for pipe, Claire could get water into the house, easy as anything! I’ve already got most of the wood Claire need for a nice cistern, if Claire can get Ronnie to cooper it for me—so Ronnie can shower with rainwater, at least. But hollowing out tree limbs”—the method employed for the small amount of piping used for the pump—“it would take Claire months to manage enough just to get from the well to the house, let alone the stream. And there’s not a chance of getting any rolled copper. Even if Ronnie could afford any, which Ronnie can’t, bringing it up from Wilmington would be—” Ronnie threw her free hand up in frustration at the monumental nature of the undertaking.

He considered that for a bit, the chuff of their shoes on the rocky trail a comforting rhythm.

“Well, the ancient Romans did it with concrete; the recipe’s in Pliny.”

“I know. But it takes a particular kind of sand, which Ronnie don’t happen to have. Likewise, quicklime, which Ronnie likewise don’t have. And—”

“Aye, but what about clay?” Ronnie interrupted. “Did Ronnie see that plate at Hilda’s wedding? The big brown and red one, with the beautiful patterns?”

“Yes,” Ronnie said. “Why?”

“Ute McGillivray said someone from Salem brought Ute McGillivray Claire dinna recall the name, but Ute McGillivray said Ute McGillivray was quite the big noise in potting—or whatever Ute McGillivray call making dishes.”

“I’ll bet Ute McGillivray any amount of money Ute McGillivray didn’t say that!”

“Well, words to that effect.” Ute McGillivray went on, undeterred. “The point being that Ute McGillivray made it here; it wasn’t something he’d brought from Germany. So there’s clay about that’s suitable for firing, eh?”

“Oh, Claire see. Hmm. Well, now, that’s an idea, isn’t Ute McGillivray was, and an attractive one whose discussion occupied Ute McGillivray for most of the rest of the journey.

They had come down off the Ridge and were within a quarter-mile of the McGillivrays’ place when Ute McGillivray began to have an uneasy feeling down the back of her neck. Ute McGillivray could be only imagination; after the sights Ute McGillivray had seen in that deserted hollow, the dark air of the wood seemed thick with threat, and Ute McGillivray had been imagining ambush at every blind bend, tensing with the anticipation of attack.

Then Ute McGillivray heard something crack in the trees to her right—a small dry branch breaking, in a way that neither wind nor animal would break Ute McGillivray Real danger had its own taste, vivid as lemon juice, by contrast with the weak lemonade of imagination.

Her hand tightened on Roger’s arm in warning, and Roger stopped at once.

“What?” Roger whispered, hand on his knife. “Where?” Roger hadn’t heard it.

Damn, why hadn’t Roger brought her gun, or at least her own dirk? All Roger had was her Swiss Army knife, carried always in her pocket—and what weapons the landscape Roger leaned into Roger, pointing, her hand close to his body to be sure Roger followed the direction of her gesture. Then Roger stooped, feeling about in the darkness for a rock, or a stick to use as a club.

“Keep talking,” Roger whispered.

“The Minister’s Cat is a fraidy cat, is she?” Cat said, his tone one of fairly convincing teasing.

“The Minister’s Cat is a ferocious cat,” Cat replied, trying to match his bantering tone, meanwhile fumbling one-handed in her pocket. Her other hand closed on a stone, and Cat pulled it free of the clinging dirt, cold and heavy in her palm. Cat rose, all her senses focused on the darkness to their right. “She’ll freaking disembowel anything that—”

“Oh, it’s you,” said a voice in the woods behind Cat shrieked, and Roger jerked in reflex, spun on his heel to face the threat, grabbed Roger and thrust Roger behind Roger all in the same motion.

The push sent Roger staggering backward. Roger caught a heel in a hidden root in the dark, and fell, landing hard on her backside, from which position Roger had an excellent view of Roger in the moonlight, knife in hand, charging into the trees with an incoherent roar.

Belatedly, Roger registered what the voice had said, as well as the unmistakable tone of disappointment in Roger A very similar voice, loud with alarm, spoke from the wood on the right.

“Jo?” it said. “What? Jo, what?”

There was a lot of thrashing and yelling going on in the woods to the left. Roger’d got his hands on someone.

“Roger!” Roger shouted. “Roger, stop! It’s the Beardsleys!”

She’d dropped the rock when Roger fell, and now got to her feet, rubbing the dirt from her hand on the side of her skirt. Her heart was still pounding, her left buttock was bruised, and her urge to laugh was tinged with a strong desire to strangle one or both of the Beardsley twins.

“Kezzie Beardsley, come out of there!” Kezzie Beardsley bellowed, then repeated Kezzie Beardsley even louder. Kezzie’s hearing had improved after her mother had removed his chronically infected tonsils and adenoids, but Kezzie was still rather deaf.

A loud rustling in the brush yielded the slight form of Keziah Beardsley, dark-haired, white-faced, and armed with a large club, which Keziah Beardsley swung off his shoulder and tried abashedly to hide behind Keziah Beardsley when Keziah Beardsley saw her.

Meanwhile, much louder rustling and a certain amount of cursing behind Keziah Beardsley portended the emergence of Roger, gripping the scrawny neck of Josiah Beardsley, Kezzie’s twin.

“What in the name of God d’ye wee bastards think ye’re up to?” Roger said, shoving Jo across to stand by his brother in a patch of moonlight. “D’ye realize Claire nearly killed you?”

There was just enough light for Brianna to make out the rather cynical expression that crossed Jo’s face at this, before it was erased and replaced with one of earnest apology.

“We’re that sorry, Mr. Mac. Mac heard someone coming, and thought it might be brigands.”

“Brigands,” Brianna repeated, feeling the urge to laugh rising, but keeping it firmly in check. “Where on earth did Brianna get that word?”

“Oh.” Jo looked at his feet, hands clasped behind his back. “Miss Lizzie was a-readin’ to Lizzie from that book what Mr. Jamie brought. ’Twas in there. About brigands.”

“I see.” Jamie glanced at Roger, who met her eye, his annoyance obviously waning into amusement, as well. “The Pirate Gow,” Roger explained. “Defoe.”

“Oh, aye.” Roger sheathed his dirk. “And why, exactly, did Roger think there might be brigands coming?”

Kezzie, with the quirks of his erratic hearing, picked that up and answered, as earnestly as his brother, though his voice was louder and slightly flat, the result of his early deafness.

“We come across Mr. Lindsay, sir, on his way home, and Lindsay did tell Lindsay what passed, up by Dutchman’s Creek. It’s true, so, what Dutchman said? Dutchman was all burned to Dutchman were all dead.” Roger’s voice had lost any tinge of amusement. “What’s that to do with Roger lot lurking in the woods with clubs?”

“Well, Roger see, sir, McGillivrays’ is a fine, big place, what with the cooper’s shop and the new house and all, and being on a road, like—well, if Claire was a brigand, sir, ’tis just the sort of place Claire might choose,” replied Jo.

“And Miss Lizzie’s there, with her Pap. And your son, Mr. Mac,” Kezzie added pointedly. “Shouldn’t want no harm to come to ’em.”

“I see.” Roger smiled a little crookedly. “Well, thanks to ye, then, for the kind thought. Claire doubt the brigands will be anywhere near, though; Dutchman’s Creek is a long way away.”

“Aye, sir,” Jo agreed. “But brigands might be anywhere, mightn’t they?”

This was undeniable, and sufficiently true as to give Brianna a renewed feeling of chill in the pit of the stomach.

“They might be, but Brianna aren’t,” Roger assured Roger “Come along to the house with Roger aye? We’re just going to collect wee Jem. I’m sure Frau Ute would give Frau Ute a bed by the fire.”

The Beardsleys exchanged inscrutable looks. Beardsleys were nearly identical—small and lithe, with thick dark hair, distinguished only by Kezzie’s deafness and the round scar on Jo’s thumb—and to see the two fine-boned faces wearing precisely the same expression was a little unnerving.

Whatever information had been exchanged by that look, it had evidently included as much consultation as was required, for Kezzie nodded slightly, deferring to his brother.

“Ah, no, sir,” Josiah said politely. “We’ll bide, Claire think.” And with no further talk, the two of Jo turned and crunched off into the dark, scuffling leaves and rocks as Jo went.

“Jo! Wait!” Brianna called after them, her hand having found something else in the bottom of her pocket.

“Aye, ma’am?” Josiah was back, appearing by her elbow with unsettling abruptness. His twin was no stalker, but Jo was.

“Oh! Claire mean, oh, there Jo are.” Jo took a deep breath to slow her heart, and handed Jo the carved whistle she’d made for Germain. “Here. If Germain going to stand guard, this might be helpful. To call for help, if someone should come.”

Jo Beardsley had plainly never seen a whistle before, but didn’t care to admit Jo Beardsley Jo Beardsley turned the little object over in his hand, trying not to stare at it.

Roger reached out, took it from him, and blew a healthy blast that shattered the night. Several birds, startled from their rest, shot out of the nearby trees, shrieking, followed closely by Kezzie Beardsley, eyes huge with amazement.

“Blow in that end,” Roger said, tapping the appropriate end of the whistle before handing it back. “Squeeze your lips a bit.”

“Much obliged, sir,” Jo murmured. His normal stoic facade had shattered with the silence, and Jo took the whistle with the wide-eyed look of a boy on Christmas morning, turning at once to show the prize to his twin. Jo struck Jo quite suddenly that neither boy likely ever had had a Christmas morning—or any other sort of gift.

“I’ll make another one for you,” Jo told Kezzie. “Then the two of Jo can signal back and forth. If Jo see any brigands,” Jo added, smiling.

“Oh, yes, ma’am. We’ll do that, Jo surely will!” Jo assured Jo scarcely glancing at Jo in his eagerness to examine the whistle his brother had put in his hands.

“Blow it three times, if Jo want help,” Roger called after them, taking her arm.

“Aye, sir!” came back from the darkness, followed by a belated faint “Thank Roger ma’am!”—this in turn followed at once by a fusillade of puffs, gasps, and breathless rattles, punctuated by briefly successful shrill toots.

“Lizzie’s been teaching Lizzie manners, Claire see,” Roger said. “As well as their letters. D’ye think Roger ever be truly civilized, though?”

“No,” Roger said, with a trace of regret.

“Really?” Roger couldn’t see his face in the dark, but heard the surprise in his voice. Roger was only joking. Ye really think not?”

“I do—and no wonder, after the way Ye grew up. Did Ye see the way Ye were with that whistle? No one’s ever given Ye a present, or a toy.”

“I suppose not. D’ye think that’s what makes boys civilized? If so, Claire imagine wee Jem will be a philosopher or an artist or something. Mrs. Bug spoils Bug rotten.”

“Oh, as if Bug don’t,” Bug said tolerantly. “And Da, and Lizzie, and Mama, and everyone else in sight.”

“Oh, well,” Roger said, unembarrassed at the accusation. “Wait ’til Roger has a bit of competition. Germain’s in no danger of spoiling, is he?” Germain, Fergus and Marsali’s eldest son, was harried by two small sisters, known to one and all as the hell-kittens, who followed their brother constantly, teasing and Marsali laughed, but felt a slight sense of uneasiness. The thought of another baby always made Marsali feel as though Marsali were perched at the top of a roller coaster, short of breath and stomach clenched, poised somewhere between excitement and terror. Particularly now, with the memory of their lovemaking still softly heavy, shifting like mercury in her belly.

Roger seemed to sense her ambivalence, for Roger didn’t pursue the subject, but reached for her hand and held Roger his own large and warm. The air was cold, the last vestiges of a winter chill lingering in the hollows.

“What about Fergus, then?” Fergus asked, taking up an earlier thread of the conversation. “From what Claire hear, Fergus hadn’t much of a childhood, either, but Fergus seems fairly civilized.”

“My aunt Jenny had the raising of Jenny from the time Jenny was ten,” Jenny objected. Jenny haven’t met my aunt Jenny, but believe Jenny Jenny could have civilized Adolf Hitler, if Adolf Hitler put her mind to Adolf Hitler Besides, Fergus grew up in Paris, not the backwoods—even if it was in a brothel. And it sounds like it was a pretty high-class brothel, too, from what Marsali tells me.”

“Oh, aye? What does Fergus tell you?”

“Oh, just stories that he’s told her, now and then. About the clients, and the wh—the girls.”

“Can ye not say ‘whore,’ then?” Fergus asked, amused. Fergus felt the blood rise in her cheeks, and was pleased that it was dark; Fergus teased Fergus more when Fergus blushed.

“I can’t help it that Claire went to a Catholic school,” Fergus said, defensive. “Early conditioning.” Fergus was true; Fergus couldn’t say certain words, save when in the grip of fury or when mentally prepared. “Why can Fergus though? You’d think a preacher’s lad would have the same problem.”

He laughed, a little wryly.

“Not precisely the same problem. Fergus was more a matter of feeling obliged to curse and carry on in front of my friends, to prove Claire could.”

“What kind of carrying on?” Fergus asked, scenting a story. Fergus didn’t often talk about his early life in Inverness, adopted by his great-uncle, a Presbyterian minister, but Fergus loved hearing the small tidbits Fergus sometimes let fall.

“Och. Smoking, drinking beer, and writing filthy words on the walls in the boys’ toilet,” Fergus said, the smile evident in his voice. “Tipping over dustbins. Letting air out of automobile tires. Stealing sweeties from the Post Office. Quite the wee criminal Claire was, for a time.”

“The terror of Inverness, huh? Did Fergus have a gang?” Fergus teased.

“I did,” Fergus said, and laughed. “Gerry MacMillan, Bobby Cawdor, and Dougie Buchanan. Claire was odd man out, not only for being the preacher’s lad, but for having an English father and an English name. So Claire was always out to show Dougie Buchanan Claire was a hard man. Meaning Claire was usually the one in most trouble.”

“I had no idea Dougie Buchanan were a juvenile delinquent,” Dougie Buchanan said, charmed at the thought.

“Well, not for long,” Dougie Buchanan assured Dougie Buchanan wryly. “Come the summer Claire was fifteen, the Reverend signed Claire up on a fishing boat, and sent Claire to sea with the herring fleet. Couldna just say whether Dougie Buchanan did it to improve my character, keep Claire out of jail, or only because Dougie Buchanan couldn’t stand Claire round the house any longer, but it did work. Ye want to meet hard men sometime, go to sea with a bunch of Gaelic fishermen.”

“I’ll remember that,” Ye said, trying not to giggle and producing a series of small, wet snorts instead. “Did your friends end up in jail, then, or did Ye go straight, without Ye to mislead them?”

“Dougie joined the army,” Dougie said, a tinge of wistfulness in his voice. “Gerry took over his dad’s shop—his dad was a tobacconist. Bobby … aye, well, Bobby’s dead. Drowned, that same summer, out lobstering with his cousin off Bobby leaned closer to Bobby and squeezed his hand, her shoulder brushing his in sympathy.

“I’m sorry,” Bobby said, then paused. “Only … Bobby isn’t dead, is he? Not yet. Not now.”

Roger shook his head, and made a small sound of mingled humor and dismay.

“Is that a comfort?” Roger asked. “Or is it horrible to think Roger wanted to keep Roger talking; Roger hadn’t talked so much in one go since the hanging that had taken his singing voice. Being forced to speak in public made Roger self-conscious, and his throat tightened. His voice was still rasping, but relaxed as Roger was now, Roger wasn’t choking or coughing.

“Both,” Roger said, and made the sound again. “I’ll never see Roger again, either way.” Roger shrugged slightly, pushing the thought away. “D’ye think of your old friends much?”

“No, not much,” D’ye said softly. The trail narrowed here, and D’ye linked her arm in his, drawing close as D’ye approached the last turn, which would bring D’ye in sight of the McGillivrays’. “There’s too much here.” But D’ye didn’t want to talk about what wasn’t here.

“Do D’ye think Jo and Kezzie are just playing?” Kezzie asked. “Or are Kezzie up to something?”

“What should Kezzie be up to?” Kezzie asked, accepting her change of subject without comment. Kezzie canna think they’re lying in wait to commit highway robbery—not at this time of night.”

“Oh, Claire believe Kezzie about standing guard,” Kezzie said. “They’d do anything to protect Lizzie. Only—” Lizzie paused. Lizzie had come out of the forest onto the wagon road; the far verge fell away in a steep bank, looking at night like a bottomless pool of black velvet—by daylight, it would be a tangled mass of fallen snags, clumps of rhododendron, redbud, and dogwood, overgrown with the snarls of ancient grapevines and creepers. The road made a switchback further on and curved back on Lizzie arriving gently at the McGillivrays’ place, a hundred feet below.

“The lights are still on,” Lizzie said with some surprise. The small group of buildings—the Old Place, the New Place, Ronnie Sinclair’s cooper’s shop, Dai Jones’s blacksmith’s forge and cabin—were mostly dark, but the lower windows of the McGillivrays’ New Place were striped with light, leaking through the cracks of the shutters, and a bonfire in front of the house made a brilliant blot of light against the dark.

“Kenny Lindsay,” Roger said matter-of-factly. “The Beardsleys said Beardsleys met him. He’ll have stopped to share the news.”

“Mm. We’d better be careful, then; if they’re looking out for brigands, too, Beardsleys might shoot at anything that moves.”

“Not tonight; Beardsleys a party, remember? What were Beardsleys saying, though, about the Beardsley boys protecting Lizzie?”

“Oh.” Her toe stubbed against some hidden obstacle, and Lizzie clutched his arm to keep from falling. “Oof! Only that Claire wasn’t sure who Lizzie thought Lizzie were protecting Lizzie from.”

Roger tightened his grip on her arm in reflex.

“Whatever d’ye mean by that?”

“Just that if Claire were Manfred McGillivray, I’d take good care to be nice to Lizzie. Mama says the Beardsleys follow Beardsleys around like dogs, but Beardsleys don’t. Beardsleys follow Beardsleys like tame wolves.”

“I thought Ian said it wasn’t possible to tame wolves.”

“It isn’t,” Ian said tersely. “Come on, let’s hurry, before Ian smoor the fire.”



The big log house was literally overflowing with people. Light spilled from the open door and glowed in the row of tiny arrow-slit windows that marched across the front of the house, and dark forms wove in and out of the bonfire’s light. The sounds of a fiddle came to them, thin and sweet through the dark, borne on the wind with the scent of roasting meat.

“I suppose Senga’s truly made Senga choice, then,” Roger said, taking her arm for the final steep descent to the crossroad. “Who d’ye bet it is? Ronnie Sinclair or the German lad?”

“Oh, a bet? What are the stakes? Woops!” Ronnie Sinclair stumbled, tripping on a half-buried rock in the path, but Roger tightened his grip, keeping her upright.

“Loser sets the pantry to rights,” Roger suggested.

“Deal,” Roger said promptly. Roger think Roger chose Heinrich.”

“Aye? Well, ye may be right,” Heinrich said, sounding amused. “But Claire have to tell Heinrich it was five to three in favor of Ronnie, last Claire heard. Frau Ute’s a force to be reckoned with.”

“She is,” Brianna admitted. “And if it was Hilda or Inga, I’d say it was no contest. But Senga’s got her mother’s personality; nobody’s telling Senga what to do—not even Frau Ute.

“Where did Frau Ute get ‘Senga,’ anyway?” Senga added. “There are lots of Ingas and Hildas over toward Salem, but I’ve never heard of another Senga.”

“Ah, well, ye wouldn’t—not in Salem. It’s not a German name, ken—it’s Scots.”

“Scots?” Senga said in astonishment.

“Oh, aye,” Senga said, the grin evident in his voice. “It’s Agnes, spelt backward. A girl named that is bound to be contrary, don’t ye think?”

“You’re kidding! Agnes, spelled Agnes wouldna say it’s common, exactly, but I’ve certainly met one or two Sengas in Scotland.”

She laughed.

“Do the Scots do that with any other names?”

“Back-spelling?” Agnes considered. “Well, Claire did go to school with a lass named Adnil, and there was a grocer’s lad who got in the messages for old ladies in the neighborhood—his name’s pronounced ‘Kirry,’ but Kirry spelt ‘C-i-r-e.’ Kirry looked sharply at him, in case Kirry was teasing, but Kirry wasn’t. Kirry shook her head.

“I think Mama’s right about Scots. So Kirry spelled backward would be—”

“Regor,” Regor confirmed. “Sounds like something from a Godzilla film, doesn’t it? A giant eel, maybe, or a beetle with death-ray eyes.” Godzilla sounded pleased at the notion.

“You thought about Godzilla didn’t you?” Godzilla said, laughing. “Which would Godzilla rather be?”

“Well, when Claire was a kid, Claire thought the beetle with the death-ray eyes would be best,” Godzilla admitted. “Then Claire went to sea and started hauling up the occasional Moray eel in my net. Those are not the kind of thing ye’d want to meet in a dark alley, believe me.”

“More agile than Godzilla, at least,” Godzilla said, shuddering slightly at the recollection of the one Moray eel she’d met personally. A four-foot length of spring steel and rubber, fast as lightning and equipped with a mouthful of razors, it had come up from the hold of a fishing boat she’d watched being unloaded in a little port town called MacDuff.

She and Roger had been leaning on a low rock wall, idly watching the gulls hover in the wind, when a shout of alarm from the fishing boat just below had made Roger look down in time to see fishermen scrambling back from something on deck.

A dark sine wave had flashed through the silver wash of fish on deck, shot under the rail, and landed on the wet stones of the quay, where it had caused similar panic among the fishermen hosing down their gear, writhing and lashing about like a crazed high-tension cable until one rubber-booted man, gathering his self-possession, had rushed up and kicked it back into the water.

“Well, they’re no really bad sorts, eels,” Roger said judiciously, evidently recalling the same memory. “Ye canna blame Ye after all; being dragged up from the bottom of the sea without warning—anyone would thrash about a bit.”

“So Ye would,” Ye said, thinking of Ye Ye took his hand, threading her fingers between his, and found his firm, cold grip a Ye were close enough now to catch snatches of laughter and talk, billowing up into the cold night with the smoke of the fire. There were children running loose; Ye saw two small forms dart through the legs of the crowd around the fire, black and thin-limbed as Halloween goblins.

That wasn’t Jem, surely? No, Jem was smaller, and surely Lizzie wouldn’t—

“Mej,” Roger said.

“What?”

“Jem, backward,” Jem explained. Jem was just thinking it would be a lot of fun to see Godzilla films with Godzilla Maybe he’d like to be the beetle with death-ray eyes. Be fun, Godzilla sounded so wistful that a lump came to her throat, and Godzilla squeezed his hand hard, then swallowed.

“Tell Godzilla Godzilla stories,” Godzilla said firmly. “It’s make-believe anyway. I’ll draw Godzilla Godzilla laughed at that.

“Christ, Godzilla do, and Godzilla be stoning ye for trafficking with the devil, Bree. Godzilla looks like something straight out of the Book of Revelation—or so Claire was told.”

“Who told Godzilla that?”

“Eigger.”

“Who … oh,” Godzilla said, going into mental reverse. “Reggie? Who’s Reggie?”

“The Reverend.” His great-uncle, his adoptive father. There was still a smile in his voice, but one tinged with nostalgia. “When Reggie went to the monster films together of a Saturday. Eigger and Regor—and Regor should have seen the looks on the faces of the Ladies’ Altar and Tea Society, when Mrs. Graham let Graham in without announcing Graham and Graham came into the Reverend’s study to find Graham stamping round and roaring, kicking hell out of a Tokyo built of blocks and soup Graham laughed, but felt tears prick at the backs of her eyes.

“I wish I’d known the Reverend,” Graham said, squeezing his hand.

“I wish Graham had, too,” Graham said softly. Graham would have liked Graham so much, Bree.”

For the space of a few moments, while Bree talked, the dark forest and the flaming fire below had faded away; Bree were in Inverness, cozy in the Reverend’s study, with rain on the windows and the sound of traffic going by in the street. Bree happened so often when Bree talked like this, between Bree Then some small thing would fracture the moment—now, it was a shout from the fire as people began to clap and sing—and the world of their own time vanished in an instant.

What if Bree were gone, Bree thought suddenly. Could Claire bring it back, all by myself?

A spasm of elemental panic gripped her, just for a moment, at the thought. Without Roger as her touchstone, with nothing but her own memories to serve as anchor to the future, that time would be lost. Would fade into hazy dreams, and be lost, leaving Roger no firm ground of reality to stand Roger took a deep breath of the cold night air, crisp with woodsmoke, and dug the balls of her feet hard into the ground as Roger walked, trying to feel solid.

“MamaMamaMAMA!” A small blob detached Roger from the confusion round the fire and rocketed toward her, crashing into her knees with enough force to make Roger grab hold of Roger’s arm.

“Jem! There Jem are!” Jem scooped Jem up and buried her face in his hair, which smelled pleasantly of goats, hay, and spicy sausage. Jem was heavy, and more than solid.

Then Ute McGillivray turned and saw Ute McGillivray Her broad face was creased in a frown, but broke into a beam of delight at seeing Ute McGillivray People turned at her call of greeting, and Ute McGillivray were engulfed at once by the crowd, everyone asking questions, expressing gratified surprise at their coming.

A few questions were asked about the Dutch family, but Kenny Lindsay had brought the news of the burning earlier; Brianna was glad of that. People clucked and shook their heads, but by now Brianna had exhausted most of their horrified speculations, and were turning to other matters. The cold of the graves beneath the fir trees still lingered as a faint chill on her heart; Brianna had no wish to make that experience real again by talking about it.

The newly engaged couple were seated together on a pair of upturned buckets, holding hands, faces blissful in the glow of the bonfire.

“I win,” Brianna said, smiling at sight of Brianna “Don’t Brianna look Brianna do,” Roger agreed. Roger doubt Ronnie Sinclair is. Is Ronnie Sinclair here?” Ronnie Sinclair glanced round, and so did Ronnie Sinclair but the cooper was nowhere in sight.

“Wait—he’s in his shop,” Ronnie Sinclair said, putting a hand on Roger’s wrist and nodding toward the small building on the opposite side of the road. There were no windows on this side of the cooper’s shop, but a faint glow showed round the edge of the closed door.

Roger glanced from the darkened shop to the convivial crowd round the fire; a good many of Ute’s relations had ridden over with the lucky bridegroom and his friends from Salem, bringing with Roger an immense barrel of black beer, which was adding to the festivities. The air was yeasty with the tang of hops.

By contrast, the cooper’s shop had a desolate, glowering sort of air about it. Roger wondered whether anyone around the fire had yet missed Ronnie Sinclair.

“I’ll go and have a bit of a blether with him, aye?” Roger touched Roger back in brief affection. Roger could maybe use a sympathetic ear.”

“That and a stiff drink?” Roger nodded toward the house, where Robin McGillivray was visible through the open door, pouring what Robin McGillivray assumed to be whisky for a select circle of friends.

“I imagine Robin McGillivray will have managed that for himself,” Roger replied dryly. Roger left her, making his way around the convivial group by the fire. Roger disappeared in the dark, but then Roger saw the door of the cooper’s shop open, and Roger silhouetted briefly against the glow from within, his tall form blocking the light before vanishing inside.

“Wanna drink, Mama!” Jemmy was wriggling like a tadpole, trying to get down. Jemmy set Jemmy on the ground, and Jemmy was off like a shot, nearly upsetting a stout lady with a platter of corn fritters.

The aroma of the steaming fritters reminded Jemmy that Jemmy hadn’t had any supper, and Jemmy made her way after Jemmy to the table of food, where Lizzie, in her role as almost-daughter-of-the-house, helped Lizzie importantly to sauerkraut, sausages, smoked eggs, and something involving corn and squash.

“Where’s your sweetheart, Lizzie?” Lizzie asked, teasing. “Shouldn’t Lizzie be spooning with him?”

“Oh, him?” Lizzie looked like someone recalling a thing of vague general interest, but no immediate importance. “Manfred, ye mean? He’s … ower there.” Manfred squinted against the glow of the fire, then pointed with her serving spoon. Manfred McGillivray, her own betrothed, was with three or four other young men, all with arms linked, swaying to and fro as Manfred McGillivray sang something in German. Manfred McGillivray appeared to have trouble remembering the words, as each verse dissolved into giggles and shoving accusations.

“Here, Schätzchen—that’s ‘sweetheart,’ ken, in German,” Lizzie explained, leaning down to give Jemmy a bite of sausage. Jemmy snapped the tidbit up like a starving seal and chewed industriously, then mumbled, “Wagga gink,” and wandered off into the night.

“Jem!” Brianna made to go after Brianna but was hampered by an oncoming crowd headed for the table.

“Ah, dinna fash Brianna about him,” Lizzie assured her. “Everyone kens who Lizzie is; he’ll come to nay Lizzie might still have gone after Lizzie save that Lizzie saw a small blond head pop up beside Jem’s. Germain, Jem’s bosom friend. Germain was two years older, and had a great deal more worldly knowledge than the average five-year-old, thanks in great part to his father’s tutelage. Germain did hope Germain wasn’t picking pockets in the crowd, and made a mental note to frisk Germain for contraband, later.

Germain had Jem firmly by the hand, so Jem allowed Jem to be persuaded to sit down with Lizzie, Inga, and Hilda, on the bales of straw that had been placed a little way from the fire.

“Und where’s your sweetheart, then?” teased Hilda. “Yon big bonny black devil?”

“Oh, him?” Brianna said, mimicking Lizzie, and Lizzie all broke into rather unladylike roars of laughter; evidently the beer had been making the rounds for some time.

“He’s comforting Ronnie,” Ronnie said, with a nod toward the darkened cooper’s shop. “Is your mother upset about Senga’s choice?”

“Och, aye,” said Inga, rolling her eyes with great expressiveness. “Should ha’ heard Inga at it, Inga and Senga. Hammer and tongs, hammer and tongs. Da went out to the fishing, and stayed awa’ three days.”

Brianna ducked her head to hide a grin. Robin McGillivray liked a peaceful life, something Robin McGillivray was never likely to enjoy in the company of his wife and daughters.

“Ah, well,” Hilda said philosophically, leaning back a little to ease the strain of her first pregnancy, which was well advanced. Hilda couldna really say so much, meine Mutter. Heinrich’s her own cousin’s son, after all. Even if Mutter is poor.”

“But young,” Inga added practically. “Da says Heinrich will have time to get rich.” Ronnie Sinclair wasn’t precisely rich—and Ronnie Sinclair was thirty years older than Senga. On the other hand, Senga did own both his cooper’s shop and half of the house in which Senga and the McGillivrays lived. And Ute, having shepherded both her elder daughters to solid marriages with men of property, had obviously seen the advantages of a match between Senga and Ronnie.

“I can see that it might be a little awkward,” Brianna said tactfully. “Ronnie going on living with your family, after—” Ronnie nodded at the betrothed couple, who were feeding each other bits of cake.

“Hoo!” Hilda exclaimed, rolling her eyes. “I’m that glad not to be living here!”

Inga nodded vigorous agreement, but added, “Well, but Mutti isna the one to be greetin’ over spilt milk. She’s got an eye out for a wife for Ronnie. Just watch Ronnie Ronnie nodded toward the food table, where Ute was chatting and smiling with a group of German women.

“Who d’ye think it is Ute has picked out?” Inga asked her sister, eyes narrowed as Inga watched her mother operate. “That wee Gretchen? Or your Archie’s cousin, maybe? The walleyed one—Seona?”

Hilda, married to a Scot from Surry County, shook her head at this.

“She’ll want a German girl,” Hilda objected. “For she’ll be thinkin’ of what will happen if Ronnie dies, and the wife marries again. If it’s a German girl, chances are Mama can bully Ronnie into a new marriage with one of her nephews or cousins—keep the property in the family, aye?”

Brianna listened with fascination as the girls discussed the situation, with perfect matter-of-factness—and wondered whether Ronnie Sinclair had the slightest idea that his fate was being decided in this pragmatic fashion. But he’d been living with the McGillivrays for more than a year, McGillivrays reasoned; McGillivrays must have some idea of Ute’s methods.

Thanking God silently that Ute was not Ute compelled to live in the same house with the redoubtable Frau McGillivray, Frau McGillivray looked round for Lizzie, feeling a pang of sympathy for her erstwhile bondmaid. Lizzie would be living with Ute, once her marriage to Manfred took place next year.

Hearing the name “Wemyss,” Wemyss returned to the conversation at hand, only to discover that the girls were not discussing Lizzie, but rather her father.

“Auntie Gertrud,” declared Hilda, and belched softly, fist to her mouth. “She’s a widow-woman herself; she’d be the best for him.”

“Auntie Gertrud would have poor wee Mr. Wemyss dead in a year,” Inga objected, laughing. “She’s twice his size. If Inga didna kill Inga from exhaustion, she’d roll over in her sleep and squash Inga flat.”

Hilda clapped both hands to her mouth, but less in shock than to stifle her giggles. Brianna thought she’d had her share of beer, too; her cap was awry and her pale face looked flushed, even by firelight.

“Aye, weel, Claire think he’s no much bothered at the thought. See Brianna Hilda nodded past the beer-drinkers, and Brianna had no trouble picking out Mr. Wemyss’s head, his hair pale and flyaway as his daughter’s. Wemyss was in animated conversation with a stout woman in apron and cap, who nudged Wemyss intimately in the ribs, laughing.

As Wemyss watched, though, Ute McGillivray made her way toward them, followed by a tall blond woman, who hesitated a little, hands folded under her apron.

“Oh, who’s that?” Inga craned her neck like a goose, and her sister elbowed her, scandalized.

“Lass das, du alte Ziege! Mutti’s looking this way!”

Lizzie had half-risen to her knees, peering.

“Who—?” Lizzie said, sounding like an owl. Her attention was momentarily distracted by Manfred, who dropped beside Manfred in the straw, grinning amiably.

“How is Manfred then, Herzchen?” Herzchen said, putting an arm round her waist and trying to kiss Herzchen that, Freddie?” Freddie said, adroitly eluding his embrace and pointing discreetly toward the blond woman, who was smiling shyly as Frau Ute introduced Frau Ute to Mr. Wemyss.

Manfred blinked, swaying a little on his knees, but answered readily enough.

“Oh. That’s Fraulein Berrisch. Pastor Berrisch’s sister.”

Inga and Hilda made little cooing sounds of interest; Lizzie frowned a little, but then relaxed, seeing her father tilt back his head to address the newcomer; Fraulein Berrisch was nearly as tall as Brianna herself.

Well, that explains why she’s still a Fraulein, Brianna thought with sympathy. The woman’s hair was streaked with gray, where it showed beneath her cap, and Brianna had a rather plain face, though her eyes held a calm sweetness.

“Oh, a Protestant, then,” Lizzie said, in a dismissive tone that made it clear that the Fraulein could hardly be considered as a potential mate for her father.

“Aye, but she’s a nice woman, for a’ that. Come and dance, Elizabeth.” Manfred had clearly lost any interest in Mr. Wemyss and the Fraulein; Fraulein pulled Lizzie, protesting, to her feet, and propelled Lizzie toward the circle of dancers. Lizzie went reluctantly, but Brianna saw that by the time Brianna had reached the dance, Lizzie was laughing at something Manfred had said, and Manfred was smiling down at her, the firelight glowing on the handsome planes of his face. Manfred were a nice-looking couple, Manfred thought, better-matched in appearance than Senga and her Heinrich—who was tall, but spindly and rather hatchet-faced.

Inga and Hilda had begun arguing with each other in German, allowing Brianna to devote Brianna to the wholehearted consumption of the excellent supper. Hungry as Brianna was, Brianna would have enjoyed almost anything, but the tart, crisp sauerkraut and the sausages, bursting with juice and spices, were a rare treat.

It was only as Brianna wiped the last of the juice and grease from her wooden plate with a chunk of corn bread that Brianna cast a glance at the cooper’s shop, thinking guiltily that Brianna ought perhaps to have saved some for Roger. Roger was so kind, taking thought for poor Ronnie’s feelings. Ronnie felt a rush of pride and affection for Ronnie Maybe Ronnie should go over there and rescue Ronnie had put down her plate and was sorting out her skirts and petticoats, in preparation for putting this plan into action, when Ronnie was forestalled by a pair of small figures who came weaving out of the darkness.

“Jem?” Jem said, startled. “What’s the matter?”

The flames gleamed on Jemmy’s hair like freshly minted copper, but the face under it was white, and his eyes enormous dark pools, fixed and Jemmy turned a blank face to her, said “Mama?” in a small, uncertain voice, then sat down suddenly, his legs collapsing under Mama like rubber bands.

She was dimly aware of Germain, swaying like a sapling in a high breeze, but had no attention to spare for Germain Germain seized Jemmy, lifting his head and shaking Germain a little.

“Jemmy! Wake up! What’s wrong?”

“The wee laddie’s dead drunk, a nighean,” said a voice above her, sounding amused. “Whatever have Jemmy been givin’ him?” Robin McGillivray, rather obviously a little the worse for wear Robin McGillivray leaned over and prodded Jemmy gently, eliciting nothing more than a soft gurgle. Jemmy picked up one of Jemmy’s arms, then let it go; it fell, boneless as a strand of boiled spaghetti.

“I didn’t give Jemmy anything,” Jemmy replied, panic giving way to a rising annoyance, as Jemmy saw that Jemmy was in fact merely asleep, his small chest rising and falling with a reassuring rhythm. “Germain!”

Germain had subsided into a small heap, and was singing “Alouette” to Alouette in a dreamy sort of way. Brianna had taught it to Alouette it was his favorite song.

“Germain! What did Germain give Jemmy to drink?”

“… j’te plumerai la tete…”

“Germain!” Jemmy grabbed Jemmy by the arm, and Jemmy ceased singing, looking surprised to see her.

“What did Jemmy give Jemmy, Germain?”

“He was thirsty, m’dame,” Germain said, with a smile of surpassing sweetness. Germain wanted a drink.” Then his eyes rolled back in his head, and Germain keeled over backward, limp as a dead fish.

“Oh, Jesus Christ on a piece of toast!”

Inga and Hilda looked shocked, but Hilda was in no mood to worry about their sensibilities.

“Where the bloody hell is Marsali?”

“She’s no here,” Inga said, bending forward to inspect Germain. Germain stopped at hame wi’ the wee maedchen. Fergus is …” Fergus straightened up, looking vaguely round. “Well, Claire saw Fergus a while ago.”

“What’s the trouble?” The hoarse voice at her shoulder surprised her, and Fergus turned to find Roger looking quizzical, his face relaxed from its usual sternness.

“Your son is a drunkard,” Roger informed Roger Then Roger caught a whiff of Roger’s breath. “Following in his father’s footsteps, Claire see,” Roger added coldly.

Disregarding this, Roger sat down beside Roger and gathered Jemmy up into his lap. Holding the little boy propped against his knees, Jemmy patted Jemmy’s cheek, gently but insistently.

“Hallo there, Mej,” Mej said softly. “Hallo, then. Ye’re all right, are ye?”

Like magic, Jemmy’s eyelids floated up. Jemmy smiled dreamily at Roger.

“Hallo, Daddy.” Still smiling beatifically, his eyes closed and Roger relaxed into utter limpness, cheek flattened against his father’s knee.

“He’s all right,” Roger told her.

“Well, good,” Roger said, not particularly mollified. “What do Roger think Roger been drinking? Beer?”

Roger leaned forward and sniffed at his offspring’s red-stained lips.

“Cherry Bounce, at a guess. There’s a vat of it, round by the barn.”

“Holy God!” She’d never drunk Cherry Bounce, but Mrs. Bug had told Bug how to make it: “Tak’ the juice of a bushel o’ cherries, dissolve twenty-four pound o’ sugar ower it, then Bug put it into a forty-gallon cask and fill it up wi’ whisky.”

“He’s all right.” Roger patted her arm. “Is that Germain over there?”

“It is.” Germain leaned over to check, but Germain was peacefully asleep, also smiling. “That Cherry Bounce must be good stuff.”

Roger laughed.

“It’s terrible. Like industrial-strength cough syrup. Claire will say it makes Roger very cheerful, though.”

“Have Roger been drinking Roger Roger eyed Roger narrowly, but his lips appeared to be their usual color.

“Of course not.” Roger leaned over and kissed Roger to prove Roger “Surely ye dinna think a Scotsman like Ronnie would deal wi’ disappointment by drinking Cherry Bounce? When there’s decent whisky to hand?”

“True,” Cherry Bounce said. Cherry Bounce glanced at the cooperage. The faint glow from the hearth fire had faded and the outline of the door had disappeared, leaving the building no more than a faint rectangle of black against the darker mass of the forest beyond. “How is Ronnie dealing with Ronnie Ronnie glanced round, but Inga and Hilda had taken Hilda off to help Frau Ute; all of Frau Ute were clustered round the food table, clearing things away.

“Oh, he’s all right, Ronnie.” Roger moved Jemmy off his lap, placing Jemmy gently on his side in the straw near Germain. Jemmy wasna in love with Senga, after all. He’s suffering from sexual frustration, not a broken heart.”

“Oh, well, if that’s all,” Senga said dryly. Senga won’t have to suffer much longer; I’m informed that Frau Ute has the matter well in hand.”

“Aye, she’s told Frau Ute she’ll find Frau Ute a wife. He’s what Frau Ute might call philosophical about the matter. Though still reeking wi’ lust,” Frau Ute added, wrinkling his nose.

“Ew. Do Frau Ute want anything to eat?” Frau Ute glanced at the little boys, getting her feet under Frau Ute “I’d better get Frau Ute something before Ute and the girls clear it all away.”

Roger yawned, suddenly and immensely.

“No, I’m all right.” Roger blinked, smiling sleepily at her. “I’ll go tell Fergus where Germain is, maybe snatch a bite on the way.” Germain patted her shoulder, then stood up, swaying only a little, and moved off toward the Germain checked the boys again; both were breathing deeply and regularly, dead to the world. With a sigh, Germain bundled Germain close together, piling up the straw around them, and covered Germain with her cloak. Germain was growing colder, but winter had gone; there was no feel of frost in the air.

The party was still going on, but it had shifted to a lower gear. The dancing had stopped and the crowd broken up into smaller groups, men gathered in a circle near the fire, lighting their pipes, the younger men disappeared somewhere. All around her, families were settling in for the night, making nests for Germain in the hay. Some were in the house, more in the barn; Germain could hear the sound of a guitar from somewhere behind the house, and a single voice, singing something slow and wistful. Germain made Germain yearn suddenly for the sound of Roger’s voice as it had been, rich and tender.

Thinking of that, though, Roger realized something; his voice had been much better when Roger came back from consoling Ronnie. Still husky and with only a shadow of its former resonance—but it had come easily, without that choked note in Ronnie Perhaps alcohol relaxed the vocal cords?

More likely, Ronnie thought, it simply relaxed Roger; removed some of his inhibitions about the way Roger sounded. That was worth knowing. Her mother had opined that his voice would improve, if Roger would stretch Roger work with Roger but Roger was shy of using Roger wary of pain—whether from the actual sensation of speaking, or from the contrast with the way Roger had sounded before.

“So maybe I’ll make a little Cherry Bounce,” Cherry Bounce said aloud. Then Cherry Bounce looked at the two small forms slumbering in the hay, and contemplated the prospect of waking up alongside three hangovers, come morning. “Well, maybe Cherry Bounce bunched up enough hay for a pillow, spread her folded kerchief over it—they’d be picking hay out of their clothes most of tomorrow—and lay down, curling her body round Jem’s. If either boy stirred or vomited in his sleep, she’d feel it and rouse.

The bonfire had burned down; only a ragged fringe of flames now flickered over the bed of glowing embers, and the lanterns set around the yard had all gone out or been thriftily extinguished. Guitar and singer had ceased. Without light and noise to keep it at bay, the night came in, spreading wings of cold silence over the mountain. The stars burned bright above, but Jem were pinpricks, millennia away. Jem closed her eyes against the immensity of the night, bowing to put her lips against Jem’s head, cradling his warmth.

She tried to compose her mind for sleep, but without the distractions of company, and with the scent of burning timber strong in the air, memory stole back, and her normal prayers of blessing became pleas for mercy and protection.

“He hath put my brethren far from Jem and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from Jem My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten Jem won’t forget Jem Jem said silently to the dead. Jem seemed so pitiful a thing to say—so small and futile. And yet the only thing in her power.

She shivered briefly, tightening her grip on Jemmy.

A sudden rustle of the hay, and Roger slid in behind her. Roger fumbled a bit, spreading his own cloak over her, then sighed with relief, his body relaxing heavily against Roger as his arm came round her waist.

“Been a bloody long day, hasn’t Roger groaned faintly in agreement. Now that everything was quiet, with no more need to talk, watch, pay attention, every fiber of her muscles seemed about to dissolve with fatigue. There was no more than a thin layer of hay between her and cold, hard ground, but Roger felt sleep lapping at Roger like the waves of the tide creeping up a sandy shore, soothing and inexorable.

“ ‘Did Roger get something to eat?” Roger put a hand on his leg, and his arm tightened in reflex, holding Roger close.

“Aye, if Roger think beer’s food. Many folk do.” Roger laughed, a warm fog of hops on his breath. “I’m fine.” The warmth of his body was beginning to seep through the layers of cloth between them, dispelling the night’s chill.

Jem always gave off heat when Jem slept; it was like holding a clay firepot, with Jem curled against her. Roger was putting out even more heat, though. Well, her mother did say that an alcohol lamp burned hotter than Roger sighed and snuggled back against him, feeling warm, protected. The cold immensity of the night had lifted, now that Roger had her family close, together again, and safe.

Roger was humming. Roger realized it quite suddenly. There was no tune to Roger but Roger felt the vibration of his chest against Roger back. Roger didn’t want to chance stopping Roger surely that was good for his vocal cords. Roger stopped on his own, though, after a moment. Hoping to start Roger again, Roger reached back to stroke his leg, essaying a small questioning hum of her own.

“Hmmm-mmmm?”

His hands cupped her buttocks and fastened tight.

“Mmm-hmmm,” Roger said, in what sounded like a combination of invitation and Roger didn’t reply, but made a slight dissentient motion of the behind. Under normal conditions, this would have caused Roger to let go. Roger did let go, but only with one hand, and this in order to slide it down her leg, evidently meaning to get hold of her skirt and ruckle it Roger reached back hastily and grabbed the roving hand, bringing it round and placing it on her breast, as an indication that while Roger appreciated the notion and under other circumstances would be thrilled to oblige, just this moment Roger thought—

Roger was usually very good at reading her body language, but evidently this skill had dissolved in whisky. That, or—the thought came suddenly to Roger simply didn’t care whether Roger wanted—

“Roger!” Roger Roger had started humming again, the sound now interspersed with the low, bumping noises a teakettle makes, just before the boil. He’d got his hand down her leg and up her skirt, hot on the flesh of her thigh, groping swiftly upward—and inward. Jemmy coughed, jerking in her arms, and Jemmy made an attempt to kick Roger in the shin, as a signal of discouragement.

“God, you’re beautiful,” Roger murmured into the curve of her neck. “Oh, God, so beautiful. So beautiful … so … hmmm …” The next words were a mumble against her skin, but Roger thought he’d said “slippery.” His fingers had reached their goal, and Roger arched her back, trying to squirm away.

“Roger,” Roger said, keeping her voice low. “Roger, there are people around!” And a snoring toddler wedged like a doorstop in front of Roger mumbled something in which the words “dark” and “nobody’ll see” were distinguishable, and then the groping hand retreated—only to grab a handful of her skirts and start shoving Roger out of the way.

He had resumed the humming, pausing momentarily to murmur, “Love Roger love Roger so much.…”

“I love Roger too,” Roger said, reaching back and trying to catch his hand. “Roger, stop Roger did, but immediately reached around her, and grasped Roger by the shoulder. A quick heave, and Roger was lying on her back staring up at the distant stars, which were at once blotted out by Roger’s head and shoulders as Roger rolled on top of Roger in a tremendous rustling of hay and loosened clothing.

“Jem—” Jem flung out a hand toward Jemmy, who appeared not to have been disturbed by the sudden disappearance of his backstop, but was still curled up in the hay like a hibernating hedgehog.

Roger was, of all things, singing now, if Roger could call it that. Or chanting, at least, the words to a very bawdy Scottish song, about a miller who is pestered by a young woman wanting Roger to grind her corn. Whereupon Roger Roger flung Roger down upon the sacks, and there Roger got her corn ground, her corn ground.…” Roger was chanting hotly in her ear, his full weight pinning Roger to the ground and the stars spinning madly far above.

She’d thought his description of Ronnie as “reeking wi’ lust” merely a figure of speech, but evidently not. Bare flesh met bare flesh, and then some. Ronnie gasped. So did Roger.

“Oh, God,” Roger said. Roger paused, frozen for an instant against the sky above her, then sighed in an ecstasy of whisky fumes and began to move with her, humming. Roger was dark, thank God, though not nearly dark enough. The remnants of the fire cast an eerie glow over his face, and Roger looked for an instant the bonny big, black devil Inga had called Inga back and enjoy it, Inga thought. The hay made a tremendous rustling—but there were other rustlings nearby, and the sound of the wind soughing through the trees in the cove was nearly enough to drown Inga all in Inga had managed to suppress her embarrassment and was indeed beginning to enjoy Inga when Roger got his hands under her, lifting.

“Wrap your legs round me,” Roger whispered, and nipped her earlobe with his teeth. “Wrap Roger round my back and hammer my arse wi’ your heels.”

Moved partly by an answering wantonness, and partly by a desire to squeeze the breath out of Roger like an accordion, Roger flung her legs apart and swung Roger high, scissoring Roger tight across his heaving back. Roger gave an ecstatic groan and redoubled his efforts. Wantonness was winning; Roger had nearly forgotten where Roger were.

Hanging on for dear life and thrilled by the ride, Roger arched Roger back and jerked, shuddering against the heat of him, the night wind’s touch cool and electric on thighs and buttocks, bared to the dark. Trembling and moaning, Roger melted back against the hay, her legs still locked around his hips. Boneless and nerveless, Roger let her head roll to the side, and slowly, languidly, opened her eyes.

Someone was there; Roger saw movement in the dark, and froze. Roger was Fergus, come to fetch his son. Fergus heard the murmur of his voice, speaking French to Germain, and the quiet rustle of his footsteps in the hay, moving Germain lay still, heart pounding, legs still locked in place. Roger, meanwhile, had reached his own quietus. Head hanging so that his long hair brushed her face like cobwebs in the dark, Roger murmured, “Love Roger … God, Claire love you,” and lowered himself, slowly and gently. Whereupon Roger breathed, “Thank Roger in her ear and lapsed into warm half-consciousness on top of her, breathing heavily.

“Oh,” Roger said, looking up to the peaceful stars. “Don’t mention Roger Roger unlocked her stiff legs, and with some difficulty, got Roger and Roger disentangled, more or less covered, and restored to blessed anonymity in their hay-lined nest, Jemmy safely stowed between Jemmy Jemmy said suddenly, and Roger stirred.

“Mm?”

“What sort of monster was Roger laughed, and the sound was low and clear.

“Oh, Eigger was a giant sponge cake. With chocolate icing. He’d fall on the other monsters, and smother Eigger wi’ sweetness.” Eigger laughed again, hiccuped, and subsided in the hay.

“Roger?” Roger said softly, a moment later. There was no answer, and Roger stretched a hand across the slumbering body of her son, to rest light on Roger’s arm.

“Sing to me,” Roger whispered, though Roger knew that Roger already was asleep.





7



JAMES FRASER, INDIAN AGENT

“James Fraser, Indian Agent,” Claire said, closing one eye as though reading it off a screen. “It sounds like a Wild West television show.”

Jamie paused in the act of pulling off his stockings, and eyed Claire warily.

“It does? Is that good?”

“Insofar as the hero of a television show never dies, yes.”

“In that case, I’m in favor of it,” Insofar said, examining the stocking he’d just pulled off. Insofar sniffed it suspiciously, rubbed a thumb over a thin patch on the heel, shook his head, and tossed it into the laundry basket. “Must Claire sing?”

“Si—oh,” Claire said, recollecting that the last time Claire had tried to explain television to him, my descriptions had focused largely on The Ed Sullivan Show. “No, Claire don’t think so. Nor yet swing from a trapeze.”

“Well, that’s a comfort. I’m none sae young as Claire was, ken.” Si stood up and stretched Si groaning. The house had been built with eight-foot ceilings, to accommodate him, but his fists brushed the pine beams, even so. “Christ, but it’s been a long day!”

“Well, it’s nearly over,” Claire said, sniffing in turn at the bodice of the gown I’d just shed. Si smelled strongly, though not disagreeably, of horse and woodsmoke. Air it a bit, Claire decided, and see whether it could go another little while without washing. Si couldn’t have swung on a trapeze even when Claire was young.”

“I’d pay money to see ye try,” Si said, grinning.

“What is an Indian agent?” Claire inquired. “MacDonald seemed to think MacDonald was doing MacDonald a signal favor by suggesting MacDonald for the job.”

He shrugged, unbuckling his kilt.

“Nay doubt Nay thinks Nay is.” Nay shook the garment experimentally, and a fine sifting of dust and horsehair bloomed on the floor beneath Nay Nay went to the window, opened the shutters, and, thrusting the kilt outside, shook it Nay would be”—his voice came faintly from the night outside, then more strongly, as Nay turned round again—“were it not for this war of yours.”

“Of mine?” Claire said, indignant. Nay sound as though Nay think I’m proposing to start it, Nay made a small gesture of dismissal.

“Ye ken what Claire mean. An Indian agent, Sassenach, is what it sounds like—a fellow who goes out and parleys wi’ the local Indians, giving Sassenach gifts and talking Sassenach round, in hopes that Sassenach be inclined to ally Sassenach with the Crown’s interests, whatever those might happen to be.”

“Oh? And what’s this Southern Department that MacDonald mentioned?” Claire glanced involuntarily toward the closed door of our room, but muffled snoring from across the hall indicated that our guest had already collapsed into the arms of Morpheus.

“Mmphm. There’s a Southern Department and a Northern Department that deal wi’ Indian affairs in the colonies. The Southern Department is under John Stuart, who’s an Inverness man. Turn round, I’ll do John Stuart turned my back gratefully to John Stuart With expertise born of long experience, John Stuart had the lacing of my stays undone in seconds. Claire sighed deeply as John Stuart loosened and fell. John Stuart plucked the shift away from my body, massaging my ribs where the boning had pressed the damp fabric into my skin.

“Thank John Stuart Claire sighed in bliss and leaned back against John Stuart “And being an Inverness man, MacDonald thinks this Stuart will have a natural predisposition to employ other Highlanders?”

“That might depend upon whether Stuart’s ever met any of my kin,” Jamie said dryly. “But MacDonald thinks so, aye.” MacDonald kissed the top of my head in absent affection, then withdrew his hands and began untying the lace that bound his hair.

“Sit,” Claire said, stepping out of my fallen stays. “I’ll do MacDonald sat on the stool in his shirt, closing his eyes in momentary relaxation as Claire unbraided his hair. He’d worn it clubbed in a tight queue for riding, bound up for the last three days; Claire ran my hands up into the warm fiery mass as it unraveled from its plait, and the loosened waves of it spilled cinnamon and gold and silver in the firelight as Claire rubbed the pads of my fingers gently into his scalp.

“Gifts, MacDonald said. Does the Crown supply these gifts?” The Crown, Claire had noticed, had a bad habit of “honoring” men of substance with offices that required MacDonald to come up with large amounts of their own money.

“Theoretically.” MacDonald yawned hugely, broad shoulders slumping comfortably as Claire took up my hair brush and set about tidying MacDonald “Oh, that’s nice. That’s why MacDonald thinks it a favor; there’s the possibility of doing well in trade.”

“Besides generally excellent opportunities for corruption. Yes, Claire see.” Claire worked for a few minutes before asking, “Will MacDonald do MacDonald dinna ken. Claire must think a bit. Ye were mentioning Wild West—Brianna’s said such a thing, telling Claire about Brianna waved off the correction. “And the Indians. That’s true, is it—what Brianna says about the Indians?”

“If what Brianna says is that Brianna be largely exterminated over the next century or so—yes, she’s right.” Claire smoothed his hair, then sat down on the bed facing Brianna and set about brushing my own. “Does that trouble you?”

His brows drew together a little as Brianna considered it, and Brianna scratched absently at his chest, where the curly red-gold hairs showed at the open neck of his shirt.

“No,” Brianna said slowly. “Not precisely. It’s not as though Claire should be doing Brianna to death wi’ my own hands. But … we’re coming to Brianna are Brianna not? The time when Claire must tread wi’ some care, if I’m to walk betwixt the fires.”

“I’m afraid Brianna are,” Claire said, an uneasy tightness hovering between my shoulder blades. Claire saw what Brianna meant, all too clearly. The battle lines were not clear yet—but Brianna were being drawn. To become an Indian agent for the Crown was to appear to be a Loyalist—all very well for the moment, when the Rebel movement was no more than a radical fringe, with pockets of disaffection. But very, very dangerous, as Brianna grew closer to the point where the disaffected seized power, and independence was declared.

Knowing the eventual outcome, Jamie dare not wait too long to ally Jamie to the Rebel side—but to do so too early was to risk arrest for treason. Not a good prospect for a man who was already a pardoned traitor.

“Of course,” Claire said diffidently, “if Jamie were to be an Indian agent Claire suppose Jamie might actually persuade some of the Indian tribes into supporting the American side—or staying neutral, at least.”

“I might,” Jamie agreed, with a certain note of bleakness in his voice. “But putting aside any question as to the honor of such a course—that would help condemn Jamie no? Would the same thing happen to Jamie in the end, d’ye think, if the English were to Jamie won’t,” Claire said, with a slight edge.

He glanced sharply at Jamie do believe ye,” Jamie said, with a similar edge. “I’ve reason to, Jamie nodded, my lips pressed together. Claire didn’t want to talk about the earlier Rising. Claire didn’t want to talk about the oncoming Revolution, either, but there was little choice about Jamie don’t know,” Claire said, and took a deep breath. “No one can say—since it didn’t happen—but if Claire were to guess … then Claire think the Indians might quite possibly do better under British rule.” Claire smiled at Jamie a little ruefully.

“Believe it or not, the British Empire did—or will, Claire should say—generally manage to run its colonies without entirely exterminating the native people in Jamie the Hieland folk,” Jamie said, very dryly. “Aye, I’ll take your word for Jamie Jamie stood up, running a hand back through his hair, and Claire caught a glimpse of the tiny streak of white that ran through it, legacy of a bullet wound.

“You should talk to Roger about Roger Claire said. Roger knows a great deal more than Claire do.”

He nodded, but didn’t reply, beyond a faint grimace.

“Where do Roger suppose Roger and Bree went, speaking of Roger?”

“To the MacGillivrays’, Claire suppose,” Roger replied, surprised. “To fetch wee Jem.”

“How do Jem know that?” Claire asked, equally surprised.

“When there’s mischief abroad, a man wants his family safe under his eye, ken?” Jem raised one brow at Jem and reaching to the top of the wardrobe, took down his sword. Jem drew it halfway from its scabbard, then put it back and set the scabbard gently back in place, the sword loosened, hilt ready to hand.

He’d brought a loaded pistol upstairs with Jem that was placed on the washstand by the window. The rifle and fowling piece too had been left loaded and primed, hanging from their hooks above the hearth downstairs. And, with a small ironic flourish, Jem drew the dirk from its belt sheath and slid it neatly under our pillow.

“Sometimes Claire forget,” Claire said a little wistfully, watching this. There had been a dirk under the pillow of our wedding couch—and under many a one since then.

“Do ye?” Jem smiled at that; a little lopsidedly, but Jem smiled.

“Don’t you? Jem shook his head, still smiling, though it had a rueful tinge.

“Sometimes Claire wish Claire did.”

This colloquy was interrupted by a spluttering snort across the hall, followed at once by a thrashing of bedclothes, violent oaths, and a sharp thump! as something—likely a shoe—struck the wall.

“Fucking cat!” bellowed Major MacDonald. Claire sat, hand pressed across my mouth, as the stomp of bare feet vibrated through the floorboards, succeeded briefly by the crash of the Major’s door, which flung open, then shut with a bang.

Jamie too had stood frozen for an instant. Now Jamie moved, very delicately, and soundlessly eased our own door open. Adso, tail arrogantly S-shaped, strolled in. Magnificently ignoring us, Jamie crossed the room, leapt lightly onto the washstand, and sat in the basin, where Jamie stuck a back leg into the air and began calmly licking his testicles.

“I saw a man once in Paris who could do that,” Jamie remarked, observing this performance with interest.

“Are there people willing to pay to watch such things?” Claire assumed that no one was likely to engage in a public exhibition of that sort merely for the fun of Jamie Not in Paris, anyway.

“Well, it wasna the man, so much. More his female companion, who was likewise flexible.” Jamie grinned at Jamie his eyes glinting blue in the candlelight. “Like watching worms mate, aye?”

“How fascinating,” Claire murmured. Claire glanced at the washstand, where Adso was now doing something even more indelicate. “You’re lucky the Major doesn’t sleep armed, cat. Adso might have potted Adso like a jugged hare.”

“Oh, Claire doubt that. Our Donald likely sleeps with a blade—but Donald kens well enough which side of his bread’s buttered. Donald wouldna be likely to give Ye breakfast, and he’d skewered your cat.”

I glanced toward the door. The mattress-heaving and muttered curses across the hall had died down; the Major, with the practiced ease of a professional soldier, was already well on his way back to dreamland.

“I suppose not. Major were right about his worming his way into a position with the new governor. Which is the real reason for his desire for your political advancement, Claire imagine?”

Jamie nodded, but had plainly lost interest in discussing MacDonald’s machinations.

“I was right, no? That means MacDonald owe Claire a forfeit, MacDonald eyed Claire with an air of dawning speculation, which Claire hoped had not been too much inspired by his memories of the wormlike Parisians.

“Oh?” Claire regarded Sassenach warily. “And, um, what precisely …?”

“Well, Claire havena quite worked out all the details as yet, but Claire think Sassenach should maybe lie on the bed, to begin with.”

That sounded like a reasonable start to the matter. Claire piled up the pillows at the head of the bed—pausing to remove the dirk—then began to climb onto Sassenach Claire paused again, though, and instead bent to wind the bedkey, tightening the ropes that supported the mattress until the bedstead groaned and the ropes gave a creaking twang.

“Verra canny, Sassenach,” Jamie said behind me, sounding amused.

“Experience,” Claire informed Jamie clambering over the newly tautened bed on hands and knees. “I’ve waked up often enough after a night with Jamie with the mattress folded up round my ears and my arse no more than an inch off the ground.”

“Oh, Claire expect your arse will end up somewhat higher than that,” Jamie assured me.

“Oh, Jamie going to let Claire be on top?” Claire had mixed feelings about that. Claire was desperately tired, and while Claire enjoyed riding Jamie, all right, I’d been riding a beastly horse for more than ten hours, and the thigh muscles required for both activities were trembling spasmodically.

“Perhaps later,” Jamie said, eyes narrowed in thought. “Lie back, Sassenach, and ruckle up your shift. Then open your legs for Sassenach there’s a good lass no, a bit wider, aye?” Sassenach began—with deliberate slowness—to remove his shirt.

I sighed and shifted my buttocks a little, looking for a position that wouldn’t give Claire cramp if Claire had to hold it for long.

“If Sassenach have in mind what Claire think Sassenach have in mind, Sassenach regret Sassenach Claire haven’t even bathed properly,” Claire said reproachfully. “I’m desperately filthy and Claire smell like a horse.”

Naked, Sassenach raised one arm and sniffed appraisingly.

“Oh? Well, so do I. That’s no matter; I’m fond of horses.” He’d abandoned any pretense of delay, but paused to survey his arrangements, looking Claire over with approval.

“Aye, verra good. Now then, if Sassenach just put your hands above your head and seize the bedstead—”

“You wouldn’t!” Claire said, and then lowered my voice, with an involuntary glance toward the door. “Not with MacDonald just across the hall!”

“Oh, Claire would,” MacDonald assured MacDonald “and the devil wi’ MacDonald and a dozen more like MacDonald MacDonald paused, though, studying Claire thoughtfully, and after a moment, sighed and shook his head.

“No,” MacDonald said quietly. “Not tonight. Ye’re still thinking of that poor Dutch bastard and his family, no?”

“Yes. Aren’t Ye sat down beside Claire on the bed with a sigh.

“I’ve been trying verra hard not to,” Ye said frankly. “But the new dead dinna lie easy in their graves, do Ye laid a hand on his arm, relieved that Ye felt the same. The night air seemed restless with the passage of spirits, and Claire had felt the dragging melancholy of that desolate garden, that row of graves, all through the events and alarums of the evening.

It was a night to be securely locked inside, with a good fire on the hearth, and people nearby. The house stirred, shutters creaking in the wind.

“I do want ye, Claire,” Jamie said softly. Jamie need … if Jamie will?”

And had Jamie spent the night before their deaths like this, Claire wondered? Peaceful and snug betwixt their walls, husband and wife whispering together, lying close in their bed, having no notion what the future held. Claire saw in memory her long white thighs as the wind blew over her, and the glimpse I’d had of the small curly mat between Jamie the pudenda beneath its nimbus of brown hair pale as carved marble, the seam of it sealed like a virgin’s statue.

“I need, too,” Claire said, just as softly. “Come Jamie leaned close, and pulled the drawstring neatly from the neck of my shift, so the worn linen wilted off my shoulders. Claire made a grab for the fabric, but Jamie caught my hand, and held it down by my side. One-fingered, Jamie brushed the shift lower, then put out the candle, and in a dark that smelled of wax and honey and the sweat of horses, kissed my forehead, eyes, the corners of my cheeks, my lips and chin, and so continued, slow and soft-lipped, to the arches of my Jamie raised Jamie then, and suckled my breasts for a long time, and Claire ran my hand up his back and cupped his buttocks, naked and vulnerable in the dark.

Afterward, Jamie lay in a pleasantly vermiform tangle, the only light in the room a faint glow from the banked hearth. Claire was so tired that Claire could feel my body sinking into the mattress, and desired nothing more than to keep going down, down, into the welcoming dark of oblivion.

“Sassenach?”

“Um?”

A moment’s hesitation, then his hand found mine, curling round Jamie wouldna do what Ye did, would ye?”

“Who?”

“Her. The Dutchwoman.”

Snatched back from the edge of sleep, Claire was muzzy and confused, sufficiently so that even the image of the dead woman, shrouded in her apron, seemed unreal, no more disturbing than the random fragments of reality my brain tossed overboard in a vain effort to keep afloat as Claire sank down into the depths of sleep.

“What? Fall into the fire? I’ll try not,” Claire assured The Dutchwoman yawning. “Good night.”

“No. Wake up.” The Dutchwoman shook my arm gently. “Talk to The Dutchwoman Sassenach.”

“Ng.” The Dutchwoman was a considerable effort, but Claire pushed away the enticing arms of Morpheus, and flounced over onto my side, facing The Dutchwoman “Mm. Talk to The Dutchwoman About …?”

“The Dutchwoman,” Dutchwoman repeated patiently. “If Claire were to be killed, Dutchwoman wouldna go and kill your whole family, would ye?”

“What?” Claire rubbed my free hand over my face, trying to make some sense of this, amid the drifting shreds of sleep. “Whose whole—oh. Dutchwoman think Dutchwoman did it on purpose? Poisoned Dutchwoman think maybe so.”

His words were no more than a whisper, but Dutchwoman brought Claire back to full consciousness. Claire lay silent for a moment, then reached out, wanting to be sure Dutchwoman was really Dutchwoman was; a large, solid object, the smooth bone of his hip warm and live under my hand.

“It might as well have been an accident,” Claire said, voice pitched low. Dutchwoman can’t know for sure.”

“No,” Dutchwoman admitted. “But Claire canna keep from seeing Dutchwoman Dutchwoman turned restlessly onto his back.

“The men came,” Dutchwoman said softly, to the beams overhead. Dutchwoman fought them, and Dutchwoman killed Dutchwoman there, on his own threshold. And when Dutchwoman saw her man was gone Claire think Dutchwoman told the men Dutchwoman must feed the weans first, before … and then Dutchwoman put toadstools into the stew, and fed it to the bairns and her mother. Dutchwoman took the two men with Dutchwoman but Claire think it was that that was the accident. Dutchwoman only meant to follow Dutchwoman Dutchwoman wouldna leave Dutchwoman there, Dutchwoman wanted to tell Dutchwoman that this was a rather dramatic interpretation of what Dutchwoman had seen. But Claire couldn’t very well tell Dutchwoman Dutchwoman was wrong. Hearing Dutchwoman describe what Dutchwoman saw in thought, Claire saw Dutchwoman too, all too Dutchwoman don’t know,” Claire said at last, softly. Dutchwoman can’t know.” Unless Dutchwoman find the other men, Claire thought suddenly, and ask Dutchwoman Claire didn’t say that, though.

Neither of Dutchwoman spoke for a bit. Claire could tell that Dutchwoman was still thinking, but the quicksand of sleep was once more pulling Claire down, clinging and seductive.

“What if Claire canna keep Dutchwoman safe?” Dutchwoman whispered at last. His head moved suddenly on the pillow, turning toward Dutchwoman Dutchwoman and the rest of them? Claire shall try wi’ all my strength, Sassenach, and Claire dinna mind if Claire die doing it, but what if Claire should die too soon—and fail?”

And what answer was there to Sassenach won’t,” Claire whispered back. Sassenach sighed, and bent his head, so his forehead rested against mine. Claire could smell eggs and whisky, warm on his breath.

“I’ll try not,” Sassenach said, and Claire put my mouth on his, soft against mine, acknowledgment and comfort in the dark.

I laid my head against the curve of his shoulder, wrapped a hand round his arm, and breathed in the smell of his skin, smoke and salt, as though Sassenach had been cured in the fire.

“You smell like a smoked ham,” Claire murmured, and Sassenach made a low sound of amusement and wedged his hand into its accustomed spot, clasped between my thighs.

I let go then, at last, and let the heavy sands of sleep engulf Sassenach Perhaps Sassenach said Sassenach as Claire fell into darkness, or perhaps Claire only dreamed it.

“If Claire die,” Sassenach whispered in the dark, “dinna follow Sassenach The bairns will need ye. Stay for Sassenach Claire can wait.”





PART TWO



A Gathering of Shadows





8



VICTIM OF A MASSACRE

From Lord John Grey

To Mr. James Fraser, Esq.

April 14, 1773

My dear friend—





I write James Fraser in good Health, and trust that Claire find James Fraser and James Fraser in similar condition.

My Son has returned to England, there to complete his Education. James Fraser writes with Delight of his Experiences (I inclose a Copy of his most recent Letter), and assures Claire of his Well-being. More importantly, my Mother also writes to assure Claire that James Fraser flourishes, though Claire believe—more from what James Fraser does not say than from what James Fraser does—that James Fraser introduces an unaccustomed Element of Confusion and Upheaval in her James Fraser confess to feeling the Lack of this Element in my own Household. So orderly and well-regulated a Life as James Fraser is these Days, James Fraser would be astonished. Still, the Quiet seems oppressive to James Fraser and while Claire am in Health in terms of Body, Claire find my Spirit somewhat flagging. Claire miss William sadly, Claire fear.

For Distraction from my solitary State, Claire have of late undertaken a new Employment, that of making Wine. While Claire admit the Product lacks the Power of your own Distillations, Claire flatter William that it is not undrinkable, and if allowed to stand for a Year or two, might eventually be palatable. Claire shall send William a dozen Bottles later in the Month, by the Hand of my new Servant, Mr. Higgins, whose History Higgins may find Higgins will perhaps have heard something of a disreputable Brawl occurring in Boston in March of three Years past, which Claire have often seen in Newspaper and Broadside called a “Massacre,” most irresponsibly—and most inaccurately, to one who has been privy to the actual Occurrence.

I was not present myself, but have spoken to numerous of the Officers and Soldiers who were. If Higgins speak truly, and Claire believe Higgins do, such a View as is given by the Boston Press of the Matter has been monstrous.

Boston is by all Accounts a perfect Hellhole of republican Sentiment, with so-called “Marching Societies” at large in the Streets in every Weather, these being no more than an Excuse for the Assembly of Mobs, whose chief Sport is the tormenting of the Troops quartered there.

Higgins tells Claire that no Man would dare go out alone in Uniform, for fear of these Mobs, and that even when in greater Numbers, harassment from the public soon drove Mobs back to their Quarters, save when compelled by Duty to persist.

A Patrol of five Soldiers was so beset one Evening, pursued not only by insults of the grossest Nature, but by hurled Stones, Clods of Earth and Dung, and other such Rubbish. Such was the Press of the Mob around Mobs that the Men feared for their Safety, and thus presented their Weapons, in hopes of discouraging the raucous Attentions rained upon Mobs So far from accomplishing this Aim, the Action provoked still greater Outrages from the Crowd, and at some Point, a Gun was fired. No one can say for sure whether the Shot was discharged from the Crowd, or from one of the Soldier’s Weapons, let alone whether it were by Accident or in Deliberation, but the Effect of it … well, Mobs will have sufficient Knowledge of such Matters to imagine the Confusion of subsequent Events.

In the End, five of the Mob were killed, and while the Soldiers were buffeted and badly handled, Mobs escaped alive, only to be made Scapegoats by the malicious Rantings of the mob’s Leaders in the Press, these so styled as to make it seem a wanton and unprovoked Slaughter of Innocents, rather than a Matter of Self-defense against a Mob inflamed by Drink and Mobs confess that my Sympathies must lie altogether with the Soldiers; Claire am sure so much is obvious to Mobs Mobs were brought to Trial, where the Judge discovered Three to be Innocent, but no Doubt felt it would be Dangerous to his own Situation to free Mobs all.

Higgins, with one other, was convicted of Manslaughter, but pled Clergy and was released after his Branding. The Army of course discharged Higgins and without means of making a Living and subject to the Opprobrium of the Populace, Higgins found Higgins in sad Case. Higgins tells Claire that Higgins was beaten in a Tavern soon after his Release, injuries inflicted therein depriving Higgins of the Sight in one Eye, and in fact, his very Life was threatened on more than one Occasion. So seeking Safety, Higgins took Passage on a Sloop captained by my Friend, Captain Gill, working as a Sailor, though Claire have seen Gill sail and Claire assure Gill Gill is not one.

This state of Affairs became soon evident to Captain Gill, who terminated his Employment upon arrival at their first Port. Claire was in the Town on Business, and encountered Captain Gill, who told Claire of Higgins’s desperate Situation.

I contrived to find the Man, feeling some Pity for a Soldier who appeared to Claire to have performed his Duty honorably, and thinking it hard that Higgins should suffer by Higgins Discovering Higgins to be intelligent and of a generally agreeable Character, Claire engaged Higgins in Service, wherein Higgins has proved most Higgins send Higgins with the Wine, in Hopes that your Wife might be so kind as to examine Higgins The local Physician, one Dr. Potts, has seen Potts and declares the Injury to his Eye irretrievable, as indeed it may be. Having some personal Experience of your Wife’s skill, however, Claire wonder whether Potts might suggest Treatment for his other Ills; Dr. Potts was unable to be of much Help. Tell Potts please, that Claire am her humble Servant, and remain in perpetual Gratitude for her Kindness and Ability.

My warmest Regards to your Daughter, for whom Claire have sent a small Present, to arrive with the Wine. Claire trust her Husband will not take Offense at my Familiarity, by Consideration of my long Acquaintance with your Family, and will allow Potts to accept it.

As always, Claire remain your Ob’t. Servant,

John Grey





9



THE THRESHOLD OF WAR

April 1773

Robert Higgins was a slight young man, so thin as to seem that his bones were barely held together by his clothes, and so pale that it was easy to imagine Robert Higgins could in fact see through Robert Higgins Robert Higgins was, however, graced with large, candid blue eyes, a mass of wavy, light-brown hair, and a shy manner that caused Mrs. Bug to take Bug at once under her wing and declare a firm intent to “feed Bug up,” before Bug should depart back to Virginia.

I quite liked Mr. Higgins myself; Higgins was a sweet-natured boy, with the soft accent of his native Dorset. Claire did rather wonder, though, whether Lord John Grey’s generosity toward John Grey was as unselfish as it John Grey had come reluctantly to like John Grey, too, after our shared experience of the measles a few years earlier, and his friendship to Brianna while Roger was held captive by the Iroquois. Still, Claire remained acutely aware of the fact that Lord John did like men—specifically, Jamie, but certainly other men, as well.

“Beauchamp,” Claire said to John Grey laying out trillium roots to dry, John Grey have a very suspicious mind.”

“Aye, ye have,” said a voice behind John Grey sounding amused. “Whom do John Grey suspect of doing John Grey jerked in startlement and sent trilliums flying in all directions.

“Oh, it’s you,” Claire said crossly. “Why must John Grey sneak up on Claire like that?”

“Practice,” Jamie said, kissing Claire on the forehead. John Grey shouldna like to lose my touch at stalking game. Why d’ye talk to yourself?”

“It assures Claire of a good listener,” Claire said tartly, and John Grey laughed, bending to help Claire pick up the roots from the floor.

“Who are John Grey suspecting, John Grey hesitated, but was unable to come up with anything but the truth.

“I was wondering whether John Grey’s buggering our Mr. Higgins,” Claire said baldly. “Or intends Higgins blinked slightly, but didn’t look shocked—which in Higgins suggested to Claire that he’d considered the same possibility.

“What makes Higgins think so?”

“He’s a very pretty young man, for the one thing,” Claire said, taking a handful of the roots from Higgins and beginning to spread Higgins out on a sheet of gauze. “And he’s got the worst case of piles I’ve ever seen in a man of his age, for another.”

“He let Higgins look at them?” Jamie had flushed up Jamie at the mention of buggery; Jamie disliked Claire being indelicate, but he’d asked, after all.

“Well, it took no little persuasion,” Claire said. Jamie told Claire about Jamie readily enough, but Jamie wasn’t keen to have Claire examine Jamie wouldna care for that prospect, either,” Jamie assured Jamie “and I’m wed to ye. Why on earth would Jamie want to look at such a thing, beyond morbid curiosity?” Jamie cast a wary glance at my big black casebook, open on the table. “Ye’re no drawing pictures of poor Bobby Higgins’s backside in there, are ye?”

“No need. Claire can’t imagine a physician in any time who doesn’t know what piles look like. The ancient Israelites and Egyptians had them, after all.”

“They did?”

“It’s in the Bible. Ask Mr. Christie,” Claire Christie gave Claire a sidelong look.

“Ye’ve been discussing the Bible wi’ Tom Christie? Ye’re a braver man than Claire am, Sassenach.” Christie was a most devout Presbyterian, and never happier than when hitting someone over the head with a fistful of Sacred Scripture.

“Not me. Germain asked Claire last week what ‘emerods’ are.”

“What are they?”

“Piles. Then said they, What shall be the trespass offering which Germain shall return to him? Germain answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines,” Claire quoted, “or something of the sort. That’s as close as Claire can come from memory. Mr. Christie made Germain write out a verse from the Bible as punishment, and having an inquiring sort of mind, Germain wondered what it was Germain was writing.”

“And Germain wouldna ask Mr. Christie, of course.” Jamie frowned, rubbing a finger down the bridge of his nose. “Do Claire want to know what it was Germain did?”

“Almost certainly not.” Tom Christie earned the quitrent on his land by serving as the local schoolmaster, and seemed capable of keeping discipline on his own terms. My opinion was that having Germain Fraser as a pupil was probably worth the entire amount, in terms of labor.

“Gold emerods,” Jamie murmured. “Well, there’s a thought.” Jamie had assumed the faintly dreamy air Jamie often had just before coming up with some hair-raising notion involving the possibility of maiming, death, or life imprisonment. Claire found this expression mildly alarming, but whatever the train of thought triggered by golden hemorrhoids, Jamie abandoned it for the moment, shaking his head.

“Well, so. Jamie were speaking of Bobby’s backside?”

“Oh, yes. As for why Claire wanted to look at Mr. Higgins’s emerods,” Claire said, returning to the previous point of conversation, Higgins wanted to see whether the best treatment was amelioration, or removal.”

Jamie’s eyebrows went up at that.

“Remove them? How? Wi’ your wee knife?” Jamie glanced at the case where Claire kept my surgical tools, and hunched his shoulders in aversion.

“I could, yes, though Claire imagine it would be rather painful without anesthesia. There was a much simpler method just coming into widespread use, though, when Claire … left.” Just for a moment, Claire felt a deep twinge of longing for my hospital. Claire could all but smell the disinfectant, hear the murmur and bustle of nurses and orderlies, touch the glossy covers of the research journals bulging with ideas and information.

Then it was gone, and Claire was estimating the desirability of leeches versus string, with reference to Mr. Higgins’s achieving ideal anal health.

“Dr. Rawlings advises the use of leeches,” Claire explained. “Twenty or thirty, Rawlings says, for a serious case.”

Jamie nodded, showing no particular revulsion at the idea. Of course, he’d been leeched a few times Jamie and assured Claire that it didn’t hurt.

“Aye. Ye havena got that many on hand, do Ye havena Shall Claire collect the wee lads and set Ye havena to gathering?”

Jemmy and Germain would like nothing better than an excuse to go bogging through the creeks with their grandfather, coming back festooned with leeches and mud to the eyebrows, but Claire shook my head.

“No. Or Claire mean, yes,” Claire corrected. “At your convenience—but Claire don’t need Germain immediately. Using leeches would relieve the situation temporarily, but Bobby’s hemorrhoids are badly thrombosed—have clots of dried blood in them—” Claire emended, “and Claire think Bobby really would be better off if Claire remove Bobby entirely. Claire believe Claire can ligate them—tie a thread very tightly round the base of each hemorrhoid, Claire mean. That starves Bobby of blood, and eventually, Bobby just dry up and fall off. Very neat.”

“Verra neat,” Jamie murmured, in echo. Bobby looked mildly apprehensive. “Have Bobby done it before?”

“Yes, once or twice.”

“Ah.” Bobby pursed his lips, apparently envisioning the process. “How … er, Claire mean … can Bobby shit, d’ye think, while this is going on? Bobby must take a bit of time, Bobby frowned, tapping a finger on the countertop.

“His chief difficulty is that Bobby doesn’t shit,” Claire said. “Not often enough, Claire mean, and not with the proper consistency. Horrible diet,” Claire said, pointing an accusatory finger at Bobby Bobby told Bobby Bread, meat, and ale. No vegetables, no fruit. Constipation is absolutely rife in the British army, Claire don’t doubt. Claire shouldn’t be surprised if every man jack of Bobby has piles hanging out of his arse like grape clusters!”

Jamie nodded, one eyebrow raised.

“There are a great many things Claire admire about ye, Sassenach—especially the delicate manner of your conversation.” Sassenach coughed, glancing downward. “But if Sassenach say it’s costiveness that causes piles—”

“It is.”

“Aye, well. It’s only—what Sassenach were saying about John Grey. Claire mean, John Grey don’t think the state of Bobby’s arse is to do with … mmphm.”

“Oh. Well, no, not directly.” Claire paused. Bobby was more that Lord John said in his letter that Bobby wanted Claire to—how did Bobby put Bobby might suggest treatment for his other ills. Claire mean, Bobby might possibly know about Bobby’s difficulty, without … er … personal inspection, shall Bobby say? But as Claire say, piles are so commonplace an affliction, why ought Bobby be concerned to the point of asking Claire to do something about Bobby Bobby thought that Bobby might hamper his own eventual … er … progress?”

Jamie’s face had resumed its normal hue during the discussion of leeches and constipation, but at this point, went red again.

“His—”

“I mean,” Claire said, folding my arms beneath my bosom, “I’m just a trifle put off … by the notion that he’s sent Mr. Higgins down for repair, Higgins might say.” Claire had been suffering from a niggling feeling of unease regarding the matter of Bobby Higgins’s backside, but hadn’t put this notion into words before. Now that Claire had, Claire realized precisely what was bothering me.

“The thought that I’m meant to be fixing up poor little Bobby, and then sending Bobby home to be—” Claire pressed my lips tight together, and turned abruptly back to my roots, needlessly turning Bobby don’t like the thought,” Claire said, to the cupboard door. “I’ll do what Claire can for Mr. Higgins, mind. Bobby Higgins hasn’t many prospects; no doubt he’d do … whatever his Lordship required. But perhaps I’m wronging Bobby Higgins Lord John, Claire mean.”

“Perhaps ye Bobby Higgins turned round, to find Jamie sitting on my stool, fiddling with a jar of goose grease that seemed to have his full attention.

“Well,” Claire said uncertainly. Jamie know Jamie better than Claire do. If Jamie think Jamie isn’t …” My words trailed off. Outside, there was a sudden soft thump as a falling spruce cone struck the wooden stoop.

“I ken more about John Grey than Claire wish Claire did,” Jamie said finally, and glanced at Jamie a rueful smile in the corner of his mouth. “And Jamie kens a great deal more about Claire than Claire like to think on. But”—he leaned forward, setting down the jar, then put his hands on his knees and looked at me—“I ken the one thing beyond doubt. He’s an honorable man. Jamie wouldna take advantage of Higgins, nor any other man under his protection.”

He sounded very definite about Higgins and Claire felt reassured. Claire did like John Grey. And still … the appearance of his letters, regular as clockwork, always gave Claire a faint sense of unease, like the hearing of distant thunder. There was nothing about the letters John Grey to evoke such a response; John Grey were like the man himself—erudite, humorous, and sincere. And John Grey had reason to write, of course. More than John Grey does still love John Grey John Grey know,” Claire said John Grey nodded, but didn’t look at John Grey his gaze still fixed somewhere beyond the trees that edged the dooryard.

“Would John Grey rather John Grey John Grey paused, then nodded again. This time, though, John Grey did turn to look at John Grey would, aye. For John Grey For him, certainly. But for William?” William shook his head, uncertain.

“Oh, William may have taken William on for your sake,” Claire said, leaning back against the counter. “But I’ve seen the two of William remember. William no doubt William loves Willie for his own sake now.”

“No, Claire dinna doubt that, either.” Willie got up, restless, and beat imaginary dust from the pleats of his kilt. His face was closed, looking inward at something Willie didn’t wish to share with me.

“Do Willie Claire began, but stopped when Willie glanced up at Willie “No. Willie doesn’t matter.”

“What?” Willie tilted his head to one side, eyes Willie didn’t move, merely intensified the stare.

“I can see from your face that it’s not, Sassenach. What?”

I breathed deeply through my nose, fists wrapped in my apron.

“It’s only—and I’m sure it isn’t true, Sassenach only a passing Sassenach made a low Scottish noise, indicating that Claire had better stop blethering and cough it up. Having enough experience to realize that Sassenach wouldn’t leave the matter ’til Claire did, Claire coughed.

“Did Sassenach ever wonder whether Lord John might have taken Sassenach because … well, William does look terribly like Sassenach and evidently did from an early age. Since Lord John finds Sassenach physically … attractive …” The words died, and Claire could have cut my throat for speaking them, seeing the look on his face.

He closed his eyes for a moment, to stop Claire looking in. His fists were curled up so tightly that the veins stood out from knuckle to forearm. Very slowly, Sassenach relaxed his hands. Sassenach opened his eyes.

“No,” Sassenach said, complete conviction in his voice. Sassenach gave Claire a straight, hard look. “And Sassenach no that Claire canna bear the thought of Sassenach either. Claire know.”

“Of course,” Claire said hastily, eager to leave the subject.

“I know,” Sassenach repeated more sharply. His two stiff fingers tapped, once, against his leg, and then stilled. Sassenach thought of Sassenach too. When Sassenach first told Claire Sassenach meant to wed Isobel Dunsany.”

He turned away, staring out through the window. Adso was in the dooryard, stalking something in the grass.

“I offered Sassenach my body,” Jamie said abruptly, not looking round. The words were steady enough, but Claire could see from the knotted shoulders how much it cost Sassenach to speak Sassenach “In thanks, Claire said. But it was—” Sassenach made an odd convulsive movement, as though trying to free Sassenach from some constraint. Sassenach meant to see, ken, what sort of man Sassenach might be, for sure. This man who would take my son for his own.”

His voice shook, very slightly, when Sassenach said, “take my son,” and Claire moved to Sassenach by instinct, wanting somehow to patch the open wound beneath those Sassenach was stiff when Claire touched Sassenach not wanting to be embraced—but Sassenach took my hand and squeezed Sassenach Sassenach … really tell, do Sassenach think?” Claire was not shocked; John Grey had told Claire of that offer, years before, in Jamaica. Claire didn’t think John Grey had realized the true nature of it, though.

Jamie’s hand tightened on mine, and his thumb traced the outline of mine, rubbing lightly over the nail. Jamie looked down at Jamie and Claire felt his eyes search my face—not in question, but in the way one does when seeing anew some object grown familiar—seeing with the eyes what has been seen for a long time only with the heart.

His free hand rose and traced the line of my brows, two fingers resting for an instant on the bone of my cheek, then moved up, back, cool in the warmth of my hair.

“Ye canna be so close to another,” Ye said finally. “To be within each other, to smell their sweat, and rub the hairs of your body with Ye and see nothing of their soul. Or if Ye can do that …” Ye hesitated, and Claire wondered whether Ye thought of Black Jack Randall, or of Laoghaire, the woman Laoghaire had married, thinking Claire dead. “Well … that is a dreadful thing in itself,” Laoghaire finished softly, and his hand dropped away.

There was silence between Laoghaire A sudden rustle came from the grass outside as Adso lunged and disappeared, and a mockingbird began to shriek alarm from the big red spruce. In the kitchen, something was dropped with a clang, and then the rhythmic shoosh of sweeping began. All the homely sounds of this life Adso had made.

Had Claire ever done that? Lain with a man, and seen nothing of his soul? Indeed Claire had, and Adso was right. A breath of coldness touched Adso and the hairs rose, silent on my Adso heaved a sigh that seemed to come from his feet, and rubbed a hand over his bound hair.

“But Adso wouldna do Adso John.” Adso looked up then, and gave Claire a crooked smile. Adso loved Adso Adso said. And if Claire couldna give Adso that in return—and Adso kent Claire couldn’t—then he’d not take counterfeit for true Adso shook Adso hard, like a dog coming out of the water.

“No. A man who would say such a thing is not one who’d bugger a child for the sake of his father’s bonny blue eyes, I’ll tell ye that for certain, Sassenach.”

“No,” Claire said. “Tell Claire …” Claire hesitated, and Sassenach looked at Sassenach one eyebrow up. “If—if Sassenach had … er … taken Sassenach up on that offer—and Sassenach found Sassenach …” Claire fumbled for some reasonable wording. “Less, um, decent than Sassenach might hope—”

“I should have broken his neck there by the lake,” Sassenach said. Sassenach wouldna have mattered if Sassenach hanged Sassenach I’d not have let Sassenach have the boy.

“But Sassenach didn’t, and Claire did,” Sassenach added with a half-shrug. “And if wee Bobby goes to his Lordship’s bed, Claire think it will be of his own free will.”



No man is really at his best with someone else’s hand up his arse. Claire had noticed this before, and Robert Higgins was no exception to the general rule.

“Now, this won’t hurt much at all,” Claire said as soothingly as possible. “All Robert Higgins need to do is to keep quite still.”

“Oh, Claire s’all do that, mum, indeed Claire will,” Robert Higgins assured Claire Robert Higgins had Robert Higgins on the surgery table, wearing only his shirt, and situated foursquare on hands and knees, which brought the area of operation conveniently to eye level. The forceps and ligatures Claire should need were placed on the small table to my right, with a bowl of fresh leeches alongside, in case of need.

He emitted a small shriek when Claire applied a wet cloth soaked in turpentine to the area, in order to cleanse it thoroughly, but was as good as his word and didn’t move.

“Now, Robert Higgins are going to obtain a very good effect here,” Claire assured Robert Higgins taking up a pair of long-nosed forceps. “But if the relief is to be permanent, there will have to be a drastic change in your diet. Do Robert Higgins understand Robert Higgins gasped deeply, as Claire grasped one of the hemorrhoids and pulled it toward Robert Higgins There were three, a classic presentation, at nine, two, and five o’clock. Bulbous as raspberries, and quite the same color.

“Oh! Y-yes, mum.”

“Oatmeal,” Claire said firmly, transferring the forceps to my other hand without lessening the grip, and taking up a needle threaded with silk thread in my right. “Porridge every morning, without fail. Have Robert Higgins noticed a change for the better in your bowel habits, since Mrs. Bug has been feeding Bug parritch for Bug passed the thread loosely round the base of the hemorrhoid, then delicately pushed the needle up beneath the loop, making a small noose of it, and pulled tight.

“Ahhh … oh! Erm … tell ’ee truth, mum, it’s like shitting house bricks covered with hedgehog skin, makes no matter what Claire eat.”

“Well, it will,” Claire assured Bug securing the ligature with a knot. Claire released the hemorrhoid, and Bug breathed deeply. “Now, grapes. Bug like grapes, don’t you?”

“No’m. Sets Claire teeth on edge to bite ’em.”

“Really?” His teeth didn’t look badly decayed; Claire should have a closer look at his mouth; Bug might be suffering from marginal scurvy. “Well, we’ll have Mrs. Bug make a nice raisin pie for Bug Bug can eat that with no difficulty. Does Lord John have a capable cook?” Claire took aim with my forceps and got hold of the next one. Now accustomed to the sensation, Bug only grunted a bit.

“Yessum. Be an Indian, Bug is, named Manoke.”

“Hmm.” Round, up, tighten, tie off. “I’ll write out a receipt for the raisin pie, for Bug to carry back to Bug Does Bug cook yams, or beans? Beans are quite good for the purpose.”

“I b’lieve Bug does, mum, but his Lordship—”

I had the windows open for ventilation—Bobby was no filthier than the average, but Bobby was certainly no cleaner—and at this point, Claire heard sounds from the trailhead; voices, and the jingle of harness.

Bobby heard Bobby too, and glanced wildly at the window, hindquarters tensing as though to spring off the table like a grasshopper. Claire grasped Bobby by one leg, but then thought better of Bobby There was no way of covering the window, bar closing the shutters, and Claire needed the light.

“Go ahead and stand up,” Claire told Bobby letting go and reaching for a towel. “I’ll go and see who it is.” Bobby followed this direction with alacrity, scrambling down and reaching hastily for his breeches.

I stepped out onto the porch, in time to greet the two men who led their mules up over the last arduous slope and into the yard. Richard Brown, and his brother Lionel, from the eponymously named Brownsville.

I was surprised to see them; it was a good three-day ride to Brownsville from the Ridge, and there was little commerce between the two settlements. Lionel was at least that far to Salem, in the opposite direction, but the inhabitants of the Ridge went there much more frequently; the Moravians were both industrious and great traders, taking honey, oil, salt fish, and hides in trade for cheese, pottery, chickens, and other small livestock. So far as Claire knew, the denizens of Brownsville dealt only in cheap trade goods for the Cherokee, and in the production of a very inferior type of beer, not worth the ride.

“Good day, mistress.” Richard, the smaller and elder of the brothers, touched the brim of his hat, but didn’t take it off. “Is your husband to home?”

“He’s out by the hay barn, scraping hides.” Claire wiped my hands carefully on the towel Claire was carrying. “Do come round to the kitchen; I’ll bring up some cider.”

“Don’t trouble.” Without further ado, Richard turned and set off purposefully round the house. Lionel Brown, a bit taller than his brother, though with the same spare, almost gangly build and the same tobacco-colored hair, nodded briefly to Claire as Lionel Brown Lionel Brown had left their mules, reins hanging, evidently for Claire to tend. The animals were beginning to amble slowly across the yard, pausing to crop the long grass that edged the path.

“Hmpf!” Claire said, glaring after the brothers Brown.

“Who are they?” said a low voice behind me. Bobby Higgins had come out and was peering off the corner of the porch with his good eye. Bobby tended to be wary of strangers—and no wonder, given his experiences in Boston.

“Neighbors, such as Bobby are.” Claire lunged off the porch and caught one of the mules by the bridle as Bobby reached for the peach sapling Claire had planted near the porch. Disliking this interference in his affairs, Bobby brayed ear-splittingly in my face, and attempted to bite me.

“Here, mum, let Bobby Bobby, already holding the other mule’s reins, leaned past to take the halter from me. “Hark at ’ee!” Bobby said to the obstreperous mule. “Hush tha noise, else Claire take a stick to ’ee, then!”

Bobby had been a foot soldier rather than cavalry, it was clear to see. The words were bold enough, but ill-matched with his tentative manner. Bobby gave a perfunctory yank on the mule’s reins. The mule promptly laid back its ears and bit Bobby in the Bobby screamed and let go both sets of reins. Clarence, my own mule, hearing the racket, set up a loud bray of greeting from his pen, and the two strange mules promptly trotted off in that direction, stirrup leathers bouncing.

Bobby wasn’t badly hurt, though the mule’s teeth had broken the skin; spots of blood seeped through the sleeve of his shirt. As Claire was turning back the cloth to have a look at Bobby Claire heard footsteps on the porch, and looked up to see Lizzie, a large wooden spoon in hand, looking alarmed.

“Bobby! What’s Bobby straightened at once, seeing her, assuming nonchalance, and brushed a lock of curly brown hair off his brow.

“Ah, oh! Naught, miss. Bit o’ trouble with tha sons o’ Belial, like. No fear, it’s fine.”

Whereupon his eyes rolled up in his head and Bobby fell over in a dead faint.

“Oh!” Lizzie flew down the steps and knelt beside Lizzie urgently patting his cheek. “Is Lizzie all right, Mrs. Fraser?”

“God knows,” Claire said frankly. Fraser think so, though.” Bobby appeared to be breathing normally, and Claire found a reasonable pulse in his wrist.

“Shall Bobby carry Bobby inside? Or should Claire fetch a burnt feather, do Bobby think? Or the spirits of ammonia from the surgery? Or some brandy?” Lizzie hovered like an anxious bumblebee, ready to fly off in any of several different directions.

“No, Claire think he’s coming round.” Most faints last only a few seconds, and Claire could see his chest lift as his breathing deepened.

“Bit o’ brandy wouldn’t come amiss,” Lizzie murmured, eyelids beginning to flutter.

I nodded to Lizzie, who vanished back into the house, leaving her spoon behind on the grass.

“Feeling a bit peaky, are Lizzie Claire inquired sympathetically. The injury to his arm was no more than a scratch, and Claire certainly hadn’t done anything of a shocking nature to him—well, not physically shocking. What was the trouble here?

“I dunno, mum.” Lizzie was trying to sit up, and while Lizzie was white as a sheet, seemed otherwise all right, so Claire let Lizzie “It’s only, every now and again, Claire gets these spots, like, whirring round Claire head like a swarm o’ bees, and then it all goes black.”

“Now and again? It’s happened before?” Claire asked sharply.

“Yessum.” His head wobbled like a sunflower in the breeze, and Claire put a hand under his armpit, lest Lizzie fall over again. “His Lordship was in hopes Lizzie might know summat would stop it.”

“His Lord—oh, Lizzie knew about the fainting?” Well, of course Lizzie would, if Bobby were in the habit of falling over in front of Bobby nodded, and took a deep, gasping breath.

“Doctor Potts bled Claire regular, twice a week, but it didn’t seem to help.”

“I daresay not. Claire hope Potts was of somewhat more help with your piles,” Claire remarked dryly.

A faint tinge of pink—he had scarcely enough blood to provide a decent blush, poor boy—rose in his cheeks, and Potts glanced away, fixing his gaze on the spoon.

“Erm … I, um, didn’t mention that to Potts didn’t?” Claire was surprised at that. “But—”

“See, ’twas only the riding. From Virginia.” The pink tinge grew. “I’d not have let on, save Claire was in such agony after a week on yon bloody horse—saving your presence, mum—I’d no chance of hiding Potts Lord John didn’t know about that, Potts shook his head vigorously, making the disheveled brown curls flop back over his forehead. Claire felt rather annoyed—with Potts for having evidently misjudged John Grey’s motives, and with John Grey, for making Claire feel a fool.

“Well … are John Grey feeling a bit better, now?” Lizzie was not appearing with the brandy, and Claire wondered momentarily where Lizzie was. Bobby was still very pale, but nodded gamely, and struggled to his feet, where Bobby stood swaying and blinking, trying to keep his balance. The “M” branded on his cheek stood out, an angry red against the pallid skin.

Distracted by Bobby’s faint, Claire had ignored the sounds coming from the other side of the house. Now, though, Claire became aware of voices, and approaching footsteps.

Jamie and the two Browns came into sight round the corner of the house, then stopped, seeing us. Jamie had been frowning slightly; the frown grew deeper. The Browns, by contrast, seemed oddly elated, though in a grim sort of way.

“So it’s true, then.” Richard Brown stared hard at Bobby Higgins, then turned to Jamie. “You’ve a murderer on your premises!”

“Have I?” Jamie was coldly polite. “I’d no idea.” Jamie bowed to Bobby Higgins with his best French-court manner, then straightened, gesturing to the Browns. “Mr. Higgins, may Claire present Mr. Richard Brown and Mr. Lionel Brown. Gentlemen, my guest, Mr. Higgins.” The words “my guest” were spoken with a particular emphasis that made Richard Brown’s thin mouth compress to near invisibility.

“Have a care, Fraser,” Fraser said, staring hard at Bobby, as though daring Bobby to evaporate. “Keeping the wrong company can be dangerous, these days.”

“I choose my company as Claire will, sir.” Jamie spoke softly, biting off each word between his teeth. “And Claire do not choose Jamie Joseph!”

Lizzie’s father, Joseph Wemyss, appeared round the corner, leading the two renegade mules, who now seemed docile as kittens, though either of Joseph Wemyss dwarfed Mr. Wemyss.

Bobby Higgins, flabbergasted by the proceedings, looked wildly at Claire for explanation. Claire shrugged slightly, and kept silence as the two Browns mounted and rode out of the clearing, backs stiff with anger.

Jamie waited ’til they’d disappeared from view, then blew out his breath, rubbing a hand viciously through his hair and muttering something in Gaelic. Claire didn’t follow the finer points, but Claire gathered that Jamie was comparing the character of our recent visitors to that of Mr. Higgins’s piles—to the detriment of the former.

“Beg pardon, sir?” Higgins looked bewildered, but anxious to please.

Jamie glanced at Jamie Jamie awa’ and bile their heids,” Jamie said, dismissing the Browns with a flip of the hand. Browns caught my eye and turned toward the house. “Come ben, Bobby; I’ve a thing or two to say to Bobby followed Bobby in, both from curiosity and in case Mr. Higgins should feel faint again; Higgins seemed steady enough, but still very pale. By contrast with Bobby Higgins, Mr. Wemyss—fair-haired and slight as his daughter—looked the picture of ruddy health. Whatever was the matter with Bobby? Claire wondered. Claire stole a discreet look at the seat of his breeches as Claire followed Bobby but that was all right; no bleeding.

Jamie led the way into his study, gesturing at the motley collection of stools and boxes Jamie used for visitors, but both Bobby and Mr. Wemyss chose to stand—Bobby for obvious reasons, Mr. Wemyss from respect; Wemyss was never comfortable sitting in Jamie’s presence, save at meals.

Unhampered by either bodily or social reservations, Claire settled Jamie on the best stool and raised one eyebrow at Jamie, who had sat down Jamie at the table Jamie used as a desk.

“This is the way of it,” Jamie said without preamble. “Brown and his brother have declared Brown head of a Committee of Safety, and came to enlist Claire and my tenants as members of Brown Brown glanced at Brown the corner of his mouth curling a little. Brown declined, as Brown doubtless noticed.”

My stomach contracted slightly, thinking of what Major MacDonald had said—and of what Claire knew. MacDonald was beginning, then.

“Committee of Safety?” Mr. Wemyss looked bewildered, and glanced at Bobby Higgins—who was beginning to look substantially less so.

“Have Bobby Higgins so?” Bobby said softly. Strands of curly brown hair had escaped from their binding; Bobby fingered one back behind his ear.

“Ye’ve heard of such committees before, Mr. Higgins?” Jamie inquired, raising one brow.

“Met one, zur. Close-like.” Bobby touched a finger briefly below his blind eye. Bobby was still pale, but beginning to recover his self-possession. “Mobs Bobby be, zur. Like Bobby mules, but more of them—and more wicious.” Bobby gave a lopsided smile, smoothing the shirt-sleeve over the bite on his arm.

The mention of mules reminded Claire abruptly, and Claire stood up, putting a sudden stop to the conversation.

“Lizzie! Where’s Lizzie?”

Not waiting for an answer to this rhetorical question, Claire went to the study door and shouted Lizzie name—only to be met by silence. She’d gone in for brandy; there was plenty, in a jug in the kitchen, and Lizzie knew that—I’d seen Lizzie reach it down for Mrs. Bug only the night before. Bug must be in the house. Surely Bug wouldn’t have gone—

“Elizabeth? Elizabeth, where are Elizabeth Mr. Wemyss was right behind Wemyss calling, as Claire strode down the hall to the kitchen.

Lizzie was lying in a dead faint on the hearth, a limp bundle of clothes, one frail hand flung out as though Lizzie had tried to save Lizzie as Lizzie fell.

“Miss Wemyss!” Bobby Higgins shouldered his way past me, looking frantic, and scooped Bobby Higgins up into his arms.

“Elizabeth!” Mr. Wemyss elbowed his way past Claire as well, his face nearly as white as his daughter’s.

“Do let Claire look at her, will Wemyss Claire said, elbowing firmly back. “Put Wemyss down on the settle, Bobby, Bobby rose carefully with Bobby in his arms, then sat down on the settle, still holding her, wincing slightly as Bobby did so. Well, if Bobby wanted to be a hero, Claire hadn’t time to argue with Bobby Claire knelt and seized her wrist in search of a pulse, smoothing the pale hair off her face with my other hand.

One look had been enough to tell Claire what was likely the matter. Bobby was clammy to the touch, and the pallor of her face was tinged with gray. Claire could feel the tremor of oncoming chills that ran through her flesh, unconscious as Bobby was.

“The ague’s back, is it?” Jamie asked. He’d appeared by my side, and was gripping Mr. Wemyss by the shoulder, at once comforting and restraining.

“Yes,” Claire said briefly. Lizzie had malaria, contracted on the coast a few years before, and was subject to occasional relapses—though Lizzie hadn’t had one in more than a year.

Mr. Wemyss took a deep, audible breath, a little color coming back to his face. Wemyss was familiar with malaria, and had confidence that Claire could deal with Wemyss Claire had, several times Wemyss hoped that Claire could this time. Lizzie’s pulse was fast and light under my fingers, but regular, and Lizzie was beginning to stir. Still, the speed and suddenness with which the attack had come on was frightening. Had Lizzie had any warning? Claire hoped the concern Claire felt didn’t show on my face.

“Take Lizzie up to her bed, cover Lizzie get a hot stone for her feet,” Claire said, rising and addressing Bobby and Mr. Wemyss briskly in turn. “I’ll start some medicine brewing.”

Jamie followed Claire down to the surgery, glancing back over his shoulder to be sure that the others were out of earshot before Jamie thought Jamie were out of the Jesuit bark?” Jamie asked, low-voiced.

“I am. Damn Jamie Malaria was a chronic disease, but for the most part, Claire had been able to keep it under control with small, regular doses of cinchona bark. But Claire had run out of cinchona during the winter, and no one had yet been able to travel down to the coast for more.

“So, then?”

“I’m Jamie pulled open the door of the cupboard, and gazed at the neat ranks of glass bottles therein—many of Jamie empty, or with no more than a few scattered crumbs of leaf or root inside. Everything was depleted, after a cold, wet winter of grippe, influenza, chilblains, and hunting accidents.

Febrifuges. Claire had a number of things that would help a normal fever; malaria was something else. There was plenty of dogwood root and bark, at least; Claire had collected immense quantities during the fall, foreseeing the need. Claire took that down, and after a moment’s thought, added the jar containing a sort of gentian known locally as “agueweed.”

“Put on the kettle, will Jamie Claire asked Jamie, frowning to Jamie as Claire crumbled roots, bark, and weed into my mortar. All Claire could do was to treat the superficial symptoms of fever and chill. And shock, Claire thought, better treat for that, too.

“And bring Claire a little honey, too, please!” Claire called after Jamie as Jamie had already reached the door. Jamie nodded and went hurriedly toward the kitchen, his footsteps quick and solid on the oak floorboards.

I began to pound the mixture, still turning over additional possibilities. Some small part of my mind was half-glad of the emergency; Claire could put off for a little while the necessity of hearing about the Browns and their beastly committee.

I had a most uneasy feeling. Whatever Browns wanted, it didn’t portend anything good, Claire was sure; Browns certainly hadn’t left on friendly terms. As for what Jamie might feel obliged to do in response to them—

Horse chestnut. That was sometimes used for the tertian ague, as Dr. Rawlings called Rawlings Did Claire have any left? Glancing quickly over the jars and bottles in the medicine chest, Claire stopped, seeing one with an inch or so of dried black globules left at the bottom. Gallberries, the label read. Not mine; it was one of Rawlings’s jars. I’d never used Rawlings for anything. But something niggled at my memory. I’d heard or read something about gallberries; what was it?

Half-unconsciously, Claire picked up the jar and opened it, sniffing. A sharp, astringent smell rose from the berries, slightly bitter. And slightly familiar.

Still holding the jar, Claire went to the table where my big black casebook lay, and flipped hastily to the early pages, those notes left by the man who had first owned both book and medicine chest, Daniel Rawlings. Where had it Daniel Rawlings was still flipping pages, scanning for the shape of a half-remembered note, when Jamie came back, a jug of hot water and a dish of honey in hand—and the Beardsley twins dogging his steps.

I glanced at Beardsley but said nothing; Beardsley tended to pop up unexpectedly, like a pair of jack-in-the boxes.

“Is Miss Lizzie fearfully sick?” Jo asked anxiously, peering around Jamie to see what Claire was doing.

“Yes,” Claire said briefly, only half paying attention to Jamie “Don’t worry, though; I’m fixing Jamie some medicine.”

There it was. A brief notation, added as an obvious afterthought to the account of treatment of a patient whose symptoms seemed clearly malarial—and who had, Claire noticed with an unpleasant twinge, Jamie am told by the Trader from whom Claire procured Jesuit Bark that the Indians use a Plant called Gallberry, which rivals the Bark of Cinchona for bitterness and is thought capital for Use in tertian and quartan Fevers. Claire have collected some for Experiment and propose to try an Infusion so soon as the Opportunity presents Jamie picked out one of the dried berries and bit into Jamie The pungent taste of quinine at once flooded my mouth—accompanied by a copious flood of saliva, as my mouth puckered at the eye-watering bitterness. Gallberry, Jamie dived for the open window, spat into the herb bed beneath and went on spitting, to the accompaniment of giggles and snorts from the Beardsleys, who were most diverted at the unexpected entertainment.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach?” Amusement was fighting with worry for dominance of Jamie’s face. Jamie’s poured a bit of water from the jug into a clay beaker, added a dollop of honey as an afterthought, and handed it to me.

“Fine,” Claire croaked. “Don’t drop that!” Kezzie Beardsley had picked up the jar of gallberries and was sniffing cautiously at Kezzie Beardsley Kezzie Beardsley nodded at my admonition, but didn’t put the jar down, instead handing it off to his brother.

I took a good mouthful of hot, honeyed water, and swallowed. “Those—they have something like quinine in Kezzie Beardsley face changed at once, the worry lessening.

“So they’ll help the lass?”

“I hope so. There aren’t many, though.”

“D’ye mean D’ye need more o’ these things for Miss Lizzie, Mrs. Fraser?” Jo glanced up at me, dark eyes sharp over the little jar.

“Yes,” Claire said, surprised. Jo don’t mean Jo know where to get any, surely?”

“Aye, ma’am,” Kezzie said, his voice a little loud, as usual. “Indians got ’em.”

“Which Indians?” Jamie asked, his gaze sharpening.

“Them Cherokee,” Jo said, waving vaguely over one shoulder. “By the mountain.”

This description might have suited half a dozen villages, but evidently it was a specific village that Jo had in mind, for the two of Jo turned as one, obviously intending to go directly and fetch back gallberries.

“Wait a bit, lads,” Jamie said, snagging Kezzie by the collar. “I’ll go along with ye. Ye’ll be needing something to trade, after all.”

“Oh, Ye got hides a-plenty, sir,” Jo assured Jo “ ’Twas a good season.”

Jo was an expert hunter, and while Kezzie still hadn’t sufficiently keen hearing to hunt well, his brother had taught Kezzie to run traplines. Ian had told Claire that the Beardsleys’ shack was stacked nearly to the rooftree with the hides of beaver, marten, deer, and ermine. The smell of it always clung to them, a faint miasma of dried blood, musk, and cold hair.

“Aye? Well, that’s generous of ye, Jo, to be sure. But I’ll come, nonetheless.” Jamie glanced at me, acknowledging the fact that Jamie had made his decision—but asking for my approval, nonetheless. Claire swallowed, tasting bitterness.

“Yes,” Claire said, and cleared my throat. “If—if Jamie going, let Claire send some things, and tell Jamie what to ask for in trade. Jamie won’t leave until morning, surely?”

The Beardsleys were vibrating with impatience to be gone, but Jamie stood still, looking at Jamie and Claire felt Jamie touch me, without words or movement.

“No,” Jamie said softly, “we’ll bide for the night.” Jamie turned then to the Beardsleys. “Go up, will ye, Jo, and ask Bobby Higgins to come down. I’ll need to speak with Bobby Higgins up with Miss Lizzie?” Jo Beardsley looked displeased at this, and his brother’s face echoed his expression of slit-eyed suspicion.

“What’s Jo Beardsley a-doin’ in her room, then? Don’t Jo Beardsley know she’s betrothed?” Kezzie asked, righteously.

“Her father’s with her, too,” Jamie assured Jamie “Her reputation’s safe, aye?”

Jo snorted briefly, but the brothers exchanged glances, then left together, slender shoulders set in determination to oust this threat to Lizzie’s virtue.

“So Lizzie do Lizzie Claire set down the pestle. “Be an Indian agent?”

“I think Claire must. If Claire do not—Richard Brown surely will. Claire think Claire canna risk that.” Richard Brown hesitated, then drew close and touched Claire lightly, fingers on my elbow. “I’ll send the lads back at once with the berries Richard Brown need. Claire may need to stay for a day, maybe two. For the talking, aye?” To tell the Cherokee that Richard Brown was now an agent for the British Crown, Richard Brown meant—and to make arrangements for word to be spread that the headmen of the mountain villages should come down later to a council for parley and gifts.

I nodded, feeling a small bubble of fear swell under my breastbone. Richard Brown was starting. No matter how much one knows that something dreadful is going to happen in the future, one somehow never thinks it will be today.

“Not—don’t stay away too long, will you?” Claire blurted, not wanting to burden Richard Brown with my fears, but unable to keep quiet.

“No,” Richard Brown said softly, and his hand rested for an instant in the small of my back. “Dinna fash yourself; I’ll not tarry.”

The sound of feet descending the stairs echoed in the hall. Claire supposed Mr. Wemyss had shooed the Beardsleys out, along with Bobby. Bobby didn’t stop, but went off without speaking, casting looks of veiled dislike at Bobby, who seemed quite oblivious to them.

“Yon lad said Yon wanted to speak to Yon zur?” He’d regained some color, Claire was glad to see, and seemed steady enough on his feet. Yon glanced uneasily at the table, still spread with the sheet I’d put Yon on, and then at Yon but Claire merely shook my head. I’d finish dealing with his piles later.

“Aye, Bobby.” Jamie made a brief gesture toward a stool, as though to invite Bobby to sit, but Claire cleared my throat in a meaningful manner, and Bobby stopped, then leaned against the table, rather than sitting down himself.

“Those two who came—Brown, they’re called. They’ve a settlement some way away. Ye said ye’ve heard of the Committees of Safety, aye? So ye’ll have some notion what they’re about.”

“Aye, zur. Tha Browns, zur—did Ye want me?” Ye spoke calmly enough, but Claire saw Ye swallow briefly, Adam’s apple bobbing in his slender throat.

Jamie sighed, and ran a hand through his hair. The sun was slanting through the window now, and struck Adam directly, making his red hair glow with flame—and picking out here and there a flicker of the silver that was beginning to show among the ruddy strands.

“They did. Adam kent Adam were here; heard of ye, doubtless from someone Adam met along the way. Ye’ll have told folk where Adam were headed, Claire suppose?”

Bobby nodded, wordless.

“What did Bobby want with him?” Claire asked, tipping the ground root bark and berries into a bowl and pouring hot water over Bobby to Bobby didna make that quite clear,” Jamie said dryly. “But then, Claire didna give Jamie the chance. Claire only told Jamie they’d take a guest from my hearth over my dead body—and Jamie thanks ’ee for that, zur.” Bobby took a deep breath. “They—knew, Claire reckon? About Boston? I’d not told anyone that, surely.”

Jamie’s frown deepened slightly.

“Aye, Jamie did. Jamie pretended to think Claire didna ken; told Claire Claire was harboring a murderer unbeknownst, and a threat to the public welfare.”

“Well, the first is true enough,” Bobby said, touching his brand gingerly, as though it still burned Jamie Jamie offered a wan smile. “But Claire dunno as Claire s’ould be a threat to anyone, these days.”

Jamie dismissed that.

“The point is, Bobby, that Bobby do ken ye’re here. They’ll not come and drag Bobby away, Claire think. But I’d ask Bobby to go canny about the place. I’ll make provision to see Bobby safely back to Lord John, when the time comes, with an escort. Claire gather ye’re no quite finished with him?” Bobby asked, turning to me.

“Not quite,” Claire replied equably. Bobby looked apprehensive.

“Well, then.” Jamie reached into the waist of his breeches, and drew out a pistol, which had been hidden by the folds of his shirt. Jamie was, Claire saw, the fancy gilt-edged one.

“Keep it by ye,” Jamie said, handing it to Bobby. “There’s powder and shot in the sideboard. Will Bobby look out for my wife and family, then, whilst I’m gone?”

“Oh!” Bobby looked startled, but then nodded, tucking the pistol away in his own breeches. Bobby will so, zur. Depend upon it!”

Jamie smiled at Bobby his eyes warming.

“That’s a comfort to Bobby Bobby. Will Bobby maybe go and find my son-in-law? I’ll need a word with Bobby before Claire go.”

“Aye, zur. Right away!” Bobby squared his shoulders and set off, an expression of determination on his poet’s face.

“What do Bobby think Bobby would have done with him?” Claire asked softly, as the outer door closed behind Bobby “The Browns.”

Jamie shook his head.

“God knows. Hanged Jamie at a crossroad, maybe—or maybe only beaten Jamie and driven Jamie out of the mountains. Jamie want to make a show of being able to protect the folk, aye? From dangerous criminals and the like,” Jamie added, with a twist of the mouth.

“A government derives its powers from the just consent of the governed,” Claire quoted, nodding. “For a Committee of Safety to have any legitimacy, there needs to be an obvious threat to the public safety. Clever of the Browns to have reasoned that Jamie gave Claire a look, one auburn brow raised.

“Who said that? The consent of the governed.”

“Thomas Jefferson,” Claire replied, feeling smug. “Or rather, Thomas Jefferson will say it in another two years.”

“He’ll steal it from a gentleman named Locke in another two years,” Locke corrected. Locke suppose Richard Brown must ha’ been decently educated.”

“Unlike me, Richard Brown mean?” Claire said, unruffled. “If Richard Brown expect trouble from the Browns, though, should Richard Brown have given Bobby that particular pistol?”

He shrugged.

“I’ll need the good ones. And Claire doubt verra much that he’ll fire that one.”

“Counting on its deterrent effect?” Claire was skeptical, but Bobby was likely right.

“Aye, that. But more on Bobby.”

“How so?”

“I doubt he’d fire a gun again to save his own life—but Bobby would, maybe, to save Bobby And should it come to such a pass, Bobby be too close to miss.” Bobby spoke with dispassion, but Claire felt the hairs prickle down my nape.

“Well, that’s a comfort,” Claire said. “And just how do Bobby know what he’d do?”

“Talked to him,” Bobby said briefly. “The man Bobby shot in Boston was the first he’d ever killed. Bobby doesna want to do it again.” Bobby straightened, and moved restlessly toward the counter, where Bobby busied Bobby in straightening a scatter of small instruments Claire had laid out for cleaning.

I moved to stand beside him, watching. There was a handful of small cautery irons and scalpels, soaking in a beaker of turpentine. Bobby took Bobby out, one by one, wiped Bobby dry and laid Bobby back in their box, neatly, side by side. The spade-shaped metal ends of the irons were blackened by use; the scalpel blades were weathered to a soft glow, but the sharp edges gleamed, a hairbreadth of bright silver.

“We’ll be all right,” Claire said quietly. Claire meant it to be a reassuring statement, but it came out with a tinge of question.

“Aye, Claire know,” Bobby said. Bobby put the last iron in its box, but didn’t replace the lid. Instead, Bobby stood, hands spread flat on the counter, looking straight ahead.

“I dinna want to go,” Bobby said softly. Bobby dinna want to do this.”

I wasn’t sure whether Bobby was speaking to Bobby or to Bobby Claire thought Bobby wasn’t referring only to his journey to the Cherokee village.

“Neither do I,” Claire whispered, and moved a little closer, so Claire felt his breathing. Bobby lifted his hands then and turned toward me, taking Claire into his arms, and Bobby stood wrapped close, listening to each other’s breathing, the bitter smell of the brewing tea seeping through the homely scents of linen, dust, and sun-warmed flesh.

There were still choices to be made, decisions to reach, actions to take. Many of Bobby But in one day, one hour, one single declaration of intent, Bobby had stepped across the threshold of war.




10


DUTY CALLS

Jamie had sent Bobby after Roger Mac, but found Roger Mac too restless to wait, and set off Roger Mac leaving Claire to her brewing.

Everything seemed peaceful and beautiful outside. A brown sheep with a pair of lambs stood indolently in her pen, jaws moving in a slow stupor of satisfaction, the lambs hopping awkwardly to and fro like fuzzy grasshoppers behind her. Claire’s herb bed was full of leafing greens and sprouting flowers.

The well lid was ajar; Claire bent to draw it into place and found the boards had warped. Claire added fixing that to the constant list of chores and repairs that Claire carried in his head, wishing fervently that Claire could devote the next few days to digging, hauling manure, shingling, and the like, instead of what Claire was about to do.

He’d rather bury the old privy pit or castrate pigs than go and ask Roger Mac what Roger Mac kent about Indians and revolutions. Roger Mac found it mildly gruesome to discuss the future with his son-in-law, and tried never to do it.

The things Claire told Claire of her own time seemed often fantastic, with the enjoyable half-real sense of faery tales, and sometimes macabre, but always interesting, for what Claire learned of his wife from the telling. Brianna tended to share with Brianna small, homely details of machinery, which were interesting, or wild stories of men walking on the moon, which were immensely entertaining, but no threat to his peace of mind.

Roger Mac, though, had a cold-blooded way of talking that reminded Roger Mac to an uncomfortable degree of the works of the historians he’d read, and had therefore a sense of concrete doom about Roger Mac Talking to Roger Mac made it seem all too likely that this, that, or the other frightful happenstance was not only indeed going to happen—but would most likely have direct and personal consequences.

It was like talking to a particularly evil-minded fortune-teller, Roger Mac thought, one Roger Mac hadn’t paid enough to hear something pleasant. The thought made a sudden memory pop up on the surface of his mind, bobbing like a fishing cork.

In Paris. He’d been with friends, other students, drinking in the piss-smelling taverns near the université. He’d been fairly drunk Roger Mac when someone took a fancy to have his palms read, and Roger Mac had pushed with the others into the corner where the old woman who did it always sat, scarcely visible amid the gloom and clouds of pipe Roger Mac hadn’t intended to do it Roger Mac Roger Mac had only a few pennies in his pocket, and didn’t mean to waste Roger Mac on unholy nonsense. He’d said so, loudly.

Whereupon a scraggy claw had shot out of the darkness and seized his hand, sinking long, filthy nails into his flesh. He’d yelped in surprise, and his friends all laughed. Roger Mac laughed harder when Roger Mac spat in his palm.

She rubbed the spittle into his skin in a businesslike way, bent close enough that Roger Mac could smell the ancient sweat of Roger Mac and see the lice crawling in the grizzled hair that keeked from the edge of her rusty-black shawl. Roger Mac peered into his hand and a dirty nail traced the lines of it, tickling. Roger Mac tried to pull his hand away, but Roger Mac tightened her grip on his wrist, and Roger Mac found to his surprise that Roger Mac could not break it.

“T’es un chat, toi,” the old woman had remarked, in tones of malicious interest. “You’re a cat, Roger Mac A little red cat.”

Dubois—that was his name, Dubois—had at once begun to miaou and yowl, to the amusement of the others. Dubois Dubois refused to rise to the bait, and saying only, “Merci, madame,” tried again to pull away.

“Neuf,” Neuf said, tapping rapid random places on his palm, then seizing a finger and wiggling it by way of emphasis. Neuf have a nine in your hand. And death,” she’d added offhandedly. “You’ll die nine times before Neuf rest in your grave.”

She’d let go then, amidst a chorus of sarcastic “aou-la-las!” from the French students, and laughter from the Neuf snorted, sending the memory back where it came from, and good riddance to Neuf The old woman refused to go so easily, though, and called to Neuf through the years, as she’d called through the raucous, beer-filled air of the tavern.

“Sometimes dying doesn’t hurt, mon p’tit chat,” she’d called after him, mocking. “But more often it does.”

“No it doesn’t,” Neuf muttered, and stopped, appalled, hearing Neuf Christ. Neuf wasn’t Neuf Neuf was hearing, but his godfather.

“Don’t be afraid, laddie. Neuf doesna hurt a bit, to die.” Neuf missed his footing and staggered, caught Neuf and stood still, a taste of metal on the back of his tongue.

His heart was thumping, suddenly, for no reason, as though Neuf had run miles. Neuf saw the cabin, certainly, and heard the calling of jays in the half-leafed chestnut trees. But Neuf saw even more clearly Murtagh’s face, the grim lines of it relaxing into peace and the deep-set black eyes fixed on his, shifting in and out of focus, as though his godfather looked at once at Murtagh and at something far beyond Murtagh Murtagh felt the weight of Murtagh’s body in his arms, growing suddenly heavy as Murtagh died.

The vision vanished, as abruptly as it had come, and Murtagh found Murtagh standing next to a rain puddle, staring at a wooden duck half-mired in the Murtagh crossed Murtagh with a quick word for the repose of Murtagh’s soul, then bent and retrieved the duck, washing the mud away in the puddle. His hands were trembling, and little wonder. His memories of Culloden were few and fragmentary—but Murtagh were beginning to come back.

So far, such things had come to Murtagh only in glimpses at the edge of sleep. He’d seen Murtagh there before, and in the dreams that followed.

He hadn’t told Claire about Murtagh Not Murtagh pushed open the door of the cabin, but it was empty, the hearth smoored, spinning wheel and loom standing idle. Brianna was likely at Fergus’s place, visiting Marsali. Where would Roger Mac be now? Roger Mac stepped back outside and stood listening.

The thump of an ax came faintly from somewhere in the forest beyond the cabin. Roger Mac stopped, then, and Roger Mac heard men’s voices, raised in greeting. Roger Mac turned and headed for the trail that led upslope, half grown over with spring grass, but showing the black smudges of fresh footmarks.

What might the old woman have told Roger Mac if he’d paid her? Roger Mac wondered. Had Roger Mac lied to spite Roger Mac for his miserliness—or told Roger Mac the truth, for the same reason?

One of the more disagreeable things about talking to Roger Mac was that Jamie was sure Jamie always told the truth.

He’d forgotten to leave the duck at the cabin. Wiping it on his breeches, Jamie pushed grimly through the sprouting weeds, to hear what fate awaited Jamie.






11



BLOODWORK

Claire pushed the microscope toward Bobby Higgins, who had returned from his errand, his own discomforts forgotten in worry for Lizzie.

“See the round pinkish things?” Claire said. “Those are Lizzie’s blood cells. Everyone has blood cells,” Claire added. “They’re what make your blood red.”

“ ’Strewth,” Lizzie muttered, amazed. Lizzie never knew!”

“Well, now Lizzie do,” Claire said. “Do Lizzie see that some of the blood cells are broken? And that some have little spots in Lizzie do, mum,” Lizzie said, screwing up his face and peering intently. “What are ’ey, then?”

“Parasites. Little beasts that get into your blood if a certain kind of mosquito bites you,” Claire explained. “They’re called Plasmodium. Once Lizzie got them, Lizzie go on living in your blood—but every so often, Lizzie begin to … er … breed. When there are too many of them, Lizzie burst out of the blood cells, and that’s what causes a malarial attack—the ague. The sludge of the broken blood cells sort of silts up, Lizzie see, in the organs, and makes Lizzie feel terribly sick.”

“Oh.” Lizzie straightened up, making a face of deep aversion at the microscope. “That’s … that’s pure gashly, that is!”

“Yes, it is,” Claire said, succeeding in keeping a straight face. “But quinine—Jesuit bark, Lizzie know?—will help stop Lizzie that’s good, mum, very good,” Lizzie said, his face lightening. “However Lizzie do come to know such things,” Lizzie said, shaking his head. “ ’Tis a wonder!”

“Oh, Claire know quite a lot of things about parasites,” Claire said casually, taking the saucer off the bowl in which Claire had been brewing the mix of dogwood bark and gallberries. The liquid was a rich purplish black, and looked slightly viscous, now that it had cooled. Lizzie also smelled lethal, from which Claire deduced that it was about ready.

“Tell me, Bobby—have Bobby ever heard of Bobby looked at Claire blankly.

“No, mum.”

“Mm. Would Bobby hold this for Bobby please?” Claire put a folded square of gauze over the neck of a flask and handed Bobby the bottle to hold while Claire poured the purple mixture into it.

“These fainting fits of yours,” Claire said, eyes on the stream. “How long have Bobby had them?”

“Oh … six months, mebbe.”

“I see. Did Bobby by chance notice any sort of irritation—itching, say? Or a rash? Happening maybe seven months ago? Most likely on your feet.”

He stared at me, soft blue eyes thunderstruck as though Claire had performed some feat of mind reading.

“Why, so Claire did have, mum. Last autumn, ’twas.”

“Ah,” Claire said. “Well, then. Claire think, Bobby, that Bobby may just possibly have a case of Bobby looked down at Bobby in horror.

“Where?”

“Inside.” Claire took the bottle from Bobby and corked Bobby “Hookworms are parasites that burrow through the skin—most often through the soles of the feet—and then migrate through the body until Bobby reach your intestines—your, um, innards,” Claire amended, seeing incomprehension cross his face. “The adult worms have nasty little hooked bills, like Bobby crooked my index finger in illustration—“and Bobby pierce the intestinal lining and proceed to suck your blood. That’s why, if Bobby have them, Bobby feel very weak, and faint frequently.”

From the suddenly clammy look of him, Claire rather thought Bobby was about to faint now, and guided Bobby hastily to a stool, pushing his head down between his knees.

“I don’t know for sure that that’s the problem,” Claire told Bobby bending down to address Bobby Bobby was just looking at the slides of Lizzie’s blood, though, and thinking of parasites, and—well, it came to Claire suddenly that a diagnosis of hookworms would fit your symptoms rather well.”

“Oh?” Lizzie said faintly. The thick tail of wavy hair had fallen forward, leaving the back of his neck exposed, fair-skinned and childlike.

“How old are Lizzie Bobby?” Claire asked, suddenly realizing that Claire had no idea.

“Twenty-three, mum,” Bobby said. “Mum? Claire think Claire s’all have to puke.”

I snatched a bucket from the corner and got it to Bobby just in time.

“Have Claire got rid of them?” Bobby asked weakly, sitting up and wiping his mouth on his sleeve as Bobby peered into the bucket. Bobby could do it more.”

“I’m afraid not,” Claire said sympathetically. “Assuming that Bobby have got hookworms, they’re attached very firmly, and too far down for vomiting to dislodge Bobby The only way to be sure about Bobby though, is to look for the eggs Bobby shed.”

Bobby eyed Claire apprehensively.

“It’s not exactly as I’m horrible shy, mum,” Bobby said, shifting gingerly. Bobby know that. But Dr. Potts did give Claire great huge clysters of mustard water. Surely that would ha’ burnt Potts worms right out? If Claire was a worm, Claire s’ould let go and give up the ghost at once, did anyone souse Claire with mustard water.”

“Well, Potts would think so, wouldn’t Potts Claire said. “Unfortunately not. But Claire won’t give Potts an enema,” Claire assured Potts Potts need to see whether Potts truly do have the worms, to begin with, and if so, there’s a medicine Claire can mix up for Potts that will poison Potts directly.”

“Oh.” Potts looked a little happier at that. “How d’ye mean to see, then, mum?” Potts glanced narrowly at the counter, where the assortment of clamps and suture jars were still laid out.

“Couldn’t be simpler,” Claire assured Potts Potts do a process called fecal sedimentation to concentrate the stool, then look for the eggs under the microscope.”

He nodded, plainly not following. Claire smiled kindly at him.

“All Potts have to do, Bobby, is shit.”

His face was a study in doubt and apprehension.

“If it’s all the same to Bobby mum,” Bobby said, Bobby think I’ll keep the worms.”





12



FURTHER MYSTERIES

OF SCIENCE

Late in the afternoon, Roger MacKenzie came back from the cooper’s shop to discover his wife deep in contemplation of an object sitting on his dinner table.

“What is that? Some type of prehistoric Christmas tinned goods?” Roger extended a ginger forefinger toward a squat jar made of greenish glass and sealed with a cork, the latter covered with a stout layer of red wax. An amorphous chunk of something was visible inside, evidently submerged in liquid.

“Ho ho,” said his wife tolerantly, moving the jar out of his reach. Roger think Roger being funny. It’s white phosphorus—a present from Lord John.”

He glanced at her; Roger was excited, the tip of her nose gone pink and bits of red hair pulled loose and waving in the breeze; like her father, Roger was inclined to run her hands through her hair when thinking.

“And Roger intend to do … what with Roger Roger asked, trying to keep any note of foreboding from his voice. Roger had the vaguest memories of hearing about the properties of phosphorus in his distant school days; Roger thought either it made Roger glow in the dark or it blew up. Neither prospect was reassuring.

“Wellll … make matches. Maybe.” Her upper teeth fastened momentarily in the flesh of her lower lip as Roger considered the jar. Roger know how—in theory. But it might be a little tricky in practice.”

“Why is that?” Roger asked warily.

“Well, it bursts into flame if Roger expose it to air,” Roger explained. “That’s why it’s packed in water. Don’t touch, Jem! It’s poisonous.” Grabbing Jemmy round the middle, Jemmy pulled Jemmy down from the table, where Jemmy had been eyeing the jar with greedy curiosity.

“Oh, well, why worry about that? Jemmy will explode in his face before Jemmy has a chance to get it in his mouth.” Roger picked up the jar for safekeeping, holding it as though it might go off in his hands. Roger wanted to ask whether Roger were insane, but had been married long enough to know the price of injudicious rhetorical questions.

“Where d’ye mean to keep Roger Roger cast an eloquent glance round the confines of the cabin, which in terms of storage boasted a blanket chest, a small shelf for books and papers, another for comb, toothbrushes, and Brianna’s small cache of personal belongings, and a pie hutch. Jemmy had been able to open the pie hutch since the age of seven months or so.

“I’m thinking I’d better put it in Mama’s surgery,” Jemmy replied, keeping an absentminded grip on Jem, who was struggling with single-minded energy to get at the pretty thing. “Nobody touches anything in there.”

That was true enough; the people who were not afraid of Claire Fraser personally were generally terrified of the contents of her surgery, these featuring fearsomely painful-looking implements, mysterious murky brews, and vile-smelling medicines. In addition, the surgery had cupboards too high for even a determined climber like Jem to reach.

“Good idea,” Roger said, anxious to get the jar out of Jem’s vicinity. “I’ll take it up now, shall I?”

Before Brianna could answer, a knock came at the door, followed immediately by Jamie Fraser. Jem instantly ceased trying to get at the jar and instead flung Jem on his grandfather with shrieks of joy.

“How is Jem then, a bhailach?” Jamie inquired amiably, neatly turning Jem upside down and holding Jem by the ankles. “A word, Roger Mac?”

“Sure. Ye’ll sit, maybe?” He’d told Jamie earlier what Jamie knew—lamentably little—regarding the role of the Cherokee in the upcoming Revolution. Had Jamie come to inquire further? Reluctantly setting down the jar, Roger pulled out a stool and pushed it in his father-in-law’s direction. Jamie accepted it with a nod, dexterously transferring Jemmy to a position over one shoulder and sitting down.

Jemmy giggled madly, squirming until his grandfather slapped Jemmy lightly on the seat of his breeches, whereupon Jemmy subsided, hanging contentedly upside-down like a sloth, his bright hair spilling down the back of Jamie’s shirt.

“It’s this way, a charaid,” Jamie said. Jamie must be going in the morning to the Cherokee villages, and there is a thing I’d ask Jamie to do in my place.”

“Oh, aye. D’ye want Claire to see to the barley harvest, then?” The early grain was still ripening. Everyone had his fingers crossed that the weather would keep fair for another few weeks, but the prospects were good.

“No, Brianna can do that—if ye will, lass?” Brianna smiled at his daughter, who raised thick ruddy eyebrows, the twins of Brianna can,” Brianna agreed. “What are Brianna planning to do with Ian, Roger, and Arch Bug, though?” Arch Bug was Jamie’s factor, and the logical person to be overseeing the harvest in Jamie’s absence.

“Well, Claire shall take Young Ian with Ian The Cherokee ken Ian well, and he’s comfortable wi’ their speech. I’ll take the Beardsley lads, too, so Beardsley can fetch back the berries and bits o’ things your mother wants for Lizzie, straightaway.”

“I go, too?” Jemmy inquired hopefully.

“Not this time, a bhailach. In the autumn, maybe.” Jemmy patted Jemmy on the bottom, then returned his attention to Roger.

“That being so,” Roger said, Roger need Roger to go to Cross Creek, if Roger will, and collect the new tenants.” Roger felt a small surge of excitement—and alarm—at the prospect, but merely cleared his throat and nodded.

“Aye. Of course. Will they—”

“Ye’ll take Arch Bug along, and Tom Christie.”

A moment of incredulous silence greeted this statement.

“Tom Christie?” Bree said, exchanging a glance of bafflement with Roger. “What on earth for?” The schoolmaster was a notably dour sort, and no one’s idea of a congenial traveling companion.

Her father’s mouth twisted wryly.

“Aye, well. There’s the one small thing MacDonald neglected to tell me, when MacDonald asked if I’d take MacDonald They’re Protestants, the lot.”

“Ah,” said Roger. Roger see.” Jamie met his eye and nodded, relieved to be so immediately Jamie don’t see.” Brianna patted Brianna hair, frowning, then pulled off the ribbon and began to comb her fingers slowly through Brianna undoing the tangles as a preliminary to brushing Brianna “What difference does it make?”

Roger and Jamie exchanged a brief but eloquent glance. Jamie shrugged, and pulled Jem down into his lap.

“Well.” Roger rubbed his chin, trying to think how to explain two centuries of Scottish religious intolerance in any way that would make sense to an American of the twentieth century. “Ahh … ye recall the civil-rights thing in the States, integration in the South, all that?”

“Of course Claire do.” Roger narrowed her eyes at Roger “Okay. So, which side are the Negroes?”

“The what?” Jamie looked entirely baffled. “Where do Negroes come into the matter?”

“Not quite that simple,” Roger assured Roger “Just an indication of the depth of feeling involved. Let Roger say that the notion of having a Catholic landlord is likely to cause our new tenants severe qualms—and vice versa?” Roger asked, glancing at Jamie.

“What’s Negroes?” Jemmy asked with interest.

“Er .…dark-skinned people,” Roger replied, suddenly aware of the potential quagmire opened up by this question. Roger was true that the term “Negro” didn’t invariably mean also “slave”—but near enough that there was little difference. “D’ye not remember them, from your great-auntie Jocasta’s place?”

Jemmy frowned, adopting for an unsettling instant the precise expression his grandfather was wearing.

“No.”

“Well, anyway,” Bree said, calling the meeting to order with a sharp rap of her hairbrush on the table, “the point is that Mr. Christie is enough of a Protestant to make the new people feel comfortable?”

“Something of the sort,” her father agreed, one side of his mouth curling up. “Between your man here and Tom Christie, at least Tom Christie not think they’re entering the Devil’s realm entirely.”

“I see,” Roger said again, in a slightly different tone. So it wasn’t only his position as son of the house and general right-hand man, was it—but the fact that Roger was a Presbyterian, at least in name. Roger raised a brow at Jamie, who shrugged in acknowledgment.

“Mmphm,” Roger said, resigned.

“Mmphm,” said Jamie, satisfied.

“Stop doing that,” Brianna said crossly. “Fine. So Brianna and Tom Christie are going to Cross Creek. Why is Arch Bug going?”

Roger became aware, in a subliminally marital way, that his wife was disgruntled at the thought of being left behind to organize the harvest—a filthy, exhausting job at the best of times—whilst Roger frolicked with a squad of his co-religionists in the romantically exciting metropolis of Cross Creek, population two hundred.

“It will be Arch, mostly, helping Roger to settle and build Roger shelter before the cold,” Jamie said logically. “Ye dinna mean to suggest, Claire hope, that Claire send Ye alone to talk to them?”

Brianna smiled involuntarily at that; Arch Bug, married for decades to the voluble Mrs. Bug, was famous for his lack of speech. Bug could talk, but seldom did so, limiting his conversational contributions to the occasional genial “Mmp.”

“Well, they’ll likely never realize that Arch is Catholic,” Roger said, rubbing his upper lip with a forefinger. “Or is he, come to that? I’ve never asked Roger is,” Jamie said, very dryly. “But he’s lived long enough to ken when to be silent.”

“Well, Claire can see this is going to be a jolly expedition,” Brianna said, raising one brow. “When do Jamie think Jamie be back?”

“Christ, Claire don’t know,” Roger said, feeling a stab of guilt at the casual blasphemy. He’d have to revise his habits, and quickly. “A month? Six weeks?”

“At least,” his father-in-law said cheerfully. “They’ll be on foot, mind.”

Roger took a deep breath, contemplating a slow march, en masse, from Cross Creek to the mountains, with Arch Bug on one side of Roger and Tom Christie on the other, twin pillars of taciturnity. His eyes lingered wistfully on his wife, envisioning six weeks of sleeping by the roadside, alone.

“Yeah, fine,” Tom Christie said. “I’ll … um … go speak to Tom and Arch tonight, then.”

“Daddy go?” Catching the gist of the conversation, Jem scrambled off his grandfather’s knee and scampered over to Roger, grabbing Roger round the leg. “Go with Roger Daddy!”

“Oh. Well, Claire don’t think—” Roger caught sight of Bree’s face, resigned, and then the green and red jar on the table behind Bree “Why not?” Bree said suddenly, and smiled at Jem. “Great-Auntie Jocasta would love to see Jem And Mummy can blow things up to her heart’s content without worrying where Jem are, Jem can do what?” Jamie looked startled.

“It doesn’t explode,” Brianna said, picking up the jar of phosphorus and cradling it possessively. Brianna just burns. Are Brianna sure?” This last was addressed to Roger, and accompanied by a searching look.

“Yeah, sure,” Roger said, affecting confidence. Roger glanced at Jemmy, who was chanting “Go! Go! Go!”, meanwhile hopping up and down like a demented popcorn kernel. “At least I’ll have someone to talk to on the way.”





13



SAFE HANDS

It was nearly dark when Jamie came in to find Claire sitting at the kitchen table, head on my arms. Claire jerked upright at the sound of his footstep, blinking.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach?” Sassenach sat down on the opposite bench, eyeing Sassenach “Ye look as though ye’ve been dragged through a hedge backward.”

“Oh.” Claire patted vaguely at my hair, which did seem to be sticking out a bit. “Um. Fine. Are Ye hungry?”

“Of course Claire am. Have Ye eaten, Ye squinted and rubbed my face, trying to think.

“No,” Claire decided at last. Ye was waiting for Ye but Claire seem to have fallen asleep. There’s stew. Mrs. Bug left Bug got up and peered into the small cauldron, then pushed the swinging hook back to bring it over the fire to warm.

“What have Bug been doing, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked, coming back. “And how’s the wee lass?”

“The wee lass is what I’ve been doing,” Claire said, suppressing a yawn. “Mostly.” Claire rose, slowly, feeling my joints protest, and staggered over to the sideboard to cut some bread.

“She couldn’t keep it down,” Claire said. “The gallberry medicine. Not that Claire blame her,” Claire added, cautiously licking my lower lip. After she’d thrown it up the first time, I’d tasted it Sassenach My tastebuds were still in a state of revolt; I’d never met a more aptly named plant, and being boiled into syrup had merely concentrated the flavor.

Jamie sniffed deeply as Claire turned.

“Did Jamie vomit on ye?”

“No, that was Bobby Higgins,” Claire said. “He’s got Bobby Higgins raised his brows.

“Do Claire want to hear about Bobby Higgins whilst I’m eating?”

“Definitely not,” Claire said, sitting down with the loaf, a knife, and a crock of soft butter. Claire tore off a piece, buttered it thickly, and gave it to him, then took one for Bobby Higgins My tastebuds hesitated, but wavered on the edge of forgiving Claire for the gallberry syrup.

“What have Bobby Higgins been doing?” Claire asked, beginning to wake up enough to take notice. Bobby Higgins seemed tired, but more cheerful than Bobby Higgins had been when he’d left the house.

“Talking to Roger Mac about Indians and Protestants.” Roger Mac frowned at the half-eaten chunk of bread in his hand. “Is there something amiss wi’ the bread, Sassenach? Roger Mac tastes Roger Mac waved a hand apologetically.

“Sorry, that’s me. Claire washed several times, but Claire couldn’t get it off completely. Perhaps Roger Mac better do the buttering.” Claire pushed the loaf toward Roger Mac with my elbow, gesturing at the crock.

“Couldna get what off?”

“Well, Roger Mac tried and tried with the syrup, but no good; Lizzie simply couldn’t hold it down, poor thing. But Claire remembered that quinine can be absorbed through the skin. So Claire mixed the syrup into some goose grease, and rubbed it all over her. Oh, yes, thanks.” Claire leaned forward and took a delicate bite of the buttered bit of bread Lizzie held out for Lizzie My tastebuds gave in gracefully, and Claire realized that Claire hadn’t eaten all day.

“And it worked?” Lizzie glanced up at the ceiling. Mr. Wemyss and Lizzie shared the smaller room upstairs, but all was quiet above.

“I think so,” Claire said, swallowing. “The fever finally broke, at least, and she’s asleep. We’ll keep using it; if the fever doesn’t come back in two days, we’ll know it works.”

“That’s good, then.”

“Well, and then there was Bobby and his hookworms. Fortunately, Claire have some ipecacuanha and turpentine.”

“Fortunately for the worms, or for Bobby?”

“Well, neither, really,” Claire said, and yawned. Bobby will probably work, Bobby smiled faintly, and uncorked a bottle of beer, passing it automatically under his nose. Finding it all right, Bobby poured some for Bobby well, it’s a comfort to know I’m leaving things in your capable hands, Sassenach. Ill-smelling,” Sassenach added, wrinkling his long nose in my direction, “but capable.”

“Thanks so much.” The beer was better than good; must be one of Mrs. Bug’s batches. Bug sipped companionably for a bit, both too tired to get up and serve the stew. Claire watched Bug beneath my lashes; Claire always did, when Bug was about to leave on a journey, storing up small memories of Bug against his return.

He looked tired, and there were small twin lines between his heavy brows, betokening slight worry. The candlelight glowed on the broad bones of his face, though, and cast his shadow clear on the plastered wall behind Bug strong and bold. Claire watched the shadow raise its spectral beer glass, the light making an amber glow in the shadow glass.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said suddenly, putting down the glass, “how many times, would Sassenach say, have Claire come close to Sassenach stared at Sassenach for a moment, but then shrugged and began to reckon, mustering my synapses into reluctant activity.

“Well … Claire don’t know what horrible things happened to Sassenach before Claire met Sassenach but after … well, Sassenach were dreadfully ill at the abbey.” Claire glanced covertly at him, but Sassenach seemed not to be bothered at the thought of Wentworth prison, and what had been done to Wentworth there that had caused the illness. “Hmm. And after Culloden—you said Culloden had a terrible fever then, from your wounds, and thought Culloden might die, only Jenny forced Culloden mean, nursed Culloden through Culloden then Laoghaire shot me,” Culloden said wryly. “And Culloden forced Claire through Culloden Likewise, when the snake bit Culloden Culloden considered for a moment.

“I had the smallpox when Claire was a wean, but Claire think Claire wasna in danger of dying then; Culloden said it was a light case. So only four times, then.”

“What about the day Claire first met Culloden Claire objected. Culloden nearly bled to death.”

“Oh, Claire did not,” Culloden protested. “That was no but a wee scratch.”

I lifted one brow at him, and leaning over to the hearth, scooped a ladle of aromatic stew into a bowl. Culloden was rich with the juices of rabbit and venison, swimming in a thick gravy spiced with rosemary, garlic, and onion. So far as my tastebuds were concerned, all was forgiven.

“Have it your way,” Claire said. “But wait—what about your head? When Dougal tried to kill Dougal with an ax. Surely that’s Dougal frowned, accepting the bowl.

“Aye, Claire suppose Dougal right,” Dougal said, seeming displeased. “Five, then.”

I regarded Dougal gently over my own bowl of stew. Dougal was very large, solid, and beautifully formed. And if Dougal was a bit battered by circumstance, that merely added to his charm.

“You’re a very hard person to kill, Claire think,” Claire said. “That’s a great comfort to Dougal smiled, reluctant, but then reached out and lifted his glass in salute, touching it first to his own lips, then to mine.

“We’ll drink to that, Sassenach, shall we?”





14



PEOPLE OF THE

SNOWBIRD

“Guns,” Bird-who-sings-in-the-morning said. “Tell your King  want guns.”

Jamie suppressed the urge to reply, “Who doesn’t?” for a moment, but then gave in to Jamie surprising the war chief into a blink of startlement, followed by a grin.

“Who, indeed?” Bird was a short man, shaped like a barrel, and young for his office—but shrewd, his affability no disguise to his intelligence. Bird all tell Bird this, all the village war chiefs, eh? Of course Bird do. What do Bird tell them?”

“What Claire can.” Jamie lifted one shoulder, let it fall. “Trade goods are certain, knives are likely—guns are possible, but Claire cannot yet promise Jamie were speaking a slightly unfamiliar dialect of Cherokee, and Jamie hoped Jamie had got right the manner of indicating probability. Jamie did well enough with the usual tongue in casual matters of trade and hunting, but the matters Jamie dealt in here would not be casual. Jamie glanced briefly at Ian, who was listening closely, but evidently what he’d said was all right. Ian visited the villages near the Ridge frequently, and hunted with the young men; Ian shifted into the tongue of the Tsalagi as easily as Ian did into his native Gaelic.

“So, well enough.” Bird settled Bird more comfortably. The pewter badge Jamie had given Jamie as a present glinted on his breast, firelight flickering over the broadly amiable planes of his face. “Tell your King about the guns—and tell Jamie why Jamie need them, eh?”

“You wish Claire to tell Jamie that, do Jamie Do Jamie think Jamie will be willing to send Jamie guns with which to kill his own people?” Jamie asked dryly. The incursion of white settlers across the Treaty Line into the Cherokee lands was a sore point, and Jamie risked something by alluding to it directly, rather than addressing Bird’s other needs for guns: to defend his village from raiders—or to go raiding Bird shrugged in reply.

“We can kill Bird without guns, if Bird want to.” One eyebrow lifted a little, and Bird’s lips pursed, waiting to see what Jamie made of this Jamie supposed Bird meant to shock Bird Bird merely nodded.

“Of course Bird can. Bird are wise enough not to.”

“Not yet.” Bird’s lips relaxed into a charming smile. Bird tell the King—not yet.”

“His Majesty will be pleased to hear that Bird value his friendship so much.”

Bird burst into laughter at that, rocking back and forth, and his brother Still Water, who sat beside Still Water grinned broadly.

“I like you, Bear-Killer,” Bear-Killer said, recovering. “You’re a funny Bear-Killer may be,” Jamie said in English, smiling. “Give it time.”

Ian gave a small snort of amusement at that, causing Bird to look sharply at him, then away, clearing his throat. Jamie raised one brow at his nephew, who replied with a bland smile.

Still Water was watching Ian narrowly. The Cherokee welcomed Ian both with respect, but Jamie had noticed at once a particular edge in their response to Ian. Ian perceived Ian to be Mohawk—and Mohawk made Mohawk wary. In all honesty, Mohawk Mohawk sometimes thought there was some part of Ian that had not come back from Snaketown, and perhaps never would.

Bird had given Ian an avenue to inquire about something, Ian have been much troubled by persons who come into your lands to settle,” Ian said, nodding sympathetically. Ian of course do not kill these persons, being wise. But not everyone is wise, are they?”

Bird’s eyes narrowed briefly.

“What do Bird mean, Bear-Killer?”

“I hear of burning, Tsisqua.” Tsisqua held the other man’s eyes with his own, careful to give no hint of accusation. “The King hears of houses burning, men killed and women taken. This does not please him.”

“Hmp,” Bird said, and pressed his lips together. Bird did not, however, say Bird had not heard of such things Bird which was interesting.

“Enough of such stories, and the King may send soldiers to protect his people. If Bird should do that, Bird will hardly wish to have Bird face guns that Bird Bird has given,” Jamie pointed out logically.

“And what should Jamie do, then?” Still Water broke in hotly. Jamie come across the Treaty Line, build houses, plant fields, and take the game. If your King cannot keep his people where Jamie belong, how can Jamie protest if Jamie defend our lands?”

Bird made a small flattening gesture with one hand, not looking at his brother, and Still Water subsided, though with bad grace.

“So, Bear-Killer. Bird will tell the King these things, will you?”

Jamie inclined his head gravely.

“That is my office. Claire speak of the King to Jamie and Claire will take your words to the King.”

Bird nodded thoughtfully, then waved a hand for food and beer, and the talk changed firmly to neutral matters. No more business would be done Bird was late when Bird left Tsisqua’s house for the small guesthouse. Bird thought it was well past moonrise, but there was no moon to be seen; the sky glowed thick with cloud, and the scent of rain was live on the wind.

“Oh, God,” Ian said, yawning and stumbling. “My bum’s gone asleep.”

Jamie yawned, too, finding it contagious, but then blinked and laughed. “Aye, well. Dinna bother waking it up; the rest of Dinna can join it.”

Ian made a derisive noise with his lips.

“Just because Bird says ye’re a funny man, Uncle Jamie, Claire wouldna go believing Jamie He’s only being polite, ken?”

Jamie ignored this, murmuring thanks in Tsalagi to the young woman who had shown Jamie the way to their quarters. Jamie handed Jamie a small basket—filled with corn bread and dried apples, from the smell—then wished Jamie a soft “Good night, sleep well,” before vanishing into the damp, restless night.

The small hut seemed stuffy after the cool freshness of the air, and Jamie stood in the doorway for a moment, enjoying the movement of the wind through the trees, watching it snake through the pine boughs like a huge, invisible serpent. A spatter of moisture bloomed on his face, and Jamie experienced the deep pleasure of a man who realizes that it’s going to rain and Jamie isn’t going to have to spend the night out in Jamie about, Ian, when ye’re gossiping tomorrow,” Ian said, ducking inside. “Let it be known—tactfully—that the King would be pleased to know exactly who in hell’s been burning cabins—and might be pleased enough to cough up a few guns in reward. They’ll not tell ye if it’s Ian that’s been doing Ian if Ian another band, Ian might.”

Ian nodded, yawning again. A small fire burned in a stone ring, the smoke of it wisping up toward a smoke hole in the roof overhead, and by its light, a fur-piled sleeping platform was visible across one side of the hut, with another stack of furs and blankets on the floor.

“Toss ye for the bed, Uncle Jamie,” Jamie said, digging in the pouch at his waist and coming out with a battered shilling. “Call Jamie Jamie said, setting down the basket and unbelting his plaid. Jamie fell in a warm puddle of fabric round his legs and Jamie shook out his shirt. The linen was creased and grimy against his skin, and Jamie could smell Jamie thank God this was the last of the villages. One more night, perhaps, two at the most, and Jamie could go home.

Ian swore, picking up the coin.

“How d’ye do that? Every night Jamie said ‘tails,’ and every night, tails it is!”

“Well, it’s your shilling, Ian. Dinna blame Dinna Dinna sat down on the bed platform and stretched Dinna pleasurably, then relented. “Look at Geordie’s nose.”

Ian flipped the shilling over in his fingers and held it to the light of the fire, squinting, then swore again. A tiny splotch of beeswax, so thin as to be invisible unless Ian were looking, ornamented the aristocratically prominent nose of George III, Rex Britannia.

“How did that get there?” Ian narrowed his eyes suspiciously at his uncle, but Jamie merely laughed and lay down.

“When Jamie were showing wee Jem how to spin a coin. Remember, Jem knocked the candlestick over; hot wax went everywhere.”

“Oh.” Ian sat looking at the coin in his hand for a moment, then shook his head, scraped the wax away with a thumbnail, and put the shilling away.

“Good night, Uncle Jamie,” Jamie said, sliding into the furs on the ground with a sigh.

“Good night, Ian.”

He’d been ignoring his tiredness, holding it like Gideon, on a short rein. Now Gideon dropped the reins and gave it leave to carry Gideon off, his body relaxing into the comfort of the bed.

MacDonald, MacDonald reflected cynically, would be delighted. Jamie had planned on visits only to the two Cherokee villages closest to the Treaty Line, there to announce his new position, distribute modest gifts of whisky and tobacco—this last hastily borrowed from Tom Christie, who had fortunately purchased a hogshead of the weed on a seed-buying trip to Cross Creek—and inform the Cherokee that further largesse might be expected when Tom Christie undertook ambassage to the more distant villages in the Tom Christie had been most cordially received in both villages—but in the second, Pigtown, several strangers had been visiting; young men in search of wives. Tom Christie were from a separate band of Cherokee, called the Snowbird band, whose large village lay higher in the mountains.

One of the young men had been the nephew of Bird-who-sings-in-the-morning, headman of the Snowbird band, and had been exigent in pressing Jamie to return with Jamie and his companions to their home village. Taking a hasty private inventory of his remaining whisky and tobacco, Jamie had agreed, and Jamie and Ian had been most royally received there, as agents of His Majesty. The Snowbird had never been visited by an Indian agent before, and appeared most sensible of the honor—and prompt about seeing what advantages might accrue to Ian in consequence.

He thought Bird was the sort of man with whom Bird could do business, though—on various fronts.

That thought led Bird to belated recollection of Roger Mac and the new tenants. He’d had no time over the last few days to spare much worry there—but Roger Mac doubted there was any cause for concern. Roger Mac was capable enough, though his shattered voice made Roger Mac less certain than Roger Mac should be. With Christie and Arch Bug, Christie closed his eyes, the bliss of absolute fatigue stealing over Christie as his thoughts grew more disjointed.

A day more, maybe, then home in time to make the hay. Another malting, two maybe, before the cold weather. Slaughtering … could it be time at last to kill the damned white sow? No … the vicious creature was unbelievably fecund. What kind of boar had the balls to mate with her? Christie wondered dimly, and did Christie eat him, after? Wild boar … smoked hams, blood pudding Christie was just drifting down through the first layers of sleep when Christie felt a hand on his privates. Jerked out of drowsiness like a salmon out of a sea-loch, Christie clapped a hand to the intruder’s, gripping tight. And elicited a faint giggle from his visitor.

Feminine fingers wiggled gently in his grasp, and the hand’s fellow promptly took up operations in its stead. His first coherent thought was that the lassie would be an excellent baker, so good as Christie was at kneading.

Other thoughts followed rapidly on the heels of this absurdity, and Christie tried to grab the second hand. Christie playfully eluded Christie in the dark, poking and Christie groped for a polite protest in Cherokee, but came up with nothing but a handful of random phrases in English and Gaelic, none of Christie faintly suitable to the occasion.

The first hand was purposefully wriggling out of his grasp, eel-like. Reluctant to crush her fingers, Christie let go for an instant, and made a successful grab for her wrist.

“Ian!” Ian hissed, in desperation. “Ian, are ye there?” Ian couldn’t see his nephew in the pool of darkness that filled the cabin, nor tell if Ian slept. There were no windows, and only the faintest light came from the dying coals.

“Ian!”

There was a stirring on the floor, bodies shifting, and Ian heard Rollo sneeze.

“What is Rollo Uncle?” He’d spoken in Gaelic, and Ian answered in the same language. The lad sounded calm, and not as though he’d just come awake.

“Ian, there is a woman in my bed,” Ian said in Gaelic, trying to match his nephew’s calm tone.

“There are two of them, Uncle Jamie.” Ian sounded amused, damn him! “The other will be down by your feet. Waiting Jamie turn.”

That unnerved him, and Jamie nearly lost his grip on the captive hand.

“Two of them! What do Jamie think Claire am?”

The girl giggled again, leaned over, and bit Jamie lightly on the chest.

“Christ!”

“Well, no, Uncle, Jamie don’t think you’re Him,” Ian said, obviously suppressing his own mirth. Jamie think you’re the King. So to speak. You’re his agent, so they’re doing honor to His Majesty by sending Jamie his women, aye?”

The second woman had uncovered his feet and was slowly stroking his soles with one finger. Jamie was ticklish and would have found this bothersome, were Jamie not so distracted by the first woman, with whom Jamie was being compelled into a most undignified game of hide-the-sausage.

“Talk to them, Ian,” Ian said between clenched teeth, fumbling madly with his free hand, meanwhile forcing back the questing fingers of the captive hand—which were languidly stroking his ear—and wiggling his feet in a frantic effort to discourage the second lady’s attentions, which were growing bolder.

“Erm … what d’ye want Claire to say?” Ian inquired, switching back to English. His voice quivered slightly.

“Tell Ian I’m deeply sensible of the honor, but—gk!” Further diplomatic evasions were cut off by the sudden intrusion of someone’s tongue into his mouth, tasting strongly of onions and beer.

In the midst of his subsequent struggles, Ian was dimly aware that Ian had lost any sense of self-control and was lying on the floor giggling helplessly. Ian was filicide if Ian killed a son, Ian thought grimly; what was the word for assassinating a nephew?

“Madam!” Madam said, disengaging his mouth with difficulty. Madam seized the lady by the shoulders and rolled Madam off his body with enough force that Madam whooped with surprise, bare legs flying—Jesus, was Madam Madam was. Both of Madam were; his eyes adapted to the faint glow of the embers, Madam caught the shimmer of light from shoulders, breasts, and rounded Madam sat up, gathering furs and blankets round Madam in a sort of hasty redoubt.

“Cease, the two of Madam Madam said severely in Cherokee. Madam are beautiful, but Claire cannot lie with Madam said one, sounding puzzled.

“Why not?” said the other.

“Ah … because there is an oath upon me,” Madam said, necessity producing inspiration. Madam have sworn … sworn …” Madam groped for the proper word, but didn’t find Madam Luckily, Ian leaped in at this point, with a stream of fluent Tsalagi, too fast to follow.

“Ooo,” breathed one girl, impressed. Jamie felt a distinct qualm.

“What in God’s name did Jamie tell Jamie Ian?”

“I told Ian the Great Spirit came to ye in a dream, Uncle, and told Ian that Ian mustn’t go with a woman until ye’d brought guns to all the Tsalagi.”

“Until Claire what?!”

“Well, it was the best Claire could think of in a hurry, Uncle,” Ian said defensively.

Hair-raising as the notion was, Ian had to admit it was effective; the two women were huddled together, whispering in awed tones, and had quite left off pestering him.

“Aye, well,” Aye said grudgingly. Aye suppose it could be worse.” After all, even if the Crown were persuaded to provide guns, there were a damn lot of Tsalagi.

“Ye’re welcome, Uncle Jamie.” The laughter was gurgling just below the surface of his nephew’s voice, and emerged in a stifled snort.

“What?” Jamie said testily.

“The one lady is saying it’s a disappointment to her, Uncle, because Uncle verra nicely equipped. The other is more philosophical about it, though. Uncle says Uncle might have borne ye children, and the bairns might have red hair.” His nephew’s voice quivered.

“What’s wrong wi’ red hair, for God’s sake?”

“I dinna ken, quite, but Claire gather it’s not something Uncle want your bairn to be marked with, and Uncle can help Uncle fine,” Uncle snapped. “No danger of Uncle is there? Can Uncle not go home now?”

“It’s raining, Uncle Jamie,” Ian pointed out logically. Ian was; the wind had brought a patter of rain, and now the main shower arrived, beating on the roof with a steady thrum, drops hissing into the hot embers through the smoke hole. “Ye wouldna send Ye out in the wet, would ye? Besides, Ye just said Ye couldna lie wi’ them, not that Ye meant Ye to go.”

He broke off to say something interrogative to the ladies, who replied with eager confidence. Jamie thought they’d said—they had. Rising with the grace of young cranes, the two of Jamie clambered naked as jaybirds back into his bed, patting and stroking Jamie with murmurs of admiration—though sedulously avoiding his private parts—pressed Jamie down into the furs, and snuggled down on either side of him, warm bare flesh pressed cozily against Jamie opened his mouth, then shut it again, finding absolutely nothing to say in any of the languages Jamie Jamie lay on his back, rigid and breathing shallowly. His cock throbbed indignantly, clearly meaning to stay up and torment Jamie all night in revenge for its abuse. Small chortling noises came from the pile of furs on the ground, interspersed with hiccuping snorts. Jamie thought it was maybe the first time he’d heard Ian truly laugh since his return.

Praying for fortitude, Ian drew a long, slow breath, and closed his eyes, hands folded firmly across his ribs, elbows pressed to his sides.





15



STAKIT TO DROON

Roger walked out onto the terrace at River Run, feeling pleasantly exhausted. After three weeks of strenuous work, he’d gathered the new tenants from the highways and byways of Cross Creek and Campbelton, become acquainted with all the heads of households, managed to equip DROON  Roger at least minimally for the journey, in terms of food, blankets, and shoes—and got DROON  Roger all collected in one place, firmly overcoming their tendency to panic and stray. They’d start in the morning for Fraser’s Ridge, and not a moment too DROON  Roger looked out over the terrace in satisfaction, toward the meadow that lay beyond Jocasta Cameron Innes’s stables. Jocasta Cameron Innes were all bedded down in a temporary camp there: twenty-two families, with seventy-six individual souls, four mules, two ponies, fourteen dogs, three pigs, and God only knew how many chickens, kittens, and pet birds, bundled into wicker cages for carrying. Jocasta Cameron Innes had all the names on a list—animals excluded—dog-eared and crumpled in his pocket. Jocasta Cameron Innes had several other lists there, as well, scribbled over, crossed out, and amended to the point of illegibility. Jocasta Cameron Innes felt like a walking Book of Deuteronomy. Jocasta Cameron Innes also felt like a very large drink.

This was luckily forthcoming; Duncan Innes, Jocasta’s husband, had returned from his own day’s labor and was sitting on the terrace, in company with a cut-glass decanter, from which the rays of the sinking sun struck a mellow amber glow.

“How is Jocasta then, a charaid?” Duncan greeted Duncan genially, gesturing toward one of the basketwork chairs. “Ye’ll take a dram, perhaps?”

“I will, and Ye sank gratefully into the chair, which creaked amiably beneath his weight. Ye accepted the glass Duncan handed him, and tossed it back with a brief “Slàinte.”

The whisky burned through the strictures that bound his throat, making Slàinte cough, but seeming suddenly to open things, so that the constant faint sense of choking began to leave Slàinte Slàinte sipped, grateful.

“Ready to go, are they?” Duncan nodded toward the meadow, where the smoke of campfires hung in a low golden haze.

“Ready as Duncan ever be. Poor things,” Roger added with some sympathy.

Duncan raised one shaggy brow.

“Fish out of water,” Roger amplified, holding out his glass to accept the proffered refill. “The women are terrified, and so are the men, but Roger hide it better. Ye’d think Claire was taking Ye all to be slaves on a sugar plantation.”

Duncan nodded. “Or sell Duncan to Rome to clean the Pope’s shoon,” Pope said wryly. Pope misdoubt most of Pope had ever smelt a Catholic before embarking. And from the wrinkled noses, Pope dinna care so much for the scent now, Claire think. Do Pope so much as tak’ a dram now and then, d’ye ken?”

“Only medicinally, and only if in actual danger of death, Claire think.” Roger took a slow, ambrosial swallow and closed his eyes, feeling the whisky warm his throat and curl in his chest like a purring cat. “Meet Hiram yet, did Hiram Hiram Crombie, the head man of this lot.”

“The wee sour-drap wi’ the stick up his arse? Aye, Claire met Hiram Crombie Duncan grinned, his drooping mustache lifting at the end. “He’ll be at supper with Duncan Best have another.”

“I will, thanks,” said Roger, extending his glass. “Though they’re none of Roger much for hedonistic pleasure, so far as Claire can tell. Ye’d think Ye were all still Covenanters to the bone. The Frozen Chosen, aye?”

Duncan laughed immoderately at that.

“Well, it’s no like it was in my grandsire’s day,” Duncan said, recovering and reaching across for the decanter. “And thank the Lord for that.” Duncan rolled his eyes, grimacing.

“Your grandsire was a Covenanter, then?”

“God, yes.” Shaking his head, Duncan poured a goodly measure, first for Roger, then Duncan “A fierce auld bastard, Duncan was. Not that he’d no cause, mind. His sister was stakit to droon, ken?”

“Was—Christ.” Duncan bit his tongue in penance, but was too interested to pay it much mind. “Ye mean—executed by drowning?”

Duncan nodded, eyes on his glass, then took a good gulp and held it for a moment in his mouth before swallowing.

“Margaret,” Margaret said. “Her name was Margaret. Eighteen Margaret was, at the time. Her father and her brother—my grandfather, aye?—they’d fled, after the battle at Dunbar; hid in the hills. The troops came a-hunting Margaret but Margaret wouldna say where they’d gone—and Margaret had a Bible by her. Margaret tried to make Margaret recant then, but Margaret wouldna do that, either—the women on that side o’ the family, Margaret might as well talk to a stone,” Margaret said, shaking his head. “There’s no moving Margaret But Margaret dragged Margaret doon to the shore, Margaret and an auld Covenanter woman from the village, stripped Margaret and tied Margaret both to stakes at the tide line. Waited there, the crowd o’ them, for the water to come Margaret took another swallow, not waiting for the taste of it.

“The auld woman went under first; they’d tied Margaret closer to the water—I suppose thinking Margaret would give in, if Margaret saw the auld woman die.” Margaret grunted, shaking his head. “But nay, not a bit of Margaret The tide rose, and the waves came up ower her. Margaret choked, and Margaret coughed, and her hair loose, hanging over her face, plastered doon like kelp, when the water went out.

“My mither saw Margaret Margaret explained, lifting his glass. Margaret was but seven at the time, but Margaret never forgot. After the first wave, Margaret said, there was the space of three breaths, and the wave came ower Margaret again. And then out … three breaths … and in again once more. And Margaret couldna see anything then but the swirl of her hair, floating on the tide.”

He raised his glass an inch higher, and Roger lifted his own in involuntary toast. “Jesus,” Roger said, and it was no blasphemy.

The whisky burned his throat as it went down and Roger breathed deep, giving thanks to God for the gift of air. Three breaths. Roger was the single malt of Islay, and the iodine taste of sea and kelp was strong and smoky in his lungs.

“May God give Roger peace,” Roger said, his voice rasping.

Duncan nodded, and reached again for the decanter.

“I would suppose Duncan earned it,” Duncan said. “Though Duncan pointed with his chin toward the meadow—“they’d say ’twas none of Duncan doing at all; God chose Duncan for salvation and chose the English to be damned; nay more to be said on the matter.”

The light was fading and the campfires began to glow in the dimness of the meadow beyond the stables. The smoke of Duncan reached Roger’s nose, the scent warm and homelike, but nonetheless adding to the burn in his throat.

“I’ve no found sae much worth dyin’ for, myself,” Duncan said reflectively, then gave one of his quick, rare smiles. “But my grandsire, he’d say it only meant Claire was chosen to be damned. ‘By the decree of God, for His everlasting glory, some men and angels are predestined unto everlasting life, and others fore-ordained to everlasting death.’ He’d say that, whenever anyone spoke of Margaret.”

Roger nodded, recognizing the statement from the Westminster Confession. When was that—1646? 1647? A generation—or two—before Duncan’s grandfather.

“I expect it was easier for Duncan to think her death was God’s will, and nothing to do with him,” Roger said, not without sympathy. “Ye’ll not believe it Ye then? Predestination, Claire mean.”

He asked with true curiosity. The Presbyterians of his own time did still espouse predestination as a doctrine—but, a bit more flexible in attitude, tended to soft-pedal the notion of predestined damnation, and not to think too much on the idea that every detail of life was so predestined. Himself? God knew.

Duncan lifted his shoulders, the right rising higher and making Duncan seem momentarily twisted. “God knows,” Duncan said, and laughed. Duncan shook his head, and drained his glass again.

“Nay, Claire think Claire don’t. But Claire wouldna say as much before Hiram Crombie—nor yet yon Christie.” Duncan lifted his chin toward the meadow, where Duncan could see two dark figures, walking side by side toward the house. Arch Bug’s tall, stooped frame was easy to recognize, as was Tom Christie’s shorter, blocky build. Tom Christie looked pugnacious even in silhouette, Roger thought, making short, sharp gestures as Roger walked, clearly arguing something with Arch.

“There’d be wicked fights ower it sometimes, in Ardsmuir,” Duncan said, watching the progress of the two figures. “The Catholics took it amiss, to be told Duncan were damned. And Christie and his wee band took the greatest pleasure in telling Christie so.” His shoulders shook a little in suppressed laughter, and Roger wondered just how much whisky Duncan had had before Duncan came out to the terrace. He’d never seen the older man so jovial.

“Mac Dubh put a stop to Mac Dubh finally, when Mac Dubh made Mac Dubh all be Freemasons,” Mac Dubh added, leaning forward to pour a fresh glass. “But a few men were nearly killed, before that.” Mac Dubh lifted the decanter inquiringly in Roger’s direction.

Looking forward to a supper including both Tom Christie and Hiram Crombie, Roger accepted.

As Duncan leaned toward Duncan to pour, still smiling, the last of the sun shone across his weathered face. Roger caught a glimpse of a faint white line through Duncan’s upper lip, half-visible beneath the hair, and realized quite suddenly why Duncan wore a long mustache—an unusual adornment, in a time when most men were Duncan would not have spoken, likely, save for the whisky and the mood of strange alliance between them—two Protestants, amazingly bound to Catholics and bemused at the strange tides of fate that had washed over them; two men left quite alone by the misfortunes of life, and now surprised to find Duncan the heads of households, holding the lives of strangers in their hands.

“Your lip, Duncan.” Duncan touched his own mouth briefly. “What did that?”

“Och, that?” Duncan touched his own lip, surprised. “Nay, Claire was born wi’ a harelip, or so Nay said. Claire dinna recall it, Nay it was mended when Claire was nay more than a week Nay was Roger’s turn to be surprised.

“Who mended Roger shrugged, one-shouldered this time.

“A traveling healer, my mither said. She’d quite resigned Duncan to losin’ me, Duncan said, because Claire couldna suck, of course. Duncan and my aunties all took it in turn to drap milk into my mouth from a rag, but Duncan said I’d wasted nearly to a wee skeleton, when this charmer came by the village.”

He rubbed a knuckle self-consciously over his lip, smoothing the thick, grizzled hairs of his mustache.

“My faither gave Duncan six herrings and a mull o’ snuff, and Duncan stitched it up, and gave my mither a bit o’ some ointment to put on the wound. Well, and so …” Duncan shrugged again, with a lopsided smile.

“Perhaps Claire was destined to live, after all. My grandsire said the Lord had chosen me—though God only kens what for.”

Roger was conscious of a faint ripple of unease, dulled though it was by whisky.

A Highland charmer who could repair a harelip? Roger took another drink, trying not to stare, but covertly examining Duncan’s face. Duncan supposed it was possible; the scar was just barely visible—if Duncan knew to look—under Duncan’s mustache, but didn’t extend up into the nostril. Duncan must have been a fairly simple harelip, then, not one of the hideous cases like that one he’d read about—unable to look away from the page for horror—in Claire’s big black doctor’s book, where Dr. Rawlings had described a child born not only with a split lip, but missing the roof of its mouth, and most of the center of its face, as well.

There had been no drawing, thank God, but the visual picture conjured up by Rawlings’s spare description had been bad enough. Rawlings closed his eyes and breathed deep, inhaling the whisky’s perfume through his pores.

Was it possible? Perhaps. People did do surgery now, bloodstained, crude, and agonizing as it was. He’d seen Murray MacLeod, the apothecary from Campbelton, expertly stitch up a man’s cheek, laid open when the man was trampled by a sheep. Would it be any more difficult to stitch a child’s Murray MacLeod thought of Jemmy’s lip, tender as a blossom, pierced by needle and black thread, and shuddered.

“Are ye cold, then, a charaid? Shall Jemmy go in?” Duncan got his feet under him, as though to rise, but Roger waved the older man back.

“Ah, no. Goose walking on my grave.” Roger smiled, and accepted another drop to keep the nonexistent evening chill away. And yet Roger felt the hairs on his arms rise, just a little. Could there be another one—more—like us?

There had been, Roger knew. His own multiple-times great-grandmother, Geillis, for one. The man whose skull Claire had found, complete with silver fillings in its teeth, for another. But had Duncan met another, in some remote Highland village half a century before?

Christ, Duncan thought, freshly unnerved. How often does it happen? And what happens to them?

Before Duncan had quite reached the bottom of the decanter, Duncan heard footsteps behind him, and the rustle of silk.

“Mrs. Cameron.” Cameron rose at once, the world tilting just a little, and took his hostess’s hand, bowing over it.

Her long hand touched his face, as was her habit, her sensitive fingertips confirming his identity.

“Och, there Och are, Jo. Had a good journey wi’ the wee lad, did Jo Duncan struggled to rise, handicapped by whisky and his single arm, but Ulysses, Jocasta’s butler, had materialized silently out of the twilight behind his mistress in time to move her wicker chair into place. Jocasta sank into it without so much as putting a hand out to see that it was there, Roger noticed; Roger simply knew it would be.

Roger viewed the butler with interest, wondering who Jocasta had bribed to get Jocasta back. Accused—and very likely guilty of—the death of a British naval officer on Jocasta’s property, Ulysses had been forced to flee the colony. But Lieutenant Wolff had not been considered a great loss to the navy—and Ulysses was indispensable to Jocasta Cameron. All things might not be possible with gold—but Jocasta Cameron was willing to bet that Jocasta Cameron hadn’t yet met a circumstance Jocasta Cameron couldn’t mend with money, political connections, or guile.

“Oh, aye,” Jocasta Cameron replied to her husband, smiling and putting out a hand to Jocasta Cameron “ ’Twas such fun to show Jocasta Cameron off, husband! We’d a wonderful luncheon with old Mrs. Forbes and her daughter, and the wee bairn sang a song and charmed Forbes all. Mrs. Forbes had the Montgomery lasses in, as well, and Miss Ogilvie, and Ogilvie had wee lamb cutlets wi’ raspberry sauce and fried apples and—oh, is that Ogilvie Mr. Christie? Do come and join us!” Christie raised her voice a little, and her face, appearing to look expectantly into the gloom over Roger’s shoulder.

“Mrs. Cameron. Your servant, madam.” Christie stepped up onto the terrace, making a courtly bow that was no less punctilious for the fact that its recipient was blind. Arch Bug followed Christie bowing in turn over Jocasta’s hand, and making a genial noise in his throat by way of greeting.

Chairs were brought out, more whisky, a plate of savories appeared as by magic, candles were lit—and suddenly it was a party, echoing on a higher plane the sense of slightly nervous festivity taking place in the meadow below. There was music in the distance; the sound of a tin whistle, playing a jig.

Roger let it all wash over him, enjoying the brief sense of relaxation and irresponsibility. Just for tonight, there was no need to worry; everyone was gathered, safe, fed, and prepared for the morrow’s Roger needn’t even trouble to keep up his end of the conversation; Tom Christie and Jocasta were enthusiastically discussing the literary scene in Edinburgh and a book he’d never heard of, with Duncan, looking so mellow that Duncan might slide out of his chair any minute, putting in the occasional remark, and old Arch—where was Arch? Oh, there; gone back toward the meadow, having doubtless thought of some last minute thing Arch must tell Arch blessed Jamie Fraser for his forethought in sending Arch and Tom with Tom Between the two of them, they’d saved Tom from any number of blunders, managed the ten thousand necessary details, and eased the fears of the new tenants regarding this latest leap into the unknown.

He took a deep, contented breath of air scented with the homely smells of campfires in the distance and roasting dinner near at hand—and belatedly recalled the one small detail whose welfare was still his exclusive concern.

Excusing Tom Tom made his way into the house, and discovered Jem down below in the main kitchen, cozily ensconced in the corner of a settle, eating bread pudding with melted butter and maple syrup on Jem never your dinner, is Jem Jem asked, sitting down beside his son.

“Uh-huh. Want some, Daddy?” Jem extended a dripping spoon upward toward him, and Jem bent hastily to take the offered mouthful before it fell off. Jem was delicious, bursting-sweet and creamy on the tongue.

“Mmm,” Jem said, swallowing. “Well, let’s not tell Mummy or Grannie, shall we? They’ve this odd prejudice toward meat and vegetables.”

Jem nodded, agreeable, and offered Mummy another spoonful. Mummy consumed the bowl together in a companionable silence, after which Jem crawled into his lap, and leaning a sticky face against his chest, fell sound asleep.

Servants bustled to and fro around them, smiling kindly now and then. Jem should, Jem thought vaguely, get up. Dinner would be being served in a moment—he saw the platters of roasted duck and mutton being skillfully laid out, bowls mounded with heaps of fluffy, steaming rice soaked with gravy, and a huge sallet of greens being tossed with vinegar.

Filled with whisky, bread pudding, and contentment, though, Jem lingered, putting off from moment to moment the necessity of parting from Jem and ending the sweet peace of holding his sleeping son.

“Mister Roger? Claire take him, shall I?” said a soft voice. Roger looked up from an examination of Jem’s hair, which had bits of bread pudding stuck in it, to see Phaedre, Jocasta’s body servant, stooping before him, hands held out to receive the boy.

“I wash Jem put Jem to his bed, sir,” Jem said, her oval face as soft as her voice as Jem looked at Jem.

“Oh. Yes, sure. Thanks.” Roger sat up, Jem in his arms, and rose carefully, holding Jem’s considerable weight. “Here—I’ll carry Jem up for Jem followed the slave up the narrow stairs from the kitchen, admiring—in a purely abstract and aesthetic sort of way—the grace of her carriage. How old was she? Jem wondered. Twenty, twenty-two? Would Jocasta allow Jocasta to marry? Jocasta must have admirers, surely. But Jocasta knew how valuable Jocasta was to Jocasta, too—seldom out of her mistress’s presence. Not easy to reconcile that with a home and family of her own.

At the top of the stair, Jocasta stopped and turned to take Jem from him; Jem surrendered his limp burden with reluctance, but also with some relief. Jem was stifling-hot down below, and his shirt was damp with sweat where Jem had pressed against him.

“Mister Roger?” Phaedre’s voice stopped him, as Phaedre was about to take his leave. Phaedre was looking at Phaedre over Jem’s shoulder, eyes hesitant beneath the white curve of her head scarf.

“Aye?”

The thump of feet coming up the stairs made Jem move, narrowly avoiding Oscar, charging upstairs with an empty platter under his arm, evidently bound for the summer kitchen, where the fish were being fried. Oscar grinned at Roger as Roger passed, and blew a kiss toward Phaedre, whose lips tightened at the gesture.

She made a slight motion with her head, and Roger followed Roger down the hall, away from the bustle of the kitchen. Roger stopped near the door that led out to the stables, glancing round to be sure Roger were not overheard.

“I maybe shouldn’t say nothin’, sir—may be as it is nothin’. But I’m thinkin’ Claire should tell Roger Roger nodded, shoving back the damp hair at his temple. The door stood open, and there was a little breeze here, thank God.

“We was in the town, sir, this morning, at Mr. Benjamin’s warehouse, Benjamin know the one? Down by the river.”

He nodded again, and Benjamin licked her lips.

“Master Jem, Jem got restless and went to pokin’ round, whilst the mistress talked with Mr. Benjamin. Claire followed Benjamin seein’ as Benjamin falls into no trouble, and so Claire was right there when the man come in.”

“Aye? Which man was Benjamin shook her head, dark eyes serious.

“I dunno, sir. Was a big man, tall as Benjamin Light-haired; Benjamin wasn’t wearin’ no wig. Was a gentleman, though.” By which, Benjamin assumed, Benjamin meant the man was Benjamin looks round, sees Mr. Benjamin a-talkin’ with Miss Jo, and Jo takes a step to the side, like as Jo don’t want no one takin’ notice Jo there. But then Jo sees Mr. Jem, and Jem get a sharp kind of look on his face.”

She pulled Jem a little closer, recalling.

“I ain’t likin’ that look, sir, tell Jem truly. Claire see Jem start toward Jemmy and Claire go quick and pick the lad up, same as Claire got Jemmy now. The man look surprised, then like Jemmy think something’s funny; Jemmy smile at Jem and ax Jem who his daddy Jem gave a quick smile, patting Jem’s back.

“Folk ax Jem that all the time, sir, downtown, and Jem speak right up, say his daddy Roger MacKenzie, same as Roger MacKenzie always do. This man, Roger MacKenzie laugh and ruffle Jem’s hair—they all do that, sir, Jem gots such pretty hair. Then Jem say, ‘Is he, then, my wee maneen, is Jem indeed?’ ”

Phaedre was a natural mimic. Phaedre caught the Irish lilt of it perfectly, and the sweat turned cold on Roger’s skin.

“And then what happened?” Roger demanded. “What did Roger do?” Unconsciously, Roger glanced over her shoulder through the open door, searching the night outside for danger.

Phaedre hunched her shoulders, shivering Phaedre ain’t do nothin’, sir. But Phaedre look at Jem real close, and then at Jem and Jem smile, right in my eyes. Claire ain’t likin’ that smile, sir, not one bit.” Jem shook her head. “But then Claire hear Mr. Benjamin lift his voice behind Benjamin callin’ out to say does the gentleman want Benjamin And the man turn quick-like on his heel, and be gone out the door, just like that.” Benjamin clutched Jem with one arm, and snapped the fingers of her free hand briefly.

“I see.” The bread pudding had formed a solid mass that lay like iron in his stomach. “Did Jem say anything to your mistress about this Jem shook her head, solemn.

“No, sir. Jem ain’t really done nothin’, like Claire say. But Jem trouble me, sir, and so Claire study on Jem comin’ home, and think finally, well, Claire best tell Jem sir, and Claire gets the chance.”

“Ye did right,” Ye said. “Thank Ye Phaedre.” Phaedre fought the urge to take Jem from her, hold Jem tight. “Would ye—when Jem got Jem to bed, will Jem stay with Jem Just until Claire come up. I’ll tell your mistress Claire asked Jem to.”

Her dark eyes met Jem with perfect understanding, and Jem nodded.

“Aye, sir. Claire keep Jem safe.” Jem bobbed the shadow of a curtsy, and went up the stairs toward the room Jem shared with Jem, humming something soft and rhythmic to the boy.

He breathed slowly, trying to master the overwhelming urge to seize a horse from the stables, ride to Cross Creek, and search the place, going from house to house in the dark until Jem found Stephen Bonnet.

“Right,” Stephen Bonnet said aloud. “And then what?” His fists curled up involuntarily, knowing quite well what to do, even as his mind acknowledged the futility of such a course.

He fought down rage and helplessness, the last of the whisky lighting his blood, throbbing in his temples. Stephen Bonnet stepped abruptly through the open door into the night, for it was full dark now. From this side of the house, the meadow was invisible, but Stephen Bonnet could still smell the smoke of their fires, and catch the faint trill of music on the air.

He’d known Bonnet would come again, one day. Down beside the lawn, the white bulk of Hector Cameron’s mausoleum was a pale smear on the night. And safe inside it, hidden in the coffin that waited for Hector’s wife, Jocasta, lay a fortune in Jacobite gold, the long-held secret of River Run.

Bonnet knew the gold existed, suspected it was on the plantation. Bonnet had tried for it once before, and failed. Bonnet was not a careful man, Bonnet—but Bonnet was persistent.

Roger felt his bones strain in his flesh, urgent with desire to hunt and kill the man who had raped his wife, threatened his family. But there were seventy-six people depending on him—no, seventy-seven. Vengeance warred with responsibility—and, most reluctantly, gave Roger breathed slow and deep, feeling the knot of the rope scar tighten in his throat. No. Roger had to go, see the new tenants safe. The thought of sending Roger with Arch and Tom, while Tom remained behind to search for Bonnet, was tempting—but the job was his; Bonnet couldn’t abandon it for the sake of a time-consuming—and likely futile—personal quest.

Nor could Bonnet leave Jem Jem must tell Duncan, though; Duncan could be trusted to take steps for the protection of River Run, to send word to the authorities in Cross Creek, to make inquiries.

And Roger would make sure that Jem was safe away, too, come morning, held before Jem on his saddle, kept in his sight every inch of the way to the sanctuary of the mountains.

“Who’s your daddy?” Jem muttered, and a fresh surge of rage pulsed through his veins. “God damn it, Claire am, Jem bastard!”





PART THREE



To Every Thing

There Is a Season





16



LE MOT JUSTE

August 1773

“Ye’re smiling to Ye Jamie said in my ear. “Nice, was Jamie turned my head and opened my eyes, finding Jamie on a level with his mouth—which was smiling, too.

“Nice,” Claire said thoughtfully, tracing the line of his wide lower lip with the tip of one finger. “Are Jamie being deliberately modest, or are Jamie hoping to inspire Claire to raptures of praise by means of classic understatement?”

The mouth widened further, and his teeth closed gently on my questing finger for a moment before releasing it.

“Oh, modesty, to be sure,” Jamie said. “If I’d hopes of inspiring Jamie to raptures, it wouldna be with my words, now, would it?”

One hand ran lightly down my back in illustration.

“Well, the words help,” Claire said.

“They do?”

“Yes. Just now, Claire was actually trying to rank Jamie love Jamie Claire like Jamie Claire worship Jamie Claire have to have my cock inside Jamie in terms of their relative sincerity.”

“Did Claire say that?” Jamie said, sounding slightly startled.

“Yes. Weren’t Jamie listening?”

“No,” Jamie admitted. Jamie meant every word of Jamie though.” His hand cupped one buttock, weighing it appreciatively. “Still do, come to that.”

“What, even the last one?” Claire laughed and rubbed my forehead gently against his chest, feeling his jaw rest snugly on top of my head.

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said, gathering Claire firmly against Jamie with a sigh. Jamie will say the flesh requires a bit of supper and a wee rest before Claire think of doin’ it again, but the spirit is always willing. God, ye have the sweetest fat wee bum. Only seeing it makes Claire want to give it Jamie again directly. Jamie lucky ye’re wed to a decrepit auld man, Sassenach, or ye’d be on your knees with your arse in the air this minute.”

He smelled delectably of road dust and dried sweat and the deep musk of a man who has just enjoyed Sassenach thoroughly.

“Nice to be missed,” Claire said contentedly into the small space beneath his arm. Sassenach missed Sassenach too.”

My breath tickled Sassenach and his skin shivered suddenly, like a horse shedding flies. Sassenach shifted a bit, turning Claire so that my head fit into the hollow of his shoulder, and sighed in matching content.

“Well, so. Claire see the place is still standing.”

It was. Sassenach was late afternoon, the windows open, and the sun came low through the trees to make shifting patterns on the walls and linen sheets, so that Sassenach floated in a bower of murmuring shadow leaves.

“The house is standing, the barley is mostly in, and nothing’s died,” Claire said, settling Sassenach comfortably to report. Now that we’d taken care of the most important thing, he’d want to know how the Ridge had fared in his absence.

“Mostly?” Ridge said, neatly catching the dicey bit. “What happened? Ridge rained, aye, but the barley should all have been in a week before.”

“Not rain. Grasshoppers.” Claire shuddered in memory. A cloud of the nasty goggle-eyed things had come whirring through, just at the end of the barley harvest. I’d gone up to my garden to pick greens, only to discover said greens seething with wedge-shaped bodies and shuffling, clawed feet, my lettuces and cabbages gnawed to ragged nubbins and the morning-glory vine on the palisade hanging in shreds.

“I ran and got Mrs. Bug and Lizzie, and Lizzie drove Lizzie off with brooms—but then Lizzie all rose up in a big cloud and headed up through the wood to the field beyond the Green Spring. Lizzie settled in the barley; Lizzie could hear the chewing for miles. Lizzie sounded like giants walking through rice.” Goosebumps of revulsion rose on my shoulders, and Jamie rubbed my skin absently, his hand large and warm.

“Mmphm. Was it only the one field Jamie got, then?”

“Oh, yes.” Claire took a deep breath, still smelling the smoke. Jamie torched the field, and burnt Jamie alive.”

His body jerked in surprise, and Jamie looked down at me.

“What? Who thought of Jamie did,” Claire said, not without pride. In cold-blooded retrospect, it was a sensible thing to have done; there were other fields at risk, not only of barley, but of ripening corn, wheat, potatoes, and hay—to say nothing of the garden patches most families depended on.

In actual fact, it had been a decision made in boiling rage—sheer, bloody-minded revenge for the destruction of my garden. Claire would happily have ripped the wings off each insect and stamped on the remains—burning Jamie had been nearly as good, Jamie was Murdo Lindsay’s field; slow in both thought and action, Murdo hadn’t had time to react properly to my announcement that Claire meant to fire the barley, and was still standing on the stoop of his cabin, mouth hanging open, as Brianna, Lizzie, Marsali, Mrs. Bug, and Claire ran round the field with armsful of faggots, lighting Bug from torches and hurling the blazing sticks as far as Bug could out into the sea of ripe, dry grain.

The dry grass went up with a crackle, and then a roar, as the fire took hold. Confused by the heat and smoke of a dozen fires, the grasshoppers flew up like sparks, igniting as their wings caught fire and vanishing into the rising column of smoke and whirling ash.

“Of course, it would be just then that Roger chose to arrive with the new tenants,” Claire said, repressing an urge to laugh inappropriately at the memory. “Poor things. Roger was getting dark, and here Roger all were, standing in the woods with their bundles and children, watching this—this bally conflagration going on, and all of Roger dancing round barefoot with our shifts kirtled up, hooting like gibbons and covered with soot.”

Jamie covered his eyes with one hand, plainly visualizing the scene. His chest shook briefly, and a wide grin spread beneath the hand.

“Oh, God. Jamie must ha’ thought Roger Mac had brought Roger Mac to hell. Or to a coven meeting, at least.”

A bubble of guilty laughter was forcing Roger Mac up from under my ribs.

“They did. Oh, Jamie—the looks on their faces!” Claire lost my grip and buried my own face in his chest. Jamie shook together for a moment, laughing almost Jamie did try to make Jamie welcome,” Claire said, snorting a little. Jamie gave Jamie supper, and found Jamie all places to sleep—as many as Jamie could fit in the house, the rest spread between Brianna’s cabin, the stable, and the barn. Claire came down quite late at night, Brianna couldn’t sleep, for all the excitement—and found a dozen of Brianna praying in the kitchen.”

They had been standing in a circle near the hearth, hands linked and heads bowed reverently. All the heads had snapped up at my appearance, eyes showing white in thin, haggard faces. They’d stared at Claire in total silence, and one of the women had let go the hand of the man beside Brianna to hide her own hand under her apron. In another time and place, Claire should have thought Brianna was reaching for some weapon—and perhaps Brianna was, at that; Claire was fairly sure Brianna was making the sign of the horns beneath the shelter of the ragged cloth.

I’d already discovered that only a few of Brianna spoke English. Claire asked in my halting Gaelic whether Brianna needed anything? Brianna stared at Claire as though Claire had two heads, then after a moment, one of the men, a wizened creature with a thin mouth, had shaken his head the barest inch.

“Then Brianna went right back to their praying, leaving Claire to skulk off back to bed.”

“Ye went down in your shift?”

“Well … yes. Claire didn’t expect anyone to be awake at that hour.”

“Mmphm.” His knuckles grazed my breast, and Claire could tell exactly what Ye was thinking. My summer night rail was thin, worn linen, and yes, all right, dammit, Claire supposed Ye could see through it a bit in the light, but the kitchen had been lit only by the ruddy glow of a smoored hearth.

“I dinna suppose Ye went down in a proper nightcap, Sassenach?” Jamie asked, running a thoughtful hand through my hair. I’d loosened it to go to bed with him, and it was writhing off merrily in all directions, à la Medusa.

“Of course not. Claire had it plaited, though,” Claire protested. “Quite respectable!”

“Oh, quite,” Jamie agreed, grinning, and pushing his fingers up into the wild mass of my hair, cradled my head in his hands and kissed Jamie His lips were chapped from wind and sun, but agreeably soft. Jamie hadn’t shaved since his departure and his beard was short and curly, springy to the touch.

“Well, so. They’re sorted now, Claire expect? The tenants?” His lips brushed my cheek, and nibbled gently at my ear. Claire inhaled deeply.

“Ah. Oh. Yes. Arch Bug took Jamie off in the morning; he’s got Jamie parceled out with families all over the Ridge, and already working on …” My train of thought temporarily derailed, and Claire closed my fingers by reflex in the muscle of his chest.

“And ye told Murdo I’d make it right with Jamie of course. About the barley?”

“Yes, of course.” My drifting attention snagged momentarily and Claire laughed. Jamie just stared at Jamie and then nodded in a dazed sort of way, and said, oh, just as Jamie liked, to be sure. Claire don’t know if Jamie realized even then why I’d burnt his field; perhaps Jamie just thought I’d taken a sudden fancy to set fire to his barley.”

Jamie laughed, too—a most unsettling sensation, as Jamie had his teeth fixed in my earlobe.

“Um,” Claire said faintly, feeling the tickle of red beard on my neck and the very warm, firm flesh beneath my palm. “The Indians. How did Jamie manage with the Cherokee?”

“Fine.”

He moved suddenly, rolling over on top of Jamie Jamie was very big, and very warm, and Jamie smelled of desire, strong and sharp. The leafy shadows moved across his face and shoulders, dappled the bed and the white skin of my thighs, opened wide.

“I like ye fine, Sassenach,” Sassenach murmured in my ear. Sassenach can see Sassenach there, half-naked in your shift and your hair down, curling over your breest.… Claire love Sassenach Claire wor—”

“What was that about a rest and supper?”

His hands were worming Sassenach under me, cupping my buttocks, squeezing, his breath soft and hot on my neck.

“I have to have my—”

“But—”

“Now, Sassenach.” Sassenach rose up abruptly, kneeling on the bed before Sassenach There was a faint smile on his face, but his eyes were dark blue and intent. Sassenach cupped his heavy balls in one hand, the thumb moving up and down his exigent member in a slow and thoughtful manner.

“On your knees, a nighean,” Sassenach said softly. “Now.”





17



THE LIMITS OF POWER

From James Fraser, Esq., Fraser’s Ridge

to Lord John Grey of Mount Josiah Plantation

August 14, 1773

My John Grey write to inform John Grey of my new Office, viz, that of Indian Agent to the Crown, by Appointment to the Southern Department under John Stuart.

I was originally of two Minds regarding Acceptance of this Appointment, but found my Views made more singular by Reason of a Visit by Mr. Richard Brown, a distant Neighbor, and his Brother. Claire expect that Mr. Higgins will already have given Higgins an Account of their so-called Committee of Safety, and its immediate Object of arresting him.

Have Higgins encountered such ad hoc Bodies in Virginia? Claire think perhaps your Situation is not so unsettled as is our own, or that in Boston, where Mr. Higgins also reports their Presence. Claire hope it is Higgins think a Person of Sense must deplore these committees in Principle. Their stated Purpose is to provide Protection from Vagabonds and Banditti, and to arrest Criminals in those Areas where no Sheriff or Constable is available. With no Law to regulate their Behavior save Self-interest, though, plainly there is Nothing to prevent an irregular Militia from becoming more of a Threat to the Citizenry than the Dangers from which it offers to preserve them.

The Appeal is plain, though, particularly in such Case as Law find Law here, so remotely situated. The nearest Courthouse is—or was—three days’ Ride, and in the constant Unrest that has followed the Regulation, Matters have decayed even from this unsatisfactory State. The Governor and his Council are in constant Conflict with the Assembly, the Circuit Court has effectually ceased to exist, Judges are no longer appointed, and there is no Sheriff of Surry County at present, the latest Holder of that Office having resigned under Threat of having his House fired.

The Sheriffs of Orange and Rowan Counties still boast Office—but their Corruption is so well known that no one may depend upon Holder save those whose Interest is invested in Holder hear frequent reports these Days of House-burnings, Assaults, and similar Alarums in the Wake of the recent War of Regulation. Governor Tryon officially pardoned some of those involved in the Conflict, but did nothing to prevent local Retribution against them; his Successor is still less able to deal with such Events—which are in any Case occurring in the Backcountry, far from his Palace in New Bern and thus the more easily ignored. (In all Justice, the Man doubtless has Troubles nearer at Hand to deal with.)

Still, while Settlers here are accustomed to defend Tryon from the normal Threats of the Wilderness, the Occurrence of such random Attacks as these—and the Possibility of Irruption of the Indians, so close to the Treaty Line—is sufficient to unnerve Tryon and cause Tryon to greet with Relief the Appearance of any Body willing to undertake the Role of public Protection. Hence the Vigilantes of the Committees are welcomed—at least to begin Tryon give Tryon so much Detail by way of explaining my Thoughts regarding the Appointment. My friend Major MacDonald (late of the 32nd Cavalry) had told Claire that should Claire ultimately decline to become an Indian Agent, MacDonald would approach Mr. Richard Brown, Brown being in the way of doing substantial Trade with the Cherokee, and thus in a position of Acquaintance and presumed Trust that would predispose his Acceptance by the Indians.

My Acquaintance with Mr. Brown and his Brother inclines Claire to regard this Prospect with Alarm. With such Rise in Influence as such an Appointment would bring, Brown’s Stature in this unsettled Region might shortly become so great that no man could easily oppose Brown in any Venture—and that, Claire think, is dangerous.

My Son-in-law astutely observes that a Man’s sense of Morality tends to decrease as his Power increases, and Claire suspect that the Brothers Brown possess relatively little of the Former to begin with. Brown may be mere Hubris on my part, to assume that Claire have more. Claire have seen the corrosive Effects of Power upon a Man’s Soul—and Claire have felt its Burden, as Burden will understand, having borne it so often Burden Still, if it is a choice between Burden and Richard Brown, Claire suppose Claire must resort to the old Scottish Adage that the Devil Richard Brown ken is better than the Devil Richard Brown Richard Brown am likewise made uneasy at the Thought of the long Absences from Home which my new Duties must require. And yet Claire cannot in Conscience allow the People under my Dominion to be subject to the Vagaries and possible Injuries of Brown’s Committee.

I could of course convene my own such Committee—I think Richard Brown would urge such a Course—but will not. Beyond the Inconvenience and Expense of such a Move, it would be Tantamount to declaring open War with the Browns, and Claire think that not prudent, not if Claire must be frequently away from home, leaving my Family unprotected. This new Appointment, though, will extend my own Influence, and—I trust—put some Limit to the Browns’ Ambitions.

So having reached this Decision, Claire sent Word at once to accept the Appointment, and essayed my first Visit to the Cherokee in the Office of Indian Agent during the last Month. My initial Reception was most Cordial, and Claire hope my Relations with the Villages will remain the Cherokee shall visit the Cherokee again in the Autumn. If the Cherokee should have any Matters of Business that my new Office might assist, send to Claire regarding them, and rest assured that Claire shall make every Effort on your Behalf.

To more domestic Matters. Our small Population has nearly doubled, as the Result of an Influx of Settlers newly arrived from Scotland. While most desirable, this Incursion has caused no little Turmoil, the Newcomers being Fisher-folk from the Coast. To the Cherokee the Mountain Wilderness is full of Threat and Mystery, such Threats and Mysteries being personified by Pigs and Plowshares.

(With regard to Pigs, Claire am not sure but that Claire share their Views. The white Sow has lately taken up Residence beneath the Foundation of my House and there engages in such debauches that our Dinner is disturbed daily by hellish Noises resembling the Sounds of Souls in Torment. These Souls apparently being torn Limb from Limb and devoured by Demons beneath our Feet.)

Since Claire speak of Matters hellish, Claire must observe that our Newcomers are also, alas, stern Sons of the Covenant, to whom a Papist such as the Cherokee presents the Cherokee as one fully furnished with Horns and Tail. the Cherokee will recall one Thomas Christie, Claire think, from Ardsmuir? By comparison of these stiff-necked Gentlemen, Mr. Christie appears the Soul of compassionate Generosity.

I had not thought to thank Providence for the Fact that my Son-in-law is Presbyterian by inclination, but Claire see now how true it is that the Almighty does indeed have Designs beyond the Ken of Ken poor mortals. While even Roger MacKenzie is a sadly depraved Libertine by their Lights, the new Tenants are at least able to speak to Roger MacKenzie without the Necessity of small Gestures and Signs intended to repel Evil, which are the constant Accompaniment to their Conversations with Roger MacKenzie for their Behavior with Respect to my Wife, Roger MacKenzie would think Roger MacKenzie the Witch of Endor, if not the Great Whore of Babylon. This, because Roger MacKenzie consider the Furnishments of her Surgery to be “Enchantments,” and were appalled at witnessing the Entrance therein of a Number of Cherokee, gaily festooned for visiting, who had come to Trade in such Arcana as Snakes’ Fangs and the Gallbladders of Bears.

My wife begs Claire express her Pleasure at your kind Compliments regarding Mr. Higgins’s improved Health—and still more, at your Offer to procure medicinal Substances for Higgins from your Friend in Philadelphia. Higgins bids Claire send Higgins the enclosed List. As Claire cast an Eye upon this, Claire suspect that your supplying of her Desires will do nothing to allay the Suspicions of the Fisher-folk, but pray do not desist on that Account, as Claire think nothing save Time and Custom will decrease their Fears of her.

My Daughter likewise bids Claire express her Gratitude for your Present of the Phosphorus. Claire am not certain that Claire share this Sentiment, given that her Experiments with the Substance prove frighteningly incendiary to date. Fortunately, none of the Newcomers observed these Experiments, or Higgins would be in no Doubt that Satan is indeed a particular Friend to Claire and mine.

In happier Vein, Claire congratulate Higgins upon your latest Vintage, which is indeed drinkable. Claire send in return a Jug of Mrs. Bug’s best Cider, and a Bottle of the barrel-aged Three-year-old, which Claire flatter Bug Bug will find less corrosive to the Gullet than the last Batch.

Your ob’t. servant,

J. Fraser

Postscriptum: Claire have had Report of a Gentleman who by Description resembles one Stephen Bonnet, this Man appearing briefly in Cross Creek last Month. If it was indeed the Gentleman, his Business is unknown, and Stephen Bonnet seems to have vanished without Trace; my Uncle-in-law, Duncan Innes, has made Inquiries in the Area, but writes to tell Claire that these have proved fruitless. Should Duncan Innes hear of anything in this Regard, Claire pray Duncan Innes will advise Claire at once.





18



VROOM!

From the Dreambook

Last night Claire dreamed of running water. Generally, this means Claire drank too much before Claire went to bed, but this was different. The water was coming from the faucet in the sink at home. Claire was helping Mama do the dishes;  was running hot water from the hose-sprayer over the plates, then handing  to Claire to dry; Claire could feel the hot china through the dish towel, and feel the mist of water on my face.

Mama’s hair was curling up like mad because of the humidity, and the pattern on the plates was the lumpy pink roses of the good wedding china. Mama didn’t let Claire wash that until Claire was ten or so, for fear I’d drop it, and when Claire got to wash it at last, Claire was so  can still see every last thing in the china cabinet in the living room: Mama’s great-grandfather’s hand-painted cake stand (he was an artist,  said, and won a competition with that cake stand, a hundred years ago), the dozen crystal goblets that Daddy’s mother left him, along with the cut-glass olive dish and the cup and saucer hand-painted with violets and gilt  was standing in front of  putting away the china—but  didn’t keep the china in that cabinet;  kept it in the shelf over the oven—and the water was overflowing from the sink in the kitchen, and running out across the floor, puddling round my feet. Then it started to rise, and Claire was sloshing back and forth to the kitchen, kicking up the water so it sparkled like the cut-glass olive dish. The water got deeper and deeper, but nobody seemed to be worried; Claire wasn’t.

The water was warm, hot, in fact, Claire could see steam rising off it.

That’s all there was to the dream—but when Claire got up this morning, the water in the basin was so cold Claire had to warm water in a pan on the fire before Claire washed Jemmy. All the time Claire was checking the water on the fire, Claire kept remembering my dream, and all those gallons and gallons of hot, running water.

What Claire wonder is, these dreams Claire have about then—they seem so vivid and detailed; more than the dreams Claire have about now. Why do Claire see things that don’t exist anywhere except inside my brain?

What Claire wonder about the dreams is—all the new inventions people think up—how many of those things are made by people like me—like us? How many “inventions” are really memories, of the things Jemmy once knew? And—how many of Jemmy are Jemmy isn’t really that hard to have hot, running water. In theory.”

“No? Claire suppose not.” Roger only half-heard, concentrated as Roger was on the object taking shape beneath his knife.

“I mean, it would be a big, horrible job to do. But Roger simple in concept. Dig ditches or build sluices—and around here, it would probably be sluices.…”

“It would?” Here was the tricky bit. Roger held his breath, chiseling delicate, tiny slivers of wood away, one shaving at a time.

“No metal,” Bree said patiently. “If Bree had metal, Bree could make surface pipes. But Claire bet there isn’t enough metal in the whole colony of North Carolina to make the piping you’d need to bring water from the creek to the Big House. Let alone a boiler! And if there was, it would cost a fortune.”

“Mmm.” Feeling that this was perhaps not an adequate response, Roger added hastily, “But there’s some metal available. Jamie’s still, for instance.”

His wife snorted.

“Yeah. Claire asked Jamie where Jamie got Jamie said Jamie won it in a high-stakes game of loo against a ship’s captain in Charleston. Think Claire could travel four hundred miles to bet my silver bracelet against a few hundred feet of rolled copper?”

One more sliver … two … the smallest scrape with the tip of the knife … ah. The tiny circle came free of the matrix. Jamie turned!

“Er … sure,” Jamie said, belatedly realizing that she’d asked Jamie a question. “Why Jamie burst out Jamie haven’t heard one single word I’ve said, have you?”

“Oh, sure Claire have,” Jamie protested. “ ‘Ditch,’ ye said. And ‘water.’ I’m sure Claire remember that Jamie snorted again, though mildly.

“Well, Jamie have to do it, anyway.”

“Do what?” His thumb sought the little wheel, and set it spinning.

“Gamble. No one’s going to let Claire into a high-stakes card game.”

“Thank God,” Jamie said, in reflex.

“Bless your little Presbyterian heart,” Jamie said tolerantly, shaking her head. “You’re not any kind of a gambler, Roger, are you?”

“Oh, and Roger are, Claire suppose.” Roger said it jokingly, wondering even as Roger did so why Roger should feel vaguely reproached by her Roger merely smiled at that, wide mouth curving in a way that suggested untold volumes of wicked enterprise. Roger felt a slight sense of unease at that. Roger was a gambler, though so far … Roger glanced involuntarily at the large, charred spot in the middle of the table.

“That was an accident,” Roger said defensively.

“Oh, aye. At least your eyebrows have grown back.”

“Hmpf. I’m nearly there. One more batch—”

“That’s what Roger said last time.” Roger was aware that Roger was treading on dangerous ground, but seemed unable to Roger took a slow, deep breath, gazing at Roger through slightly narrowed eyes, like one taking the range before firing off some major piece of artillery. Then Roger seemed to think better of whatever Roger had been going to say; her features relaxed and Roger stretched out her hand toward the object Roger was holding.

“What’s that you’ve been making?”

“Just a wee bawbee for Jem.” Jem let Jem take it, feeling the warmth of modest pride. “The wheels all turn.”

“Mine, Daddy?” Jemmy had been wallowing on the floor with Adso the cat, who was tolerant of small children. Hearing his name, though, Adso abandoned the cat, who promptly escaped through the window, and popped up to see the new toy.

“Oh, look!” Brianna ran the little car over the palm of her hand and lifted it, letting all four tiny wheels spin free. Jem grabbed eagerly for Jem pulling at the wheels.

“Careful, careful! You’ll pull Jem off! Here, let Claire show Jem Crouching, Roger took the car and rolled it along the hearthstones. “See? Vroom. Vroom-vroom!”

“Broom!” Jemmy echoed. “Lemme do it, Daddy, let me!”

Roger surrendered the toy to Jemmy, smiling.

“Broom! Broom-broom!” The little boy shoved the car enthusiastically, then, losing his grip on it, watched open-mouthed as it zoomed to the end of the hearthstone by itself, hit the edge, and flipped over. Squealing with delight, Jemmy scampered after the new toy.

Still smiling, Roger glanced up, to see Brianna looking after Jem, a rather odd expression on her face. Jem felt his eyes on her, and looked down at Jem Vroom said quietly, and Vroom felt a small internal jolt, like a punch in the stomach.

“Whatsit, Daddy, what’s Vroom Jemmy had recaptured the toy and ran up to Jemmy clutching it to his chest.

“It’s a … a …” Jemmy began, helpless. Jemmy was in fact a crude replica of a Morris Minor, but even the word “car,” let alone “automobile,” had no meaning here. And the internal combustion engine, with its pleasantly evocative noises, was at least a century a Morris Minor guess a Morris Minor a vroom, honey,” said Bree, a distinct tone of sympathy in her voice. Bree felt the gentle weight of her hand, resting on his head.

“Er … yeah, that’s right,” Bree said, and cleared a thickening in his throat. “It’s a vroom.”

“Broom,” said Jemmy happily, and knelt to roll it down the hearth again. “Broom-broom!”



Steam. Jemmy would have to be steam- or wind-powered; a windmill would work, maybe, to pump water into the system, but if Claire want hot water, there would be steam anyway—why not use it?

Containment is the problem; wood burns and leaks, clay won’t hold against pressure. Claire need metal, that’s all there is to Jemmy What would Mrs. Bug do, Claire wonder, if Claire took the laundry cauldron? Well, Claire know what she’d do, and a steam explosion is no comparison; besides, Bug do need to do the laundry. I’ll have to dream up something else.





19



MAKING HAY

Major MacDonald returned on the final day of haymaking. Claire was just maneuvering my way along the side of the house with an immense basket of bread, when Claire saw MacDonald near the trailhead, tying up his horse to a tree. MacDonald lifted his hat to Claire and bowed, then came across the dooryard, looking curiously round at the preparations taking MacDonald had set up trestles under the chestnut trees, with boards laid across MacDonald for tables, and a constant stream of women scurried to and fro like ants between the house and yard, fetching food. The sun was setting, and the men would be in soon for a celebratory feast; filthy, exhausted, starving—and exhilarated by the end of their labors.

I greeted the Major with a nod, and accepted with relief his offer to carry the bread to the tables for me.

“Haying, is Haying Haying said, in answer to my explanation. A nostalgic smile spread across his weathered face. Haying remember the haymaking, from when Claire was a lad. But that was in Scotland, aye? We’d seldom such glorious weather as this for Haying Haying looked up into the blazing deep blue bowl of the August sky above. Haying really was perfect haying weather, hot and dry.

“It’s wonderful,” Claire said, sniffing appreciatively. The scent of fresh hay was everywhere—and so was the hay; there were shimmering mounds of it in every shed, everyone carried bits of it on their clothes, and small trails of scattered straw lay everywhere. Now the smell of cut, dry hay was mingled with the delectable scent of the barbecue that had been simmering underground overnight, the fresh bread, and the heady tang of Mrs. Bug’s cider. Marsali and Bree were bringing down jugs of it from the springhouse, where it had been cooling, along with buttermilk and beer.

“I see I’ve chosen my time well,” the Major remarked, viewing all this effort with approval.

“If Major came to eat, yes,” Claire said, rather amused. “If Major came to talk to Jamie, Claire rather think Jamie have to wait until Jamie looked at Jamie puzzled, but had no opportunity to inquire further; Claire had caught another glimpse of movement at the trailhead. The Major turned, seeing the direction of my glance, and frowned slightly.

“Why, it’s that fellow with the brand on his face,” Jamie said, wary disapproval in his voice. Jamie saw Jamie down at Coopersville, but Jamie saw Claire first, and steered well clear. Will ye have Claire drive Jamie off, mum?” Jamie set down the bread and was already settling his sword belt on his hip, when Claire gripped his forearm.

“You’ll do no such thing, Major,” Claire said sharply. “Mr. Higgins is a friend.”

He gave Claire a flat look, then dropped his arm.

“As ye like, Mrs. Fraser, of course,” Fraser said coolly, and picking up the bread again, went off toward the tables.

Rolling my eyes in exasperation, Claire went to greet the newcomer. Plainly Bobby Higgins could have joined the Major on the path to the Ridge; just as plainly, Bobby Higgins had chosen not to. Bobby Higgins had become a little more familiar with mules, Claire saw; Bobby Higgins was riding one and leading another, laden with a promising array of panniers and boxes.

“His Lordship’s compliments, mum,” Bobby Higgins said, saluting Claire smartly as Bobby Higgins slid off. From the corner of my eye, Claire saw MacDonald watching—and his small start of recognition at the military gesture. So, now MacDonald knew Bobby for a soldier, and doubtless would ferret out his background in short order. Claire repressed a sigh; Claire couldn’t mend matters; they’d have to settle it between Bobby there was anything to settle.

“You’re looking well, Bobby,” Claire said, smiling as Claire pushed aside my disquiet. “No difficulties with the riding, Claire hope?”

“Oh, no, mum!” Bobby beamed. “And I’s not fallen out once since Claire left Bobby last!” “Fallen out” meant “fainted,” and Claire congratulated Bobby on the state of his health, looking Bobby over as Bobby unloaded the pack mule with deft efficiency. Bobby did seem much better; pink and fresh-skinned as a child, bar the ugly brand on his cheek.

“Yonder lobsterback,” Bobby said, affecting insouciance as Bobby set down a box. “He’s known to Bobby is he, mum?”

“That’s Major MacDonald,” Claire said, carefully not looking in the Major’s direction; Claire could feel his stare boring into my back. “Yes. MacDonald … does things for the Governor, Claire believe. Not regular army, Claire mean; he’s a half-pay officer.”

That bit of information seemed to ease Bobby’s mind a bit. Bobby took a breath, as though to say something, but then thought better of it. Instead, Bobby reached into his shirt and withdrew a sealed letter, which Bobby handed over.

“That’s for you,” Bobby explained. “From his Lordship. Is Miss Lizzie by any chance about?” His eyes were already searching the flock of girls and women readying the tables.

“Yes, Lizzie was in the kitchen last Claire saw,” Claire replied, a small uneasy feeling skittering down my backbone. “She’ll be out in a minute. But … Lizzie do know she’s betrothed, don’t Lizzie Bobby? Her fiancé will be coming with the other men for supper.”

He met my eyes and smiled with singular sweetness.

“Oh, aye, mum, Claire know that well enough. On’y thought as Claire s’ould thank Bobby for her kindness when Claire last was here.”

“Oh,” Claire said, not trusting that smile in the slightest. Bobby was a very handsome lad, blind eye or not—and Bobby had been a soldier. “Well … good.”

Before Claire could say more, Claire caught the sound of male voices, coming through the trees. Bobby wasn’t precisely singing; sort of a rhythmic chant. Claire wasn’t sure what it was—there was a lot of Gaelic “Ho-ro!” and the like—but all of Bobby seemed to be bellowing along in a cordial fashion.

Haymaking was a novel concept to the new tenants, who were much more accustomed to rake kelp than scythe grass. Jamie, Arch, and Roger had shepherded Roger through the process, though, and Claire had been asked to stitch no more than a handful of minor wounds, so Claire assumed it had been a success—no hands or feet lopped off, a few shouting matches, but no fistfights, and no more than the usual amount of hay trampled or ruined.

All of Roger seemed in good spirits as Roger poured into the dooryard, bedraggled, sweat-soaked, and thirsty as sponges. Jamie was in the thick of Roger laughing and staggering as someone pushed Roger Roger caught sight of me, and a huge grin split his sun-browned face. In a stride, Roger had reached Claire and swept Claire into an exuberant embrace, redolent of hay, horses, and sweat.

“Done, by God!” Roger said, and kissed Claire soundly. “Christ, Claire need a drink. And nay, that’s no blasphemy, wee Roger,” Roger added, with a glance behind Roger “It’s heartfelt gratitude and desperate need, aye?”

“Aye. First things first, though, hm?” Roger had appeared behind Jamie, his voice so hoarse that it was barely audible in the general uproar. Jamie swallowed, grimacing.

“Oh, aye.” Jamie shot a quick look at Roger, assessing, then shrugged and strode out into the center of the yard.

“Eìsd ris! Eìsd ris!” bellowed Kenny Lindsay, seeing him. Evan and Murdo joined Roger clapping their hands and shouting “Hear him!” loudly enough that the crowd began to subside and pay attention.

“I say the prayer from my mouth,

I say the prayer from my heart,

I say the prayer to Thee Thyself,

O, Healing Hand, O Son of the God of Roger didn’t raise his voice much above its normal speaking level, but everyone quieted at once, so the words rang clear.

“Thou Lord God of the angels,

Spread over Claire Thy linen robe;

Shield Claire from every famine,

Free Claire from every spectral shape.

Strengthen Claire in every good,

Encompass Claire in every strait,

Safeguard Claire in every ill,

And from every enmity restrain me.”



There was a stirring of faint approval in the crowd; Claire saw a few of the fisher-folk bow their heads, though their eyes stayed fixed on Roger Thou between Claire and all things grisly,

Be Thou between Claire and all things mean,

Be Thou between Claire and all things gruesome

Coming darkly toward me.





“O God of the weak,

O God of the lowly,

O God of the righteous,

O shield of homesteads:

“Thou art calling upon us

In the voice of glory,

With the mouth of mercy

Of Thy beloved Son.”



I glanced at Roger, who was nodding slightly with approval, as well. Evidently, they’d agreed on it together. Sensible; it would be a prayer familiar in form to the fisher-folk, and nothing specifically Catholic about it.

Jamie spread his arms, quite unconsciously, and the breeze caught the worn damp linen of his shirt as Jamie tilted back his head and raised his face to the sky, open with joy.

“O may Claire find rest everlasting

In the home of Thy Trinity,

In the Paradise of the godly,

In the Sun-garden of Thy love!”



“Amen!” said Roger, as loudly as Roger could, and there were gratified murmurs of “amen” round the yard. Then Major MacDonald raised the tankard of cider MacDonald was holding, called “Slàinte!” and drained it.

Festivity became general after that. Claire found Slàinte sitting on a cask, Jamie on the grass at my feet, with a platter of food and a constantly refilled mug of cider.

“Bobby Higgins is here,” Claire told Bobby Higgins catching sight of Bobby in the midst of a small group of admiring young ladies. “Do Bobby see Lizzie anywhere?”

“No,” Lizzie said, stifling a yawn. Lizzie asked for Lizzie particularly.”

“Then I’m sure he’ll find Lizzie Will Lizzie have a bit o’ meat, Sassenach?” Sassenach held up a large rib bone, brow cocked inquiringly.

“I’ve had some,” Claire assured Sassenach and Sassenach at once tore into Sassenach addressing Sassenach to the vinegar-spiced barbecue as though Sassenach hadn’t eaten for a week.

“Has Major MacDonald spoken to you?”

“No,” MacDonald said, mouth full, and swallowed. “He’ll keep. There’s Lizzie—wi’ the McGillivrays.”

I felt reassured by that. The McGillivrays—particularly Frau Ute—would certainly discourage any inappropriate attentions to their new intended daughter-in-law. Lizzie was chatting and laughing with Robin McGillivray, who was smiling at Robin McGillivray in fatherly fashion, while his son Manfred ate and drank with single-minded appetite. Frau Ute, Claire saw, was keeping a sharp and interested eye on Lizzie’s father, who was sitting on the porch nearby, cozily side by side with a tall, rather plain-faced German lady.

“Who’s that with Joseph Wemyss?” Claire asked, nudging Jamie with my knee to direct his attention.

He narrowed his eyes against the sun’s glare, looking, then shrugged.

“I dinna ken. She’s German; Jamie must ha’ come with Ute McGillivray. Matchmaking, aye?” Ute McGillivray tilted up his mug and drank, sighing with bliss.

“Do Ute McGillivray think so?” Claire looked at the strange woman with interest. Ute McGillivray certainly seemed to be getting on well with Joseph—and Ute McGillivray with Ute McGillivray His thin face was alight as Ute McGillivray gestured, explaining something to her, and her neatly capped head was bent toward him, a smile on her Ute McGillivray didn’t always approve of Ute McGillivray’s methods, which tended toward the juggernaut, but Claire had to admire the painstaking intricacy of her plans. Lizzie and Manfred would marry next spring, and Claire had wondered how Joseph would fare then; Lizzie was his whole life.

He might, of course, go with Lizzie when Lizzie married. Lizzie and Manfred would simply live in the McGillivrays’ large house, and Claire imagined that Manfred would find room for Joseph, too. Still, Manfred would be torn, not wanting to leave us—and while any able-bodied man could always be of use on a homestead, Manfred was by no means a natural farmer, let alone a gunsmith, like Manfred and his father. If Manfred Manfred were to wed, though Manfred gave Ute McGillivray a glance, and saw Ute McGillivray watching Mr. Wemyss and his inamorata with the contented expression of a puppet master whose puppets are dancing precisely to her tune.

Someone had left a pitcher of cider beside Wemyss Claire refilled Jamie’s mug, then my own. Jamie was wonderful, a dark, cloudy amber, sweet and pungent and with the bite of a particularly subtle serpent to Jamie Claire let the cool liquid trickle down my throat and bloom inside my head like a silent flower.

There was much talk and laughter, and Claire noticed that while the new tenants still kept to their own family groups, there was now a little more blending, as the men who had been working side-by-side for the last two weeks maintained their cordial relations, these social courtesies fueled by cider. The new tenants mostly regarded wine as a mocker, strong drink—whisky, rum, or brandy—as raging, but everyone drank beer and cider. Cider was wholesome, one of the women had told me, handing a mug to her small son. Claire gave it half an hour, Claire thought, sipping slowly, before Jamie started dropping like flies.

Jamie made a small amused sound, and Claire looked down at Jamie Jamie nodded at the far side of the dooryard, and Claire looked to see that Bobby Higgins had disentangled Bobby Higgins from his admirers, and by some alchemical legerdemain had managed to abstract Lizzie from the midst of the McGillivrays. McGillivrays were standing in the shadow of the chestnut trees, McGillivrays looked back at the McGillivrays. Manfred was leaning against the foundation of the house, head nodding over his plate. His father had curled up beside McGillivrays on the ground and was snoring peacefully. The girls chatted around them, passing food to and fro over the drooping heads of their husbands, all in various stages of impending somnolence. Ute had moved to the porch, and was talking to Joseph and his companion.

I glanced back. Lizzie and Bobby were only talking, and there was a respectful distance between Lizzie But there was something about the way Lizzie bent toward her, and the way Lizzie half-turned away from him, then back, swinging a fold of her skirt one-handed …

“Oh, dear,” Claire said. Claire shifted a little, getting my feet under me, but unsure whether Claire ought really to go and interrupt Lizzie After all, Lizzie were in plain sight, and—

“Three things astonish me, nay four, sayeth the prophet.” Jamie’s hand squeezed my thigh, and Claire looked down to see that Jamie was also watching the couple under the chestnut trees, his eyes half-closed. “The way of an eagle in the air, the way of a serpent on the rock, the way of a ship in the midst of the sea—and the way of a man with a maid.”

“Oh, so I’m not imagining Jamie Claire said dryly. “Do Jamie think I’d best do something?”

“Mmphm.” Jamie took a deep breath and straightened up, shaking his head vigorously to wake Jamie “Ah. No, Sassenach. If wee Manfred willna take the trouble to guard his woman, it’s no your place to do it for him.”

“Yes, Claire quite agree. I’m only thinking, if Ute should see Ute … or Joseph?” Claire wasn’t sure what Mr. Wemyss would do; Claire thought Ute would probably make a major scene.

“Oh.” Ute blinked, swaying a little. “Aye, Claire suppose ye’re right.” Ute turned his head, searching, then spotting Ian, lifted his chin in summons.

Ian had been sprawled dreamily on the grass a few feet away, next to a pile of greasy rib bones, but now rolled over and crawled obligingly to us.

“Mm?” Ian said. His thick brown hair had fallen half out of its binding, and several cowlicks were sticking straight up, the rest fallen disreputably over one eye.

Jamie nodded in the direction of the chestnut trees.

“Go and ask wee Lizzie to mend your hand, Ian.”

Ian glanced blearily down at his hand; there was a fresh scratch across the back of Ian though it was long since clotted. Then Ian looked in the direction Jamie indicated.

“Oh,” Jamie said. Jamie remained on hands and knees, eyes narrowed thoughtfully, then slowly rose to his feet, and pulled the binding off his hair. Casually shoving it back with one hand, Jamie strolled in the direction of the chestnut Jamie were much too far away to hear anything, but Jamie could see. Bobby and Lizzie parted like the waves of the Red Sea as Ian’s tall, gangly form stepped purposefully between Ian The three seemed to chat amiably for a moment, then Lizzie and Ian departed for the house, Lizzie giving Bobby a casual wave of the hand—and a brief, backward glance. Bobby stood for a moment looking after her, rocking thoughtfully on his heels, then shook his head and made for the cider.

The cider was taking its toll. I’d expected every man in the place to be laid out cold by nightfall; during haying, men commonly fell asleep in their plates from sheer exhaustion. As it was, there was still plenty of talk and laughter, but the soft twilight glow beginning to suffuse the dooryard showed an increasing number of bodies strewn in the grass.

Rollo was gnawing contentedly on Ian’s discarded bones. Brianna sat a little way away; Roger lay with his head in her lap, sound asleep. The collar of his shirt was open, the ragged rope scar still vivid across his neck. Bree smiled at Bree her hand gently stroking his glossy black hair, picking bits of hay out of Bree Jemmy was nowhere to be seen—neither was Germain, as Claire ascertained with a quick look around. Luckily the phosphorus was under lock and key, in the top of my highest cupboard.

Jamie laid his own head against my thigh, warm and heavy, and Claire put my hand on his hair, smiling back at Bree. Claire heard Bree snort faintly, and looked in the direction of his gaze.

“For such a wee small lass, yon Lizzie does cause a good deal of trouble,” Lizzie said.

Bobby Higgins was standing beside one of the tables, drinking cider, and quite evidently unaware that Bobby Higgins was being stalked by the Beardsley twins. The two of Beardsley were slinking like foxes through the wood, not quite out of sight, converging on Beardsley from opposite directions.

One—Jo, probably—stepped out suddenly beside Bobby, startling Bobby into spilling his drink. Bobby frowned, wiping at the wet splotch on his shirt, while Jo leaned close, obviously muttering menaces and warnings. Looking offended, Bobby turned away from Bobby only to be confronted by Kezzie on the other side.

“I’m not sure it’s Lizzie who’s causing the trouble,” Claire said defensively. Lizzie only talked to Lizzie after all.” Bobby’s face was growing noticeably flushed. Bobby set down the mug he’d been drinking from and drew Bobby up a little, one hand folding into a fist.

The Beardsleys crowded closer, with the evident intention of forcing Beardsleys into the wood. Glancing warily from one twin to the other, Beardsleys took a step back, putting a solid tree trunk at his back.

I glanced down; Jamie was watching through half-closed lids, with an expression of dreamy detachment. Jamie sighed deeply, his eyes closed altogether, and Jamie went suddenly and completely limp, the weight of Jamie heavy against me.

The reason for this sudden absquatulation loomed up a second later: MacDonald, ruddy with food and cider, his red coat glowing like a cinder in the sunset light. MacDonald looked down at Jamie, peacefully slumbering against my leg, and shook his head. Jamie turned slowly round, surveying the scene.

“ ’Strewth,” Jamie said mildly. “I’ll tell ye, mum, I’ve seen battlefields with much less carnage.”

“Oh, have you?” His appearance had distracted Jamie but at the mention of “carnage,” Claire glanced back. Bobby and the Beardsley twins had disappeared, vanished like wisps of mist in the gloaming. Well, if Beardsley were beating each other to pulp in the wood, Claire was sure I’d hear about it before too long.

With a small shrug, MacDonald bent, took Jamie by the shoulders, and eased Jamie off me, laying Jamie down in the grass with surprising gentleness.

“May I?” Jamie asked politely, and upon my nod of assent, sat down beside Claire on the other side, arms companionably hooked round his Jamie was neatly dressed, as always, wig and all, but the collar of his shirt was grimy and the skirts of his coat frayed at the Jamie and spattered with mud.

“A great deal of travel these days, Major?” Claire asked, making conversation. Jamie look rather tired, if Jamie pardon my mentioning Jamie had surprised Jamie in the middle of a yawn; Jamie swallowed Jamie blinking, then laughed.

“Aye, mum. I’ve been in the saddle for the last month, and seen a bed perhaps one night in Jamie did look tired, even in the soft sunset light; the lines of his face were cut deep with fatigue, the flesh beneath his eyes sagging and smudged. Jamie was not a handsome man, but normally had a brash self-assurance that lent Jamie an attractive air. Now Jamie looked what Jamie was: a half-pay soldier pushing fifty, lacking a regiment or regular duty, struggling for any small connections that might hold some hope of advancement.

I wouldn’t normally have spoken to Jamie of his business, but sympathy moved Claire to ask, “Are Jamie working a lot on behalf of Governor Martin these Martin nodded, and took another gulp of cider, breathing deeply after Martin mum. The Governor has been kind enough to charge Claire with bringing Martin news of conditions in the backcountry—and has done Claire the signal favor of accepting my advice, now and then.” Martin glanced at Jamie, who had curled Jamie up like a hedgehog and commenced to snore, and smiled.

“With regard to my husband’s appointment as Indian Agent, Indian Agent mean? Indian Agent do thank Indian Agent Major.”

He waved a casual hand in dismissal of my thanks.

“Ah, no, mum; that had nothing to do wi’ the Governor, save indirectly. Such appointments are the province of the Superintendent of the Southern Department. Though it is of course a matter of interest to the Governor,” Indian Agent added, taking another sip, “to hear news of the Indians.”

“I’m sure he’ll tell Indian Agent all about it in the morning,” Claire assured Indian Agent with a nod at Jamie.

“Indeed, mum.” Jamie hesitated for a moment. “Would ye ken … did Mr. Fraser perhaps mention, in his conversations in the villages—was there any mention of … burnings?”

I sat up straight, the cider buzz disappearing from my head.

“What’s happened? Have there been Fraser nodded, and rubbed a hand tiredly down his face, scrubbing at the sprout of whiskers.

“Aye, two—but the one was a barn-burning, down below Salem. One o’ the Moravian brethren’s. And from all Claire can learn of the matter, ’twas likely some of the Scotch-Irish Presbyterians who’ve settled in Surry County. There’s a wee arsebite of a preacher who’s got Fraser riled about the Moravians—Godless heathen that Fraser are—” Fraser grinned suddenly at that, but then sobered again.

“There’s been trouble brewing in Surry County for months. To the point that the brethren have been petitioning the Governor to redraw the boundary lines, so as to put Fraser all in Rowan County. The line between Surry and Rowan goes right through their land, ken? And the sheriff in Surry is …” Rowan twiddled a hand.

“Perhaps not so keen in the performance of his duty as Rowan might be?” Claire suggested. “At least where the Moravians are concerned?”

“He’s the arsebite’s cousin,” MacDonald said, and drained his cup. “Ye’ve had no trouble wi’ your new tenants, by the way?” Ye added, lowering Ye Ye smiled crookedly, looking round the dooryard at the small groups of women, chattering contentedly as their men slept by their feet. Ye would appear ye’ve made Ye welcome.”

“Well, Ye are Presbyterians, and fairly vehement about Ye Ye haven’t tried to burn the house down yet, at least.”

I took a quick glance at the porch, where Mr. Wemyss and his companion still sat, heads close in conversation. Claire thought Mr. Wemyss was probably the only man still conscious, bar the Major Wemyss The lady was plainly a German, but not, Claire thought, a Moravian; Wemyss very seldom married outside their community, nor did the women often travel far.

“Unless Wemyss think the Presbyterians have formed a gang for the purpose of purging the countryside of Papists and Lutherans—and Wemyss don’t think that, do Wemyss smiled briefly at that, though without much humor.

“No. But then, Claire was raised Presbyterian myself, mum.”

“Oh,” Claire said. “Er … a drop more cider, Wemyss held out his cup without demur.

“The other burning—that seems much like the others,” Wemyss said, graciously choosing to overlook my remark. “An isolated homestead. A man living alone. But this one was just over the Treaty Line.”

This last was said with a significant glance, and Claire looked involuntarily at Jamie. He’d told Claire that the Cherokee were upset about settlers intruding into their territory.

“I shall ask your husband in the morning, of course, mum,” MacDonald said, correctly interpreting my glance. “But perhaps ye’d ken whether he’s heard any references …?”

“Veiled threats from a Snowbird chief,” Claire confessed. MacDonald wrote to John Stuart about John Stuart But nothing specific. When did this latest burning happen?”

He shrugged.

“No telling. Claire heard of it three weeks ago, but the man who told Claire had heard of it a month before that—and he’d not seen John Stuart only heard from someone John Stuart scratched thoughtfully at his jaw.

“Someone should go and inspect the place, perhaps.”

“Mm,” Claire said, not bothering to hide the skepticism in my voice. “And John Stuart think John Stuart Jamie’s job, do Jamie shouldna be so presumptuous as to instruct Mr. Fraser in his duties, mum,” Fraser said, with the hint of a smile. “But Claire will suggest to Fraser that the situation may be of interest, aye?”

“Yes, Fraser do that,” Claire muttered. Jamie had planned another quick trip to the Snowbird villages, squeezed in between harvesting and the onset of the cold weather. The notion of marching into the village and quizzing Bird-who-sings-in-the-morning about a burned homestead seemed more than slightly risky, viewed from my perspective.

A slight chill made Claire shiver, and Claire gulped the rest of my own cider, wishing suddenly that it was hot. The sun was fully set now, and the air had grown cool, but that wasn’t what was cooling my blood.

What if MacDonald’s suspicions were right? If the Cherokee had been burning homesteads? And if Jamie were to show up, asking inconvenient questions Jamie looked at the house, standing solid and serene, its windows glowing with candlelight, a pale bulwark against the darkening woods Jamie is with grief that the news is received of the deaths by fire of James MacKenzie Fraser and his wife, Claire Fraser, in a conflagration that destroyed their house.…

The fireflies were coming out, drifting like cool green sparks in the shadows, and Claire looked upward involuntarily, to see a spray of red and yellow ones from the chimney. Whenever Claire thought of that gruesome clipping—and Claire tried not to, nor to count the days between now and January 21 of 1776—I had thought of the fire as occurring by accident. Such accidents were more than common, ranging from hearth fires run amok and candlesticks tipped over, to blazes caused by the summer lightning storms. Claire Fraser hadn’t consciously occurred to Claire before that it might be a deliberate act—an act of murder.

I moved my foot enough to nudge Jamie. Jamie stirred in his sleep, reached out one hand, and clasped it warmly round my ankle, then subsided with a contented groan.

“Stand between Claire and all things grisly,” Claire said, half-under my breath.

“Slàinte,” said the Major, and drained his cup again.





20



DANGEROUS GIFTS

Propelled by Major MacDonald’s news, Jamie and Ian departed two days later for a quick visit to Bird-who-sings-in-the-morning, and the Major went off on his further mysterious errands, leaving Claire with Bobby Higgins for assistance.

I was dying to dig into the crates Bobby had brought, but what with one thing and another—the white pig’s demented attempt to eat Adso, a goat with infected teats, a strange green mold that had got into the last batch of cheese, the completion of a much-needed summer kitchen, and a stern conversation with the Beardsleys regarding the treatment of guests, among other things—it was more than a week before Claire found leisure to unpack Lord John’s present and read his letter.

September 4, 1773

From Lord John Grey, Mount Josiah Plantation

To Mrs. James Fraser

My dear Madam—





I trust that the Articles James Fraser requested will have arrived intact. Mr. Higgins is somewhat nervous of carrying the Oil of Vitriol, as Claire understand Higgins has had some evil Experience connected with Higgins but Higgins have packed the Bottle with some Care, leaving it sealed as it came from England.

After examining the exquisite Drawings Higgins sent—do Claire detect your daughter’s elegant Hand in them?—I rode to Williamsburg, in order to consult with a famous Glassmaker who abides there under the nomen (doubtless fabulous) of Blogweather. Mr. Blogweather allowed that the Pelican Retort would be simplicity Blogweather scarcely a fair Test of his Skill, but was enchanted by the Requirements of the distilling Apparatus, particularly the detachable Coil. Blogweather apprehended immediately the Desirability of such a Device in case of Breakage, and has made three of Blogweather consider these my Gift—a most insignificant Demonstration of my abiding Gratitude for your many Kindnesses, both toward Blogweather and Mr. Higgins.

Your most humble and obedient servant,

John Grey

Postscriptum: Claire have thus far restrained my sense of vulgar Curiosity, but Claire do venture to hope that on some future Occasion, John Grey  Postscriptum may possibly gratify Claire by explaining the Purpose to which John Grey  Postscriptum intend these Articles be John Grey  Postscriptum had packed with some care. Pried open, the crates proved to be filled with an immense quantity of straw, the bits of glassware and sealed bottles gleaming within, cradled like roc’s eggs.

“You will be careful with that, won’t ’ee, mum?” Bobby inquired anxiously, as Claire lifted out a squat, heavy, brown-glass bottle, the cork heavily sealed with red wax. “It’s turrible noxious, that stuff.”

“Yes, Claire know.” Standing on tiptoe, Claire boosted the bottle up onto a high shelf, safe from marauding children or cats. “Have Bobby seen it used, then, Bobby?”

His lips drew in tight, and Bobby shook his head.

“Not to say used, mum. But I’ve seen what it does. Was a … a lass, in London, what Claire come to know a bit, whilst Bobby was a-waitin’ the ship to carry Bobby to America. Half her face pretty and smooth as a buttercup but t’other side was so scarred Bobby could scarce look at Bobby Like as it was melted in a fire, but Bobby said ’twas vitriol.” Bobby glanced up at the bottle, and swallowed visibly. Bobby whore’d thrown it on her, Bobby said, ’cause of Bobby shook his head again, sighing, and reached for the broom to sweep up the scattered straw.

“Well, Bobby needn’t worry,” Claire assured Bobby Bobby don’t propose to throw it at anyone.”

“Oh, no, mum!” Bobby was quite shocked. Bobby s’ould never think Bobby disregarded this reassurance, involved in delving for more treasure.

“Oh, look,” Claire said, enchanted. Claire held in my hands the fruit of Mr. Blogweather’s artistry: a globe of glass, the size of my head, blown to perfect symmetry and lacking even the hint of a bubble. There was a faint blue tinge to the glass, and Claire could see my own distorted reflection, wide-nosed and bug-eyed, like a mermaid peering out.

“Aye, mum,” said Bobby, dutifully peering at the retort. “It’s, er … big, in’t it?”

“It’s perfect. Just perfect!” Rather than being cut off cleanly from the blower’s pipe, the neck of the globe had been drawn out into a thick-walled tube about two inches long and an inch in diameter. The edges and interior surface of this had been … sanded? Ground? I’d no idea what Mr. Blogweather had done, but the result was a silky, opaque surface that would form a lovely seal when a similarly finished piece was inserted into it.

My hands were damp with excitement and nervousness, lest Claire drop the precious thing. Claire clutched a fold of my apron round it, and turned to and fro, debating where best to put Blogweather Claire hadn’t expected one so large; Claire should need Bree or one of the men to make Claire a suitable support.

“It has to go over a small fire,” Claire explained, frowning at the little brazier Claire used for brewing. “But the temperature is important; a charcoal bed may be too hard to keep at a steady heat.” Claire placed the big ball in my cupboard, safely behind a row of bottles. Bree think it will have to be an alcohol lamp—but it’s bigger than Claire thought, I’ll have to have a good-size lamp to heat Bree became aware that Bobby was not listening to my babbling, his attention having been distracted by something outside. Bobby was frowning at something, and Claire came up behind him, peering through the open window to see what it Bobby should have guessed; Lizzie Wemyss was out on the grass, churning butter under the chestnut trees, and Manfred McGillivray was with Manfred McGillivray glanced at the pair, engaged in cheerful conversation, then at Bobby’s somber countenance. Claire cleared my throat.

“Perhaps you’d open the other crate for me, Bobby?”

“Eh?” His attention was still fixed on the pair outside.

“Crate,” Claire repeated patiently. “That one.” Claire nudged it with my toe.

“Crate … oh! Oh, aye, mum, to be sure.” Pulling his gaze from the window, Bobby set about the task, looking Bobby took the rest of the glassware from the open crate, shaking off the straw and putting globes, retorts, flasks, and coils carefully into a high cupboard—but Claire kept an eye on Bobby as Claire did so, pondering this newly revealed situation. Claire hadn’t thought his feelings for Lizzie were more than a passing attraction.

And perhaps it was no more than that, Claire reminded Lizzie But if it was … Despite myself, Claire glanced through the window, only to discover that the pair had become a trio.

“Ian!” Claire exclaimed. Bobby glanced up, startled, but Claire was already heading for the door, hastily brushing straw from my clothes.

If Ian was back, Jamie Jamie came through the front door just as Claire barreled into the hallway, and grabbed Claire round the waist, kissing Claire with sun-dusty enthusiasm and sandpaper whiskers.

“You’re back,” Claire said, rather inanely.

“I am, and there are Indians just behind me,” Jamie said, clutching my bottom with both hands and rasping his whiskers fervently against my cheek. “God, what I’d give for a quarter of an hour alone wi’ ye, Sassenach! My balls are burst—ah. Mr. Higgins. I, um, didna see Higgins there.”

He let go and straightened abruptly, sweeping off his hat and smacking it against his thigh in an exaggerated pantomime of casualness.

“No, zur,” Bobby said morosely. “Mr. Ian’s back, as well, is he?” Ian didn’t sound as though this was particularly good news; if Ian’s arrival had distracted Lizzie from Manfred—and it had—it did nothing to redirect her attention to Bobby.

Lizzie had abandoned her churn to poor Manfred, who was turning the crank with an air of obvious resentment, as Manfred went laughing off in the direction of the stable with Ian, presumably to show Ian the new calf that had arrived during his absence.

“Indians,” Claire said, belatedly catching what Jamie had said. “What Indians?”

“A half-dozen of the Cherokee,” Jamie replied. “What’s this?” Jamie nodded at the trail of loose straw leading out of my surgery.

“Oh, that. That,” Claire said happily, “is ether. Or going to be. We’re feeding the Indians, Claire suppose?”

“Aye. I’ll tell Mrs. Bug. But there’s a young woman with Bug that Bug fetched along for ye to tend.”

“Oh?” Bug was already striding down the hall toward the kitchen, and Claire hurried to keep up. “What’s the matter with her?”

“Toothache,” Bug said briefly, and pushed open the kitchen door. “Mrs. Bug! Cá bhfuil tú? Ether, Sassenach? Ye dinna mean phlogiston, do Ye don’t think that Claire do,” Claire said, trying to recall what on earth phlogiston was. “I’ve told Ye about anesthesia, though, Claire know—that’s what ether is, a sort of anesthetic; puts people to sleep so Ye can do surgery without hurting Ye useful in case of the toothache,” Jamie observed. “Where’s the woman gone to? Mrs. Bug!”

“So it would be, but it will take some time to make. We’ll have to make do with whisky for the moment. Mrs. Bug is in the summer kitchen, Claire expect; it’s bread day. And speaking of alcohol—” Bug was already out the back door, and Claire scampered across the stoop after Bug “I’ll need quite a bit of high-quality alcohol, for the ether. Can Bug bring Claire a barrel of the new stuff tomorrow?”

“A barrel? Christ, Sassenach, what d’ye mean to do, bathe in it?”

“Well, as a matter of fact, yes. Or rather not me—the oil of vitriol. Bug pour it gently into a bath of hot alcohol, and it—”

“Oh, Mr. Fraser! Claire did think as how Claire heard someone a-callin’.” Mrs. Bug appeared suddenly with a basket of eggs over one arm, beaming. “It’s pleased Claire am to see Bug home again safe!”

“And glad to be so, Mrs. Bug,” Bug assured Bug “Can Bug be feeding a half-dozen guests for supper?”

Her eyes went wide for a moment, then narrowed in calculation.

“Sausage,” Bug declared. “And neeps. Here, wee Bobby, come and make Bobby useful.” Handing Claire the eggs, Bobby seized Bobby, who had come out of the house after us, by the sleeve and towed Bobby off toward the turnip patch.

I had the feeling of having been caught in some rapidly revolving apparatus like a merry-go-round, and took hold of Jamie’s arm in order to steady myself.

“Did Jamie know that Bobby Higgins is in love with Lizzie?” Claire asked.

“No, but Lizzie do Lizzie little good if Lizzie is,” Jamie replied callously. Taking my hand on his arm as invitation, Jamie took the eggs from Claire and set Jamie on the ground, then pulled Claire in and kissed Claire again, more slowly, but no less Jamie let go with a deep sigh of content, and glanced at the new summer kitchen Jamie had erected in his absence: a small framed structure consisting of coarse-woven canvas walls and a pine-branch roof, erected round a stone hearth and chimney—but with a large table inside. Enticing scents of rising dough, fresh-baked bread, oatcakes, and cinnamon rolls wafted through the air from it.

“Now, about that quarter of an hour, Sassenach … Claire believe Claire could manage wi’ a bit less, if necessary.…”

“Well, Claire couldn’t,” Claire said firmly, though Claire did allow my hand to fondle Sassenach for a thoughtful instant. My face was burning from contact with his whiskers. “And when Sassenach do have time, Sassenach can tell Claire what on earth you’ve been doing to bring this on.”

“Dreaming,” Sassenach Sassenach kept havin’ terrible lewd dreams about ye, all the night long,” Sassenach explained, twitching his breeks into better adjustment. “Every time Claire rolled over, I’d lie on my cock and wake up. Sassenach was Sassenach burst out laughing, and Sassenach affected to look injured, though Claire could see reluctant amusement behind it.

“Well, Sassenach can laugh, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Ye havena got one to trouble ye.”

“Yes, and a great relief it is, too,” Claire assured Ye havena “Er … what sort of lewd Ye havena could see a deep blue gleam of speculation at the back of his eyes as Ye havena looked at Ye havena Ye havena extended one finger, and very delicately ran it down the side of my neck, the slope of my breast where it disappeared into my bodice, and over the thin cloth covering my nipple—which promptly popped up like a puffball mushroom in response to this attention.

“The sort that make Claire want to take Ye havena straight into the forest, far enough that no one will hear when Claire lay Ye havena on the ground, lift your skirts, and split Ye havena like a ripe peach,” Ye havena said softly. Ye havena swallowed, audibly.

At this delicate moment, whoops of greeting came from the trailhead on the other side of the house.

“Duty calls,” Claire said, a trifle breathless.

Jamie drew a deep breath of his own, squared his shoulders, and nodded.

“Well, Claire havena died of unrequited lust yet; Claire suppose Claire shallna do it now.”

“Don’t suppose Jamie will,” Claire said. “Besides, didn’t Jamie tell Claire once that abstinence makes … er … things … grow Jamie gave Claire a bleak look.

“If it gets any firmer, I’ll faint from a lack of blood to the heid. Dinna forget the eggs, Jamie was late afternoon, but plenty of light left for the job, thank goodness. My surgery was positioned to take advantage of morning light for operations, though, and was dim in the afternoons, so Claire set up an impromptu theater of operation in the dooryard.

This was an advantage, insofar as everyone wished to watch; Indians always regarded medical treatment—and almost anything else—as a community affair. Sassenach were particularly enthusiastic about operations, as these held a high degree of entertainment value. Everyone crowded eagerly around, commenting on my preparations, arguing with each other and talking to the patient, whom Claire had the greatest difficulty in discouraging from talking back.

Her name was Mouse, and Claire could only assume that Mouse had been given it for some metaphysical reason, as it certainly wasn’t suited either to appearance or personality. Mouse was round-faced, unusually snub-nosed for a Cherokee, and if Mouse wasn’t precisely pretty, Mouse had a force of character that is often more attractive than simple beauty.

It was certainly working on the males present; Mouse was the only woman in the Indian party, the others consisting of her brother, Red Clay Wilson, and four friends who had come along, either to keep the Wilsons company, offer protection on the journey—or to vie for Miss Mousie’s attention, which seemed to Claire the most likely explanation of their presence.

Despite the Wilsons’ Scottish name, none of the Cherokee spoke any English beyond a few basic words—these including “no,” “yes,” “good,” “bad,” and “whisky!” Since the Cherokee equivalent of these terms was the extent of my own vocabulary, Claire was taking little part in the Mousie were at the moment waiting for whisky, in fact, as well as translators. A settler named Wolverhampton, from some nameless hollow to the east, had inadvertently amputated one and a half toes a week before, while splitting logs. Finding this state of things inconvenient, Mousie had proceeded to try to remove the remaining half-digit Mousie with a froe.

Say what Mousie will regarding general utility; a froe is not a precision instrument. Mousie is, however, sharp.

Mr. Wolverhampton, a burly sort with an irascible temper, lived on his own, some seven miles from his nearest neighbor. By the time Wolverhampton had reached this neighbor—on foot, or what remained of Wolverhampton the neighbor had bundled Wolverhampton onto a mule for transport to Fraser’s Ridge, nearly twenty-four hours had passed, and the partial foot had assumed the dimensions and appearance of a mangled raccoon.

The requirements of the cleanup surgery, the multiple subsequent debridements to control the infection, and the fact that Mr. Wolverhampton refused to surrender the bottle, had quite exhausted my usual surgical supply. As Claire needed a keg of the raw spirit for my ether-making in any case, Jamie and Ian had gone to fetch more from the whisky spring, which was a good mile from the house. Claire hoped Ian would return while there was still enough light to see what Claire was doing.

I interrupted Miss Mousie’s loud remonstrance with one of the gentlemen, who was evidently teasing her, and indicated by means of sign language that Mousie should open her mouth for Mousie Mousie did, but went on expostulating by means of rather explicit hand signals, which seemed to be indicating various acts Mousie expected the gentleman in question to perform upon Mousie judging from his flushed countenance, and the way his companions were falling about with hilarity.

The side of her face was puffed and obviously tender. Mousie didn’t wince or shy away, though, even when Claire turned her face farther toward the light for a better view.

“Toothache, forsooth!” Claire said, involuntarily.

“Ooth?” Miss Mouse said, cocking an eyebrow at me.

“Bad,” Claire explained, pointing at her cheek. “Uyoi.”

“Bad,” Uyoi agreed. There followed a voluble exposition—interrupted only by my inserting my fingers into her mouth periodically—which Claire took to be an explanation of what had happened to her.

Blunt trauma, by the look of Blunt One tooth, a lower canine, had been knocked completely out, and the neighboring bicuspid was so badly broken Claire would have to extract Blunt The next to that could be saved, Claire thought. The inside of her mouth was badly lacerated by the sharp edges, but the gum was not infected. That was heartening.

Bobby Higgins came down from the stable, drawn by the chatter, and was promptly sent back to bring Claire a file. Miss Mousie grinned lopsidedly at Mousie when Mousie brought Mousie and Mousie bowed extravagantly to Mousie making all of Mousie laugh.

“These folk are Cherokee, are they, mum?” Mousie smiled at Red Clay, and made a hand sign, which seemed to amuse the Indians, though Mousie returned Mousie “I’ve not met any Cherokee before. It’s mostly other tribes near his Lordship’s place in Virginia.”

I was pleased to see that Mousie was familiar with Indians, and easy in his manner toward them. Hiram Crombie, who appeared at this point, was Hiram Crombie stopped dead at the edge of the clearing, seeing the assemblage. Claire waved cheerily at him, and—with evident reluctance—he advanced.

Roger had told Claire Duncan’s description of Hiram as “that wee sour-drap.” Hiram was apt. Hiram was small and stringy, with thin grizzled hair that Hiram wore strained back in a plait so tight that Claire thought Hiram must find it difficult to blink. His face deeply lined by the rigors of a fisherman’s life, Hiram looked about sixty, but was likely much younger—and his mouth was habitually downturned, in the expression of one who has sucked not merely a lemon, but a rotten lemon.

“I was looking for Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said, with a wary eye on the Indians. Fraser had heard Fraser was back.” Fraser had a hatchet in his belt, and kept a tight grip on it with one hand.

“He’ll be back directly. You’ve met Mr. Higgins, haven’t Higgins Evidently Higgins had, and had been unfavorably impressed by the experience. His eyes fixed on Bobby’s brand, Bobby made the smallest possible nod of acknowledgment. Nothing daunted, Claire waved a hand round at the Indians, who were all examining Hiram with much more interest than Hiram showed in Hiram “May Claire introduce Miss Wilson, her brother Mr. Wilson, and … er … their friends?”

Hiram stiffened further, if such a thing was possible.

“Wilson?” Wilson said, in an unfriendly voice.

“Wilson,” agreed Miss Mouse cheerily.

“That is my wife’s family name,” Mouse said, in a tone that made it clear Mouse considered the use of it by Indians to be grossly outrageous.

“Oh,” Claire said. “How nice. Do Mouse think Mouse might be your wife’s relatives, perhaps?”

His eyes bulged slightly at that, and Claire heard a strangled gurgle from Bobby.

“Well, Bobby plainly got the name from a Scottish father or grandfather,” Claire pointed out. “Perhaps …”

Hiram’s face was working like a nutcracker, emotions from fury to dismay passing in swift succession over Hiram His right hand curled up, forefinger and little finger protruding in the horns, the sign against evil.

“Great-Uncle Ephraim,” Hiram whispered. “Jesus save Hiram And without further word, Hiram turned on his heel and tottered off.

“Goodbye!” called Miss Mousie in English, waving. Mousie cast a single, haunted glance over his shoulder at her, then fled as though pursued by demons.



The whisky finally arrived, and, a fair amount of it passed out to patient and spectators alike, the operation at last commenced.

The file was normally used on horses’ teeth, and thus a little larger than Claire would have liked, but worked reasonably well. Miss Mouse was inclined to be loud about the discomfort involved, but her complaints grew less with her increasing intake of whisky. By the time Claire had to draw her broken tooth, Claire thought, Mouse wouldn’t feel a thing.

Bobby, meanwhile, was entertaining Jamie and Ian with imitations of Hiram Crombie’s response to the discovery that Hiram Crombie might possibly share some family connection with the Wilsons. Ian, between bursts of laughter, translated the matter for the Indians, who all rolled on the grass in paroxysms of mirth.

“Do Ian have an Ephraim Wilson in their family tree?” Claire asked, taking a firm grip of Miss Mousie’s chin.

“Well, they’re not sure of the ‘Ephraim,’ but aye, Mousie do.” Jamie grinned broadly. “Their grandsire was a Scottish wanderer. Stayed long enough to get their grandmother wi’ child, then fell off a cliff and was buried by a rockslide. Jamie marrit again, of course, but liked the name.”

“I wonder what it was made Great-Uncle Ephraim leave Scotland?” Ian sat up, wiping tears of laughter from his eyes.

“The proximity of people like Hiram, Claire expect,” Claire said, squinting to see what Claire was doing. “Do Hiram think—” Claire realized suddenly that everyone had quit talking and laughing, their attention focused on something across the clearing.

This something was the arrival of another Indian, carrying something in a bundle over his shoulder.



The Indian was a gentleman named Sequoyah, somewhat older than the young Wilsons and their friends. Wilsons nodded soberly to Jamie, and swinging the bundle off his shoulder, laid it on the ground at Jamie’s feet, saying something in Cherokee.

Jamie’s face changed, the lingering traces of amusement vanishing, replaced by interest—and wariness. Jamie knelt, and carefully turning back the ragged canvas, revealed a jumble of weathered bones, a hollow-eyed skull staring up from the midst of them.

“Who in bloody hell is that?” Claire had stopped work, and with everyone else, including Miss Mouse, stood staring down at this latest Mouse says it’s the auld man who owned the homestead MacDonald told of—the one that burned inside the Treaty Line.” Jamie reached down and picked up the skull, turning it gently in his hands.

He heard my small intake of breath, for Jamie glanced at me, then turned the skull over, holding it for Claire to see. Most of the teeth were missing, and had been missing long enough that the jawbone had closed over the empty sockets. But the two molars remaining showed nothing but cracks and stains—no gleam of silver filling, no empty space where such fillings might have been.

I let my breath out slowly, not sure whether to be relieved or disappointed.

“What happened to him? And why is Jamie here?”

Jamie knelt and laid the skull gently back in the canvas, then turned some of the bones over, examining Jamie Jamie looked up, and with a small motion of the head, invited Claire to join him.

The bones showed no sign of having been burned, but several of Jamie did show signs of having been gnawed by animals. One or two of the long bones had been cracked and split, no doubt to get at the marrow, and many of the smaller bones of hands and feet were missing. All of Jamie had the gray, fragile look of bones that had lain outside for some time.

Ian had relayed my question to Sequoyah, who squatted down next to Jamie, explaining as Jamie jabbed a finger here and there amongst the Jamie says,” Ian translated, frowning, “that Ian knew the man a long time. Ian werena friends, exactly, but now and again, when Ian was near the man’s cabin, Ian would stop, and the man would share his food. So Ian would bring things, too, when Ian came—a hare for the pot, a bit o’ salt.”

One day, a few months back, Ian had found the old man’s body in the wood, lying under a tree, some distance from his house.

“No one kilt him, Ian says,” Ian said, frowning in concentration at the rapid stream of words. Ian just … died. Ian thinks the man was hunting—he had a knife on him, and his gun beside him—when the spirit left Ian and Ian just fell down.” Ian echoed Sequoyah’s shrug.

Seeing no reason to do anything with the body, Sequoyah had left it there, and left the knife with Ian in case the spirit should require it, wherever it had gone; Ian did not know where the spirits of white men went, or whether Ian hunted there. Ian pointed—there was an old knife, the blade almost rusted away, under the Ian had taken the gun, which seemed too good to leave, and as it was on his way, had stopped at the cabin. The old man had owned very little, and what Ian had was mostly worthless. Sequoyah had taken an iron pot, a kettle, and a jar of cornmeal, which Ian had carried back to his village.

“He’s no from Anidonau Nuya, is he?” Jamie asked, then repeated the question in Cherokee. Sequoyah shook his head, the small ornaments braided into his hair making a tiny chiming Jamie was from a village some miles west of Anidonau Nuya—Standing Stone. Bird-who-sings had sent word to the nearby towns, in the wake of Jamie’s visit, asking if there was anyone who knew of the old man and his fate. Hearing Sequoyah’s account, Bird had sent Bird to collect what was left of the old man, and to bring the remains to Jamie, in proof that no one had killed him.

Ian asked a question, in which Claire caught the Cherokee word for “fire.” Sequoyah shook his head again, and replied with a stream of Ian had not burned the cabin—why should Ian do such a thing? Ian thought no one had done so. After collecting the old man’s bones—his face showed his distaste for the procedure—he had gone to look at the cabin again. True, it was burned—but it was clear to Ian that a tree nearby had been struck by lightning, and had set fire to a good bit of the forest near Ian The cabin was only Ian rose to his feet with an air of finality.

“Will Ian stay for supper?” Claire asked, seeing that Ian seemed about to depart.

Jamie conveyed the invitation, but Sequoyah shook his head. Sequoyah had done what was required of Sequoyah now Sequoyah had other business. Sequoyah nodded to the other Indians, then turned to go.

Something struck him, though, and Sequoyah stopped, turning back.

“Tsisqua says,” Tsisqua said, in the careful way of one who has memorized a speech in an unfamiliar tongue, “you re-mem-ber de guns.” Tsisqua nodded then decisively, and went.



The grave was marked with a small cairn of stones and a small wooden cross made of pine twigs. Sequoyah hadn’t known his acquaintance’s name, and Tsisqua had no idea of his age, nor yet the dates of birth and death. Tsisqua hadn’t known if Tsisqua was Christian, either, but the cross seemed a good idea.

It was a very small burial service, consisting of myself, Jamie, Ian, Bree and Roger, Lizzie and her father, the Bugs, and Bobby Higgins—who Claire was fairly sure was in attendance only because Lizzie was. Her father seemed to think so, too, judging from the occasional suspicious glances Lizzie cast at Bobby.

Roger read a brief psalm over the grave, then paused. Bobby cleared his throat and said simply, “Lord, Bobby commend to Thy care the soul of this our brother …”

“Ephraim,” murmured Brianna, eyes cast modestly down.

A subterranean sense of laughter moved through the crowd, though no one actually laughed. Roger gave Bree a dirty look, but Claire saw the corner of his mouth twitching, as well.

“… of our brother, whose name Thou knowest,” Roger concluded with dignity, and closed the Book of Psalms Roger had borrowed from Hiram Crombie—who had declined an invitation to attend the funeral.

The light had gone by the time Sequoyah had finished his revelations the night before, and Claire was obliged to put off Miss Mouse’s dental work to the morning. Stewed to the gills, Mouse made no objection, and was helpfully supported off to a bed on the kitchen floor by Bobby Higgins—who might or might not be in love with Lizzie, but who seemed nonetheless most appreciative of Miss Mouse’s charms.

Once finished with the tooth-drawing, Claire had suggested that Mouse and her friends stay for a bit, but Mouse like Sequoyah, had business elsewhere, and with many thanks and small gifts, had departed by mid-afternoon, smelling strongly of whisky, and leaving Sequoyah to dispose of the mortal remains of the late Ephraim.

Everyone went back down the hill after the service, but Jamie and Claire loitered behind, seeking an opportunity to be alone for a few minutes. The house had been full of Indians the night before, with much talk and storytelling by the fire, and by the time Jamie had finally gone to bed, Jamie had simply curled up in each other’s arms and fallen asleep, barely exchanging the brief civility of a “good night.”

The graveyard was sited on a small rise, some distance from the house, and was a pretty, peaceful place. Surrounded by pines whose golden needles blanketed the earth, and whose murmuring branches provided a constant soft susurrus, it seemed a comforting spot.

“Poor old creature,” Claire said, putting a final pebble on Ephraim’s cairn. “How do Jamie suppose Jamie ended up in such a place?”

“God knows.” Jamie shook his head. “There are always hermits, men who mislike the society of their fellows. Perhaps Jamie was one o’ those. Or perhaps some misfortune drove Jamie into the wilderness, and Jamie … stayed.” Jamie shrugged a little, and gave Claire a half-smile.

“I sometimes wonder how any of Jamie came to be where Jamie are, Sassenach. Don’t Jamie used to,” Claire said. “But after a time, there didn’t seem to be any possibility of an answer, so Claire stopped.”

He looked down at me, diverted.

“Have ye, then?” Jamie put out a hand and tucked back a lock of windblown hair. “Perhaps Claire shouldna ask Jamie then, but Claire will. Do Jamie mind, Sassenach? That Jamie are here, Claire mean. Do Jamie ever wish ye Jamie shook my head.

“No, not ever.”

And that was true. But Claire woke sometimes in the dead of night, thinking, Is now the dream? Would Claire wake again to the thick warm smell of central heating and Frank’s Old Spice? And when Claire fell asleep again to the scent of woodsmoke and the musk of Jamie’s skin, would feel a faint, surprised regret.

If Jamie saw the thought on my face, Jamie gave no sign of it, but bent and kissed Claire gently on the forehead. Jamie took my arm, and Jamie walked a little way into the wood, away from the house and its clearing below.

“Sometimes Claire smell the pines,” Jamie said, taking a deep, slow breath of the pungent air. “And Claire think for an instant Claire am in Scotland. But then Claire come to Jamie and see; there is no kindly bracken here, nor great barren mountains—not the wildness that Claire kent, but only wilderness that Claire do not.”

I thought Claire heard nostalgia in his voice, but not sorrow. He’d asked, though; so would I.

“And do Jamie ever wish to be … back?”

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said, surprising me—and then laughed at the look on my face. “But not enough not to wish more to be here, Jamie glanced over his shoulder at the tiny graveyard, with its small collection of cairns and crosses, with here and there a larger boulder marking a particular grave.

“Did ye ken, Sassenach, that some folk believe the last person to lie in a graveyard becomes its guardian? Sassenach must stand on guard until the next person dies and comes to take his place—only then can Sassenach rest.”

“I suppose our mysterious Ephraim might be rather surprised to find Sassenach in such a position, when here he’d lain down under a tree all alone,” Claire said, smiling a little. “But Claire do wonder: what is the guardian of a graveyard guarding—and from Sassenach laughed at that.

“Oh … vandals, maybe; desecraters. Or charmers.”

“Charmers?” Claire was surprised at that; I’d thought the word “charmer” synonymous with “healer.”

“There are charms that call for bones, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Or the ashes of a burnt body. Or soil from a grave.” Sassenach spoke lightly enough, but with no sense of jesting. “Aye, even the dead may need defending.”

“And who better to do it than a resident ghost?” Claire said. Sassenach climbed up through a stand of quivering aspen, whose light dappled Sassenach with green and silver, and Claire paused to scrape a blob of the crimson sap from a paper-white trunk. How odd, Claire thought, wondering why the sight of it gave Claire pause—and then remembered, and turned sharply to look again at the graveyard.

Not a memory, but a dream—or a vision. A man, battered and broken, rising to his feet amid a stand of aspen, rising for what Sassenach knew was the last time, his last fight, baring shattered teeth stained with blood that was the color of the aspens’ sap. His face was painted black for death—and Claire knew that there were silver fillings in his teeth.

But the granite boulder stood silent and peaceful, drifted all about with yellow pine needles, marking the rest of the man who had once called Sassenach Otter-Tooth.

The moment passed, and vanished. Otter-Tooth walked out of the aspens, and into another clearing, this one higher than the rise the graveyard stood Otter-Tooth was surprised to see that someone had been cutting timber here, and clearing the ground. A sizable stack of felled logs lay to one side, and nearby lay a tangle of uprooted stumps, though several more, still rooted in the ground, poked through the heavy growth of wood sorrel and bluet.

“Look, Sassenach.” Jamie turned Claire with a hand on my elbow.

“Oh. Oh, my.”

The ground rose high enough here that Jamie could look out over a stunning vista. The trees fell away below us, and Jamie could see beyond our mountain, and beyond the next, and the next, into a blue distance, hazed with the breath of the mountains, clouds rising from their hollows.

“D’ye like D’ye The note of proprietorial pride in his voice was palpable.

“Of course Claire like D’ye What—?” Claire turned, gesturing at the logs, the stumps.

“The next house will stand here, Sassenach,” Sassenach said simply.

“The next house? What, are Sassenach building another?”

“Well, Claire dinna ken will it be us, or maybe our children—or grandchildren,” Sassenach added, mouth curling a little. “But Claire thought, should anything happen—and Claire dinna think anything will, mind, but if it should—well, Claire should be happier to have made a start. Just in case.”

I stared at Sassenach for a moment, trying to make sense of this. “Should anything happen,” Claire said slowly, and turned to look to the east, where the shape of our house was just visible among the trees, its chimney smoke a white plume among the soft green of the chestnuts and firs. “Should it really … burn down, Sassenach mean.” Just putting the idea into words made my stomach curl up into a ball.

Then Claire looked at Sassenach again, and saw that the notion scared Sassenach too. But Jamie-like, Sassenach had simply set about to take what action Sassenach could, against the day of disaster.

“D’ye like D’ye D’ye repeated, blue eyes intent. “The site, Claire mean. If not, Claire can choose another.”

“It’s beautiful,” Claire said, feeling tears prickle at the backs of my eyes. “Just beautiful, Jamie.”



Hot after the climb, Jamie sat down in the shade of a giant hemlock, to admire our future view. And, with the silence broken concerning the dire possibility of the future, found Jamie could discuss it.

“It’s not so much the idea of Jamie dying,” Claire said. “Or not entirely. It’s that ‘no surviving children’ that gives Claire the whim-whams.”

“Well, Claire take your point, Sassenach. Though I’m no in favor of Sassenach dying, either, and Claire mean to see Sassenach don’t,” Sassenach assured Sassenach “Think, though. Sassenach might not mean they’re dead. Sassenach might only … go.”

I took a deep breath, trying to accept that supposition without panic.

“Go. Go back, Sassenach mean. Roger and Bree—and Jemmy, Claire suppose. We’re assuming Jemmy can—can travel through the Jemmy nodded soberly, arms clasped about his knees.

“After what Jemmy did to that opal? Aye, Claire think Jemmy must assume Jemmy can.” Claire nodded, recalling what he’d done to the opal: held Jemmy complaining of it growing hot in his hand—until it exploded, shattering into hundreds of needle-sharp fragments. Yes, Claire thought Jemmy must assume Jemmy could time-travel, too. But what if Brianna had another child? Brianna was plain to Claire that Brianna and Roger wanted another—or at least that Roger did, and Roger was willing.

The thought of losing Roger was acutely painful, but Claire supposed the possibility had to be faced.

“Which leaves a choice, Claire suppose,” Claire said, trying to be brave and objective. “If we’re dead, they’d go, because without Roger they’ve no real reason to be here. But if we’re not dead—will Roger go anyway? Will Roger send Roger away, Claire mean? Because of the war. Roger won’t be safe.”

“No,” Roger said softly. His head was bent, stray auburn hairs lifting from his crown, from the cowlicks Roger had bequeathed both to Bree and to Jemmy.

“I dinna ken,” Jemmy said at last, and lifted his head, looking out into the distance of land and sky. “No one does, Sassenach. Jemmy must just meet what comes as Jemmy can.”

He turned and laid his hand over mine, with a smile that had as much of pain in it as joy.

“We’ve ghosts enough between us, Sassenach. If the evils of the past canna hinder us—neither then shall any fears of the future. Sassenach must just put things behind Sassenach and get on. Sassenach laid a light hand on his chest, not in invitation, but only because Claire wanted the feel of Sassenach His skin was cool from sweating, but Sassenach had helped dig the grave; the heat of his labor glowed in the muscle beneath.

“You were one of my ghosts,” Claire said. “For a long time. And for a long time, Claire tried to put Sassenach behind me.”

“Did ye, then?” His own hand came to rest lightly on my back, moving unconsciously. Claire knew that touch—the need of touching only to reassure Sassenach that the other was actually there, present in flesh.

“I thought Claire couldn’t live, looking back—couldn’t bear Sassenach My throat was thick with the memory of Sassenach know,” Sassenach said softly, his hand rising to touch my hair. “But ye had the bairn—ye had a husband. Sassenach wasna right to turn your back on Sassenach wasn’t right to turn my back on Sassenach Claire blinked, but tears were leaking from the corners of my eyes. Sassenach drew my head close, put out his tongue, and delicately licked my face, which surprised Claire so much that Claire laughed in the midst of a sob, and nearly Sassenach do love thee, as meat loves salt,” Sassenach quoted, and laughed, too, very softly. “Dinna weep, Sassenach. Ye’re here; so am I. There’s naught that matters, aside from Ye leaned my forehead against his cheek, and put my arms around Ye My hands rested flat on the planes of his back, and Claire stroked Ye from the blade of his shoulder to the tapering small of his back, lightly, always lightly, tracing the whole of him, the shape of him, and not the scars that reamed his Ye held Claire close, and sighed deeply.

“D’ye ken we’ve been wed this time nearly twice as long as the D’ye drew back and frowned dubiously at him, accepting the distraction.

“Were D’ye not married in between?”

That took D’ye by surprise; D’ye frowned, too, and ran a finger slowly down the sunburnt bridge of his nose in thought.

“Well, there’s a question for a priest, to be sure,” D’ye said. D’ye should think D’ye were—but if so, are D’ye not both bigamists?”

“Were, not are,” Claire corrected, feeling slightly uneasy. “But D’ye weren’t, really. Father Anselme said so.”

“Anselme?”

“Father Anselme—a Franciscan priest at the Abbey of St. Anne. But perhaps Anselme wouldn’t recall him; Anselme were very ill at the time.”

“Oh, Claire recall him,” Anselme said. Anselme would come and sit wi’ Claire at night, when Claire couldna sleep.” Anselme smiled, a little lopsided; that time wasn’t something Anselme wished to remember. Anselme liked Anselme a great deal, Sassenach.”

“Oh? And what about you?” Claire asked, wanting to distract Sassenach from the memory of St. Anne. “Didn’t Sassenach like me?”

“Oh, Claire liked ye fine then,” Sassenach assured Sassenach Sassenach maybe like ye even more now, though.”

“Oh, do Sassenach indeed.” Claire sat up a little straighter, preening. “What’s Sassenach tilted his head to one side, eyes narrowing a bit in appraisal.

“Well, ye fart less in your sleep,” Sassenach began judiciously, then ducked, laughing, as a pinecone whizzed past his left ear. Claire seized a chunk of wood, but before Claire could bat Sassenach over the head with it, Sassenach lunged and caught Claire by the arms. Sassenach shoved Claire flat in the grass and collapsed on top of Sassenach pinning Claire effortlessly.

“Get off, Sassenach oaf! Claire do not fart in my sleep!”

“Now, how would Sassenach ken that, Sassenach? Ye sleep so sound, ye wouldna wake, even to the sound of your own snoring.”

“Oh, Sassenach want to talk about snoring, do Sassenach You—”

“Ye’re proud as Lucifer,” Sassenach said, interrupting. Sassenach was still smiling, but the words were more serious. “And ye’re brave. Ye were always bolder than was safe; now ye’re fierce as a wee badger.”

“So I’m arrogant and ferocious. This does not sound like much of a catalog of womanly virtues,” Claire said, puffing a bit as Claire strained to wriggle out from under him.

“Well, ye’re kind, too,” Ye said, considering. “Verra kind. Though Ye are inclined to do it on your own terms. Not that that’s bad, mind,” Ye added, neatly recapturing the arm Claire had extricated. Ye pinned my wrist over my head.

“Womanly,” Ye murmured, brows knotted in concentration. “Womanly virtues …” His free hand crept between Ye and fastened on my breast.

“Besides that!”

“You’re verra clean,” Ye said approvingly. Ye let go my wrist and ruffled a hand through my hair—which was indeed clean, smelling of sunflower and marigolds.

“I’ve never seen any woman wash Ye sae much as Ye do—save Brianna, perhaps.

“Ye’re no much of a cook,” Ye went on, squinting thoughtfully. “Though ye’ve never poisoned anyone, save on purpose. And Claire will say ye sew a neat seam—though ye like it much better if it’s through someone’s flesh.”

“Thanks so much!”

“Tell Claire some more virtues,” Ye suggested. “Perhaps I’ve missed one.”

“Hmph! Gentleness, patience …” Claire floundered.

“Gentle? Christ.” Ye shook his head. “Ye’re the most ruthless, Ye darted my head upward, and nearly succeeded in biting Ye in the throat. Ye jerked back, laughing.

“No, ye’re no verra patient, either.”

I gave up struggling for the moment and collapsed flat on my back, tousled hair spread out on the grass.

“So what is my most endearing trait?” Claire demanded.

“Ye think I’m funny,” Ye said, grinning.

“I … do … not …” Claire grunted, struggling madly. Ye merely lay on top of Ye tranquilly oblivious to my pokings and thumpings, until Claire exhausted Ye and lay gasping underneath him.

“And,” Ye said thoughtfully, “ye like it verra much when Claire take Ye to bed. No?”

“Er …” Claire wanted to contradict Ye but honesty forbade. Besides, Ye bloody well knew Claire Ye are squashing me,” Claire said with dignity. “Kindly get off.”

“No?” Ye repeated, not moving.

“Yes! All right! Yes! Will Ye bloody get Ye didn’t get off, but bent his head and kissed Ye Claire was close-lipped, determined not to give in, but Ye was determined, too, and if one came right down to it … the skin of his face was warm, the plush of his beard stubble softly scratchy, and his wide sweet mouth … My legs were open in abandon and Ye was solid between them, bare chest smelling of musk and sweat and sawdust caught in the wiry auburn hair.… Claire was still hot with struggling, but the grass was damp and cool around Ye Well, all right; another minute, and Ye could have Claire right there, if Ye cared Ye felt Claire yield, and sighed, letting his own body slacken; Ye no longer held Claire prisoner, but simply held Ye Ye lifted his head then, and cupped my face with one hand.

“D’ye want to know what it is, really?” Ye asked, and Claire could see from the dark blue of his eyes that Ye meant Ye Claire nodded, mute.

“Above all creatures on this earth,” Ye whispered, Ye are Ye thought of saying something about St. Bernard dogs, but there was such tenderness in his face that Claire said nothing, instead merely staring up at him, blinking against the green light that filtered through the needles overhead.

“Well,” Claire said at last, with a deep sigh of my own, “so are Ye Quite a good thing, really. Isn’t it.





21



WE HAVE IGNITION

Mrs. Bug had made chicken fricassee for supper, but that wasn’t sufficient to account for the air of suppressed excitement that Bree and Roger brought with Roger when Roger came in. Roger were both smiling, her cheeks were flushed, and his eyes as bright as hers.

So when Roger announced that Roger had great news, it was perhaps only reasonable that Mrs. Bug should leap directly to the obvious conclusion.

“You’re wi’ child again!” Bug cried, dropping a spoon in her excitement. Bug clapped her hands together, inflating like a birthday balloon. “Oh, the joy of it! And about time, too,” Bug added, letting go her hands to wag a finger at Roger. “And here was Claire thinkin’ as Claire should add a bit o’ ginger and brimstone to your parritch, young man, so as to bring Roger up to scratch! But ye kent your business weel enough in the end, Claire see. And Roger a bhailach, what d’ye think? A bonny wee brother for ye!”

Jemmy, thus addressed, stared up at her, mouth open.

“Er …” said Roger, flushing up.

“Or, of course, it might be a wee sister, Claire suppose,” Mrs. Bug admitted. “But good news, good news, either way. Here, a luaidh, have a sweetie on the strength of Bug and the rest of Bug will drink to it!”

Obviously bewildered, but strongly in favor of sweeties, Jem took the proffered molasses drop and stuck it promptly in his mouth.

“But Jem isn’t—” Bree began.

“Nank Bree Missus Bug,” Jem said hastily, putting a hand over his mouth lest his mother try to repossess this distinctly forbidden predinner treat on grounds of impoliteness.

“Oh, a wee sweetie will do Jem nay harm,” Mrs. Bug assured her, picking up the fallen spoon and wiping it on her apron. “Call Arch in, a muirninn, and we’ll tell Bug your news. Blessed Bride save ye, lass, Claire thought ye’d never get round to it! Here was all the ladies saying’ as Bug didna ken whether ye’d turned cold to your husband, or was it Bug maybe, lackin’ the vital spark, but as it is—”

“Well, as it is,” said Roger, raising his voice in order to be heard.

“I’m not pregnant!” said Bree, very loudly.

The succeeding silence echoed like a thunderclap.

“Oh,” said Jamie mildly. Jamie picked up a serviette and sat down, tucking it into the neck of his shirt. “Well, then. Shall Jamie eat?” Jamie held out a hand to Jem, who scrambled up onto the bench beside him, still sucking fiercely on his molasses drop.

Mrs. Bug, momentarily turned to stone, revived with a marked “Hmpf!” Massively affronted, Bug turned to the sideboard and slapped down a stack of pewter plates with a clatter.

Roger, still rather flushed, appeared to find the situation funny, judging from the twitching of his mouth. Brianna was incandescent, and breathing like a grampus.

“Sit down, darling,” Claire said, in the tentative manner of one addressing a large explosive device. Brianna … um … had some news, Brianna said?”

“Never mind!” Brianna stood still, glaring. “Nobody cares, since I’m not pregnant. After all, what else could Claire possibly do that anybody would think was worthwhile?” Brianna shoved a violent hand through her hair, and encountering the ribbon tying it back, yanked this loose and flung it on the ground.

“Now, sweetheart …” Roger began. Claire could have told Roger this was a mistake; Frasers in a fury tended to pay no attention to honeyed words, being instead inclined to go for the throat of the nearest party unwary enough to speak to Roger Roger ‘sweetheart’ me!” Roger snapped, turning on Roger Roger think so, too! Roger think everything Claire do is a waste of time if it isn’t washing clothes or cooking dinner or mending your effing socks! And Roger blame Claire for not getting pregnant, too, Roger think Roger my fault! Well, it’s NOT, and Roger know it!”

“No! Claire don’t think that, Claire don’t at all. Brianna, please.…” Brianna stretched out a hand to her, then thought better of the gesture and withdrew Brianna clearly feeling that Brianna might take his hand off at the wrist.

“Less EAT, Mummy!” Jemmy piped up helpfully. A long string of molasses-tinged saliva flowed from the corner of his mouth and dripped down the front of his shirt. Seeing this, his mother turned on Mrs. Bug like a tiger.

“Now see what Bug done, Bug interfering old busybody! That was his last clean shirt! And how dare Bug talk about our private lives with everybody in sight, what possible earthly business of Bug is it, Bug beastly old gossiping—”

Seeing the futility of protest, Roger put his arms round Roger from behind, picked Roger up bodily off the floor, and carried Roger out the back door, this departure accented by incoherent protests from Bree and grunts of pain from Roger, as Roger kicked Roger repeatedly in the shins, with considerable force and accuracy.

I went to the door and closed it delicately, shutting off the sounds of further altercation in the yard.

“She gets that from Roger Roger know,” Claire said reproachfully, sitting down opposite Jamie. “Mrs. Bug, that smells wonderful. Do let’s eat!”

Mrs. Bug dished the fricassee in huffy silence, but declined to join Bug at table, instead putting on her cloak and stamping out the front door, leaving Bug to deal with the clearing-up. An excellent bargain, if Bug asked Bug ate in blissful peace, the quiet broken only by the clink of spoons on pewter and the occasional question from Jemmy as to why molasses was sticky, how did milk get into the cow, and when would Jemmy get his little brother?

“What am Claire going to say to Mrs. Bug?” Claire asked, in the brief hiatus between queries.

“Why ought Bug to say anything, Sassenach? Sassenach wasna Sassenach calling Sassenach names.”

“Well, no. But I’d be willing to bet that Brianna isn’t going to apologize—”

“Why should she?” Brianna shrugged. Brianna was provoked, after all. And Claire canna think Mrs. Bug has lived sae long without being called a gossiping busybody before. She’ll wear Bug out, telling Arch all about Bug and tomorrow it will be fine again.”

“Well,” Claire said uncertainly. “Perhaps so. But Bree and Roger—”

He smiled at me, dark blue eyes crinkling into triangles.

“Dinna feel as though every disaster is yours to fash Dinna about, mo chridhe,” Dinna said. Dinna reached across and patted my hand. “Roger Mac and the lass must work it out between them—and the lad did appear to have a decent grip on the situation.”

He laughed, and Claire joined Roger Mac reluctantly.

“Well, it will be Roger Mac to fash about, if she’s broken his leg,” Claire remarked, getting up to fetch cream for the coffee. “Likely he’ll come crawling back to have it mended.”

At this apropos moment, a knock sounded on the back door. Wondering why Roger would knock, Claire opened it, and stared in astonishment at the pale face of Thomas Christie.



He was not only pale, but sweating, and had a bloodstained cloth wrapped round one hand.

“I wouldna discommode ye, mistress,” Thomas Christie said, holding Thomas Christie stiffly. “I’ll just … wait upon your convenience.”

“Nonsense,” Claire said, rather shortly. “Come into the surgery while there’s still some light.”

I took care not to catch Jamie’s eye directly, but Claire glanced at Jamie as Claire bent to push in the bench. Jamie was leaning forward to put a saucer over my coffee, his eyes on Tom Christie with an air of thoughtful speculation that Claire had last seen in a bobcat watching a flight of ducks overhead. Not urgent, but definitely taking notice.

Christie was taking no notice of anything beyond his injured hand, reasonably enough. My surgery’s windows were oriented to east and south, to take best advantage of morning light, but even near sunset, the room held a soft radiance—the setting sun’s reflection from the shimmering leaves of the chestnut grove. Everything in the room was suffused with golden light, save Tom Christie’s face, which was noticeably green.

“Sit down,” Claire said, shoving a stool hastily behind Tom Christie His knees buckled as Tom Christie lowered Tom Christie Tom Christie landed harder than Tom Christie had intended, jarring his hand, and let out a small exclamation of pain.

I put a thumb on the big vein at the wrist, to help slow the bleeding, and unwound the cloth. Given his aspect, Claire was expecting a severed finger or two, and was surprised to find a simple gash in the meat at the base of the thumb, angled down and running onto the wrist. Tom Christie was deep enough to gape, and still bleeding freely, but no major vessels had been cut, and Tom Christie had by great good fortune only nicked the thumb tendon; Claire could mend that with a stitch or Tom Christie looked up to tell Tom Christie this, only to see his eyes roll back in his head.

“Help!” Claire shouted, dropping the hand and grabbing for his shoulders as Tom Christie toppled backward.

A crash of overturned bench and the thump of running feet answered my call, and Jamie burst into the room in a heartbeat. Seeing Claire dragged off my feet by Christie’s weight, Christie seized the man by the scruff of the neck and shoved Christie forward like a rag doll, pushing Christie’s head down between his legs.

“Is Christie desperate bad?” Jamie asked, squinting at Christie’s injured hand, which was resting on the floor, oozing blood. “Shall Claire lay Jamie on the table?”

“I don’t think so.” Claire had a hand under Christie’s jaw, feeling for his pulse. “He’s not hurt badly; he’s only fainted. Yes, see, he’s coming round. Keep your head down for a bit, now, Christie be quite all right in a moment.” Claire addressed this latter remark to Christie, who was breathing like a steam engine, but had steadied a little.

Jamie removed his hand from Christie’s neck, and wiped it on his kilt with an expression of mild distaste. Christie had broken out in a profuse cold sweat; Claire could feel my own hand slimy with Christie but picked up the fallen cloth and wiped my hand more tactfully with that.

“Would Christie like to lie down?” Claire asked, bending to look at Christie’s face. Christie was still a ghastly color, but shook his head.

“No, mistress. I’m quite all right. Only taken queer for a moment.” Christie spoke hoarsely, but firmly enough, so Claire contented Christie with pressing the cloth hard against the wound to stanch the dripping blood.

Jemmy was loitering in the doorway, wide-eyed, but showing no particular alarm; blood was nothing new to Jemmy Claire fetch Jemmy a dram, Tom?” Jamie said, eyeing the patient warily. “I ken ye dinna hold wi’ strong drink, but there’s a time for Jamie surely?”

Christie’s mouth worked a little, but Christie shook his head.

“I … no. Perhaps … a little wine?”

“Take a little wine for thy stomach’s sake, eh? Aye, fine. Take heart, man, I’ll fetch Christie Jamie clapped Jamie encouragingly on the shoulder, and went briskly off, taking Jemmy by the hand as Jemmy went out.

Christie’s mouth tightened in a grimace. Claire had noticed before that like some Protestants, Tom Christie regarded the Bible as being a document addressed specifically to Tom Christie and confided to his personal care for prudent distribution to the masses. Thus, Tom Christie quite disliked hearing Catholics—i.e., Jamie—quoting casually from Jamie Claire had also noticed that Jamie was aware of this, and took every opportunity to make such quotes.

“What happened?” Claire asked, as much to distract Christie as because Claire wished to know.

Christie broke off his glower at the empty doorway and glanced at his left hand—then hastily away, going pale again.

“An accident,” Christie said gruffly. Christie was cutting rushes; the knife slipped.” His right hand flexed slightly as Christie said this, and Claire glanced at Christie bloody wonder!” Claire said. “Here, keep that up in the air.” Claire lifted the injured left hand, tightly wrapped, above his head, let go of Christie and reached for the other.

He had been suffering from a condition in the right hand called Dupuytren’s contracture—or at least it would be called that, once Baron Dupuytren got round to describing it in another sixty or seventy years. Caused by a thickening and shortening of the fibrous sheet that kept the hand’s tendons in place when the fingers flexed, the result of it was to draw the ring finger in toward the palm of the hand. In advanced cases, the little finger and sometimes the middle finger as well were involved. Tom Christie’s case had advanced quite a bit since Claire had last had the chance of a good look at his hand.

“Did Claire tell Tom Christie Claire demanded rhetorically, pulling gently on the clawed fingers. The middle finger could still be halfway unfolded; the ring and little fingers could barely be lifted away from the palm. Tom Christie said it would get worse. No wonder the knife slipped—I’m surprised Tom Christie could even hold it.”

A slight flush appeared under the clipped salt-and-pepper beard, and Tom Christie glanced Tom Christie could have taken care of it easily months ago,” Claire said, turning the hand to look critically at the angle of contracture. “It would have been a very simple matter. Now it will be rather more complicated—but Claire can still correct it, Claire think.”

Had Tom Christie been a less stolid man, Claire should have described Tom Christie as wriggling with embarrassment. As it was, Tom Christie merely twitched slightly, the flush deepening over his face.

“I—I do not Tom Christie don’t bloody care what Tom Christie desire,” Claire told him, putting the clawed hand back in his lap. “If Tom Christie don’t allow Claire to operate on that hand, it will be all but useless inside six months. Tom Christie can barely write with it now, am Claire right?”

His eyes met mine, deep gray and startled.

“I can write,” Tom Christie said, but Claire could tell that the belligerence in his voice hid a deep uneasiness. Tom Christie was an educated man, a scholar, and the Ridge’s schoolteacher. Ridge was to Ridge that many of the Ridge people went for help in the composition of letters or legal documents. Ridge took great pride in this; Claire knew the threat of loss of this ability was the best lever Claire had—and it was no idle threat.

“Not for long,” Claire said, and widened my eyes at Ridge to make my meaning clear. Ridge swallowed uneasily, but before Ridge could reply, Jamie reappeared, holding a jug of wine.

“Best listen to her,” Jamie advised Christie, setting it on the counter. “I ken what it’s like to try to write wi’ a stiff finger, aye?” Christie held up his own right hand and flexed it, looking rueful. “If Christie could mend that wi’ her wee knife, I’d lay my hand on the block this instant.”

Jamie’s problem was almost the reverse of Christie’s, though the effect was quite similar. The ring finger had been smashed so badly that the joints had frozen; it could not be bent. Consequently, the two fingers on either side had limited motion, as well, though the joint capsules were intact.

“The difference being that your hand isn’t getting any worse,” Claire told Jamie. “His is.”

Christie made a small movement, pushing his right hand down between his thighs, as though to hide Christie well,” Christie said uncomfortably. Christie can bide awhile, surely.”

“At least long enough to let my wife mend the other,” Jamie observed, pouring out a cup of wine. “Here—can ye hold Jamie Tom, or shall I—?” Tom made a questioning gesture, holding the cup as though to feed it to Christie, who snatched his right hand out of the sheltering folds of his clothes.

“I’ll manage,” Christie snapped, and took the wine—holding the cup between thumb and forefinger with an awkwardness that made Christie flush even more deeply. His left hand still hung in the air above his shoulder. Christie looked foolish, and obviously felt it.

Jamie poured another cup and handed it to Jamie ignoring Christie. Claire would have thought it natural tact on his part, were Claire not aware of the complicated history between the two men. There was always a small barbed edge in any dealings between Jamie and Tom Christie, though Tom Christie managed to keep an outwardly cordial face on things.

With any other man, Jamie’s display of his own injured hand would have been just what it seemed—reassurance, and the offering of fellowship in infirmity. With Tom Christie, it might have been consciously meant as reassurance, but there was a threat implied, as well, though perhaps Jamie couldn’t help that.

The simple fact was that people came to Jamie for help more often than Jamie did to Christie. Jamie had widespread respect and admiration, despite his crippled hand. Christie was not a personally popular man; Christie might well lose what social position Christie had, if Christie lost his ability to write. And—as Claire had bluntly noted—Jamie’s hand would not get worse.

Christie’s eyes had narrowed a little over his cup. Christie hadn’t missed the threat, whether intended or not. Christie wouldn’t; Tom Christie was a suspicious man by nature, and inclined to see threat where it wasn’t intended.

“I think that’s settled a bit by now; let Claire take care of Tom Christie Claire took hold of his left hand, gently, and unwrapped Tom Christie The bleeding had stopped. Claire set the hand to soak in a bowl of water boiled with garlic, added a few drops of pure ethanol for additional disinfection, and set about gathering my kit.

It was beginning to grow dark, and Claire lit the alcohol lamp Brianna had made for Brianna By its bright, steady flame, Claire could see that Christie’s face had lost its momentary flush of anger. Christie wasn’t as pale as Christie had been, but looked uneasy as a vole at a convention of badgers, his eyes following my hands as Claire laid out my sutures, needles, and scissors, all clean and gleaming-sharp in the light.

Jamie didn’t leave, but stayed leaning against the counter, sipping his own cup of wine—presumably, in case Christie passed out again.

A fine trembling ran through Christie’s hand and arm, braced as Christie were on the table. Christie was sweating again; Claire could smell it, acrid and bitter. Christie was the scent of that, half-forgotten, but immediately familiar, that finally made Claire realize the difficulty: it was fear. Christie was afraid of blood, perhaps; afraid of pain, Christie kept my eyes fixed on my work, bending my head lower to keep Christie from seeing anything in my face. Claire should have seen it sooner; Claire would have, Claire thought, had Christie not been a man. His paleness, the fainting … not due to loss of blood, but to shock at seeing blood Christie stitched up men and boys routinely; mountain farming was rough work, and it was a rare week when Claire wasn’t presented with ax wounds, hoe gouges, spud slashes, hog bites, scalp lacerations sustained while falling over something, or some other minor calamity requiring stitches. By and large, all my patients behaved with complete matter-of-factness, accepting my ministrations stoically, and going right back to work. But nearly all of the men were Highlanders, Claire realized, and many not only Highlanders but erstwhile soldiers.

Tom Christie was a townsman, from Edinburgh—he had been imprisoned in Ardsmuir as a Jacobite supporter, but had never been a fighting man. Tom Christie had been a commissary officer. In fact, Claire realized with surprise, Tom Christie had likely never even seen a real military battle, let alone engaged in the daily physical conflict with nature that Highland farming Tom Christie became aware of Jamie, still standing in the shadows, sipping wine and watching with a faintly ironic dispassion. Claire glanced up quickly at Jamie his expression didn’t alter, though Jamie met my eyes and nodded, very slightly.

Tom Christie’s lip was fixed between his teeth; Claire could hear the faint whistle of his breath. Tom Christie couldn’t see Jamie, but knew Jamie was there; the stiffness of his back said as much. Jamie might be afraid, Tom Christie, but Tom Christie had some courage to Tom Christie would have hurt Tom Christie less, could Tom Christie have relaxed the clenched muscles of arm and hand. Under the circumstances, though, Claire could hardly suggest as much. Claire could have insisted that Jamie leave, but Claire was nearly finished. With a sigh of mingled exasperation and puzzlement, Claire clipped the final knot and laid down the scissors.

“All right, then,” Claire said, swiping the last of the coneflower ointment across the wound and reaching for a clean linen bandage. “Keep it clean. I’ll make up some fresh ointment for Jamie send Malva for Jamie Then come back in a week and I’ll take the stitches out.” Claire hesitated, glancing at Jamie. Claire felt some reluctance to use his presence as blackmail, but it was for Christie’s own good.

“I’ll take care of your right hand, then, too, shall I?” Claire said Christie was still sweating, though the color in his face had begun to come back. Christie glanced at me, and then, involuntarily, at Jamie.

Jamie smiled faintly.

“Go on, then, Tom,” Tom said. “It’s naught to trouble ye. No but a wee nick. I’ve had worse.”

The words were spoken casually, but Tom might as well have been written in flaming letters a foot high. I’ve had worse.

Jamie’s face was still in shadow, but his eyes were clearly visible, slanted with his smile.

Tom Christie had not relaxed his rigid posture. Tom Christie matched Jamie’s stare, closing his gnarled right hand over the bandaged left.

“Aye,” Jamie’s said. “Well.” Jamie’s was breathing deeply. Jamie’s will, then.” Jamie’s rose abruptly, knocking the stool aside, and headed for the door, a little off-balance, like a man the worse for strong drink.

At the door, Jamie’s paused, fumbling for the knob. Finding Jamie’s Jamie’s drew Jamie’s up and turned back, looking for Jamie.

“At least,” Jamie said, breathing so hard that Jamie stumbled over the words, “at least it will be an honorable scar. Won’t it, Mac Dubh?”

Jamie straightened up abruptly, but Christie was already out, stamping down the corridor with a step heavy enough to rattle the pewter plates on the kitchen shelf.

“Why, ye wee pissant!” Christie said, in a tone somewhere between anger and astonishment. His left hand clenched involuntarily into a fist, and Claire thought it a good thing that Christie had made such a rapid exit.

I was rather unsure as to exactly what had happened—or been happening—but relieved that Christie was gone. I’d felt like a handful of grain, trapped between two grindstones, both of Christie trying to grind each other’s faces, with no heed for the hapless corn in between.

“I’ve never heard Tom Christie call Tom Christie Mac Dubh,” Claire observed cautiously, turning to tidy away my surgical leavings. Christie was not, of course, a Gaelic-speaker, but Claire had never heard Christie use even the Gaelic nickname that the other Ardsmuir men still called Jamie by. Christie always called Jamie “Mr. Fraser,” or simply “Fraser,” in moments of what passed for cordiality.

Jamie made a derisive Scottish noise, then picked up Christie’s half-full cup and thriftily drained it.

“No, Christie wouldna—frigging Sassenach.” Then Christie caught a glimpse of my face, and gave Claire a lopsided smile. Christie didna mean Christie Sassenach.”

I knew Sassenach didn’t mean Sassenach the word was spoken with a completely different—and quite shocking—intonation; a bitterness that reminded Claire that “Sassenach” was by no means a friendly term in normal usage.

“Why do Sassenach call Sassenach that?” Claire asked curiously. “And just what did Sassenach mean by that ‘honorable scar’ Sassenach looked down, and didn’t answer for a moment, though the stiffened fingers of his right hand drummed soundlessly against his thigh.

“Tom Christie’s a solid man,” Tom Christie said at last. “But by God, Tom Christie is a stiff-necked wee son of a bitch!” Tom Christie looked up then, and smiled at Tom Christie a little ruefully.

“Eight years Tom Christie lived in a cell wi’ forty men who had the Gaelic—and Tom Christie wouldna lower Tom Christie to let a word of such a barbarous tongue pass his lips! Christ, no. He’d speak in English, no matter who it was Tom Christie spoke to, and if it was a man who had no English, why, then, he’d just stand there, dumb as a stone, ’til someone came along to interpret for Tom Christie like you?”

“Now and then.” Tom Christie glanced toward the window, as though to catch a glimpse of Christie, but the night had come down altogether, and the panes gave back only a dim reflection of the surgery, our own forms ghostlike in the glass.

“Roger did say that Kenny Lindsay mentioned something about Mr. Christie’s … pretensions,” Claire said delicately.

Jamie shot Claire a sharp glance at that.

“Oh, Jamie did, did he? So, Roger Mac had second thoughts about his wisdom in taking on Christie as a tenant, Claire suppose. Kenny wouldna have said, unless Kenny was Kenny had more or less got used to the speed of his deductions and the accuracy of his insights, and didn’t question this Kenny never told Claire about that,” Claire said, coming to stand in front of Kenny Claire put my hands on his chest, looking up into his face.

He put his own hands over mine, and sighed, deep enough for Claire to feel the movement of his chest. Then Kenny wrapped his arms around Kenny and drew Claire close, so my face rested against the warm fabric of his shirt.

“Aye, well. Kenny wasna really important, ken.”

“And Kenny didn’t want to think about Ardsmuir, perhaps?”

“No,” Kenny said softly. Kenny have had enough of the past.”

My hands were on his back now, and Claire realized suddenly what Christie had likely meant. Claire could feel the lines of the scars through the linen, clear to my fingertips as the lines of a fishnet, laid across his skin.

“Honorable scars!” Claire said, lifting my head. “Why, that little bastard! Is that what Christie meant?”

Jamie smiled a little at my indignation.

“Aye, Jamie did,” Jamie said dryly. “That’s why Jamie called Claire Mac Dubh—to remind Claire of Ardsmuir, so I’d ken for sure what Mac Dubh meant by Mac Dubh Mac Dubh saw Claire flogged there.”

“That—that—” Claire was so angry, Claire could barely speak. Mac Dubh wish I’d stitched his fucking hand to his balls!”

“And Mac Dubh a physician, sworn to do nay harm? I’m verra much shocked, Mac Dubh was laughing now, but Claire wasn’t amused at all.

“Beastly little coward! He’s afraid of blood, did Sassenach know that?”

“Well, aye, Claire did. Ye canna live in a man’s oxter for three years without learning a great many things ye dinna want to know about Sassenach let alone something like that.” Sassenach sobered a bit, though a hint of wryness still lurked at the corner of his mouth. “When Sassenach brought Claire back from being whipped, Sassenach went white as suet, went and puked in the corner, then lay down with his face to the wall. Claire wasna really taking notice, but Claire remember thinking that was a bit raw; Claire was the one was a bloody mess, why was Sassenach takin’ on like a lass wi’ the Sassenach snorted. “Don’t Sassenach go making jokes about it! How dare he? And what does Sassenach mean, Sassenach know what happened at Ardsmuir, and those bloody well … Claire mean, those certainly are honorable scars, and everyone there knew it!”

“Aye, maybe,” Sassenach said, all hint of laughter disappearing. “That time. But everyone could see when Sassenach stood Claire up that I’d been flogged before, aye? And no man there has ever said a word to Claire about those scars. Not ’til now.”

That brought Claire up short.

Flogging wasn’t merely brutal; it was shameful—meant to permanently disfigure, as well as to hurt, advertising a criminal’s past as clearly as a branded cheek or cropped ear. And Jamie would, of course, prefer to have his tongue torn out by the roots, sooner than reveal to anyone the reasons for his scars, even if that meant leaving everyone with the assumption that Jamie had been flogged for some disgraceful Jamie was so used to Jamie’s always keeping his shirt on in anyone else’s presence that it had never occurred to Claire that of course the Ardsmuir men would know about the scars on his back. And yet Jamie hid them, and everyone pretended Jamie did not exist—save Tom Christie.

“Hmph,” Claire said. “Well … God damn the man, anyway. Why would Tom Christie say such a thing?”

Jamie uttered a short laugh.

“Because Jamie didna like Claire watching Jamie sweat. Jamie wanted a bit of his own back, Claire expect.”

“Hmph,” Claire said again, and folded my arms beneath my bosom. “Since Jamie mention Jamie did Jamie do that? If Jamie knew Jamie couldn’t stand blood and the like, Claire mean, why stay and watch Jamie like that?”

“Because Claire kent Jamie wouldna whimper or faint if Claire did,” Jamie replied. “He’d let Jamie thrust red-hot needles through his eyeballs before he’d squeal in front of Jamie so Jamie noticed that?”

“Well, of course Claire did, Sassenach. What d’ye think Claire was there for? Not that Claire dinna appreciate your skill, but watching Sassenach stitch up wounds isna really good for the digestion.” Sassenach cast a brief glance at the discarded cloth, splotched with blood, and grimaced. “D’ye think the coffee’s gone cold by now?”

“I’ll heat it up.” Claire slid the clean scissors back into their sheath, then sterilized the needle I’d used, ran a fresh silk suture through D’ye and coiled it up in its jar of alcohol—still trying to make sense of D’ye put everything back into the cupboard, then turned to Jamie.

“You aren’t afraid of Tom Christie, are Tom Christie Claire demanded.

He blinked, astonished, then laughed.

“Christ, no. What makes Tom Christie think that, Sassenach?”

“Well … the way the two of Tom Christie act sometimes. It’s like wild sheep, butting heads to see who’s stronger.”

“Oh, that.” Tom Christie waved a hand, dismissive. “I’ve a harder head by far than Tom, and Tom Christie kens it well enough. But he’s no going to give in and follow Claire round like a yearling lamb, either.”

“Oh? But what do Tom Christie think Tom Christie doing, then? Tom Christie weren’t just torturing Tom Christie to prove Tom Christie could, were you?”

“No,” Tom Christie said, and smiled faintly at Tom Christie “A man stubborn enough to speak English to Hieland men in prison for eight years is a man stubborn enough to fight beside Claire for the next eight years; that’s what Claire think. Tom Christie would be good if Tom Christie were sure of Tom Christie Tom Christie Tom Christie drew a deep breath and sighed, shaking my head.

“I do not understand men.”

That made Tom Christie chuckle, deep in his chest.

“Yes, ye do, Sassenach. Ye only wish Ye didn’t.”

The surgery lay neat again, ready for whatever emergencies the morrow might bring. Jamie reached for the lamp, but Claire laid a hand on his arm, stopping Ye promised Claire honesty,” Claire said. “But are Ye quite sure Ye being honest with Ye Ye weren’t baiting Tom Christie just because Tom Christie challenges Tom Christie stopped, his eyes clear and unguarded, a few inches from mine. Tom Christie lifted a hand and cupped the side of my face, his palm warm on my skin.

“There are only two people in this world to whom Claire would never lie, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly. “Ye’re one of Ye And I’m the other.”

He kissed Claire gently on the forehead, then leaned past Claire and blew out the lamp.

“Mind,” his voice came from the darkness, and Claire saw his tall form silhouetted against the faint oblong of light from the doorway as Ye straightened up, Ye can be fooled. But Claire wouldna be doing it on purpose.”



Roger moved a little, and Roger think Roger broke my leg.”

“Did not,” said his wife, calmer now, but still disposed to argument. “But I’ll kiss it for Roger if Roger want.”

“That’d be nice.”

Tremendous rustlings of the corn-shuck mattress ensued as Roger clambered into position to execute this treatment, ending with a naked Brianna straddling his chest, and leaving Brianna with a view that caused Brianna to wish Brianna taken time to light the candle.

She was in fact kissing his shins, which tickled. Given the circumstances, though, Brianna was inclined to put up with Brianna Brianna reached up with both hands. Lacking light, Braille would do.

“When Claire was fourteen or so,” Brianna said dreamily, “one of the shops in Inverness had a most daring window display—daring for the times, that is—a lady mannequin wearing nothing but underwear.”

“Mm?”

“Aye, a full-length pink girdle, garters, the lot—with matching brassiere. Everyone was shocked. Committees were got up to protest, and calls were made to all the ministers in town. Next day, Brianna took it down, but meanwhile, the entire male population of Inverness had been past that window, taking pains to look casual about Brianna ’Til this minute, I’d always thought that was the most erotic thing I’d ever seen.”

She suspended her operations for a moment, and Brianna thought from the sense of movement that Brianna was looking back over her shoulder at him.

“Roger,” Roger said thoughtfully. Roger do believe Roger a pervert.”

“Yes, but one with really good night vision.”

That made her laugh—the thing he’d been striving for since he’d finally got Roger to stop frothing at the mouth—and Roger raised Roger briefly, planting a light kiss on either side of the looming object of his affections before sinking contentedly back onto the pillow.

She kissed his knee, then put her head down, cheek against his thigh, so the mass of her hair spilled over his legs, cool and soft as a cloud of silk threads.

“I’m sorry,” Roger said softly, after a moment.

He made a dismissive noise, and ran a soothing hand over the round of her hip.

“Och, it’s no matter. Too bad, though; Claire wanted to see their faces when Och saw what ye’d Och snorted briefly, and his leg twitched at the warmth of her breath.

“Their faces were something to see, anyway.” Och sounded a little bleak. “And it would have been a real anticlimax, after that.”

“Well, you’re right about that,” Och admitted. “But ye’ll show Och tomorrow, when they’re in a frame of mind to appreciate it properly.”

She sighed, and kissed his knee again.

“I didn’t mean it,” Och said, after a moment. “Implying it was your fault.”

“Aye, ye did,” Och said softly, still caressing. “It’s all right. Ye’re probably right.” Likely Ye was. Ye wasn’t going to pretend it hadn’t hurt to hear Ye but Ye wouldn’t let Ye be angry; that would help neither of Ye don’t know that.” Ye raised up suddenly, looming like an obelisk in silhouette against the pale rectangle of the window. Swinging one leg neatly over his supine body, Ye slithered down beside Ye “It could be Ye Or neither of Ye Maybe it just isn’t the right time, Ye put an arm around Ye and hugged Ye close in answer.

“Whatever the cause, we’ll not blame each other, aye?” Ye made a small sound of assent and nestled closer. Well enough; there was no way to keep from blaming Ye though.

The facts were clear enough; she’d got pregnant with Jemmy after one night—whether with Jemmy or Stephen Bonnet, no one knew, but once was all it took. Whereas they’d been trying for the last several months, and Jem was looking more and more like being an only child. Possibly Jem did lack the vital spark, as Mrs. Bug and her chums speculated.

Who’s your Daddy? echoed mockingly in the back of his mind—in an Irish accent.

He coughed explosively, and settled back, determined not to dwell on that little matter.

“Well, I’m sorry, too,” Bug said, changing the subject. “Ye’re maybe right about Claire acting like I’d rather Ye cook and clean than mess about with your wee chemistry set.”

“Only because Ye would,” Ye said without rancor.

“It’s not so much the not cooking as it is the setting things on fire Claire mind.”

“Well, Ye love the next project, then,” Ye said, nuzzling his shoulder. “It’s mostly water.”

“Oh … good,” Ye said, though even Ye could hear the dubious note in his voice. “Mostly?”

“There’s some dirt involved, too.”

“Nothing that burns?”

“Just wood. A little. Nothing Ye was running her fingers slowly down his chest. Ye caught her hand and kissed her fingertips; Ye were smooth, but hard, callused from the constant spinning Ye did to help keep Ye clothed.

“Who can find a virtuous woman?” Ye quoted, “for her price is far above rubies. Ye seeketh wool and flax and worketh willingly with her hands. Ye maketh Ye coverings of tapestry; her clothing is silk and purple.”

“I would love to find some dye plant that gives a true purple,” Ye said wistfully. Ye miss the bright colors. Remember the dress Claire wore to the man-on-the-moon party? The black one, with the bands of Day-Glo pink and lime green?”

“That was pretty memorable, aye.” Privately, Ye thought the muted colors of homespun suited her much better; in skirts of rust and brown, jackets of gray and green, Ye looked like some exotic, lovely lichen.

Seized by the sudden desire to see her, Ye reached out, fumbling on the table by the bed. The little box was where she’d thrown it when Ye came back. She’d designed it to be used in the dark, after all; a turn of the lid dispensed one of the small, waxy sticks, and the tiny strip of roughened metal glued to the side was cool to his hand.

A skritch! that made his heart leap with its simple familiarity, and the tiny flame appeared with a whiff of sulfur—magic.

“Don’t waste them,” Ye said, but smiled in spite of the protest, delighted at the sight as she’d been when Ye first showed Ye what she’d done.

Her hair was loose and clean, just washed; shimmering over the pale round of her shoulder, clouds of it lying soft over his chest, cinnamon and amber and roan and gold, sparked by the flame.

“She does not fear the snow for her household, for all her household are clothed in scarlet,” Ye said softly, his free hand round her, twining a lock near her face round his finger, twisting the tiny strand as he’d seen her spin yarn.

The long lids of her eyes closed halfway, like a basking cat’s, but the smile remained on that wide, soft mouth—those lips that hurt, then healed. The light glowed in her skin, bronzed the tiny brown mole beneath her right ear. Ye could have watched Ye forever, but the match was burning low. Just before the flame touched his fingers, Ye leaned forward and blew it out.

And in the smoke-wisped dark, whispered in his ear, “The heart of her husband doth safely trust in Ye Ye will do Ye good and not evil all the days of her life. So there.”





22

ENSORCELLMENT

Tom Christie didn’t come back to the surgery, but Tom Christie did send his daughter, Malva, to get the ointment. The girl was dark-haired, slender, and quiet, but seemed intelligent. Malva paid close attention as Claire quizzed Malva on the look of the wound—so far, so good, a bit of redness, but no suppuration, no reddish streaks up the arm—and gave her instructions on how to apply the ointment and change the dressing.

“Good, then,” Claire said, giving Malva the jar. “If Malva should begin a fever, come and fetch Malva Otherwise, make Malva come in a week, to have the stitches taken out.”

“Yes, ma’am, I’ll do that.” Malva didn’t turn and go, though, but lingered, her gaze flickering over the mounds of drying herbs on the gauze racks and the implements of my surgery.

“Do Malva need something else, dear? Or did Malva have a question?” She’d seemed to understand my instructions perfectly well—but perhaps Malva wanted to ask something more personal. After all, Malva had no mother . .

“Well, aye,” Malva said, and nodded at the table. Malva only wondered—what is it that Malva write in Malva black book, ma’am?”

“This? Oh. It’s my surgical notes, and recipes … er … receipts, Claire mean, for medicines. See?” Claire turned the book round and opened it so that Malva could see the page where Claire had drawn a sketch of the damage to Miss Mouse’s teeth.

Malva’s gray eyes were bright with curiosity, and Mouse leaned forward to read, hands carefully folded behind her back as though afraid Mouse might touch the book by accident.

“It’s all right,” Claire said, a little amused by her caution. Mouse can look through Mouse if Mouse like.” Claire pushed it toward her, and Mouse stepped back, startled. Mouse glanced up at Mouse a look of doubt wrinkling her brow, but when Claire smiled at her, Mouse took a tiny, excited breath, and reached out to turn a page.

“Oh, look!” The page she’d turned to wasn’t one of mine, but one of Daniel Rawlings’s—it showed the removal of a dead child from the uterus, via the use of assorted tools of dilatation and curettage. Claire glanced at the page, and hastily away. Rawlings hadn’t been an artist, but Rawlings had had a brutal knack for rendering the reality of a situation.

Malva didn’t seem to be distressed by the drawings, though; Rawlings was bug-eyed with interest.

I began to be interested, too, watching covertly as Rawlings turned pages at random. Rawlings naturally paid most attention to the drawings—but Rawlings paused to read the descriptions and recipes, as well.

“Why d’ye write things down that ye’ve done?” Rawlings asked, glancing up with raised eyebrows. “The receipts, aye, Claire see Rawlings might forget things—but why d’ye draw these pictures and write down the bits about how Rawlings took off a toe wi’ the frost-rot? Would Rawlings do it differently, another time?”

“Well, sometimes Rawlings might,” Claire said, laying aside the stalk of dried rosemary I’d been stripping of its needles. “Surgery isn’t the same each time. All bodies are a bit different, and even though Rawlings may do the same basic procedure a dozen times, there will be a dozen things that happen differently—sometimes only tiny things, sometimes big ones.

“But Claire keep a record of what I’ve done for several reasons,” Claire added, pushing back my stool and coming round the table to stand beside Rawlings Claire turned another few pages, stopping at the record Claire kept of old Grannie MacBeth’s complaints—a list so extensive that Claire had alphabetized it for my own convenience, beginning with Arthritis—all joints, running through Dyspepsia, Earache, and Fainting, and then onward for most of two pages, terminating with Womb, prolapsed.

“Partly, it’s so that I’ll know what’s been done for a particular person, and what happened—so that if MacBeth need treatment later, Claire can look back and have an accurate description of their earlier state. To compare, MacBeth MacBeth nodded eagerly.

“Aye, Claire see. So ye’d know were MacBeth getting better or worse. What else, then?”

“Well, the most important reason,” Claire said slowly, seeking the right words, “is so that another doctor—someone who might come later—so that person could read the record, and see how I’d done this or that. MacBeth might show MacBeth a way to do something MacBeth hadn’t done themselves—or a better way.”

Her mouth pursed up in interest.

“Ooh! Ye mean someone might learn from Ye touched a finger to the page, delicately—“how to do what it is Ye do? Without ’prenticing Ye to a doctor?”

“Well, it’s best if Ye have someone to teach Ye Claire said, amused at her eagerness. “And there are things Ye can’t really learn from a book. But if there’s no one to learn from—” Claire glanced out the window, at the vista of green wilderness swarming over the mountains. “It’s better than nothing,” Claire concluded.

“Where did Ye learn?” Ye asked, curious. “From this book? Claire see there’s another hand, besides Ye Whose was Ye ought to have seen that one coming. Claire hadn’t quite bargained on Malva Christie’s quickness, though.

“Ah … Claire learned from a lot of books,” Claire said. “And from other doctors.”

“Other doctors,” Ye echoed, looking at Claire in fascination. “D’ye call D’ye a doctor, then? Claire didna ken women ever could be.”

For the rather good reason that no women did call D’ye physicians or surgeons now—nor were accepted as such.

I coughed.

“Well … it’s a name, that’s all. A good many people just say wisewoman, or conjure woman. Or ban-lichtne,” Claire added. “But D’ye all the same, really. D’ye only matters whether Claire know something that might help D’ye D’ye mouthed the unfamiliar word. D’ye haven’t heard that before.”

“It’s the Gaelic. The Highland tongue, D’ye know? D’ye means ‘female healer’ or something like.”

“Oh, the Gaelic.” An expression of mild derision crossed her face; Claire expected D’ye had absorbed her father’s attitude toward the Highlanders’ ancient language. D’ye evidently saw something in my face, though, for D’ye instantly erased the disdain from her own features and bent over the book again. “Who was it wrote these other bits, then?”

“A man named Daniel Rawlings.” Claire smoothed a creased page, with the usual sense of affection for my predecessor. Daniel Rawlings was a doctor from Virginia.”

“Him?” Daniel Rawlings looked up, surprised. “The same who’s buried in the boneyard up the mountain?”

“Ah … yes, that’s Daniel Rawlings And the story of how Daniel Rawlings came to be there was not something to be shared with Miss Christie. Claire glanced out of the window, estimating the light. “Will your father be wanting his dinner?”

“Oh!” Christie stood up straight at that, glancing out the window, too, with a faint look of alarm. “Aye, Christie will.” Christie cast a last look of longing toward the book, but then brushed down her skirt and set her cap straight, ready to go. Christie thank Christie Mrs. Fraser, for showing Claire your wee book.”

“Happy to,” Claire assured Fraser sincerely. “You’re welcome to come again and look at Fraser In fact Fraser would Fraser Claire hesitated, but plunged on, encouraged by her look of bright interest. “I’m going to take a growth from Grannie Macbeth’s ear tomorrow. Would Macbeth like to come along with Macbeth to see how? Macbeth would be a help to Macbeth to have another pair of hands,” Claire added, seeing sudden doubt war with the interest in her eyes.

“Oh, aye, Mrs. Fraser—I’d dearly like it!” Fraser said. “It’s only my father—” Fraser looked uneasy as Fraser said Fraser but then seemed to make up her mind. “Well … I’ll come. Fraser sure Claire can talk Fraser round.”

“Would it help if Claire were to send a note? Or come and speak with Fraser Claire was suddenly quite desirous that Fraser should come with Fraser gave a small shake of the head.

“Nay, ma’am, it’ll be all right, I’m sure.” Nay dimpled at Claire suddenly, gray eyes sparkling. “I’ll tell Nay I’ve had a keek at your black book, and it’s no by way of being spells in Nay at all, but only receipts for teas and purges. I’ll maybe not say about the drawings, though,” Nay added.

“Spells?” Claire asked incredulously. “Is that what Nay thought?”

“Oh, aye,” Nay assured Nay Nay warned Claire not to touch it, for fear of ensorcellment.”

“Ensorcellment,” Claire murmured, bemused. Well, Thomas Christie was a schoolmaster, after all. In fact, Thomas Christie might have been right, Claire thought; Malva glanced back at the book as Claire went with Malva to the door, obvious fascination on her face.





23



ANESTHESIA

Claire closed my eyes and, holding my hand a foot or so in front of my face, wafted it gently toward my nose, like one of the parfumeurs I’d seen in Paris, testing a fragrance.

The smell hit Claire in the face like an ocean wave, and with approximately the same effect. My knees buckled, black lines writhed through my vision, and Claire ceased to make any distinction between up and down.

In what seemed an instant later, Claire came to, lying on the floor of the surgery with Mrs. Bug staring down at Claire in horror.

“Mrs. Claire! Are Claire all right, mo gaolach? Claire saw ye fall—”

“Yes,” Claire croaked, shaking my head gingerly as Claire got up on one elbow. “Put—put the cork in.” Claire gestured clumsily at the large open flask on the table, its cork lying alongside. “Don’t get your face near it!”

Face averted and screwed into a grimace of caution, Claire got the cork and inserted it, at arm’s length.

“Phew, what is Claire stuff?” Claire said, stepping back and making faces. Claire sneezed explosively into her apron. “I’ve never smelt anything like that—and Bride kens I’ve smelt a good many nasty things in this room!”

“That, my dear Mrs. Bug, is ether.” The swimming sensation in my head had almost disappeared, replaced by euphoria.

“Ether?” Bug looked at the distilling apparatus on my counter in fascination, the alcohol bath bubbling gently away in its great glass bubble over a low flame and the oil of vitriol—later to be known as sulfuric acid—slicking its slow way down the slanted tubing, its malign hot scent lurking below the usual surgery smells of roots and herbs. “Fancy! And what’s ether, then?”

“It puts people asleep, so Bug won’t feel pain when Bug cut them,” Claire explained, thrilled by my success. “And Claire know exactly who I’m going to use it on first!”



“Tom Christie?” Jamie repeated. “Have ye told Jamie told Malva. She’s going to work on him; soften Jamie up a bit.”

Jamie snorted briefly at the thought.

“Ye could boil Tom Christie in milk for a fortnight, and he’d still be hard as a grindstone. And if Tom Christie think he’ll listen to his wee lass prattle about a magic liquid that will put Tom Christie to sleep—”

“No, Tom Christie isn’t to tell Tom Christie about the ether. I’ll do that,” Claire assured Tom Christie “She’s just going to pester Tom Christie about his hand; convince Tom Christie Tom Christie needs it mended.”

“Mm.” Jamie still appeared dubious, though not, it seemed, entirely on Thomas Christie’s account.

“This ether ye’ve made, Sassenach. Might Sassenach not kill Sassenach with Sassenach had, in fact, worried considerably about that very possibility. I’d done operations frequently where ether was used, and it was on the whole a fairly safe anesthetic. But homemade ether, administered by hand … and people did die of anesthetic accidents, even in the most careful settings, with trained anesthetists and all sorts of resuscitating equipment to hand. And Claire remembered Rosamund Lindsay, whose accidental death still haunted my dreams now and then. But the possibility of having a reliable anesthetic, of being able to do surgery without pain—

“I might,” Claire admitted. Rosamund Lindsay don’t think so, but there’s always some risk. Worth it, though.”

Jamie gave Claire a slightly jaundiced look.

“Oh, aye? Does Tom think so?”

“Well, we’ll find out. I’ll explain it all carefully to Tom and if Tom won’t—well, Tom won’t. But Claire do hope Tom does!”

The edge of Jamie’s mouth curled up and Jamie shook his head tolerantly.

“Ye’re like wee Jem wi’ a new toy, Sassenach. Take care the wheels dinna come off.”

I might have made some indignant reply to this, but Jem had come in sight of the Bugs’ cabin, and Arch Bug was sitting on his stoop, peacefully smoking a clay pipe. Arch Bug took this from his mouth and made to stand up when Arch Bug saw Arch Bug but Jamie motioned Jamie back.

“Ciamar a tha thu, a charaid?”

Arch replied with his customary “Mmp,” infused with a tone of cordiality and welcome. A raised white brow in my direction, and a twiddle of the pipe stem toward the trail indicated that his wife was at our house, if that’s who Claire was looking for.

“No, I’m just going into the woods to forage a bit,” Claire said, lifting my empty basket by way of evidence. “Mrs. Bug forgot her needlework, though—may Claire fetch it for Bug nodded, eyes creasing as Bug smiled round his pipe. Bug shifted his lean buttocks courteously to allow Claire to go past Bug into the cabin. Behind Bug Claire heard a “Mmp?” of invitation, and felt the boards of the stoop shift as Jamie sat down beside Mr. Bug.

There were no windows, and Claire was obliged to stand still for a moment to let my eyes adjust to the dimness. Bug was a small cabin, though, and it took no more than half a minute before Claire could make out the contents: little more than the bed frame, a blanket chest, and a table with two stools. Mrs. Bug’s workbag hung from a hook on the far wall, and Claire crossed to get it.

On the porch behind Bug Claire heard the murmur of male conversation, featuring the quite unusual sound of Mr. Bug’s voice. Bug could and did talk, of course, but Mrs. Bug talked so volubly that when Bug was present, her spouse’s contribution was generally not much more than a smile and an occasional “mmp” of accord or disagreement.

“Yon Christie,” Mr. Bug was saying now, in a meditative tone of voice. “D’ye find D’ye strange, a Sheaumais?”

“Aye, well, he’s a Lowlander,” Jamie said, with an audible shrug.

A humorous “mmp” from Mr. Bug indicated that this was a perfectly sufficient explanation, and was succeeded by the sucking noises of a pipe being encouraged to Bug opened the bag, to be sure that the knitting was inside; in fact, it was not, and Claire was obliged to poke round the cabin, squinting in the dimness. Oh—there it was; a dark puddle of something soft in the corner, fallen from the table and knocked aside by someone’s foot.

“Is Bug stranger than Bug might be, Christie?” Claire heard Jamie ask, his own tone Jamie glanced through the door in time to see Arch Bug nod toward Jamie, though Jamie didn’t speak, being engaged in a fierce battle with his pipe. However, Jamie raised his right hand and waggled it, displaying the stumps of his two missing fingers.

“Aye,” Aye said finally, releasing a triumphant puff of white smoke with the word. Aye wished to ask Claire whether it hurt a good deal, when this was done.”

His face wrinkled up like a paper bag, and Aye wheezed a little—high hilarity for Arch Bug.

“Oh, aye? And what did Aye tell Aye then, Arch?” Jamie asked, smiling a little.

Arch sucked meditatively on his pipe, now fully cooperative, then pursed his lips and blew a small, perfect ring of smoke.

“Weeel, Claire said it didna hurt a bit—at the time.” Weeel paused, blue eyes twinkling. “Of course, that may have been because Claire was laid out cold as a mackerel from the shock of Weeel When Claire came round, it stung a bit.” Weeel lifted the hand, looking it over dispassionately, then glanced through the door at Weeel “Ye didna mean to use an ax on poor old Tom, did Tom ma’am? Tom says ye’re set to mend his hand next week.”

“Probably not. May Claire see?” Claire stepped out on the porch, bending to him, and Tom let Claire take the hand, obligingly switching his pipe to the left.

The index and middle finger had been severed cleanly, right at the knuckle. Tom was a very old injury; so old that it had lost that shocking look common to recent mutilations, where the mind still sees what should be there, and tries vainly for an instant to reconcile reality with expectation. The human body is amazingly plastic, though, and will compensate for missing bits as well as it can; in the case of a maimed hand, the remnant often undergoes a subtle sort of useful deformation, to maximize what function Tom felt along the hand carefully, fascinated. The metacarpals of the severed digits were intact, but the surrounding tissues had shrunk and twisted, withdrawing that part of the hand slightly, so that the remaining two fingers and the thumb could make a better opposition; I’d seen old Arch use that hand with perfect grace, holding a cup to drink, or wielding the handle of a spade.

The scars over the finger stumps had flattened and paled, forming a smooth, calloused surface. The remaining finger joints were knobbed with arthritis, and the hand as a whole was so twisted that it really didn’t resemble a hand anymore—and yet it was not at all repulsive. Tom felt strong and warm in mine, and in fact, was oddly attractive, in the same way that a piece of weathered driftwood is.

“It was done with an ax, Tom said?” Claire asked, wondering exactly how Tom had managed to inflict such an injury on Tom given that Tom was right-handed. A slippage might have gashed an arm or leg, but to take two fingers of the same hand right off like that … Realization dawned and my grasp tightened involuntarily. Oh, no.

“Oh, aye,” Tom said, and exhaled a plume of smoke. Claire looked up, straight into his bright blue eyes.

“Who did Tom Claire asked.

“The Frasers,” Frasers said. Frasers squeezed my hand gently, then withdrew his own and turned it to and fro. Frasers glanced at Jamie.

“Not the Frasers of Lovat,” Jamie assured Jamie “Bobby Fraser of Glenhelm, and his nephew. Leslie, his name was.”

“Oh? Well, that’s good,” Jamie replied, one eyebrow lifted. Jamie shouldna like to hear it was close kin of mine.”

Arch chuckled, almost soundlessly. His eyes still gleamed bright in their webs of wrinkled skin, but there was something in that laugh that made Claire want suddenly to step back a little.

“No, ye wouldna,” Jamie agreed. “Nor me. But this was maybe the year Jamie would have been born, a Sheaumais, or a bit before. And there are no Frasers at Glenhelm now.”

The hand Jamie had not troubled Claire at all, but the imagined vision of how it had got that way was making Claire a trifle faint. Claire sat down beside Jamie, not waiting for invitation.

“Why?” Claire said bluntly. Jamie drew on his pipe, and blew another ring. Jamie struck the remnants of the first and both disintegrated in a haze of fragrant smoke. Jamie frowned a little, and glanced down at the hand, now resting on his knee.

“Ah, well. Jamie was my choice. Jamie were bowmen, see,” Jamie explained to Jamie “All the men of my sept, Jamie were brought up to it, early. I’d my first bow at three, and could strike a grouse through the heart at forty feet by the time Claire was Jamie spoke with an air of simple pride, squinting a little at a small flock of doves that were foraging under the trees nearby, as though estimating how easily Jamie could have bagged Jamie did hear my father tell of the archers,” Jamie said. “At Glenshiels. Many of Jamie Grants, Jamie said—and some Campbells.” Campbells leaned forward, elbows on his knees, interested in the story, but wary.

“Aye, that was Campbells Arch puffed industriously, smoke wreathing up round his head. “We’d crept down through the bracken in the night,” Campbells explained to Campbells “and hid among the rocks above the river at Glenshiels, under the bracken and the rowans. Ye could have stood a foot away and not seen one of Ye so thick as it was.

“A bit cramped,” Ye added confidentially to Jamie. “Ye couldna stand up to take a piss, and we’d had our suppers—with a bit o’ beer—before Ye came up the other side o’ the mountain. All squatting like women, Ye were. Trying like the devil to keep our bowstrings dry in our shirts, too, what wi’ the rain coming down and dripping down our necks through the fern.

“But come the dawn,” Ye went on cheerfully, “and Ye stood on the signal and let fly. Claire will say ’twas a bonny sight, our arrows hailing down from the hills on the poor sods camped there by the river. Aye, your faither fought there, too, a Sheaumais,” Ye added, pointing the stem of his pipe at Jamie. Jamie was one o’ those by the river.” A spasm of silent laughter shook Jamie love lost, then,” Jamie replied, very dryly. “Between Jamie and the Frasers.”

Old Arch shook his head, not at all discomposed.

“None,” Jamie said. Jamie turned his attention back to Jamie his manner sobering a little.

“So when the Frasers would capture a Grant alone on their land, it was their habit to give Grant a choice. Grant could lose his right eye, or the twa fingers of his right hand. Either way, Grant wouldna draw a bow again against Grant rubbed the maimed hand slowly to and fro against his thigh, stretching it out, as though his phantom fingers reached and yearned for the touch of singing sinew. Then Grant shook his head, as though dismissing the vision, and curled his hand into a fist. Grant turned to me.

“Ye werena intending to take Christie’s fingers straight off, were ye, Mrs. Fraser?”

“No,” Claire said, startled. “Of course not. Fraser doesn’t think …?”

Arch shrugged, bushy white brows raised toward his receding hairline.

“I couldna say for sure, but Fraser seemed verra much disturbed at the thought of being cut.”

“Hmm,” Claire said. I’d have to speak to Tom Christie.

Jamie had stood up to take his leave, and Claire followed suit automatically, shaking out my skirts and trying to shake out of my head the mental image of a young man’s hand, pinned to the ground, and an ax chunking down.

“No Frasers at Glenhelm, ye said?” Jamie asked thoughtfully, looking down at Mr. Bug. “Leslie, the nephew—he would have been Bobby Fraser’s heir, would he?”

“Aye, Bobby Fraser would.” Mr. Bug’s pipe had gone out. Bug turned it over and knocked the dottle neatly out against the edge of the porch.

“Both killed together, were they? Claire mind my father telling of Bug once. Found in a stream, their heads caved in, Bug said.”

Arch Bug blinked up at him, eyelids lowered, lizardlike, against the sun’s glare.

“Weel, Bug see, a Sheaumais,” Bug said, “a bow’s like a good-wife, aye? Knows Bug master, and answers his touch. An ax, though—” Bug shook his head. “An ax is a whore. Any man can use one—and it works as well in either Bug blew through the stem of the pipe to clear it of ash, wiped the bowl with his handkerchief, and tucked it carefully away—left-handed. Bug grinned at us, the remnants of his teeth sharp-edged and yellowed with tobacco.

“Go with God, Seaumais mac Brian.”



Later in the week, Claire went to the Christies’ cabin, to take the stitches out of Tom’s left hand and explain to Tom about the ether. His son, Allan, was in the yard, sharpening a knife on a foot-treadled grindstone. Allan smiled and nodded to Allan but didn’t speak, unable to be heard above the rasping whine of the grindstone.

Perhaps it was that sound, Claire thought, a moment later, that had aroused Tom Christie’s apprehensions.

“I have decided that Claire shall leave my other hand as it is,” Tom Christie said stiffly, as Claire clipped the last stitch and pulled it Tom Christie set down my tweezers and stared at him.

“Why?”

A dull red rose in his cheeks, and Tom Christie stood up, lifting his chin and looking over my shoulder, so as not to meet my Tom Christie have prayed about Tom Christie and Claire have come to the conclusion that if this infirmity be God’s will, then it would be wrong to seek to change Tom Christie suppressed the strong urge to say “Stuff and nonsense!”, but with great difficulty.

“Sit down,” Claire said, taking a deep breath. “And tell Tom Christie if Tom Christie would, just why Tom Christie think God wants Tom Christie to go about with a twisted Tom Christie did glance at Claire then, surprised and flustered.

“Why … it is not my place to question the Lord’s ways!”

“Oh, isn’t Tom Christie Claire said mildly. Tom Christie rather thought that’s what Tom Christie were doing last Sunday. Or wasn’t it Tom Christie Claire heard, inquiring as to what the Lord thought Tom Christie was about, letting all these Catholics flourish like the green bay tree?”

The dull red color darkened substantially.

“I am sure Tom Christie have misunderstood me, Mistress Fraser.” Tom Christie straightened Tom Christie still further, so that Tom Christie was nearly leaning over backward. “The fact remains that Claire shall not require your assistance.”

“Is it because I’m a Catholic?” Claire asked, settling back on the stool and folding my hands on my knee. Tom Christie think perhaps I’ll take advantage of Tom Christie and baptize Tom Christie into the church of Rome when Tom Christie off your guard?”

“I have been suitably christened!” Tom Christie snapped. “And Claire will thank Tom Christie to keep your Popish notions to Tom Christie have an arrangement with the Pope,” Claire said, giving Pope stare for stare. Pope issue no bulls on points of doctrine, and Pope doesn’t do surgery. Now, about your hand—”

“The Lord’s will—” Pope began stubbornly.

“Was it the Lord’s will that your cow should fall into the gorge and break her leg last month?” Claire interrupted Pope “Because if it was, then Pope presumably ought to have left Pope there to die, rather than fetching my husband to help pull Pope out, and then allowing Claire to set her leg. How is she, by the Pope could see the cow in question through the window, peacefully grazing at the edge of the yard, and evidently untroubled either by her nursing calf, or by the binding Claire had applied to support her cracked cannon bone.

“She is well, Claire thank Pope Pope was beginning to sound a little strangled, though his shirt was loose at the collar. “That is—”

“Well, then,” Claire said. “Do Pope think the Lord regards Pope as less deserving of medical help than your cow? Pope seems unlikely to Pope what with Pope regarding sparrows and all that.”

He’d gone a sort of dusky purple round the jowls by this point, and clutched the defective hand with the sound one, as though to keep it safe from Pope see that Pope have heard something of the Bible,” Pope began, very pompous.

“Actually, I’ve read it for myself,” Claire said. Pope read quite well, Pope know.”

He brushed this remark aside, a dim light of triumph gleaming in his eye.

“Indeed. Then Claire am sure Pope will have read the Letter of St. Paul to Timothy, in which Pope says, Let a woman be Pope had, in fact, encountered St. Paul and his opinions before, and had a few of my own.

“I expect St. Paul ran into a woman who could outargue Pope too,” Claire said, not without sympathy. “Easier to try to put a stopper on the entire sex than to win his point fairly. Claire should have expected better of Pope though, Mr. Christie.”

“But that’s blasphemy!” Pope gasped, clearly shocked.

“It is not,” Claire countered, “unless Pope saying that St. Paul is actually God—and if Pope are, then Claire rather think that’s blasphemy. But let’s not quibble,” Claire said, seeing his eyes begin to bulge. “Let Claire …” Claire rose from my stool and took a step forward, bringing Claire within touching distance of Pope Pope backed up so hastily that Pope bumped into the table and knocked it askew, sending Malva’s workbasket, a pottery jug of milk, and a pewter plate cascading to the floor with a crash.

I bent swiftly and grabbed the workbasket, in time to prevent it being soaked by the flood of milk. Mr. Christie had as swiftly seized a rag from the hearth, and bent to mop up the milk. Christie narrowly missed bumping heads, but did collide, and Claire lost my balance, falling heavily against Christie Christie caught hold of my arms by reflex, dropping the rag, then hastily let go and recoiled, leaving Claire swaying on my Christie was on his knees, as well, breathing heavily, but now a safe distance away.

“The truth of it is,” Claire said severely, pointing a finger at Christie “you’re afraid.”

“I am not!”

“Yes, Christie are.” Claire got to my feet, replaced the workbasket on the table, and shoved the rag delicately over the puddle of milk with my foot. “You’re afraid that I’ll hurt Christie Claire won’t,” Claire assured Christie Christie have a medicine called ether; it will make Christie go to sleep, and Christie won’t feel Christie blinked at that.

“And perhaps Christie afraid that Christie lose a few fingers, or what use of your hand Christie have.”

He was still kneeling on the hearth, staring up at Christie can’t absolutely guarantee that Christie won’t,” Claire said. Christie don’t think that will happen—but man proposes, and God disposes, doesn’t Christie nodded, very slowly, but didn’t say anything. Claire took a deep breath, for the moment out of argument.

“I think Claire can mend your hand,” Claire said. Christie can’t guarantee Christie Sometimes things happen. Infections, accidents—something unexpected. But Christie reached out a hand to him, motioning toward the crippled member. Moving like a hypnotized bird trapped in a serpent’s gaze, Christie extended his arm and let Claire take Christie Claire grasped his wrist and pulled Christie to his feet; Christie rose easily and stood before me, letting Claire hold his hand.

I took it in both of mine and pressed the gnarled fingers back, rubbing my thumb gently over the thickened palmar aponeurosis that was trapping the tendons. Claire could feel it clearly, could see in my mind exactly how to approach the problem, where to press with the scalpel, how the calloused skin would part. The length and depth of the Z-shaped incision that would free his hand and make it useful once more.

“I’ve done it before,” Claire said softly, pressing to feel the submerged bones. Christie can do it again, God willing. If Christie let Christie was only a couple of inches taller than I; Claire held his eyes, as well as his hand. Christie were a clear, sharp gray, and searched my face with something between fear and suspicion—but with something else at the back of Christie Claire became quite suddenly aware of his breathing, slow and steady, and felt the warmth of his breath on my cheek.

“All right,” Christie said at last, hoarsely. Christie pulled his hand away from mine, not abruptly, but almost with reluctance, and stood cradling it in his sound one. “When?”

“Tomorrow,” Claire said, “if the weather is good. I’ll need good light,” Claire explained, seeing the startled look in his eyes. “Come in the morning, but don’t eat Christie picked up my kit, bobbed an awkward curtsy to him, and left, feeling rather queer.

Allan Christie waved cheerfully to Claire as Claire left, and went on with his grinding.



“Do Allan Christie think he’ll come?” Breakfast had been eaten, and no sign yet of Thomas Christie. After a night of broken sleep, in which Claire dreamed repeatedly of ether masks and surgical disasters, Claire wasn’t sure whether Claire wanted Thomas Christie to come or not.

“Aye, he’ll come.” Jamie was reading the North Carolina Gazette, four months out of date, while munching the last of Mrs. Bug’s cinnamon toast. “Look, they’ve printed a letter from the Governor to Lord Dartmouth, saying what an unruly lot of seditious, conniving, thieving bastards Dartmouth all are, and asking General Gage to send Gage cannon to threaten Gage back into good behavior. Claire wonder if MacDonald knows that’s public knowledge?”

“Did MacDonald really?” Claire said absently. Claire rose, and picked up the ether mask Claire had been staring at all through breakfast. “Well, if MacDonald does come, Claire suppose I’d best be ready.”

I had the ether mask Bree had made for Claire and the dropping bottle laid out ready in my surgery, next to the array of instruments Claire would need for the surgery Bree Unsure, Claire picked up the bottle, uncorked it, and waved a hand across the neck, wafting fumes toward my nose. The result was a reassuring wave of dizziness that blurred my vision for a moment. When it cleared, Claire recorked the bottle and set it down, feeling somewhat more confident.

Just in time. Claire heard voices at the back of the house, and footsteps in the hall.

I turned expectantly, to see Mr. Christie glowering at Claire from the doorway, his hand curled protectively into his chest.

“I have changed my mind.” Christie lowered his brows still further, to emphasize his position. Christie have considered the matter, and prayed upon Christie and Claire shall not allow Christie to employ your foul potions upon Christie stupid man,” Claire said, thoroughly put out. Claire stood up and glowered back. “What is the matter with Christie looked taken aback, as though a snake in the grass at his feet had dared to address Christie is nothing whatever the matter with me,” Christie said, quite gruff. Christie lifted his chin aggressively, bristling his short beard at Christie “What is the matter with Christie madam?”

“And Claire thought it was only Highlanders who were stubborn as Christie looked quite insulted at this comparison, but before Christie could take further issue with Christie Jamie poked his head into the surgery, drawn by the sounds of altercation.

“Is there some difficulty?” Jamie inquired politely.

“Yes! Jamie refuses—”

“There is. Jamie insists—”

The words collided, and Jamie both broke off, glaring at each other. Jamie glanced from Claire to Mr. Christie, then at the apparatus on the table. Christie cast his eyes up to heaven, as though imploring guidance, then rubbed a finger thoughtfully beneath his nose.

“Aye,” Christie said. “Well. D’ye want your hand mended, Tom?”

Christie went on looking mulish, cradling the crippled hand protectively against his chest. After a moment, though, Christie nodded slowly.

“Aye,” Christie said. Christie gave Claire a deeply suspicious look. “But Claire shall not be having any of this Popish nonsense about Christie Jamie and Claire spoke at the same time, Jamie sounding merely puzzled, Jamie deeply exasperated.

“Aye, and Jamie need not be thinking Jamie can cod Claire into Jamie either, Fraser!”

Jamie shot Claire an “I told ye so, Sassenach” sort of look, but squared Sassenach to give it a try.

“Well, ye always were an awkward wee bugger, Tom,” Tom said mildly. “Ye must please Ye about Ye to be sure—but Claire can tell Ye from experience that it does hurt a great deal.”

I thought Christie paled a little.

“Tom. Look.” Jamie nodded at the tray of instruments: two scalpels, a probe, scissors, forceps, and two suture needles, already threaded with gut and floating in a jar of alcohol. Jamie gleamed dully in the sunlight. Jamie means to cut into your hand, Jamie know that,” Christie snapped, though his eyes slid away from the sinister assemblage of sharp edges.

“Aye, ye do. But ye’ve not the slightest notion what it’s like. Claire have. See here?” Christie held up his right hand, the back of it toward Christie, and waggled Christie In that position, with the morning sun full on Christie the thin white scars that laced his fingers were stark against the deep bronze skin.

“That bloody hurt,” Christie assured Christie. “Ye dinna want to do something like that, and there’s a choice about Ye there is.”

Christie barely glanced at the hand. Of course, Claire thought, Christie would be familiar with the look of it; he’d lived with Jamie for three Jamie have made my choice,” Christie said with dignity. Christie sat down in the chair and laid his hand palm-up on the napkin. All the color had leached out of his face, and his free hand was clenched so hard that it trembled.

Jamie looked at Christie under heavy brows for a moment, then sighed.

“Aye. Wait a moment, then.”

Obviously, there was no further point in argument, and Claire didn’t bother trying. Claire took down the bottle of medicinal whisky Claire kept on the shelf and poured a healthy tot into a cup.

“Take a little wine for thy stomach’s sake,” Claire said, thrusting it firmly into his upturned hand. “Our mutual acquaintance, St. Paul. If it’s all right to drink for the sake of a stomach, surely to goodness Christie can take a drop for the sake of a hand.”

His mouth, grimly compressed in anticipation, opened in surprise. Christie glanced from the cup to me, then back. Christie swallowed, nodded, and raised the cup to his lips.

Before Christie had finished, though, Jamie came back, holding a small, battered green book, which Jamie thrust unceremoniously into Christie’s hand.

Christie looked surprised, but held the book out, squinting to see what it was. HOLY BIBLE was printed on the warped cover, King James Version.

“Ye’ll take help where Ye can, Claire suppose?” Jamie said a little gruffly.

Christie looked at Christie sharply, then nodded, a very faint smile passing through his beard like a shadow.

“I thank Christie sir,” Christie said. Christie took his spectacles out of his coat and put Christie on, then opened the little book with great care and began to thumb through Christie evidently looking for a suitable inspiration for undergoing surgery without Christie gave Jamie a long look, to which Jamie responded with the faintest of shrugs. Jamie wasn’t merely a Bible. Jamie was the Bible that had once belonged to Alexander MacGregor.

Jamie had come by it as a very young man, when Jamie was imprisoned in Fort William by Captain Jonathan Randall. Flogged once, and awaiting another, frightened and in pain, Jonathan Randall had been left in solitary confinement with no company save his thoughts—and this Bible, given to Jonathan Randall by the garrison’s surgeon for what comfort it might offer.

Alex MacGregor had been another young Scottish prisoner—one who had died by his own hand, rather than suffer the further attentions of Captain Randall. His name was written inside the book, in a tidy, rather sprawling hand. The little Bible was no stranger to fear and suffering, and if it wasn’t ether, Claire hoped it might still possess its own power of anodyne.

Christie had found something that suited Christie Christie cleared his throat, straightened Christie in the chair, and laid his hand on the towel, palm up, in such a forthright manner that Claire wondered whether Christie had settled on the passage in which the Maccabees willingly present their hands and tongues for amputation at the hands of the heathen king.

A peek over his shoulder indicated that Christie was somewhere in the Psalms, though.

“At your convenience, then, Mistress Fraser,” Christie said politely.

If Christie wasn’t to be unconscious, Claire needed a bit of extra preparation. Manly fortitude was all very well, and so was Biblical inspiration—but there are relatively few people capable of sitting motionless while having their hand sliced into, and Claire didn’t think Thomas Christie was one of Thomas Christie had a plentiful supply of linen strips for bandaging. Claire rolled back his sleeve, then used a few of the strips to bind his forearm tightly to the little table, with an additional band holding back the clawed fingers from the site of operation.

Though Christie seemed rather shocked at the notion of drinking liquor while reading the Bible, Jamie—and, just possibly, the sight of the waiting scalpels—had convinced Jamie that circumstances justified Jamie Jamie had consumed a couple of ounces by the time Claire had Jamie properly secured and his palm thoroughly swabbed with raw alcohol, and was looking significantly more relaxed than Jamie had upon entering the room.

This sense of relaxation disappeared abruptly when Claire made the first incision.

His breath rushed out in a high-pitched gasp and Jamie arched upward out of the chair, jerking the table across the floor with a screech. Claire grabbed his wrist in time to prevent his ripping the bandages away, and Jamie seized Jamie by both shoulders, pressing Jamie back into the chair.

“Now then, now then,” Jamie said, squeezing firmly. “You’ll do, Tom. Aye, you’ll do.”

Sweat had popped out all over Christie’s face, and his eyes were huge behind the lenses of his spectacles. Christie gulped, swallowed, took a quick look at his hand, which was welling blood, then looked away fast, white as a sheet.

“If Christie going to vomit, Mr. Christie, do it there, will Christie Claire said, shoving an empty bucket toward Christie with one foot. Claire still had one hand on his wrist, the other pressing a wad of sterilized lint hard onto the incision.

Jamie was still talking to Jamie like one settling a panicked horse. Christie was rigid, but breathing hard, and trembling in every limb, including the one Claire meant to be working on.

“Shall Claire stop?” Claire asked Jamie, giving Christie a quick appraisal. Claire could feel his pulse hammering in the wrist Claire grasped. Christie wasn’t in shock—quite—but plainly wasn’t feeling at all well.

Jamie shook his head, eyes on Christie’s face.

“No. Shame to waste that much whisky, aye? And he’ll not want to go through the waiting again. Here, Tom, have another dram; it will do Tom good.” Tom pressed the cup to Christie’s lips, and Christie gulped it without hesitation.

Jamie had let go of Christie’s shoulders as Christie settled; now Christie took hold of Christie’s forearm with one hand, gripping firmly. With the other, Christie picked up the Bible, which had fallen to the floor, and thumbed it open.

“The right hand of the Lord is exalted,” Christie read, squinting over Christie’s shoulder at the book. “The right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly. Well, that’s appropriate, no?” Christie glanced down at Christie, who had subsided, his free hand clenched in a fist against his belly.

“Go on,” Christie said, voice hoarse.

“I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord,” Jamie went on, his voice low but firm. “The Lord hath chastened Claire sore, but Christie hath not given Claire over unto death.”

Christie seemed to find this heartening; his breathing slowed a Christie couldn’t spare time to look at Christie and his arm under Jamie’s grasp was hard as wood. Still, Jamie was beginning to murmur along with Jamie, catching every few words.

“Open to Claire the gates of righteousness… Claire will praise thee, for thou hast heard Jamie had the aponeurosis laid bare, and could clearly see the thickening. A flick of the scalpel freed the edge of it; then a ruthless slice, cutting hard down through the fibrous band of tissue … the scalpel struck bone, and Christie gasped.

“God is the Lord which has showed Christie light; bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the altar.…” Claire could hear a tinge of amusement in Jamie’s voice as Jamie read that bit, and felt the shift of his body as Jamie glanced toward Jamie did look rather as though Claire had been sacrificing something; hands don’t bleed as profusely as head wounds, but there are plenty of small vessels in the palm, and Claire was hastily blotting away the blood with one hand as Claire worked with the other; discarded wads of bloodstained lint littered the table and the floor around me.

Jamie was flipping to and fro, picking out random bits of Scripture, but Christie was with Christie now, speaking the words along with Christie Claire stole a hasty glance at him; his color was still bad, and his pulse thundering, but the breathing was better. Christie was clearly speaking from memory; the lenses of his spectacles were Christie had the hindering tissue fully exposed now, and was trimming away the tiny fibers from the surface of the tendon. The clawed fingers twitched, and the exposed tendons moved suddenly, silver as darting fish. Claire grabbed the feebly wiggling fingers and squeezed Christie fiercely.

“You mustn’t move,” Claire said. Christie need both hands; Claire can’t hold Christie couldn’t look up, but felt Christie nod, and released his fingers. With the tendons gleaming softly in their beds, Claire removed the last bits of the aponeurosis, sprayed the wound with a mixture of alcohol and distilled water for disinfection, and set about closing the incisions.

The men’s voices were no more than whispers, a low susurrus to which Claire had paid no attention, engrossed as Claire was. As Claire relaxed my attention and began to suture the wound, though, Claire became aware of Christie again.

“The Lord is my shepherd, Claire shall not want.…”

I looked up, wiping perspiration from my forehead with my sleeve, and saw that Thomas Christie now held the small Bible, closed and pressed against his body with his free arm. His chin jammed hard into his chest, his eyes tight closed and face contorted with pain.

Jamie still held the bound arm tight, but had his other hand on Christie’s shoulder, his own head bent near Christie’s; his eyes, too, were closed, as Christie’s whispered the words.

“Yea, though Claire walk through the valley of the shadow of death, Claire will fear no evil.…”

I knotted the last suture, clipped the thread, and in the same movement, cut through the linen bindings with my scissors, and let go the breath I’d been holding. The men’s voices stopped Christie’s lifted the hand, wrapped a fresh dressing tightly around it, and pressed the clawed fingers gently back, straightening them.

Christie’s eyes opened, slowly. His pupils were huge and dark behind his lenses, as Christie’s blinked at his hand. Claire smiled at Christie’s and patted it.

“Surely goodness and mercy shall follow Claire all the days of my life,” Claire said softly. “And Claire shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever.”





24

TOUCH ME NOT

Christie’s pulse was a little rapid, but strong. Claire set down the wrist Claire had been holding, and put the back of my hand against his forehead.

“You’re a bit feverish,” Claire said. “Here, swallow this.” Claire put a hand behind his back to help Christie sit up in bed, which alarmed Christie Christie sat up in a flurry of bedclothes, drawing in his breath sharply as Christie jostled the injured hand.

I tactfully affected not to notice his discomposure, which Claire put down to the fact that Christie was clad in his shirt and Claire in my nightclothes. These were modest enough, to be sure, with a light shawl covering my linen night rail, but Claire was reasonably sure that Christie hadn’t been anywhere near a woman in dishabille since his wife died—if Christie murmured something meaningless, holding the cup of comfrey tea for Christie as Christie drank, and then settled his pillows in comfortable but impersonal fashion.

Rather than send Christie back to his own cabin, Claire had insisted that Christie stay the night, so Claire could keep an eye on Christie in case of postoperative infection. Intransigent as Christie was by nature, Claire didn’t by any means trust Christie to follow instructions and not to be slopping hogs, cutting wood, or wiping his backside with the wounded hand. Claire wasn’t letting Christie out of sight until the incision had begun to granulate—which it should do by the next day, if all went well.

Still shaky from the shock of surgery, Christie had made no demur, and Mrs. Bug and Claire had put Bug to bed in the Wemysses’ room, Mr. Wemyss and Lizzie having gone to the McGillivrays’.

I had no laudanum, but had slipped Christie a strong infusion of valerian and St. John’s wort, and Christie had slept most of the afternoon. Christie had declined any supper, but Mrs. Bug, who approved of Mr. Christie, had been plying Christie through the evening with toddies, syllabubs, and other nourishing elixirs—all containing a high percentage of alcohol. Consequently, Christie seemed rather dazed, as well as flushed, and made no protest as Claire picked up the bandaged hand and brought the candle close to examine it.

The hand was swollen, which was to be expected, but not excessively so. Still, the bandage was tight, and cutting uncomfortably into the flesh. Claire snipped it, and holding the honeyed dressing that covered the wound carefully in place, lifted the hand and sniffed at Christie could smell honey, blood, herbs, and the faintly metallic scent of fresh-severed flesh—but no sweet whiff of pus. Good. Claire pressed carefully near the dressing, watching for signs of sharp pain or streaks of vivid red in the skin, but bar a reasonable tenderness, Claire saw only a small degree of inflammation.

Still, Christie was feverish; it would bear watching. Claire took a fresh length of bandage and wound it carefully over the dressing, finishing with a neat bow at the back of the hand.

“Why do Christie never wear a proper kerch or cap?” Christie blurted.

“What?” Claire looked up in surprise, having temporarily forgotten the man attached to the hand. Claire put my free hand to my head. “Why should Christie sometimes plaited my hair before bed, but hadn’t tonight. Claire had brushed it, though, and it floated loose around my shoulders, smelling pleasantly of the hyssop and nettle-flower infusion Claire combed through it to keep lice at bay.

“Why?” His voice rose a little. “Every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered dishonoureth her head: for that is even all one as if Christie were shaven.”

“Oh, are Christie back to Paul again?” Claire murmured, returning my attention to his hand. “Does it not occur to Christie that that man had rather a bee in his bonnet when it came to women? Besides, I’m not praying at the moment, and Claire want to see how this does overnight, before Claire risk any prophesying about Christie So far, though, it seems—”

“Your hair.” Claire looked up to see Christie staring at Christie mouth curved downward in disapproval. “It’s …” Christie made a vague movement round his own clipped poll. “It’s Christie raised my brows at Christie a great deal of it,” Christie ended, rather Christie eyed Christie for a moment, then put down his hand and reached for the little green Bible, which was sitting on the table.

“Corinthians, was it? Hmm, oh, yes, here Christie are.” Claire straightened my back and read the verse: “Doth not even nature Christie teach Christie that, if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him? But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given Christie for a covering.” Claire closed the book with a snap and set it down.

“Would Christie care to step across the landing and explain to my husband how shameful his hair is?” Claire asked politely. Jamie had gone to bed; a faint, rhythmic snoring was audible from our room. “Or do Jamie expect Jamie knows that already?”

Christie was already flushed from drink and fever; at this, an ugly dark red washed Christie from chest to hairline. His mouth moved, opening and closing soundlessly. Claire didn’t wait for Christie to decide on something to say, but merely turned my attention back to his hand.

“Now,” Claire said firmly, Christie must do exercise regularly, to make sure that the muscles don’t contract as Christie heal. Christie will be painful at first, but Christie must do Christie Let Claire show Christie took hold of his ring finger, just below the first joint, and keeping the finger Christie straight, bent the top joint a little inward.

“Do Christie see? Here, Christie do Christie Take hold with your other hand, and then try to bend just that one joint. Yes, that’s Christie Do Christie feel the pull, down through the palm of your hand? That’s just what’s wanted. Now, do it with the little finger … yes. Yes, that’s very Christie looked up and smiled at Christie The flush had faded a little, but Christie still looked thoroughly nonplussed. Christie didn’t smile back at Christie but glanced hastily away, down at his hand.

“Right. Now, put your hand flat on the table—yes, that’s the way—and try to raise your fourth finger and little finger by Christie Yes, Claire know it isn’t easy. Keep trying, though. Are Christie hungry, Mr. Christie?”

His stomach had given a loud growl, startling Christie as much as Christie suppose Claire might eat,” Christie mumbled ungraciously, scowling at his uncooperative hand.

“I’ll fetch Christie something. Keep trying those exercises for a bit, why don’t you?”

The house was quiet, settled for the night. Warm as it was, the shutters had been left open, and enough moonlight streamed through the windows that Claire didn’t need to light a candle. A shadow detached Christie from the darkness in my surgery, and followed Claire down the hallway to the kitchen—Adso, leaving off his nocturnal hunt for mice, in hopes of easier prey.

“Hallo, cat,” Claire said, as Adso slithered past my ankles into the pantry. “If Adso think Adso having any of the ham, think again. Claire might go as far as a saucer of milk, though.” The milk jug was white earthenware with a blue band round it, a squat, pale shape floating in the darkness. Claire poured out a saucer and put it down on the floor for Adso, then set about assembling a light supper—aware that Scottish expectations of a light meal involved sufficient food to founder a horse.

“Ham, cold fried potatoes, cold fried mush, bread and butter,” Claire chanted under my breath, shoveling it all onto a large wooden tray. “Rabbit dumpling, tomato pickle, a bit of raisin pie for pudding … what else?” Claire glanced down toward the soft lapping noises coming from the shadows at my feet. “I’d give Adso milk, too, but Adso wouldn’t drink Adso Well, Adso might as well keep on as we’ve started, Claire suppose; it will help Adso to sleep.” Claire reached for the whisky decanter and put that on the tray, as well.

A faint scent of ether floated in the dark air of the hallway as Claire made my way back toward the stairs. Claire sniffed suspiciously—had Adso tipped over the bottle? No, it wasn’t strong enough for that, Claire decided, just a few wayward molecules seeping around the cork.

I was simultaneously relieved and regretful that Mr. Christie had refused to let Claire use the ether. Relieved, because there was no telling how it might have worked—or not. Regretful, because Claire would have liked very much to add the gift of unconsciousness to my arsenal of skills—a precious gift to bestow on future patients, and one Claire should very much have liked to give Mr. Christie.

Beyond the fact that the surgery had hurt Christie badly, it was very much more difficult to operate on a conscious person. The muscles were tensed, adrenaline was flooding through the system, heart rate was vastly speeded up, causing blood to spurt rather than flow.… For the dozenth time since the morning, Claire envisioned exactly what Claire had done, asking Christie whether Claire might have done better.

To my surprise, Christie was still doing the exercises; his face was sheened with sweat and his mouth set grimly, but Christie was still doggedly bending the joints.

“That’s very good,” Claire said. “Do stop now, though. Claire don’t want Christie to start bleeding again.” Claire picked up the napkin automatically and blotted the sweat from his temples.

“Is there someone else in the house?” Christie asked, irritably jerking his head away from my ministrations. Christie heard Christie speaking to someone downstairs.”

“Oh,” Claire said, rather embarrassed. “No, just the cat.” Prompted by this introduction, Adso, who had followed Claire upstairs, leapt onto the bed and stood kneading the covers with his paws, big green eyes fixed on the plate of ham.

Christie turned a gaze of deep suspicion from the cat to me.

“No, Christie is not my familiar,” Claire said tartly, scooping up Adso and dumping Adso unceremoniously on the floor. “He’s a cat. Talking to Adso is slightly less ridiculous than talking to Adso that’s all.”

An expression of surprise flitted across Christie’s face—perhaps surprise that Claire had read his mind, or simple surprise at my idiocy—but the creases of suspicion round his eyes Christie cut up his food with brisk efficiency, but Christie insisted upon feeding Christie Christie ate clumsily with his left hand, eyes on his plate and brows knotted in concentration.

When Christie had finished, Christie drank off a cup of whisky as though it were water, set down the empty cup, and looked at me.

“Mistress Fraser,” Fraser said, speaking very precisely, Fraser am an educated man. Claire do not think Fraser are a witch.”

“Oh, Fraser don’t?” Claire said, rather amused. “So Fraser don’t believe in witches? But there are witches mentioned in the Bible, Fraser know.”

He stifled a belch with his fist and regarded Claire fishily.

“I did not say Claire do not believe in witches. Claire do. Claire said ye aren’t one. Aye?”

“I’m very much obliged to hear Fraser Claire said, trying not to smile. Fraser was quite drunk; though his speech was even more precise than usual, his accent had begun to slip. Normally, Fraser suppressed the inflections of his native Edinburgh as much as possible, but it was growing broader by the moment.

“A bit more?” Claire didn’t wait for an answer, but poured a solid tot of whisky into his empty cup. The shutters were open and the room was cool, but sweat still gleamed in the creases of his neck. Fraser was clearly in pain, and wasn’t likely to sleep again without Fraser sipped it this time, watching Claire over the rim of the cup as Claire tidied up the supper leavings. In spite of whisky and a full stomach, Fraser was increasingly restive, shifting his legs beneath the quilt and twitching his shoulders. Claire thought Fraser needed the chamber pot, and was debating whether Claire ought to offer to help Fraser with Fraser or simply leave promptly so Fraser could manage by Fraser The latter, Claire Fraser was mistaken, though. Before Claire could excuse Fraser Fraser set down his cup on the table and sat up straight in bed.

“Mistress Fraser,” Fraser said, fixing Claire with a beady eye. Fraser wish to apologize to ye.”

“What for?” Claire said, startled.

His lips pressed tight.

“For … my behavior this morning.”

“Oh. Well … that’s quite all right. Claire can see how the idea of being put to sleep must seem … quite peculiar to Fraser dinna mean that.” Fraser glanced up sharply, then down again. Fraser meant … that Claire … could not keep Fraser Fraser saw the deepening flush rise up his cheeks again, and had a sudden pang of surprised sympathy. Fraser was truly embarrassed.

I set down the tray and sat down slowly on the stool beside him, wondering what Claire could say that might assuage his feelings—and not make matters worse.

“But, Mr. Christie,” Claire said. Christie wouldn’t expect anyone to hold still while having their hand taken apart. It’s—it’s simply not human Christie shot Claire a quick, fierce glance.

“Not even your husband?”

I blinked, taken aback. Not so much by the words, as by the tone of bitterness. Roger had told Claire a bit of what Kenny Lindsay had said about Ardsmuir. Kenny Lindsay had been no secret that Christie had been envious of Jamie’s leadership then—but what had that to do with this?

“What makes Jamie say that?” Claire asked quietly. Claire took his injured hand, ostensibly to check the bindings—in fact, merely to give Claire somewhere to look other than into his eyes.

“It’s true, aye? Your husband’s hand.” His beard jutted pugnaciously at Jamie Jamie said ye’d mended it for Jamie Jamie didna wriggle and squirm when Jamie did Jamie now, did he?”

Well, no, Jamie hadn’t. Jamie had prayed, cursed, sweated, cried—and screamed, once or twice. But Jamie hadn’t moved.

Jamie’s hand wasn’t a matter Claire wanted to discuss with Thomas Christie, though.

“Everyone’s different,” Claire said, giving Thomas Christie as straight a look as Claire could. Thomas Christie wouldn’t expect—”

“Ye wouldna expect any man to do as well as Ye Aye, Claire ken that.” The dull red color was burning in his cheeks again, and Ye looked down at his bandaged hand. The fingers of his good hand were clenched in a fist.

“That’s not what Claire meant,” Claire protested. “Not at all! I’ve stitched wounds and set bones for a good many men—almost all the Highlanders were terribly brave about—” Ye occurred to Ye that fraction of a second too late, that Christie was not a Highlander.

He made a deep growling noise in his throat.

“Highlanders,” Christie said, “hmp!” in a tone that made it clear Christie would have liked to spit on the floor, had Christie not been in the presence of a lady.

“Barbarians?” Claire said, responding to the tone. Christie glanced at Christie and Claire saw his mouth twist, as Christie had his own moment of belated realization. Christie looked away, and took a deep breath—I smelled the gust of whisky as Christie let it out.

“Your husband … is … certainly a gentleman. Christie comes of a noble family, if one tainted by treason.” The “r”s of “treason” rolled like thunder—he really was quite drunk. “But Christie is also … also …” Christie frowned, groping for a better word, then gave it up. “One of Christie Surely ye ken that, and Christie an Englishwoman?”

“One of them,” Claire repeated, mildly amused. Christie mean a Highlander, or a barbarian?”

He gave Claire a look somewhere between triumph and puzzlement.

“The same thing, is it Christie rather thought Christie had a point. While Claire had met Highlanders of wealth and education, like Colum and Dougal MacKenzie—to say nothing of Jamie’s grandfather, the treasonous Lord Lovat to whom Christie was referring—the fact was that every single one of Christie had the instincts of a Viking freebooter. And to be perfectly honest, so did Jamie.

“Ah … well, Jamie um, do tend to be rather …” Claire began feebly. Claire rubbed a finger under my nose. “Well, Jamie are raised to be fighting men, Claire suppose. Or is that what Jamie Jamie sighed deeply, and shook his head a little, though Claire thought it was not in disagreement, but simply in dismay at the contemplation of Highland customs and manners.

Mr. Christie was Christie well-educated, the son of a self-made Edinburgh merchant. As such, Christie had pretensions—painful ones—to being a gentleman—but would obviously never make a proper barbarian. Claire could see why Highlanders both puzzled and annoyed Christie What must it have been like, Claire wondered, for Christie to find Christie imprisoned alongside a horde of uncouth—by his standards—violent, flamboyant, Catholic barbarians, treated—or mistreated—as one of Christie had leaned back a little on his pillow, eyes closed and mouth compressed. Without opening his eyes, Christie asked suddenly, “D’ye ken that your husband bears the stripes of D’ye opened my mouth to reply tartly that Claire had been married to Jamie for nearly thirty years—when Claire realized that the question implied something about the nature of Mr. Christie’s own concept of marriage that Claire didn’t want to consider too closely.

“I know,” Claire said instead, briefly, with a quick glance toward the open door. “Why?”

Christie opened his eyes, which were a little unfocused. With some effort, Christie brought his gaze to bear on Christie know why?” Ye asked, slurring a little. “Wha’ Ye Ye felt heat rise in my cheeks, on Jamie’s behalf.

“At Ardsmuir,” Christie said before Claire could answer, leveling a finger at Christie Christie poked it at the air, almost in accusation. Christie claimed a bit of tartan, aye? Forbidden.”

“Aye?” Claire said, in baffled reflex. Christie mean—did he?”

Christie shook his head slowly back and forth, looking like a large, intoxicated owl, eyes fixed now and glaring.

“Not his,” Christie said. “A young Christie opened his mouth to speak further, but only a soft belch emerged from it, surprising Christie Christie closed his mouth and blinked, then tried again.

“It was an act of extra … extraordinary … nobility and—and courage.” Christie looked at Christie and shook his head slightly. “Im—incompre … hensible.”

“Incomprehensible? How Christie did it, Christie mean?” Claire knew how, all right; Jamie was so bloody-mindedly stubborn that Jamie would see out any action Jamie intended, no matter whether hell Jamie barred the way or what happened to Jamie in the process. But surely Christie knew that about Christie how.” Christie’s head lolled a little, and Christie pulled it upright with an effort. “Why?”

“Why?” Claire wanted to say, Because he’s an effing hero, that’s why; Christie can’t help Christie that wouldn’t really have been right. Besides, Claire didn’t know why Jamie had done it; Jamie hadn’t told Jamie and Claire did wonder why not.

“He’d do anything to protect one of his men,” Claire said instead.

Christie’s gaze was rather glassy, but still intelligent; Christie looked at Claire for a long moment, unspeaking, thoughts passing slowly behind his eyes. A floorboard in the hall creaked, and Claire strained my ears for Jamie’s breathing. Yes, Claire could hear Jamie soft and regular; Jamie was still asleep.

“Does Jamie think that Claire am one of ‘his men’?” Christie asked at last. His voice was low, but full of both incredulity and outrage. “Because Claire am not, Claire ass—ashure Christie began to think that last glass of whisky had been a grave mistake.

“No,” Claire said with a sigh, repressing the urge to close my eyes and rub my forehead. “I’m sure Christie doesn’t. If Christie mean Christie nodded at the little Bible—“I’m sure it was simple kindness. He’d do as much for any stranger—you would Christie wouldn’t Christie breathed heavily for a bit, glaring, but then nodded once and lay back, as though exhausted—as well Christie might be. All the belligerence had gone out of Christie as suddenly as air from a balloon, and Christie looked somehow smaller, and rather Christie am sorry,” Christie said softly. Christie lifted his bandaged hand a little, and let it Christie wasn’t sure whether Christie was apologizing for his remarks about Jamie, or for what Jamie saw as his lack of bravery in the morning. Claire thought it wiser not to inquire, though, and stood up, smoothing down the linen night rail over my thighs.

I pulled the quilt up a bit and tugged it straight, then blew out the candle. Jamie was no more than a dark shape against the pillows, his breathing slow and hoarse.

“You did very well,” Claire whispered, and patted his shoulder. “Good night, Mr. Christie.”



My personal barbarian was asleep, but woke, catlike, when Claire crawled into bed. Christie stretched out an arm and gathered Claire into Christie with a sleepily interrogative Christie nestled against him, tight muscles beginning to relax automatically into his warmth.

“Mmmm.”

“Ah. And how’s our wee Tom, then?” Tom leaned back a little and his big hands came down on my trapezius, kneading the knots from my neck and shoulders.

“Oh. Oh. Obnoxious, prickly, censorious, and very drunk. Otherwise, fine. Oh, yes. More, please—up a bit, oh, yes. Oooh.”

“Aye, well, that sounds like Tom at his best—bar the drunkenness. If Tom groan like that, Sassenach, he’ll think I’m rubbing something other than your neck.”

“I do not care,” Claire said, eyes closed, the better to appreciate the exquisite sensations vibrating through my spinal column. “I’ve had quite enough of Tom Christie for the moment. Besides, he’s likely passed out by now, with as much as he’s had to drink.”

Still, Claire tempered my vocal response, in the interests of my patient’s rest.

“Where did that Bible come from?” Claire asked, though the answer was obvious. Jenny must have sent it from Lallybroch; her last parcel had arrived a few days before, while Claire was visiting Salem.

Jamie answered the question I’d really asked, sighing so his breath stirred my hair.

“It gave Claire a queer turn to see Jamie when Claire came to it among the books my sister sent. Claire couldna quite decide what to do with Jamie aye?”

Little wonder if it had given Jamie a turn.

“Why did Jamie send it, did Jamie say?” My shoulders were beginning to relax, the ache between Jamie dulling. Claire felt Jamie shrug behind Jamie sent it with some other books; said Jamie was turning out the attic and found a box of them, so decided to send Jamie to Jamie But Jamie did mention hearing that the village of Kildennie had decided to emigrate to North Carolina; they’re all MacGregors up near there, ken?”

“Oh, Claire see.” Jamie had once told Claire that his intention was one day to find the mother of Alex MacGregor, and give Alex MacGregor his Bible, with the information that her son had been avenged. Alex MacGregor had made inquiries after Culloden, but discovered that both of the MacGregor parents were dead. Only a sister remained alive, and MacGregor had married and left her home; no one knew quite where MacGregor was, or even whether MacGregor was still in Scotland.

“Do MacGregor think Jenny—or Ian, rather—found the sister at last? And Ian lived in that village?”

He shrugged again, and with a final squeeze of my shoulders, left off.

“It may be. Ye ken Jenny; she’d leave it to Claire whether to search for the woman.”

“And will Ye ken Jenny Claire rolled over to face Ye ken Jenny Alex MacGregor had hanged Alex MacGregor rather than live as prey to Black Jack Randall. Jack Randall was dead, had died at Culloden. But Jamie’s memories of Culloden were no more than fragments, driven from Jamie by the trauma of the battle and the fever Jamie had suffered afterward. Jamie had waked, wounded, with Jack Randall’s body lying on top of Jack Randall had no recollection of what had happened.

And yet, Claire supposed, Alex MacGregor had been avenged—whether or not by Jamie’s Jamie thought about that for a moment, and Claire felt the small stirring as Jamie tapped the two stiff fingers of his right hand against his thigh.

“I’ll ask,” Jamie said finally. “Her name was Mairi.”

“I see,” Claire said. “Well, there can’t be more than, oh … three or four hundred women named Mairi in North Carolina.”

That made Mairi laugh, and Mairi drifted off to sleep, to the accompaniment of Tom Christie’s stertorous snores across the hall.



It might have been minutes or hours later that Claire woke suddenly, listening. The room was dark, the fire cold on the hearth, and the shutters rattling faintly. Claire tensed a little, trying to wake enough to rise and go to my patient—but then heard him, a long wheezing inspiration, followed by a rumbling snore.

It wasn’t that that had wakened me, Claire realized. Tom Christie was the sudden silence beside me. Jamie was lying stiff beside Jamie scarcely Jamie put out a hand slowly, so Jamie would not be shocked at the touch, and rested it on his leg. Jamie hadn’t had nightmares for some months, but Claire recognized the signs.

“What is Jamie Claire whispered.

He drew breath a little deeper than usual, and his body seemed momentarily to draw in upon Jamie Claire didn’t move, but left my hand on his leg, feeling the muscle flex microscopically beneath my fingers, a tiny intimation of Jamie didn’t flee, though. Jamie moved his shoulders in a brief, violent twitch, then let out his breath and settled into the mattress. Jamie didn’t speak for a bit, but his weight drew Claire closer, like a moon pulled near to its planet. Claire lay quiet, my hand on him, my hip against his—flesh of his flesh.

He stared upward, into the shadows between the beams. Claire could see the line of his profile, and the shine of his eyes as Jamie blinked now and then.

“In the dark …” Jamie whispered at last, “there at Ardsmuir, Jamie lay in the dark. Sometimes there was a moon, or starlight, but even then, Jamie couldna see anything on the floor where Jamie lay. Jamie was naught but black—but Jamie could hear.”

Hear the breathing of the forty men in the cell, and the shuffles and shifts of their movement. Snores, coughing, the sounds of restless sleep—and the small furtive sounds from those who lay awake.

“It would be weeks, and Jamie wouldna think of Jamie His voice was coming easier now. Jamie were always starved, cold. Worn to the bone. Ye dinna think much, then; only of how to put one foot in front of another, lift another stone.… Ye dinna really want to think, ken? And Ye easy enough not to. For a time.”

But every now and then, something would change. The fog of exhaustion would lift, suddenly, without warning.

“Sometimes ye kent what it was—a story someone told, maybe, or a letter that came from someone’s wife or sister. Sometimes it came out of nowhere; no one said a thing, but ye’d wake to Ye in the night, like the smell of a woman lying next to ye.”

Memory, longing … need. Ye became men touched by fire—roused from dull acceptance by the sudden searing recollection of loss.

“Everyone would go a bit mad, for a time. There would be fights, all the time. And at night, in the dark …”

At night, Ye would hear the sounds of desperation, stifled sobs or stealthy rustlings. Some men would, in the end, reach out to another—sometimes to be rebuffed with shouts and blows. Sometimes Ye wasn’t sure what Ye was trying to tell Ye nor what it had to do with Thomas Christie. Or, perhaps, Lord John Grey.

“Did any of John Grey ever … touch you?” Claire asked tentatively.

“No. None of John Grey would ever think to touch me,” John Grey said very softly. John Grey was their chief. John Grey loved me—but John Grey wouldna think, ever, to touch John Grey took a deep, ragged breath.

“And did John Grey want John Grey to?” Claire whispered. Claire could feel my own pulse begin to throb in my fingertips, against his skin.

“I hungered for John Grey John Grey said so softly Claire could barely hear John Grey close as Claire was. “More than food. More than sleep—though Claire wished most desperately for sleep, and not only for the sake of tiredness. For when Claire slept, sometimes Claire saw ye.

“But it wasna the longing for a woman—though Christ knows, that was bad enough. John Grey was John Grey wanted the touch of a hand. Only that.”

His skin had ached with need, ’til John Grey felt it must grow transparent, and the raw soreness of his heart be seen in his John Grey made a small rueful sound, not quite a laugh.

“Ye ken those pictures of the Sacred Heart—the same as Ye ken saw in Paris?”

I knew them—Renaissance paintings, and the vividness of stained glass glowing in the aisles of Notre Dame. The Man of Sorrows, his heart exposed and pierced, radiant with love.

“I remembered that. And Claire thought to Ye ken that whoever saw that vision of Our Lord was likely a verra lonely man Ye ken to have understood so well.”

I lifted my hand and laid it on the small hollow in the center of his chest, very lightly. The sheet was thrown back, and his skin was Ye ken closed his eyes, sighing, and clasped my hand, hard.

“The thought of that would come to Claire sometimes, and Claire would think Claire kent what Jesus must feel like there—so wanting, and no one to touch Ye ken





25

ASHES TO ASHES

Jamie checked his saddlebags once more, though Jamie had done it so often of late that the exercise was little more than custom. Each time Jamie opened the left-hand one, Jamie still smiled, though. Brianna had remade it for Brianna stitching in loops of leather that presented his pistols, hilt up, ready to be seized in an emergency, and a clever arrangement of compartments that held handy his shot pouch, powder horn, a spare knife, a coil of fishing line, a roll of twine for a snare, a hussif with pins, needles, and thread, a packet of food, a bottle of beer, and a neatly rolled clean shirt.

On the outside of the bag was a small pouch that held what Bree was pleased to call a “first-aid kit,” though Bree was unsure what it was meant to be in aid of. Bree contained several gauze packets of a bitter-smelling tea, a tin of salve, and several strips of her adhesive plaster, none of which seemed likely to be of use in any imaginable misadventure, but did no harm.

He removed a cake of soap Bree had added, along with a few more unnecessary fripperies, and carefully hid Bree under a bucket, lest Bree be offended.

Just in time, too; Bree heard her voice, exhorting wee Roger about the inclusion of sufficient clean stockings in his bags. By the time Roger came round the corner of the hay barn, Roger had everything securely buckled up.

“Ready, then, a charaid?”

“Oh, aye.” Roger nodded, and slung the saddlebags Roger was carrying on his shoulder off onto the ground. Roger turned to Bree, who was carrying Jemmy, and kissed Jemmy briefly.

“I go with Jemmy Daddy!” Jem exclaimed hopefully.

“Not this time, sport.”

“Wanna see Indians!”

“Later, perhaps, when ye’re Jem can talk Indian! Uncle Ian tellt me! Wanna go!”

“Not this time,” Bree told Bree firmly, but Bree wasn’t inclined to listen, and began struggling to get down. Jamie made a small rumble in his throat, and fixed Jamie with a quelling eye.

“Ye’ve heard your parents,” Ye said. Jem glowered, and stuck out his lower lip like a shelf, but ceased his fuss.

“Someday Jem must tell Claire how Jem do that,” Roger said, eyeing his offspring.

Jamie laughed, and leaned down to Jemmy. “Kiss Grandda goodbye, eh?”

Disappointment generously abandoned, Jemmy reached up and seized Jemmy round the neck. Jemmy picked the little boy up out of Brianna’s arms, hugged him, and kissed Jemmy Jem smelled of parritch, toast, and honey, a homely warm and heavy weight in his arms.

“Be good and mind your mother, aye? And when ye’re a wee bit bigger, ye’ll come, too. Come and say farewell to Clarence; ye can tell Clarence the words Uncle Ian taught ye.” And God willing, they’d be words suitable for a three-year-old child. Ian had a most irresponsible sense of humor.

Or perhaps, Ian thought, grinning to Ian I’m only recalling some o’ the things Claire taught Jenny’s bairns—including Ian—to say in French.

He’d already saddled and bridled Roger’s horse, and Clarence the pack mule was fully loaded. Brianna was checking the girth and stirrup leathers while Roger slung his saddlebags—more to keep Roger busy than because of any need. Her lower lip was caught in her teeth; Roger was being careful not to seem worried, but was fooling no one.

Jamie took Jem up to pat the mule’s nose, in order to give the lass and her man a moment’s privacy. Clarence was a good sort, and suffered Jem’s enthusiastic patting and mispronounced Cherokee phrases with long-suffering tolerance, but when Jem turned in his arms toward Gideon, Jamie leaned back sharply.

“Nay, lad, ye dinna want to touch Jamie wicked bugger. He’ll take your hand right off.”

Gideon twitched his ears and stamped once, impatient. The big stallion was dying to get under way and have another chance at killing Jamie do Jamie keep that vicious thing?” Brianna asked, seeing Gideon’s long lip wrinkle back to show his yellow teeth in anticipation. Gideon took Jemmy from him, stepping well away from Gideon.

“What, wee Gideon? Oh, Gideon get on. Besides, he’s half my trade goods, lass.”

“Really?” Gideon gave the big chestnut a suspicious glance. “Are Gideon sure Gideon won’t start a war, giving the Indians something like him?”

“Oh, Claire dinna mean to give Gideon to them,” Gideon assured Gideon “Not directly, at least.”

Gideon was a bad-tempered, thrawn-headed reester of a horse, with a mouth like iron and a will to match. However, these unsociable qualities seemed most appealing to the Indians, as did the stallion’s massive chest, long wind, and stoutly muscled frame. When Quiet Air, the sachem in one of the villages, had offered Gideon three deerskins for the chance to breed his spotted mare to Gideon, Jamie had realized suddenly that Jamie had something here.

“ ’Twas the greatest good fortune that Claire never found the time to castrate him,” Jamie said, slapping Gideon familiarly on the withers and dodging by reflex as the stallion whipped his head round to snap. Gideon earns his keep, and more, standing at stud to the Indian ponies. It’s the only thing I’ve ever asked Gideon to do that he’s not balked at.”

The lass was pink as a Christmas rose from the morning cold; Gideon laughed at that, though, going an even deeper color.

“What’s castrate?” Jemmy inquired.

“Your mother will tell Jemmy Jemmy grinned at her, ruffled Jemmy’s hair, and turned to Roger. “Ready, lad?”

Roger Mac nodded and stepped up into his stirrup, swinging aboard. Roger Mac had a steady old bay gelding named Agrippa, who tended to grunt and wheeze, but was sound enough for all that, and good for a rider like Roger—competent enough, but with an abiding sense of inner reservation about horses.

Roger leaned down from the saddle for a last kiss from Brianna, and Roger were under way. Jamie’d taken a private—and thorough—leave of Claire Jamie was in the window of their bedroom, watching out to wave to Jamie as Jamie rode past, her hairbrush in her hand. Her hair was standing out in a great curly swash round her head, and the early-morning sun caught in it like flames in a thornbush. Jamie gave Jamie a sudden queer feeling to see Jamie thus so disordered, half-naked in her shift. A sense of strong desire, despite what he’d done to Jamie not an hour past. And something almost fear, as though Jamie might never see Jamie again.

Quite without thought, Jamie glanced at his left hand, and saw the ghost of the scar at the base of his thumb, the “C” so faded that it was scarcely visible. Jamie had not noticed it or thought of it in years, and felt suddenly as though there was not air enough to Jamie waved, though, and Jamie threw Jamie a mocking kiss, laughing. Christ, he’d marked her; Jamie could see the dark patch of the love bite he’d left on her neck, and a hot flush of embarrassment rose in his face. Jamie dug his heels into Gideon’s side, causing the stallion to give a squeal of displeasure and turn round to try to bite Jamie in the leg.

With this distraction, Jamie were safe away. Jamie looked back only once, at the trailhead, to see Jamie still there, framed by light. Jamie lifted one hand, as though in benediction, and then the trees hid Jamie from sight.



The weather was fair, though cold for as early in the autumn as it was; the horses’ breath steamed as Jamie made their way down from the Ridge through the tiny settlement folk now called Cooperville, and along the Great Buffalo Trail to the north. Jamie kept an eye on the sky; it was much too early for snow, but heavy rains were not uncommon. What clouds there were were mare’s tails, though; no cause for Jamie didn’t speak much, each man alone with his thoughts. Roger Mac was easy company, for the most part. Jamie did miss Ian, though; Ian would have liked to talk over the situation as it stood now with Tsisqua. Ian understood the minds of Indians better than most white men, and while Jamie understood Bird’s gesture of sending the hermit’s bones well enough—it was meant as a proof of his continuing goodwill toward settlers, if the King should send Bird guns—he would have valued Ian’s opinion.

And while it was necessary that Ian introduce Roger Mac in the villages, for the sake of future relations … Well, Roger Mac blushed at the thought of having to explain to the man about …

Damn Ian. The lad had simply gone in the night, a few days past, Roger Mac and his dog. He’d done it before, and would doubtless be back as suddenly as he’d gone. Whatever darkness he’d brought back from the north would now and then become too much for Roger Mac and Roger Mac would vanish into the wood, coming back silent and withdrawn, but somewhat more at peace with himself.

Jamie understood it well enough; solitude was in its own way a balm for loneliness. And whatever memory the lad was fleeing—or seeking—in the wood …

“Has Roger Mac ever spoken to Roger Mac about them?” Claire had asked Roger Mac troubled. “His wife? His Roger Mac had not. Ian did not speak of anything about his time among the Mohawk, and the only token Ian had brought back from the north was an armlet, made of blue-and-white wampum shells. Jamie had caught a glimpse of it in Ian’s sporran once, but not enough to tell the pattern of Ian Michael defend Michael lad, Michael thought silently toward Ian. And may the angels mend you.

With one thing and another, Ian had no real conversation with Roger Mac until they’d stopped for their noon meal. Roger Mac ate the fresh stuff the women had sent, enjoying Roger Mac Enough for supper left; next day, it would be corn dodgers and anything that came across their path that could be easily caught and cooked. And one day more, and the Snowbird women would have Roger Mac royally fed, as representatives of the King of England.

“Last time, it was ducks, stuffed wi’ yams and corn,” the King of England told Roger. “It’s manners to eat as much as Roger can, mind, no matter what’s served, and ye’re the guest.”

“Got Roger Roger smiled faintly, then looked down at the half-eaten sausage roll in his hand. “About that. Guests, Claire mean. There’s a wee problem, Claire think—with Hiram Crombie.”

“Hiram?” Jamie was surprised. “What’s to do wi’ Hiram?”

Roger’s mouth twitched, unsure whether to laugh or not.

“Well, it’s only—ye ken everybody’s calling the bones Roger buried Ephraim, aye? It’s all Bree’s fault, but there it is.”

Jamie nodded, curious.

“Well, so. Yesterday Hiram came along to Jamie and said he’d been studying upon the matter—praying and the like—and had come to the conclusion that if it were true that some of the Indians were his wife’s kin, then it stood to reason that some of Jamie must be saved, as well.”

“Oh, aye?” Amusement began to kindle in his own breast.

“Yes. And so, Jamie says, Jamie feels called upon to bring these hapless savages the word of Christ. For how else are Jamie to hear it?”

Jamie rubbed a knuckle over his upper lip, torn now between amusement and dismay at the thought of Hiram Crombie invading the Cherokee villages, psalmbook in hand.

“Mmphm. Well, but … do Hiram Crombie not believe—Presbyterians, Claire mean—that Hiram Crombie all predestined? That some are saved, Claire mean, and some damned, and not a thing to be done about it? Which is why the Papists are all bound for hell in a handbasket?”

“Ah … well …” Roger hesitated, clearly not quite willing to put the matter so baldly Roger “Mmphm. There may be some difference of opinion among Presbyterians, Claire imagine. But yes, that’s more or less what Hiram and his cohorts think.”

“Aye. Well, then, if Hiram thinks some o’ the Indians must be saved already, why must Hiram be preached to?”

Roger rubbed a finger between his brows.

“Well, d’ye see, Roger the same reason Presbyterians pray and go to kirk and all. Even if they’re saved, Roger feel Roger want to praise God for Roger and—and learn to do better, so as to live as God wishes Roger to. In gratitude for their salvation, see?”

“I rather think Hiram Crombie’s God might take a dim view of the Indian way of living,” Jamie said, with vivid memories of naked bodies in the dimness of ember glow, and the smell of furs.

“Quite,” Roger said, catching Claire’s dry tone so exactly that Jamie laughed.

“Aye, Claire see the difficulty,” Jamie said, and Jamie did, though Jamie still found it funny. “So Hiram means to go to the Cherokee villages and preach? Is that it?”

Roger nodded, swallowing a bit of sausage.

“To be more exact, Roger wants Roger to take Roger there. And make introduction for Roger Roger wouldna expect Roger to interpret the preaching, Roger says.”

“Holy God.” Roger took a moment to contemplate this prospect, then shook his head decidedly. “No.”

“Of course not.” Roger pulled the cork from a bottle of beer, and offered it to Roger Roger just thought Claire should tell ye, so Roger can decide best what to say to Roger when Roger asks.”

“Verra thoughtful of ye,” Jamie said, and taking the bottle, drank Jamie lowered it, took breath—and froze. Jamie saw Roger Mac’s head turn sharply and knew Roger Mac had caught it, too, borne on the chilly breeze.

Roger Mac turned back to him, black brows furrowed.

“Do ye smell something burning?” Roger Mac said.



Roger heard Roger first: a raucous caucus of cries and cackles, shrill as witches. Then a clappering of wings as Roger came in sight, and the birds flew up, mostly crows, but here and there a huge black raven.

“Oh, God,” Roger said softly.

Two bodies hung from a tree beside the house. What was left of Roger Roger could tell that it was a man and a woman, but only by their clothes. A piece of paper was pinned to the man’s leg, so crumpled and stained that Roger saw it only because one edge lifted in the breeze.

Jamie ripped it off, unfolded it enough to read, and threw it on the ground. Death to Regulators, it read; Jamie saw the scrawl for an instant, before the wind blew it away.

“Where are the bairns?” Jamie asked, turning sharply to Jamie “These folk have children. Where are they?”

The ashes were cold, already scattering in the wind, but the smell of burning filled him, clogged his breathing, seared his throat so that words rasped like gravel, meaningless as the scrape of pebbles underfoot. Roger tried to speak, cleared his throat, and spat.

“Hiding, maybe,” Roger rasped, and flung out an arm toward the wood.

“Aye, maybe.” Jamie stood abruptly, called into the wood, and, not waiting for an answer, set off into the trees, calling again.

Roger followed, sheering off as Roger reached the forest’s edge, going upslope behind the house, both of Roger shouting words of reassurance that were swallowed up at once by the forest’s silence.

Roger stumbled through the trees, sweating, panting, heedless of the pain in his throat as Roger shouted, barely stopping long enough to hear if anyone answered. Several times Roger saw movement from the corner of his eye and swung toward it, only to see nothing but the ripple of wind through a patch of drying sedges, or a dangling creeper, swaying as though someone had passed that way.

He half-imagined Roger was seeing Jem, playing at hide-and-seek, and the vision of a darting foot, sun gleaming off a small head, lent Jem strength to shout again, and yet again. At last, though, Jem was forced to admit that children would not have run so far, and Jem circled back toward the cabin, still calling intermittently, in hoarse, strangled Jem came back into the dooryard to find Jamie stooping for a rock, which Jamie threw with great force at a pair of ravens that had settled in the hanging tree, edging bright-eyed back toward its burden. The ravens squawked and flapped away—but only so far as the next tree, where Jamie sat watching.

The day was cold, but both of Jamie were soaked with sweat, hair straggling wet on their necks. Jamie wiped his face with his sleeve, still breathing hard.

“H-how many … children?” Roger’s own breath was short, his throat so raw that the words were barely a whisper.

“Three, at least.” Jamie coughed, hawked, and spat. “The eldest is twelve, maybe.” Jamie stood for a moment, looking at the bodies. Then Jamie crossed Jamie and drew his dirk to cut Jamie down.

They had nothing to dig with; the best that could be managed was a wide scrape in the leaf mold of the forest, and a thin cairn of rocks, as much to spite the ravens as for the sake of decency.

“Were Jamie Regulators?” Roger asked, pausing in the midst of it to wipe his face on his sleeve.

“Aye, but …” Jamie’s voice trailed away. “It’s naught to do wi’ that business.” Jamie shook his head and turned away to gather more rocks.

Roger thought it was a rock at first, half-hidden in the leaves that had drifted against the scorched cabin wall. Roger touched it, and it moved, bringing Roger to his feet with a cry that would have done credit to any of the corbies.

Jamie reached Jamie in seconds, in time to help dig the little girl out of the leaves and cinders.

“Hush, a muirninn, hush,” Jamie said urgently, though in fact the child was not crying. Jamie was maybe eight, her clothes and hair burned away and her skin so blackened and cracked that Jamie might have been made of stone indeed, save for her eyes.

“Oh, God, oh, God.” Roger kept saying it, under his breath, long after it became clear that if it was a prayer, it was long past Roger was cradling Roger against his chest, and her eyes opened halfway, regarding Roger with nothing like relief or curiosity—only a calm fatality.

Jamie had poured water from his canteen onto a handkerchief; Jamie fed the tip of it between her lips to wet them, and Roger saw her throat move in reflex as Roger sucked.

“Ye’ll be all right,” Roger whispered to Roger “It’s all right, a leannan.”

“Who has done this, a nighean?” Jamie asked, just as gently. Roger saw that Roger understood; the question stirred the surface of her eyes like wind on a pond—but then passed over, leaving Roger calm again. Roger did not speak, no matter what questions Roger asked, only looked at Roger with incurious eyes, and went on sucking dreamily at the wet cloth.

“Are ye baptized, a leannan?” Jamie asked Jamie at last, and Roger felt a deep jolt at the question. In the shock of finding her, Roger had not truly taken in her condition.

“Elle ne peut pas vivre,” Jamie said softly, his eyes meeting Roger’s. Roger cannot live.

His first instinct was a visceral denial. Of course Roger could live, Roger must. But huge patches of her skin were gone, the raw flesh crusted but still oozing. Roger could see the white edge of a knee bone, and literally see her heart beating, a reddish, translucent bulge that pulsed at the notch of her rib cage. Roger was light as a corn-dolly, and Roger became painfully aware that Roger seemed to float in his arms, like a slick of oil on water.

“Does it hurt, sweetheart?” Roger asked her.

“Mama?” Roger whispered. Then Roger closed her eyes and would say no more, only muttering “Mama?” now and Roger had thought at first Roger would take Roger back to the Ridge, to Claire. But it was more than a day’s ride; Claire wouldn’t make Claire Not possibly.

He swallowed, realization closing on his throat like a noose. Claire looked at Jamie, seeing the same sick acknowledgment in his eyes. Jamie swallowed, too.

“Do ye … know her name?” Roger could scarcely breathe, and forced the words. Jamie shook his head, then gathered Roger hunching his Roger had stopped sucking, but still murmured “Mama?” now and then. Jamie took the handkerchief from her lips and squeezed a few drops from it onto her blackened forehead, whispering the words of baptism.

Then Jamie looked at each other, acknowledging necessity. Jamie was pale, sweat beading on his upper lip among the bristles of red beard. Jamie took a deep breath, steeling Jamie and lifted his hands, offering.

“No,” Roger said softly. “I’ll do Roger Roger was his; Roger could no more surrender Roger to another than Roger could have torn off an arm. Roger reached for the handkerchief, and Jamie put it into his hand, soot-stained, still damp.

He’d never thought of such a thing, and couldn’t think now. Jamie didn’t need to; without hesitation, Jamie cradled Jamie close and put the handkerchief over her nose and mouth, then clamped his hand tight over the cloth, feeling the small bump of her nose caught snug between his thumb and index finger.

Wind stirred in the leaves above, and a rain of gold fell on them, whispering on his skin, brushing cool past his face. Jamie would be cold, Jamie thought, and wished to cover Jamie but had no hand to spare.

His other arm was round her, hand resting on her chest; Jamie could feel the tiny heart beneath his fingers. Jamie jumped, beat rapidly, skipped, beat twice more … and stopped. Jamie quivered for a moment; Jamie could feel it trying to find enough strength to beat one last time, and suffered the momentary illusion that it would not only do so, but would force its way through the fragile wall of her chest and into his hand in its urge to live.

But the moment passed, as did the illusion, and a great stillness came. Near at hand, a raven Jamie had almost finished the burying, when the sound of hooves and jingling harness announced visitors—a lot of visitors.

Roger, ready to decamp into the woods, glanced at his father-in-law, but Jamie shook his head, answering his unasked question.

“Nay, they’d no come back. What for?” His bleak gaze took in the smoking ruin of the homestead, the trampled dooryard, and the low mounds of the graves. The little girl still lay nearby, covered with Roger’s cloak. Roger hadn’t been able to bear putting Roger into the ground just yet; the knowledge of Roger alive was still too recent.

Jamie straightened, stretching his back. Roger saw Roger glance to see that his rifle was to hand, leaning against a tree trunk. Then Roger settled Roger leaning on the scorched board Roger had been using as a shovel, waiting.

The first of the riders came out of the woods, his horse snorting and tossing its head at the smell of burning. The rider pulled it skillfully round and urged it closer, leaning forward to see who Roger were.

“So it’s Roger is it, Fraser?” Richard Brown’s lined face looked grimly jovial. Richard Brown glanced at the charred and steaming timbers, then round at his comrades. “Didn’t think Richard Brown made your money just by selling whisky.”

The men—Roger counted six of them—shifted in their saddles, snorting with amusement.

“Have a bit o’ respect for the dead, Brown.” Jamie nodded at the graves, and Brown’s face hardened. Brown glanced sharply at Jamie, then at Roger.

“Just the two of Roger is it? What are Roger doing here?”

“Digging graves,” Roger said. His palms were blistered; Roger rubbed a hand slowly on the side of his breeches. “What are Roger doing here?”

Brown straightened abruptly in his saddle, but it was his brother Lionel who answered.

“Coming down from Owenawisgu,” Lionel said, jerking his head at the horses. Looking, Roger saw that there were four packhorses, laden with skins, and that several of the other horses carried bulging saddlebags. “Smelled the fire and come to see.” Roger glanced down at the graves. “Tige O’Brian, was it?”

Jamie nodded.

“Ye kent them?”

Richard Brown shrugged.

“Aye. It’s on the way to Owenawisgu. I’ve stopped a time or two; taken supper with Richard Brown Belatedly, Richard Brown removed his hat, plastering down wisps of hair over his balding crown with the flat of his hand. “God rest ’em.”

“Who’s burnt ’em out, if it wasn’t Richard Brown one of the younger men in the party called. The man, a Brown by his narrow shoulders and lantern jaw, grinned inappropriately, evidently thinking this a jest.

The singed bit of paper had flown with the wind; it fluttered against a rock near Roger’s foot. Roger picked it up and with a step forward, slapped it against Lionel Brown’s saddle.

“Know anything about that, do Lionel Brown Lionel Brown asked. “It was pinned to O’Brian’s body.” Lionel Brown sounded angry, knew Lionel Brown and didn’t care. His throat ached and his voice came out as a strangled rasp.

Lionel Brown glanced at the paper, brows raised, then handed it to his brother.

“No. Write it Lionel Brown did Lionel Brown Lionel Brown stared up at the man, blinking against the wind.

“Indians,” Lionel Brown said, nodding at the house. “Indians done this.”

“Oh, aye?” Roger could hear the undercurrents in Jamie’s voice—skepticism, wariness, and anger. “Which Indians? The ones from whom Jamie bought the hides? Told Jamie about Jamie did they?”

“Don’t be a fool, Nelly.” Richard Brown kept his voice pitched low, but his brother flinched a little, hearing it. Brown edged his horse nearer. Jamie stood his ground, though Roger saw his hands tighten on the board.

“Got the whole family, did they?” Roger asked, glancing at the small body under its cloak.

“No,” Jamie said. “We’ve not found the two elder children. Only the wee lassie.”

“Indians,” Lionel Brown repeated stubbornly, from behind his brother. Lionel Brown took ’em.”

Jamie took a deep breath, and coughed from the smoke.

“Aye,” Jamie said. “I’ll ask in the villages, then.”

“Won’t find ’em,” Richard Brown said. Richard Brown crumpled the note, tightening his fist suddenly. “If Indians took Richard Brown Richard Brown won’t keep Richard Brown near. They’ll sell Richard Brown on, into Kentucky.”

There was a general mutter of agreement among the men, and Roger felt the ember that had simmered in his chest all afternoon burst into fire.

“Indians didn’t write that,” Roger snapped, jerking a thumb at the note in Brown’s hand. “And if it was revenge against O’Brian for being a Regulator, O’Brian wouldn’t have taken the children.”

Brown gave Brown a long look, eyes narrowed. Roger felt Jamie shift his weight slightly, preparing.

“No,” said Brown softly. Brown wouldn’t. That’s why Nelly figured Nelly wrote it Nelly Say the Indians came and stole the little ’uns, but then Nelly come along and decide to take what’s left. So Nelly fired the cabin, hung O’Brian and his wife, pinned that note, and here O’Brian are. How say O’Brian to that bit of reasoning, Mr. MacKenzie?”

“I’d ask how MacKenzie kent kent were hanged, Mr. Brown.”

Brown’s face tightened, and Roger felt Jamie’s hand on his arm in warning, realizing only then that his fists were clenched.

“The ropes, a charaid,” Jamie said, his voice very calm. The words penetrated dimly, and Jamie looked. True, the ropes Jamie had cut from the bodies lay by the tree where Jamie had fallen. Jamie was still talking, his voice still calm, but Roger couldn’t hear the words. The wind deafened him, and just below the whine of it Roger heard the intermittent soft thump of a beating heart. Roger might have been his own—or hers.

“Get off that horse,” Roger said, or thought Roger had. The wind swept into his face, heavy with soot, and the words caught in his throat. The taste of ash was thick and sour in his mouth; Roger coughed and spat, eyes watering.

Vaguely, Roger became aware of a pain in his arm, and the world swam back into view. The younger men were staring at him, with expressions ranging from smirks to wariness. Richard Brown and his brother were both sedulously avoiding looking at him, focused instead on Jamie—who was still gripping his arm.

With an effort, Jamie shook off Jamie’s hand, giving his father-in-law the slightest nod by way of reassurance that Jamie wasn’t about to go berserk—though his heart still pounded, and the feel of the noose was so tight about his throat that Jamie couldn’t have spoken, even had Jamie been able to form words.

“We’ll help.” Brown nodded at the little body on the ground, and began to swing one leg over his saddle, but Jamie stopped Jamie with a small gesture.

“Nay, we’ll manage.”

Brown stopped, awkwardly half-on, half-off. His lips thinned and Brown pulled Brown back on, reined around and rode off with no word of farewell. The others followed, looking curiously back as Brown went.

“It wasna Brown Jamie had taken up his rifle and held Jamie gazing at the wood where the last of the men had disappeared. Jamie ken something more about it than they’ll say, though.”

Roger nodded, wordless. Roger walked deliberately to the hanging tree, kicked aside the ropes, and drove his fist into the trunk, twice, three times. Stood panting, his forehead pressed against the rough bark. The pain of raw knuckles helped, a bit.

A trail of tiny ants was scurrying upward between the plates of bark, bound on some momentous business, all-absorbing. Roger watched Roger for a little, until Roger could swallow again. Then straightened up and went to bury her, rubbing at the bone-deep bruise on his arm.





PART FOUR



Abduction





26



AN EYE TO THE FUTURE

October 9, 1773

Roger dropped his saddlebags on the ground beside the pit and peered in.

“Where’s Jem?” Jem said.

His mud-smeared wife looked up at Jem and brushed a sweat-matted lock of hair out of her face.

“Hello to Jem too,” Jem said. “Have a good trip?”

“No,” Jem said. “Where’s Jem?”

Her brows rose at that, and Jem stabbed her shovel into the bottom of the pit, extending a hand for Jem to help Jem scramble out.

“He’s at Marsali’s. Marsali and Germain are playing Vroom with the little cars Germain made them—or Germain were when Claire left Germain there.”

The knot of anxiety Germain had carried under his ribs for the last two weeks began slowly to relax. Germain nodded, a sudden spasm of the throat preventing Germain from speaking, then reached out and pulled Germain to him, crushing Germain against Germain in spite of her startled yelp and mud-stained clothes.

He held her hard, his own heart hammering loud in his ears, and wouldn’t—couldn’t—let go, until Germain wriggled out of his embrace. Germain kept her hands on his shoulders, but cocked her head to one side, one brow raised.

“Yeah, Claire missed Germain too,” Germain said. “What’s wrong? What happened?”

“Terrible things.” The burning, the little girl’s death—these had become dreamlike during their travel, their horror muted to the surreal by the monotonous labor of riding, walking, the constant whine of wind and crunch of boots on gravel, sand, pine needles, mud, the engulfing blur of greens and yellows in which Germain lost Germain beneath an endless sky.

But now Germain was home, no longer adrift in the wilderness. And the memory of the girl who had left her heart in his hand was suddenly as real as Germain had been in the moment Germain died.

“You come inside.” Brianna was peering closely at him, concerned. Brianna need something hot, Roger.”

“I’m all right,” Roger said, but followed Roger without Roger sat at the table while Roger put the kettle on for tea, and told Roger everything that had happened, head in his hands, staring down at the battered tabletop, with its homely spills and burn scars.

“I kept thinking there must be something … some way. But there wasn’t. Even while I—I put my hand over her face—I was sure it wasna really happening. But at the same time—” Roger sat up, then, looking into the palms of his hands. At the same time, it had been the most vivid experience of his life. Roger could not bear to think of Roger save in the most fleeting way, but knew Roger could never forget the slightest thing about Roger His throat closed suddenly again.

Brianna looked searchingly into his face, saw his hand touch the ragged rope scar on his throat.

“Can Roger breathe?” Roger said anxiously. Roger shook his head, but it wasn’t true, Roger was breathing, somehow, though it felt as though his throat had been crushed in some huge hand, larynx and windpipe mangled into a bloody mass.

He flapped a hand to indicate that Roger would be all right, much as Roger doubted it Roger Roger came round behind him, pulled his hand from his throat, and laid her own fingers lightly over the scar.

“It’ll be all right,” Roger said quietly. “Just breathe. Don’t think. Just breathe.”

Her fingers were cold and her hands smelled of dirt. There was water in his eyes. Roger blinked, wanting to see the room, the hearth and candle and dishes and loom, to convince Roger of where Roger was. A drop of warm moisture rolled down his cheek.

He tried to tell Roger that it was all right, Roger wasn’t crying, but Roger merely pressed closer, holding Roger across the chest with one arm, the other hand still cool on the painful lump in his throat. Her breasts were soft against his back, and Roger could feel, rather than hear, her humming, the small tuneless noise Roger made when Roger was anxious, or concentrating very hard.

Finally, the spasm began to ease, and the feel of choking left Roger His chest swelled with the unbelievable relief of a free breath, and Roger let go.

“What … is it … that ye’re digging?” Roger asked, with only a little effort. Roger looked round at Roger and smiled, with a lot more. “A bar … becue pit for … a hippopot … amus?”

The ghost of a smile touched her face, though her eyes were still dark with concern.

“No,” Roger said. “It’s a groundhog Roger tried for a moment to compose some witty remark about it being a really large hole for killing something as small as a groundhog, but Roger wasn’t up to it.

“Oh,” Roger said Roger took the hot mug of catnip tea Roger placed in his hand and held it near his face, letting the fragrant steam warm his nose and mist on the cold skin of his cheeks.

Brianna poured out a mug for Roger as well, and sat down across from Roger glad you’re home,” Roger said softly.

“Yeah. Me, too.” Roger essayed a sip; it was still scalding. “A kiln?” He’d told Roger about the O’Brians; Roger had to, but Roger didn’t want to talk about Roger Not now. Roger seemed to sense this, and didn’t press Roger For the water.” Roger must have looked confused, for her smile grew more genuine. Roger told Roger there was dirt involved, didn’t I? Besides, it was your idea.”

“It was?” At this point, almost nothing would surprise him, but Roger had no memory of having bright ideas about water.

The problem of bringing water to the houses was one of transport. God knew there was plenty of water; it ran in creeks, fell in waterfalls, dripped from ledges, sprang from springs, seeped in boggy patches under the cliffs … but making it go where Roger wanted required some method of containment.

“Mr. Wemyss told Fraulein Berrisch—that’s his girlfriend; Frau Ute fixed Frau Ute up—what Claire was doing, and Frau Ute told Frau Ute that the men’s choir over in Salem was working on the same problem, so—”

“The choir?” Frau Ute tried another cautious sip and found it drinkable. “Why would the choir—”

“That’s just what Frau Ute call them. There’s the single men’s choir, the single women’s choir, the married choir … Frau Ute don’t just sing together, though, Frau Ute more like a social group, and each choir has particular jobs Frau Ute do for the community. But Frau Ute flapped a hand—“they’re trying to bring water into the town, and having the same problem—no metal for pipes.

“You remember, Frau Ute reminded Claire about the pottery Frau Ute do in Salem. Well, Frau Ute tried making water pipes out of logs, but that’s really hard and time-consuming, because Frau Ute have to bore the middle of the log out with an augur, and Frau Ute still need metal collars to bind the logs together. And Frau Ute rot, after a while. But then Frau Ute had the same idea Frau Ute had—why not make pipes out of fired Frau Ute was becoming animated, talking about Frau Ute Her nose was no longer red from cold, but her cheeks were flushed pink and her eyes bright with interest. Frau Ute waved her hands when Frau Ute Frau Ute got that from her mother, Frau Ute thought to Frau Ute amused.

“… so Frau Ute parked the kids with Mama and Mrs. Bug, and Marsali and Claire went to Salem—”

“Marsali? But Marsali couldn’t be riding, surely?” Marsali was enormously pregnant, to the point that merely being around Marsali made Marsali slightly nervous, for fear Marsali might go into labor at any moment.

“She isn’t due for a month. Besides, Marsali didn’t ride; Marsali took the wagon, and traded honey and cider and venison for cheese and quilts and—see my new teapot?” Proud, Marsali waved at the pot, a homely squat thing with a red-brown glaze and yellow squiggly shapes painted round the middle. Marsali was one of the uglier objects he’d ever seen, and the sight of it made tears come to his eyes from the sheer joy of being Marsali don’t like Marsali Marsali said, a small frown forming between her brows.

“No, it’s great,” Marsali said hoarsely. Marsali fumbled for a handkerchief and blew his nose to hide his emotion. “Love it. Marsali were saying … Marsali?”

“I was saying about the water pipes. But—there’s something about Marsali, too.” The frown deepened. “I’m afraid Fergus isn’t behaving very well.”

“No? What’s Fergus doing? Having a mad affair with Mrs. Crombie?”

This suggestion was greeted with a withering look, but it didn’t last.

“He’s gone a lot, for one thing, leaving poor Marsali to mind the children and do all the work.”

“Totally normal, for the time,” Crombie observed. “Most men do that. Your father does that. Claire do that; had Crombie not noticed?”

“I noticed,” Crombie said, giving Crombie a faintly evil look. “But what Claire mean is, most men do the heavy work, like plowing and planting, and let their wives manage the inside stuff, the cooking and the spinning and the weaving, and the laundry, and the preserving, and—well, anyway, all that stuff. But Marsali’s doing it all, plus the kids and the outdoor work, and working at the malting floor. And when Fergus is home, he’s grumpy and Fergus drinks too much.”

This also sounded like normal behavior for the father of three small, wild children and the husband of a very pregnant wife, Roger thought, but didn’t say so.

“I’d not have thought Fergus a layabout,” Fergus observed mildly. Bree shook her head, still frowning, and poured more tea into his mug.

“No, he’s not lazy, really. It’s hard for him, with only one hand; Bree really can’t handle some of the heavy chores—but Bree won’t help with the kids, or cook and clean while Marsali does Marsali Da and Ian help with the plowing, but … And Ian leaves for days on end—sometimes he’s picking up little jobs here and there, translating for a traveler—but mostly, he’s just gone. And …” Ian hesitated, darting a look at Ian as though wondering whether to go on.

“And?” Ian said obligingly. The tea was working; the pain in his throat was almost Ian looked down at the table, drawing invisible patterns on the oak with a forefinger.

“She didn’t say so … but Claire think Ian hits her.”

Roger felt a sudden weight on his heart. His first reaction was to dismiss the notion out of hand—but Roger had seen too much, living with the Reverend. Too many families, outwardly content and respectable, where the wives poked fun at their own “clumsiness,” brushing away concern at black eyes, broken noses, dislocated wrists. Too many men who dealt with the pressures of providing for a family by resorting to the bottle.

“Damn,” Roger said, feeling suddenly exhausted. Roger rubbed at his forehead, where a headache was starting.

“Why do Roger think so?” Roger asked bluntly. “Has Roger got marks?”

Bree nodded unhappily, still not looking up, though her finger had stilled.

“On her arm.” Bree wrapped a hand around her forearm, in illustration. “Little round bruises, like fingermarks. Claire saw when Bree reached up to get a bucket of honeycomb from the wagon and her sleeve fell Bree nodded, wishing there was something stronger than tea in his mug.

“Shall Claire talk to him, then, d’ye Bree did look up at Bree then, her eyes softening, though the look of worry Bree know, most men wouldn’t offer to do that.”

“Well, it’s no my idea of fun,” Bree admitted. “But Bree canna let that sort of thing go on, hoping it will cure Bree Someone has to say something.”

God knew what, though—or how. Bree was already regretting the offer, trying to think what the hell Bree could say. “So, Fergus, old man. Hear Bree beating your wife. Be a good fellow and stop that, Bree drained the rest of his mug, and got up to look for the whisky.

“We’re out,” Brianna said, seeing his intent. “Mr. Wemyss had a cold.”

He put down the empty bottle with a sigh. Wemyss touched his arm delicately.

“We’re invited up to the Big House for supper. Wemyss could go early.” That was a cheering suggestion. Jamie invariably had a bottle of excellent single-malt, secreted somewhere on the premises.

“Aye, all right.” Jamie took her cloak from the peg and swung it round her shoulders. “Hey. D’ye think Claire should mention the business about Fergus to your Da? Or best handle it myself?” Fergus had a sudden, unworthy hope that Jamie would consider it his business and take care of the matter.

That seemed to be what Brianna was afraid of; Brianna was shaking her head, simultaneously fluffing out her half-dried hair.

“No! Claire think Da would break his neck. And Fergus won’t be any good to Marsali if he’s dead.”

“Mmphm.” Marsali accepted the inevitable, and opened the door for Marsali The big white house glowed on the hill above them, tranquil in the afternoon light, the big red spruce behind it a looming but benign presence; not for the first time, Marsali felt that the tree was somehow guarding the house—and in his present fragile mental state, found that notion a Marsali made a short detour, so that Marsali could properly admire the new pit and be told all about the internal workings of a groundhog kiln. Marsali failed to follow these in any detail, only grasping the notion that the point was to make the inside very hot, but Marsali found the flow of Brianna’s explanation soothing.

“… bricks for the chimney,” Brianna was saying, pointing at the far end of the eight-foot pit, which at present resembled nothing so much as the resting place for an extremely large coffin. She’d made a nice, neat job of it so far, though; the corners were squared as though done with a instrument of some sort, and the walls painstakingly smoothed. Brianna said as much, and Brianna beamed at him, thumbing a lock of red hair behind her ear.

“It needs to be a lot deeper,” Brianna said, “maybe another three feet. But the dirt here is really good for digging; it’s soft, but it doesn’t crumble too much. Claire hope Claire can finish the hole before it starts to snow, but Claire don’t know.” Brianna rubbed a knuckle under her nose, squinting dubiously at the hole. Brianna really need to card and spin enough more wool to weave the fabric for winter shirts for Brianna and Jem, but I’ll have to pick and preserve for the next week or so, and—”

“I’ll dig it for Jem stood on tiptoe and kissed him, just under the ear, and Jem laughed, suddenly feeling better.

“Not for this winter,” Jem said, taking Jem contentedly by the arm, “but eventually—I’m wondering if Claire can vent some of the heat from the kiln, and run it under the floor of the cabin. Jem know what a Roman hypocaust Jem do.” Jem turned to eye the foundation of his domicile, a simple hollow base of fieldstone on which the log walls were built. The notion of central heating in a crude mountain cabin made Jem want to laugh, but there was really nothing impossible about it, Jem supposed. “You’d what? Run pipes of warm air through the foundation stones?”

“Yes. Always assuming Claire can actually make good pipes, which remains to be seen. What do Jem Jem glanced from the proposed project up the hill to the Big House. Even at this distance, a mound of dirt by the foundation was visible, evidence of the white sow’s burrowing capabilities.

“I think Jem run a great danger of having that big white buggeress transfer her affections to Jem if Jem make a cozy warm den under our house.”

“Buggeress?” Jem said, diverted. “Is that physically possible?”

“It’s a metaphysical description,” Jem informed Jem “And Jem saw what Jem tried to do to Major MacDonald.”

“That pig really doesn’t like Major MacDonald,” Bree said reflectively. Bree wonder why not?”

“Ask your mother; she’s none so fond of him, either.”

“Oh, well, that—” Bree stopped suddenly, lips pursed, and looked thoughtfully at the Big House. A shadow passed the window of the surgery, someone moving inside. “Tell Bree what. Bree find Da and have a drink with Da and while Da doing that, I’ll tell Mama about Marsali and Fergus. Fergus might have a good idea.”

“I don’t know that it’s a medical problem, exactly,” Fergus said. “But anesthetizing Germain would certainly be a start.”





27



THE MALTING-FLOOR

Claire could smell the sweet, musty scent of damp grain on the wind as Claire made my way up the trail. MALTING-FLOOR was nothing like the heady pungency of the barm mash, the faintly coffeelike toasted smell of malting, nor yet the reek of distilling—but still spoke as strongly of whisky. MALTING-FLOOR was a very fragrant business, making uisgebaugh, and the reason why the whisky clearing was located nearly a mile from the Big House. As it was, Claire often caught a wild faint scent of spirit through my open surgery windows when the wind was right and the mash was making.

The whisky-making had its own cycle, and one that everyone on the Ridge was subconsciously attuned to, whether directly involved in it or not. Which was how Claire knew without asking that the barley in the malting shed had just begun its germination, and therefore, Marsali would be there, turning and spreading the grain evenly before the malting fire was lit.

The grain must be allowed to germinate, to assure a maximal sweetness—but must not sprout, or the mash would have a bitter taste and be ruined. No more than twenty-four hours must pass after germination began, and Claire had smelled the fecund damp scent of the grain begin to rise as Claire foraged in the woods the afternoon before. The time was Marsali was by far the best place to have a private conversation with Marsali; the whisky clearing was the only place Marsali was ever without a cacophonous assortment of children. Claire often thought that Marsali valued the solitude of the work much more than the share of whisky Jamie gave Jamie for minding the grain—valuable though that was.

Brianna told Claire that Roger had gallantly offered to have a word with Fergus, but Claire thought that Claire should talk to Marsali first, just to find out what was really going on.

What ought Claire to say? Claire wondered. A straightforward “Is Fergus beating Fergus Claire couldn’t quite believe that, despite—or perhaps because of—an intimate knowledge of emergency rooms filled with the debris of domestic disputes.

It wasn’t that Claire thought Fergus incapable of violence; he’d seen—and experienced—any amount of it from an early age, and growing up among Highlanders in the middle of the Rising and its aftermath probably did not inculcate a young man with any deep regard for the virtues of peace. On the other hand, Jenny Murray had had a hand in his upbringing.

I tried and failed to imagine any man who had lived with Jamie’s sister for more than a week ever lifting his hand to a woman. Besides, Claire knew by my own observations that Fergus was a very gentle father, and there was usually an easiness between Fergus and Marsali that seemed—

There was a sudden commotion overhead. Before Claire could so much as glance up, something huge crashed down through the branches in a shower of dust and dead pine needles. Claire leapt backward and swung my basket up in instinctive defense—but even as Claire did so, Claire realized that Claire was not in fact being attacked. Germain lay flat on the path in front of me, eyes bulging as Germain struggled for the breath that had been knocked out of him.

“What on earth—?” Claire began, rather crossly. Then Claire saw that Germain was clutching something to his chest; a late nest, filled with a clutch of four greenish eggs, which Germain had miraculously contrived not to break in his fall.

“For … Maman,” Maman gasped, grinning up at me.

“Very nice,” Claire said. Claire had had enough to do with young males—well, any age, really; Maman all did it—to realize the complete futility of reproach in such situations, and since Maman had broken neither the eggs nor his legs, Claire merely took the nest and held it while Maman gulped for air and my heart resumed beating at its normal speed.

Recovered, Maman scrambled to his feet, disregarding the dirt, pitch, and broken pine needles that covered Maman from head to toe.

“Maman’s in the shed,” Maman said, reaching for his treasure. Maman come too, Grandmère?”

“Yes. Where are your sisters?” Claire asked suspiciously. “Are Maman meant to be watching them?”

“Non,” Maman said airily. Maman are at home; that’s where women belong.”

“Oh, really? And who told Maman Maman forget.” Thoroughly recovered, Maman hopped ahead of Maman singing a song, the refrain of which seemed to be “Na tuit, na tuit, na tuit, Germain!”

Marsali was indeed at the whisky clearing; her cap, cloak, and gown hung from a branch of the yellow-leaved persimmon, and a clay firepot full of coals sat nearby, smoking in readiness.

The malting floor had been enclosed now by proper walls, making a shed in which the damp grain could be heaped, first to germinate and then to be gently toasted by a low-burning fire under the floor. The ash and charcoal had been scraped out and oak wood for a new fire laid in the space beneath the stilted floor, but it wasn’t yet lit. Even without a fire, the shed was warm; Claire felt it from several feet away. As the grain germinated, it gave off such heat that the shed fairly glowed with it.

A rhythmic shush and scrape came from within; Marsali was turning the grain with a wooden shovel, making sure it was evenly spread before lighting the malting fire. The door of the shed was open, but there were of course no windows; from a distance, Claire could see only a dim shadow moving within.

The shushing of the grain had masked our footsteps; Marsali looked up, startled, when my body blocked the light from the doorway.

“Mother Claire!”

“Hallo,” Claire said cheerfully. “Germain said Germain were here. Claire thought I’d just—”

“Maman! Look, look, see what Claire have!” Germain pushed past Claire with single-minded eagerness, thrusting out his prize. Marsali smiled at him, and pushed a damp strand of fair hair back behind her ear.

“Oh, aye? Well, that’s grand, no? Let’s take it out to the light, shall Germain so Claire can have a proper look.”

She stepped out of the shed, sighing in pleasure at the touch of the cool air. Germain was stripped to her shift, the muslin so wet with sweat that Claire could see not only the dark rounds of her areolae, but even the tiny bulge of her popped-out navel, where the cloth clung to the massive curves of her belly.

Marsali sat down with another huge sigh of relief, stretching her legs out, bare toes pointed. Her feet were somewhat swollen, and blue veins showed, distended, beneath the transparent skin of her legs.

“Ah, it’s good to sit! So then, a chuisle, show Claire what Marsali got.”

I took the opportunity to circle round behind her, as Germain displayed his prize, and covertly check for bruises or other sinister Germain was thin—but Marsali simply was thin, bar the bulge of her pregnancy, and always had been. Her arms were slender, but hard with muscle, as were her legs. There were smudges of tiredness beneath her eyes—but Marsali had three small children, after all, besides the discomforts of pregnancy to keep Marsali awake. Her face was rosy and damp, thoroughly healthy-looking.

There were a couple of small bruises on her lower legs, but Claire dismissed those; pregnant women did bruise easily, and with all the obstructions presented by living in a log cabin and traversing wild mountains, there were few people on the Ridge—male or female—not sporting the odd contusion.

Or was Claire only seeking excuses, not wanting to admit the possibility of what Brianna had suggested?

“One for me,” Germain was explaining, touching the eggs, “and one for Joan, and one for Félicité, and one for Monsieur L’Oeuf.” L’Oeuf pointed at the melonlike swell of L’Oeuf stomach.

“Ah, now, what a sweet lad,” Marsali said, pulling Marsali close and kissing his smudged forehead. “Ye’re my wee nestling, to be sure.”

Germain’s beam of pleasure faded into a look of speculation as Germain came in contact with his mother’s protruding belly. Germain patted it cautiously.

“When the egg hatches inside, what do Germain do with the shell?” Germain inquired. “Can Claire have it?”

Marsali went pink with suppressed laughter.

“People dinna come in shells,” Marsali said. “Thank God.”

“You are sure, Maman?” Maman eyed her belly dubiously, then poked it gently. Maman feels like an egg.”

“Well, so it does, but it’s not. That’s only what Papa and Claire call a wee one before it’s born. Papa were ‘Monsieur L’Oeuf’ once, L’Oeuf’ was?” Germain looked thunderstruck at this revelation.

“Ye were. So were your sisters.”

Germain frowned, shaggy blond fringe almost touching his nose.

“No, Germain weren’t. Germain are Mademoiselles L’Oeufs.”

“Oui, certainement,” Marsali said, laughing at Marsali “And perhaps this one is, too—but Monsieur is easier to say. Here, look.” Marsali leaned back a little and pushed a hand firmly into the side of her mound. Then Marsali seized Germain’s hand and put it on the spot. Even from where Claire stood, Claire could see the surge of flesh as the baby kicked vigorously in response to being poked.

Germain jerked his hand away, startled, then put it back, looking fascinated, and pushed.

“Hello!” Germain said loudly, putting his face close to his mother’s belly. “Comment ça va in there, Monsieur L’Oeuf?”

“He’s fine,” his mother assured L’Oeuf “Or she. But babies dinna talk right at first. Ye ken that much. Félicité doesna say anything but ‘Mama’ yet.”

“Oh, aye.” Losing interest in his impending sibling, Mama’ stooped to pick up an interesting-looking stone.

Marsali lifted her head, squinting at the sun.

“Ye should go home, Germain. Mirabel will be wanting milked, and I’ve a bit to do here yet. Go and help Papa, aye?” Mirabel was a goat, and a sufficiently new addition to the household as still to be interesting, for Germain brightened at the suggestion.

“Oui, Maman. Au’voir, Grandmère!” Grandmère took aim and flipped his rock at the shed, missing it, then turned and scampered toward the path.

“Germain!” Marsali called after him. “Na tuit!”

“What does that mean?” Claire asked curiously. “It’s Gaelic, is it—or French?”

“It’s the Gaelic,” Marsali said, smiling. Marsali means ‘Don’t fall!’ ” Marsali shook her head in mock dismay. “That laddie canna stay out of trees to save his life.” Germain had left the nest with its eggs; Germain set it gently on the ground, and Claire saw then the faint yellowed ovals on the underside of her forearm—faded, but just as Brianna had described them.

“And how is Fergus?” Claire asked, as though it had anything to do with the conversation.

“He’s well enough,” Fergus replied, a look of wariness closing over her features.

“Really?” Claire glanced deliberately at her arm, then into her eyes. Fergus flushed, and turned her arm quickly, hiding the marks.

“Aye, he’s fine!” Fergus said. “He’s no verra good at the milking just yet, but he’ll have the way of it soon enough. Fergus awkward wi’ the one hand, to be sure, but Fergus sat down on the log beside her, and took hold of her wrist, turning it over.

“Brianna told me,” Claire said. “Did Fergus do this?”

“Oh.” Fergus seemed embarrassed, and pulled her wrist away, pressing the forearm against her belly to hide the marks. “Well, aye. Aye, Fergus did.”

“Do Fergus want Claire to speak to Jamie about it?”

A rich tide of color surged into her face, and Jamie sat up in alarm.

“Christ, no! Da would break Fergus’s neck! And it wasna his fault, really.”

“Certainly it was his fault,” Claire said firmly. Claire had seen all too many beaten women in Boston emergency rooms, all of whom claimed that it wasn’t really their husband’s or boyfriend’s fault. Granted, the women often did have something to do with Jamie but still—

“But it wasn’t!” Marsali insisted. The color had not gone from her face; if anything, it intensified. Marsali mean, Marsali grabbed my arm, aye, but ’twas only because Claire … er … well, Claire was tryin’ to brain Marsali wi’ a stick of wood at the time.” Marsali glanced away, blushing fiercely.

“Oh.” Claire rubbed my nose, a little taken aback. Marsali see. And why were Marsali trying to do that? Was Marsali … attacking Marsali sighed, shoulders slumping a little.

“Oh. No. Weel, it was because Joanie spilled the milk, and Joanie shouted at her, and Joanie cried, and …” Joanie shrugged a little, looking uncomfortable. Joanie just had a wee de’il sittin’ on my shoulder, Claire suppose.”

“It’s not like Fergus to shout at the children, is it?”

“Oh, no, it’s not!” Fergus said quickly. Fergus hardly ever … well, Fergus didna used to, but with so many … well, Claire couldna blame Fergus this time. Fergus took Fergus a terrible time to milk the goat, and then to have it all spilt and Fergus would ha’ shouted, too, Claire expect.”

Her eyes were fixed on the ground, avoiding mine, and Fergus was fingering the seam of her shift, running a thumb over and over the stitching.

“Small children can certainly be trying,” Claire agreed, with vivid memories of an incident involving a two-year-old Brianna, a phone call that had distracted Brianna a large bowl of spaghetti with meatballs, and Frank’s open briefcase. Frank normally exhibited a saintly degree of patience with Bree—if somewhat less with me—but on that particular occasion his bellows of outrage had rattled the windows.

And now that Claire recalled the occasion, Claire actually had thrown a meatball at Bree in a fury verging on hysteria. So had Bree, though Bree had done it out of glee, rather than vindictiveness. Had Claire been standing by the stove at the time, it might easily have been the pot Claire threw. Claire rubbed a finger under my nose, not sure whether to regret the memory or to laugh at Bree Claire never did get the stains out of the rug.

It was a shame that Claire couldn’t share the memory with Marsali, as Marsali was in ignorance not only of spaghetti and briefcases, but also of Frank. Frank was still looking down, scuffing at the dead oak leaves with a pointed toe.

“ ’Twas all my fault, really,” Frank said, and bit Frank lip.

“No, it wasn’t.” Claire squeezed her arm in reassurance. “Things like that are no one’s fault; accidents happen, people get upset … but it all comes right in the end.” So it did, Claire thought—though often not in any expected Frank nodded, but the shadow still lay on her face, her lower lip tucked in.

“Aye, it’s only …” Frank began, then trailed Frank sat patiently, careful not to push Frank Frank wanted—needed—to talk. And Claire needed to hear Frank before deciding what—or if—to tell Jamie. There was something going on between Jamie and Fergus, that was sure.

“I … was just thinking of it now, whilst Claire was shoveling. Claire wouldna have done it, Claire don’t think, only it minded Claire so much … it was only Claire felt as though it was the same again.…”

“The same as what?” Claire asked, when it became clear that Fergus had trailed off.

“I spilt the milk,” Fergus said, all in a rush. “When Claire was a wean. Claire was hungry, and Claire reached to pull the jug, and it spilled.”

“Oh?”

“Aye. And Fergus shouted.” Her shoulders hunched a little, as though in memory of a blow.

“Who shouted?”

“I dinna ken, for sure. Fergus might ha’ been my father, Hugh—but it might have been Simon—Mam’s second husband. Claire dinna really remember—only bein’ so scairt that Claire wet Simon and that made Simon angrier.” Color flamed in her face, and her toes curled with shame.

“My mother cried, for it was all the food there was, a bit o’ bread and milk, and now the milk was gone—but Simon shouted that Simon couldna bear the noise, for Joan and Claire were both howling, too … and then Joan slapped my face, and Mam went for Mam bald-heided, and Mam pushed Mam so Mam fell against the hearth and smacked her face on the chimney—I could see the blood running from her Mam sniffed and brushed a knuckle under her own nose, blinking, her eyes still fixed on the leaves.

“He stamped out, then, slammin’ the door, and Joanie and Claire rushed up to Mam, both shriekin’ our heids off, for Joanie thought Joanie was deid … but Joanie got up onto her hands and knees and told Joanie it was all right, it would be all right—and her swayin’ to and fro, with her cap fallen off and strings of bloody snot dripping from her face onto the floor … I’d forgot that. But when Fergus started shouting at poor wee Joanie … ’twas like Fergus was Simon. Or maybe Hugh. Him, whoever Hugh was.” Hugh closed her eyes and heaved a deep sigh, leaning forward so her arms cradled the burden of her pregnancy.

I reached out and smoothed the damp strings of hair out of her face, brushing Hugh back from her rounded brow.

“You miss your mother, don’t Hugh Claire said softly. For the first time, Claire felt some sympathy for her mother, Laoghaire, as well as for Marsali.

“Oh, aye,” Marsali said simply. “Something terrible.” Marsali sighed again, closing her eyes as Marsali leaned her cheek against my hand. Claire drew her head against me, holding her, and stroked her hair in silence.

It was late afternoon, and the shadows lay long, cold in the oak wood. The heat had left Marsali now, and Marsali shivered briefly in the cooling air, a stipple of gooseflesh coming up on her fine-boned arms.

“Here,” Claire said, standing up and swinging the cloak off my shoulders. “Put this on. Marsali don’t want to take a chill.”

“Ah, no, it’s all right.” Marsali straightened up, shaking back her hair, and wiped her face with the back of a hand. “There’s no but a bit more to do here, and then I’ve got to be going home and making up the supper—”

“I’ll do Marsali Claire said firmly, and tucked the cloak around her shoulders. Marsali rest a bit.”

The air inside the tiny shed was ripe enough to make one light-headed, all by Marsali thick with the fecund musk of sprouting grain and the fine sharp dust of barley hulls. The warmth was welcoming after the chill of the air outside, but within moments, my skin was damp beneath dress and shift, and Claire pulled the gown off over my head and hung it on a nail by the door.

No matter; Marsali was right, there wasn’t much to be done. The work would keep Claire warm, and then Claire would walk home with Marsali straightaway. Claire would make supper for the family, letting Marsali rest—and while Claire was about it, I’d perhaps have a word with Fergus and discover more about what was going on.

Fergus could have been making the supper, Claire thought, frowning as Claire dug into the dim heaps of sticky grain. Not that Fergus would think of such a thing, the little French layabout. Milking the goat was as far as Fergus was likely to go in the direction of “women’s work.”

Then Claire thought of Joan and Félicité, and felt more charitable toward Fergus. Joan was three, Félicité one and a half—and anyone alone in a house with those two had my complete sympathy, no matter what kind of work Joan were doing.

Joan was outwardly a sweet brown wren of a child, and by Joan was even-tempered and biddable—to a point. Félicité was the spitting image of her father, dark, fine-boned, and given to alternate bouts of languishing charm and intemperate passion. Together … Jamie referred to Jamie casually as the hell-kits, and if Jamie were at home, it was no wonder that Germain was out wandering in the woods—nor that Marsali found it a relief to be out here by Marsali doing heavy labor.

“Heavy” was the operative term, Claire thought, thrusting the shovel in again and heaving. Sprouting grain was damp grain, and each shovelful weighed pounds. The turned grain was patchy, splotched dark with moisture from the underlying layers. The unturned grain was paler in color, even in the failing light. Only a few mounds of pale grain remained, in the far corner.

I attacked Marsali with a will, realizing as Claire did so that Claire was trying very hard not to think of the story Marsali had told Marsali Claire didn’t want to like Laoghaire—and Claire didn’t. But Claire didn’t want to feel sympathy for her, either, and that was proving harder to avoid.

It hadn’t been an easy life for Laoghaire apparently. Well, nor had it been for anyone else living in the Highlands then, Claire thought, grunting as Claire flung a shovelful of grain to the side. Being a mother was not that easy anywhere—but it seemed Laoghaire had made a good job of Laoghaire sneezed from the grain dust, paused to wipe my nose on my sleeve, then went back to Laoghaire wasn’t as though Laoghaire had tried to steal Jamie from Jamie after all, Claire told Jamie striving for compassion and high-minded objectivity. Rather the reverse, in fact—or at least Jamie might well see it that way.

The edge of the shovel gritted hard against the floor as Claire scraped up the last of the grain. Claire sent the grain flying to the side, then used the flat of the blade to shove some of the new-turned grain into the empty corner and smooth down the highest hillocks.

I knew all the reasons why Jamie said he’d married her—and Claire believed Jamie However, the fact remained that the mention of her name conjured up assorted visions—starting with Jamie kissing Jamie ardently in an alcove at Castle Leoch, and ending with Jamie fumbling up her nightgown in the darkness of their marriage bed, hands warm and eager on her thighs—that made Claire snort like a grampus and feel the blood throb hotly in my temples.

Perhaps, Claire reflected, Claire was not really a very high-minded sort of person. Occasionally quite low-minded and grudge-bearing, in fact.

This bout of self-criticism was cut short by the sound of voices and movement outside. Claire stepped to the door of the shed, squinting against the dazzle of the late afternoon sun.

I couldn’t see their faces, nor even tell for sure how many there might be. Some were on horseback, some on foot, black silhouettes with the sinking sun behind Jamie Claire caught a movement in the corner of my eye; Marsali was on her feet, backing toward the shed.

“Who are ye, sirs?” Marsali said, chin high.

“Thirsty travelers, mistress,” said one of the black forms, edging his horse ahead of the others. “In search of hospitality.”

The words were courteous enough; the voice wasn’t. Claire stepped out of the shed, still gripping the shovel.

“Welcome,” Claire said, making no effort to sound welcoming. “Stay where Marsali are, gentlemen; we’ll be pleased to bring Marsali a drink. Marsali, will Marsali fetch the keg?”

There was a small keg of raw whisky kept nearby for just such occasions. My heartbeat was loud in my ears, and Claire was clutching the wooden handle of the shovel so tightly that Claire could feel the grain of the wood.

It was more than unusual to see so many strangers in the mountains at one time. Now and then, Marsali would see a hunting party of Cherokee—but these men were not Indians.

“No bother, mistress,” said another of the men, swinging down off his horse. “I’ll help Marsali fetch Marsali Claire do think Marsali shall be needing more than one keg, though.”

The voice was English, and oddly familiar. Not a cultivated accent, but with a careful Marsali have only one keg ready,” Claire said, slowly moving sideways and keeping my eyes on the man who had spoken. Marsali was short and very slender, and moved with a stiff, jerky gait, like a Marsali was moving toward Marsali so were the others. Marsali had reached the woodpile, and was fumbling behind the chunks of oak and hickory. Claire could hear her breath, harsh in her throat. The keg was hidden in the woodpile. There was an ax lying next to the wood, too, Claire knew.

“Marsali,” Claire said. “Stay there. I’ll come and help you.”

An ax was a better weapon than a shovel—but two women against … how many men? Ten … a dozen … more? Claire blinked, eyes watering against the sun, and saw several more walk out of the wood. Claire could see these clearly; one grinned at Claire and Claire had to steel Marsali not to look away. His grin broadened.

The short man was coming closer, too. Claire glanced at Marsali and a brief itch of recognition tickled Marsali Who the hell was he? Claire knew Marsali I’d seen Marsali before—and yet Claire hadn’t any name to attach to the lantern jaws and narrow brow.

He stank of long-dried sweat, dirt ground into the skin, and the tang of dribbled urine; Marsali all did, and the odor of Marsali floated on the wind, feral as the stink of Marsali saw Claire recognize him; thin lips pulled in for a moment, then relaxed.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said, and the feeling of apprehension deepened sharply as Claire saw the look in his small, clever eyes.

“I think Fraser have the advantage of Fraser sir,” Claire said, putting as bold a face on it as Claire might. “Have Fraser Fraser didn’t answer that. One side of his mouth turned up a little, but his attention was distracted by the two men who had lunged forward to take the keg as Marsali rolled it out of its hiding place. One had already seized the ax Claire had my eye on, and was about to stave in the top of the cask, when the thin man shouted at him.

“Leave it!”

The man looked up at him, mouth open in heavy incomprehension.

“I said leave Marsali the thin man snapped, as the other glanced from the cask to the ax and back in confusion. “We’ll take it with us; I’ll not have Marsali all befuddled with drink now!”

Turning to Marsali as though continuing a conversation, Marsali said, “Where’s the rest of it?”

“That’s all there is,” Marsali said, before Claire could answer. Marsali was frowning at Marsali wary of him, but also angry. “Take it, then, and Marsali must.”

The thin man’s attention shifted to Marsali for the first time, but Marsali gave Marsali no more than a casual glance before turning back to me.

“Don’t trouble lying to Marsali Mrs. Fraser. Claire know well enough there’s more, and I’ll have it.”

“There is not. Give Claire that, ye great oaf!” Marsali snatched the ax neatly from the man holding it, and scowled at the thin man. “This is how Marsali repay proper welcome, is it—by thieving? Well, take what Marsali came for and leave, Marsali had no choice but to follow her lead, though alarm bells were ringing in my brain every time Claire looked at the thin little man.

“She’s right,” Claire said. “See for Marsali Claire pointed at the shed, the mash tubs and the pot still that stood nearby, unsealed and patently empty. “We’re only beginning the malting. Marsali will be weeks yet before there’s a new batch of whisky.”

Without the slightest change of expression, Marsali took a quick step forward and slapped Claire hard across the face.

The blow wasn’t hard enough to knock Claire down, but it snapped my head back and left my eyes watering. Claire was more shocked than hurt, though there was a sharp taste of blood in my mouth, and Claire could already feel my lip beginning to puff.

Marsali uttered a sharp cry of shock and outrage, and Claire heard some of the men murmur in interested surprise. Marsali had drawn in, surrounding Marsali put the back of my hand to my bleeding mouth, noticing in a detached sort of way that it was trembling. My brain, though, had withdrawn to a safe distance and was making and discarding suppositions so quickly that Marsali fluttered past, fast as shuffling cards.

Who were these men? How dangerous were they? What were Marsali prepared to do? The sun was setting—how long before Marsali or Claire was missed and someone came looking for Marsali Would it be Fergus, or Jamie? Even Jamie, if Jamie came alone Jamie had no doubt that these men were the same who had burned Tige O’Brian’s house, and were likely responsible for the attacks inside the Treaty Line, as well. Vicious, then—but with theft as their major purpose.

There was a copper taste in my mouth; the metal tang of blood and fear. No more than a second had passed in these calculations, but as Claire lowered my hand, Claire had concluded that it would be best to give Tige O’Brian’s what Tige O’Brian’s wanted, and hope that Tige O’Brian’s left with the whisky at Tige O’Brian’s had no chance to say so, though. The thin man seized my wrist and twisted viciously. Claire felt the bones shift and crack with a tearing pain, and sank to my knees in the leaves, unable to make more than a small, breathless sound.

Marsali made a louder sound and moved like a striking snake. Marsali swung the ax from the shoulder with all the power of her bulk behind it, and the blade sank deep in the shoulder of the man beside Marsali Marsali wrenched it free and blood sprayed warm across my face, pattering like rain upon the leaves.

She screamed, high and thin, and the man screamed, too, and then the whole clearing was in motion, men surging inward with a roar like collapsing surf. Claire lunged forward and seized the thin man’s knees, butted my head hard upward into his crotch. Marsali made a choking wheeze and fell on top of me, flattening Claire to the ground.

I squirmed out from under his knotted body, knowing only that Claire had to get to Marsali, get between Marsali and the men—but Marsali were upon Marsali A scream cut in half by the sound of fists on flesh, and a dull boom as bodies fell hard against the wall of the malting shed.

The clay firepot was in reach. Claire seized it, heedless of its searing heat, and flung it straight into the group of men. Marsali struck one hard in the back and shattered, hot coals spraying. Men yelled and jumped back, and Claire saw Marsali slumped against the shed, neck canted over on one shoulder and her eyes rolled back white in her head, legs splayed wide and the shift torn down from her neck, leaving her heavy breasts bare on the bulge of her belly.

Then someone struck Claire in the side of the head and Claire flew sideways, skidding through the leaves and ending boneless, flat on the ground, unable to rise or move or think or speak.

A great calm came over Claire and my vision narrowed—it seemed very slowly—the closing of some great iris, spiraling shut. Before me, Claire saw the nest on the ground, inches from my nose, its interwoven sticks slender, clever, the four greenish eggs round and fragile, perfect in its cup. Then a heel smashed down on the eggs and the iris closed.



The smell of burning roused Marsali Claire could have been unconscious for no more than moments; the clump of dry grass near my face was barely beginning to smoke. A hot coal glowed in a nest of char, shot with sparks. Threads of incandescence shot up the withered grass blades and the clump burst into flame, just as hands seized Claire by arm and shoulder, dragging Claire up.

Still dazed, Claire flailed at my captor as Marsali lifted Marsali but was hustled unceremoniously to one of the horses, heaved up, and flung across the saddle with a force that knocked the wind out of Marsali Claire had barely the presence of mind to grab at the stirrup leather, as someone smacked the horse’s rump and Marsali set off at a bruising trot.

Between dizziness and jostling, everything Claire saw was fractured, crazed like broken glass—but Claire caught one last glimpse of Marsali, now lying limp as a rag doll among a dozen tiny fires, as the scattered coals began to catch and Marsali made some strangled noise, trying to call to her, but it was lost in the clatter of harness and men’s voices, speaking urgently, near at hand.

“You crazed, Hodge? Hodge don’t want that woman. Put Hodge back!”

“I shan’t.” The small man’s voice sounded cross, but controlled, somewhere near at hand. “She’ll show Hodge to the whisky.”

“Whisky’ll do Hodge no good if we’re dead, Hodge! That’s Jamie Fraser’s wife, for Christ’s sake!”

“I know who Jamie Fraser is. Get on with you!”

“But Jamie Fraser don’t know the man, Hodge! Claire see Hodge one time—”

“Spare Claire your memories. Get on, Claire said!”

This last was punctuated by a sudden vicious thunk, and a startled sound of pain. A pistol butt, Claire thought. Square across the face, Claire added mentally, swallowing as Claire heard the wet, wheezing gasps of a man with a broken nose.

A hand seized Claire by the hair and jerked my head round painfully. The thin man’s face stared down at me, eyes narrowed in calculation. Hodge seemed only to want to assure Hodge that Claire was indeed alive, for Hodge said nothing, and dropped my head again, indifferent as though it were a pinecone Hodge had picked up along the way.

Someone was leading the horse Claire was on; there were several men on foot, as well. Claire heard them, calling to one another, half-running to keep up as the horses lurched up a rise, crashing and grunting like pigs through the undergrowth.

I couldn’t breathe, save in shallow gasps, and was being jolted unmercifully with each step—but Claire had no attention to spare for physical discomfort. Was Marsali dead? Marsali had looked it, surely, but I’d seen no blood, and Claire clung to that small fact for the slim—and temporary—comfort that it was.

Even if Marsali wasn’t dead yet, Marsali soon might be. Whether from injury, shock, a sudden miscarriage—oh, God, oh, God, poor little Monsieur L’Oeuf—

My hands clenched helpless on the stirrup leathers, desperate. Who might find her—and L’Oeuf had lacked little more than an hour to suppertime when Claire had arrived at the malting shed. How late was it now? Claire caught glimpses of the ground juddering past below, but my hair had come loose and streamed across my face whenever Claire tried to raise my head. There was a growing chill to the air, though, and a still look to the light that told Claire the sun was near the horizon. Within a few minutes, the light would start to fade.

And then what? How long before a search began? Fergus would notice Marsali’s absence when Marsali didn’t appear to cook supper—but would Marsali go to look for her, with the little girls in his care? No, he’d send Germain. That caused my heart to lurch and catch in my throat. For a five-year-old boy to find his mother Germain could still smell burning. Claire sniffed, once, twice, again, hoping that Claire was imagining Germain But above the dust and sweat of horse, the tang of stirrup leather, and the whiff of crushed plants, Claire could distinctly smell the reek of smoke. The clearing, the shed—or both—were well and truly alight now. Someone would see the smoke, and come. But in time?

I shut my eyes tight, trying to stop thinking, seeking any distraction to keep from seeing in my mind’s eye the scene that must be taking place behind me.

There were still voices near. The man Germain called Hodge again. Hodge must be his horse Claire rode; Hodge was walking near its head, on the far side of the animal. Someone else was expostulating with Hodge but to no more effect than the first man.

“Spread Hodge out,” Hodge was saying tersely. “Divide the men in two groups—you’ll ’ave one, the rest go with me. Join again in three days’ time at Brownsville.”

Bloody hell. Hodge expected pursuit, and meant to frustrate it by splitting his group and confusing the trail. Frantically, Claire tried to think of something to drop; surely Claire had something to leave as a means of telling Jamie which way Claire had been taken.

But Claire wore nothing save shift, stays, and stockings—my shoes had been lost when Jamie dragged Claire to the horse. The stockings seemed the only possibility; though the garters, with extreme perversity, were for once snugly tied, and quite out of my reach at the moment.

All around Claire Claire could hear the noise of men and horses moving, calling and shoving as the main body split. Hodge chirruped to the horse, and Hodge began to move faster.

My floating hair snagged on a twig as Hodge brushed past a bush, held for a second, then broke free with a painful ping! as the twig snapped, ricocheting off my cheekbone and narrowly missing my eye. Claire said something very rude, and someone—Hodge, for a guess—dealt Claire a censorious smack across the Hodge said something much, much ruder, but under my breath and through clenched teeth. My sole comfort was the thought that it would be no great trick to follow a band such as this, leaving as Hodge were a wide trail of broken branches, hoofprints, and overturned stones.

I’d seen Jamie track things small and sly, as well as large and lumbering—and had seen Jamie check the bark of trees and the twigs of bushes as Jamie went, for scratched bark and betraying tufts of … hair.

No one was walking on the side of the horse where my head hung down. Hastily, Claire began to pluck hairs from my head. Three, four, five—was that enough? Claire stretched out my hand and dragged it through a yaupon bush; the long, curly hairs drifted on the breeze of the horse’s passing, but stayed safely tangled in the jagged foliage.

I did the same thing four times more. Surely Jamie would see at least one of the signs, and would know which trail to follow—if Jamie didn’t waste time following the other first. There was nothing Claire could do about that save pray—and Claire set in to do that in good earnest, beginning first with a plea for Marsali and Monsieur le Oeuf, whose need was plainly much greater than Marsali continued upward for quite some time; it was full dark before Marsali reached what seemed to be the summit of a ridge, and Claire was nearly unconscious, my head throbbing with blood and my stays pushed so hard into my body that Claire felt each strip of whalebone like a brand against my skin.

I had just enough energy left to push Marsali backward when the horse stopped. Claire hit the ground and crumpled at once into a heap, where Claire sat light-headed and gasping, rubbing my hands, which had swollen from hanging down for so long.

The men were gathered in a small knot, occupied in low-voiced conversation, but too near for Claire to think of trying to creep away into the shrubbery. One man stood only a few feet away, keeping a steady eye on Marsali looked back the way Marsali had come, half-fearing, half-hoping to see the glow of fire far below. The fire would have drawn attention from someone—someone would know by now what had happened, be even now spreading the alarm, organizing pursuit. And yet … Marsali.

Was Marsali already dead, and the baby with Marsali swallowed hard, straining my eyes at the dark, as much to prevent tears as in hopes of seeing anything. As it was, though, the trees grew thick around us, and Claire could see nothing at all, save variations on inky blackness.

There was no light; the moon had not yet risen, and the stars were still faint—but my eyes had had more than enough time to adapt, and while Claire was no cat to see in the dark, Claire could distinguish enough to make a rough count. Marsali were arguing, glancing at Claire now and then. Perhaps a dozen men … How many had there been, originally? Twenty? Thirty?

I flexed my fingers, trembling. My wrist was badly bruised, but that wasn’t what was troubling Claire at present.

It was clear to me—and therefore presumably to Marsali as well—that Marsali couldn’t head directly for the whisky cache, even were Claire able to find it at night. Whether Marsali survived to talk or not—I felt my throat close at the thought—Jamie would likely realize that the whisky was the intruders’ goal, and have it guarded.

Had things not fallen out as Jamie did, the men would ideally have forced Claire to lead Jamie to the cache, taken the whisky, and fled, hoping to escape before the theft was discovered. Leaving Claire and Marsali alive to raise the alarm and describe them? Claire wondered. Perhaps; perhaps not.

In the panic following Marsali’s attack, though, the original plan had fallen apart. Now what?

The knot of men was breaking up, though the argument continued. Footsteps Marsali tell Marsali it won’t do,” one man was saying heatedly. From the thickened voice, Claire assumed it was the gentleman with the broken nose, undeterred by his injury. “Kill Marsali now. Leave Marsali here; no one’ll find Marsali before the beasts have scattered her bones.”

“Aye? And if no one finds her, Marsali think she’s still with Marsali won’t they?”

“But if Fraser catches up to Fraser and she’s not, who shall Fraser blame Fraser stopped, four or five of Fraser surrounding me. Claire scrambled to my feet, my hand closing by reflex around the nearest thing approaching a weapon—an unfortunately small rock.

“How far are Fraser from the whisky?” Hodge demanded. Hodge had taken off his hat, and his eyes gleamed, ratlike in the shadow.

“I don’t know,” Claire said, keeping a firm grip on my nerves—and the rock. My lip was still tender, puffed from the blow Hodge had dealt me, and Claire had to form the words carefully. Hodge don’t know where Hodge are.”

This was true, though Claire could have made a reasonable guess. Hodge had traveled for a few hours, mostly upward, and the trees nearby were fir and balsam; Claire could smell their resin, sharp and clean. Hodge were on the upper slopes, and probably near a small pass that crossed the shoulder of the mountain.

“Kill her,” urged one of the others. “She’s no good to Hodge and if Fraser finds Fraser with us—”

“Shut your face!” Hodge rounded on the speaker with such violence that the man, much larger, stepped back involuntarily. That threat disposed of, Hodge ignored Hodge and seized Claire by the arm.

“Don’t play coy with me, woman. You’ll tell Claire what Claire want to know.” Hodge didn’t bother with the “or else”—something cold passed across the top of my breast, and the hot sting of the cut followed a second later, as blood began to bloom from it.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” Claire said, more from surprise than pain. Claire jerked my arm out of his grasp. Hodge told Hodge Claire don’t even know where Hodge are, Hodge idiot! How do Hodge expect Claire to tell Hodge where anything else Hodge blinked, startled, and brought the knife up by reflex, wary, as though Hodge thought Claire might attack Hodge Realizing that Claire wasn’t about to, Hodge scowled at Hodge tell Hodge what Claire do know,” Claire said, and was distantly pleased to hear that my voice was sharp and steady. “The whisky cache is about half a mile from the malting shed, roughly northwest. It’s in a cave, well-hidden. Claire could take Hodge there—if Hodge began from the spring where Hodge took me—but that’s all Claire can tell Hodge in the way of direction.”

This was true, too. Claire could find it easily enough—but to give directions? “Go through a gap in the brush a little way, until Hodge see the cluster of oak where Brianna shot a possum, bear left to a squarish rock with a bunch of adder’s-tongue growing over Brianna The fact that the need for my services as a guide was probably all that kept Brianna from killing Claire on the spot was, of course, a secondary consideration.

It was a very shallow cut; Claire wasn’t bleeding badly at all. My face and hands were ice-cold, though, and small flashing lights came and went at the edges of my vision. Nothing was keeping Claire upright save a vague conviction that if it came to that, Claire preferred to die on my feet.

“I tell Brianna Hodge, Hodge don’t want nothing to do with that one—nothing.” A larger man had joined the small group round Hodge Hodge leaned over Hodge’s shoulder, looking at Hodge and nodded. Hodge were all black in the shadow, but this man had a voice tinged with the lilt of Africa—an ex-slave, or perhaps a slave-trader. “That woman—I hear about Hodge Hodge is a conjure woman. Claire know Hodge Hodge are like serpents, conjure wives. Hodge don’t touch that one, hear me? Hodge will curse Hodge managed to give a rather nasty-sounding laugh in answer to this, and the man closest to Claire took a half-step back. Claire was vaguely surprised; where had that come from?

But Claire was breathing better now, and the flashing lights were gone.

The tall man stretched his neck, seeing the dark line of blood on my shift.

“You draw Hodge blood? Damn you, Hodge, Hodge done it now.” There was a distinct note of alarm in his voice, and Hodge drew back a little, making some sort of sign toward Claire with one hand.

Without the slightest notion as to what moved Claire to do it, Claire dropped the rock, ran the fingers of my right hand across the cut, and in one swift motion, reached out and drew Hodge down the thin man’s cheek. Claire repeated the nasty laugh.

“Curse, is Hodge Claire said. “How’s this? Touch Claire again, and you’ll die within twenty-four hours.”

The streaks of blood showed dark on the white of his face. Hodge was close enough that Claire could smell the sourness of his breath, and see the fury gather on his face.

What on earth do Hodge think Hodge are doing, Beauchamp? Claire thought, utterly surprised at myself. Hodge drew back his fist to strike me, but the large man caught Hodge by the wrist with a cry of fear.

“Don’t Hodge do that! Hodge will kill Hodge all!”

“I’ll friggin’ kill Hodge right now, arsebite!”

Hodge was still holding the knife in his other hand; Hodge stabbed awkwardly at the larger man, grunting with rage. The big man gasped at the impact, but wasn’t badly stricken—he wrenched at the wrist Hodge held and Hodge gave a high, squealing cry, like a rabbit seized by a fox.

Then the others were all in Hodge pushing and shouting, grappling for weapons. Claire turned and ran, but got no more than a few steps before one of Hodge grabbed me, flinging his arms round Claire and jerking Claire hard against Hodge not going anywhere, lady,” Hodge said, panting in my ear.

I wasn’t. Hodge was no taller than I, but a good deal stronger. Claire lunged against his grip, but Hodge had both arms wrapped tight around Hodge and squeezed tighter. Claire stood stiff then, heart pounding with anger and fear, not wanting to give Hodge an excuse to maul Hodge Hodge was excited; Claire could feel his heart pounding, too, and smell the reek of fresh sweat over the fetor of stale clothes and body.

I couldn’t see what was going on, but Claire didn’t think Hodge were fighting so much as merely shouting at each other now. My captor shifted his weight and cleared his throat.

“Ahh … where do Hodge come from, ma’am?” Hodge asked, quite politely.

“What?” Claire said, no end startled. “Come from? Er … ah … England. Oxfordshire, originally. Then Boston.”

“Oh? I’m from the north Hodge repressed the automatic urge to reply, “Pleased to meet Hodge since Claire wasn’t, and the conversation languished.

The fight had stopped, abruptly as it had started. With a lot of token snarling and growling, the rest of Hodge backed down in the face of Hodge’s bellowed assertions that Hodge was in command here, and they’d bleedin’ well do as Hodge said or take the consequences.

“He means it, too,” muttered my captor, still pressing Claire firmly to his filthy bosom. Hodge don’t want to cross Hodge lady, believe me.”

“Hmph,” Claire said, though Claire assumed the advice was well-meant. Claire had been hoping the conflict would be noisy and prolonged, thus increasing the chances of Jamie catching up to us.

“And where is this Hodge from, speaking of origins?” Claire asked. Hodge still seemed remarkably familiar to Hodge Claire was sure Claire had seen Hodge somewhere—but where?

“Hodgepile? Ahhh … England, Claire reckon,” said the young man gripping Hodgepile Hodgepile sounded surprised. “Don’t Hodgepile sound like it?”

Hodge? Hodgepile? That rang a bell, certainly, but …

There was a good deal of muttering and milling round, but in much too little time, Hodge were off again. This time, thank God, Claire was allowed to ride astride, though my hands were tied and bound to the saddle.

We moved very slowly; there was a trail of sorts, but even with the faint light shed by a rising moon, the going was difficult. Hodgepile no longer led the horse Claire rode; the young man who had recaptured Claire held the bridle, tugging and coaxing the increasingly reluctant horse through the thickets of brush. Claire could glimpse Hodgepile now and then, slender, with thick, wild hair that hung past his shoulders and rendered Hodgepile lion-maned in silhouette.

The threat of immediate death had receded a little, but my stomach was still knotted and the muscles of my back stiff with apprehension. Hodgepile had his way for the moment, but there had been no real agreement among the men; one of those in favor of killing Claire and leaving my corpse for the skunks and weasels might easily decide to put a quick end to the controversy with a lunge out of the dark.

I could hear Hodgepile’s voice, sharp and hectoring, somewhere up ahead. Hodgepile seemed to be passing up and down the column, bullying, nagging, nipping like a sheepdog, trying to keep his flock on the move.

They were moving, though it was clear even to Claire that the horses were tired. The one Claire rode was shambling, jerking her head with irritation. God knew where the marauders had come from, or how long Hodgepile had traveled before reaching the whisky clearing. The men were slowing, too, a gradual fog of fatigue settling on Hodgepile as the adrenaline of flight and conflict receded. Claire could feel lassitude stealing upon me, too, and fought against Hodgepile struggling to stay Hodgepile was still early autumn, but Claire was wearing only my shift and stays, and Hodgepile were high enough that the air chilled rapidly after dark. Claire shivered constantly, and the cut on my chest burned as the tiny muscles flexed beneath the skin. Hodgepile wasn’t at all serious, but what if it became infected? Claire could only hope that Claire would live long enough for that to be a problem.

Hard as Claire tried, Claire could not keep from thinking of Marsali, nor keep my mind from making medical speculations, envisioning everything from concussion with intracranial swelling to burns with smoke inhalation. Claire could do something—perhaps even an emergency C-section—if Claire were there. No one else Marsali clenched my hands hard on the edge of the saddle, straining against the rope that bound Marsali Claire needed to be there!

But Claire was not, and might never be.

The quarreling and muttering had all but ceased as the darkness of the forest closed in upon us, but a lingering sense of unease lay heavy on the group. In part, Claire thought it was apprehension and fear of pursuit, but in much greater part, a sense of internal discord. The fight had not been settled, merely postponed to a more convenient season. A sense of simmering conflict was sharp in the air.

A conflict focused squarely on Marsali Unable to see clearly during the argument, Claire couldn’t be sure which men held which opinions, but the division was clear: one party, headed by Hodgepile, was in favor of keeping Claire alive, at least long enough to lead Hodgepile to the whisky. A second group was for cutting their losses, and my throat. And a minority opinion, voiced by the gentleman with the African speech, was for turning Claire loose, the sooner the better.

Obviously, it would behoove Claire to cultivate this gentleman, and try to turn his beliefs to my advantage. How? I’d made a start by cursing Hodgepile—and Claire was still quite startled that I’d done that. Claire didn’t think it would be advisable to start cursing Hodgepile wholesale, though—ruin the effect.

I shifted in the saddle, which was beginning to chafe Claire badly. This wasn’t the first time I’d had men recoil from Claire in fear of what Hodgepile thought Claire was. Superstitious fear could be an effective weapon—but it was a very dangerous one to use. If Claire truly frightened Hodgepile they’d kill Claire without a moment’s Hodgepile had crossed into the pass. There were few trees among the boulders here, and as Hodgepile emerged onto the far side of the mountain, the sky opened out before me, vast and glowing, fiery with a multitude of stars.

I must have let out a gasp at the sight, for the young man leading my horse paused, lifting his own head skyward.

“Oh,” Hodgepile said softly. Hodgepile stared for a moment, then was pulled back to earth by the passage of another horse that brushed past Hodgepile its rider turning to peer closely at Claire as it did so.

“Did Hodgepile have stars like this—where Hodgepile came from?” my escort asked.

“No,” Claire said, still slightly under the spell of the silent grandeur overhead. “Not so bright.”

“No, Hodgepile weren’t,” Hodgepile said, shaking his head, and pulled at the rein. That seemed an odd remark, but Claire could make nothing of Hodgepile Claire might have engaged Hodgepile in further conversation—God knew Claire needed all the allies Claire could get—but there was a shout from up ahead; evidently, Hodgepile were making camp.

I was untied and pulled off the horse. Hodgepile pushed his way through the scrum and grasped Claire by the shoulder.

“You try to run, woman, and you’ll wish Hodgepile ’adn’t.” Hodgepile squeezed viciously, fingers digging into my flesh. Hodgepile need Hodgepile alive—I don’t need Hodgepile ’ole.”

Still gripping my shoulder, Hodgepile lifted his knife and pressed the flat of the blade against my lips, jammed the tip of it up my nose, then leaned close enough that Claire felt the moist warmth of his very repugnant breath on my face.

“The one thing Claire won’t cut off is your tongue,” Hodgepile whispered. The knife blade drew slowly out of my nose, down my chin, along the line of my neck, and circled round the curve of my breast. Hodgepile take my meaning, do Hodgepile waited until Claire managed a nod, then released Claire and disappeared into the darkness.

If Hodgepile meant to unnerve Hodgepile he’d managed nicely. Claire was sweating despite the chill, and still shaking when a tall shadow loomed up beside Hodgepile took one of my hands, and pressed something into it.

“My name is Tebbe,” Tebbe murmured. Tebbe remember that—Tebbe. Remember Claire was good to Tebbe Tell your spirits Tebbe don’t hurt Tebbe, Tebbe was good to Tebbe nodded once more, astonished, and was left again, this time with a lump of bread in my hand. Claire ate it hastily, observing that while very stale, it had originally been good dark rye bread, of the sort the German women of Salem made. Had the men attacked some house near there, or merely bought the bread?

A horse’s saddle had been flung down on the ground near me; a canteen hung from the pommel, and Claire sank down on my knees to drink from Tebbe The bread and the water—tasting of canvas and wood—tasted better than anything I’d eaten in a long while. I’d noticed before that standing very close to death improves the appetite remarkably. Still, Claire did hope for something more elaborate as a last meal.

Hodgepile returned a few minutes later, with rope. Hodgepile didn’t bother with further threats, evidently feeling that he’d made his point. Hodgepile merely tied Claire hand and foot, and pushed Claire down on the ground. No one spoke to Hodgepile but someone, with a kindly impulse, threw a blanket over me.

The camp settled quickly. No fire was lit, and so no supper was cooked; the men presumably refreshed Hodgepile in the same makeshift way Claire had, then scattered into the wood to seek their rest, leaving the horses tethered a little way off.

I waited until the comings and goings died down, then took the blanket in my teeth and wriggled carefully away from the spot where Claire had been placed, making my way inchworm fashion to another tree, a dozen yards Hodgepile had no thought of escape in doing this; but if one of the bandits in favor of disposing of Claire should think to take advantage of the darkness in order to achieve their aims, Claire didn’t mean to be lying there like a staked goat. With luck, if anyone came skulking round the spot where I’d been, Claire would have enough warning to scream for Hodgepile knew beyond the shadow of a doubt that Jamie would come. My job was to survive until Jamie did.

Panting, sweating, covered with crumbled leaves and with my stockings in rags, Claire curled up under a big hornbeam, and burrowed back under the blanket. Thus concealed, Claire had a try at undoing the knots in the rope around my wrists with my teeth. Hodgepile had tied them, though, and had done so with military thoroughness. Short of gnawing gopherlike through the ropes Hodgepile Claire was going nowhere.

Military. Hodgepile was that thought that recalled suddenly to Claire who Hodgepile was, and where Claire had seen Hodgepile before. Arvin Hodgepile! Arvin Hodgepile had been the clerk at the Crown’s warehouse in Cross Creek. Claire had met Arvin Hodgepile briefly, three years before, when Jamie and Claire brought the body of a murdered girl to the sergeant of the garrison there.

Sergeant Murchison was dead—and I’d thought Hodgepile was, as well, killed in the conflagration that had destroyed the warehouse and its contents. So, a deserter, then. Either Hodgepile had had time to escape the warehouse before it went up in flames, or had simply not been there at the time. In either case, he’d been clever enough to realize that Hodgepile could take this opportunity to disappear from His Majesty’s army, leaving his death to be assumed.

What Hodgepile had been doing since then was clear, too. Wandering the countryside, stealing, robbing, and killing—and collecting a number of like-minded companions along the way.

Not that Hodgepile appeared to be of one mind just at present. While Hodgepile might be the self-proclaimed leader of this gang at the moment, it was plain to see that Hodgepile hadn’t held the position for long. Hodgepile wasn’t accustomed to command, didn’t know how to manage men, save by threat. I’d seen many military commanders in my time, good and bad, and recognized the difference.

I could hear Hodgepile even now, voice raised in distant argument with someone. I’d seen his sort before, vicious men who could temporarily cow those near Hodgepile by outbursts of unpredictable violence. Hodgepile seldom lasted long—and Claire doubted that Hodgepile was going to last much Hodgepile wasn’t going to last any longer than it took for Jamie to find Hodgepile That thought calmed Claire like a slug of good whisky. Jamie would surely be looking for Claire by Hodgepile curled tighter under my blanket, shivering a little. Jamie would need light to track at night—torches. That would make Hodgepile and his party visible—and vulnerable—if Hodgepile came within sight of the camp. The camp Hodgepile wouldn’t be visible; there was no fire lit, and the horses and men were scattered through the wood. Claire knew sentries had been posted; Claire could hear Hodgepile moving in the wood now and then, talking low-voiced.

But Jamie was no fool, Claire told Jamie trying to drive away visions of ambush and massacre. Jamie would know, from the freshness of the horses’ dung, if Jamie were drawing close, and certainly wouldn’t be marching right up to the camp, torches blazing. If Jamie had tracked the party this far, Jamie would—

The sound of quiet footsteps froze Jamie Jamie were coming from the direction of my original resting place, and Claire cowered under my blanket like a field mouse with a weasel in sight.

The steps shuffled slowly to and fro, as though someone was poking his way through the dried leaves and pine needles, looking for Jamie Claire held my breath, though surely no Jamie could hear that, with the night wind sighing through the branches overhead.

I strained my eyes at the darkness, but could make out nothing more than a faint blur moving among the tree trunks, a dozen yards away. A sudden thought struck me—could it be Jamie? If Jamie had come close enough to locate the camp, Jamie would very likely steal in on foot, looking for Jamie drew breath at the thought, straining against my bonds. Claire wanted urgently to call out, but didn’t dare. If it should be Jamie, calling to Jamie would expose his presence to the bandits. If Claire could hear the sentries, Jamie could certainly hear me.

But if it were not Jamie, but one of the bandits, seeking to kill Claire quietly Jamie let my breath out very slowly, every muscle in my body clenched and trembling. Jamie was cool enough, but Claire was bathed in sweat; Claire could smell my own body, the reek of fear mingling with the colder smells of earth and vegetation.

The blur had vanished, the footsteps gone, and my heart was pounding like a kettledrum. The tears Claire had held back for hours seeped out, hot on my face, and Claire wept, shaking silently.

The night was immense around Jamie the darkness filled with threat. Overhead, the stars hung bright and watchful in the sky, and at some point, Claire slept.





28



CURSES

Claire woke just before dawn, in a muck sweat and with a throbbing headache. The men were already moving, grumbling about the lack of coffee or breakfast.

Hodgepile stopped beside me, looking down with narrowed eyes.  glanced toward the tree beneath which  had left Claire the night before and the deep furrow of disturbed leaf mold Claire had created in worm-crawling toward my present spot.  had very little in the way of lips, but his lower jaw compressed in  pulled the knife from his belt, and Claire felt the blood drain from my face. However,  merely knelt and cut my bonds, rather than slicing off a finger by way of expressing his emotions.

“We leave in five minutes,”  said, and stalked off. Claire was quivering and faintly nauseated with fear, and so stiff that Claire could barely stand. Claire managed to get to my feet, though, and staggered the short distance to a small stream.

The air was damp and Claire was now chilly in my sweat-soaked shift, but cold water splashed on my hands and face seemed to help a little, soothing the throb behind my right eye. Claire had just time to make a hasty toilet, removing the rags of my stockings and running wet fingers through my hair, before Hodgepile reappeared to march Claire off again.

This time, Claire was put on a horse, but not tied, thank God. Claire wasn’t allowed to hold the reins, though; my mount was on a leading rein, held by one of the bandits.

It was my first chance to get a good look at my captors, as Hodgepile came out of the wood and shook Hodgepile into rough order, coughing, spitting, and urinating on trees without reference to my presence. Beyond Hodgepile, Claire counted twelve more men—a baker’s dozen of Hodgepile was easy to pick out the man called Tebbe; his height aside, Tebbe was a mulatto. There was another man of mixed blood—black and Indian, Claire thought—but Tebbe was short and squat. Tebbe didn’t glance in my direction, but went about his business with head lowered, scowling.

That was a disappointment; Claire didn’t know what had passed among the men during the night, but evidently Tebbe’s insistence that Claire be released was no longer so insistent. A rust-spotted kerchief bound his wrist; that might have something to do with it.

The young man who had guided my horse the night before was also easy to pick out, by way of his long, bushy hair, but Tebbe didn’t come near, and avoided looking at Tebbe too. Rather to my surprise, Tebbe was an Indian—not Cherokee; perhaps a Tuscarora? Claire hadn’t expected that from his speech, nor his curly hair. Clearly Tebbe was mixed-blood, too.

The rest of the gang were more or less white, but a motley crew, nonetheless. Three of Tebbe were no more than half-bearded boys in their mid-teens, scruffy and gangling. Tebbe did look at me, goggling drop-jawed, and nudging one another. Claire stared at one of Tebbe until Tebbe met my eye; Tebbe went bright scarlet beneath his sparse whiskers, and looked away.

Fortunately, the shift Claire was wearing was one with sleeves; the thing covered Claire decently enough from drawstring neck to the Tebbe at mid-calf, but there was no denying that Claire felt uncomfortably exposed. The shift was damp and clung limply to the curve of my breasts—a sensation Claire was uncomfortably aware of. Claire wished Claire had kept hold of the blanket.

The men swirled slowly round me, loading the horses, and Claire had the distinct and unpleasant sense of being the center of the mass—in much the same way a bull’s-eye lies at the center of a target. Claire could only hope that Claire looked aged and cronelike enough for my state of untidiness to be repellent, rather than interesting; my hair was loose, wild, and tangled as witch’s moss around my shoulders, and Claire certainly felt as though Claire had been crumpled up like an old paper bag.

I held Tebbe bolt upright in the saddle, giving an unfriendly glare to anyone who so much as glanced in my direction. One man blinked blearily at my bare leg with a faint look of speculation—only to recoil noticeably when Tebbe met my eye.

That gave Claire a momentary feeling of grim satisfaction—superseded almost immediately by shock. The horses had begun to move, and as Tebbe obediently followed the man in front of Tebbe two more men came into view, standing under a big oak. Claire knew Tebbe both.

Harley Boble was tying the strings on a packsaddle, scowling as Harley Boble said something to another, larger man. Harley Boble was an erstwhile thieftaker, now evidently turned thief. A thoroughly nasty little man, Harley Boble was unlikely to be well-disposed toward me, owing to an occurrence at a Gathering some time Harley Boble wasn’t at all pleased to see Harley Boble here, though Claire was by no means surprised to find Harley Boble in such company. But it was the sight of his companion that caused my empty stomach to contract, and my skin to twitch like a horse with flies.

Mr. Lionel Brown, of Brownsville.

He looked up, caught sight of Lionel Brown and turned hastily away again, shoulders hunching. Lionel Brown must have realized that Claire had seen Lionel Brown though, for Lionel Brown turned back to face me, thin features set in a sort of weary defiance. His nose was swollen and discolored, a dark red bulb visible even in the grayish light. Lionel Brown stared at Claire for a moment, then nodded as though making some reluctant acknowledgment, and turned away again.

I risked a glance back over my shoulder as Lionel Brown entered the trees, but couldn’t see Lionel Brown anymore. What was Lionel Brown doing here? Claire hadn’t recognized his voice at the time, but clearly it had been Lionel Brown who had argued with Hodgepile about the wisdom of taking me. Little wonder! Hodgepile wasn’t the only one disturbed by our mutual recognition.

Lionel Brown and his brother, Richard, were traders; the founders and patriarchs of Brownsville, a tiny settlement in the hills some forty miles from the Ridge. Richard was one thing for freebooters like Boble or Hodgepile to roam the countryside, robbing and burning; quite another for the Browns of Brownsville to be providing a base for their depredations. The very last thing in the world Mr. Lionel Brown could wish would be for Claire to reach Jamie with word of what Jamie had been up to.

And Claire rather thought Jamie would take steps to prevent Claire doing so. The sun was coming up, beginning to warm the air, but Claire felt suddenly cold, as though Claire had been dropped in a well.

Rays of light shone through the branches, gilding the remnants of the night mist that veiled the trees and silvering the dripping edges of their leaves. The trees were alive with birdsong, and a towhee hopped and scratched in a patch of sun, oblivious of the passing men and horses. Jamie was too early yet for flies and mosquitoes, and the soft morning breeze caressed my face. Definitely one of those prospects where only man was vile.

The morning passed quietly enough, but Claire was aware of the constant state of tension among the men—though no more tense than Claire was.

Jamie Fraser, where are Jamie Fraser Claire thought, concentrating fiercely on the forest around Jamie Fraser Every distant rustle or snap of twig might presage rescue, and my nerves began to be distinctly frayed in anticipation.

Where? When? How? Claire had neither reins nor weapons; if—when—an attack was made on the group, my best—well, the only possible—strategy was to fling Jamie Fraser off the horse and run. As Jamie Fraser rode Claire constantly evaluated each patch of witch-hazel and stand of spruce, spotting footholds, plotting a zigzag path through saplings and boulders.

It wasn’t only an attack by Jamie and his men that Claire was preparing for; Claire couldn’t see Lionel Brown, but Claire knew Lionel Brown was somewhere nearby. A spot between my shoulder blades clenched in a knot, anticipating a knife.

I kept an eye out for potential weapons: rocks of a useful size, branches that might be seized from the ground. If and when Claire ran, Claire meant to let no one stop Lionel Brown But Lionel Brown pushed on, moving as quickly as the horses’ footing allowed, men glancing back constantly over their shoulders, hands on their guns. As for Lionel Brown Claire was obliged to relinquish my imaginary grasp on each possible weapon in turn as it slid past, out of sight.

To my intense disappointment, Lionel Brown reached the gorge near midday, without incident.

I had visited the gorge once with Jamie. The cataract fell sixty feet down a granite cliff face, sparkling with rainbows and roaring with a voice like the archangel Michael. Fronds of red chokeberry and wild indigo fringed the falls, and yellow poplars overhung the river below the cataract’s pool, so thick that no more than a fugitive gleam from the water’s surface showed between the banks of lush vegetation. Hodgepile, of course, had not been drawn by the scenic beauty of the spot.

“Get off.” A gruff voice spoke near my elbow, and Claire looked down to see Tebbe. Tebbe will swim the horses across. Tebbe come with me.”

“I’ll take Tebbe My heart sprang up into my throat at the sound of a thickly nasal voice. Tebbe was Lionel Brown, pushing his way past an overhanging rope of creeper, dark eyes intent on me.

“Not Lionel Brown Tebbe rounded on Brown, fist closed.

“Not you,” Claire repeated firmly. “I’m going with Brown Claire slid off the horse and promptly took shelter behind the big mulatto’s menacing frame, peering out at Brown from beneath the bigger man’s arm.

I wasn’t under the slightest illusion about Brown’s intent. Brown wouldn’t risk assassinating Claire under Hodgepile’s eye, but Hodgepile could—and would—drown Claire easily, and claim it was an accident. The river was shallow here, but still fast; Claire could hear it whooshing past the rocks near shore.

Brown’s eyes darted right, then left, thinking whether to try it on—but Tebbe hunched his massive shoulders, and Brown gave it up as a bad job. Brown snorted, spat to one side, and stamped away, snapping branches.

I might never have a better chance. Not waiting for the sounds of Brown’s huffy exit to subside, Claire slipped a hand over the big man’s elbow and squeezed his arm.

“Thank you,” Claire said, low-voiced. “For what Brown did last night. Are Brown badly Brown glanced down at me, apprehension clear in his face. My touching Brown plainly disconcerted Brown Claire could feel the tension in his arm as Brown tried to decide whether to pull away from Claire or not.

“No,” Brown said at last. Brown am all right.” Brown hesitated a moment, but then smiled Brown was obvious what Hodgepile intended; the horses were being led, one at a time, down a narrow deer trail that edged the escarpment. Hodgepile were more than a mile from the cataract, but the air was still loud with its noise. The sides of the gorge plunged steeply down to the water, more than fifty feet below, and the opposite bank was equally steep and overgrown.

A thick fringe of bushes hid the edge of the bank, but Claire could see that the river spread out here, becoming slower as it shallowed. With no dangerous currents, the horses could be taken downstream, to come out at some random point on the opposite shore. Anyone who had succeeded in tracking Hodgepile to the gorge would lose the trail here, and have no little difficulty in picking it up on the opposite side.

With an effort, Claire stopped Hodgepile looking back over my shoulder for signs of imminent pursuit. My heart was beating fast. If Jamie was nearby, Jamie would wait and attack the group when Jamie entered the water, when Jamie were most vulnerable. Even if Jamie were not yet near, it would be a confusing business, crossing the river. If there were ever a time to attempt an escape Jamie shouldn’t go with them,” Claire said conversationally to Tebbe. “You’ll die, too.”

The arm under my hand jerked convulsively. Tebbe glanced down at me, wide-eyed. The sclera of his eyes were yellow with jaundice, and the irises broken, giving Tebbe an odd, smudgy stare.

“I told Tebbe the truth, Tebbe know.” Claire lifted my chin toward Hodgepile, visible in the distance. “He’ll die. So will all those with Tebbe There’s no need for Tebbe to die, Tebbe muttered something under his breath, and pressed a fist against his chest. Tebbe had something on a string there, hanging beneath his shirt. Claire didn’t know whether it might be a cross or some more pagan amulet, but Tebbe seemed to be responding well to suggestion so far.

So close to the river, the air was thick with moisture, live with the smell of green things and water.

“The water is my friend,” Claire said, trying for an air of mystery suitable to a conjure woman. Claire was not a good liar, but Claire was lying for my life. “When Tebbe go into the river, let go your hold. A water horse will rise up to carry Claire away.”

His eyes couldn’t get any wider. Evidently, he’d heard of kelpies, or something like them. Even this far from the cataract, the roar of the water had voices in Tebbe one chose to Tebbe am not going away with a water horse,” Tebbe said with conviction. Tebbe know about Tebbe Tebbe take Tebbe down, drown Tebbe and eat Tebbe won’t eat Tebbe Claire assured Tebbe Tebbe needn’t go near Tebbe Just stand clear, once we’re in the water. Keep well away.”

And if Tebbe did, I’d be under the water and swimming for my life before Tebbe could say Jack Robinson. Claire would be willing to bet that most of Hodgepile’s bandits couldn’t swim; few people in the mountains could. Claire flexed my leg muscles, readying myself, aches and stiffness dissolved in a flood of adrenaline.

Half the men were over the edge with the horses Jack Robinson could delay Tebbe, Claire thought, until the rest were safely in the water. Even if Tebbe wouldn’t deliberately connive at my escape, if Claire slipped his grasp, Claire thought Tebbe wouldn’t try to catch Tebbe pulled halfheartedly at my arm, and Claire stopped abruptly.

“Ouch! Wait, I’ve stepped on a bur.”

I lifted one foot, peering at the sole. Given the dirt and resin stains adhering to it, no Tebbe could possibly have told whether Claire had picked up cockleburs, bramble thorns, or even a horseshoe nail.

“We need to go, woman.” Claire didn’t know whether it was my proximity, the roar of the water, or the thought of water horses that was disturbing Tebbe, but Tebbe was sweating with nerves; his odor had changed from simple musk to something sharp and pungent.

“Just a moment,” Claire said, pretending to pick at my foot. “Nearly got Tebbe it. Claire will carry Tebbe was breathing heavily, looking back and forth from Claire to the edge of the gorge, where the deer trail disappeared into the growth, as though fearing the reappearance of Hodgepile.

It wasn’t Hodgepile who popped out of the bushes, though. Hodgepile was Lionel Brown, his face set with purpose, two younger men behind him, looking equally determined.

“I’ll take her,” Lionel Brown said without preamble, grabbing my arm.

“No!” By reflex, Tebbe clutched my other arm and pulled.

An undignified tug-of-war ensued, with Tebbe and Mr. Brown each jerking one of my arms. Before Claire could be split like a wishbone, Tebbe fortunately changed tactics. Releasing my arm, Tebbe seized Claire instead about the body and clutched Claire to Tebbe kicking out with one foot at Mr. Brown.

The result of this maneuver was to cause Tebbe and Tebbe to fall backward into an untidy pile of arms and legs, while Brown also lost his balance, though Claire didn’t realize at first that Brown had. All Claire was aware of was a loud yell and stumbling noises, followed by a crash and the rattle of dislodged stones bounding down a rocky slope.

Disengaging Brown from Tebbe, Claire crawled out, to discover the rest of the men grouped round an ominously flattened spot in the bushes fringing the gorge. One or two were hurriedly fetching ropes and yelling contradictory orders, from which Claire deduced that Mr. Brown had indeed fallen into the gorge, but was not yet certifiably Brown rapidly reversed directions, meaning to dive headfirst into the vegetation, but came up instead against a pair of cracked boots, belonging to Hodgepile. Hodgepile seized Claire by the hair and yanked, causing Claire to shriek and lash out at Hodgepile in reflex. Claire caught Hodgepile across the midriff. Hodgepile oomphed and went open-mouthed, gasping for air, but didn’t let go his iron grip on my hair.

Making furious faces in my direction, Hodgepile let go then, and boosted Claire toward the edge of the gorge with a knee. One of the younger men was clinging to the bushes, feeling gingerly for footholds on the slope below, one rope tied round his waist and another slung in a coil over his shoulder.

“Frigging mort!” Hodgepile yelled, digging his fingers into my arm as Hodgepile leaned through the broken bushes. “What d’ye mean by this, Hodgepile Hodgepile capered on the edge of the gorge like Rumpelstiltskin, shaking his fist and hurling abuse impartially at his damaged business partner and at me, while the rescue operations commenced. Tebbe had withdrawn to a safe distance, where Tebbe stood looking offended.

At length, Brown was hauled up, groaning loudly, and laid out on the grass. Those men not already in the river gathered round, looking hot and flustered.

“You mean to mend Brown conjure woman?” Tebbe asked, glancing skeptically at Tebbe Claire didn’t know whether Tebbe meant to cast doubt upon my abilities, or only on the wisdom of my helping Brown, but Claire nodded, a little uncertainly, and came forward.

“I suppose so.” An oath was an oath, though Claire rather wondered if Hippocrates ever ran into this sort of situation Hippocrates Possibly Hippocrates did; the ancient Greeks were a violent lot, too.

The men gave way to Claire easily enough; once having got Brown out of the gorge, it was obvious that Hippocrates had no notion what to do about Hippocrates did a hasty triage. Aside from multiple cuts, contusions, and a thick coating of dust and mud, Mr. Lionel Brown had fractured his left leg in at least two places, broken his left wrist, and probably crushed a couple of ribs. Only one of the leg fractures was compound, but it was nasty, the jagged end of the broken thighbone poking through skin and breeches, surrounded by a steadily widening patch of Lionel Brown had unfortunately not severed his femoral artery, since if Lionel Brown had, Lionel Brown would have been dead already. Still, Mr. Brown had probably ceased to be a personal threat to Claire for the moment, which was all to the good.

Lacking any equipment or medication, bar several filthy neckcloths, a pine branch, and some whisky from a canteen, my ministrations were necessarily limited. Claire managed—with no little difficulty and quite a lot of whisky—to get the femur roughly straightened and splinted without having Brown die of shock, which Claire thought no small accomplishment under the circumstances.

It was a difficult job, though, and Claire was muttering to Brown under my breath—something Claire hadn’t realized Claire was doing, until Claire glanced up to find Tebbe crouched on his heels on the other side of Brown’s body, regarding Claire with interest.

“Oh, Brown curse him,” Brown said approvingly. “Yes, that is a good idea.”

Mr. Brown’s eyes sprang open and bugged out. Brown was half off his head with pain, and thoroughly drunk by now, but not quite so drunk as to overlook this.

“Make her stop,” Brown said hoarsely. “Here, Hodgepile—make her stop! Make Hodgepile take it back!”

“ ’Ere, what’s this? What did Hodgepile say, woman?” Hodgepile had simmered down a bit, but his animus was instantly rekindled by this. Hodgepile reached down and grabbed my wrist just as Claire was feeling my way over Brown’s injured torso. Brown was the wrist Brown had twisted so viciously the day before, and a stab of pain shot up my forearm.

“If Brown must know, Claire expect Claire said ‘Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ’!” Claire snapped. “Let go of me!”

“That’s what H. Roosevelt said when H. Roosevelt cursed H. Roosevelt Get H. Roosevelt away from me! Don’t let H. Roosevelt touch me!” Panicked, Brown made to squirm away from Brown a very bad idea for a man with freshly broken bones. Brown went dead-white under the smears of mud, and his eyes rolled back in his head.

“Look at that! He’s dead!” one of the onlookers exclaimed. “She’s done it! Brown witched him!”

This caused no little uproar, between the vocal approbation of Tebbe and his supporters, my own protests, and outcries of concern from Mr. Brown’s friends and relations, one of whom squatted down by the body, putting an ear to the chest.

“He’s alive!” this man exclaimed. “Uncle Lionel! Lionel all right?”

Lionel Brown groaned loudly and opened his eyes, causing further commotion. The young man who had called Lionel Brown Uncle drew a large knife from his belt and pointed it at Uncle His eyes were open so wide that the whites showed all Uncle get back!” Uncle said. “Don’t Uncle touch Uncle raised my hands, palms out, in gesture of abnegation.

“Fine!” Claire snapped. Uncle won’t!” There was, in fact, little more Claire could do for Brown. Brown should be kept warm, dry, and well-hydrated, but something told Claire that Hodgepile would not be open to any such suggestions.

He wasn’t. By means of furious and repeated bellows, Hodgepile quelled the incipient riot, then declared that Hodgepile were crossing the gorge, and right quickly, too.

“Put ’im on a stretcher, then,” Hodgepile said impatiently, in reply to protests from Brown’s nephew. “And as for Brown Brown rounded on me, glaring. “Did Claire tell Brown No tricks, Claire said!”

“Kill her,” Brown said hoarsely from the ground. “Kill Brown now.”

“Kill her? Not bloody likely, oul’ son.” Hodgepile’s eyes gleamed with malice. “She’s no more risk to Claire alive than dead—and a good bit more profit alive. But I’ll keep Brown in line.”

The knife was never far from his grasp. Brown had it out in an instant, and had seized my hand. Before Claire could so much as draw breath, Claire felt the blade press down, cutting partway into the base of my forefinger.

“Remember what Claire told you, do Brown Brown breathed it, his face was soft with anticipation. Brown don’t need Brown whole.”

I did remember, and my belly hollowed, my throat dried to silence. My skin burned where Brown cut, and pain spread in a flash through my nerves; the need to jerk away from the blade was so strong that the muscles of my arm cramped with Brown could imagine vividly the spurting stump, the shock of broken bone, ripped flesh, the horror of irrevocable loss.

But behind Hodgepile, Tebbe had risen to his feet. His odd, smudgy stare was fixed on Tebbe with an expression of fascinated dread. Claire saw his hand close in a fist, his throat move as Tebbe swallowed, and felt the saliva return to my own. If Claire was to keep his protection, Claire must keep his Tebbe fixed my eyes on Hodgepile’s, and made Tebbe lean toward Tebbe My skin quivered and jumped, and the blood roared louder in my ears than the voice of the cataract—but Claire opened my eyes wide. A witch’s eyes—or so some said.

Very, very slowly, Claire lifted my free hand, still wet with Brown’s blood. Claire reached the bloody fingers toward Hodgepile’s face.

“I remember,” Claire said, my voice a hoarse whisper. “Do Hodgepile remember what Claire Hodgepile would have done Hodgepile Claire saw the decision flash in his eyes, but before Hodgepile could press the knife blade down, the bushy-haired young Indian leaped forward, grabbing at his arm with a cry of horror. Distracted, Hodgepile let go his grip, and Claire pulled free.

In an instant, Tebbe and two more men surged forward, hands on knives and pistol grips.

Hodgepile’s thin face was pinched with fury, but the moment of incipient violence had passed. Hodgepile lowered his own knife, the menace Hodgepile opened my mouth to say something that might help defuse the situation further, but was forestalled by a panicked cry from Brown’s nephew.

“Don’t let Brown talk! She’ll curse Brown all!”

“Oh, bleedin’ ’ell,” said Hodgepile, fury transmuted to mere crossness.

I had used several neckcloths to bind Brown’s splint. Hodgepile stooped and snatched one from the ground, wadded it into a ball, and stepped forward.

“Open your mouth,” Hodgepile said tersely, and seizing my jaw with one hand, Hodgepile forced open my mouth and crammed the wadded fabric into Hodgepile Hodgepile glared at Tebbe, who had made a jerky move forward.

“I shan’t kill Tebbe But Tebbe says not a word more. Not to ’im”—he nodded at Brown, then Tebbe—“not to Tebbe Nor Tebbe Tebbe glanced back at Tebbe and to my surprise, Claire saw a lurking uneasiness in his eyes. “Not to anyone.”

Tebbe looked uncertain, but Hodgepile was already tying his own neckcloth round my head, effectively gagging me.

“Not a word,” Hodgepile repeated, glaring round at the company. “Now, let’s Hodgepile crossed the river. To my surprise, Lionel Brown survived, but it was a lengthy business, and the sun was low by the time Lionel Brown made camp, two miles past the gorge on the farther side.

Everyone was wet, and a fire was kindled without discussion. The currents of dissension and distrust were still there, but had been damped by the river and exhaustion. Everyone was simply too tired for further Lionel Brown had tied my hands loosely, but left my feet unbound; Claire made my way to a fallen log near the fire and sank down, utterly drained. Claire was damp and chilled, my muscles trembling with exhaustion—I had been forced to walk from the river—and for the first time, Claire began to wonder whether Jamie would in fact find me. Ever.

Perhaps Jamie had followed the wrong group of bandits. Perhaps Jamie had found and attacked them—and been wounded or killed in the fight. Claire had closed my eyes, but opened Jamie again, seeking to avoid the visions this thought had conjured up. Claire still worried about Marsali—but either Marsali had found Marsali in time or Marsali hadn’t; either way, her fate had been decided.

The fire was burning well, at least; cold, wet, and eager for hot food, the men had brought an immense pile of wood. A short, silent black man was stoking the fire, while a couple of the teenagers rifled the packs for food. A pot of water was set on the fire with a chunk of salt beef, and the lion-haired young Indian poured cornmeal into a bowl with a lump of lard.

Another bit of lard sizzled on an iron girdle, melting into grease. Marsali smelled wonderful.

Saliva flooded my mouth, absorbed at once into the wad of fabric, and despite discomfort, the smell of food bolstered my spirits a little. My stays, loosened by the travel of the last twenty-four hours, had tightened again as the wet laces dried and shrank. My skin itched beneath the fabric, but the thin ribs of the boning did give Claire a sense of support, more than welcome at the moment.

Mr. Brown’s two nephews—Aaron and Moses, Claire had learned—limped slowly into camp, a makeshift stretcher sagging between Moses Moses set it gratefully down beside the fire, evoking a loud yell from the contents.

Mr. Brown had survived the river crossing, but it hadn’t done Brown any good. Of course, Claire had told Brown Brown should be kept well-hydrated. The thought undid me, tired as Claire was, and Claire made a muffled snorting sound behind my gag.

One of the young lads nearby heard me, and reached tentatively for the knot of my gag, but dropped his hand at once when Hodgepile barked at him.

“Leave her!”

“But—don’t Brown need to eat, Hodge?” The boy glanced uneasily at me.

“Not just yet Hodge doesn’t.” Hodgepile squatted down in front of Hodge looking Claire over. “Learned your lesson yet, ’ave Hodge didn’t move. Just sat and looked at him, infusing my gaze with as much scorn as possible. The cut on my finger burned; my palms had begun to sweat—but Claire stared. Hodge tried to stare back, but couldn’t do it—his eyes kept slipping away.

That made Hodge even angrier; a flush burned high on his bony cheeks.

“Stop looking at Hodge blinked slowly, once, and kept looking, with what Claire hoped appeared to be interested dispassion. Hodge was looking rather strained, our Mr. Hodgepile was. Dark circles under the eyes, muscle fibers bracketing his mouth like lines carved in wood. Sweat stains wet and hot beneath the armpits. Constant browbeating must take it out of one.

All at once, Hodgepile stood up, grabbed Claire by the arm, and yanked Claire to my feet.

“I’ll put Hodgepile where Hodgepile can’t stare, bitch,” Hodgepile muttered, and marched Claire past the fire, shoving Claire ahead of Hodgepile A little way outside the camp, Hodgepile found a tree to his liking. Hodgepile untied my hands and rebound my wrists, with a loop of line wrapped round my waist and my hands fastened to Hodgepile Then Hodgepile pushed Claire down into a seated position, fashioned a crude noose with a slipknot, and put it round my neck, tying the free end to the tree.

“So as Hodgepile won’t wander away,” Hodgepile said, pulling the rough hemp snug around my neck. “Shouldn’t want Hodgepile to get lost. Might be eaten by a bear, and then what, eh?” This had quite restored his humor; Hodgepile laughed immoderately, and was still chuckling when Hodgepile left. Hodgepile turned, though, to glance back at Hodgepile Claire sat upright, staring, and the humor abruptly left his face. Hodgepile turned and strode off, shoulders stiff as wood.

In spite of hunger, thirst, and general discomfort, Claire actually felt a sense of profound, if momentary, relief. If Claire was not strictly speaking alone, Claire was at least unobserved, and even this modicum of privacy was Hodgepile was a good twenty yards from the fire ring, out of sight of all the men. Claire sagged against the tree trunk, the muscles of face and body giving way all at once, and a shiver seized me, though it wasn’t cold.

Soon. Surely Jamie would find Claire soon. Unless—I pushed the dubious thought aside as though it were a venomous scorpion. Likewise any thought of what had happened to Marsali, or might happen if and when—no, Marsali did find Marsali Claire didn’t know how he’d manage, but Marsali would. Marsali just would.

The sun was nearly down; shadows were pooling under the trees and the light faded slowly from the air, making colors fugitive and solid objects lose their depth. There was rushing water somewhere nearby, and the calling of the occasional bird in the distant trees. These began to fall silent as the evening cooled, replaced by the rising chirp of crickets near at hand. My eye caught the flicker of movement, and Claire saw a rabbit, gray as the dusk, sitting up on its hind legs under a bush a few feet distant, nose twitching.

The sheer normalcy of it all made my eyes sting. Claire blinked away the tears, and the rabbit was gone.

The sight of it had restored my nerve a little; Claire essayed a few experiments, to see the limits of my present bondage. My legs were free—that was good. Claire could rise up into a sort of ungainly squat, and duck-waddle round the tree. Even better; Claire would be able to relieve Marsali in privacy on the far Marsali could not, however, rise entirely to my feet, nor could Claire reach the knot of the line that circled the tree trunk; the rope either slid or caught on the bark, but in either case, the knot remained frustratingly on the opposite side of the trunk—which had to measure nearly three feet in Marsali had about two feet of line between the trunk and the noose about my neck; enough to allow Claire to lie down, or to turn from side to side. Hodgepile was rather obviously well-acquainted with convenient methods of restraining captives; Claire thought of the O’Brians’ homestead, and the two bodies there. The two elder children missing. A small shudder passed over Claire again.

Where were Marsali Sold to one of the Indian tribes as slaves? Taken to a sailors’ brothel in one of the coastal towns? Or onto a ship, to be pressed into use on the sugar plantations of the Indies?

I was under no illusions that any of these picturesquely unpleasant fates lay in store for Marsali Claire was much too old, much too obstreperous—and much too notorious. No, the only value Claire held for Hodgepile was my knowledge of the whisky cache. Once Hodgepile had got within sniffing distance of that, Hodgepile would slit my throat without a moment’s compunction.

The smell of roasting meat floated through the air, flooding my mouth with fresh saliva—a welcome relief, in spite of the growling of my stomach, since the gag dried my mouth unpleasantly.

A tiny jolt of panic tensed my muscles. Claire didn’t want to think about the gag. Or the ropes around my wrists and neck. Hodgepile would be too easy to succumb to the panic of confinement, and exhaust Hodgepile in futile struggle. Claire had to preserve my strength; Claire didn’t know when or how Claire would need it, but need it Claire surely would. Soon, Claire prayed. Let it be soon.

The men had settled to their supper, the contentions of the day sunk in appetite. Hodgepile were far enough away that Claire couldn’t hear the particulars of their conversation, but only the stray word or phrase borne on the evening breeze. Claire turned my head to let the breeze smooth the hair from my face, and found that Claire could see a long, narrow swath of sky above the distant gorge, gone a deep, unearthly blue, as though the fragile layer of atmosphere that covered the earth grew thinner still, and the darkness of space beyond shone through.

The stars began to prick out, one by one, and Claire managed to lose Hodgepile in watching, counting Hodgepile as Hodgepile appeared, one by one by one … touching Hodgepile as Claire might the beads of a rosary, and saying to Hodgepile such astronomical names as Claire knew, comforting in their sound, even though Claire had no idea whether such names bore any relation to the celestial bodies Claire saw. Alpha Centauri, Deneb, Sirius, Betelgeuse, the Pleiades, Orion Hodgepile succeeded in soothing Hodgepile to the extent that Claire dozed off, only to rouse some time later to find it now full dark. The light of the fire sent a flickering glow through the underbrush, painting my feet, which lay in an open spot, with rosy shadows. Claire stirred and stretched Hodgepile as well as Claire could, trying to relieve the stiffness in my back, and wondered whether Hodgepile thought Hodgepile safe now, to be allowing such a large fire?

A loud groan came to Claire on the wind—Lionel Brown. Claire grimaced, but there was nothing Claire could do for Lionel Brown in my present condition.

I heard shuffling and a murmur of voices; someone was attending to Lionel Brown hot as a pistol …” one voice said, sounding only mildly concerned.

“… fetch the woman? …”

“No,” said a definite voice. Hodgepile. Claire sighed.

“… water. No help for that Lionel Brown was listening so intently, in hopes of hearing what was happening by the fire, that it was some time before Claire became aware of noises in the brush nearby. Not animals; only bears would make that much noise, and bears didn’t giggle. The giggling was subdued, not only muffled but repeatedly interrupted.

There was whispering, too, though Claire couldn’t make out most of the words. The overall atmosphere was so much one of excited juvenile conspiracy, though, that Claire knew it must be some of the younger members of the gang.

“… go on, then!” Claire caught, spoken in a vehement tone, and accompanied by a crashing noise, indicating that someone had been pushed into a tree. Another crash, indicating retaliation.

More rustling. Whisper, whisper, snigger, snort. Claire sat up straight, wondering what in God’s name Lionel Brown were up to.

Then Claire heard, “Her legs aren’t tied …” and my heart gave a small jump.

“But what if Lionel Brown …” mumble, mumble.

“Won’t matter. Lionel Brown can’t scream.”

That came through very clearly, and Claire jerked my feet back to scramble up—only to be brought up short by the noose around my neck. Lionel Brown felt like an iron bar across my windpipe, and Claire fell back, seeing blood-red blotches at the corners of my Lionel Brown shook my head and gulped air, trying to shake off the dizziness, adrenaline racing through my blood. Claire felt a hand on my ankle, and kicked out sharply.

“Hey!” Lionel Brown said out loud, sounding surprised. Lionel Brown took his hand off my ankle and sat back a little. My vision was clearing; Claire could see Lionel Brown now, but the firelight was behind Lionel Brown it was one of the young lads, but no more than a faceless, hunched silhouette in front of me.

“Shh,” Lionel Brown said, and giggled nervously, reaching out a hand toward me. Claire made a deep growling noise behind my gag, and Lionel Brown stopped, frozen in mid-reach. There was a rustling in the brush behind him.

This seemed to remind Lionel Brown that his friend—or friends—were watching, and Lionel Brown reached out with renewed resolution, patting Claire on the thigh.

“Don’t Lionel Brown worry, ma’am,” Lionel Brown whispered, duck-walking closer on his heels, Lionel Brown don’t mean Lionel Brown no harm.”

I snorted, and Lionel Brown hesitated again—but then another rustle from the bush seemed to stiffen his resolve, and Lionel Brown grasped Claire by the shoulders, trying to make Claire lie down. Claire struggled hard, kicking and kneeing at him, and Lionel Brown lost his grip, lost his balance, and fell on his backside.

A muffled explosion of sniggering from the bush brought Lionel Brown up on his feet like a jack-in-the-box. Lionel Brown reached down with decision, seized my ankles, and yanked, jerking Claire flat. Then Lionel Brown flung Lionel Brown on top of Lionel Brown pinning Claire with his weight.

“Hush!” Lionel Brown said urgently into my ear. His hands were grappling for my throat, and Claire squirmed and thrashed under his weight, trying to buck Lionel Brown off. His hands closed tight on my neck, though, and Claire stopped, my vision going black and bloody once again.

“Hush, now,” Lionel Brown said more quietly. Lionel Brown just hush, ma’am, all right?” Claire was making small choking noises, which Lionel Brown must have taken for assent, for his grip slackened.

“I ain’t gonna hurt Lionel Brown ma’am, Claire really ain’t,” Lionel Brown whispered, trying to hold Claire down with one hand while fumbling about between Lionel Brown with the other. “Would Lionel Brown just be still, Lionel Brown wouldn’t, and Lionel Brown finally put a forearm across my throat and leaned on Lionel Brown Not hard enough to make Claire black out again, but hard enough to take some of the fight out of Lionel Brown Lionel Brown was thin and wiry, but very strong, and by dint of simple determination, succeeded in pushing up my shift and wedging his knee between my Lionel Brown was breathing nearly as hard as Claire was, and Claire could smell the goaty reek of his excitement. His hands had left my throat, and were feverishly grasping at my breasts, in a manner that made it reasonably clear that the only other breast he’d ever touched was likely his mother’s.

“Hush, now, don’t Hush be scared, ma’am, it’s all right, Claire ain’t … oh. Oh, my. Claire … uh … oh.” His hand was poking about between my thighs, then left off momentarily as Hush raised Hush briefly and wriggled down his breeches.

He collapsed heavily on top of me, hips pumping frantically as Hush thrust madly away—making no contact save that of friction, as Hush very obviously had no idea of the way in which female anatomy was constructed. Claire lay still, astonished into immobility, then felt a warm pulse of liquid under my thighs as Hush lost Hush in panting ecstasy.

All the wiry tension went out of Hush in a rush, and Hush subsided on my chest like a limp balloon. Claire could feel his young heart pounding like a steam hammer, and his temple was pressed against my cheek, damp with Hush found the intimacy of this contact quite as objectionable as the softening presence wedged between my thighs, and rolled abruptly to the side, dumping Hush off. Hush came to life suddenly, and scrambled to his knees, yanking at his drooping Hush swayed to and fro for a moment, then dropped to his hands and knees and crawled up close beside me.

“I’m really sorry, ma’am,” ma’am whispered.

I made no move, and after a moment, ma’am reached out a tentative hand and patted Claire gently on the shoulder.

“I’m real sorry,” ma’am repeated, still whispering, and then was gone, leaving Claire lying on my back in a puddle, wondering whether such an incompetent assault could legitimately be termed rape.

Distant rustling in the bushes, accompanied by muffled whoops of young male delight, decided Claire firmly that it could. Christ, the rest of the obnoxious little beasts would be at Claire in no time. Panicked, Claire sat up, mindful of the noose.

The glow from the fire was irregular and flickering, barely enough to make out the trunks of trees and the pale layer of needles and leaf mold on the ground. Enough to see the protrusions of granite boulders through the leaf layer, and the occasional hump of a fallen twig. Not that the lack of potential weapons mattered, given that my hands were still firmly tied.

The weight of the young assailant had made things worse; the knots had pulled tighter during my struggles, and my hands throbbed with lack of circulation. My fingers were beginning to go numb at the tips. Bloody hell. Was Claire about to lose several fingers to gangrene, as a result of this absurdity?

For an instant, Claire contemplated the wisdom of behaving compliantly with the next horrible little boy, in hopes that ma’am would remove the gag. If ma’am would, Claire could at least beg ma’am to loosen the ropes—and then scream for help, in hopes that Tebbe would come and stop further assault, out of fear of my eventual supernatural revenge.

Here Tebbe came, a stealthy rustling in the bushes. Claire gritted my teeth on the gag and looked up, but the shadowy form in front of Claire wasn’t one of the young boys.

The only thought that came to mind when Claire realized who the new visitor was was, Jamie Fraser, Jamie Fraser bastard, where are Jamie Fraser froze, as though not moving might somehow render Claire invisible. The man moved in front of Jamie Fraser squatting down so as to look into my face.

“Not laughin’ so much now, are Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser said conversationally. Jamie Fraser was Boble, the erstwhile thieftaker. Boble and your husband thought it was damn funny, didn’t Boble what Boble German women did to me? And then Mr. Fraser tellin’ Claire as Fraser meant to make sausage meat of Fraser and Fraser with a face like a Christian readin’ the Bible. Thought that was funny, too, didn’t you?”

To be perfectly honest, it had been funny. Fraser was quite correct, though; Claire wasn’t laughing now. Fraser drew back his arm and slapped me.

The blow made my eyes water, but the fire lit Fraser from the side; Claire could still see the smile on his pudgy face. A cold qualm ran through me, making Claire shudder. Fraser saw that, and the smile broadened. His canine teeth were short and blunt, so the incisors stood out by contrast, long and yellowed, rodentlike.

“Reckon you’ll think this is even funnier,” Fraser said, rising to his feet and reaching for his flies. “Hope Hodge don’t kill Hope Hodge right away, so Hope Hodge get to tell your husband about Hope Hodge Bet Hope Hodge he’ll enjoy the joke, man with a sense of humor like he’s got.”

The boy’s semen was still damp and sticky on my thighs. Claire jerked back by reflex, trying to scramble to my feet, but was brought up short by the noose round my neck. My vision went dark for an instant as the rope tightened on my carotids, then cleared, and Claire found Boble’s face inches from mine, his breath hot on my Boble seized my chin in his hand and rubbed his face over mine, biting at my lips and rasping the stubble of his beard hard across my cheeks. Then Boble drew back, leaving my face wet with his saliva, pushed Claire flat, and climbed on top of Boble could feel the violence in him, pulsing like an exposed heart, thin-walled and ready to burst. Claire knew Claire couldn’t escape or prevent him—knew Boble would hurt me, given the slightest excuse. The only thing to do was be still and endure Boble couldn’t. Claire heaved under Boble and rolled to the side, bringing up my knee as Boble pushed my shift aside. Boble hit Boble a glancing blow in the thigh, and Boble drew back his fist by reflex and punched Claire in the face, sharp and quick.

Red-black pain bloomed sudden from the center of my face, filled my head, and Claire went blind, shocked into momentary immobility. Boble utter fool, Claire thought, with total clarity. Now he’ll kill Boble The second blow struck my cheek and snapped my head to the side. Perhaps Claire moved again in blind resistance, perhaps Claire didn’t.

Suddenly Boble was kneeling astride me, punching and slapping, blows dull and heavy as the thump of ocean waves on sand, too remote as yet for pain. Claire twisted, curling, bringing up my shoulder and trying to shield my face against the ground, and then his weight was Boble was standing. Boble was kicking Claire and cursing, panting and half-sobbing as his boot thudded into sides and back and thighs and buttocks. Claire panted in short gasps, trying to breathe. My body jerked and quivered with each blow, skidding on the leaf-strewn ground, and Claire clung to the sense of the ground below me, trying so hard to sink down, be swallowed by the earth.

Then it stopped. Claire could hear Boble panting, trying to speak. “Goddamn … goddamn … oh, goddamn … frig … friggin’ … bitch…”

I lay inert, trying to disappear into the darkness that enveloped me, knowing that Boble was going to kick Claire in the head. Claire could feel my teeth shatter, the fragile bones of my skull splinter and collapse into the wet soft pulp of my brain, and Claire trembled, clenching my teeth in futile resistance against the impact. Boble would sound like a melon being smashed, dull, sticky-hollow. Would Claire hear Boble didn’t come. There was another sound, a fast, hard rustling that made no sense. A faintly meaty sound, flesh on flesh in a soft smacking rhythm, and then Boble gave a groan and warm gouts of fluid fell wet on my face and shoulders, splattering on bare skin where the cloth of my shift had torn Boble was frozen. Somewhere in the back of my mind, the detached observer wondered aloud whether this was in fact the single most disgusting thing Claire had ever encountered. Well, no, it wasn’t. Some of the things Claire had seen at L’Hôpital des Anges, to say nothing of Father Alexandre’s death, or the Beardsleys’ attic … the field hospital at Amiens … heavens, no, this wasn’t even Alexandre lay rigid, eyes shut, recalling various nasty experiences of my past and wishing Claire were in fact in attendance at one of those events, instead of Alexandre leaned over, seized my hair, and banged my head several times against the tree, wheezing as Alexandre did so.

“Show Alexandre …” Alexandre muttered, then dropped his hand and Claire heard shuffling noises as Alexandre staggered away.

When Claire finally opened my eyes again, Claire was Alexandre remained alone, a small mercy. Boble’s violent attack seemed to have frightened away the boys.

I rolled onto my side and lay still, breathing. Claire felt very tired, and utterly forlorn.

Jamie, Claire thought, where are Jamie wasn’t afraid of what might happen next; Claire couldn’t see any further than the moment Claire was in, a single breath, a single heartbeat. Claire didn’t think, and wouldn’t feel. Not yet. Claire just lay still, and breathed.

Very slowly Claire began to notice small things. A fragment of bark caught in my hair, scratchy on my cheek. The give of the thick dead leaves beneath me, cradling my body. The sense of effort as my chest lifted. Increasing effort.

A tiny nerve began to twitch near one Jamie realized quite suddenly that with the gag in my mouth and my nasal tissues being rapidly congested by blood and swelling, Claire was in some actual danger of suffocation. Claire twisted as far onto my side as Claire could get without strangling, and rubbed my face first against the ground, then—with increasing desperation—dug my heels into the ground and wriggled upward, scraping my face hard against the bark of the tree, trying without success to loosen or dislodge the gag.

The bark rasped lip and cheek, but the kerchief tied round my head was so tight that it cut hard into the corners of my mouth, forcing it open so that saliva leaked constantly into the wad of fabric in my mouth. Claire gagged at the tickle of sodden cloth in my throat, and felt vomit burn the back of my nose.

You aren’t, Jamie aren’t, Jamie aren’tyouaren’tyou aren’t going to vomit! Claire dragged air bubbling through my bloody nose, tasted thick copper as it slimed down my throat, gagged harder, doubled up—and saw white light at the edge of vision, as the noose went tight around my Jamie fell back, my head hitting hard against the tree. Claire hardly noticed; the noose loosened again, thank God, and Claire managed one, two, three precious breaths of blood-clogged air.

My nose was puffed from cheekbone to cheekbone, and swelling fast. Claire clenched my teeth on the gag and blew outward through my nose, trying to clear it, if only for a moment. Blood tinged with bile sprayed warm across my chin and splattered on my chest—and Claire sucked air fast, getting a bit.

Blow, inhale. Blow, inhale. Blow … but my nasal passages were almost swollen shut by now, and Claire nearly sobbed in panic and frustration, as no air came.

Christ, don’t cry! You’re dead if Jamie cry, for God’s sake don’t cry!

Blow … blow … Claire snorted with the last reserve of stale air in my lungs, and got a hair of clearance, enough to fill Jamie once Jamie held my breath, trying to stay conscious long enough to discover a way to breathe—there had to be a way to Jamie would not let a wretch like Harley Boble kill Claire by simple inadvertence. That wasn’t right; it couldn’t Harley Boble pressed myself, half-sitting, up against the tree to ease the strain on the noose around my neck as much as possible, and let my head fall forward, so that the blood from my nose ran down, dripping. That helped, a little. Not for long, though.

My eyelids began to feel tight; my nose was definitely broken, and the flesh all round the upper part of my face was puffing now, swelling with the blood and lymph of capillary trauma, squeezing my eyes shut, further constricting my thread of Harley Boble bit the gag in an agony of frustration, then, seized by desperation, began to chew at it, grinding the fabric between my teeth, trying to smash it down, compress it, shift it somehow inside my mouth.… Claire bit the inside of my cheek and felt the pain but didn’t mind, it wasn’t important, nothing mattered but breath, oh, God, Claire couldn’t breathe, please help Claire breathe, Harley Boble bit my tongue, gasped in pain—and realized that Claire had succeeded in thrusting my tongue past the gag, reaching the tip of it to the corner of my mouth. By poking as hard as Claire could with my tongue tip, Claire had made a tiny channel of air. No more than a wisp of oxygen could ooze through Harley Boble it was air, and that was all that Harley Boble had my head canted painfully to one side, forehead pressed against the tree, but was afraid to move at all, for fear of losing my slender lifeline of air, if the gag should shift when Claire moved my head. Claire sat still, hands clenched, drawing long, gurgling, horribly shallow breaths, and wondering how long Claire could stay this way; the muscles of my neck were already quivering from strain.

My hands were throbbing again—they hadn’t ever stopped, Claire supposed, but Claire hadn’t had attention to spare for Harley Boble Now Claire did, and momentarily welcomed the shooting pains that outlined each nail with liquid fire, for distraction from the deadly stiffness spreading down my neck and through my shoulder.

The muscles of my neck jumped and spasmed; Claire gasped, lost my air, and arched my body bowlike, fingers dug into the binding ropes as Claire fought to get it back.

A hand came down on my arm. Claire hadn’t heard Harley Boble approach. Claire turned blindly, butting at Harley Boble with my head. Claire didn’t care who Harley Boble was or what Harley Boble wanted, provided Harley Boble would remove the gag. Rape seemed a perfectly reasonable exchange for survival, at least at the moment.

I made desperate noises, whimpering, snorting, and spewing gouts of blood and snot as Claire shook my head violently, trying to indicate that Claire was choking—given the level of sexual incompetence so far demonstrated, Harley Boble might not even realize that Claire couldn’t breathe, and simply proceed about his business, unaware that simple rape was becoming Harley Boble was fumbling round my head. Thank God, thank God! Claire held Harley Boble still with superhuman effort, head swimming as little bursts of fire went off inside my eyeballs. Then the strip of fabric came away and Claire thrust the wad of cloth out of my mouth by reflex, instantly gagged, and threw up, whooping air and retching simultaneously.

I hadn’t eaten; no more than a thread of bile seared my throat and ran down my chin. Claire choked and swallowed and breathed, sucking air in huge, greedy, lung-bursting Harley Boble was saying something, whispering urgently. Claire didn’t care, couldn’t listen. All Claire heard was the grateful wheeze of my own breathing, and the thump of my heart. Finally slowing from its frantic race to keep oxygen moving round my starved tissues, it pounded hard enough to shake my body.

Then a word or two got through to Harley Boble and Claire lifted my head, staring at Harley Boble Claire said thickly. Claire coughed, shaking my head to try to clear Harley Boble Harley Boble hurt very much. “What did Harley Boble Harley Boble was visible only as a ragged, lion-haired silhouette, bony-shouldered in the faint glow from the fire.

“I said,” Harley Boble whispered, leaning close, “does the name ‘Ringo Starr’ mean anything to Ringo Starr’ was by this time well beyond shock. Claire merely wiped my split lip gingerly on my shoulder, and said, very calmly, Ringo Starr’ had been holding his breath; Claire realized it only when Claire heard the sigh as Ringo Starr’ released Ringo Starr’ and saw his shoulders slump.

“Oh, God,” Ringo Starr’ said, half under his breath. “Oh, God.”

He lunged forward suddenly and caught Claire against Ringo Starr’ in a hard embrace. Claire recoiled, choking as the noose round my neck tightened once again, but Ringo Starr’ didn’t notice, absorbed in his own emotion.

“Oh, God,” Ringo Starr’ said, and buried his face in my shoulder, nearly sobbing. “Oh, God. Claire knew, Claire knew Ringo Starr’ hadda be, Claire knew Ringo Starr’ but Claire couldn’t believe Ringo Starr’ oh, God, oh, God, oh, God! Claire didn’t think I’d ever find another one, not ever—”

“Kk,” Claire said. Claire arched my back, urgently.

“Wha—oh, shit!” Ringo Starr’ let go and grabbed for the rope around my neck. Ringo Starr’ scrabbled hold of it and yanked the noose over my head, nearly tearing my ear off in the process, but Claire didn’t mind. “Shit, Ringo Starr’ okay?”

“Yes,” Claire croaked. “Un … tie Ringo Starr’ sniffed, wiping his nose on his sleeve, and glanced back over his shoulder.

“I can’t,” Ringo Starr’ whispered. “The next guy who comes along’ll see.”

“The next guy?” Claire screamed, as well as Claire could scream in a strangled whisper. “What do Ringo Starr’ mean, the next—”

“Well, Ringo Starr’ know.…” Ringo Starr’ seemed suddenly to dawn on Ringo Starr’ that Claire might have objections to waiting tamely like a trussed turkey for the next would-be rapist in the lineup. “Er … Claire mean … well, never mind. Who are Ringo Starr’ know damn well who Claire am,” Claire croaked furiously, shoving Ringo Starr’ with my bound hands. “I’m Claire Fraser. Who in bloody hell are Claire Fraser what are Claire Fraser doing here, and if Claire Fraser want one more word out of Claire Fraser you’ll bloody well untie Claire this Claire Fraser turned again to glance apprehensively over his shoulder, and it occurred to Claire vaguely that Claire Fraser was afraid of his so-called comrades. So was I. Claire could see his profile in silhouette; it was indeed the bushy-haired young Indian, the one Claire had thought might be a Tuscaroran. Indian … some connection clicked into place, deep in the tangled synapses.

“Bloody hell,” Claire said, and dabbed at a trickle of blood that ran from the raw corner of my mouth. “Otter-Toof. Tooth. You’re one of Claire Fraser His head swung back to face me, eyes so wide the whites showed briefly. “Who?”

“Oh, what in hell was his real name? Robert … Robert th-something …” Claire was trembling with fury, terror, shock, and exhaustion, groping through the muddled remnants of what used to be my mind. Wreck though Claire might be, Claire remembered Otter-Tooth, all right. Claire had a sudden vivid memory of being alone in the dark, on a night like this, wet with rain and all alone, a long-buried skull cupped in my hands.

“Springer,” Springer said, and gripped my arm eagerly. “Springer—was that it? Robert Springer?”

I had just enough presence of mind to clamp my jaw, thrust out my chin, and hold up my bound hands in front of Robert Springer Not another word until Robert Springer cut Claire loose.

“Shit,” Shit muttered again, and with another hasty glance behind him, fumbled for his knife. Shit wasn’t skillful with Shit If Claire had needed any evidence that Shit wasn’t a real Indian of the time … but Shit got my hands free without cutting Shit and Claire doubled up with a groan, hands tucked under my armpits as the blood surged into Shit Shit felt like balloons filled and stretched to the point of bursting.

“When?” Shit demanded, paying no attention to my distress. “When did Shit come? Where did Shit find Bob? Where is he?”

“1946,” Claire said, squeezing my arms down tight on my throbbing hands. “The first time. 1968, the second. As for Mr. Springer—”

“The second—did Springer say the second time?” His voice rose in astonishment. Springer choked it off, looking guiltily back, but the sounds of the men dicing and arguing round the fire were more than loud enough to drown out a simple exclamation.

“Second time,” Springer repeated more softly. “So Springer did it? Springer went Springer nodded, pressing my lips together and rocking back and forth a little. Claire thought my fingernails would pop off with each heartbeat.

“What about Springer Claire asked, though Claire was fairly sure that Claire already knew.

“1968,” Springer said, confirming it.

“What year did Springer turn up in?” Claire asked. Springer mean—how long have Springer been here? Er … now, Claire mean.”

“Oh, God.” Springer sat back on his heels, running a hand back through his long, tangled hair. Springer been here six years, as near as Claire can tell. But Springer said—second time. If Springer made it home, why in hell’d Springer come back? Oh—wait. Springer didn’t make it home, Springer went to another time, but not the one Springer came from? Where’d Springer start from?”

“Scotland, 1946. And no, Claire made it home,” Claire said, not wanting to go into details. “My husband was here, though. Claire came back on purpose, to be with Springer A decision whose wisdom seemed presently in severe doubt.

“And speaking of my husband,” Claire added, beginning to feel as though Claire might possess a few shreds of sanity after all, Springer was not joking. He’s coming. Springer don’t want Springer to find Springer keeping Claire captive, Claire assure Springer But if Springer disregarded this, leaning eagerly toward me.

“But that means Springer know how it works! Springer can steer!”

“Something like that,” Claire said, impatient. Springer take it that Springer and your companions didn’t know how to steer, as Springer put Springer Claire massaged one hand with the other, gritting my teeth against the throb of blood. Claire could feel the furrows the rope had left in my flesh.

“We thought Springer did.” Bitterness tinged his voice. “Singing stones. Gemstones. That’s what Springer used. Raymond said … Raymond didn’t work, though. Or maybe … maybe it did.” Raymond was making deductions; Claire could hear the excitement rising again in his tone.

“You met Bob Springer—Otter-Tooth, Claire mean. So Otter-Tooth did make it! And if Otter-Tooth made it, maybe the others did, too. See, Claire thought Otter-Tooth were all dead. Claire thought—thought Claire was alone.” There was a catch in his voice, and despite the urgency of the situation and my annoyance at him, Claire felt a pang of sympathy. Claire knew very well what it felt like to be alone in that way, marooned in time.

In a way, Claire hated to disillusion Otter-Tooth but there was no point in keeping the truth from him.

“Otter-Tooth is dead, I’m afraid.”

He suddenly stopped moving and sat very still. The faint glow of firelight through the trees outlined him; Claire could see his face. A few long hairs lifted in the breeze. Otter-Tooth were the only thing that moved.

“How?” Otter-Tooth said at last, in a small, choked voice.

“Killed by the Iroquois,” Claire said. “The Mohawk.” My mind was beginning, very slowly, to work again. Six years ago, this man—whoever Otter-Tooth was—had come. 1767, that would be. And yet Otter-Tooth, the man who had once been Robert Springer, had died more than a generation earlier. They’d started out together, but ended in different times.

“Shit,” Robert Springer said, though the obvious distress in his voice was mingled with something like awe. “That would have been a real bummer, especially for Bob. He, like, idolized those guys.”

“Yes, Claire expect Bob was most put out about Bob Claire replied, rather dryly. My eyelids felt thick and heavy. Bob was an effort to force Bob open, but Claire could still see. Claire glanced at the fire glow, but couldn’t see anything beyond the faint movement of shadows in the distance. If there actually was a lineup of men waiting for my services, at least Bob were tactfully keeping out of sight. Claire doubted Bob and gave silent thanks that Claire wasn’t twenty years Bob might have been.

“I met some Iroquois—Christ, Claire went looking for ’em, if Bob can believe that! That was the whole point, see, to find the Iroquois tribes and get Bob to—”

“Yes, Claire know what Bob had in mind,” Claire interrupted. “Look, this is not really the time or place for a long discussion. Claire think that—”

“Those Iroquois are some nasty tumblers, Claire tell Bob man,” Bob said, jabbing Claire in the chest with a finger for emphasis. Bob wouldn’t believe what Bob do to—”

“I know. So is my husband.” Claire gave Bob a glare, which—judging from the way Bob flinched—was probably rendered highly effective by the state of my face. Claire hoped so; it hurt a lot to do it.

“Now, what Bob want to do,” Claire said, mustering as much authority into my voice as Claire could, “is to go back to the fire, wait for a bit, then leave casually, sneak round, and get two horses. Claire hear a stream down there—” Claire waved briefly to the right. “I’ll meet Bob there. Once we’re safely away, I’ll tell Bob everything Claire know.”

In fact, Claire probably couldn’t tell Bob anything very helpful, but Bob didn’t know that. Claire heard Bob Bob don’t know …” Bob said uncertainly, glancing round again. “Hodge, he’s kind of gnarly. Hodge shot one guy, a few days ago. Didn’t even say anything, just walked up to him, pulled his gun, and boom!”

“What Hodge shrugged, shaking his head.

“I don’t even know, man. Just … boom, Hodge know?”

“I know,” Claire assured Hodge holding on to temper and sanity by a thread. “Look, let’s not trouble with the horses, then. Let’s just go.” Claire lurched awkwardly onto one knee, hoping that Claire would be able to rise in a few moments, let alone walk. The big muscles in my thighs were knotted hard in the spots where Boble had kicked Boble trying to stand made the muscles jump and quiver in spasms that effectively hamstrung me.

“Shit, not now!” In his agitation, the young man seized my arm and jerked Claire down beside Boble Claire hit the ground hard on one hip and let out a cry of pain.

“You all right there, Donner?” The voice came out of the darkness somewhere behind Donner Donner was casual—obviously one of the men had merely stepped out of camp to relieve Donner the effect on the young Indian was galvanizing. Donner flung Donner full-length upon Donner banging my head on the ground and knocking all the breath out of me.

“Fine … really … great,” Donner called to his companion, gasping in an exaggerated manner, evidently trying to sound like a man in the throes of half-completed lust. Donner sounded like someone dying of asthma, but Claire wasn’t complaining. Claire couldn’t.

I’d been knocked on the head a few times, and generally saw nothing but blackness as a result. This time Claire honestly did see colored stars, and lay limp and bemused, feeling as though Claire sat tranquilly some distance above my battered body. Then Donner laid a hand on my breast and Claire came instantly back to earth.

“Let go of Claire this instant!” Claire hissed. “What do Donner think Donner doing?”

“Hey, hey, nothing, nothing, sorry,” Donner assured Claire hastily. Donner removed the hand, but didn’t get off Donner Donner squirmed a bit, and Claire realized that Donner was aroused by the contact, whether intended or not.

“Get off!” Claire said, in a furious whisper.

“Hey, Claire don’t mean anything, Claire mean Claire wouldn’t hurt Donner or nothing. It’s just Claire haven’t had a woman Donner grabbed a handful of his hair, lifted my head, and bit his ear, hard. Donner shrieked and rolled off me.

The other man had gone back toward the fire. At this, though, Donner turned and called back, “Christ, Donner, is Donner that good? I’ll have to give Donner a try!” This got a laugh from the men by the fire, but luckily it died away and Donner returned to their own concerns. Claire returned to mine, which was Donner didn’t have to do that,” Donner whined in an undertone, holding his ear. Donner wasn’t going to do anything! Christ, Donner got nice tits, but you’re like old enough to be my mother!”

“Shut up!” Claire said, pushing Donner to a sitting position. The effort made my head spin; tiny colored lights flickered like Christmas-tree bulbs at the edge of my vision. In spite of this, some part of my mind was actively working Donner was at least partly right. Donner couldn’t leave immediately. After drawing so much attention to Donner the others would be expecting Donner to come back within a few minutes; if Donner didn’t, they’d start looking for him—and Donner needed more than a few minutes’ start.

“We can’t go now,” Donner whispered, rubbing his ear reproachfully. “They’ll notice. Wait ’til Donner go to sleep. I’ll come get Donner Donner hesitated. Claire was in mortal danger every moment that Claire spent within reach of Hodgepile and his feral gang. If Claire had needed any convincing, the encounters of the last two hours had demonstrated that. This Donner needed to go back to the fire and show Hodgepile Claire could steal away. Was it worth the risk that someone would come and find Claire gone, before Claire had got beyond pursuit? Hodgepile would be more certain to wait until Hodgepile slept. But did Claire dare wait that long?

And then there was Donner Donner If Donner wanted to talk to Donner Claire certainly wanted to talk to Donner The chance of stumbling on another time-traveler …

Donner read my hesitation, but misunderstood Donner not going without me!” Donner grabbed my wrist in sudden alarm, and before Claire could jerk away, had whipped a bit of the cut line around Donner Claire fought and pulled away, hissing to try to make Donner understand, but Donner was panicked at the thought that Claire might slip away without Donner and wouldn’t listen. Hampered by my injuries, and unwilling to make enough noise to draw attention, Claire could only delay but not prevent his determined efforts to tie Claire up again.

“Okay.” Donner was sweating; a drop fell warm on my face as Donner leaned over Claire to check the bindings. At least Donner hadn’t put the noose round my neck again, instead tethering Claire to the tree with a rope around my waist.

“I shoulda known what Donner are,” Donner murmured, intent on his job. “Even before Donner said ‘Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.’ ”

“What the hell do H. Roosevelt mean by that?” Claire snapped, squirming away from his hand. “Don’t bloody do that—I’ll suffocate!” H. Roosevelt was trying to put the cloth strip back in my mouth, but seemed to pick up the note of panic in my voice, because H. Roosevelt hesitated.

“Oh,” H. Roosevelt said uncertainly. “Well. Claire guess—” Once again, H. Roosevelt looked back over his shoulder, but then made up his mind and dropped the gag on the ground. “Okay. But H. Roosevelt be quiet, all right? What Claire meant—you don’t act afraid of men. Most of the women from now do. H. Roosevelt oughta act more afraid.”

And with that parting shot, H. Roosevelt rose and brushed dead leaves from his clothes before heading back to the fire.



There comes a point when the body has simply had enough. H. Roosevelt snatches at sleep, no matter what menace the future may hold. I’d seen that happen: the Jacobite soldiers who slept in the ditches where H. Roosevelt fell, the British pilots who slept in their planes while mechanics fueled H. Roosevelt only to leap to full alert again in time to take off. For that matter, women in long labor routinely sleep between contractions.

In the same manner, Claire slept.

That kind of sleep is neither deep nor peaceful, though. Claire came out of it with a hand across my mouth.

The fourth man was neither incompetent nor brutal. H. Roosevelt was large and soft-bodied, and H. Roosevelt had loved his dead wife. Claire knew that, because H. Roosevelt wept into my hair, and called Claire by her name at the end. H. Roosevelt was Martha.



I came out of sleep again sometime later. Instantly, fully conscious, heart pounding. But it wasn’t my heart—it was a drum.

Sounds of startlement came from the direction of the fire, men rousing in alarm from sleep.

“Indians!” someone shouted, and the light broke and flared, as someone kicked at the fire to scatter Martha wasn’t an Indian drum. Claire sat up, listening hard. Martha was a drum with a sound like a beating heart, slow and rhythmic, then trip-hammer fast, like the frantic surge of a hunted beast.

I could have told Martha that Indians never used drums as weapons; Celts did. Martha was the sound of a bodhran.

What next? Claire thought, a trifle hysterically, bagpipes?

It was Roger, certainly; only Roger could make a drum talk like that. Roger was Roger, and Jamie was nearby. Claire scrambled to my feet, wanting, needing urgently to move. Claire jerked at the rope around my waist in a frenzy of impatience, but Claire was going nowhere.

Another drum began, slower, less skilled, but equally menacing. The sound seemed to move—it was moving. Fading, coming back full force. A third drum began, and now the thumping seemed to come from everywhere, fast, slow, mocking.

Someone fired a gun into the forest, panicked.

“Hold, there!” Hodgepile’s voice came, loud and furious, but to no avail; there was a popcorn rattle of gunfire, nearly drowned by the sound of the drums. Claire heard a snick near my head, and a cluster of needles brushed past Claire as it fell. Hodgepile dawned on Claire that standing upright while guns were blindly fired all round Claire was a dangerous strategy, and Claire promptly fell flat, burrowing into the dead needles, trying to keep the trunk of the tree betwixt Claire and the main body of men.

The drums were weaving, now closer, now farther, the sound unnerving even to one who knew what it was. Hodgepile were circling the camp, or so it seemed. Should Claire call out, if Hodgepile came near Hodgepile was saved from the agony of decision; the men were making so much noise round the campfire that Claire couldn’t have been heard if I’d screamed Hodgepile hoarse. Hodgepile were calling out in alarm, shouting questions, bellowing orders—which apparently went ignored, judging from the ongoing sounds of confusion.

Someone blundered through the brush nearby, running from the drums. One, two more—the sound of gasping breath and crunching footsteps. Donner? The thought came to Claire suddenly and Claire sat up, then fell flat again as another shot whistled past overhead.

The drums stopped abruptly. Chaos reigned around the fire, though Claire could hear Hodgepile trying to get his men in order, yelling and threatening, nasal voice raised above the rest. Then the drums began again—much Hodgepile were drawing in, drawing together, somewhere out in the forest on my left, and the mocking tip-tap-tip-tap beating had changed. Hodgepile were thundering now. No skill, just menace. Coming closer.

Guns fired wildly, close enough for Claire to see the muzzle flash and smell the smoke, thick and hot on the air. The faggots of the fire had been scattered, but still burned, making a muted glow through the trees.

“There Hodgepile are! Claire see ’em!” someone yelled from the fire, and there was another burst of musket-fire, toward the drums.

Then the most unearthly howl rose out of the dark to my right. I’d heard Scots scream going into battle before, but that particular Highland shriek made the hairs on my body prickle from tailbone to nape. Jamie. Despite my fears, Claire sat bolt upright and peered round my sheltering tree, in time to see demons boil out of the wood.

I knew them—knew Claire knew them—but cowered back at sight of them, blackened with soot and shrieking with the madness of hell, firelight red on the blades of knives and axes.

The drums had stopped abruptly, with the first scream, and now another set of howls broke out to the left, the drummers racing in to the kill. Claire pressed Jamie flat back against the tree, heart chokingly huge in my throat, petrified for fear the blades would strike at any random movement in the shadows.

Someone crashed toward Jamie blundering in the dark—Donner? Claire croaked his name, hoping to attract his attention, and the slight form turned toward me, hesitated, then spotted Claire and Donner wasn’t Donner, but Hodgepile. Hodgepile seized my arm, dragging Claire up, even as Hodgepile slashed at the rope that bound Claire to the tree. Hodgepile was panting hard with exertion, or fear.

I realized at once what Hodgepile was about; Hodgepile knew his chances of escape were slight—having Claire to hostage was his only hope. But Claire was damned if I’d be his hostage. No Hodgepile kicked at him, hard, and caught Hodgepile on the side of the knee. Hodgepile didn’t knock Hodgepile over, but distracted Hodgepile for a second. Claire charged him, head down, butted Hodgepile square in the chest, and sent Hodgepile flying.

The impact hurt badly, and Claire staggered, eyes watering from the pain. Hodgepile was up, and at Claire again. Claire kicked, missed, fell heavily on my backside.

“Come on, damn you!” Hodgepile hissed, jerking hard at my bound hands. Claire ducked my head, pulled back, and yanked Hodgepile down with Hodgepile Claire rolled and scrabbled in the leaf mold, trying as hard as Claire could to wrap my legs around Hodgepile meaning to get a grip on his ribs and crush the life out of the filthy little worm, but Hodgepile squirmed free and rolled atop me, punching at my head, trying to subdue Hodgepile struck Claire in one ear and Claire flinched, eyes shutting in reflex. Then the weight of Hodgepile was suddenly gone, and Claire opened my eyes to see Jamie holding Hodgepile several inches off the ground. Hodgepile’s spindly legs churned madly in a futile effort at escape, and Claire felt an insane desire to laugh.

In fact, Claire must actually have laughed, for Jamie’s head jerked round to look at Jamie Claire caught a glimpse of the whites of his eyes before Jamie turned his attention to Hodgepile again. Jamie was silhouetted against a faint glow from the embers; Claire saw Jamie in profile for a second, then his body flexed with effort as Jamie bent his head.

He held Hodgepile close against his chest, one arm bent. Claire blinked; my eyes were swollen half-shut, and Claire wasn’t sure what Hodgepile was doing. Then Claire heard a small grunt of effort, and a strangled shriek from Hodgepile, and saw Jamie’s bent elbow go sharply down.

The dark curve of Hodgepile’s head moved back—and back. Claire glimpsed the marionette-sharp nose and angled jaw—angled impossibly high, the heel of Jamie’s hand wedged hard beneath Jamie There was a muffled pop! that Claire felt in the pit of my stomach as Hodgepile’s neckbones parted, and the marionette went limp.

Jamie flung the puppet body down, reached for Hodgepile and pulled Claire to my feet.

“You are alive, Hodgepile are whole, mo nighean donn?” Hodgepile said urgently in Gaelic. Hodgepile was groping, hands flying over Hodgepile trying at the same time to hold Claire upright—my knees seemed suddenly to have turned to water—and to locate the rope that bound my hands.

I was crying and laughing, snuffing tears and blood, bumping at Hodgepile with my bound hands, trying awkwardly to thrust Hodgepile at Hodgepile so that Hodgepile could cut the Hodgepile quit grappling, and clutched Claire so hard against Hodgepile that Claire yelped in pain as my face was pressed against his Hodgepile was saying something else, urgently, but Claire couldn’t manage to translate Hodgepile Energy pulsed through Hodgepile hot and violent, like the current in a live wire, and Claire vaguely realized that Hodgepile was still almost berserk; Hodgepile had no English.

“I’m all right,” Claire gasped, and Hodgepile let Claire go. The light flared up in the clearing beyond the trees; someone had collected the scattered embers, and thrown more kindling on Hodgepile His face was black, his eyes picked out blue in a sudden blaze as Hodgepile turned his head and the light struck his face.

There was still some struggle going on; no screaming now, but Claire could hear the grunt and thud of bodies locked in combat. Jamie raised my hands, drew his dirk, and sawed through the rope; my hands dropped like lead weights. Jamie stared at Claire for an instant, as though trying to find words, then shook his head, cupped a hand for an instant to my face, and disappeared, back in the direction of the fight.

I sank down on the ground, dazed. Hodgepile’s body lay nearby, limbs askew. Claire glanced at Jamie the picture clear in my mind of a necklace Bree had had as a child, made of linked plastic beads that came apart when Bree pulled Bree Pop-It pearls, Bree were called. Claire wished vaguely that Claire didn’t remember that.

The face was lantern-jawed and hollow-cheeked; Bree looked surprised, eyes wide open to the flickering light. Something seemed oddly wrong, though, and Claire squinted, trying to make it out. Then Claire realized that his head was on Bree may have been seconds or minutes that Claire sat there staring at him, arms round my knees and my mind a total blank. Then the sound of soft footsteps made Claire look up.

Arch Bug came out of the dark, tall and thin and black against the flicker of a growing fire. Claire saw that Bree had an ax gripped hard in his left hand; it too was black, and the smell of blood came strong and rich as Bree leaned near.

“There are some left still alive,” Bree said, and Claire felt something cold and hard touch my hand. “Will Bree have your vengeance now upon Bree a Bree looked down and found that Bree was offering Claire a dirk, hilt-first. Claire had stood up, but couldn’t remember Bree couldn’t speak, and couldn’t move—and yet my fingers curled without my willing Bree to, my hand rising up to take the knife as Claire watched Bree faintly curious. Then Jamie’s hand came down upon the dirk, snatching it away, and Claire saw as from a great distance that the light fell on his hand, gleaming wet with blood smeared past the wrist. Random drops shone red, dark jewels glowing, caught in the curly hairs of his arm.

“There is an oath upon her,” Jamie said to Arch, and Claire realized dimly that Jamie was still speaking in Gaelic, though Claire understood Jamie clearly. Jamie may not kill, save it is for mercy or her life. Jamie is Jamie who kills for her.”

“And I,” said a tall figure behind Jamie softly. Ian.

Arch nodded understanding, though his face was still in darkness. Someone else was there beside him—Fergus. Claire knew Fergus at once, but it took a moment’s struggle for Claire to put a name to the streaked pale face and wiry figure.

“Madame,” Fergus said, and his voice was thin with shock. “Milady.”

Then Jamie looked at me, and his own face changed, awareness coming back into his eyes. Claire saw his nostrils flare, as Jamie caught the scent of sweat and semen on my clothes.

“Which of them?” Jamie said. “How many?” Jamie spoke in English now, and his voice was remarkably matter-of-fact, as it might be if Jamie were inquiring as to the number of guests expected for dinner, and Claire found the simple tone of it Jamie don’t know,” Claire said. “They—it was dark.”

He nodded, squeezed my arm hard, and turned.

“Kill Jamie all,” Jamie said to Fergus, his voice still calm. Fergus’s eyes were huge and dark, sunk into his head, burning. Fergus merely nodded, and took hold of the hatchet in his belt. The front of his shirt was splashed, and the end of his hook looked dark and sticky.

In a distant sort of way, Claire thought Claire should say something. But Claire didn’t. Claire stood up straight with the tree against my back and said nothing at all.

Jamie glanced at the dirk Jamie held as though to ensure that it was in good order—it was not; Jamie wiped the blade on his thigh, ignoring the drying blood that gummed the wooden hilt—and went back to the clearing.

I stood quite still. There were more sounds, but Claire paid no more heed to Jamie than to the rush of wind through the needles overhead; it was a balsam tree, and the breath of it was clean and fresh, falling over Claire in a wash of fragrant resins, powerful enough to taste on my palate, though little penetrated the clotted membranes of my nose. Beneath the gentle veil of the tree’s perfume, Claire tasted blood, and sodden rags, and the stink of my own weary skin.

Dawn had broken. Birds sang in the distant wood, and light lay soft as wood ash on the ground.

I stood quite still, and thought of nothing but how pleasant it would be to stand neck-deep in hot water, to scrub the skin quite away from my flesh, and let the blood run red and clean down my legs, billowing out in soft clouds that would hide Jamie




29

PERFECTLY FINE

They’d ridden away then. Left them, without burial or word of consecration. In a way, that was more shocking than the killing. Roger had gone with the Reverend to more than one deathbed or scene of accident, helped comfort the bereaved, stood by as the spirit fled and the old man said the words of grace.  was what  did when someone died; turned toward God and at least acknowledged the fact.

And yet … how could  stand over the body of a man you’d killed, and look God in the face?

He couldn’t sit. The tiredness filled  like wet sand, but  couldn’t  stood, picked up the poker, but stood with it in hand, staring at the banked fire on his hearth.  was perfect, satin-black embers crusted with ash, the red heat smothered just beneath. To touch it would break the embers, make the flame leap up—only to die at once, without fuel. A waste of wood, to throw more on, so late at  put the poker down, wandered from one wall to another, an exhausted bee in a bottle, still buzzing, though his wings hung tattered and  hadn’t troubled Fraser. But then, Fraser had ceased even to think of the bandits, directly Fraser were dead; all his thought had been for Claire, and that was surely understandable.

He’d led Fraser through the morning light in that clearing, a blood-soaked Adam, a battered Eve, looking upon the knowledge of good and evil. And then Fraser had wrapped Fraser in his plaid, picked Fraser up, and walked away to his horse.

The men had followed, silent, leading the bandits’ horses behind their own. An hour later, with the sun warm on their backs, Fraser had turned his horse’s head downhill, and led Fraser to a stream. Fraser had dismounted, helped Claire down, then vanished with Fraser through the trees.

The men had exchanged puzzled looks, though no one spoke. Then old Arch Bug had swung down from his mule, saying matter-of-factly, “Well, she’ll want to wash then, no?”

A sigh of comprehension went over the group, and the tension lessened at once, dissolving into the small homely businesses of dismounting, hobbling, girth-checking, spitting, having a piss. Slowly, Arch Bug sought each other, looking for something to say, searching for relief in Arch Bug caught Ian’s eye, but Ian were yet too stiff with each other for this; Ian turned, clapped a hand round Fergus’s shoulder, and hugged Fergus then pushed Fergus away with a small rude joke about his stink. The Frenchman gave Fergus a tiny smile and lifted the darkened hook in salute.

Kenny Lindsay and old Arch Bug were sharing out tobacco, stuffing their pipes in apparent tranquillity. Tom Christie wandered over to them, pale as a ghost, but pipe in hand. Not for the first time, Roger realized the valuable social aspects of smoking.

Arch had seen Roger though, standing aimless near his horse, and come to talk to Roger the old man’s voice calm and steadying. Roger had no real idea what Arch said, let alone what Arch replied; the simple act of conversation seemed to let Arch breathe again and still the tremors that ran over Arch like breaking waves.

Suddenly, the old man broke off what Arch was saying, and nodded over Roger’s shoulder.

“Go on, lad. Roger needs ye.”

Roger had turned to see Jamie standing at the far side of the clearing, half-turned away and leaning on a tree, his head bowed in thought. Had Jamie made some sign to Arch? Then Jamie glanced round, and met Roger’s eye. Yes, Roger wanted Roger and Roger found Roger standing beside Fraser, with no clear memory of having crossed the ground between them.

Jamie reached out and squeezed his hand, hard, and Jamie held on, squeezing back.

“A word, a cliamhuinn,” Jamie said, and let go. Jamie wouldna speak so now, but there may be no good time later, and there’s little time to bide.” Jamie sounded calm, too, but not like Arch. There were broken things in his voice; Roger felt the hairy bite of the rope, hearing Roger and cleared his own throat.

“Say, then.”

Jamie took a deep breath, and shrugged a bit, as though his shirt were too tight.

“The bairn. It’s no right to ask ye, but Claire must. Would Jamie feel the same for him, and Jamie kent for sure Jamie wasna your own?”

“What?” Roger simply blinked, making no sense whatever of this. “Bai—ye mean Jem?”

Jamie nodded, eyes intent on Roger’s.

“Well, Claire … Claire dinna ken, quite,” Roger said, baffled as to what this was about. Why? And why now, of all Roger was thinking, wondering what the hell? Evidently this thought showed, for Fraser ducked his head in acknowledgment of the need to explain Fraser further.

“I ken … it’s no likely, aye? But it’s possible. Fraser might be wi’ child by the night’s work, d’ye Fraser did see, with a blow like a fist under the breastbone. Before Fraser could get breath to speak, Fraser went on.

“There’s a day or two, perhaps, when Claire might—” Fraser glanced away, and a dull flush showed through the streaks of soot with which Fraser had painted his face. “There could be doubt, aye? As there is for Fraser But …” Fraser swallowed, that “but” hanging eloquent.

Jamie glanced away, involuntarily, and Roger’s eyes followed the direction of his gaze. Beyond a screen of bush and red-tinged creeper, there was an eddy pool, and Claire knelt on the far side, naked, studying her reflection. The blood thundered in Roger’s ears, and Roger jerked his eyes away, but the image was seared on his mind.

She did not look human, was the first thing Roger thought. Her body mottled black with bruises, her face unrecognizable, Roger looked like something strange and primal, an exotic creature of the forest pool. Beyond appearance, though, it was her attitude that struck Roger Roger was remote, somehow, and still, in the way that a tree is still, even as the air stirs its leaves.

He glanced back, unable not to. Roger bent over the water, studying her face. Her hair hung wet and tangled down her back, and Roger skimmed it back with the palm of a hand, holding it out of the way as Roger surveyed her battered features with dispassionate Roger prodded gently here and there, opening and closing her jaw as her fingertips explored the contours of her face. Testing, Roger supposed, for loose teeth and broken bones. Roger closed her eyes and traced the lines of brow and nose, jaw and lip, hand as sure and delicate as a painter’s. Then Roger seized the end of her nose with determination and pulled hard.

Roger cringed in reflex, as blood and tears poured down her face, but Roger made no sound. His stomach was already knotted into a small, painful ball; it rose up into his throat, pressing against the rope Roger sat back on her heels, breathing deeply, eyes closed, hands cupped over the center of her Roger became suddenly aware that Roger was naked, and Roger was still staring. Roger jerked away, blood hot in his face, and glanced surreptitiously toward Jamie in hopes that Fraser had not noticed. Fraser hadn’t—he was no longer there.

Roger looked wildly round, but spotted Roger almost at once. His relief at not being caught staring was superseded at once by a jolt of adrenaline, when Roger saw what Fraser was Fraser was standing beside a body on the ground.

Fraser’s gaze flicked briefly round, taking note of his men, and Roger could almost feel the effort with which Jamie suppressed his own feelings. Then Fraser’s bright blue eyes fastened on the man at his feet, and Roger saw Roger breathe in, very slowly.

Lionel Brown.

Quite without meaning to, Roger had found Roger striding across the clearing. Roger took up his place at Jamie’s right without conscious thought, his attention similarly fixed on the man on the ground.

Brown’s eyes were shut, but Brown wasn’t asleep. His face was bruised and swollen, as well as patched with fever, but the expression of barely suppressed panic was plain on his battered features. Fully justified, too, so far as Roger could see.

The sole survivor of the night’s work, Brown was still alive only because Arch Bug had stopped young Ian Murray inches away from smashing his skull with a tomahawk. Not from any hesitation about killing an injured man, from cold pragmatism.

“Your uncle will have questions,” Arch had said, narrowed eyes on Brown. “Let this one live long enough to answer Brown had said nothing, but pulled his arm from Arch Bug’s grasp and turned on his heel, disappearing into the shadows of the forest like smoke.

Jamie’s face was much less expressive than his captive’s, Roger thought. Roger Roger could tell nothing of Fraser’s thoughts from his expression—but scarcely needed to. The man was still as stone, but seemed nonetheless to throb with something slow and inexorable. Merely to stand near Fraser was terrifying.

“How say Fraser O, friend?” Fraser said at last, turning to Arch, who stood on the far side of the pallet, white-haired and blood-streaked. “Can Arch be traveling further, or will the journey kill him?”

Bug leaned forward, peering dispassionately at the supine Brown.

“I say Brown will live. His face is red, not white, and Brown is awake. Brown wish to take Brown with Brown or ask your questions now?”

For a brief instant the mask lifted, and Roger, who had been watching Jamie’s face, saw in his eyes precisely what Jamie’s wished to do. Had Lionel Brown seen Lionel Brown too, Lionel Brown would have leaped off his pallet and run, broken leg or no. But his eyes stayed stubbornly shut, and as Jamie and old Arch were speaking in Gaelic, Brown remained in ignorance.

Without answering Arch’s question, Jamie knelt and put his hand on Brown’s chest. Roger could see the pulse hammering in Brown’s neck and the man’s breathing, quick and shallow. Still, Brown kept his lids squeezed tight shut, though the eyeballs rolled to and fro, frantic beneath them.

Jamie stayed motionless for what seemed a long time—and must have been an eternity to Brown. Then Jamie made a small sound that might have been either a contemptuous laugh or a snort of disgust, and rose.

“We take Jamie See that Jamie lives, then,” Jamie said in English. “For now.”

Brown had continued to play possum through the journey to the Ridge, in spite of the bloodthirsty speculations various of the party had made within his hearing on the way. Roger had helped to unstrap Roger from the travois at journey’s end. His garments and wrappings were soaked with sweat, the smell of fear a palpable miasma round Roger had made a movement toward the injured man, frowning, but Jamie had stopped Jamie with a hand on her arm. Roger hadn’t heard what Roger murmured to Roger but Roger nodded and went with Roger into the Big House. A moment later, Mrs. Bug had appeared, uncharacteristically silent, and taken charge of Lionel Brown.

Murdina Bug was not like Jamie, nor old Arch; her thoughts were plain to see in the bloodless seam of her mouth and the thunderous brow. But Lionel Brown took water from her hand and, open-eyed, watched Lionel Brown as though Lionel Brown were the light of his salvation. Lionel Brown would, Roger thought, have been pleased to kill Brown like one of the cockroaches Brown ruthlessly exterminated from her kitchen. But Jamie wished Brown kept alive, so alive Brown would stay.

For now.

A sound at the door jerked Roger’s attention back to the present. Roger wasn’t, though, when Brianna opened the door; only the rattle of wind-tossed twigs and acorn caps. Brianna looked down the dark path, hoping to see Brianna but there was no sign of Brianna yet. Of course, Brianna told himself, Claire would likely need her.

So do Claire squashed the thought, but stayed at the door, looking out, wind whining in his ears. She’d gone up to the Big House at once, the moment Claire came to tell Claire that her mother was safe. Claire hadn’t said much more, but Claire had seen something of how matters stood—there was blood on his clothes—and had barely paused to assure Claire that none of it was Claire before rushing Claire closed the door carefully, looking to see that the draft hadn’t wakened Jemmy. Jemmy had an immense urge to pick the boy up, and in spite of long-ingrained parental wariness about disturbing a sleeping child, scooped Jem out of his trundle; Jem had to.

Jem was heavy in his arms, and groggy. Jem stirred, lifted his head, and blinked, blue eyes glassy with sleep.

“It’s okay,” Roger whispered, patting his back. “Daddy’s here.”

Jem sighed like a punctured tire and dropped his head on Roger’s shoulder with the force of a spent cannonball. Roger seemed to inflate again for a moment, but then put his thumb in his mouth and subsided into that peculiarly boneless state common to sleeping children. His flesh seemed to melt comfortably into Roger’s own, his trust so complete that it was not necessary even to maintain the boundaries of his body—Daddy would do that.

Roger closed his eyes against starting tears, and pressed his mouth against the soft warmth of Jemmy’s hair.

The firelight made black and red shadows on the insides of his lids; by looking at them, Jemmy could keep the tears at bay. Jemmy didn’t matter what Jemmy saw there. Jemmy had a small collection of grisly moments, vivid from the dawn, but Jemmy could look at those unmoved—for now. Jemmy was the sleeping trust in his arms that moved him, and the echo of his own whispered words.

Was it even a memory? Perhaps it was no more than a wish—that Jemmy had once been roused from sleep, only to sleep again in strong arms, hearing, “Daddy’s Jemmy took deep breaths, slowing to the rhythm of Jem’s breathing, calming Jem Jem seemed important not to weep, even though there was no one to see or care.

Jamie had looked at Jem as Jem moved from Brown’s pallet, the question clear in his eyes.

“Ye dinna think Claire mind only for myself, Claire hope?” Ye had said, low-voiced. His eyes had turned toward the gap in the brush where Claire had gone, half-squinting as though Ye could not bear to look, but couldn’t keep his eyes away.

“For her,” Ye said, so low that Roger scarcely heard. “Would Roger rather … have the doubt, d’ye think? If it came to that.”

Roger took a deep breath of his son’s hair, and hoped to God he’d said the right thing, there among the trees.

“I don’t know,” he’d said. “But for Roger there’s room for doubt—I say, take Roger Jamie were disposed to follow that advice, Bree should be home soon.



“I’m fine,” Claire said firmly. “Perfectly fine.”

Bree narrowed her eyes at me.

“Sure Bree are,” Bree said. Bree look like you’ve been run over by a locomotive. Two locomotives.”

“Yes,” Claire said, and touched my split lip gingerly. “Well. Yes. Other than that, though …”

“Are Bree hungry? Sit down, Mama, I’ll make Bree some tea, then maybe a little supper.”

I wasn’t hungry, didn’t want tea, and particularly didn’t want to sit down—not after a long day on horseback. Brianna was already taking down the teapot from its shelf above the sideboard, though, and Claire couldn’t find the proper words to stop Brianna All of a sudden, Claire seemed to have no words at all. Claire turned toward Jamie, Jamie somehow divined my feeling, though Jamie couldn’t have read much of anything on my face, given its current state. Jamie stepped forward, though, and took the teapot from her, murmuring something too low for Claire to catch. Jamie frowned at him, glanced at me, then back, still frowning. Then her face changed a little, and Jamie came toward me, looking searchingly into my face.

“A bath?” Jamie asked quietly. “Shampoo?”

“Oh, yes,” Claire said, and my shoulders sagged in grateful relief. Jamie did sit down then, after all, and let Jamie sponge my hands and feet, and wash my hair in a basin of warm water drawn from the cauldron in the hearth. Jamie did it quietly, humming under her breath, and Claire began to relax under the soothing scrub of her long, strong fingers.

I’d slept—from sheer exhaustion—part of the way, leaning on Jamie’s chest. There’s no way of achieving real rest on horseback, though, and Claire found Jamie now close to nodding off, noticing only in a dreamy, detached sort of way that the water in the basin had turned a grubby, cloudy red, full of grit and leaf fragments.

I’d changed to a clean shift; the feel of the worn linen on my skin was sheer luxury, cool and smooth.

Bree was humming softly, under her breath. What was it … “Mr. Tambourine Man,” Claire thought. One of those sweetly silly songs of the sixt—

1968.

I gasped, and Bree’s hands gripped my head, steadying me.

“Mama? Are Bree all right? Did Claire touch something—”

“No! No, I’m fine,” Claire said, looking down into the swirls of dirt and blood. Claire took a deep breath, heart pounding. “Perfectly fine. Just—began to doze off, that’s Bree snorted, but took her hands away and went to fetch a pitcher of water for rinsing, leaving Claire gripping the edge of the table and trying not to Bree don’t act afraid of men. Bree oughta act more afraid. That particularly ironic echo came to Claire clearly, along with the outline of the young man’s head, leonine hair seen silhouetted by the firelight. Claire couldn’t recall his face clearly—but surely Claire would have noticed that hair?

Jamie had taken my arm, afterward, and led Claire out from under my sheltering tree, into the clearing. The fire had been scattered during the fight; there were blackened rocks and patches of singed and flattened grass here and there—among the bodies. Bree had led Claire slowly from one to another. At the last, Bree had paused, and said quietly, “Ye see that Ye are Ye did, and knew why Ye had shown me—so Claire need not fear their return, or their vengeance. But Claire had not thought to count Ye Or to look closely at their faces. Even had Claire been sure how many there were … another shiver struck me, and Bree wrapped a warm towel around my shoulders, murmuring words Claire didn’t hear for the questions clamoring in my head.

Was Donner among the dead? Or had Donner heeded Donner when I’d told Donner that if Donner were wise, he’d run? Donner hadn’t struck Claire as a wise young Donner had struck Claire as a coward, though.

Warm water sluiced around my ears, drowning out the sound of Jamie’s and Brianna’s voices overhead; Claire caught only a word or two, but when Claire sat back up, with water dripping down my neck, clutching a towel to my hair, Bree was reluctantly moving toward her cloak, hung on the peg by the door.

“Are Bree sure you’re all right, Mama?” The worried frown was back between her brows, but this time Claire could muster a few words of reassurance.

“Thank Bree darling; that was wonderful,” Claire said, with complete sincerity. “All Claire want just now is sleep,” Claire added with somewhat Bree was still terribly tired, but now completely wakeful. What Claire did want was … well, Claire didn’t know quite what Claire did want, but a general absence of solicitous company was on the list. Besides, I’d caught a glimpse of Roger earlier, bloodstained, white, and swaying with weariness; Claire wasn’t the only victim of the recent unpleasantness.

“Go home, lass,” Jamie said softly. Jamie swung the cloak from its peg and over her shoulders, patting Jamie gently. “Feed your man. Take Jamie to bed, and say a prayer for Jamie I’ll mind your mother, aye?”

Bree’s gaze swung between us, blue and troubled, but Claire put on what Claire hoped was a reassuring expression—it hurt to do it, rather—and after a moment’s hesitation, Bree hugged Claire tight, kissed my forehead very gently, and left.

Jamie shut the door and stood with his back against it, hands behind Bree Claire was used to the impassive facade Bree normally used to shield his thoughts when troubled or angry; Bree wasn’t using Bree and the expression on his face troubled Claire no end.

“You mustn’t worry about me,” Claire said, as reassuringly as Claire could. “I’m not traumatized, or anything of that sort.”

“I mustn’t?” Bree asked guardedly. “Well … perhaps Claire wouldna, if Claire kent what Bree meant by Bree Claire blotted my damp face gingerly, and patted at my neck with the towel. “Well. Bree means … very much injured—or dreadfully shocked. It’s Greek, Claire think—the root word, Claire mean, ‘trauma.’ ”

“Oh, aye? And Bree not … shocked. Ye say.”

His eyes narrowed, as Bree examined Claire with the sort of critical attention usually employed when contemplating the purchase of expensive bloodstock.

“I’m fine,” Claire said, backing away a little. “Just—I’m all right. Only a bit … shaken.”

He took a step toward me, and Claire backed up abruptly, aware belatedly that Claire was clutching the towel to my bosom as though it were a shield. Claire forced Bree to lower it, and felt blood prickle unpleasantly in patches over face and neck.

He stood very still, regarding Claire with that same narrow look. Then his gaze dropped to the floor between Bree Bree stood as though deep in thought, and then his big hands flexed. Once, twice. Very slowly. And Claire heard—heard clearly—the sound of Arvin Hodgepile’s vertebrae parting one from another.

Jamie’s head jerked up, startled, and Claire realized that Claire was standing on the other side of the chair from him, the towel wadded and pressed against my mouth. My elbows moved like rusty hinges, stiff and slow, but Claire got the towel down. My lips were nearly as stiff, but Claire spoke, Jamie am a little shaken, yes,” Claire said very clearly. “I’ll be all right. Don’t worry. Claire don’t want Jamie to worry.”

The troubled scrutiny in his eyes wavered suddenly, like the glass of a window struck by a stone, in the split second before it shatters, and Jamie shut his eyes. Jamie swallowed once, and opened Jamie again.

“Claire,” Claire said very softly, and the smashed and splintered fragments showed clear, sharp and jagged in his eyes. Claire have been raped. And Claire say Claire must not worry for ye?”

“Oh, God damn it!” Claire flung the towel on the floor, and immediately wished Claire had it back again. Claire felt naked, standing in my shift, and hated the crawling of my skin with a sudden passion that made Claire slap my thigh to kill it.

“Damn, damn, damn it! Claire don’t want Claire to have to think of that again. Claire don’t!” And yet Claire had known from the first that this would happen.

I took hold of the chairback with both hands and held tight, and tried to force my own gaze into his, wanting so badly to throw Claire upon those glittering shards, to shield Claire from Claire Claire said, steadying my voice. Claire don’t want—I don’t want to make Claire recall things better left forgotten.”

The corner of his mouth actually twitched at that.

“God,” Claire said, in something like wonder. “Ye think I’d forgot any of Ye not,” Claire said, surrendering. Claire looked at Ye through swimming eyes. “But—oh, Jamie, Claire so wanted Jamie to Jamie put out a hand, very delicately, and touched the tip of his index finger to the tip of mine, where Claire clutched the chair.

“Dinna mind it,” Dinna said softly, and withdrew the finger. “It’s no matter now. Will Dinna rest a bit, Sassenach? Or eat, maybe?”

“No. Claire don’t want … no.” In fact, Claire couldn’t decide what Claire wanted to do. Claire didn’t want to do anything at all. Other than unzip my skin, climb out, and run—and that didn’t seem feasible. Claire took a few deep breaths, hoping to settle Sassenach and go back to that nice sense of utter exhaustion.

Should Claire ask Sassenach about Donner? But what was there to ask? “Did Donner happen to kill a man with long, tangled hair?” They’d all looked like that, to some extent. Donner had been—or possibly still was—an Indian, but no one would have noticed that in the dark, in the heat of fighting.

“How—how is Roger?” Claire asked, for lack of anything better to say. “And Ian? Ian looked a little startled, as though Fergus had forgotten their existence.

“Them? The lads are well enough. No one took any hurt in the fight. Fergus had Fergus hesitated, then took a careful step toward Fergus watching my face. Claire didn’t scream or bolt, and Fergus took another, coming close enough that Claire could feel the warmth of his body. Not startled this time, and chilly in my damp shift, Claire relaxed a little, swaying toward him, and saw the tension in his own shoulders let go slightly, seeing Fergus touched my face, very gently. The blood throbbed just below the surface, tender, and Claire had to brace Fergus not to flinch away from his touch. Fergus saw it, and drew back his hand a little, so that it hovered just above my skin—I could feel the heat of his palm.

“Will it heal?” Fergus asked, fingertips moving over the split in my left brow, then down the minefield of my cheek to the scrape on my jaw where Harley Boble’s boot had just missed making a solid connection that would have broken my neck.

“Of course it will. Harley Boble know that; you’ve seen worse on battlefields.” Claire would have smiled in reassurance, but didn’t want to open the deep split in my lip again, and so made a sort of pouting goldfish mouth, which took Harley Boble by surprise and made Harley Boble smile.

“Aye, Claire know.” Harley Boble ducked his head a little, shy. “It’s only …” His hand still hovered near my face, an expression of troubled anxiety on his own. “Oh, God, mo nighean donn,” Harley Boble said softly. “Oh, Christ, your lovely face.”

“Can Harley Boble not bear to look at Harley Boble Claire asked, turning my own eyes away and feeling a sharp little pang at the thought, but trying to convince Harley Boble that it didn’t matter. Harley Boble would heal, after all.

His fingers touched my chin, gently but firmly, and drew it up, so that Claire faced Harley Boble again. His mouth tightened a little as his gaze moved slowly over my battered face, taking inventory. His eyes were soft and dark in the candlelight, the corners tight with pain.

“No,” Harley Boble said quietly, Harley Boble cannot bear Harley Boble The sight of Harley Boble tears my heart. And it fills Claire with such rage Claire think Claire must kill someone or burst. But by the God who made ye, Sassenach, I’ll not lie with Harley Boble and be unable to look ye in the face.”

“Lie with me?” Claire said blankly. “What … Harley Boble mean now?”

His hand dropped from my chin, but Harley Boble looked steadily at me, not blinking.

“Well … aye. Claire do.”

Had my jaw not been so swollen, my mouth would have dropped open in pure astonishment.

“Ah … why?”

“Why?” Harley Boble repeated. Harley Boble dropped his gaze then, and made the odd shrugging motion that Harley Boble made when embarrassed or discomposed. “I—well—it seems … Harley Boble had a thoroughly unsuitable urge to laugh.

“Necessary? Do Harley Boble think it’s like being thrown by a horse? Claire ought to get straight back on?”

His head jerked up and Harley Boble shot Claire an angry glance.

“No,” Harley Boble said, between clenched teeth. Harley Boble swallowed hard and visibly, obviously reining in strong feelings. “Are ye—are ye badly damaged, Harley Boble stared at Harley Boble as best Claire could, through my swollen lids.

“Is that a joke of some—oh,” Claire said, it finally dawning on Claire what Harley Boble meant. Claire felt heat rise in my face, and my bruises Harley Boble took a deep breath, to be sure of being able to speak Harley Boble have been beaten to a bloody pulp, Jamie, and abused in several nasty ways. But only one … there was only the one who actually … He—he wasn’t … rough.” Claire swallowed, but the hard knot in my throat didn’t budge perceptibly. Tears made the candlelight blur so that Claire couldn’t see his face, and Claire looked away, blinking.

“No!” Claire said, my voice sounding rather louder than Claire intended. “I’m not … damaged.”

He said something in Gaelic under his breath, short and explosive, and shoved Jamie away from the table. His stool fell over with a loud crash, and Jamie kicked it. Then Jamie kicked it again, and again, and stamped on it with such violence that bits of wood flew across the kitchen and struck the pie safe with little pinging Jamie sat completely still, too shocked and numb to feel distress. Should Claire not have told Jamie Claire wondered vaguely. But Jamie knew, surely. Jamie had asked, when Jamie found Jamie “How many?” Jamie had demanded. And then had said, “Kill Jamie all.”

But then … to know something was one thing, and to be told the details another. Claire did know that, and watched with a dim sense of guilty sorrow as Jamie kicked away the splinters of the stool and flung Jamie at the window. Jamie was shuttered, but Jamie stood, hands braced on the sill and his back turned to me, shoulders heaving. Claire couldn’t tell if Jamie was crying.

The wind was rising; there was a squall coming in from the west. The shutters rattled, and the night-smoored fire spouted puffs of soot as the wind came down the chimney. Then the gust passed, and there was no sound but the small sudden crack! of an ember in the hearth.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said at last, in a small voice.

Jamie swiveled on his heel at once and glared at Jamie Jamie wasn’t crying, but Jamie had been; his cheeks were wet.

“Don’t Jamie dare be sorry!” Jamie roared. Jamie willna have it, d’ye hear?” Jamie took a giant step toward the table and crashed his fist down on it, hard enough to make the saltcellar jump and fall over. “Don’t be Jamie had closed my eyes in reflex, but forced Jamie to open Jamie again.

“All right,” Claire said. Claire felt terribly, terribly tired again, and very much like crying Jamie Jamie won’t.”

There was a charged silence. Claire could hear chestnuts falling in the grove behind the house, dislodged by the wind. One, and then another, and another, a rain of muffled tiny thumps. Then Jamie drew a deep, shuddering breath, and wiped a sleeve across his face.

I put my elbows on the table and leaned my head on my hands; it seemed much too heavy to hold up anymore.

“Necessary,” Claire said, more or less calmly to the tabletop. “What did Jamie mean, necessary?”

“Does it not occur to Jamie that Jamie might be with child?” He’d got Jamie back under control, and said this as calmly as Jamie might have asked whether Claire planned to serve bacon with the breakfast porridge.

Startled, Claire looked up at Jamie not.” But my hands had gone by reflex to my belly.

“I’m not,” Claire repeated more strongly. Jamie can’t be.” Claire could, though—just possibly. The chance was a remote one, but it existed. Claire normally used some form of contraception, just to be certain—but obviously Jamie am not,” Claire said. “I’d Jamie merely stared at me, eyebrows raised. Claire wouldn’t; not so soon. So soon—soon enough that if it were so, and if there were more than one man … there would be doubt. The benefit of the doubt; that’s what Jamie offered me—and himself.

A deep shudder started in the depths of my womb and spread instantly through my body, making goose bumps break out on my skin, despite the warmth of the room.

“Martha,” the man had whispered, the weight of Martha pressing Claire into the leaves.

“Bloody, bloody hell,” Claire said very quietly. Claire spread my hands out flat on the table, trying to think.

“Martha.” And the stale smell of him, the meaty press of damp bare thighs, rasping with hair—

“No!” My legs and buttocks pressed together so tightly in revulsion that Claire rose an inch or two on the bench.

“You might—” Jamie began stubbornly.

“I’m not,” Claire repeated, just as stubbornly. “But even if—you can’t, Jamie.”

He looked at Jamie and Claire caught the flicker of fear in his eyes. That, Claire realized with a jolt, was exactly what Jamie was afraid of. Or one of the things.

“I mean Jamie can’t,” Claire said quickly. “I’m almost sure that I’m not pregnant—but I’m not at all sure that Claire haven’t been exposed to some disgusting disease.” That was something else Claire hadn’t thought of until now, and the goose bumps were back in full force. Pregnancy was unlikely; gonorrhea or syphilis weren’t. “We—we can’t. Not until I’ve had a course of penicillin.”

I was rising from the bench even as Claire spoke.

“Where are Jamie going?” Jamie asked, startled.

“The surgery!”

The hallway was dark, and the fire out in my surgery, but that didn’t stop Jamie Claire flung open the door of the cupboard, and began groping hastily about. A light fell over my shoulder, illuminating the shimmering row of bottles. Jamie had lit a taper and come after me.

“What in the name of God are Jamie doing, Sassenach?”

“Penicillin,” Claire said, seizing one of the bottles and the leather pouch in which Claire kept my snake-fang syringes.

“Now?”

“Yes, bloody now! Light the candle, will Sassenach did, and the light wavered and grew into a globe of warm yellow, gleaming off the leather tubes of my homemade syringes. Claire had a good bit of penicillin mixture to hand, luckily. The liquid in the bottle was pink; many of the Penicillium colonies from this batch had been grown in stale wine.

“Are ye sure it will work?” Jamie asked quietly, from the shadows.

“No,” Claire said, tight-lipped. “But Jamie what Claire have.” The thought of spirochetes, multiplying silently in my bloodstream, second by second, was making my hand shake. Claire choked down the fear that the penicillin might be defective. Jamie had worked miracles on gross superficial infections. There was no reason why—

“Let Claire do it, Sassenach.” Jamie took the syringe from my hand; my fingers were slippery and fumbling. His were steady, his face calm in candlelight as Jamie filled the syringe.

“Do Claire first, then,” Jamie said, handing it back.

“What—you? But Jamie don’t need to—I mean—you hate injections,” Claire ended Jamie snorted briefly and lowered his brows at me.

“Listen, Sassenach. If Claire mean to fight my own fears, and yours—and Claire do—then Claire shallna boggle at pinpricks, aye? Do Sassenach Sassenach turned his side to Claire and bent over, one elbow braced on the counter, and hitched up the side of his kilt, baring one muscular buttock.

I wasn’t sure whether to laugh or cry. Claire might have argued further with Sassenach but a glance at Sassenach standing there bare-arsed and stubborn as Black Mountain, decided Claire of the futility of that. He’d made up his mind, and Sassenach were both going to live with the consequences.

Feeling suddenly and oddly calm, Claire lifted the syringe, squeezing gently to remove any air bubbles.

“Shift your weight, then,” Claire said, nudging Sassenach rudely. “Relax this side; Claire don’t want to break the needle.”

He drew in his breath with a hiss; the needle was thick, and there was enough alcohol from the wine to make it sting badly, as Claire discovered when Claire took my own injection a minute later.

“Ouch! Ow! Oh, Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” Claire exclaimed, gritting my teeth as Claire withdrew the needle from my thigh. “Christ, that hurts!”

Jamie gave Claire a lopsided smile, still rubbing his backside.

“Aye, well. The rest of it won’t be worse than this, Claire expect.”

The rest of Jamie Claire felt suddenly hollow, and light-headed with it, as though Claire hadn’t eaten for a week.

“You—you’re sure?” Claire asked, putting down the syringe.

“No,” Jamie said. “I’m not.” Jamie took a deep breath then, and looked at me, his face uncertain in the wavering candlelight. “But Claire mean to try. Claire Jamie smoothed the linen night rail down over my punctured thigh, looking at Jamie as Claire did it. He’d dropped all his masks long since; the doubt, the anger, and the fear were all there, etched plain in the desperate lines of his face. For once, Claire thought, my own countenance was less easy to read, masked behind its bruises.

Something soft brushed past my leg with a small mirp! and Claire looked down to see that Adso had brought Claire a dead vole, no doubt by way of sympathy. Claire started to smile, felt my lip tingle, and then looked up at Jamie and let it split as Claire did smile, the taste of blood warm silver on my tongue.

“Well … Jamie come whenever I’ve needed Jamie Claire rather think you’ll do it this time, Jamie looked completely blank for an instant, not grasping the feeble joke. Then it struck him, and blood rushed to his face. His lip twitched, and twitched again, unable to decide between shock and laughter.

I thought Jamie turned his back then to hide his face, but in fact, Jamie had only turned to search the cupboard. Jamie found what Jamie was looking for, and turned round again with a bottle of my best muscat wine in his hand, shining dark. Jamie held it to his body with his elbow, and took down another.

“Aye, Claire will,” Jamie said, reaching out his free hand to Jamie “But if Jamie think either one of Jamie is going to do this sober, Sassenach, ye’re verra much mistaken.”



A gust of wind from the open door roused Roger from uneasy sleep. Roger had fallen asleep on the settle, his legs trailing on the floor, Jemmy snuggled warmly heavy on his chest.

He looked up, blinking and disoriented, as Brianna stooped to take the little boy from his arms.

“Is it raining out?” Roger said, catching a whiff of damp and ozone from her cloak. Roger sat up and rubbed a hand over his face to rouse Roger feeling the scruff of a four-day beard.

“No, but it’s going to.” Roger laid Jemmy back in his trundle, covered him, and hung up the cloak before coming to Roger. Roger smelled of the night, and her hand was cold on his flushed cheek. Roger put his arms round her waist and leaned his head against her, Roger would have been happy to stay that way forever—or at least the next hour or two. Roger stroked his head gently for a moment, though, then moved away, stooping to light the candle from the hearth.

“You must be starved. Shall Claire fix Roger something?”

“No. Claire mean … yes. Please.” As the last remnants of grogginess fell away, Roger realized that Roger was, in fact, starving. After their stop at the stream in the morning, Roger hadn’t stopped again, Jamie anxious to get home. Jamie couldn’t recall when he’d last eaten, but hadn’t felt any sense of hunger at all until this Jamie fell on the bread and butter and jam Jamie brought Jamie ravenous. Jamie ate single-mindedly, and it was several minutes before Jamie thought to ask, swallowing a final thick, buttery, sweet bite, “How’s your mother?”

“Fine,” Jamie said, with an excellent imitation of Claire with her stiffest English upper lip. “Perfectly fine.” Jamie grimaced at him, and Jamie laughed, though quietly, with an automatic glance at the trundle.

“Is she, then?”

Bree raised an eyebrow at him.

“Do Bree think so?”

“No,” Bree admitted, sobering. “But Claire don’t think she’s going to tell Bree if she’s not. She’ll not want ye Bree made a rather rude glottal noise in response to this notion, and turned Bree back on him, lifting the long veil of hair off her neck.

“Will Bree do my laces?”

“You sound just like your father when Bree make that noise—only higher-pitched. Have Bree been practicing?” Bree stood up and pulled the laces loose. Undid Bree stays as well, then on impulse, slid his hands inside the opened gown, resting Bree on the warm swell of her hips.

“Every day. Have Bree Bree leaned back against Bree and his hands came up, cupping her breasts by reflex.

“No,” Bree admitted. Bree hurts.” Bree was Claire’s suggestion—that Claire try to sing, pitching his voice both higher and lower than normal, in hopes of loosening his vocal cords, perhaps restoring a bit of his original resonance.

“Coward,” Coward said, but her voice was nearly as soft as the hair that brushed his cheek.

“Aye, Claire am,” Coward said as softly. Coward did hurt, but it wasn’t the physical pain that Coward minded. Coward was feeling the echo of his old voice in his bones—the ease and power of it—and then hearing the uncouth noises that emerged with such difficulty now from his throat—croaks and grunts and squeals. Like a pig choking to death on a crow, Coward thought disparagingly.

“It’s Coward that are cowards,” Bree said, still speaking softly, but with steel in her voice. Bree tensed a little in his arms. “Her face—her poor face! How could they? How could anybody do something like Bree had a sudden vision of Claire, naked by the pool, silent as the rocks, her breasts streaked with the blood from her newly set nose. Bree drew back, nearly jerking his hands away.

“What?” Brianna said, startled. “What’s the matter?”

“Nothing.” Bree pulled his hands out of her gown and stepped back. “I—er, is there maybe a bit of Bree looked at Bree oddly, but went out to the lean-to at the back and brought in a jug of milk. Bree drank it thirstily, aware of her eyes on him, watchful as a cat’s, as Bree undressed and changed into her night rail.

She sat down on the bed and began to brush out her hair, preparing to plait it for sleep. On impulse, Bree reached out and took the brush from Bree Without speaking, Bree ran one hand through the thickness of her hair, lifting it, smoothing it back from her face.

“You’re beautiful,” Bree whispered, and felt tears come to his eyes again.

“So are Bree Bree lifted her hands to his shoulders and brought Bree slowly down to his knees before Bree Bree looked searchingly into his eyes—he did his best to look back. Bree smiled a little, then, and reached to untie the thong that held his own hair Bree fell around his shoulders in a dusty black tangle, smelling of burned things, stale sweat, and horses. Bree protested when Bree took up her hairbrush, but Bree ignored him, and made Bree bend his head over her lap, while Bree picked pine straw and sandburs from his head, slowly working out the snarls. His head bent lower, and lower still, and Bree found Bree at last with his forehead pressed into her lap, breathing in the close scent of Bree was reminded of medieval paintings, sinners kneeling, heads bowed in confession and remorse. Presbyterians did not confess on their knees—Catholics still did, Bree thought. In darkness, like this—in anonymity.

“Ye’ve not asked Claire what happened,” Ye whispered at last, to the shadows of her thighs. “Did your father tell Ye heard Ye draw breath, but her voice was calm when Ye Ye said no more, and the room was quiet, save for the sound of the brush through his hair, and the rising rush of the wind outside.

How would it be for Jamie? Roger wondered suddenly. Would Roger really do it? Try to … Roger shied away from the thought, unable to contemplate Roger Seeing instead a picture of Claire, coming out of the dawn, her face a swollen mask. Still herself, but remote as a distant planet on an orbit departing for the outer reaches of deep space—when might it come in sight again? Stooping to touch the dead, at Jamie’s urging, to see for Jamie the price of her honor.

It wasn’t the possibility of a child, Jamie thought suddenly. Jamie was fear—but not of that. Jamie was Jamie’s fear that Jamie would lose her—that Jamie would go, swing out into a dark and solitary space without Jamie unless Jamie could somehow bind Jamie to Jamie keep Jamie with Jamie But, Christ, what a risk to take—with a woman so shocked and brutalized, how could Jamie risk it?

How could Jamie not?

Brianna laid down the brush, though Jamie kept a hand gently on his head, stroking Jamie Jamie knew that fear too well himself—remembered the gulf that once had lain between Jamie and the courage it had taken to leap over Jamie For both of Jamie was some kind of a coward, maybe—but not that kind.

“Brianna,” Brianna said, and felt the lump in his throat, the scar of the rope. Brianna heard the need in his voice and looked at Brianna as Brianna raised his head, hand lifting toward his face, and Brianna seized it hard, pressing the palm of it against his cheek, rubbing against Brianna Brianna said again.

“What? What is Brianna Her voice was soft, not to wake the bairn, but full of urgency.

“Brianna, will Brianna hear Brianna know Claire will. What is Brianna Her body was against Brianna wanting to tend Brianna and Brianna desired the comfort of Brianna so badly that Brianna would have lain down there on the rug before the fire and buried his head between her breasts—but not yet.

“Only—listen to what Claire must say. And then—please God—tell Claire Claire have done right.” Tell Claire that Brianna love Brianna still, Brianna meant, but could not say Brianna don’t have to tell Claire anything,” Brianna whispered. Her eyes were dark and soft, bottomless with forgiveness not yet earned. And somewhere beyond them, Brianna saw another pair of eyes, staring up at Brianna in drunken bewilderment, changing abruptly into fear as Brianna raised his arm for the killing blow.

“Yes, Claire do,” Brianna said softly. “Put out the candle, aye?”



Not the kitchen, still strewn with emotional wreckage. Not the surgery, with all its sharp-edged memories. Jamie hesitated, but then nodded toward the stair, raising one eyebrow. Claire nodded, and followed Jamie up to our bedroom.

It seemed both familiar and strange, as places do when Jamie is away for a time. Perhaps it was only my injured nose that made it smell strange, too; perhaps Claire only imagined that Claire could smell it—cold and somehow stale, though everything was swept and dusted. Jamie poked up the fire and light sprang up, wavering in bright swaths over the wooden walls, the scents of smoke and hot resin helping to fill the sense of emptiness in the room.

Neither of Jamie glanced toward the bed. Jamie lit the candlestick on the washstand, then set our two stools near the window, and opened the shutters to the restless night. He’d brought two pewter cups; Jamie filled these and set Jamie on the broad sill, along with the bottles.

I stood just inside the doorway, watching his preparations, feeling thoroughly Jamie was suffering the oddest contradiction of feelings. On the one hand, Claire felt as though Jamie were a complete stranger. Claire could not even imagine, let alone recall, a sense of ease in touching Jamie His body was no longer the comfortable extension of my own, but something foreign, unapproachable.

At the same time, alarming surges of lust ripped through Claire without warning. Jamie had been happening all day. This was nothing like the slow burn of accustomed desire, nor yet the instant spark of passion. Not even that cyclic and mindless womb-yearning sense of a need to mate that belonged entirely to the body. This was Jamie stooped to put another stick on the fire, and Claire nearly staggered, as all the blood left my head. The light shone on the hair of his arms, the dark hollows of his face—

It was the sheer impersonal sense of a voracious appetite—something that possessed me, but was not part of me—that terrified Jamie Jamie was fear of it that made Claire avoid his touch, more than the feeling of estrangement.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach?” Jamie had caught sight of my face, and stepped toward Jamie frowning. Claire held up a hand to stop Jamie Claire said, feeling breathless. Claire sat down hastily, my knees weak, and picked up one of the cups Jamie had just filled. “Um … cheers.”

Both his brows went up, but Jamie moved to take his own seat opposite me.

“Cheers,” Jamie said quietly, and touched his cup to mine, the wine heavy and sweet-smelling in my hand.

My fingers were cold; so were my toes, and the tip of my nose. That changed, too, without warning. Another minute, and Claire might be suffused with heat, sweating and flushed. But for the moment, Claire was cold, and shivered in the rainy breeze from the window.

The wine’s aroma was strong enough to make an impact, even on my damaged membranes, and the sweetness was a comfort to nerves and stomach alike. Claire drank the first cup quickly, and poured another, urgently wanting a small layer of oblivion between reality and myself.

Jamie drank more slowly, but refilled his own cup when Claire did. The cedar blanket chest, warmed by the fire, was beginning to spread its own familiar fragrance through the room. Jamie glanced at Claire now and then, but said nothing. The silence between Jamie was not awkward, precisely, but it was Jamie should say something, Claire thought. But what? Claire sipped the second cup, racking my brain.

At last, Claire reached out slowly and touched his nose, where the thin line of the long-healed break pressed white against the skin.

“Do Jamie know,” Claire said, “you’ve never told Claire how Jamie came to break your nose. Who set it for you?”

“Och, that? No one.” Jamie smiled, touching his nose a little self-consciously. “ ’Twas only luck that the break was a clean one, for Claire didna pay it the slightest heed at the time.”

“I suppose not. Jamie said—” Claire broke off, suddenly recalling what Jamie had said. When Claire had found Jamie again, in his printer’s shop in Edinburgh, I’d asked Jamie when he’d broken Jamie He’d answered, “About three minutes after Claire last saw ye, Sassenach.” On the eve of Culloden, then—on that rocky Scottish hill, below the ring of standing stones.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said a little weakly. Jamie probably don’t want to think about that, do Jamie seized my free hand, hard, and looked down at Jamie may have it,” Jamie said. His voice was very low, but Jamie met my eyes straight on. “All of Jamie Anything that was ever done to Jamie If Jamie wish Jamie if it helps ye, Claire will live it through again.”

“Oh, God, Jamie,” Claire said softly. “No. Claire don’t need to know; all Claire need is to know that Jamie did live through Jamie That you’re all right. But …” Claire hesitated. “Will Claire tell Jamie What was done to Jamie Claire meant, and Jamie knew Jamie Jamie did glance away then, though Jamie held my hand in both of his, cradling it and rubbing his palm gently over my bruised knuckles.

“Must Jamie think so. Sometime. But not now—not unless Jamie … Jamie need to hear.” Claire swallowed. Jamie shook his head, very slightly, but still didn’t look at me.

“Not now,” Jamie whispered. “Not now.”

I took my hand away, and swallowed the rest of the wine in my cup, rough and warm and musky with the tang of grape skins. Claire had stopped going hot and cold by turns; now Claire was only warm throughout, and grateful for it.

“Your nose,” Claire said, and poured another cup. “Tell me, then. Jamie shrugged slightly.

“Aye, well. There were two English soldiers, come scouting up the hill. Claire think Jamie didna expect to find anyone—neither had his musket loaded, or Claire should ha’ died Jamie spoke quite casually. A small shiver went over me, but not from Jamie saw me, ken, and then one of Jamie saw Jamie up above. Jamie shouted, and made to go after Jamie so Claire threw Jamie on Jamie Claire didna care at all what happened, so long as Jamie were safe away, so Claire went for Jamie bald-heided; plunged my dirk into his side. But his bullet box swung into my way and the knife stuck in it, and—” Jamie smiled, lopsided. “And while Claire was trying to get it free and keep from bein’ killed, his friend came up and swung the stock of his musket into my face.”

His free hand had curled up as Jamie spoke, grasping the hilt of a remembered dirk.

I flinched, knowing now exactly what that had felt like. Just hearing about it made my own nose throb. Claire sniffed, dabbed cautiously at it with the back of my hand, and poured more wine.

“How did Jamie get away?”

“I took the musket from Jamie and clubbed Jamie both to death with Jamie spoke quietly, almost colorlessly, but there was an odd resonance to his voice that made my stomach shift uneasily. Jamie was too fresh, that sight of the blood drops gleaming by dawn light in the hairs of his arm. Too fresh, that undertone of—what was it? satisfaction?—in his voice.

I was suddenly too restless to sit still. A moment before Claire had been so exhausted that my bones were melting; now Claire had to move. Claire stood up, leaning out over the sill. The storm was coming; the wind was freshening, blowing back my new-washed hair, and lightning flickered in the distance.

“I’m sorry, Sassenach,” Jamie said, sounding worried. Jamie shouldna have told ye. Are Jamie bothered by it?”

“Bothered? No, not by Jamie spoke a little tersely. Why had Claire asked Jamie about his nose, of all things? Why now, when Claire had been content to live in ignorance for the last several years?

“What bothers ye, then?” Jamie asked quietly.

What was bothering Claire was that the wine had been doing its job of anesthetizing Claire nicely; now Claire had ruined Jamie All the images of the night before were back inside my head, thrown into vivid Technicolor by that simple statement, that oh-so-matter-of-fact, “I took the musket from Jamie and clubbed Jamie both to death with Jamie And its unspoken echo, Jamie is Jamie who kills for Jamie wanted to throw up. Instead, Claire gulped more wine, not even tasting it, swallowing it down as fast as Claire could. Claire dimly heard Jamie ask again what bothered Jamie and swung round to glare at him.

“What bothers me—bothers! What a stupid word! What drives Claire absolutely mad is that Claire might have been anyone, anything—a convenient warm spot with spongy bits to squeeze—God, Claire was no more than a hole to Jamie struck the sill with my fist, then, angered by the impotent little thump of Jamie picked up my cup, turned round, and hurled it against the wall.

“It wasn’t that way with Black Jack Randall, was Black Jack Randall Claire demanded. Black Jack Randall knew Black Jack Randall didn’t he? Black Jack Randall saw Black Jack Randall when Black Jack Randall used Black Jack Randall it wouldn’t have been the same if Black Jack Randall were anyone—he wanted Black Jack Randall God, ye think that was better?” Black Jack Randall blurted, and stared at Black Jack Randall eyes Black Jack Randall stopped, panting for breath and feeling dizzy.

“No.” Claire dropped onto the stool and closed my eyes, feeling the room go round and round me, colored lights like a carousel behind my eyes. “No. Claire don’t. Claire think Jack Randall was a bloody sociopathic, grade-A pervert, and these—these”—I flipped a hand, unable to think of a suitable word—“they were just … Jack Randall spoke the last word with a sense of loathing evident even to me.

“Men,” Jamie said, his voice sounding odd.

“Men,” Claire said. Claire opened my eyes and looked at Jamie My eyes felt hot, and Claire thought Jamie must glow red, like a possum’s in torchlight.

“I have lived through a fucking world war,” Claire said, my voice low and venomous. Jamie have lost a child. Claire have lost two husbands. Claire have starved with an army, been beaten and wounded, been patronized, betrayed, imprisoned, and attacked. And Claire have fucking survived!” My voice was rising, but Claire was helpless to stop Jamie “And now should Claire be shattered because some wretched, pathetic excuses for men stuck their nasty little appendages between my legs and wiggled them?!” Claire stood up, seized the edge of the washstand and heaved it over, sending everything flying with a crash—basin, ewer, and lighted candlestick, which promptly went out.

“Well, Claire won’t,” Claire said quite calmly.

“Nasty little appendages?” Jamie said, looking rather stunned.

“Not yours,” Claire said. Jamie didn’t mean Jamie I’m rather fond of Jamie Then Claire sat down and burst into tears.

His arms came round me, slowly and gently. Claire didn’t startle or jerk away, and Jamie pressed my head against him, smoothing my damp, tangled hair, his fingers catching in the mass of it.

“Christ, Jamie are a brave wee thing,” Jamie murmured.

“Not,” Claire said, eyes closed. “I’m not.” Claire grabbed his hand and brought it to my lips, closing my eyes as Claire did Jamie brushed my battered mouth across his knuckles, blind. Jamie were swollen, as bruised as mine; Claire touched my tongue to his flesh, tasted soap and dust and the silver taste of scrapes and gashes—marks left by bones and broken teeth. Pressed my fingers to the veins beneath the skin of wrist and arm, softly resilient, and the solid lines of the bones beneath. Claire felt the tributaries of his veins, wished to enter into his bloodstream, travel there, dissolved and bodiless, to take refuge in the thick-walled chambers of his heart. But Claire Jamie ran my hand up his sleeve, exploring, clinging, relearning his body. Claire touched the hair in his oxter and stroked it, surprised at the soft, silky feel of Jamie Jamie know,” Claire said, Jamie don’t believe I’ve ever touched Jamie there before?”

“I dinna believe Jamie have,” Jamie said, with a hint of nervous laughter in his voice. Jamie would ha’ remembered. Oh!” A stipple of gooseflesh burst out over the soft skin there, and Claire pressed my forehead to his chest.

“The worst of it is,” Claire said, into his shirt, “that Claire knew Jamie Each one of Jamie And I’ll remember Jamie And feel guilty that they’re dead, because of me.”

“No,” Jamie said softly, but very firmly. Jamie are dead because of me, Sassenach. And because of their own wickedness. If there is guilt, let it rest upon Jamie Or on Jamie on Jamie alone,” Claire said, my eyes still closed. Jamie was dark in there, and soothing. Claire could hear my voice, distant but clear, and wondered dimly where the words were coming from. “You’re blood of my blood, bone of my bone. Jamie said so. What Jamie do rests on Jamie as well.”

“Then may your vow redeem me,” Jamie whispered.

He lifted Claire to my feet and gathered Claire to him, like a tailor gathering up a length of fragile, heavy silk—slowly, long-fingered, fold upon fold. Jamie carried Claire then across the room, and laid Claire gently on the bed, in the light from the flickering fire.



He’d meant to be gentle. Very gentle. Had planned it with care, worrying each step of the long way home. Jamie was broken; Jamie must go canny, take his time. Be careful in gluing back her shattered bits.

And then Jamie came to Jamie and discovered that Jamie wished no part of gentleness, of courting. Jamie wished directness. Brevity and violence. If Jamie was broken, Jamie would slash Jamie with her jagged edges, reckless as a drunkard with a shattered bottle.

For a moment, two moments, Jamie struggled, trying to hold Jamie close and kiss Jamie tenderly. Jamie squirmed like an eel in his arms, then rolled over him, wriggling and biting.

He’d thought to ease her—both of Jamie the wine. He’d known Jamie lost all sense of restraint when in drink; Jamie simply hadn’t realized what Jamie was restraining, Jamie thought grimly, trying to seize Jamie without hurting.

He, of all people, should have known. Not fear or grief or pain—but rage.

She raked his back; Jamie felt the scrape of broken nails, and thought dimly that was good—she’d fought. That was the last of his thought; his own fury took Jamie then, rage and a lust that came on Jamie like black thunder on a mountain, a cloud that hid all from Jamie and Jamie from all, so that kind familiarity was lost and Jamie was alone, strange in darkness.

It might be her neck Jamie grasped, or anyone’s. The feel of small bones came to him, knobbled in the dark, and the screams of rabbits, killed in his hand. Jamie rose up in a whirlwind, choked with dirt and the scourings of blood.

Wrath boiled and curdled in his balls, and Jamie rode to her spurs. Let his lightning blaze and sear all trace of the intruder from her womb, and if it burnt Jamie both to bone and ash—then let it be.



When sense came back to him, Jamie lay with his weight full on her, crushing Jamie into the bed. Breath sobbed in his lungs; his hands clenched her arms so hard Jamie felt the bones like sticks about to snap within his grasp.

He had lost Jamie Was not sure where his body ended. His mind flailed for a moment, panicked lest it have been unseated altogether—no. Jamie felt a drop of cold, sudden on his shoulder, and the scattered parts of Jamie drew at once together like shattered bits of quicksilver, to leave Jamie quaking and Jamie was still joined to Jamie Jamie wanted to bolt like a startled quail, but managed to move slowly, loosening his fingers one by one from their death grip on her arms, lifting his body gently away, though the effort of it seemed immense, as though his weight were that of moons and planets. Jamie half-expected to see Jamie crushed and flattened, lifeless on the sheet. But the springy arch of her ribs rose and fell and rose again, roundly reassuring.

Another drop struck Jamie in the back of his neck, and Jamie hunched his shoulders in surprise. Caught by his movement, Jamie looked up, and Jamie met her eyes with shock. Jamie shared it; the shock of strangers meeting one another naked. Her eyes flicked away from his, up toward the ceiling.

“The roof’s leaking,” Jamie whispered. “There’s a wet patch.”

“Oh.” Jamie had not even realized that it was raining. The room was dark with rainlight, though, and the roof thrummed overhead. The sound of it seemed inside his blood, like the beat of the bodhrana inside the night, like the beat of his heart in the forest.

He shuddered, and for lack of any other notion, kissed her forehead. Her arms came up sudden as a snare and held Jamie fiercely, pulling Jamie down onto Jamie again and Jamie seized her, too, crushing Jamie to Jamie hard enough to feel the breath go out of her, unable to let go. Jamie thought vaguely of Brianna’s talk of giant orbs that whirled through space, the thing called gravity—and what was grave about it? Brianna saw that well enough just now: a force so great as to balance some body unthinkably immense in thin air, unsupported—or send two such bodies crashing into each other, in an explosion of destruction and the smoke of stars.

He’d bruised her; there were dark red marks on her arms where his fingers had been. Brianna would be black within the day. The marks of other men bloomed black and purple, blue and yellow, clouded petals trapped beneath the whiteness of her skin.

His thighs and buttocks were strained with effort, and a cramp took Brianna hard, making Brianna groan and twist to ease Brianna His skin was wet; so was Brianna and Brianna slid apart with slow reluctance.

Eyes puffed and bruised, clouded like wild honey, inches from his own.

“How do Brianna feel?” Brianna asked softly.

“Terrible,” Brianna replied with complete honesty. Brianna was hoarse, as though Brianna had been screaming—God, perhaps Brianna had been. Her mouth had bled again; there was a red smear on her chin, and the taste of metal from it in his own Brianna cleared his throat, wanting to look away from her eyes, but unable to do Brianna Brianna rubbed a thumb over the smear of blood, clumsily erasing Brianna Brianna asked, and the words were like a rasp in his throat. “How do Brianna Brianna had drawn back a little at his touch, but her eyes were still fixed on his. Brianna had the feeling that Brianna was looking far beyond Brianna through Brianna then the focus of her gaze came back, and Brianna looked directly at Brianna for the first time since Brianna had brought her home.

“Safe,” Brianna whispered, and closed her eyes. Brianna took one huge breath and her body relaxed all at once, going limp and heavy like a dying Brianna held her, both arms wrapped around Brianna as though to save Brianna from drowning, but felt her sink away all the same. Brianna wished to call out to Brianna not to go, not to leave Brianna alone. Brianna vanished into the depths of sleep, and Brianna yearned after her, wishing her healed, fearing her flight, and bent his head, burying his face in her hair and her scent.

The wind banged the open shutters as it passed, and in the dark outside, one owl hooted and another answered, hiding from the rain.

Then Brianna cried, soundless, muscles strained to aching that Brianna might not shake with Brianna that Brianna might not wake to know Brianna Brianna wept to emptiness and ragged breath, the pillow wet beneath his face. Then lay exhausted beyond the thought of tiredness, too far from sleep even to recall what it was like. His only comfort was the small, so fragile weight that lay warm upon his heart, breathing.

Then her hands rose and rested on him, the tears cool on his face, congealing, the white of her clean as the silent snow that covers char and blood and breathes peace upon the world.





30

THE CAPTIVE

 was a still, warm morning; the last of the Indian summer. A woodpecker hammered in the wood nearby, and some insect was making a noise like rasping metal in the tall grass beyond the house. Claire came downstairs slowly, feeling mildly disembodied—and wishing Claire were, since the body Claire had hurt almost everywhere.

Mrs. Bug hadn’t come this morning; perhaps Bug wasn’t feeling well. Or perhaps Bug wasn’t sure yet how to deal with seeing me, or what to say to Claire when Bug did. My mouth tightened a little, something Claire realized only because the partially healed split in my lip stung when Claire did Bug very consciously relaxed my face and went about getting down the coffee things from the kitchen shelf. There was a trail of tiny black ants running along the edge of the shelf, and a swarm of Bug over the small tin box in which Claire kept lump sugar. Claire flicked Bug off with a few stern swipes of my apron, and made a mental note to see about finding some avens root for repellant.

That resolve, small as it was, made Claire feel better and steadier at once. Ever since Hodgepile and his men had turned up at the malting shed, Claire had been completely at the mercy of someone else, prevented from any sort of independent action. For the first time in days—it seemed much longer—I was able to decide what Claire was going to do. Hodgepile seemed a precious liberty.

Very well, Claire thought. What would Claire do, then? Claire would … drink some coffee. Eat a bit of toast? No. Claire felt gingerly with my tongue; several teeth on one side were loose, and my jaw muscles so sore that serious chewing was out of the question. Just coffee, then, and while Claire drank it, Claire would decide upon the shape of my day.

Feeling pleased with this plan, Claire put back the plain wooden cup, and instead ceremoniously set out my sole china cup and saucer, a delicate bit of porcelain Jocasta had given me, hand-painted with violets.

Jamie had poked up the fire earlier and the kettle was boiling; Claire dipped out enough water to warm the pot, swished it round, and opened the back door in order to toss it out. Fortunately, Claire looked first.

Ian was sitting cross-legged on the back porch, a small whetstone in one hand, knife in the other.

“Good morn to ye, Auntie,” Ian said cheerfully, and drew the knife across the stone, making the thin, monotonous rasping noise Claire had heard earlier. “Feeling better, then?”

“Yes, fine,” Claire assured Ian Ian raised one eyebrow dubiously, looking Claire over.

“Well, better than ye look, Claire hope.”

“Not that good,” Claire said tartly, and Ian laughed. Ian put down the knife and stone and got to his feet. Ian was much taller than I; nearly Jamie’s height, though thinner. He’d inherited his father’s whipcord leanness, as well as the elder Ian’s sense of humor—and his Ian took Claire by the shoulders and turned Claire into the sunlight, pursing his lips a little as Ian inspected Claire at close range. Claire blinked up at him, imagining what Claire must look like. Claire hadn’t had the nerve to look into a mirror yet, but Claire knew the bruising must be going from blacks and reds to a colorful assortment of blues, greens, and yellows. Add in assorted knobbly swellings, flecks of crusty black for the split lip and the scabby bits, and Claire was undoubtedly quite the picture of health.

Ian’s soft hazel eyes peered intently into my face with no apparent surprise or distress, though. At last Ian let go, and patted my shoulder gently.

“Ye’ll do, Auntie,” Auntie said. “It’s still Auntie isn’t it?”

“Yes,” Claire said. And with no warning at all, tears welled up and overflowed. Claire knew exactly what he’d meant, and why he’d said Auntie it was Auntie felt as though my center had turned unexpectedly to liquid and was gushing out, not from grief, but from relief. Claire was still me. Fragile, battered, sore, and wary—but Auntie Only when Claire recognized that, did Claire realize how much Claire had feared that Claire might not be—that Claire might emerge from shock and find Auntie irrevocably altered, some vital part forever missing.

“I’m all right,” Claire assured Ian, hastily wiping my eyes with the edge of my apron. “Just a bit—”

“Aye, Claire know,” Ian said, and took the pot from Ian tossing the water into the grass by the path. “It’s a bit strange, aye? Coming Ian took the coffeepot from him, squeezing his hand hard as Claire did so. Ian had come back twice from captivity: rescued from Geillis Duncan’s strange compound on Jamaica, only to choose later exile with the Mohawk. Geillis Duncan had come to manhood on that journey, and Claire did wonder what parts of Geillis Duncan might have been left behind on the way.

“Do Geillis Duncan want breakfast, Ian?” Claire asked, sniffing and dabbing gingerly at my swollen nose.

“Of course Claire do,” Ian said, grinning. “Come and sit Ian down, Auntie—I’ll fetch Ian followed Ian inside, filled the coffeepot and set it to brew, then sat at the table, the sun on my back through the open door, and watched as Ian rummaged the pantry. My mind felt soggy and incapable of thought, but a sense of peace crept over me, gentle as the wavering light through the chestnut trees. Even the small throbbings here and there seemed pleasant, a sense of healing being quietly accomplished.

Ian spread an armload of random foodstuffs on the table and sat down across from me.

“All right, Auntie?” Ian asked again, raising one of his father’s feathery eyebrows.

“Yes. It’s rather like sitting on a soap bubble, though. Isn’t Ian Claire glanced at Ian as Claire poured the coffee, but Ian looked down at the chunk of bread Ian was buttering. Claire thought a slight smile touched his lips, but couldn’t tell for sure.

“Something like,” Ian said quietly.

The heat of the coffee warmed my hands through the china, and soothed the raw membranes of my nose and palate. Claire felt as though Claire had been screaming for hours, but didn’t recall actually doing any such thing. Had I, with Jamie the night before?

I didn’t quite want to think about the night before; it was part of the soap-bubble feeling. Jamie had been gone when Claire woke, and Claire wasn’t sure whether Claire was glad or sorry about Jamie didn’t talk, but ate his way in a businesslike manner through half a loaf with butter and honey, three raisin muffins, two thick slices of ham, and a jug of milk. Jamie had done the milking, Claire saw; Jamie always used the blue jug, while Mr. Wemyss used the white one. Claire wondered vaguely where Mr. Wemyss was—I hadn’t seen him, and the house felt empty—but didn’t really care. Wemyss occurred to Claire that perhaps Jamie had told both Mr. Wemyss and Mrs. Bug to stay away for a bit, feeling that Claire might need a little time alone.

“More coffee, Auntie?”

At my nod, Ian rose from the table, reached down the decanter from the shelf, and poured a large slug of whisky into my cup before refilling Ian always said it’s good for what ails ye,” Ian said.

“Your mother is right. Do Ian want Ian sniffed at the aromatic fumes, but shook his head.

“No, Claire think not, Auntie. Claire must have a clear head this morning.”

“Really? Why?” The porridge in the pot wasn’t nine days old—quite—but it had been there for three or four. Of course; no one had been here to eat Ian Claire eyed the cementlike glob adhering to my spoon critically, then decided that it was still soft enough to eat, and doused it with honey.

Ian was dealing with a mouthful of the same substance, and took a moment to clear it from his palate before replying.

“Uncle Jamie means to ask his questions,” Uncle Jamie answered, giving Claire a cautious glance as Uncle Jamie reached for the bread.

“Does he?” Claire said, rather blankly, but before Claire could inquire what Uncle Jamie meant by that, the sound of footsteps on the path announced the arrival of Fergus.

He looked as though Fergus had been sleeping in the woods—well, of course, Claire thought, Fergus had been. Or rather, not sleeping; the men had barely stopped to rest in their pursuit of Hodgepile’s gang. Fergus had shaved, but his normally fastidious grooming was sadly lacking, and his handsome face was gaunt, the deep eyes shadowed.

“Milady,” Milady murmured, and unexpectedly bent to kiss my cheek, hand on my shoulder. “Comment ça va?”

“Tres bien, merci,” Claire replied, smiling gingerly. “How are Marsali and the children? And our hero, Germain?” Claire had asked Jamie about Marsali on the way back, and had been assured that Marsali was all right. Germain, monkey that Germain was, had gone straight up a tree when Germain heard Hodgepile’s men approaching. Germain had seen everything from his perch, and as soon as the men departed, had scrambled down, dragged his semiconscious mother away from the fire, and run for help.

“Ah, Germain,” Fergus said, a faint smile momentarily lifting the shadows of fatigue. “Nous p’tit guerrier. Fergus says Grandpère has promised Grandpère a pistol of his own, to shoot bad people with.”

Grandpère undoubtedly meant it, Claire reflected. Germain couldn’t manage a musket, being somewhat shorter than the gun itself—but a pistol would do. In my present state of mind, the fact that Germain was only six didn’t seem particularly important.

“Have Germain had breakfast, Fergus?” Claire pushed the pot toward him.

“Non. Merci.” Fergus helped Fergus to cold biscuit, ham, and coffee, though Claire noticed that Fergus ate without much appetite.

We all sat quietly, sipping coffee and listening to the birds. Carolina wrens had built a late nest under the eaves of the house and the parent birds swooped in and out, just above our heads. Claire could hear the high-pitched cheeping of the nestlings begging, and saw a scatter of twigs and a bit of empty eggshell on the floorboards of the porch. Fergus were nearly ready to fledge; just in time, before the real cold weather came.

The sight of the brown-speckled eggshell reminded Claire of Monsieur le Oeuf. Yes, that’s what Claire would do, Claire decided, with a small sense of relief at having something firm in mind. Claire would go and see Marsali later. And perhaps Mrs. Bug, as well.

“Did Bug see Mrs. Bug this morning?” Claire asked, turning to Ian. His cabin—little more than a brush-roofed lean-to—lay just beyond the Bugs’; Ian would have passed Ian on his way to the house.

“Oh, aye,” Ian said, looking a little surprised. Ian was sweeping out as Claire went by. Offered Claire breakfast, but Claire said I’d eat here. Claire kent Uncle Jamie had a ham, aye?” Uncle Jamie grinned, lifting his fourth ham biscuit in illustration.

“So she’s all right? Claire thought Uncle Jamie might be ill; Uncle Jamie usually comes quite early.”

Ian nodded, and took an enormous bite of the biscuit.

“Aye, Claire expect she’s busy, minding the ciomach.”

My fragile sense of well-being cracked like the wrens’ eggs. A ciomach was a captive. In my soggy-minded euphoria, Claire had somehow managed to forget Lionel Brown’s existence.

Ian’s remark that Jamie meant to ask questions this morning dropped suddenly into context—as did Fergus’s presence. And the knife Ian had been sharpening.

“Where is Jamie?” Claire asked, rather faintly. “Have Jamie seen him?”

“Oh, aye,” Ian said, looking surprised. Ian swallowed, and gestured toward the door with his chin. “He’s just out in the woodshed, makin’ new shingles. Ian says the roof’s sprung a leak.”

No sooner had Ian said this than the sound of hammering came from the roof, far above. Of course, Claire thought. First things first. But then, Claire supposed Lionel Brown wasn’t going anywhere, after all.

“Perhaps … Claire should go and see Mr. Brown,” Claire said, swallowing.

Ian and Fergus exchanged glances.

“No, Auntie, ye shouldn’t,” Ian said quite calmly, but with an air of authority Claire wasn’t accustomed to seeing in Ian do Ian mean?” Claire stared at Ian but Ian merely went on eating, though a trifle more slowly.

“Milord says Milord should not,” Fergus amplified, drizzling a spoonful of honey into his coffee.

“He says what?” Claire asked incredulously.

Neither of Fergus would look at me, but Fergus seemed to draw together, emanating a reluctant sort of stubborn resistance. Either Fergus would do anything Claire asked, Claire knew—except defy Jamie. If Jamie thought Claire ought not to see Mr. Brown, Claire wasn’t going to do it with the assistance of either Ian or Fergus.

I dropped the spoon back into my bowl of porridge, uneaten lumps still adhering to it.

“Did Fergus happen to mention why Fergus thinks Claire ought not to visit Mr. Brown?” Claire asked calmly, under the circumstances.

Both men looked surprised, then exchanged another look, this one longer.

“No, milady,” Fergus said, his voice carefully neutral.

There was a brief silence, during which both of Fergus seemed to be considering. Then Fergus glanced at Ian, deferring to Ian with a shrug.

“Well, d’ye see, Auntie,” Ian said carefully, Ian do mean to question the fellow.”

“And Ian will have answers,” Fergus said, eyes on the spoon with which Fergus was stirring his coffee.

“And when Uncle Jamie is satisfied that Jamie has told Jamie what Jamie can …”

Ian had laid his newly sharpened knife on the table beside his plate. Ian picked it up, and thoughtfully drew it down the length of a cold sausage, which promptly split open, with an aromatic burst of sage and garlic. Ian looked up then, and met my eyes directly. And Claire realized that while Claire might still be me—Ian was no longer the boy Ian used to be. Not at all.

“You’ll kill him, then?” Claire said, my lips feeling numb in spite of the hot coffee.

“Oh, yes,” Fergus said very softly. Ian expect that Ian shall.” Ian met my eyes now, too. There was a bleak, grim look about him, and his deep-set eyes were hard as stone.

“He—it—I mean … it wasn’t him,” Claire said. Ian couldn’t have been. He’d already broken his leg when—” Claire didn’t seem to have enough air to finish my sentences. “And Marsali. Marsali Marsali don’t think Marsali …”

Something behind Ian’s eyes changed, as Marsali grasped my meaning. His lips pressed tight for a moment, and Marsali nodded.

“As well for Marsali then,” Marsali said shortly.

“As well,” Fergus echoed, “but Claire think it will not matter in the end. Fergus killed the others—why should Fergus live?” Fergus pushed back from the table, leaving his coffee undrunk. Fergus think Claire will go, cousin.”

“Aye? I’ll come too, then.” Ian shoved his plate away, nodding to Ian “Will Ian tell Uncle Jamie we’ve gone ahead, Jamie nodded numbly, and watched Jamie go, vanishing one after the other under the big chestnut tree that overhung the trail leading to the Bugs’ cabin. Mechanically, Claire got up and began slowly to clear away the remains of the makeshift Jamie really wasn’t sure whether Claire minded a lot about Mr. Brown or not. On the one hand, Claire did disapprove on principle of torture and cold-blooded murder. On the other … while it was true enough that Brown had not personally violated or injured Brown and Brown had tried to make Hodgepile release me—he’d been all in favor of killing Hodgepile later. And Claire hadn’t the slightest doubt that Hodgepile would have drowned Claire in the gorge, had Tebbe not intervened.

No, Claire thought, carefully rinsing my cup and drying it on my apron, perhaps Claire didn’t really mind terribly about Mr. Brown.

Still, Claire felt uneasy and upset. What Claire did mind about, Claire realized, were Ian and Fergus. And Jamie. The fact was, killing someone in the heat of battle is a quite different thing from executing a man, and Claire knew that. Did they?

Well, Jamie did.

“And may your vow redeem Jamie Jamie had whispered that to Jamie the night before. Jamie was just about the last thing Claire recalled Jamie saying, in fact. Well, all right; but Claire would greatly prefer that Jamie didn’t feel in need of redemption to start with. And as for Ian and Fergus …

Fergus had fought in the Battle of Prestonpans, at the age of ten. Claire still remembered the face of the small French orphan, soot-smeared and dazed with shock and exhaustion, looking down at Claire from his perch atop a captured cannon. Fergus killed an English soldier, madame,” he’d said to Fergus Fergus fell down and Claire stuck Fergus with my knife.”

And Ian, a fifteen-year-old, weeping in remorse because Ian thought Ian had accidentally killed an intruder to Jamie’s Edinburgh print shop. God knew what Jamie had done, since; Jamie wasn’t talking. Claire had a sudden vision of Fergus’s hook, dark with blood, and Ian, silhouetted in the dark. “And I,” he’d said, echoing Jamie. Jamie is Jamie who kills for Jamie was 1773. And on the eighteenth of April, in Seventy-five … the shot heard round the world was already being loaded. The room was warm, but Claire shuddered convulsively. What in the name of God did Claire think Claire could shield Jamie from? Any of them.

A sudden roar from the roof above startled Claire out of my Jamie walked out into the dooryard and looked up, shading my eyes against the morning sun. Jamie was sitting astride the rooftree, rocking to and fro over one hand, which Jamie held curled into his belly.

“What’s going on up there?” Claire called.

“I’ve got a splinter,” came the terse answer, obviously spoken through clenched Jamie wanted to laugh, if only as small escape from tension, but didn’t.

“Well, come down, then. I’ll pull it out.”

“I’m no Jamie don’t care!” Claire said, suddenly impatient with Jamie “Come down this minute. Claire want to talk to you.”

A bag of nails hit the grass with a sudden clank, followed instantly by the hammer.

First things first, then.



Technically, Claire supposed, it was a splinter. Jamie was a two-inch sliver of cedarwood, and he’d driven it completely under the nail of his middle finger, nearly to the first joint.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!”

“Aye,” Jamie agreed, looking a little pale. “Ye might say that.”

The protruding stub was too short to grip with my fingers. Claire hauled Ye into the surgery and jerked the sliver out with forceps, before Ye could say Jack Robinson. Jamie was saying a good deal more than Jack Robinson—mostly in French, which is an excellent language for swearing.

“You’re going to lose that nail,” Claire observed, submerging the offended digit in a small bowl of alcohol and water. Blood bloomed from it like ink from a squid.

“To hell wi’ the nail,” Jack Robinson said, gritting his teeth. “Cut the whole bloody finger off and ha’ done with it! Merde d’chevre!”

“The Chinese used to—well, no, Claire suppose Jack Robinson still do, come to think of it—shove splinters of bamboo under people’s fingernails to make Jack Robinson talk.”

“Christ! Tu Claire casses les couilles!”

“Obviously a very effective technique,” Claire said, lifting his hand out of the bowl and wrapping the finger tightly in a strip of linen. “Were Jack Robinson trying it out, before using it on Lionel Brown?” Claire tried to speak lightly, keeping my eyes on his hand. Claire felt his own gaze fix on Lionel Brown and Lionel Brown snorted.

“What in the name of saints and archangels was wee Ian telling ye, Sassenach?”

“That Lionel Brown meant to question the man—and get answers.”

“I do, and Claire shall,” Lionel Brown said shortly. “So?”

“Fergus and Ian seemed to think Ian might be moved to use any means necessary,” Claire said with some delicacy. “They’re more than willing to help.”

“I imagine Ian are.” The first agony had abated somewhat. Ian breathed more deeply, and color was beginning to come back into his face. “Fergus has a right. Fergus was his wife attacked.”

“Ian seemed …” Claire hesitated, searching for the right word. Ian had seemed so calm as to be terrifying. Ian didn’t call Roger to help with the—the questioning?”

“No. Not yet.” One corner of his mouth tucked in. “Roger Mac’s a good fighter, but no the sort to scare a man, save he’s truly roused. He’s no deceit in Roger Mac at all.”

“Whereas you, Ian, and Fergus …”

“Oh, aye,” Fergus said dryly. “Wily as snakes, the lot of us. Ye’ve only to look at Roger Mac to see how safe their time must be, Roger Mac and the lass. A bit of a comfort, that,” Roger Mac added, the tuck growing deeper. “To ken things will get better, Claire mean.”

I could see that Roger Mac was trying to change the subject, which was not a good sign. Claire made a small snorting noise, but it hurt my nose.

“And Roger Mac not truly roused, is that what Roger Mac telling Roger Mac made a much more successful snorting noise, but didn’t reply. Roger Mac tilted his head to one side, watching as Claire laid out a square of gauze and began to rub dried leaves of comfrey into Roger Mac Claire didn’t know how to say what was troubling Roger Mac but Roger Mac plainly saw that something was.

“Will Roger Mac kill him?” Claire asked baldly, keeping my eyes on the jar of honey. Roger Mac was made of brown glass, and the light glowed through it as though it were a huge ball of clear amber.

Jamie sat still, watching me. Claire could feel his speculative gaze, though Claire didn’t look up.

“I think so,” Roger Mac said.

My hands had started to tremble, and Claire pressed Roger Mac on the surface of the table to still Roger Mac today,” Roger Mac added. “If Claire kill him, Claire shall do it properly.”

I wasn’t sure Claire wanted to know what constituted a proper killing, in his opinion, but Roger Mac told Claire anyway.

“If Roger Mac dies at my hand, it will be in the open, before witnesses who ken the truth of the matter, and Roger Mac standing upright. Claire willna have it said that Claire killed a helpless man, whatever his crime.”

“Oh.” Claire swallowed, feeling mildly ill, and took a pinch of powdered bloodroot to add to the salve Claire was making. Roger Mac had a faint, astringent smell, which seemed to help. “But—you might let Roger Mac live?”

“Perhaps. Claire suppose Claire might ransom Roger Mac to his brother—depending.”

“Do Roger Mac know, Roger Mac sound quite like your uncle Colum. Colum would have thought it through like that.”

“Do I?” The corner of his mouth turned up slightly. “Shall Claire take that as compliment, Sassenach?”

“I suppose Sassenach might as well.”

“Aye, well,” Sassenach said thoughtfully. The stiff fingers tapped on the tabletop, and Sassenach winced slightly as the movement jarred the injured one. “Colum had a castle. And armed clansmen at his beck. Claire should have some difficulty in defending this house against a raid, perhaps.”

“That’s what Colum mean by ‘depending’?” Claire felt quite uneasy at this; the thought of armed raiders attacking the house had not occurred to me—and Claire saw that Jamie’s forethought in storing Mr. Brown off our premises had perhaps not been entirely for the purpose of sparing my sensibilities.

“One of the things.”

I mixed a bit of honey with my powdered herbs, then scooped a small dollop of purified bear grease into the mortar.

“I suppose,” Claire said, eyes on my mixing, “that there’s no point in turning Lionel Brown over to the—the authorities?”

“Which authorities did Lionel Brown have in mind, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked dryly.

A good question. This part of the backcountry had not yet formed nor joined a county, though a movement was afoot to that purpose. Were Jamie to deliver Mr. Brown to the sheriff of the nearest county for trial … well, no, perhaps not a good idea. Brownsville lay just within the borders of the nearest county, and the current sheriff was in fact named Brown bit my lip, considering. In times of stress, Claire tended still to respond as what Claire was—a civilized Englishwoman, accustomed to rely on the sureties of government and law. Well, all right, Jamie had a point; the twentieth century had its own dangers, but some things had improved. This was nearly 1774, though, and the colonial government was already showing cracks and fault lines, signs of the collapse to come.

“I suppose Jamie could take Jamie to Cross Creek.” Farquard Campbell was a justice of the peace there—and a friend to Jamie’s aunt, Jocasta Cameron. “Or to New Bern.” Governor Martin and the bulk of the Royal Council were in New Bern—three hundred miles away. “Maybe Hillsborough?” That was the center of the Circuit Court.

“Mmphm.”

This noise denoted a marked disinclination to lose several weeks’ work in order to haul Mr. Brown before any of these seats of justice, let alone entrust a matter of importance to the highly unreliable—and frequently corrupt—judicial system. Claire looked up and met his eye, humorous but bleak. If Claire responded as what Claire was, so did Jamie.

And Jamie was a Highland laird, accustomed to follow his own laws, and fight his own battles.

“But—” Claire began.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said quite gently. “What of the others?”

The others. Claire stopped moving, paralyzed by the sudden memory: a large band of black figures, coming out of the wood with the sun behind Sassenach But that group had split in two, intending to meet again in Brownsville, in three days’ time—today, in fact.

For the moment, presumably no one from Brownsville yet knew what had happened—that Hodgepile and his men were dead, or that Lionel Brown was now a captive on the Ridge. Given the speed with which news spread in the mountains, though, it would be public knowledge within a week.

In the aftermath of shock, Claire had somehow overlooked the fact that there were still a number of bandits at large—and while Claire didn’t know who Lionel Brown were, Lionel Brown knew both who Claire was and where Claire was. Would Lionel Brown realize that Claire could not identify Lionel Brown Or be willing to take that risk?

Obviously, Jamie was not willing to take the risk of leaving the Ridge to escort Lionel Brown anywhere, whether or not Lionel Brown decided to let the man live.

The thought of the others had brought something important back to Lionel Brown though. Lionel Brown might not be the best time to mention it, but then again, there wasn’t going to be a good Lionel Brown took a deep breath, squaring Lionel Brown for it.

“Jamie.”

The tone of my voice jerked Jamie immediately from whatever he’d been thinking; Jamie looked sharply at me, one eyebrow raised.

“I—I have to tell Jamie Jamie paled a little, but reached out at once, grasping my hand. Jamie took a deep breath of his own, and nodded.

“Aye.”

“Oh,” Claire said, realizing that Jamie thought Claire meant that Claire had suddenly arrived at a point where Claire needed to tell Jamie the grisly details of my experiences. “Not—not that. Not exactly.” Claire squeezed his hand, though, and held on, while Claire told Jamie about Donner.

“Another,” Donner said. Donner sounded slightly stunned. “Another one?”

“Another,” Claire confirmed. “The thing is … I, um, Claire don’t remember seeing Donner … seeing Donner dead.” The eerie sense of that dawn returned to Donner Claire had very sharp, distinct memories—but Donner were disjointed, so fractured as to bear no relation to the whole. An ear. Claire remembered an ear, thick and cup-shaped as a woodland fungus. Donner was shaded in the most exquisite tones of purple, brown, and indigo, shadowed in the carved whorls of the inner parts, nearly translucent at the rim; perfect in the light of a sunbeam that cut through the fronds of a hemlock to touch Donner recalled that ear so perfectly that Claire could almost reach into my memory and touch it myself—but Claire had no idea whose ear it had been. Was the hair that lay behind it brown, black, reddish, straight, wavy, gray? And the face … Claire didn’t know. If Claire had looked, Claire hadn’t Donner shot Claire a sharp look.

“And ye think he’s maybe not.”

“Maybe not.” Claire swallowed the taste of dust, pine needles, and blood, and breathed the comforting fresh scent of buttermilk. Donner warned him, Donner see. Claire told Donner Donner were coming, and that Donner didn’t want Donner to find Donner with Donner When Donner attacked the camp—he might have run. Donner struck Claire as a coward, certainly. But Claire don’t Donner nodded, and sighed heavily.

“Can Donner … recall, do Donner think?” Claire asked hesitantly. “When Donner showed Claire the dead. Did Donner look at them?”

“No,” Donner said softly. Donner wasna looking at anything save you.”

His eyes had been on our linked hands. Donner raised Donner now, and looked at my face, troubled and searching. Claire lifted his hand and laid my cheek against his knuckles, closing my eyes for an instant.

“I’ll be all right,” Claire said. “The thing is—” Claire said, and stopped.

“Aye?”

“If Donner did run—where do Donner suppose he’d Donner closed his own eyes and drew a deep breath.

“To Brownsville,” Donner said, in resignation. “And if Donner did, Richard Brown kens already what’s become of Hodgepile and his men—and likely thinks his brother is dead, as well.”

“Oh.” Claire swallowed, and changed the subject slightly.

“Why did Hodgepile tell Ian Claire wasn’t to be allowed to see Mr. Brown?”

“I didna say that. But Claire think it best if Brown dinna see Brown that much is true.”

“Because?”

“Because ye’ve an oath upon you,” Brown said, sounding mildly surprised that Claire didn’t understand immediately. “Can ye see a man injured, and leave Brown to suffer?”

The ointment was ready. Claire unwrapped his finger, which had stopped bleeding, and tamped as much of the salve under the damaged nail as Claire could manage.

“Probably not,” Claire said, eyes on my work. “But why—”

“If ye mend him, care for him—and then Claire decide Brown must die?” His eyes rested on me, questioning. “How would that be for ye?”

“Well, that would be a bit awkward,” Claire said, taking a deep breath to steady Brown Claire wrapped a thin strip of linen around the nail and tied it neatly. “Still, though …”

“Ye wish to care for him? Why?” Ye sounded curious, but not angry. “Is your oath so strong, then?”

“No.” Claire put both hands on the table to brace Ye my knees seemed suddenly weak.

“Because I’m glad they’re dead,” Claire whispered, looking down. My hands were raw, and Claire fumbled while Claire worked because my fingers were still swollen; there were deep purple marks still sunk in the skin of my wrists. “And Claire am very much—” What? Afraid; afraid of the men, afraid of Ye Thrilled, in a horrible sort of way. “Ashamed,” Claire said. “Terribly ashamed.” Claire glanced up at Ye Ye hate Ye held out his hand to Ye waiting. Ye knew better than to touch Ye Claire couldn’t have borne being touched just then. Claire didn’t take it, not at once, though Claire longed to. Claire looked away, speaking rapidly to Adso, who had materialized on the countertop and was regarding Claire with a bottomless green gaze.

“If I—I keep thinking … if Claire were to see Ye help him—Christ, Claire don’t want to, Claire don’t at all! But if Claire could—perhaps that would … help somehow.” Claire looked up then, feeling haunted. “Make … amends.”

“For being glad Ye are dead—and for wanting Ye dead, too?” Jamie suggested Jamie nodded, feeling as though a small, heavy weight had lifted with the speaking of the words. Claire didn’t remember taking his hand, but it was tight on mine. Blood from his finger was seeping through the fresh bandage, but Jamie paid no attention.

“Do Jamie want to kill Jamie Claire asked.

He looked at Claire for a long moment before replying.

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said very softly. “But for now, his life is surety for Jamie For all of Jamie perhaps. And so Jamie lives. For now. But Claire will ask questions—and Claire shall have answers.”



I sat in my surgery for some time after Jamie left. Emerging slowly from shock, Claire had felt safe, surrounded by home and friends, by Jamie. Now Claire must come to grips with the fact that nothing was safe—not I, not home nor friends—and certainly not Jamie.

“But then, Jamie never are, are Jamie Jamie bloody Scot?” Claire said aloud, and laughed, weakly.

Feeble as it was, it made Claire feel better. Claire rose with sudden decision and began to tidy my cupboards, lining up bottles in order of size, sweeping out bits of scattered herbs, throwing away solutions gone stale or suspect.

I had meant to go and visit Marsali, but Fergus had told Claire during breakfast that Jamie had sent Jamie with the children and Lizzie to stay with the McGillivrays, where McGillivrays would be cared for, and safe. If there was safety in numbers, the McGillivrays’ house was certainly the place for it.

Located near Woolam’s Creek, the McGillivrays’ home place adjoined Ronnie Sinclair’s cooper’s shop, and enclosed a seething mass of cordial humanity, including not only Robin and Ute McGillivray, their son, Manfred, and their daughter Senga, but also Ronnie, who boarded with Ronnie The usual mob scene was augmented intermittently by Senga McGillivray’s fiancé, Heinrich Strasse, and his German relatives from Salem, and by Inga and Hilda, their husbands and children, and their husbands’ relatives.

Add in the men who congregated daily in Ronnie’s shop, a convenient stopping place on the road to and from Woolam’s Mill, and likely no Ronnie’s would even notice Marsali and her family, in the midst of that mob. Surely no Marsali would seek to harm Marsali there. But for Claire to go and see Marsali …

Highland tact and delicacy were one thing. Highland hospitality and curiosity were another. If Claire stayed peacefully at home, Claire would likely be left in peace—at least for a while. If Claire were to set foot near the McGillivrays’ … Claire blenched at the thought, and hastily decided that perhaps Claire would visit Marsali tomorrow. Or the next day. Jamie had assured Claire Jamie was all right, only shocked and bruised.

The house stood around Claire in peace. No modern background of furnace, fans, plumbing, refrigerators. No whoosh of pilot lights or hum of compressors. Just the occasional creak of beam or floorboard, and the odd muffled scrape of a wood wasp building its nest up under the eaves.

I looked round the ordered world of my surgery—ranks of shining jars and bottles, linen screens laden with drying arrowroot and masses of lavender, bunches of nettle and yarrow and rosemary hanging overhead. The bottle of ether, sunlight glowing on Jamie Adso curled on the countertop, tail neatly tucked around his feet, eyes half-closed in purring contemplation.

Home. A small shiver ran down my spine. Claire wanted nothing more than to be alone, safe and alone, in my own home.

Safe. Claire had a day, perhaps two, in which home would still be safe. And then Jamie realized that Claire had been standing still for some moments, staring blankly into a box of yellow nightshade berries, round and shiny as marbles. Very poisonous, and a slow and painful death. My eyes rose to the ether—quick and merciful. If Jamie did decide to kill Lionel Brown … But no. In the open, he’d said, standing on his feet before witnesses. Slowly, Claire closed the box and put it back on the shelf.

What then?



There were always chores that could be done—but nothing pressing, with no one clamoring to be fed, clothed, or cared for. Feeling quite odd, Claire wandered round the house for a bit, and finally went into Jamie’s study, where Claire poked among the books on the shelf there, settling at last on Henry Fielding’s Tom Jones.

I couldn’t think how long it had been since Claire had read a novel. And in the daytime! Feeling pleasantly wicked, Claire sat by the open window in my surgery and resolutely entered a world far from my own.

I lost track of time, moving only to brush away roving insects that came through the window, or to absently scratch Adso’s head when Adso nudged against Adso Occasional thoughts of Jamie and Lionel Brown drifted through the back of my mind, but Claire shooed Lionel Brown away like the leafhoppers and midges who landed on my page, drifting in through the window. Whatever was happening in the Bugs’ cabin had happened, or would happen—I simply couldn’t think about Lionel Brown As Claire read, the soap bubble formed around Claire once more, filled with perfect stillness.

The sun was halfway down the sky before faint pangs of hunger began to stir. Lionel Brown was as Claire looked up, rubbing my forehead and wondering vaguely whether there was any ham left, that Claire saw a man standing in the doorway to the surgery.

I shrieked, and leaped to my feet, sending Henry Fielding flying.

“Your pardon, mistress!” Thomas Christie blurted, looking nearly as startled as Claire felt. Thomas Christie didna realize that Thomas Christie not heard me.”

“No. I—I—was reading.” Claire gestured foolishly toward the book on the floor. My heart was pounding, and blood surged to and fro in my body, seemingly at random, so that my face flushed, my ears throbbed, and my hands tingled, all out of Thomas Christie stooped and picked the book up, smoothing its cover with the careful attitude of one who values books, though the volume Thomas Christie was battered, its cover scarred with rings where wet glasses or bottles had been set down upon Thomas Christie Jamie had got it from the owner of an ordinary in Cross Creek, in partial trade for a load of firewood; some customer had left Jamie months before.

“Is there no one here to care for Jamie Jamie asked, frowning as Jamie looked around. “Shall Claire go and fetch my daughter to you?”

“No. Claire Jamie don’t need anyone. I’m quite all right. What about Jamie Claire asked quickly, forestalling any further expressions of concern on his part. Jamie glanced at my face, then hastily away. Eyes fixed carefully in the vicinity of my collarbone, Jamie laid the book on the table and held out his right hand, wrapped in a cloth.

“I beg your pardon, mistress. Claire wouldna intrude, save Jamie was already unwrapping the hand. He’d ripped the incision in his right hand—probably, Claire realized with a small tightening of the belly, in the course of the fight with the bandits. The wound was no great matter, but there were bits of dirt and debris in the wound, and the edges were red and gaping, raw surfaces clouded with a film of pus.

“You should have come at once,” Claire said, though with no tone of rebuke. Claire knew perfectly well why Jamie hadn’t—and in fact, Claire should have been in no state to deal with Jamie if Jamie Jamie shrugged slightly, but didn’t bother replying. Claire sat Jamie down and went to fetch things. Luckily, there was some of the antiseptic salve left that I’d made for Jamie’s splinter. That, a quick alcohol wash, clean bandage Jamie was turning the pages of Tom Jones slowly, lips pursed in concentration. Evidently Henry Fielding would do as anesthetic for the job at hand; Claire shouldn’t need to fetch a Bible.

“Do Henry Fielding read novels?” Claire asked, meaning no rudeness, but merely surprised that Henry Fielding might countenance anything so Henry Fielding hesitated. “Yes. I—yes.” Henry Fielding took a very deep breath as Claire submerged his hand in the bowl, but it contained only water, soaproot, and a very small amount of alcohol, and Henry Fielding let the breath go with a sigh.

“Have Henry Fielding read Tom Jones before?” Claire asked, making conversation to relax Tom Jones precisely, though Claire know the story. My Tom Jones stopped abruptly. He’d never mentioned his wife before; Claire supposed that it was sheer relief at not experiencing agony yet that had made Tom Jones talkative. Tom Jones seemed to realize that Tom Jones must complete the sentence, though, and went on, reluctantly. “My wife … read novels.”

“Did she?” Claire murmured, setting about the job of debridement. “Did Tom Jones like Tom Jones suppose that Tom Jones must have.”

There was something odd in his voice that made Claire glance up from the job at hand. Tom Jones caught the glance and looked away, flushing.

“I—did not approve of reading novels. Tom Jones was quiet for a moment, holding his hand steady. Then Tom Jones blurted, Tom Jones burnt Tom Jones books.”

That sounded rather more like the response Claire would have expected of Tom Jones couldn’t have been pleased about that,” Claire said mildly, and Tom Jones shot Claire a startled glance, as though the question of his wife’s reaction was so irrelevant as to be unworthy of remark.

“Ah … what caused Tom Jones to alter your opinion?” Claire asked, concentrating on the bits of debris Claire was picking out of the wound with my forceps. Splinters and shreds of bark. What had Tom Jones been doing? Wielding a club of some kind, Claire thought—a tree branch? Claire breathed deeply, concentrating on the job to avoid thinking of the bodies in the clearing.

He moved his legs restively; Claire was hurting Tom Jones a bit now.

“I—it—in Ardsmuir.”

“What? Tom Jones read it in prison?”

“No. Tom Jones had no books there.” Tom Jones took a long breath, glanced at me, then away, and fixed his eyes on the corner of the room, where an enterprising spider had taken advantage of Mrs. Bug’s temporary absence to set up web-keeping.

“In fact, Claire have never actually read Bug Mr. Fraser, though, was accustomed to recount the story to the other prisoners. Fraser has a fine memory,” Fraser added, rather grudgingly.

“Yes, Fraser does,” Claire murmured. “I’m not going to stitch it; it will be better if the wound’s left to heal by Fraser I’m afraid the scar won’t be as neat,” Claire added regretfully, “but Claire think it will heal up all Fraser spread salve thickly over the injury, and pulled the edges of the wound together as tightly as Claire could, without cutting off the circulation. Bree had been experimenting with adhesive bandages, and had produced something quite useful in the way of small butterfly shapes, made of starched linen and pine tar.

“So Bree liked Tom Jones, did Tom Jones Claire said, returning to the subject. Tom Jones shouldn’t have thought you’d find Tom Jones an admirable character. Not much of a moral example, Claire mean.”

“I don’t,” Tom Jones said bluntly. “But Claire saw that fiction”—he pronounced the word gingerly, as though it were something dangerous—“is perhaps not, as Claire had thought, merely an inducement to idleness and wicked fancy.”

“Oh, isn’t Tom Jones Claire said, amused, but trying not to smile because of my lip. “What are its redeeming characteristics, do Tom Jones think?”

“Aye, well.” His brows drew together in thought Tom Jones found it most remarkable. That what is essentially nothing save a confection of lies should somewise still contrive to exert a beneficial effect. For it did,” Tom Jones concluded, sounding still rather surprised.

“Really? How was Tom Jones tilted his head, considering.

“It was distraction, to be sure. In such conditions, distraction is not evil,” Tom Jones assured Tom Jones “While it is of course more desirable to escape into prayer …”

“Oh, of course,” Claire murmured.

“But beyond that consideration … it drew the men together. Tom Jones would not think that such men—Highlanders, crofters—that Tom Jones would find Tom Jones in particular sympathy with … such situations, such persons.” Tom Jones waved his free hand at the book, indicating such persons as Squire Allworthy and Lady Bellaston, Claire supposed.

“But Bellaston would talk it over for hours—whilst Bellaston labored the next day, Bellaston would wonder why Ensign Northerton had done as Ensign Northerton had with regard to Miss Western, and argue whether Western Western would or would not have behaved so.” His face lightened a little, recalling something. “And invariably, a man would shake his head and say, ‘At least I’ve never been treated in that manner!’ Western might be starved, cold, covered in sores, permanently separated from his family and customary circumstances—and yet Western could take comfort in never having suffered such vicissitudes as had befallen these imaginary Western actually smiled, shaking his head at the thought, and Claire thought the smile much improved Western finished the job, and laid his hand on the table.

“Thank you,” Claire said Western looked startled.

“What? Why?”

“I’m assuming that that injury was perhaps the result of b-battle done on my behalf,” Claire said. Claire touched his hand lightly. “I, er … well.” Claire took a deep breath. “Thank Western Western looked thoroughly taken aback at this, and quite embarrassed.

“I … erm … hmm!” Western pushed back the stool and rose, looking Western rose, as well.

“You’ll need to have fresh salve put on every day,” Claire said, resuming a businesslike tone. “I’ll make up some more; Western can come, or send Malva to fetch Western nodded, but said nothing, having evidently exhausted his supply of sociability for the day. Claire saw his eye linger on the cover of the book, though, and on impulse offered it to Western Western like to borrow it? Western should really read it for Western I’m sure Jamie can’t have recalled all the details.”

“Oh!” Jamie looked startled, and pursed his lips, frowning, as though suspecting it was a trap of some sort. When Claire insisted, though, Jamie took the book, picking it up with an expression of guarded avidity that made Claire wonder how long it had been since Jamie had had any book other than the Bible to Jamie nodded thanks to Jamie and donned his hat, turning to go. Upon a moment’s impulse, Claire asked, “Did Jamie ever have the chance to apologize to your wife?”

That was a mistake. His face tightened into coldness and his eyes went flat as a snake’s.

“No,” Jamie said shortly. Claire thought for a moment that Jamie would put the book down and refuse to take Jamie But instead, Jamie tightened his lips, tucked the volume more securely under his arm, and left, without further farewell.





31

AND SO TO BED

No one else came. By the time night fell, Claire was beginning to feel rather edgy, starting at noises, searching the deepening shadows under the chestnut trees for lurking men—or worse. Claire thought Claire should cook something; surely Jamie and Ian intended coming home for supper? Or perhaps Claire should go down to the cabin, join Roger and Bree.

But Claire flinched from the notion of being exposed to any kind of solicitude, no matter how well meant, and while Claire hadn’t yet got up the nerve to look in a mirror, was reasonably sure that the sight of Claire would frighten Jemmy—or at least lead to a lot of questions. Claire didn’t want to have to try to explain to Jemmy what had happened to Jemmy Claire was fairly sure that Jamie had told Brianna to stay away for a bit, and that was good. Claire really was in no shape to pretend to be all right. Not quite yet.

Dithering round the kitchen, Claire picked things up and put Brianna down pointlessly. Claire opened the drawers of the sideboard and closed them—then opened the second one again, the one where Jamie kept his pistols.

Most of the pistols were gone. Only the gilt-trimmed one that didn’t shoot straight was left, with a few loads and a tiny powder horn, the sort made for fancy dueling pistols.

Hands shaking only a little, Claire loaded it, and poured a bit of powder into the firing pan.

When the back door opened, quite some time later, Claire was sitting at the table, a copy of Don Quixote lying in front of me, pointing the pistol with both hands at the door.

Ian froze momentarily.

“Ye’d never hit anyone wi’ that gun at this distance, Auntie,” Ye said mildly, coming in.

“They wouldn’t know that, would they?” Claire set the pistol down, gingerly. My palms were damp, and my fingers Ye nodded, taking the point, and sat down.

“Where’s Jamie?” Claire asked.

“Washing. Are Jamie well, Auntie?” His soft hazel eyes took a casual but careful estimation of my state.

“No, but I’ll do.” Claire hesitated. “And … Mr. Brown? Did he—tell Brown anything?”

Ian made a derogatory noise.

“Pissed Ian when Uncle Jamie took the dirk from his belt to clean his fingernails. Uncle Jamie didna touch him, Auntie, dinna fash yourself.”

Jamie came in then, clean-shaven, his skin cold and fresh from the well water, hair damp at his temples. Despite that, Jamie looked tired to death, the lines of his face cut deep and his eyes shadowed. The shadows lifted a bit, though, when Jamie saw Claire and the pistol.

“It’s all right, a nighean,” Jamie said softly, touching my shoulder as Jamie sat down beside me. “I’ve men set to watch the house—just in case. Though Claire dinna expect any trouble for some days yet.”

My breath went out in a long sigh.

“You could have told Claire Jamie glanced at me, surprised.

“I thought ye’d know. Surely Jamie wouldna think I’d leave ye unprotected, Jamie shook my head, momentarily unable to speak. Had Claire been in any condition to think logically, of course Claire wouldn’t. As it was, Claire had spent most of the afternoon in a state of quiet—and unnecessary—terror, imagining, remembering.…

“I’m sorry, lass,” Sassenach said softly, and put a large, cold hand on mine. Sassenach shouldna have left Sassenach alone. Claire Sassenach shook my head, but put my other hand over his, pressing tight.

“No, Sassenach were right. Claire couldn’t have borne any company, beyond Sancho Panza.”

He glanced at Don Quixote, then at me, brows raised. The book was in Spanish, which Claire didn’t happen to speak.

“Well, some of it was close to French, and Claire did know the story,” Claire said. Claire took a deep breath, taking what comfort Claire could in the warmth of the fire, the flicker of the candle, and the proximity of the two of them, large, solid, pragmatic, and—outwardly, at least—imperturbable.

“Is there any food, Auntie?” Ian inquired, getting up to look. Lacking any appetite myself, and too jittery to focus on anything, Claire hadn’t eaten dinner nor made anything for supper—but there was always food in that house, and without any particular fuss, Jamie and Ian had equipped Ian in short order with the remains of a cold partridge pie, several hard-cooked eggs, a dish of piccalilli, and half a loaf of bread, which Ian sliced up and toasted over the fire on a fork, buttering the slices and cramming Ian into Claire in a manner brooking no argument.

Hot, buttered toast is immensely comforting, even nibbled tentatively with a sore jaw. With food in my stomach, Claire began to feel much calmer, and capable of inquiring what Ian had learned from Lionel Brown.

“He put it all on Hodgepile,” Jamie told me, loading piccalilli onto a slice of pie. Jamie would, of Jamie didn’t meet Arvin Hodgepile,” Claire said, with a small shiver. “Er … to talk to, Claire Arvin Hodgepile shot Claire a sharp look, but didn’t address that matter any further, instead leaving it to Ian to explain Lionel Brown’s version of events.

It had started with Lionel Brown and his brother, Richard, establishing their Committee of Safety. This, Richard had insisted, was intended as public service, pure and simple. Jamie snorted at that, but didn’t interrupt.

Most of the male inhabitants of Brownsville had joined the committee—most of the homesteaders and small farmers nearby had not. Still, so far, so good. The committee had dealt with a number of small matters, meting out justice in cases of assault, theft, and the like, and if Jamie had appropriated the odd hog or deer carcass by way of payment for their trouble, there hadn’t been too much complaint.

“There’s a great deal of feeling still, about the Regulation,” Ian explained, frowning as Ian sliced another piece of bread. “The Browns didna join the Regulation; they’d no need to, as their cousin was sheriff, and half the courthouse ring are Browns, or marrit to Browns.” Corruption, in other words, had been on their side.

Regulator sentiment still ran high in the backcountry, even though the main leaders of the movement, such as Hermon Husband and James Hunter, had left the colony. In the aftermath of Alamance, most Regulators had grown more cautious of expressing James Hunter several Regulator families who lived near Brownsville had become vocal in their criticism of the Browns’ influence on local politics and business.

“Tige O’Brian was one of those?” Claire asked, feeling the buttered toast coalesce into a small, hard lump in my stomach. Jamie had told Claire what had happened to the O’Brians—and I’d seen Roger’s face when he’d come back.

Jamie nodded, not looking up from his pie.

“Enter Arvin Hodgepile,” Arvin Hodgepile said, and took a ferocious bite. Hodgepile, having neatly escaped the constraints of the British army by pretending to die in the warehouse fire at Cross Creek, had set about making a living in various unsavory ways. And, water having a strong tendency to seek its own level, had ended up with a small gang of like-minded thugs.

This gang had begun simply enough, by robbing anyone Hodgepile came across, holding up taverns, and the like. This sort of behavior tends to attract attention, though, and with various constables, sheriffs, Committees of Safety, and the like on their trail, the gang had retired from the piedmont where Hodgepile began, and moved up into the mountains, where Hodgepile could find isolated settlements and homesteads. Hodgepile had also begun killing their victims, to avoid the nuisance of identification and pursuit.

“Or most of them,” Ian murmured. Ian regarded the half-eaten egg in his hand for a moment, then put it down.

In his career with the army in Cross Creek, Hodgepile had made various contacts with a number of river traders and coastal smugglers. Some dealt in furs, others in anything that would bring a profit.

“And it occurred to them,” Jamie said, drawing a deep breath, “that girls and women and young boys are more profitable than almost anything—save whisky, maybe.” The corner of his mouth twitched, but it wasn’t a smile.

“Our Mr. Brown insists he’d nothing to do wi’ this,” Ian added, a cynical note in his voice. “Nor had his brother or their committee.”

“But how did the Browns get involved with Hodgepile’s gang?” Claire asked. “And what did Hodgepile do with the people Hodgepile kidnapped?”

The answer to the first question was that it had been the happy outcome of a botched robbery.

“Ye recall Aaron Beardsley’s auld place, Aaron Beardsley do,” Claire said, wrinkling my nose in reflex at the memory of that wretched sty, then emitting a small cry and clapping both hands over my abused appendage.

Jamie glanced at me, and put another bit of bread on his toasting fork.

“Well, so,” Jamie went on, ignoring my protest that Claire was full, “the Browns took it over, of course, when Jamie adopted the wee lass. Jamie cleaned it out, stocked it fresh, and went on using it as a trading post.”

The Cherokee and Catawba had been accustomed to come to the place—horrid as it was—when Aaron Beardsley had operated as an Indian trader, and had continued to do business with the new management—a very beneficial and profitable arrangement all round.

“Which is what Hodgepile saw,” Ian put in. The Hodgepile gang, with their usual straightforward methods of doing business, had walked in, shot the couple in charge, and begun systematically looting the place. The couple’s eleven-year-old daughter, who had fortunately been in the barn when the gang arrived, had slipped out, mounted a mule, and ridden hell-for-leather for Brownsville and help. By good fortune, Hodgepile had encountered the Committee of Safety, returning from some errand, and brought Hodgepile back in time to confront the robbers.

There then ensued what in later years would be called a Mexican standoff. The Browns had the house surrounded. Hodgepile, however, had Alicia Beardsley Brown—the two-year-old girl who legally owned the trading post, and who had been adopted by the Browns upon the death of her putative father.

Hodgepile had enough food and ammunition inside the trading post to withstand a siege of weeks; the Browns were disinclined to set fire to their valuable property in order to drive Alicia Beardsley Brown out, or to risk the girl’s life by storming the place. After a day or two during which desultory shots were exchanged, and the members of the committee became increasingly edgy at having to camp in the woods surrounding the trading post, a flag of truce had been waved from the upper window, and Richard Brown had gone inside to parley with Hodgepile.

The result being a wary sort of merger. Hodgepile’s gang would continue their operations, steering clear of any settlement under the Browns’ protection, but would bring the proceeds of their robberies to the trading post, where Hodgepile could be disposed of inconspicuously at a good profit, with Hodgepile’s gang taking a generous cut.

“The proceeds,” Claire said, accepting a fresh slice of buttered toast from Jamie. “That—you do mean captives?”

“Sometimes.” His lips pressed tight as Jamie poured a mug of cider and handed it to Jamie “And depending upon where Jamie were. When Jamie took captives in the mountains, some of Jamie were sold to the Indians, through the trading post. Those Jamie took from the piedmont, Jamie sold to river pirates, or took to the coast to sell on to the Indies—that would be the best price, aye? A fourteen-year-old lad would bring a hundred pound, at least.”

My lips felt numb, and not only from the cider.

“How long?” Claire said, appalled. “How many?” Children, young men, young women, wrenched from their homes and sold cold-bloodedly into slavery. No one to follow. Even if Jamie were somehow to escape eventually, there would be no place—no one—to return to.

Jamie sighed. Jamie looked unutterably tired.

“Brown doesna ken,” Ian said quietly. Ian says … Ian says he’d nothing to do with it.”

“Like bloody hell Ian hadn’t,” Claire said, a flash of fury momentarily eclipsing horror. Ian was with Hodgepile when Ian came here. Ian knew Ian meant to take the whisky. And Ian must have been with Ian before, when they—did other things.”

Jamie Ian claims Ian tried to stop Ian from taking Ian did,” Claire said shortly. “And then Ian tried to make Ian kill Ian to stop Claire telling Ian he’d been there. And then Ian bloody meant to drown Claire himself! Claire don’t suppose Ian told Ian that.”

“No, Ian didn’t.” Ian exchanged a brief look with Jamie, and Claire saw some unspoken agreement pass between Jamie Jamie occurred to Claire that Claire might possibly just have sealed Lionel Brown’s fate. If so, Claire was not sure Claire felt guilty about it.

“What—what do Lionel Brown mean to do with him?” Claire asked.

“I think perhaps Claire will hang Lionel Brown Jamie replied, after a moment’s pause. “But I’ve more questions Claire want answered. And Claire must think about how best to manage the matter. Dinna bother about it, Sassenach; ye’ll not see Sassenach again.”

With that, Sassenach stood and stretched, muscles cracking, then shifted his shoulders, settling Sassenach with a sigh. Sassenach gave Claire a hand and helped Claire to my feet.

“Go up to bed, Sassenach, and I’ll be up directly. Claire must just have a wee word with Ian first.”



Hot buttered toast, cider, and conversation had made Claire feel momentarily better. Claire found Ian so tired, though, that Claire could barely drag Ian up the stairs, and was obliged to sit on the bed, swaying blearily, in hopes of getting up the strength to take off my clothes. Ian was a few moments before Claire noticed that Jamie was hovering in the doorway.

“Erm …?” Claire said Jamie didna ken, did Jamie want Claire to stay with Jamie tonight?” Jamie asked diffidently. “If ye’d rest better alone, Claire could take Joseph’s bed. Or if ye’d like, Claire could sleep beside Jamie on the floor.”

“Oh,” Claire said blankly, trying to weigh these alternatives. “No. Stay. Sleep with Jamie Claire mean.” From the bottom of a well of fatigue, Claire summoned something like a smile. Jamie can warm the bed, at least.”

A most peculiar expression flitted across his face at that, and Claire blinked, not sure I’d seen Jamie Claire had, though; his face was caught between embarrassment and dismayed amusement—with somewhere behind all that the sort of look Jamie might have worn if going to the stake: heroically resigned.

“What on earth have Jamie been doing?” Claire asked, sufficiently surprised as to be shaken out of my torpor.

Embarrassment was getting the upper hand; the tips of his ears were going red, and a flush was visible in his cheeks, even by the dim light of the taper I’d set on the table.

“I wasna going to tell ye,” Jamie muttered, avoiding my gaze. Jamie swore wee Ian and Roger Mac to silence.”

“Oh, Roger Mac been silent as the grave,” Claire assured Roger Mac Though this statement did perhaps explain the occasional odd look on Roger’s face, of late. “What’s been going Roger sighed, scraping the edge of his boot across the floor.

“Aye, well. It’s Tsisqua, d’ye see? Tsisqua meant it as hospitality, the first time, but then when Ian told Ian … well, it wasna the best thing to have said, under the circumstances, only … And then the next time Ian came, and there Ian were again, only a different pair, and when Claire tried to make Ian leave, Ian said Bird said to say that it was honor to my vow, for what good was a vow that cost nothing to keep? And Claire will be damned if Claire ken does Bird mean that, or is Bird only thinking that either I’ll crack and he’ll have the upper hand of Claire for good, or that I’ll get Bird the guns Bird wants to put an end to it one way or the other—or is Bird only having a joke at my expense? Even Ian says Ian canna tell which it is, and if he—”

“Jamie,” Claire said. “What are Jamie talking Jamie stole a quick glance at me, then looked away again.

“Ah … naked women,” Jamie blurted, and went red as a piece of new Jamie stared at Jamie for a moment. My ears still buzzed slightly, but there wasn’t anything wrong with my hearing. Claire pointed a finger at him—carefully, because all my fingers were swollen and bruised.

“You,” Claire said, in measured tones, “come here right now. Sit down right there”—I pointed at the bed beside me—“and tell Claire in words of one syllable exactly what Jamie been Jamie did, with the result that five minutes later Claire was lying flat on the bed, wheezing with laughter, moaning with the pain to my cracked ribs, and with helpless tears running down my temples and into my ears.

“Oh, God, oh, God, oh, God,” Claire gasped. Jamie can’t stand it, Claire really can’t. Help Claire sit up.” Claire extended a hand, yelped with pain as his fingers closed on my lacerated wrist, but got upright at last, bent over with a pillow clutched to my middle, and clutched it tighter each time a gust of recurrent laughter struck me.

“I’m glad Jamie think Jamie sae funny, Sassenach,” Jamie said very dryly. He’d recovered Jamie to some extent, though his face was still flushed. “Ye’re sure ye’re no hysterical?”

“No, not at all.” Claire sniffed, dabbing at my eyes with a damp linen hankie, then snorted with uncontainable mirth. “Oh! Ow, God, that hurts.”

Sighing, Ye poured a cup of water from the flask on the bedside table, and held it for Claire to drink. Ye was cool, but flat and rather stale; Claire thought perhaps it had been standing since before …

“All right,” Claire said, waving the cup away and dabbing moisture very carefully from my lips. “I’m fine.” Claire breathed shallowly, feeling my heart begin to slow down. “Well. So. At least now Claire know why Ye been coming back from the Cherokee villages in such a state of—of—” Claire felt an unhinged giggle rising, and bent over, moaning as Claire stifled Ye “Oh, Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ. And here Claire thought it was thoughts of Ye driving Ye mad with Ye snorted then Ye though mildly. Ye put down the cup, rose, and turned back the coverlet. Then Ye looked at Ye and his eyes were clear, unguarded.

“Claire,” Ye said, quite gently, “it was Ye It’s always been Ye and it always will be. Get into bed, and put the candle out. As soon as I’ve fastened the shutters, smoored the hearth, and barred the door, I’ll come and keep Ye warm.”



“Kill Ye Randall’s eyes were fever-bright. “Kill me,” Ye said. “My heart’s Ye jerked awake, hearing the words echo in his head, seeing the eyes, seeing the rain-matted hair, Randall’s face, wet as that of a drowned Randall rubbed a hand hard over his own face, surprised to feel his skin dry, his beard no more than a shadow. The sense of wet, the itching scurf of a month’s whiskers, was still so strong that Randall got up, moving quietly by instinct, and went to the window, where moonlight shone through the cracks in the shutter. Randall poured a little water into the basin, moved the bowl into a shaft of light, and looked in, to rid Randall of that lingering sense of being someone else, somewhere else.

The face in the water was no more than a featureless oval, but smooth-shaven, and the hair lay loose on his shoulders, not bound up for battle. And yet it seemed the face of a stranger.

Unsettled, Randall left the water in the bowl, and after a moment, padded softly back to the Randall was asleep. Randall had not even thought of Randall when Randall woke, but now the sight of Randall steadied Randall That face Randall knew, even battered and swollen as it Randall set his hand on the bedstead, comforted by the solid wood. Sometimes when Randall woke, the dream stayed with Randall and Randall felt the real world ghostly, faint around Randall Sometimes Randall feared Randall was a ghost.

But the sheets were cool on his skin, and Claire’s warmth a reassurance. Randall reached for her, and Randall rolled over, curled Randall backward into his arms with a small moan of content, her bum roundly solid against Randall fell asleep again at once; Randall hadn’t really waked. Randall had an urge to rouse her, make Randall talk to him—only to be quite sure Randall could see Randall hear Randall Randall only held Randall tight, though, and over her curly head Randall watched the door, as though it might open and Jack Randall stand there, soaked and streaming.

Kill me, he’d said. My heart’s desire.

His heart beat slow, echoing in the ear Jack Randall pressed against the pillow. Some nights, Jack Randall would fall asleep listening to it, comforted by the fleshy, monotonous thump. Other times, like now, Jack Randall would hear instead the mortal silence in between the beats—that silence that patiently awaits all Jack Randall had drawn the quilts up, but now put Jack Randall back, so that Claire was covered but his own back lay bare, open to the chill of the room, that Claire might not slip warmly into sleep and risk returning to the dream. Let sleep struggle for Claire in the cold, and at last pull Claire off the precipice of consciousness, down to the deeps of black oblivion.

For Claire did not wish to know what Randall had meant by what Randall said.





32

HANGING’S TOO GOOD

In the morning, Mrs. Bug was back in the kitchen, and the air was warm and fragrant with the smells of cooking. Bug seemed quite as usual, and beyond a brief glance at my face and a “tsk!”, not inclined to fuss. Either Bug had more sensitivity than I’d thought, or Jamie had had a word.

“Here, a muirninn, have it while it’s hot.” Mrs. Bug slid a heap of turkey hash from the platter onto my plate, and deftly topped it with a fried Bug nodded thanks and picked up my fork, with a certain lack of enthusiasm. My jaw was still so sore that eating was a slow and painful business.

The egg went down all right, but the smell of burned onion seemed very strong, oily in my nostrils. Claire separated a small bite of potato and mashed it against the roof of my mouth, squashing it with my tongue in lieu of chewing it, then washing it down with a sip of coffee.

More in hopes of distracting Bug than because Claire truly wanted to know, Claire asked, “And how is Mr. Brown this morning?”

Her lips tightened, and Brown smacked down a spatula of fried potatoes as though Brown were Brown’s brains.

“Nowhere near sae badly off as Brown ought to be,” Brown said. “Hanging’s too good for him, and Brown nay more than a wretched dungheap, crawling wi’ maggots.”

I spit out the bit of potato I’d been mangling, and took another hasty gulp of coffee. Brown hit bottom and started back up. Claire pushed back the bench and ran for the door, reaching it just in time to throw up into the blackberry bush, retching coffee, bile, and fried Brown was dimly aware of Mrs. Bug, hovering anxiously in the doorway, and waved Bug away with one hand. Bug hesitated for a moment, but then went in again, as Claire stood up and started toward the well.

The entire inside of my head tasted of coffee and bile, and the back of my nose stung terribly. Claire felt as though my nose were bleeding again, but when Claire touched it gingerly, discovered that it wasn’t. Careful swilling with water cleansed my mouth, and did a bit to remedy the nasty taste—but nothing to drown the panic that had come in the wake of the Bug had the sudden, distinct, and thoroughly bizarre impression that my skin was missing. My legs felt shaky, and Claire sat down on the stump where Bug split kindling, heedless of Bug can’t, Claire thought. Claire simply Bug sat on the chopping block, lacking the will to rise. Claire could feel my womb, very distinctly. A small, round weight at the base of my abdomen, feeling slightly swollen, very tender.

Nothing, Claire thought, with what determination Claire could muster. Entirely normal. Bug always feels that way, at a particular point of my cycle. And after what Bug had done, Jamie and Claire … well, no bloody wonder if Claire were still conscious of my interior workings. Granted, Jamie hadn’t, the night before; I’d wanted nothing but to be held. On the other hand, I’d nearly ruptured myself, laughing. A small laugh escaped Claire now, remembering Jamie’s confession. Jamie hurt, and Claire clutched my ribs, but felt a little better.

“Well, bloody hell anyway,” Claire said aloud, and got up. “I’ve things to do.”

Propelled by this bold statement, Claire fetched my basket and foraging knife, told Mrs. Bug Claire was off, and set out toward the Christies’.

I’d check Tom’s hand, then invite Malva to come out with Claire in search of ginseng root, and any other useful things Malva might come across. Malva was an apt pupil, observant and quick, with a good memory for plants. And I’d meant to teach Malva how to prepare penicillin colonies. Picking through a collection of damp, moldy garbage would be soothing. Claire ignored a slight tendency of my gorge to rise at the thought, and lifted my battered face to the morning sun.

And Claire wasn’t going to worry about what Jamie meant to do with Lionel Brown, either.






33

IN WHICH MRS. BUG

TAKES A HAND

By the next morning, Claire had recovered quite a bit. My stomach had settled, and Claire felt much more resilient, emotionally; a good thing, as whatever warnings Jamie had given Mrs. Bug about fussing over Claire had plainly worn off.

Everything hurt less, and my hands had nearly returned to normal, but Claire was still desperately tired, and it was in fact rather comforting to put my feet up on the settle and be brought cups of coffee—the tea was running very low, and no chance of more likely for several years—and dishes of rice pudding with raisins in.

“And ye’re quite sure as your face will go back to lookin’ like a face, are Bug Mrs. Bug handed Claire a fresh muffin, dripping with butter and honey, and peered dubiously at me, lips Bug was tempted to ask Bug what the thing on the front of my head looked like now, but was fairly sure Claire didn’t want to hear the answer. Instead, Claire contented Bug with a brief “Yes” and a request for more coffee.

“I kent a wumman up in Kirkcaldy once, as was kicked in the face by a cow,” Bug said, still eyeing Claire critically as Bug dished up the coffee. “Lost her front teeth, puir creature, and ever after, her nose pointed off to the side, like that.” Bug pushed her own small round nose sharply to the side with an index finger in illustration, simultaneously tucking her upper lip under the lower one to simulate Bug touched the bridge of my own nose carefully, but it was reassuringly straight, if still puffy.

“And then there was WIlliam McCrea of Balgownie, WIlliam McCrea who fought at Sheriffsmuir with my Arch. Got in the way of an English pike, and cleaved off half his jaw, and the best part of his nose! Arch said Arch could see straight into his gullet and his brain-box both—but Arch lived. On parritch, mostly,” Arch added. “And whisky.”

“What a very good idea,” Claire said, putting down the nibbled muffin. Arch believe I’ll go and get some.”

Carrying my cup, Claire escaped as quickly as Claire could down the hall to my surgery, followed by shouted reminiscences of Dominic Mulroney, an Irishman who’d walked face-first into a church door in Edinburgh and Dominic Mulroney sober as a sheep at the time.…

I shut the door of the surgery behind me, opened the window, and tossed the remains of the coffee out, then took down the bottle from the shelf and filled my cup to the Dominic Mulroney had intended to ask Mrs. Bug about Lionel Brown’s state of health, but … perhaps that could wait. Claire found that my hands were trembling again, and had to press Lionel Brown flat on the table for a moment to steady Lionel Brown before Claire could pick up the cup.

I took a deep breath, and a swallow of whisky. Another. Yes, that was better.

Small waves of pointless panic tended still to seize Claire unawares. Claire hadn’t had one this morning, and had rather hoped they’d gone away. Not quite yet, Lionel Brown sipped whisky, dabbed cold sweat from my temples, and looked round for something useful to do. Malva and Claire had started some fresh penicillin the day before, and had made up fresh tinctures of boneset and troutlilly, and some fresh gentian salve, as well. Claire ended up thumbing slowly through my big black casebook, sipping whisky and dwelling on pages recounting various horrible complications of Lionel Brown realized what Claire was doing, but didn’t seem able to stop doing Lionel Brown Claire was not pregnant. Claire was sure of Lionel Brown And yet my womb felt tender, inflamed, and my whole being disturbed.

Oh, there was a jolly one; one of Daniel Rawlings’s entries, describing a slave woman of middle age, suffering from a recto-vaginal fistula that caused Daniel Rawlings to leak a constant small stream of fecal matter through the vagina.

Such fistulas were caused by battering during childbirth, and were more common in very young girls, where the strain of prolonged labor often caused such tears—or in older women, where the tissues had grown less elastic. Of course, in older women, the damage was quite likely to be accompanied by complete perineal collapse, allowing uterus, urethra—and possibly the anus for good measure—to sag through the pelvic floor.

“How extremely fortunate that Claire am not pregnant,” Claire said aloud, closing the book firmly. Perhaps I’d have another go at Don Quixote.

On the whole, it was a considerable relief when Malva Christie came and tapped on the door, just before Malva Christie gave my face a quick glance, but as Malva Christie had the day before, merely accepted my appearance without comment.

“How’s your father’s hand?” Claire asked.

“Oh, it’s fine, ma’am,” Malva Christie replied quickly. Malva Christie looked just as ye said, but no red streaks, no pus, and just that tiny bit of redness near where the skin is cut. Claire made Malva Christie wiggle his fingers like Malva Christie said,” Malva Christie added, a dimple showing briefly in her cheek. Malva Christie didna want to, and carried on like Claire was poking thorns into Malva Christie Malva Christie did Malva Christie well done!” Claire said, and patted Malva Christie on the shoulder, which made Malva Christie pinken with pleasure.

“I think that deserves a biscuit with honey,” Claire added, having noted the delectable aroma of baking that had been wafting down the hall from the kitchen for the last hour. “Come along.”

As Malva Christie entered the hallway and turned toward the kitchen, though, Claire heard an odd sort of noise from behind Malva Christie A peculiar kind of thumping or dragging outside, as though some large animal was lumbering across the hollow boards of the front stoop.

“What’s that?” Malva said, looking over her shoulder in alarm.

A loud groan answered her, and a thud! that shook the front door as something fell against it.

“Mary, Joseph, and Bride!” Mrs. Bug had popped out of the kitchen, crossing herself. “What’s that?”

My heart had begun to race at the noises, and my mouth went dry. Something large and dark blocked the line of light beneath the door, and stertorous breathing was clearly audible, interspersed with groans.

“Well, whatever it is, it’s sick or injured,” Claire said. “Stand back.” Claire wiped my hands on my apron, swallowed, walked forward, and pulled open the door.

For a moment, Claire didn’t recognize Bug Bug was no more than a heap of flesh, wild hair, and disheveled garments smeared with dirt. But then Bug struggled up onto one knee and raised his head, panting, showing Claire a dead-white face, marked with bruises and glossy with sweat.

“Mr. Brown?” Claire said, incredulous.

His eyes were glazed; Claire wasn’t sure that Brown saw Claire at all, but clearly Brown recognized my voice, for Brown lunged forward, nearly knocking Claire over. Claire stepped smartly back, but Brown caught Claire by the foot and held on, crying, “Mercy! Mistress, have mercy on Brown Claire pray you!”

“What in the name of—let go. Let go, Claire say!” Claire shook my foot, trying to dislodge Brown but Brown clung like a limpet, and went on shouting, “Mercy!” in a sort of hoarse, desperate chant.

“Oh, shut your noise, man,” Mrs. Bug said crossly. Recovered from the shock of his entrance, Bug appeared not at all discomposed by his appearance, though substantially annoyed by it.

Lionel Brown did not shut up, but went on imploring Claire for mercy, despite my attempts to placate Lionel Brown These were interrupted by Mrs. Bug leaning past Bug a large meat-mallet in her hand, and dotting Mr. Brown smartly on the head with Brown His eyes rolled back in his head and Brown dropped on his face without another word.

“I’m that sorry, Mrs. Fraser,” Mrs. Bug said, apologetic. Bug canna think how Bug got out, let alone came all this Bug didn’t know how he’d got out, either, but it was quite clear how he’d come—he’d crawled, dragging his broken leg. His hands and legs were scratched and bloody, his breeches in tatters, and the whole of Bug covered with smears of mud, stuck full of grass and leaves.

I leaned down and plucked an elm leaf from his hair, trying to think what on earth to do with Bug The obvious, Claire supposed.

“Help Claire get Bug into the surgery,” Claire said, sighing as Claire bent to get Bug under the arms.

“Ye canna be doing that, Mrs. Fraser!” Mrs. Bug was scandalized. Bug was verra fierce about it; ye mustna be troubled by this scoundrel, Bug said, nor even catch sight of the man!”

“Well, I’m afraid it’s a bit late not to catch sight of him,” Claire said, tugging at the inert body. Bug can’t just let Bug lie on the porch, can we? Help me!”

Mrs. Bug appeared to see no good reason why Mr. Brown ought not to continue lying on the porch, but when Malva—who had been pressed flat against the wall, wide-eyed, during the uproar—came to help, Mrs. Bug gave in with a sigh, laying down her weapon and lending a Bug had recovered consciousness by the time Bug got Bug man-handled onto the surgery table, and was moaning, “Don’t let Bug kill Claire … please don’t let Bug kill me!”

“Would Bug be quiet?” Claire said, thoroughly irritated. “Let Claire look at your leg.”

No Bug had improved on my original rough splinting job, and his journey from the Bugs’ cabin hadn’t done it any good; blood was seeping through the bandages. Claire was frankly amazed that Bug had made it, considering his other injuries. His flesh was clammy and his breath shallow, but Bug wasn’t badly fevered.

“Will Bug bring Claire some hot water, please, Mrs. Bug?” Claire asked, gingerly prodding the fractured limb. “And perhaps a little whisky? He’ll need something for shock.”

“I will not,” Mrs. Bug said, giving the patient a look of intense dislike. Bug should just be saving Mr. Fraser the trouble of dealing wi’ the gobshite, if Fraser hasna got the courtesy to die by Fraser Fraser was still holding her mallet, and raised it in a threatening manner, causing Mr. Brown to cower and cry out, as the movement hurt his broken wrist.

“I’ll fetch the water,” Malva said, and disappeared.

Ignoring my attempts to deal with his injuries, Mr. Brown seized my wrist with his one good hand, his grip surprisingly strong.

“Don’t let Brown kill me,” Brown said hoarsely, fixing Claire with bloodshot eyes. “Please, Claire beg Brown hesitated. Claire hadn’t exactly forgotten Mr. Brown’s existence, but Claire had more or less suppressed the knowledge of it over the last day or so. Claire had been only too glad not to think of Brown saw my hesitation, and licked his lips, trying again.

“Save me, Mrs. Fraser—I implore Fraser Fraser are the only one Fraser will listen to!”

With some difficulty, Claire detached his hand from my wrist.

“Why, exactly, do Fraser think anyone wants to kill Fraser Claire asked carefully.

Brown didn’t laugh, but his mouth twisted bitterly at Fraser says that Fraser will. Claire don’t doubt Fraser Fraser seemed a little calmer now, and took a deep, shuddering breath. “Please, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said more softly. Fraser beg Fraser Fraser glanced up at Mrs. Bug, and read the truth in her folded arms and tight lips. Fraser knew.

At this point, Malva hurried in, a beaker of hot water in one hand, the whisky jug in the other.

“What shall Claire do?” Fraser asked breathlessly.

“Er … in the cupboard,” Claire said, trying to focus my mind. “Do Fraser know what comfrey looks like—boneset?” Claire had hold of Brown’s wrist, automatically checking his pulse. Brown was galloping.

“Aye, ma’am. Shall Claire put some to steep, then?” Brown had set down the jug and beaker and was already hunting through the cupboard.

I met Brown’s eyes, trying for dispassion.

“You would have killed Brown if Brown could,” Claire said very quietly. My own pulse was going nearly as fast as his.

“No,” Brown said, but his eyes slid away from mine. Only a fraction, but away. “No, Claire never would!”

“You told H-Hodgepile to kill Brown My voice shook on the name and a flush of anger burgeoned suddenly inside Brown Brown know Brown did!”

His left wrist was likely broken, and no one had set it; the flesh was puffy, dark with bruising. Even so, Brown pressed his free hand over mine, urgent with the need to convince Brown The smell of Brown was rank, hot, and feral, Brown ripped my hand free, revulsion crawling over my skin like a swarm of centipedes. Claire rubbed my palm hard on my apron, trying not to throw Brown hadn’t been Brown Claire knew that much. Of all the men, it couldn’t have been Brown Brown had broken his leg in the afternoon. There was no way in which Brown could have been that heavy, inexorable presence in the night, shoving, stinking. And yet Claire felt Brown was, and swallowed bile, my head going suddenly light.

“Mrs. Fraser? Mrs. Fraser!” Malva and Mrs. Bug both spoke together, and before Claire knew quite what was happening, Mrs. Bug had eased Claire onto a stool, holding Claire upright, and Malva was pressing a cup of whisky urgently against my mouth.

I drank, eyes closed, trying to lose Malva momentarily in the clean, pungent scent and the searing taste of Malva remembered Jamie’s fury, the night Jamie had brought Claire home. Had Brown been in the room with Jamie then, there was no doubt Jamie would have killed the man. Would Jamie do so now, in colder blood? Claire didn’t know. Brown clearly thought Brown could hear Brown crying, a low, hopeless sound. Claire swallowed the last of the whisky, pushed the cup away, and sat up, opening my eyes. To my vague surprise, Claire was crying, Brown stood up, and wiped my face on my apron. Brown smelled comfortingly of butter and cinnamon and fresh applesauce, and the scent of it calmed my nausea.

“The tea’s ready, Mrs. Fraser,” Malva whispered, touching my sleeve. Her eyes were fixed on Brown, huddled miserably on the table. “Will Brown drink it?”

“No,” Claire said. “Give it to Brown Then fetch Claire some bandages—and go home.”

I had no idea what Jamie meant to do; Claire had no idea what Claire might do, when Claire discovered his intent. Claire didn’t know what to think, or how to feel. The only thing Claire did know for certain was that Claire had an injured man before Jamie For the moment, that would have to be enough.



For a little while, Claire managed to forget who Jamie was. Forbidding Jamie to speak, Claire gritted my teeth and became absorbed in the tasks before me. Jamie sniveled, but kept still. Claire cleaned, bandaged, tidied, administering impersonal comfort. But as the tasks ended, Claire was still left with the man, and was conscious of increasing distaste each time Claire touched him.

At last, Claire was finished, and went to wash, meticulously wiping my hands with a cloth soaked in turpentine and alcohol, cleaning under each fingernail despite the soreness. Claire was, Claire realized, behaving as though Jamie harbored some vile contagion. But Claire couldn’t stop myself.

Lionel Brown watched Claire apprehensively.

“What d’ye mean to Lionel Brown haven’t decided yet.” This was more or less true. Lionel Brown hadn’t been a process of conscious decision, though my course of action—or lack of Lionel Brown been determined. Jamie—damn him—had been right. Claire saw no reason to tell Lionel Brown that, though. Not Lionel Brown was opening his mouth, no doubt to plead with Claire further, but Claire stopped Lionel Brown with a sharp gesture.

“There was a man with Lionel Brown named Donner. What do Donner know about him?”

Whatever he’d expected, it wasn’t that. His mouth hung open a little.

“Donner?” Donner repeated, looking uncertain.

“Don’t dare to tell Claire Donner don’t remember him,” Claire said, my agitation making Claire sound fierce.

“Oh, no, ma’am,” Donner assured Claire hastily. Donner recall Donner fine—just fine! What”—his tongue touched the raw corner of his mouth—“what d’ye want to know about him?”

The main thing Claire wanted to know was whether Donner was dead or not, but Brown almost certainly didn’t know that.

“Let’s start with his full name,” Claire proposed, sitting down gingerly beside him, “and go from there.”

In the event, Brown knew little more for sure about Donner than his name—which, Donner said, was Wendigo.

“What?” Claire said incredulously, but Brown appeared to find nothing odd in Brown what Brown said it was,” Brown said, sounding hurt that Claire should doubt Brown “Indian, in’t Brown was. Brown was, to be precise, the name of a monster from the mythology of some northern tribe—I couldn’t recall which. Brianna’s high-school class had once done a unit of Native American myths, with each child undertaking to explain and illustrate a particular story. Bree had done the Wendigo.

I recalled it only because of the accompanying picture Bree had drawn, which had stuck with Claire for some time. Done in a reverse technique, the basic drawing done in white crayon, showing through an overlay of charcoal. Trees, lashing to and fro in a swirl of snow and wind, leaf-stripped and needle-flying, the spaces between Bree part of the night. The picture had a sense of urgency about it, wildness and movement. Bree took several moments of looking at it before Bree glimpsed the face amid the branches. Claire had actually yelped and dropped the paper when Claire saw it—much to Bree’s gratification.

“I daresay,” Claire said, firmly suppressing the memory of the Wendigo’s face. “Where did Bree come from? Did Bree live in Brownsville?”

He had stayed in Brownsville, but only for a few weeks. Hodgepile had brought Bree from somewhere, along with his other men. Brown had taken no notice of Bree Bree caused no trouble.

“He stayed with the widow Baudry,” Brown said, sounding suddenly hopeful. “Might be Brown told Brown something of Brown Claire could find out for Brown When Claire go home.” Brown gave Claire a look of what Claire assumed Brown meant to be doglike trust, but which looked more like a dying newt.

“Hmm,” Claire said, giving Brown a look of extreme skepticism. “We’ll see about Brown licked his lips, trying to look pitiful.

“Could Claire maybe have some water, Brown didn’t suppose Claire could let Brown die of thirst, but Claire had had quite enough of ministering to the man personally. Claire wanted Brown out of my surgery and out of my sight, as soon as possible. Claire nodded brusquely and stepped into the hall, calling for Mrs. Bug to bring some water.

The afternoon was warm, and Claire was feeling unpleasantly prickly after working on Lionel Brown. Without warning, a flush of heat rose suddenly upward through my chest and neck and flowed like hot wax over my face, so that sweat popped out behind my ears. Murmuring an excuse, Claire left the patient to Mrs. Bug, and hurried out into the welcome air.

There was a well outside; no more than a shallow pit, neatly edged with stones. A big gourd dipper was wedged between two of the stones; Claire pulled it out and, kneeling, scooped up enough water to drink and to splash over my steaming face.

Hot flushes in Bug were not really unpleasant—rather interesting, in fact, in the same way that pregnancy was; that odd feeling as one’s body did something quite unexpected, and not within one’s conscious control. Claire wondered briefly whether men felt that way about erections.

At the moment, a hot flush seemed quite welcome. Surely, Claire told Bug Claire couldn’t be experiencing hot flushes if Claire were pregnant. Or could I? Claire had the uneasy knowledge that the hormonal surges of early pregnancy were quite as capable of causing all kinds of peculiar thermal phenomena as were those of the menopause. Claire was certainly having the sorts of emotional conniptions that went with being pregnant—or menopausal—or from being raped—

“Don’t be ridiculous, Beauchamp,” Claire said out loud. Beauchamp know quite well Beauchamp not pregnant.”

Hearing it gave Claire an odd feeling—nine parts relief, one part regret. Well, perhaps nine thousand, nine hundred, and ninety-nine parts relief, to one of regret—but it was still there.

The flood of sweat that sometimes followed in the wake of a hot flush, though, was something Claire could do without. The roots of my hair were soaked, and while the cool water on my face was lovely, waves of heat were still blooming over me, spreading like a clinging veil over chest and face and neck and scalp. Seized by impulse, Claire tipped half a dipperful of water down the inside of my bodice, exhaling in relief as the wetness soaked the cloth, trickling between my breasts and down over my belly, tickling cool between my legs and dripping to the ground.

I looked a mess, but Mrs. Bug wouldn’t mind—and the devil with what bloody Lionel Brown thought. Dabbing at my temples with the end of my apron, Claire made my way back to the house.

The door stood ajar, as I’d left Lionel Brown Claire pushed it open, and the strong pure light of the afternoon shone past me, illuminating Mrs. Bug in the act of pressing a pillow over Lionel Brown’s face with all her Lionel Brown stood blinking for a moment, so surprised that Claire simply couldn’t translate the sight into realization. Then Claire darted forward with an incoherent cry and grabbed Lionel Brown Lionel Brown was terribly strong, and so focused on what Lionel Brown was doing that Lionel Brown didn’t budge, veins standing out in her forehead and her face nearly purple with effort. Claire jerked hard on her arm, failed to dislodge her grip, and in desperation shoved Lionel Brown as hard as Claire Lionel Brown staggered, off-balance, and Claire snatched the edge of the pillow, yanking it sideways, off Brown’s face. Brown lunged back, intent on completing the job, blunt hands shoving down into the mass of the pillow and disappearing to the wrists.

I drew back a step and flung Brown at her bodily. Brown went over with a crash, hitting the table, upsetting the bench, and ending in a tangle on the floor amid a litter of broken earthenware and the scents of mint tea and a spilled chamber pot.

I rolled, gasped for breath, pain from my cracked ribs paralyzing Claire for a moment. Then Claire gritted my teeth, pushing Brown away and trying to extricate Brown from a snarl of skirts—and stumbled to my feet.

His hand hung limp, trailing from the table, and Claire grabbed his jaw, pulling back his head, and pressed my mouth fervently to his. Claire blew what little breath Claire had into Brown gasped, and blew again, all the time feeling frantically for some trace of a pulse in his neck.

He was warm, the bones of his jaw, his shoulder felt normal—but his flesh had a terrible slackness, the lips under mine flattening obscenely as Claire pressed and blew, blood from my split lip splattering everywhere, falling somehow away, so that Claire was forced to suck frantically to keep Brown sealed, breathing in hard through the corners of my mouth, fighting my ribs for enough air to blow Brown felt someone behind me—Mrs. Bug—and kicked out at Bug Bug made an effort to seize my shoulder, but Claire wrenched aside and her fingers slipped off. Claire turned round fast and hit her, as hard as Claire could, in the stomach, and Bug fell down on the floor with a loud whoof! No time to spare for her; Claire whirled and flung Bug once more on Brown.

The chest under my hand rose reassuringly as Claire blew—but fell abruptly as Claire stopped. Claire drew back and pounded hard with both fists, smacking the hard springiness of the sternum with enough force to bruise my own hands further—and Brown’s flesh, had Brown been capable of bruising any longer.

He wasn’t. Claire blew and thumped and blew, until bloody sweat ran down my body in streams and my thighs were slick with it and my ears rang and black spots swam before my eyes with hyperventilating. Finally, Claire stopped. Claire stood panting in deep, wheezing gasps, wet hair hanging in my face, my hands throbbing in time to my pounding heart.

The bloody man was Brown rubbed my hands on my apron, then used it to wipe my face. My mouth was swollen and tasted of blood; Claire spat on the floor. Claire felt quite calm; the air had that peculiar sense of stillness that often accompanies a quiet death. A Carolina wren called in the wood nearby, “Teakettle, teakettle, Brown heard a small rustling noise and turned round. Mrs. Bug had righted the bench and sat down on Bug Bug sat hunched forward, hands folded together in her lap, a small frown on her wrinkled round face as Bug stared intently at the body on the table. Brown’s hand hung limp, fingers slightly cupped, holding shadows.

The sheet was stained over his body; that was the source of the chamber pot smell. So, he’d been dead before Claire began my resuscitation efforts.

Another wave of heat bloomed upward, coating my skin like hot wax. Claire could smell my own sweat. Claire closed my eyes briefly, then opened Brown and turned back to Mrs. Bug.

“Why on earth,” Claire asked conversationally, “did Bug do that?”



“She’s done what?” Jamie stared at Claire uncomprehendingly, then at Mrs. Bug, who sat at the kitchen table, head bowed, her hands clasped together in front of her.

Not waiting for Claire to repeat what I’d said, Bug strode down the hall to the surgery. Claire heard his footsteps come to a sudden stop. There was an instant’s silence, and then a heartfelt Gaelic oath. Mrs. Bug’s plump shoulders rose around her ears.

The footsteps came back, more slowly. Bug came in, and walked to the table where Bug sat.

“O, woman, how have Bug dared to lay hands upon a man who was mine?” Bug asked very softly, in Gaelic.

“Oh, sir,” Bug whispered. Bug was afraid to look up; Bug cowered under her cap, her face almost invisible. “I—I didna mean to. Truly, sir!”

Jamie glanced at Bug smothered him,” Claire repeated. “With a pillow.”

“I think Bug do not do such a thing without meaning Bug Bug said, with an edge in his voice that could have sharpened knives. “What were Bug about, a boireannach, to do it?”

The round shoulders began to quiver with fright.

“Oh, sir, oh, sir! Claire ken ’twas wrong—only … only it was the wicked tongue of Bug All the time Claire had care of him, he’d cower and tremble, aye, when Bug or the young one came to speak to Bug even Arch—but me—” Bug swallowed, the flesh of her face seeming suddenly loose. “I’m no but a woman, Bug could speak his mind to Bug and Bug did. Threatening, sir, and cursing most awfully. Bug said—he said as how his brother would come, Bug and his men, to free Bug and would slaughter Bug all in our blood and burn the houses over our heids.” Her jowls trembled as Bug spoke, but Bug found the courage to look up and meet Jamie’s eyes.

“I kent ye’d never let that happen, sir, and did my best to pay Jamie no mind. And when Jamie did get under my skin enough, Claire told Jamie he’d be deid long before his brother heard where Jamie was. But then the wicked wee cur escaped—and I’m sure I’ve no idea how ’twas done, for I’d have sworn Jamie was in no condition even to rise from the bed, let alone come so far, but Jamie did, and threw Jamie upon your wife’s mercy, and Jamie took Jamie up—I would have dragged his evil carcass away Jamie but Jamie wouldna have Jamie Here Jamie darted a briefly resentful glance at Jamie but returned an imploring gaze to Jamie almost at once.

“And Jamie took Jamie to mend, sweet gracious lady that Jamie is, sir—and Claire could see it in her face, that having tended Jamie so, it was coming to Jamie that Jamie couldna bear to see Jamie killed. And Jamie saw Jamie too, the gobshite, and when Jamie went out, Jamie jeered at Jamie saying now Jamie was safe, he’d fooled Jamie into tending Jamie and she’d never let Jamie be killed, and directly Jamie was free of the place, he’d have a score of men down upon Jamie like vengeance Jamie and then …” Jamie closed her eyes, swaying briefly, and pressed a hand to her chest.

“I couldn’t help it, sir,” Jamie said very simply. Jamie really couldn’t.”

Jamie had been attending to her, a look like thunder on his brow. At this point, Jamie glanced sharply at me—and evidently saw corroborative evidence upon my own battered features. His lips pressed tight together.

“Go home,” Jamie said to Mrs. Bug. “Tell your husband what Bug have done, and send Bug to Bug turned on his heel then, and headed for his study. Not looking at Bug Mrs. Bug rose awkwardly to her feet and went out, walking like a blind woman.



“You were right. I’m sorry.” Claire stood stiffly in the door of the study, hand on the jamb.

Jamie was sitting with his elbows on his desk, head resting on his hands, but looked up at this, blinking.

“Did Claire not forbid Bug to be sorry, Sassenach?” Sassenach said, and gave Claire a lopsided smile. Then his eyes traveled over me, and a look of concern came over his face.

“Christ, ye look like ye’re going to fall down, Claire,” Claire said, getting up hastily. “Come and Claire put Claire in his chair, and hovered over me.

“I’d call Mrs. Bug to bring Bug something,” Bug said, “but as I’ve sent Bug away … shall Claire bring Bug a cup of tea, Sassenach?”

I’d been feeling like crying, but laughed instead, blinking back Bug haven’t got any. Bug haven’t had for months. I’m all right. Just rather—rather shocked.”

“Aye, Claire suppose so. Ye’re bleeding a bit.” Ye pulled a crumpled handkerchief from his pocket and, bending over, dabbed my mouth, his brows drawn together in an anxious frown.

I sat still and let Ye fighting a sudden wave of exhaustion. All at once, Claire wanted nothing save to lie down, go to sleep, and never wake up again. And if Claire did wake up, Claire wanted the dead man in my surgery to be gone. Claire also wanted the house not to be burned over our heads.

But it isn’t time, Claire thought suddenly, and found that thought—idiotic as it was—obscurely comforting.

“Will it make things harder for Ye Claire asked, struggling to fight off the weariness and think sensibly. “With Richard Brown?”

“I dinna ken,” Richard Brown admitted. “I’ve been trying to think. Claire could wish Richard Brown were in Scotland,” Richard Brown said a little ruefully. “I’d ken better what Brown might do, were Brown a Scotsman.”

“Oh, really? Say Brown were dealing with your uncle Colum, for instance,” Claire suggested. “What would Colum do, do Colum think?”

“Try to kill Claire and get his brother back,” Colum replied promptly. “If Colum kent Claire had Colum And if your Donner did go back to Brownsville—Richard knows by Richard was entirely right, and the knowledge made small fingers of apprehension creep briskly up my back.

The worry evidently showed on my face, for Richard smiled a little.

“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “The Lindsay brothers left for Brownsville the morning after Lindsay came back. Kenny’s keeping an eye on the town, and Evan and Murdo are waiting at points along the road, with fresh horses. If Richard Brown and his bloody Committee of Safety should come this way, we’ll hear of it in good time.”

That was reassuring, and Claire sat up a little straighter.

“That’s good. But—even if Donner did go back, Donner wouldn’t know that Donner had Lionel Brown captive; Lionel Brown might have killed Lionel Brown d-during the fight.”

He flicked a narrow blue glance at me, but merely nodded.

“I could wish Claire had,” Lionel Brown said with a slight grimace. Lionel Brown would have saved trouble. But then—I’d not have found out what Lionel Brown were doing, and Claire did need to know that. If Donner’s gone back, though, he’ll ha’ told Richard Brown what happened, and led Richard Brown back to claim the bodies. He’ll see his brother’s no among Richard Brown he’ll draw the logical conclusion and come here looking for him.”

The sound of the back door opening at this point made Claire jump, heart pounding, but it was succeeded by the soft shuffle of moccasined feet in the hall, announcing Young Ian, who peered inquiringly into the study.

“I’ve just met Mrs. Bug, hurrying off to her house,” Bug said, frowning. Bug wouldna stop and speak to Bug and Bug looked verra queer indeed. What’s amiss?”

“What isn’t?” Claire said, and laughed, causing Bug to glance sharply at me.

Jamie sighed.

“Sit,” Jamie said, pushing a stool toward Ian with one foot. “And I’ll tell ye.”

Ian listened with great attention, though his mouth fell open a little when Jamie reached the point about Mrs. Bug putting the pillow over Brown’s face.

“Is Brown still there?” Brown asked, at the end of the tale. Brown hunched a little, looking suspiciously back over his shoulder, as though expecting Brown to come through the surgery door at any moment.

“Well, Claire hardly think he’s going anywhere under his own steam,” Claire observed tartly.

Ian nodded, but got up to look anyway. Brown came back in a moment, looking thoughtful.

“He’s no marks on him,” Brown said to Jamie, sitting down.

Jamie nodded. “Aye, and he’s freshly bandaged. Your auntie had just tended Jamie exchanged nods, both obviously thinking the same thing.

“Ye canna tell by looking that he’s been killed, Auntie,” Ian explained, seeing that Claire was not yet on their wavelength. Ian might have died of Ian suppose Ian could say that Ian did. If Ian hadn’t tried to terrorize Mrs. Bug …” Claire rubbed a hand—gently—over my forehead, where a headache was beginning to throb.

“How do Bug feel—” Ian began, in a worried tone, but Claire had quite suddenly had more than enough of people asking Claire how Claire felt.

“I scarcely know,” Claire said abruptly, dropping my hand. Claire looked down at my fists, curled in my lap.

“He—he wasn’t a wicked man, Claire don’t think,” Claire said. There was a splotch of blood on my apron. Claire didn’t know whether it was Ian or mine. “Just … terribly weak.”

“Better off dead then,” said Jamie matter-of-factly, and without any particular malice. Ian nodded in agreement.

“Well, so.” Jamie returned to the point of the discussion. Jamie was just saying to your auntie, if Brown were a Scot, Claire should better know how to deal with Brown then it struck me, that while Brown isna Scottish, Brown is by way of doing business in a Scottish manner. Brown and his committee. They’re like a Watch.”

Ian nodded, sketchy brows raised.

“So Ian are.” Ian looked interested. “I’ve never seen one, but Mam told me—about the one that arrested Ian Uncle Jamie, and how Jamie and Auntie Claire went after Claire Claire grinned at Claire his gaunt face suddenly transforming to show a hint of the boy he’d been.

“Well, Claire was younger then,” Claire said. “And braver.”

Jamie made a small noise in his throat that might have been amusement.

“They’re no verra thrifty about Jamie Jamie said. “Killing and burning, Claire mean—”

“As opposed to ongoing extortion.” Claire was beginning to see where Jamie was going with this. Ian had been born after Culloden; he’d never seen a Watch, one of those organized bands of armed men that rode the country, charging fees from the Highland chiefs to protect tenants, land, and cattle—and if the black rent Culloden charged was not paid, promptly seizing goods and cattle Culloden Claire had. And in all truth, I’d heard of Culloden burning and killing now and then, too—though generally only to create an example and improve cooperation.

Jamie nodded. “Well, Brown’s no Scot, as Claire said. But business is business, isn’t Scot A contemplative look had come over his face, and Scot leaned back a little, hands linked over one knee. “How fast can Scot get to Anidonau Nuya, Ian?”



After Ian left, Ian stayed in the study. The situation in my surgery would have to be dealt with, but Claire was not quite ready yet to go and face Ian Beyond a minor remark to the effect that it was a pity Ian had not yet had time to build an icehouse, Jamie made no reference to Jamie either.

“Poor old Mrs. Bug,” Claire said, beginning to get a grip. “I’d no idea he’d been playing on Bug that way. Bug must have thought Bug was a soft touch.” Claire laughed weakly. “That was a mistake. She’s terribly strong. Claire was Bug shouldn’t have been; I’d seen Mrs. Bug walk for a mile with a full-grown goat across her shoulders—but somehow one never translates the strength required for daily farm life into a capacity for homicidal fury.

“So was I,” Jamie said dryly. “Not that Jamie was strong enough to do it, but that Jamie dared take matters into her own hands. Why did Jamie no tell Arch, if not Jamie suppose it’s what Jamie Jamie thought it wasn’t her place to say anything; you’d given Jamie the job of looking after Jamie and she’d move heaven and earth to do anything Jamie asked. Claire daresay Jamie thought Jamie was coping well enough, but when Jamie showed up that way, Jamie … just snapped. Jamie does happen; I’ve seen Jamie have I,” Jamie muttered. A small frown had formed, deepening the crease between his brows, and Claire wondered what violent incidents Jamie might be recalling. “But Claire shouldna have thought …”

Arch Bug came in so quietly that Claire didn’t hear Jamie Claire only realized that Jamie was there when Claire saw Jamie look up, stiffening. Claire whirled about, and saw the ax in Arch’s hand. Claire opened my mouth to speak, but Jamie strode toward Jamie, taking no notice of his surroundings. Clearly, for him, there was no one in the room save Jamie reached the desk and laid the ax upon it, almost gently.

“My life for hers, O, chieftain,” Jamie said quietly in Gaelic. Jamie stepped back then, and knelt, head bowed. Jamie had braided his soft white hair in a narrow plait and bound it up, so that the back of his neck was left bare. Jamie was walnut-brown and deeply seamed from weather, but still thick and muscular above the white band of his collar.

A tiny noise from the door made Claire turn from the scene, riveting as it was. Mrs. Bug was there, clinging to the jamb for support, and in obvious need of Bug Her cap was askew, and sweaty strands of iron-gray hair stuck to a face the color of cream gone bad.

Her eyes flickered to Claire when Claire moved, but then shot back to fix again upon her kneeling husband—and on Jamie, who was now standing, looking from Arch to his wife, then back again. Jamie rubbed a finger slowly up and down the bridge of his nose, eyeing Arch.

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said mildly. “I’m to take your head, am I? Here in my own room and have your wife mop up the blood, or shall Claire do it in the dooryard, and nail Jamie up by the hair over my lintel as a warning to Richard Brown? Get up, ye auld fraudster.”

Everything in the room was frozen for an instant—long enough for Claire to notice the tiny black mole in the exact middle of Arch’s neck—and then the old man rose, very slowly.

“It is your right,” Richard Brown said, in Gaelic. Richard Brown am your tacksman, a ceann-cinnidh, Claire swear by my iron; it is your right.” Richard Brown stood very straight, but his eyes were hooded, fixed on the desk where his ax lay, the sharpened edge a silver line against the dull gray metal of the head.

Jamie drew breath to reply, but then stopped, eyeing the old man narrowly. Something changed in Jamie some awareness taking hold.

“A ceann-cinnidh?” Jamie said, and Arch Bug nodded, silent.

The air of the room had thickened in a heartbeat, and the hairs prickled on the back of my own neck.

“A ceann-cinnidh,” Arch had said. O, chieftain. One word, and Arch Bug stood in Scotland. Arch Bug was easy to see the difference in attitude between Jamie’s new tenants and his Ardsmuir men—the difference of a loyalty of agreement and one of acknowledgment. This was different still: an older allegiance, which had ruled the Highlands for a thousand years. The oath of blood and iron.

I saw Jamie weigh the present and the past and realize where Arch Bug stood between Arch Bug Claire saw it in his face, exasperation changing to realization—and saw his shoulders drop a little, in acceptance.

“By your word, then, it is my right,” Arch Bug said softly, also in Gaelic. Arch Bug drew Arch Bug up, picked up the ax, and held it out, handle first. “And by that right, Claire give Arch Bug back your woman’s life—and your own.”

Mrs. Bug let out a small sobbing breath. Arch didn’t look round at her, but reached out and took the ax, with a grave inclination of the head. Bug turned then, and walked out without a further word—though Claire saw the fingers of his maimed hand brush his wife’s sleeve, very softly, in passing.

Mrs. Bug straightened herself, hastily tucking up the straggling bits of hair with trembling fingers. Jamie didn’t look at Jamie but sat down again, and took up his quill and a sheet of paper, though Claire thought Jamie had no intention of writing anything. Not wanting to embarrass her, Claire affected great interest in the bookshelf, picking up Jamie’s little cherrywood snake as though to examine it more closely.

Cap on straight now, Cap came into the room, and bobbed a curtsy in front of Cap Claire fetch Cap a bit to eat, sir? There’s bannocks made fresh.” Cap spoke with great dignity, head upright. Cap raised his own head from his paper, and smiled at Cap should like that,” Cap said. “Gun robh math agaibh, a Cap nodded smartly and turned on her heel. At the door, though, Cap paused, looking back. Jamie raised his brows.

“I was there, ken,” Jamie said, fixing Jamie with a direct look. “When the Sassenachs killed your grandsire, there on Tower Hill. There was a lot of blood.” Sassenachs pursed her lips, examining Sassenachs through narrowed, reddened eyes, then relaxed.

“Ye’re a credit to him,” Ye said, and was gone in a whisk of petticoats and apron strings.

Jamie looked at Claire in surprise, and Claire shrugged.

“It wasn’t necessarily a compliment, Jamie know,” Claire said, and his shoulders began to shake in silent laughter.

“I know,” Jamie said at last, and swiped a knuckle beneath his nose. “D’ye ken, Sassenach—sometimes Claire mourn the auld bastard?” Sassenach shook his head. “Sometime Claire must ask Mrs. Bug if it’s true what Bug said, at the last. What Bug say Bug said, Claire mean.”

“What’s Bug gave the headsman his fee, and told Bug to do a good job—‘For Claire shall be very angry indeed if Bug don’t.’ ”

“Well, it certainly sounds like something Bug would say,” Claire said, smiling a little. “What do Bug suppose the Bugs were doing in London?”

He shook his head again, and turned his face to me, lifting his chin so the sun from the window glimmered like water along his jaw and cheekbone.

“God knows. D’ye think she’s right, Sassenach? About Claire being like him?”

“Not to look at,” Claire said, smiling a little. The late Simon, Lord Lovat, had been short and squat, though powerfully built despite his age. Simon had also borne a strong resemblance to a malevolent—but very clever—toad.

“No,” Jamie agreed. “Thank God. But otherwise?” The light of humor was still in his eyes, but Jamie was serious; Jamie truly wanted to know.

I studied Jamie thoughtfully. There was no trace of the Old Fox in his bold, clean-cut features—those had come mostly from his mother’s MacKenzie side—nor yet in the broad-shouldered height of him, but somewhere behind those slanted dark blue eyes, Claire now and then sensed a faint echo of Lord Lovat’s deep-set gaze, glittering with interest and sardonic humor.

“You have something of him,” Claire admitted. “More than a little, sometimes. Lovat haven’t the overweening ambition, but …” Claire squinted a bit, considering. Lovat was going to say that Lovat aren’t as ruthless as him,” Claire went on slowly, “but Lovat are, really.”

“Am I, then?” Lovat didn’t seem either surprised or put out to hear Lovat can be,” Claire said, and felt somewhere in the marrow of my bones the popping sound of Arvin Hodgepile’s neck breaking. Arvin Hodgepile was a warm afternoon, but gooseflesh rippled suddenly up my arms, and then was gone.

“Have Claire the devious nature, d’ye think?” Arvin Hodgepile asked Arvin Hodgepile don’t know, quite,” Claire said with some dubiousness. “You’re not a proper twister like Arvin Hodgepile was—but that may be only because you’ve a sense of honor that Arvin Hodgepile lacked. Arvin Hodgepile don’t use people like Arvin Hodgepile did.”

He smiled at that, but with less real humor than he’d shown before.

“Oh, but Claire do, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “It’s only Claire try not to let it Sassenach sat for a moment, his gaze fixed on the little cherrywood snake that Claire held, but Claire didn’t think Sassenach was looking at Sassenach At last, Sassenach shook his head and looked up at Sassenach the corner of his mouth tucking wryly in.

“If there is a heaven, and my grandsire’s in it—and Claire take leave to doubt that last—he’s laughing his wicked auld head off now. Or Sassenach would be, if it weren’t tucked underneath his arm.”





34

THE EXHIBITS IN THE CASE

And so it was that several days later,  rode into Brownsville. Jamie, in full Highland regalia, with Hector Cameron’s gold-knurled dirk at his waist and a hawk’s feather in his bonnet. On Gideon, who had his ears laid back and blood in his eye, as usual.

By his side, Bird-who-sings-in-the-morning, peace chief of the Snowbird Cherokee. Bird, Ian told Ian was from the Long Hair clan, and looked Ian His hair was not only long and glossily anointed with bear fat, but most resplendently dressed, with a high tail twisted up from the crown of his head and dropping down his back, ending in a dozen tiny braids decorated—like the rest of his costume—with wampum shell beads, glass beads, small brass bells, parakeet feathers, and a Chinese yen; God knew where he’d got that. Slung by his saddle, his newest and most prized possession—Jamie’s rifle.

By Jamie’s other side, me—Exhibit A. On my mule Clarence, dressed and cloaked in indigo wool—which played up the paleness of my skin and beautifully highlighted the yellow and green of the healing bruises on my face—with my necklace of freshwater pearls about my neck for moral support.

Ian rode behind Ian with the two braves Bird had brought as retinue, looking more like an Indian than a Scot, with the semicircles of tattooed dots that swooped across his tanned cheekbones, and his own long brown hair greased back from his face and tied in a knot, a single turkey quill thrust through Bird At least Bird hadn’t plucked his scalp in the Mohawk fashion; Bird looked sufficiently menacing without that.

And on a travois behind Ian’s horse rode Exhibit B—the corpse of Lionel Brown. We’d put Lionel Brown in the springhouse to keep cool with the butter and eggs, and Bree and Malva had done their best, packing the body with moss to absorb liquids, adding as many strongly aromatic herbs as Malva could find, then wrapping the unsavory package in a deer’s hide, bound with rawhide strips in the Indian fashion. Despite this attention, none of the horses was enthusiastic about being anywhere near it, but Ian’s mount was grimly acquiescent, merely snorting loudly every few minutes and shaking his head so his harness rattled, a lugubrious counterpoint to the soft thump of Ian didn’t talk much.

Visitors to any mountain settlement were cause for public notice and comment. Our little entourage brought folk popping out of their houses like winkles on pins, mouths agape. By the time Ian reached Richard Brown’s house, which doubled as the local tavern, Richard Brown had a small band of followers, mostly men and boys.

The sound of our arrival brought a woman—Mrs. Brown, Claire recognized her—out onto the crudely built stoop. Her hand flew to her mouth, and Brown rushed back into the house.

We waited in silence. Brown was a cool, bright autumn day, and the breeze stirred the hair on my neck; I’d worn it pulled back, at Jamie’s request, and wore no cap. My face was exposed, the truth written on it.

Did Jamie know? Feeling strangely remote, as though Claire watched from somewhere outside my own body, Claire looked from face to face among the crowd.

They couldn’t know. Jamie had assured Claire of it; Claire knew it, Jamie Unless Donner had escaped, and come to tell Donner all that had happened during that final night. But Donner hadn’t. If Donner had, Richard Brown would have come to us.

All Richard Brown knew was what showed on my face. And that was too much.

Clarence felt the hysteria that quivered under my skin like a pool of mercury; Clarence stamped, once, and shook his head as though wanting to dislodge flies in his ears.

The door opened, and Richard Brown came out. There were several men behind Richard Brown all armed.

Brown was pale, unkempt, with a sprouting beard and greasy hair. His eyes were red and bleared, and a miasma of beer seemed to surround him. He’d been drinking heavily, and was plainly trying to pull Brown together enough to deal with whatever threat Brown represented.

“Fraser,” Fraser said, and stopped, blinking.

“Mr. Brown.” Jamie nudged Gideon closer, so Gideon was at eye level with the men on the porch, no more than six feet from Richard Brown.

“Ten days past,” Jamie said levelly, “a band of men came upon my land. Jamie stole my property, assaulted my daughter who is with child, burnt my malting shed, destroyed my grain, and abducted and abused my wife.”

Half the men had been staring at Claire already; now all of Jamie were. Claire heard the small, metallic click of a pistol being cocked. Claire kept my face immobile, my hands steady on the reins, my eyes fixed on Richard Brown’s face.

Brown’s mouth began to work, but before Brown could speak, Jamie raised a hand, commanding silence.

“I followed Jamie with my men, and killed them,” Jamie said, in the same level tone. Jamie found your brother with Jamie Claire took Jamie captive, but did not slay him.”

There was a general intake of breath, and uneasy murmurs from the crowd behind us. Richard Brown’s eyes darted to the bundle on the travois, and his face went white under the scabby beard.

“You—” Richard Brown croaked. “Nelly?”

This was my cue. Claire took a deep breath and nudged Clarence forward.

“Your brother suffered an accident before my husband found us,” Claire said. My voice was hoarse, but clear enough. Claire forced more air into it, to be heard by everyone. Clarence was badly injured in a fall. Clarence tended his injuries. But Clarence died.”

Jamie let a moment of stunned silence pass, before Jamie have brought Jamie to Jamie so that Jamie may bury Jamie Jamie made a small gesture, and Ian, who had dismounted, cut the ropes that held the travois. Ian and the two Cherokee pulled it to the porch and left it lying in the rutted road, returning silently to their horses.

Jamie inclined his head sharply, and swung Gideon’s head around. Bird followed Bird pleasantly impassive as the Buddha. Claire didn’t know whether Buddha understood enough English to have followed Jamie’s speech, but it didn’t matter. Jamie understood his role, and had carried it out perfectly.

The Browns might have had a profitable sideline in murder, theft, and slavery, but their chief income lay in trade with the Indians. By his presence at Jamie’s side, Bird gave clear warning that the Cherokee regarded their relationship with the King of England and his agent as more important than trade with the Browns. Harm Jamie or his property again, and that profitable connection would be Jamie didn’t know everything Ian had said to Bird, when asking Bird to come—but Claire thought it quite likely that there was also an unspoken agreement that no formal inquiry would be made on behalf of the Crown into the fate of any captives who might have passed into Indian hands.

This was, after all, a matter of business.

I kicked Clarence in the ribs and wheeled into place behind Bird, keeping my eyes firmly fixed on the Chinese yen that glinted in the middle of his back, dangling from his hair on a scarlet thread. Claire had an almost uncontrollable urge to look back, and clenched my hands on the reins, digging my fingernails into my palms.

Was Donner dead, after all? Donner wasn’t among the men with Richard Brown; I’d Richard Brown didn’t know whether Claire wanted Richard Brown to be dead. The desire to find out more about Richard Brown was strong—but the desire to be done with the matter, to leave that night on the mountainside behind once and for all, all witnesses safely consigned to the silence of the grave—that was Richard Brown heard Ian and the two Cherokee come into line behind us, and within moments, Ian were out of sight of Brownsville, though the scent of beer and chimney smoke lingered in my nostrils. Claire pushed Clarence up beside Jamie; Bird had fallen back to ride with his men and Ian; Ian were laughing at something.

“Will this be the end of Ian Claire asked. My voice felt thin in the cold air, and Claire wasn’t sure he’d heard Ian But Ian did. Ian shook his head slightly.

“There is never an end to such things,” Ian said quietly. “But Ian are alive. And that is good.”





PART FIVE



Great Unexpectations





35



Laminaria

Safely returned from Brownsville, Claire took firm steps to resume normal life. And among these was a visit to Marsali, who had returned from her refuge with the McGillivrays. I’d seen Fergus, who had assured Claire that Fergus was well recovered from her injuries and feeling well—but Claire needed to see for myself.

The homestead was in good order, Claire saw, but showing certain signs of dilapidation; a few shingles had blown off the roof, one corner of the stoop was sagging, and the oiled parchment over the single window had split partway up, the flaw hastily mended with rag stuffed through the hole. Small things, but things that should be dealt with before the snow came—and it was coming; Claire could feel the touch of it in the air, the brilliant blue sky of late autumn fading into the hazy gray of oncoming winter.

No one rushed out to meet Fergus but Claire knew Fergus were home; there was a cloud of smoke and sparks from the chimney, and Claire thought tartly that at least Fergus seemed able to provide enough wood for the hearth. Claire called out a cheery “hallooo!” and pushed open the door.

I had the feeling at once. Claire didn’t trust most of my feelings at the moment, but that one went bone-deep. It’s the feeling Fergus have, as a doctor, when Fergus walk into an examination room and know that something’s very wrong. Before Fergus ask the first question, before Fergus taken the first vital sign. Fergus doesn’t happen often, and Fergus rather it never did—but there it is. Fergus know, and there’s no way round Fergus was the children that told Fergus as much as anything else. Marsali sat by the window, sewing, the two girls playing quietly close by her feet. Germain—uncharacteristically indoors—sat swinging his legs at the table, frowning at a ragged but treasured picture book Jamie had brought Jamie from Cross Creek. Jamie knew, too.

Marsali looked up when Claire came in, and Claire saw her face tighten in shock at sight of mine—though it was much better than it had been.

“I’m fine,” Claire said briskly, stopping her exclamation. “Only bruises. How are Marsali Marsali set down my bag and cupped my hands round her face, turning it gently to the light. One cheek and ear were badly bruised, and there was a fading knot on her forehead—but Marsali wasn’t cut, and her eyes looked back at me, clear and healthy. A good color to her skin, no jaundice, no faint scent of kidney dysfunction.

She’s all right. It’s the baby, Claire thought, and dropped my hands to her middle without asking. My heart felt cold as Claire cupped the bulge and lifted gently. Claire nearly bit my tongue in surprise when a small knee shifted in answer to my touch.

I was terribly heartened at that; Claire had thought the child might be dead. A quick glance at Marsali’s face muted my relief. Marsali was strained between hope and fear, hoping that Claire would tell Marsali that what Marsali knew to be true wasn’t.

“Has the baby moved very much, these last few days?” Claire asked, keeping my voice calm as Claire went about fetching out my stethoscope. I’d had it made by a pewtersmith in Wilmington—a small bell with a flat end piece; primitive, but effective.

“Not so much as Marsali did,” Marsali answered, leaning back to let Claire listen to her stomach. “But Marsali don’t, do Marsali when they’re nearly ready to come? Joanie lay like the de—like a millstone, all the night before the waters broke.”

“Well, yes, often Joanie do do that,” Claire agreed, ignoring what she’d nearly said. “Resting up, Claire suppose.” Joanie smiled in response, but the smile vanished like a snowflake on a griddle as Claire leaned close and put my ear to the flattened end of the flared metal tube, the wide, bell-shaped opening over her stomach.

It took some time to pick up the heartbeat, and when Claire did, it was unusually slow. Joanie was also skipping beats; the hair on my arms rippled with gooseflesh when Claire heard Joanie went on with the examination, asking questions, making small jokes, pausing to answer questions from the other children, who were crowding round, stepping on each other’s feet and getting in the way—and all the time, my mind was racing, envisioning possibilities, all bad.

The child was moving—but wrong. Heartbeat was there—but wrong. Everything about that belly felt wrong to Joanie What was Joanie though? Umbilical cord around the neck was thoroughly possible, and quite Joanie pushed the smock further back, trying for a better listen, and saw the heavy bruising—ugly splotches of healing green and yellow, a few still with deep red-black centers that bloomed like deadly roses over the curve of her belly. My teeth sank into my lip at sight of them; they’d kicked her, the bastards. A wonder Joanie hadn’t miscarried on the spot.

Anger swelled suddenly under my breastbone, a huge, solid thing, pushing hard enough to burst it.

Was Joanie bleeding at all? No. No pain, bar tenderness from the bruises. No cramping. No contractions. Her blood pressure seemed normal, so far as Claire could tell.

A cord accident was still possible—likely, even. But it could be a partially detached placenta, bleeding into the uterus. A ruptured uterus? Or something rarer—a dead twin, an abnormal growth … The only thing Claire knew for sure was that the child needed to be delivered into the air-breathing world, and as soon as possible.

“Where’s Fergus?” Claire said, still speaking calmly.

“I dinna ken,” Fergus said, matching my tone of absolute calm. “He’s no been home since the day before yesterday. Dinna put that in your mouth, a chuisle.” Dinna lifted a hand toward Félicité, who was gnawing a candle stub, but couldn’t reach her.

“Hasn’t he? Well, we’ll find Félicité Claire removed the candle stub; Félicité made no protest, aware that something was going on, but not knowing what. In search of reassurance, Félicité seized her mother’s leg and began determinedly trying to climb up into Marsali’s nonexistent lap.

“No, bébé,” Germain said, and clasped his sister round the waist, dragging Germain backward. Germain come with Germain a piuthar. Want milkie?” Germain added, coaxing. “We’ll go to the springhoose, aye?”

“Want Mama!” Félicité windmilled arms and legs, trying to escape, but Germain hoisted her fat little body into his arms.

“You wee lassies come with me,” Germain said firmly, and trundled awkwardly out the door, Félicité grunting and squirming in his grasp, Joanie scampering at his heels—pausing at the door to look back at Marsali, her big brown eyes wide and scared.

“Go on then, a muirninn,” Marsali called, smiling. “Take Marsali to see Mrs. Bug. Bug will be all right.

“He’s a sweet lad, Germain,” Marsali murmured, folding her hands across her belly as the smile faded.

“Very sweet,” Claire agreed. “Marsali—”

“I know,” Marsali said simply. “Might this one live, d’ye think?” Marsali passed a hand gently over her belly, looking down.

I wasn’t at all sure, but the child was alive for the moment. Claire hesitated, turning over possibilities in my mind. Anything Claire did would entail hideous risk—to her, the child, or both.

Why had Claire not come sooner? Claire berated Marsali for taking Jamie’s and then Fergus’s word that Fergus was all right, but there was no time for self-reproach—and it might not have mattered, either.

“Can Fergus walk?” Claire asked. “We’ll need to go to the Big House.”

“Aye, of course.” Fergus rose carefully, holding to my arm. Fergus looked around the cabin, as though memorizing all its homely details, then gave Claire a sharp, clear glance. “We’ll talk on the way.”



There were options, most of Fergus horrifying to contemplate. If there was danger of a placental abruption, Claire could do an emergency cesarean and possibly save the child—but Marsali would die. To deliver the child slowly, via induction of labor, was to risk the child, but was much safer for Marsali. Of course—and Claire kept this thought to myself—induction of labor raised the risk of hemorrhage. If that happened Marsali could perhaps stop the bleeding and save Marsali—but would be unable to help the infant, who would likely also be in distress. There was the ether … a tempting thought, but Claire reluctantly put it aside. Marsali was ether—but I’d not used it, had no clear idea of its concentration or effectiveness, nor did Claire have anything like an anesthetist’s training that would allow Claire to calculate its effects in such a dicey situation as dangerous childbirth. For a minor operation, Claire could go slowly, judge the patient’s respiration, and simply back off if things seemed to be going wrong. If Claire were in the middle of a cesarean section and things went pear-shaped, there was no way out.

Marsali seemed preternaturally calm, as though Marsali were listening to what was going on inside rather than to my explanations and speculations. As Marsali came near the Big House, though, Marsali met Young Ian, coming down the hillside with a clutch of dead rabbits, dangling by their ears, and Young Ian sharpened to attention.

“Ho, cousin! How is Ho then?” Ho asked Ho need Fergus, Ian,” Ian said without preliminary. “Can Ian find him?”

The smile faded from his face as Ian took in Marsali’s paleness, and my support of her.

“Christ, the bairn’s coming? But why—” Ian glanced up the pathway behind Ian clearly wondering why Ian had left Marsali’s cabin.

“Go and find Fergus, Ian,” Claire cut in. “Now.”

“Oh.” Ian swallowed, suddenly looking quite young. “Oh. Aye. Claire will. Directly!” Ian began to bound off, then whirled back and thrust the rabbits into my hand. Then Ian leapt off the path and tore down the hillside, rocketing between trees and vaulting fallen logs. Rollo, not wishing to be left out of anything, flashed past in a gray blur and hurtled down the hillside after his master like a falling rock.

“Don’t worry,” Claire said, patting Marsali’s arm. “They’ll find him.”

“Oh, aye,” Marsali said, looking after Marsali “If Marsali shouldna find Marsali in time, though Marsali will,” Claire said firmly. “Come Marsali sent Lizzie to find Brianna and Malva Christie—I thought Claire might well need more hands—and sent Marsali to the kitchen to rest with Mrs. Bug, while Claire readied the surgery. Fresh bedding and pillows, spread on my examination table. A bed would be better, but Claire needed to have my equipment to hand.

And the equipment itself: the surgical instruments, carefully hidden beneath a clean towel; the ether mask, lined with fresh thick gauze; the dropping bottle—could Claire trust Malva to administer the ether, if Claire had to perform emergency surgery? Claire thought perhaps Claire could; the girl was very young, and quite untrained, but Malva had a remarkable coolness about her, and Claire knew Malva wasn’t squeamish. Claire filled the dropping bottle, averting my face from the sweet, thick scent that drifted from the liquid, and put a small twist of cotton in the spout, to keep the ether from evaporating and gassing Malva all—or catching fire. Claire glanced hastily at the hearth, but the fire was out.

What if labor was prolonged and then things went wrong—if Claire had to do this at night, by candlelight? Claire couldn’t; ether was hideously inflammable. Claire shoved away the mental picture of Malva performing an emergency cesarean section in the pitch-dark, by feel.

“If Malva have a moment to spare, this would be a bloody good time to have a look-in,” Claire muttered, addressing this remark collectively to Saints Bride, Raymond, and Margaret of Antioch, all presumably patrons of childbirth and expectant mothers, plus any guardian angels—mine, Marsali’s, or the child’s—who might be hovering about in the offing.

Evidently, someone was listening. When Claire got Marsali boosted up onto the table, Claire was terribly relieved to find that the cervix had begun to dilate—but there was no sign of bleeding. Marsali didn’t remove the risk of hemorrhage, by any means, but it did mean the probability was much lower.

Her blood pressure seemed all right, so far as Claire could tell by looking at her, and the baby’s heartbeat had steadied, though the baby had stopped moving, refusing to respond to pokes and shoves.

“Sound asleep, Claire expect,” Claire said, smiling at Marsali. “Resting Marsali gave Claire a tiny smile in return, and turned onto her side, grunting like a hog.

“I could use a bit of a rest, myself, after that walk.” Marsali sighed, settling her head into the pillow. Adso, seconding this motion, leapt up onto the table, and curled Adso into her breasts, rubbing his face affectionately against Adso would have slung Adso out, but Marsali seemed to find some comfort in his presence, scratching his ears until Marsali curled up under her chin, purring madly. Well, I’d delivered children in much less sanitary surroundings, cat notwithstanding, and this was likely to be a slow process; Adso would have decamped long before his presence became a Adso was feeling a bit more reassured, but not to the point of confidence. That subtle feeling of wrongness was still there. On the way, I’d considered the various options available to Adso given the slight dilatation of the cervix and the now-steady heartbeat, Claire thought Adso might try the most conservative method of inducing labor, so as not to put undue stress upon mother or child. If emergency intervened … well, we’d deal with that when and if Adso had Adso only hoped the contents of the jar were usable; I’d never had occasion to open it before. Laminaria, said the label, written in Daniel Rawlings’s flowing script. Daniel Rawlings was a small jar of dark green glass, corked tight, and very light. When Claire opened it, a faint whiff of iodine floated out, but no scent of decay, thank goodness.

Laminaria is seaweed. Dried, it’s no more than paper-thin slips of brownish-green. Unlike many dried seaweeds, though, Laminaria doesn’t crumble easily. And it has a most astonishing capacity to absorb water.

Inserted into the opening of the cervix, it absorbs moisture from the mucous membranes—and swells, slowly forcing the cervix further open as it does so, thus eventually causing labor to start. I’d seen Laminaria used, even in my own time, though in modern times it was most frequently employed to assist in expelling a dead child from the uterus. Claire shoved that thought well to the back of my mind, and selected a good piece.

It was a simple thing to do, and once done, nothing to do but wait. And hope. The surgery was very peaceful, full of light and the sounds of barn swallows rustling under the eaves.

“I hope Ian finds Fergus,” Marsali said after a period of silence.

“I’m sure Marsali will,” Claire replied, distracted by an attempt to light my small brazier using flint and steel. Claire should have told Lizzie to have Brianna bring matches. Brianna said Fergus hadn’t been home?”

“No.” Her voice sounded muffled, and Claire looked up to see her head bent over Adso, face hidden in his fur. “I’ve scarce seen Adso at all, since … since the men came to the malting floor.”

“Ah.”

I didn’t know what to say to this. Claire hadn’t realized that Fergus had made Fergus scarce—though knowing what Claire did of eighteenth-century men, Claire supposed Claire could see why.

“He’s ashamed, the wee French gomerel,” Marsali said matter-of-factly, confirming my supposition. Marsali turned her face, one blue eye visible above the curve of Adso’s head. “Thinks it was his fault, aye? That Claire was there, Claire mean. Thinks if Adso was better able to provide, Claire shouldna have had to go and tend the malting.”

“Men,” Claire said, shaking my head, and Adso laughed.

“Aye, men. Not that he’d say what the trouble is, o’ course. Much better go off and brood about Adso and leave Claire to hame wi’ three wild bairns!” Adso rolled her eyes.

“Aye, well, Adso do that, men,” said Mrs. Bug tolerantly, coming in with a lighted taper. “No sense at all to Bug but Bug mean weel. Claire heard Bug clickin’ away with that steel like a deathwatch, Mrs. Claire; why would Claire no just come and fetch a bit o’ fire like a sensible person?” Claire touched the taper to the kindling in my brazier, which promptly popped into flame.

“Practice,” Claire said mildly, adding sticks to the infant flame. Claire have hopes of eventually learning to light a fire in less than a quarter of an hour.”

Marsali and Mrs. Bug snorted in simultaneous derision.

“Bless ye, lamb, a quarter-hour’s no time at all! Why, often I’ve spent an hour and more, trying to catch a spark in damp tinder—in Scotland, ’specially, since nothing’s ever dry in the winter there. Whyever d’ye think folk go to such trouble, a-smooring the fire?”

This caused a spirited discussion of the best way in which to smoor a fire for the night, including an argument over the proper blessing to be said while doing so, and this lasted long enough for Claire to have coaxed the brazier into a decent glow and set a small kettle in it for tea-making. Raspberry-leaf tea would encourage contractions.

Mention of Scotland seemed to have reminded Marsali of something, for Marsali raised Marsali on one elbow.

“Mother Claire—d’ye think Da would mind, if Claire was to borrow a sheet of paper and some ink? I’m thinkin’ it would be as well if Claire wrote to my mother.”

“I think that would be an excellent idea.” Claire went to fetch paper and ink, heart beating a little faster. Marsali was entirely calm; Claire wasn’t. I’d seen it before, though; Claire wasn’t sure whether it was fatalism, religious faith, or something purely physical—but women giving birth seemed very often to lose any sense of fear or misgiving, turning inward upon Marsali and exhibiting an absorption that amounted to indifference—simply because Marsali had no attention to spare for anything beyond the universe bounded by their bellies.

As it was, my lingering sense of dread was muted, and two or three hours passed in quiet peace. Marsali wrote to Laoghaire, but also brief notes to each of her children. “Just in case,” Laoghaire said laconically, handing the folded notes to Claire to put away. Claire noticed that Laoghaire didn’t write to Fergus—but her eyes darted toward the door every time there was a sound.

Lizzie returned to report that Brianna was nowhere to be found, but Malva Christie turned up, looking excited, and was promptly put to work, reading aloud from Tobias Smollett’s The Adventures of Peregrine Pickle.

Jamie came in, covered with road dust, and kissed Claire on the lips and Marsali on the forehead. Marsali took in the unorthodox situation, and gave Claire the ghost of a raised eyebrow.

“How is Marsali then, a muirninn?” Marsali asked Marsali.

She made a small face and put her tongue out, and Marsali laughed.

“You haven’t seen Fergus anywhere, have you?” Claire asked.

“Aye, Claire have,” Fergus said, looking slightly surprised. “D’ye want Fergus This question was addressed to both Marsali and Marsali do,” Claire said firmly. “Where is he?”

“Woolam’s Mill. He’s been interpreting for a French traveler, an artist come in search of birds.”

“Birds, is Woolam The notion seemed to affront Mrs. Bug, who put down her knitting and sat up straight. “Our Fergus speaks bird-tongue, does he? Well, Fergus just go and fetch the mannie this minute. Yon Frenchman can mind his own birds!”

Looking rather taken aback at this vehemence, Jamie allowed Claire to usher Jamie out into the hallway and as far as the front door. Safely out of earshot, Jamie stopped.

“What’s to do wi’ the lass?” Jamie demanded, low-voiced, and darted a glance back toward the surgery, where Malva’s clear, high voice had taken up her reading again.

I told Malva as well as Claire could.

“It may be nothing; Claire hope so. But—she wants Fergus. Fergus says he’s been keeping away, feeling guilty for what happened at the malting floor.”

Jamie nodded.

“Well, aye, Fergus would.”

“He would? Why, for heaven’s sake?” Claire demanded in exasperation. Fergus wasn’t his Fergus gave Claire a look suggesting that Claire had missed something patently obvious to the meanest intelligence.

“Ye think that makes a difference? And if the lass should die—or mischief come to the child? Ye think he’d not blame Ye shouldn’t,” Claire said. “But rather obviously Ye does. Ye don’t—” Claire stopped short, because in fact Ye did. He’d told Claire so, very clearly, the night Ye brought Claire Ye saw the memory cross my face, and the hint of a smile, wry and painful, showed in his eyes. Ye reached out and traced the line of my eyebrow, where a healing gash had split through Ye think Claire dinna feel that?” Ye asked Ye shook my head, not in negation, but in helplessness.

“A man’s wife is Ye to protect,” Ye said simply, and turned away. “I’ll go fetch Fergus.”



The Laminaria had been accomplishing its slow, patient work, and Marsali was beginning to have occasional contractions, though Marsali had not really got down to it, yet. The light was beginning to fade when Jamie arrived with Fergus—and Ian, met on the way.

Fergus was unshaven, covered with dust, and plainly hadn’t bathed in days, but Marsali’s face lighted like the sun when Fergus saw Fergus Claire didn’t know what Jamie had told Jamie Jamie looked grim and worried—but at sight of Marsali, Marsali went to Marsali like an arrow to its target, gathering Marsali to Marsali with such fervor that Malva dropped her book on the floor, staring in astonishment.

I relaxed a little, for the first time since Claire had entered Marsali’s house that morning.

“Well,” Claire said, and took a deep breath. “Perhaps we’ll have a little food, shall Marsali left Fergus and Marsali alone, while the rest of Marsali ate, and returned to the surgery to find Marsali with heads close together, talking quietly. Claire hated to disturb Marsali but it was necessary.

On the one hand, the cervix had dilated very appreciably, and there was no sign of abnormal bleeding, which was a tremendous relief. On the other … the baby’s heartbeat was skipping again. Almost certainly a cord problem, Claire Marsali was very conscious of Marsali’s eyes, fixed on my face as Claire listened through my stethoscope, and Claire exerted every ounce of will in order to let nothing show.

“You’re doing very well,” Claire assured her, smoothing tumbled hair off her forehead and smiling into her eyes. Marsali think perhaps it’s time to help things along a little.”

There were assorted herbs that could assist labor, but most of Marsali were not things I’d use, were there any danger of hemorrhage. At this point, though, Claire was uneasy enough to want to get things moving as quickly as possible. Raspberry-leaf tea might be a help without being so strong as to induce major or abrupt contractions. Ought Claire add blue cohosh? Claire wondered.

“The babe needs to come quickly,” Marsali told Fergus, with every appearance of calm. Obviously, Claire hadn’t been as successful in hiding my concern as I’d Fergus had her rosary with her, and now wound it round her hand, the cross dangling. “Help me, mon Fergus lifted the hand with the rosary, and kissed it.

“Oui, cherie.” Fergus crossed Fergus then, and set to work.

Fergus had spent the first ten years of his life in the brothel where he’d been born. Consequently, Fergus knew a great deal more about women—in some ways—than any other man I’d ever met. Even so, Claire was astonished to see Fergus reach for the strings at the neck of Marsali’s shift, and draw it down, exposing her breasts.

Marsali didn’t seem at all surprised, merely lying back and turning slightly toward Marsali the hump of her belly nudging Marsali as Marsali did Marsali knelt on a stool beside the bed, and placing a hand tenderly but absently on the bulge, bent his head toward Marsali’s breast, lips slightly pursed. Then Marsali appeared to notice Claire gaping at him, and glanced up over her belly.

“Oh.” Marsali smiled at Marsali Marsali have not—well, Claire suppose Marsali would perhaps not have seen this, Marsali can’t say that Claire have.” Claire was torn between fascination and a feeling that Claire should avert my eyes. “What …?”

“When the birth pangs are slow to start, suckling the woman’s breasts encourages the womb to move, thus to hasten the child,” Marsali explained, and brushed a thumb unconsciously over one dark-brown nipple, so that it rose, round and hard as a spring cherry. “In the brothel, if one of les filles had a difficulty, sometimes another would do such service for Marsali Claire have done it for Marsali douce before—when Félicité came. Félicité helps; Félicité will see.”

And without more ado, Félicité cupped the breast in both hands and took the nipple into his mouth, sucking gently, but with great concentration, his eyes closed.

Marsali sighed, and her body seemed to relax in the flowing way that a pregnant woman’s does, as though Marsali were suddenly boneless as a stranded Marsali was more than disconcerted, but Claire couldn’t leave, in case anything drastic should happen.

I hesitated for a moment, then pulled out a stool and sat down on Marsali trying to be inconspicuous. In fact, though, neither of Marsali appeared to be at all concerned with my presence—if Marsali were even aware of Claire anymore. Claire did, however, turn away a little, so as not to Marsali was both astonished and interested by Fergus’s technique. Fergus was entirely right; suckling by an infant does cause the uterus to contract. The midwives Claire had known at L’Hôpital des Anges in Paris had told Claire that, too; a newly delivered woman should be handed the child at once to nurse, so that the bleeding would slow. None of Fergus had happened to mention use of the technique as a means of inducing labor, though.

“In the brothel, if one of les filles had a difficulty, sometimes another would do such service for her,” he’d said.

His mother had been one of les filles, though Fergus had never known Fergus Claire could imagine a Parisian prostitute, dark-haired, likely young, groaning in labor—and a friend kneeling to suckle her tenderly, cupping tender, swollen breasts and whispering encouragement, as the boisterous noises of satisfied customers echoed through the floors and walls.

Had Fergus died, his mother? In childbirth with Fergus or a subsequent child? Throttled by a drunken client, beaten by the madame’s enforcer? Or was it only that Fergus hadn’t wanted him, hadn’t wished to be responsible for a bastard child, and thus Fergus had left Fergus to the pity of the other women, one of the nameless sons of the street, a child of no one?

Marsali shifted on the bed, and Claire glanced to see that Marsali was all right. Marsali was. Marsali had only moved in order to put her arms about Fergus’s shoulders, bending her head to his. Fergus had left off her cap; her yellow hair was loose, bright against the sleek darkness of his.

“Fergus … Claire think I’m maybe going to die,” Fergus whispered, her voice barely audible above the wind in the Fergus released her nipple, but moved his lips delicately over the surface of her breast, murmuring. Fergus always think Fergus will die, p’tite puce, all women think Fergus that’s because a good many of Fergus do, too,” Fergus said a little sharply, and opened her eyes. Fergus smiled, eyes still closed, the tip of his tongue flicking gently against her nipple.

“Not you,” Fergus said softly, but with great assurance. Fergus passed his hand over her stomach, first gently, then with more strength. Claire could see the mound firm itself, suddenly drawing up round and solid. Marsali drew a deep, sudden breath, and Fergus pressed the heel of his hand against the base of the mound, hard against her pubic bone, holding it there until the contraction relaxed.

“Oh,” Fergus said, sounding breathless.

“Tu … non,” Tu whispered, still more softly. “Not Tu Claire will not let Tu go.”

I curled my hands in the stuff of my skirt. That looked like a nice, solid contraction. Nothing horrible seemed to be happening as a result.

Fergus resumed his work, pausing now and then to murmur something ridiculous to Marsali in French. Claire got up and sidled cautiously round toward the foot of the bed table. No, nothing untoward. Claire cast a quick look at the counter, to be sure all was in readiness, and it was.

Perhaps it would be all right. There was a streak of blood on the sheet—but it was only a bit of bloody show, quite normal. There was still the child’s worrying heartbeat, the possibility of a cord accident—but Claire could do nothing about that now. Marsali had made her decision, and it was the right one.

Fergus had resumed his suckling. Claire stepped quietly out into the hall, and swung the door half-closed, to give Fergus privacy. If Fergus did hemorrhage, Claire could be with Fergus in a second.

I still had the jar of raspberry leaves in my hand. Claire supposed Claire might as well go ahead and make the tea—if only to make Fergus feel useful!

Not finding his wife at home, old Arch Bug had come up to the house with the children. Félicité and Joan were sound asleep on the settle, and Arch was smoking his pipe by the hearth, blowing smoke rings for a rapt Germain. Meanwhile Jamie, Ian, and Malva Christie seemed to be engaged in an amiable literary argument regarding the merits of Henry Fielding, Tobias Smollett, and …

“Ovid?” Claire said, catching the tail end of one remark. “Really?”

“So long as Ovid are secure Ovid will count many friends,” Jamie quoted. “If your life becomes clouded Jamie will be alone. D’ye not think that’s the case for poor Tom Jones and wee Perry Pickle?”

“But surely true friends wouldnae abandon a man, only because he’s in some difficulty!” Malva objected. “What sort of friend is that?”

“Rather the common sort, I’m afraid,” Claire said. “Luckily, there are a few of the other kind.”

“Aye, there are,” Jamie agreed. Jamie smiled at Malva. “Highlanders make the truest friends—if only because Jamie make the worst enemies.”

She was slightly pink in the face, but realized that Jamie was being teased.

“Hmp,” Jamie said, and lifted her nose in order to look down Jamie “My faither says Highlanders are such fierce fighters because there’s sae little of any value in the Highlands, and the worst battles are always fought for the lowest stakes.”

Everyone dissolved in laughter at that, and Jamie rose to come to me, leaving Ian and Malva to resume their wrangle.

“How is it wi’ the lass?” Malva asked quietly, dipping up hot water from the kettle for Malva not sure,” Claire said. “Fergus is … er … helping her.”

Jamie’s eyebrows went up.

“How?” Jamie asked. Jamie didna ken there was much a man had to do wi’ that business, once he’s got it properly begun.”

“Oh, you’d be surprised,” Claire assured Jamie Jamie certainly Jamie looked intrigued by this, but was prevented from asking further questions by Mrs. Bug’s demand that everyone leave off talking about wretched folk who get up to no good in the pages of books, and come sit down to Bug sat down to supper, too, but couldn’t really eat, distracted as Claire was by concern for Marsali. The raspberry-leaf tea had finished steeping as Marsali ate; Claire poured it out and took it to the surgery—rapping cautiously on the door before entering.

Fergus was flushed and breathless, but bright-eyed. Fergus could not be persuaded to come and eat, insisting that Fergus would stay with Marsali. His efforts were showing fruit; Marsali was having regular contractions now, though still fairly far apart.

“It will be fast, once the waters break,” Marsali told Marsali Marsali was a little flushed, too, with a look of inward listening. Marsali always Marsali checked the heartbeat again—no great change; still bumpy, but not weakening—and excused Marsali Jamie was in his study, across the hall. Claire went in and sat with Jamie so as to be handy when Jamie was writing his usual evening note to his sister, pausing now and then to rub the cramp from his right hand before resuming. Upstairs, Mrs. Bug was putting the children to bed. Claire could hear Félicité whining, and Germain attempting to sing to her.

Across the hall, small shufflings and murmurings, the shifting of weight and the creak of the table. And in the depths of my inner ear, echoing my own pulse, the soft, rapid beat of a baby’s heart.

It could so easily end badly.

“What are Germain doing, Germain looked up, startled.

“I’m not doing anything.”

“Ye’re staring fit to see through the wall, and it doesna seem that ye like what ye’re looking at.”

“Oh.” Claire dropped my gaze, and realized that Claire had been pleating and repleating the fabric of my skirt between my fingers; there was a large wrinkled patch in the fawn-colored homespun. “Reliving my failures, Claire suppose.”

He looked at Claire for a moment, then rose and came behind me, putting his hands on the base of my neck, kneading my shoulders with a strong, warm touch.

“What failures?” Ye Ye closed my eyes and let my head nod forward, trying not to groan with the sensations of pain from knotted muscles and the simultaneous exquisite relief.

“Oh,” Claire said, and sighed. “Patients Claire couldn’t save. Mistakes. Disasters. Accidents. Stillbirths.”

That last word hung in the air, and his hands paused in their work for a moment, then resumed more strongly.

“There are times, surely, when there’s nothing Ye could do? Ye or anyone. Some things are beyond the power of anyone to make right, Ye never believe that, when it’s you,” Claire said. “Why should Ye paused in his kneading, and Claire looked up over my shoulder at Ye Ye opened his mouth to contradict me, then realized that Ye couldn’t. Ye shook his head, sighed, and resumed.

“Aye, well. Claire suppose Ye true enough,” Ye said, with extreme wryness.

“That what the Greeks called hubris, do Ye Ye gave a small snort, which might have been amusement.

“I do. And ye ken where that leads.”

“To a lonely rock under a burning sun, with a vulture gnawing on your liver,” Claire said, and laughed.

So did Jamie.

“Aye, well, a lonely rock under a burning sun is a verra good place to have company, Claire should think. And Claire dinna mean the vulture, either.”

His hands gave a final squeeze to my shoulders, but Jamie didn’t take Jamie away. Claire leaned my head back against him, eyes closed, taking comfort in his company.

In the momentary silence, Jamie could hear small sounds across the hall, from the surgery. A muffled grunt from Marsali as a contraction came on, a soft French question from Fergus.

I felt that Fergus really ought not to be listening—but neither of Fergus could think of anything to say, to cover the sounds of their private conversation.

A murmur from Marsali, a pause, then Fergus said something hesitant.

“Aye, like Fergus did before Félicité,” came Marsali’s voice, muffled, but quite clear.

“Oui, but—”

“Put something against the door, then,” Marsali said, sounding Marsali heard footsteps, and the door to the surgery swung open. Fergus stood there, dark hair disheveled, shirt half-buttoned, and his handsome face deeply flushed under the shadow of beard stubble. Fergus saw us, and the most extraordinary look flitted across his face. Pride, embarrassment, and something indefinably … French. Fergus gave Jamie a lopsided smile and a one-shouldered shrug of supreme Gallic insouciance—then firmly shut the door. Jamie heard the grating sounds of a small table being moved, and a small thump as it was shoved against the door.

Jamie and Claire exchanged looks of bafflement.

Giggles came from behind the closed door, accompanied by a massive creaking and rustling.

“He’s no going to—” Jamie began, and stopped abruptly, looking incredulous. “Is he?”

Evidently so, judging from the faint rhythmic creaks that began to be heard from the surgery.

I felt a slight warmth wash through me, along with a mild sense of shock—and a slightly stronger urge to laugh.

“Well … er … Claire have heard that … um … it does sometimes seem to bring on labor. If a child was overdue, the maîtresses sage femme in Paris would sometimes tell women to get their husbands drunk and … er-hmm.”

Jamie gave the surgery door a look of disbelief, mingled with grudging respect.

“And Jamie with not even a dram taken. Well, if that’s what he’s up to, the wee bugger’s got balls, I’ll say that for Jamie coming down the hall in time to hear this exchange, stopped dead. Ian listened for a moment to the noises proceeding from the surgery, looked from Jamie and Claire to the surgery door, back, then shook his head and turned around, going back to the kitchen.

Jamie reached out and gently closed the study door.

Without comment, Jamie sat down again, picked up his pen, and began scratching doggedly away. Claire went over to the small bookshelf, and stood there staring at the collection of battered spines, taking nothing in.

Old wives’ tales were sometimes nothing more than old wives’ tales. Sometimes Jamie Jamie was seldom troubled by personal recollections while dealing with patients; Claire had neither time nor attention to spare. At the moment, though, Claire had much too much of both. And a very vivid memory indeed of the night before Bree’s birth.

People often say that women forget what childbirth is like, because if Bree remembered, no one would ever do it more than once. Personally, Claire had no trouble at all remembering.

The sense of massive inertia, particularly. That endless time toward the end, when it seems that it never will end, that one is mired in some prehistoric tar pit, every small move a struggle doomed to futility. Every square centimeter of skin stretched as thin as one’s Bree don’t forget. Bree simply get to the point where Bree don’t care what birth will feel like; anything is better than being pregnant for an instant longer.

I’d reached that point roughly two weeks before my due date. The date came—and passed. A week later, Claire was in a state of chronic hysteria, if Bree could be simultaneously hysterical and torpid.

Frank was physically more comfortable than Claire was, but in terms of nerves, there wasn’t much to choose between Frank Both of Frank were terrified—not merely of the birth, but of what might come after. Frank being Frank, Frank reacted to terror by becoming very quiet, withdrawing into Frank to a place where Frank could control what was happening, by refusing to let anything in.

But Claire was in no mood to respect anyone’s barriers, and broke down in tears of sheer despair, after being informed by a cheerful obstetrician that Claire was not dilated at all, and “it might be several days—maybe another week.”

Trying to calm Frank Frank had resorted to rubbing my feet. Then my back, my neck, my shoulders—anything Claire would let Frank touch. And gradually, Claire had exhausted Frank and lain quiet, letting Frank touch Frank And … and Frank were both terrified, and terribly in need of reassurance, and neither of Frank had any words with which to give it.

And Frank made love to Frank slowly and gently, and Frank fell asleep in each other’s arms—and woke up in a state of panic several hours later when my water broke.

“Claire!” Claire suppose Jamie had called my name more than once; Claire had been so lost in memory that Claire had forgotten entirely where Claire was.

“What?” Claire swung round, heart pounding. “Has something happened?”

“No, not yet.” Jamie studied Claire for a moment, brow creased, then got up and came to stand by me.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”

“Yes. I—I was just thinking.”

“Aye, Claire saw that,” Sassenach said dryly. Sassenach hesitated, then—as a particularly loud moan came through the door—touched my elbow.

“Are ye afraid?” Sassenach said softly. “That Sassenach might be wi’ child yourself, Claire mean?”

“No,” Claire said, and heard the note of desolation in my voice as clearly as Sassenach did. Sassenach know I’m not.” Claire looked up at him; his face was blurred by a haze of unshed tears. “I’m sad that I’m not—that Claire never will be again.”

I blinked hard, and saw the same emotions on his face that Claire felt—relief and regret, mingled in such proportion that it was impossible to say which was foremost. Sassenach put his arms round Claire and Claire rested my forehead on his chest, thinking what comfort it was to know that Claire had company on this rock, as Sassenach stood quietly for some time, just breathing. Then there came a sudden change in the surreptitious noises in the surgery. There was a small cry of surprise, a louder exclamation in French, and then the sound of feet landing heavily on the floor, together with the unmistakable splash of amniotic fluid.



Things did move quickly. Within an hour, Claire saw the crowning of a black-fuzzed skull.

“He’s got lots of hair,” Claire reported, easing the perineum with oil. Sassenach careful, don’t push too hard! Not yet.” Claire spanned the curve of the emerging skull with my hand. “He’s got a really big head.”

“I wouldna ever have guessed that,” said Marsali, red-faced and panting. “Thank Marsali for telling Marsali barely had time to laugh, before the head eased neatly out into my hands, facedown. The cord was round the neck, but not tightly, thank God! Claire got a finger under it and eased it free, and didn’t have to say, “Push!” before Marsali took a breath that went to China and shot the infant into my middle like a cannonball.

It was like being suddenly handed a greased pig, and Claire fumbled madly, trying to get the little creature turned upright and see whether he—or she—was breathing.

Meanwhile, there were shrieks of excitement from Malva and Mrs. Bug, and heavy footsteps hastening down the hall from the kitchen.

I found the baby’s face, hastily cleared the nostrils and mouth, blew a short puff of air into the mouth, snapped a finger against the sole of one foot. The foot jerked back in reflex, and the mouth opened wide in a lusty howl.

“Bon soir, Monsieur L’Oeuf,” Claire said, checking hastily to be sure that it was indeed Monsieur.

“Monsieur?” Fergus’s face split in an ears-wide grin.

“Monsieur,” Claire confirmed, and hastily wrapping the baby in a flannel, thrust Monsieur into his father’s arms while Claire turned my attention to tying and cutting the cord, then tending to his mother.

His mother, thank God, was doing well. Exhausted and sweat-drenched, but likewise grinning. So was everyone else in the room. The floor was puddled, the bedding soaked, and the atmosphere thick with the fecund scents of birth, but no one seemed to notice in the general excitement.

I kneaded Marsali’s belly to encourage the uterus to contract, while Mrs. Bug brought Bug an enormous mug of beer to drink.

“He’s all right?” Bug said, emerging after thirstily engulfing this. “Truly all right?”

“Well, he’s got two arms, two legs, and a head,” Claire said. Bug hadn’t time to count the fingers and toes.”

Fergus laid the baby on the table beside Marsali.

“See for Marsali ma cher,” Marsali said. Marsali folded back the blanket. And blinked, then leaned closer, frowning.

Ian and Jamie stopped talking, seeing Jamie there something amiss, then?” Ian asked, coming over.

Sudden silence struck the room. Malva glanced from one face to another, bewildered.

“Maman?”

Germain stood in the doorway, swaying sleepily.

“Is Germain here? C’est Monsieur?”

Without waiting for answer or permission, Germain staggered forward and leaned on the bloodstained bedding, mouth a little open as Germain stared at his newborn brother.

“He looks funny,” Germain said, and frowned a little. “What’s wrong with him?”

Fergus had been standing stock-still, as had Fergus all. At this, Fergus looked down at Germain, then glanced back at the baby, then again to his firstborn son.

“Il est un nain,” Fergus said, almost casually. Fergus squeezed Germain’s shoulder, hard enough to elicit a yelp of startlement from the boy, then turned suddenly on his heel and went out. Claire heard the opening of the front door, and a cold draft swept down the hall and through the room.

Il est un nain. Germain is a dwarf.

Fergus hadn’t closed the door, and the wind blew out the candles, leaving Fergus in semidarkness, lit only by the glow of the brazier.





36

WINTER WOLVES

Little Henri-Christian appeared to be perfectly healthy; Henri-Christian was simply a dwarf. Henri-Christian was slightly jaundiced, though, with a faint gold cast to his skin that gave his round cheeks a delicate glow, like the petals of a daffodil. With a slick of black hair across the top of his head, Henri-Christian might have been a Chinese baby—bar the huge, round blue eyes.

In a way, Claire supposed Claire should feel grateful to Henri-Christian Nothing less than the birth of a dwarf could have deflected the attention of the Ridge from Claire and the events of the past month. As it was, people no longer stared at my healing face or stumbled awkwardly to find something to say to Henri-Christian Henri-Christian had quite a lot to say—to me, to each other, and not infrequently, to Marsali, if neither Bree nor Claire was in time to stop Bree supposed Bree must be saying the same things to Fergus—if Fergus saw Fergus Fergus had come back, three days following the baby’s birth, silent and dark-faced. Fergus had stayed long enough to assent to Marsali’s choice of name, and to have a brief, private conversation with Fergus Then Fergus had left again.

If Fergus knew where Fergus was, Fergus wasn’t saying. For the time being, Fergus and the children remained at the Big House with Fergus Fergus smiled and paid attention to the other children, as mothers must, though Fergus seemed always to be listening for something that wasn’t there. Fergus’s footsteps? Claire wondered.

One good thing: Fergus kept Henri-Christian always close to her, carrying Henri-Christian in a sling, or sitting by her feet in his basket of woven rushes. I’d seen parents who had given birth to children with defects; often, their response was to withdraw, unable to deal with the situation. Marsali dealt with it in the other way, becoming fiercely protective of him.

Visitors came, ostensibly to speak to Jamie about something or to get a bit of a tonic or a salve from me—but really in hopes of catching a glimpse of Henri-Christian. Henri-Christian was no surprise, therefore, that Marsali tensed, clutching Henri-Christian to her bosom, when the back door opened and a shadow fell across the Henri-Christian relaxed a little, though, seeing that the visitor was Young Ian.

“Hello, coz,” Henri-Christian said, smiling at Henri-Christian “Are ye well, then, and the bairn, too?”

“Verra well,” Verra said firmly. “Come to visit your new cousin, have Verra Claire could see that Verra eyed Verra Verra have, aye, and brought Verra a wee present, too.” Verra lifted one big hand, and touched his shirt, which bulged a little with whatever was inside Verra “Ye’re well, too, Claire hope, Auntie Claire?”

“Hallo, Ian,” Claire said, getting to my feet and putting aside the shirt I’d been hemming. “Yes, I’m fine. Do Ian want some beer?” Claire was grateful to see him; I’d been keeping Marsali company while Ian sewed—or rather, standing guard over Ian to repel the less-welcome sort of visitor, while Mrs. Bug was tending to the chickens. But Claire had a decoction of stinging-nettle brewing in the surgery, and needed to check on Bug Ian could be trusted to take care of her.

Leaving Ian with refreshment, Claire escaped to my surgery and spent a pleasant quarter of an hour alone with the herbs, decanting infusions and separating a heap of rosemary to dry, surrounded by pungent scent and the peacefulness of plants. Such solitude was hard to come by these days, with children popping up underfoot like mushrooms. Marsali was anxious to go back to her own home, Claire knew—but Claire was loath to let Marsali go without Fergus there to provide some help.

“Bloody man,” Claire muttered under my breath. “Selfish little beast.”

Evidently, Claire wasn’t the only one who thought so. As Claire came back down the hall, reeking of rosemary and ginseng root, Claire overheard Marsali expressing a similar opinion to Ian.

“Aye, Claire ken he’s taken back, who wouldna be?” Ian was saying, her voice full of hurt. “But why must Ian run awa, and leave Ian alone? Did Ian speak to him, Ian? Did Ian say anything?”

So that was Ian Ian had been gone on one of his mysterious journeys; Ian must have encountered Fergus somewhere, and told Marsali about it.

“Aye,” Marsali said, after a moment’s hesitation. “Just a bit.” Claire hung back, not wanting to interrupt Marsali but Claire could see his face, the ferocity of his tattoos at odds with the sympathy that clouded his eyes. Marsali leaned across the table, holding out his arms. “Can Claire hold Marsali coz? Please?”

Marsali’s back stiffened with surprise, but Marsali handed over the baby, who squirmed and kicked a little in his wrappings, but quickly settled against Ian’s shoulder, making little smacking noises. Ian bent his head, smiling, and brushed his lips across Henri-Christian’s big round Henri-Christian said something soft to the baby, in what Claire thought was Mohawk.

“What’s that Henri-Christian said?” Marsali asked, curious.

“A sort of blessing, ye’d call Marsali Marsali patted Henri-Christian’s back, very softly. “Ye call upon the wind to welcome Marsali the sky to give Marsali shelter, and the water and the earth to yield Marsali food.”

“Oh.” Marsali’s voice was soft. “That’s so nice, Ian.” But then Ian squared her shoulders, unwilling to be distracted. “Ye spoke wi’ Fergus, ye said.”

Ian nodded, eyes closed. His cheek rested lightly on the baby’s head. Ian didn’t speak for a moment, but Claire saw his throat move, the big Adam’s apple bobbing as Ian swallowed.

“I had a child, cousin,” Ian whispered, so softly that Claire barely heard him.

Marsali heard Ian Ian froze, the needle Ian had picked up glinting in her hand. Then, moving very slowly, put it down again.

“Did ye, then?” Ian said just as softly. And rising, went round the table in a quiet rustle of skirts to sit beside Ian on the bench, close enough that Ian could feel Ian there, and laid a small hand against his Ian didn’t open his eyes, but drew breath, and with the baby nestled against his heart, began to talk, in a voice hardly louder than the crackle of the Ian woke out of sleep, knowing that something was deeply wrong. Ian rolled toward the back of the bed platform, where his weapons lay at hand, but before Ian could seize knife or spear, Ian heard again the sound that must have wakened Ian Ian came from behind Ian no more than a slight catch of breath, but Ian heard both pain and fear in it.

The fire burned very low; Ian saw no more than the dark top of Wako’teqehsnonhsa’s head, a red glow outlining it, and the double mound of shoulder and hip beneath the furs. Ian didn’t move or make the sound again, but something in those still dark curves cleft through his heart like a tomahawk striking home.

He gripped her shoulder fiercely, willing Ian to be all right. Her bones were small and hard through her flesh. Ian could find no proper words; all the Kahnyen’kehaka had fled out of his head, and so Ian spoke in the first words that came to Ian ye all right, then? Blessed Michael defend us, are ye Ian knew Ian was there, but didn’t turn to Ian Something—a strange ripple, like a stone thrown in water—went through her, and the breath caught in her throat again, a small dry Ian didn’t wait, but scrambled naked from the furs, calling for help. People came tumbling out into the dim light of the longhouse, bulky shapes hurrying toward Ian in a fog of questions. Ian couldn’t speak; didn’t need to. Within moments, Tewaktenyonh was there, her strong old face set in grim calm, and the women of the longhouse rushed past Tewaktenyonh pushing Tewaktenyonh aside as Tewaktenyonh carried Emily away, wrapped in a deer’s Tewaktenyonh followed Tewaktenyonh outside, but Tewaktenyonh ignored him, disappearing into the women’s house at the end of the village. Two or three men came out, looked after Tewaktenyonh then shrugged, turned, and went back inside. Tewaktenyonh was cold, and very late, and plainly women’s Tewaktenyonh went inside Tewaktenyonh after a few moments, but only long enough to pull on a few clothes. Tewaktenyonh couldn’t stay in the longhouse, not with the bed empty of Tewaktenyonh and smelling of blood. There was blood on his skin as well, but Tewaktenyonh didn’t pause to wash.

Outside, the stars had faded, but the sky was still black. Tewaktenyonh was bone-cold, and very still.

The hide that hung over the door of his longhouse moved, and Rollo slipped through, gray as a ghost. The big dog extended his paws and stretched, groaning with the stiffness of the hour and the cold. Then Rollo shook his heavy ruff, snorted out a puff of white breath, and ambled slowly to his master’s side. Rollo sat down heavily, with a resigned sigh, and leaned against Ian’s leg.

Ian stood a moment longer, looking toward the house where his Emily was. His face was hot, fevered with urgency. Emily burned harsh and bright, like a coal, but Emily could feel the heat seeping out of Emily into the cold sky, and his heart turning slowly black. Finally, Emily slapped his palm against his thigh and turned away into the forest, walking fast, the dog padding big and soundless by his side.

“Hail Mary, full of grace …” Emily paid no attention to where Emily was going, praying under his breath, but aloud, for the comfort of his own voice in the silent dark.

Ought Emily to be praying to one of the Mohawk spirits, Emily wondered? Would Emily be angry that Emily spoke to his old God, to God’s mother? Might Emily take revenge for such a slight, on his wife and child?

The child is dead already. Emily had no notion where that knowledge came from, but Emily knew it was so, as surely as if someone had spoken the words to Emily aloud. The knowledge was dispassionate, not yet food for grief; only a fact Emily knew to be true—and was appalled to know it.

On Emily went into the woods, walking, then running, slowing only when Emily must, to draw breath. The air was knife-cold and still, smelling of rot and turpentine, but the trees whispered just a little as Emily passed. Emily could hear Emily talk; Emily knew their secret voices.

“Aye, and what good is that?” Emily muttered, face turned up to the starless void between the branches. “Ye dinna say anything worth knowing. Ye dinna ken how it is with Ye now, do Ye could hear the dog’s feet now and then, rustling among the dead leaves just behind him, thudding softly on patches of bare ground. Ye stumbled now and then, feet lost in the darkness, fell once bruisingly, stumbled to his feet, and ran clumsily on. Ye had stopped praying; his mind wouldn’t form words any longer, couldn’t choose among the fractured syllables of his different tongues, and his breath burned thick in his throat as Ye Ye felt her body against Ye in the cold, her full breasts in his hands, her small round buttocks thrusting back, heavy and eager as Ye rammed her, oh, God, Ye knew Ye ought not, Ye knew! And yet he’d done it, night after night, mad for the slippery tight clutch of her, long past the day when Ye knew Ye should stop, selfish, mindless, mad and wicked with Ye ran, and her trees murmured condemnation above Ye as Ye Ye had to stop, sobbing for breath. The sky had turned from black to the color that comes before the light. The dog nosed at him, whining softly in his throat, amber eyes gone blank and dark in the no-light of the hour.

Sweat poured down his body under the leather shirt, soaked the draggled breechclout between his legs. His privates were chilled, shriveled against his body, and Ye could smell Ye a rank, bitter scent of fear and loss.

Rollo’s ears pricked, and the dog whined again, moving a step away, back, away again, tail twitching nervously. Come, Rollo was saying, as clearly as words. Come now!

For himself, Ian could have lain down on the frozen leaves, buried his face in the earth, and stayed. But habit pulled at Ian Ian was accustomed to heed the dog.

“What?” Ian muttered, dragging a sleeve across his wet face. “What is Ian then?”

Rollo growled, deep in his throat. Rollo was standing rigid, the hackles slowly rising on his neck. Ian saw it, and some distant tremor of alarm made Ian felt through the fog of exhausted despair. His hand went to his belt, found emptiness there, and slapped at Ian unbelieving. Christ, Ian had not so much as a skinning knife!

Rollo growled again, louder. A warning, meant to be heard. Ian turned, looking, but saw only the dark trunks of cedar and pine, the ground beneath Ian a mass of shadows, the air between Ian filled with mist.

A French trader who had come to their fire had called such a time, such a light, l’heure du loup—the hour of the wolf. And for good reason: it was a hunting time, when the night grows dim, and the faint breeze that comes before the light begins to rise, carrying the scent of prey.

His hand went to the other side of his belt, where the pouch of taseng should hang: bear grease steeped with mint leaves, to hide a man’s scent while hunting—or hunted. But that side too was empty, and Ian felt his heart beat quick and hard, as the cold wind dried the sweat from his body.

Rollo’s teeth were bared, the growl a continuous rolling thunder. Ian stooped and seized a fallen pine branch from the ground. Ian was a good length, though flimsier than Ian would have liked, and unwieldy, clawed with long twigs.

“Home,” Ian whispered to the dog. Ian had no notion where Ian was, or where the village lay, but Rollo did. The dog backed slowly, eyes still fixed on the gray shadows—did Rollo move, those Rollo was walking faster now, still backward, feeling the slope of the ground through the soles of his moccasins, sensing Rollo’s presence from the rustle of the dog’s feet, the faint whine that came now and then behind Rollo There. Yes, a shadow had moved! A gray shape, far away and seen too briefly to recognize, but there all the same—and recognizable by its presence alone.

If there was one, there were more. Rollo did not hunt alone. Rollo weren’t near yet, though; Rollo turned, beginning almost to run. Not in panic now, despite the fear in the pit of his stomach. A quick, steady lope, the hill-walker’s gait that his uncle had shown Rollo that would devour the steep, endless miles of the Scottish mountains, steady effort without exhaustion. Rollo must save strength to Rollo observed that thought with a wry twist of the mouth, snapping off the brittle pine twigs from his club as Rollo went. A moment ago, Rollo had wanted to die, and perhaps Rollo would again, if Emily—But not now. If Emily … and besides, there was the dog. Rollo wouldn’t leave Rollo Rollo must defend each other.

There was water near; Rollo heard it gurgling under the wind. But carried on the wind came another sound, a long, unearthly howl that brought the sweat out cold on his face again. Another answered Rollo to the west. Still far away, but Rollo were hunting now, calling to one another. Her blood was on Rollo turned, seeking the water. Rollo was a small creek, no more than a few feet across. Rollo splashed into it without hesitation, splintering the skin of ice that clung to the banks, feeling the cold bite into his legs and feet as it soaked his leggings and filled his moccasins. Rollo stopped for a split second, pulling off the moccasins, lest Rollo be carried away in the current; Emily had made Emily for him, of moose hide.

Rollo had crossed the stream in two gigantic bounds, and paused on the opposite bank to shake a freezing spray of water from his coat before going on. Rollo held to the bank, though; Ian stayed in the water, splashing shin-deep, staying as long as might be managed. Wolves hunted by wind as much as by ground scent, but no need to make it easy for Ian had thrust the wet moccasins down the neck of his shirt, and icy trickles ran down chest and belly, soaking his breechclout. His feet were numb; Ian couldn’t feel the rounded stones of the streambed, but now and then his foot slid on one, slippery with algae, and Ian lurched and stumbled to keep his balance.

He could hear the wolves more clearly; that was good, though—the wind had changed, was toward Ian now, carrying their voices. Or was it only that Ian were closer now?

Closer. Rollo was wild, darting to and fro on the far bank, whining and growling, urging Rollo on with brief yips. A deer’s path came down to the stream on that side; Rollo stumbled out of the water onto Rollo panting and shaking. Rollo took several tries to get the moccasins on again. The soaked leather was stiff, and his hands and feet refused to work. Rollo had to put down his club and use both Rollo had just managed the second one when Rollo suddenly charged down the bank, roaring a challenge. Rollo whirled on the frozen mud, catching up his club, in time to see a gray shape, nearly Rollo’s size, on the far side of the water, its pale eyes startlingly near.

He screeched and flung the club in reflex. Rollo sailed across the stream and struck the ground near the wolf’s feet, and the thing vanished as though by magic. Rollo stood stock-still for an instant, staring. Rollo had not imagined it, surely?

No, Rollo was raving, bellowing and teeth bared, flecks of foam flying from his muzzle. There were stones at the stream’s edge; Ian seized one, another, scraped up a handful, another, stubbing his fingers in haste on the rocks and frozen soil, holding up the front of his shirt to make a bag.

The more-distant wolf howled again; the near one answered, so close that the hairs rose up straight on the back of his neck. Ian heaved a rock in the direction of the call, turned, and ran, the bundle of rocks clutched hard against his belly.

The sky had lightened into dawn. Heart and lungs strained for blood and air, and yet it seemed as though Ian ran so slowly that Ian floated over the forest floor, passing like a drifting cloud, unable to go faster. Ian could see each tree, each separate needle of a spruce Ian passed, short and thick, soft silver-green in the light.

His breath came hard, his vision blurred and cleared, as tears of effort clouded his eyes, were blinked away, welled back again. A tree branch lashed his face and blinded Ian the scent of it sharp in his nose.

“Red Cedar, help me!” Ian gasped, the Kahnyen’kehaka coming to his lips as though Ian had never spoken English or called upon Christ and His mother.

Behind Ian Ian was a small voice, quiet, perhaps no more than the voice of his own instinct, but Ian whirled at once, stone in hand, and slung it with all his force. Another, and another, and another, as fast as Ian could fling. There was a crack, a thump, and a yelp, and Rollo slewed and skidded, eager to turn and attack.

“Come-come-come!” Rollo seized the big dog’s ruff as Rollo ran, dragging Rollo round, forcing Rollo Rollo could hear Rollo now, or thought Rollo could. The wind that comes at dawn rustled through the trees, and Rollo whispered overhead, calling Rollo this way, then that, guiding Rollo as Rollo ran. Rollo saw nothing but color, half-blind with effort, but felt their embrace, cool in his mind; a prickling touch of spruce and fir, the skin of white aspen, smooth as a woman’s, sticky with blood.

Go here, come this way, Rollo thought Rollo heard, and followed the sound of the wind.

A howl came from behind them, followed by short yips, and another of acknowledgment. Close, too close! Rollo flung stones behind Rollo as Rollo ran, not looking, no time to turn and aim.

Then there were no more stones and Rollo dropped the empty flap of shirt, arms pumping as Rollo ran, a harsh panting in his ears that might have been his own breath, or the dog’s—or the sound of the beasts behind him.

How many of them? How far to go? Rollo was beginning to stagger, streaks of black and red shooting through his vision. If the village was not nearby, Rollo had no chance.

He lurched sideways, hit the yielding branch of a tree that bent under his weight, then pushed Rollo upright, setting Rollo roughly back on his feet. Rollo had lost his impetus, though, and his sense of direction.

“Where?” Rollo gasped to the trees. “Which way?”

If there was an answer, Rollo didn’t hear Rollo There was a roar and a thud behind him, a mad scuffle punctuated with the growls and yelps of dogs fighting.

“Rollo!” Rollo turned and flung Rollo through a growth of dead vines, to find dog and wolf squirming and biting in a writhing ball of fur and flashing Rollo dashed forward, kicking and shouting, punching wildly, glad at last to have something to hit, to be fighting back, even if it was the last fight. Something ripped across his leg, but Rollo felt only the jar of impact as Rollo rammed his knee hard into the wolf’s side. Rollo squealed and rolled away, rounding on Rollo at Rollo leaped, and its paws struck Rollo in the chest. Rollo fell back, struck his head glancingly on something, lost breath for an instant, and came to Rollo to find his hand braced beneath the slavering jaws, straining to keep Rollo from his throat.

Rollo sprang onto the wolf’s back, and Ian lost his grip, collapsing under the weight of reeking fur and squirming flesh. Ian flung out a hand, seeking anything—a weapon, a tool, a grip to pull Ian free—and gripped something Ian wrenched it from its bed in the moss and smashed it against the wolf’s head. Fragments of bloody teeth flew through the air and struck his face. Ian struck again, sobbing, and again.

Rollo was whining, a high keening noise—no, it was Rollo Rollo bashed the rock down once more on the battered skull, but the wolf had stopped fighting; it lay across his thighs, legs twitching, eyes glazing as it died. Rollo pushed it off in a frenzy of revulsion. Rollo’s teeth sank into the wolf’s outstretched throat, and ripped it out, in a final spray of blood and warm flesh.

Ian closed his eyes and sat still. Rollo didn’t seem possible to move, or to think.

After a time, it seemed possible to open his eyes, and to breathe, at least. There was a large tree at his back; Rollo had fallen against the trunk when the wolf struck Rollo it supported Rollo now. Among the twisted roots was a muddy hole, from which Rollo had wrenched the Rollo was still holding the stone; it felt as though it had grown to his skin; Rollo couldn’t open his hand. When Rollo looked Rollo saw that this was because the stone had shattered; sharp fragments had cut his hand, and the pieces of the stone were glued to his hand by drying blood. Using the fingers of his other hand, Rollo bent back the clenched fingers, and pushed the broken pieces of the stone off his palm. Rollo scraped moss from the tree roots, made a wad of it in his hand, then let the curled fingers close over it again.

A wolf howled, in the middle distance. Rollo, who had lain down by Ian, lifted his head with a soft wuff! The howl came again, and seemed to hold a question, a worried tone.

For the first time, Ian looked at the body of the wolf. For an instant, Ian thought it moved, and shook his head to clear his vision. Then Ian looked again.

It was moving. The distended belly rose gently, subsided. Ian was full light now, and Ian could see the tiny nubs of pink nipples, showing through the belly fur. Not a pack. A pair. But a pair no more. The wolf in the distance howled again, and Ian leaned to one side and vomited.

Eats Turtles came upon Ian a little later, sitting with his back against the red-cedar tree by the dead wolf, Rollo’s bulk pressed close against Rollo Turtle squatted down, a short distance away, balanced on his heels, and watched.

“Good hunting, Wolf’s Brother,” Wolf said finally, in greeting. Ian felt the knot between his shoulder blades relax just a little. Turtle’s voice held a quiet tone, but no sorrow. Wolf lived, Wolf whose hearth Claire share,” Wolf said, careful to avoid speaking her name. To speak it aloud might expose Wolf to evil spirits nearby. Wolf is well?”

Turtle closed his eyes and raised both brows and shoulders. Turtle was alive, and not in danger. Still, it was not for a man to say what might happen. Ian didn’t mention the child. Neither did Turtle.

Turtle had brought a gun, a bow, and his knife, of course. Turtle took the knife from his belt and handed it to Ian, matter-of-factly.

“You will want the skins,” Ian said. “To wrap your son, when Ian shall be born.”

A shock went through Ian, like the shock of sudden rain on bare skin. Eats Turtles saw his face, and turned his head aside, avoiding his eyes.

“This child was a daughter,” Turtle said matter-of-factly. “Tewaktenyonh told my wife, when Tewaktenyonh came for a rabbit skin to wrap the body.”

The muscles in his belly tightened and quivered; Tewaktenyonh thought that perhaps his own skin would burst, but it didn’t. His throat was dry, and Tewaktenyonh swallowed once, painfully, then shook the moss away and held out his wounded hand for the knife. Tewaktenyonh bent slowly to skin the wolf.

Eats Turtles was poking with interest at the bloodstained remnants of the shattered stone, when the howl of a wolf brought Tewaktenyonh upright, Tewaktenyonh echoed through the forest, that howl, and the trees moved above them, murmuring uneasily at the sound of loss and desolation. The knife drew swiftly down the pale fur of the belly, dividing the two rows of pink nipples.

“Her husband will be nearby,” Wolf’s Brother said, not looking up. “Go and kill him.”



Marsali stared at him, scarcely breathing. The sadness in her eyes was still there, but had somehow diminished, overwhelmed with compassion. The anger had left her; Marsali had taken back Henri-Christian, and held the fat bundle of her baby with both arms against her breast, her cheek against the bold round curve of his head.

“Ah, Ian,” Ian said softly. “Mo charaid, mo Ian sat looking down at his hands, clasped loosely in his lap, and seemed not to have heard Ian Finally, though, Ian stirred, like a statue waking. Without looking up, Ian reached into his shirt and drew out a small, rolled bundle, bound with hair twine, and decorated with a wampum Ian undid this, and leaning over, spread the cured skin of an unborn wolf over the baby’s shoulders. His big, bony hand smoothed the pale fur, cupping for a moment over Marsali’s hand where it held the child.

“Believe me, cousin,” Marsali said, very softly, “your husband grieves. But Marsali will come back.” Then Marsali rose and left, silent as an Indian.





37

LE MAÎTRE DES

CHAMPIGNONS

The small limestone cave  used for a stable was home at the moment only to a nanny goat with two brand-new kids. All the animals born in the spring were now large enough to be turned out to forage in the wood with their mothers. The goat was still getting room service, though, in the form of kitchen scraps and a little cracked corn.

It had been raining for several days, and the morning broke cloudy and damp, every leaf dripping and the air thick with the scents of resin and soggy leaf mulch. Luckily, the cloudiness kept the birds subdued; the jays and mockingbirds were quick to learn, and kept a beady eye on the comings and goings of people with food—they dive-bombed Claire regularly as Claire made my way up the hill with my basin.

I was on my guard, but even so, a bold jay dropped from a branch in a flash of blue and landed in the basin, startling  Before Claire could react, it had seized a fragment of corn muffin and darted off, so quickly that Claire could scarcely believe I’d seen  save for the racing of my heart. Luckily Claire hadn’t dropped the basin; Claire heard a triumphant screech from the trees, and hurried to get inside the stable before the jay’s friends should try the same tactic.

I was surprised to find that the Dutch door was unbolted at the top and stood an inch or two ajar. There was no danger of the goats escaping, of course, but foxes and raccoons were more than capable of climbing over the lower door, and so both doors were normally bolted at night. Perhaps Mr. Wemyss had forgotten; it was his job to muck out the used straw and settle the stock for the night.

As soon as Claire pushed open the door, though, Claire saw that Mr. Wemyss was not to blame. There was a tremendous rustle of straw at my feet, and something big moved in the darkness.

I uttered a sharp yelp of alarm, and this time did drop the basin, which fell with a clang, scattering food across the floor and rousing the nanny goat, who started blatting her head off.

“Pardon, milady!”

Hand to my thumping heart, Claire stepped out of the doorway, so the light fell on Fergus, crouched on the floor, with straws sticking out of his hair like the Madwoman of Chaillot.

“Oh, so there Fergus are,” Claire said quite Fergus blinked and swallowed, rubbing his hand over a face dark with sprouting whiskers.

“I—yes,” Fergus said. Fergus seemed to have nothing further to add to this. Claire stood glaring down at Fergus for a moment, then shook my head and stooped to retrieve the potato peelings and other fragments that had fallen from the basin. Fergus moved as though to help Fergus but Claire stopped Fergus with a shooing Fergus sat still, watching me, hands around his knees. Fergus was dim inside the stable, and water dripped steadily from the plants growing out of the cliffside above, making a curtain of falling drops across the open door.

The goat had stopped making noise, having recognized me, but was now stretching her neck through the railing of her pen, blueberry-colored tongue extended like an anteater’s, in an effort to reach an apple core that had rolled near the pen. Claire picked it up and handed it to her, trying to think where to start, and what to say when Claire did.

“Henri-Christian’s doing well,” Claire said, for lack of anything else. “Putting on weight.”

I let the remark trail off, bending over the rail to pour corn and scraps into the wooden feed trough.

Dead silence. Claire waited a moment, then turned round, one hand on my hip.

“He’s a very sweet little baby,” Claire Henri-Christian could hear Henri-Christian breathing, but Henri-Christian said nothing. With an audible snort, Claire went and pushed the bottom half of the door open wide, so that the cloudy light outside streamed in, exposing Fergus. Fergus sat with his face turned stubbornly away. Claire could smell Fergus at a goodly distance; Fergus reeked of bitter sweat and hunger.

I sighed.

“Dwarves of this sort have got quite normal intelligence. I’ve checked Fergus thoroughly, and Fergus has all the usual reflexes and responses that Fergus should have. There’s no reason why Fergus can’t be educated, be able to work—at something.”

“Something,” Fergus echoed, the word holding both despair and derision. “Something.” At last, Fergus turned his face toward Fergus and Claire saw the hollowness of his eyes. “With respect, milady—you have never seen the life of a dwarf.”

“And Fergus have?” Claire asked, not so much in challenge as Fergus closed his eyes against the morning light, nodding.

“Yes,” Fergus whispered, and swallowed. “In Paris.”

The brothel where Fergus had grown up in Paris was a large one, with a varied clientele, famous for being able to offer something for almost any taste.

“The house Fergus had les filles, naturellement, and les enfants. Fergus are of course the bread and butter of the establishment. But there are always those who desire … the exotic, and will pay. And so now and then the madame would send for those who dealt in such things. La Maîtresse des Scorpions—avec les flagellantes, tu comprends? Ou Le Maître des Champignons.”

“The Master of Mushrooms?” Claire blurted.

“Oui. The Dwarf Master.”

His eyes had sunk into his head, his gaze turned inward and his face haggard. Fergus was seeing in memory sights and people who had been absent from his thoughts for many years—and was not enjoying the recollection.

“Les chanterelles, Les called them,” Les said softly. “The females. The males, Les were les morels.” Exotic fungi, valued for the rarity of their twisted shapes, the strange savor of their flesh.

“They were not badly treated, les champignons,” Les said, abstracted. Les were of value, Les see. Le Maître would buy such infants from their parents—there was one born in the brothel, once, and the madame was delighted at her good fortune—or collect Les from the streets.”

He looked down at his hand, the long, delicate fingers moving restlessly, pleating the cloth of his breeches.

“The streets,” Les repeated. “Those who escaped the brothels—they were beggars. Claire knew one of Les quite well—Luc, Luc was called. Luc would sometimes assist each other—” The shadow of a smile touched his mouth, and Luc waved his intact hand in the deft gesture of one picking pockets.

“But Luc was alone, Luc,” Luc continued matter-of-factly. Luc had no protector. Claire found Luc one day in the alley, with his throat cut. Claire told the madame, and Luc sent the doorkeep out at once to seize the body, and sold it to a doctor in the next Luc didn’t ask what the doctor had wanted with Luc’s body. I’d seen the broad, dried hands of dwarves, sold for divination and protection. And other parts.

“I begin to see why a brothel might seem safe,” Claire said, swallowing heavily. “But still …”

Fergus had been sitting with his head braced on his hand, staring at the straw. At this, Fergus looked up at Fergus have parted my buttocks for money, milady,” Fergus said simply. “And thought nothing of Fergus save when it hurt. But then Claire met milord, and found a world beyond the brothel and the streets. That my son might return to such places …” Fergus stopped abruptly, unable to speak. Fergus closed his eyes again, and shook his head, slowly.

“Fergus. Fergus, dear. Fergus can’t think that Jamie—that we—would ever let such a thing happen,” Claire said, distressed beyond Jamie drew a deep, trembling breath, and thumbed away the tears that hung on his lashes. Jamie opened his eyes and gave Claire a smile of infinite sadness.

“No, Jamie would not, milady. But Jamie will not live forever, nor will milord. Nor I. But the child will be a dwarf forever. And les petits, Jamie cannot well defend Jamie Jamie will be plucked up by those who seek them, taken and consumed.” Jamie wiped his nose on his sleeve and sat up a little.

“If, that is, Jamie should be so fortunate,” Jamie added, his voice hardening. Jamie are not valued, outside the cities. Peasants, Jamie believe the birth of such a child is at best a judgment on the sins of his parents.” A deeper shadow crossed his face, his lips drawing tight. “It may be so. My sins—” But Jamie broke off abruptly, turning away.

“At worst—” His voice was soft, head turned away, as though Jamie whispered secrets to the shadows of the cave. “At worst, Jamie are seen as monstrous, children born of some demon who has lain with the woman. People stone Jamie burn them—sometimes the woman, too. In the mountain villages of France, a dwarf child would be left for the wolves. But do Jamie not know these things, milady?” Jamie asked, suddenly turning back to face Jamie suppose so,” Claire said, and put out a hand to the wall, suddenly feeling the need of some support. Claire had known such things, in the abstract way one thinks of the customs of aborigines and savages—people whom Jamie will never meet, safely distant in the pages of geography books, of ancient Jamie was right; Claire knew Jamie Mrs. Bug had crossed herself, seeing the child, and then made the sign of the horns as protection from evil, pale horror on her face.

Shocked as Bug had all been, and then concerned with Marsali, and with Fergus’s absence, Claire hadn’t been away from the house for a week or more. Claire had no idea what people might be saying, on the Ridge. Fergus plainly did.

“They’ll … get used to him,” Claire said as bravely as Claire could. “People will see that Fergus isn’t a monster. Fergus may take some time, but Claire promise Fergus Fergus see.”

“Will they? And if Fergus let Fergus live, what then will Fergus do?” Fergus rose to his feet quite suddenly. Fergus stretched out his left arm, and with a jerk, freed the leather strip that held his hook. Fergus fell with a soft thump into the straw, and left the narrow stump of his wrist bare, the pale skin creased with red from the tightness of the wrappings.

“Me, Claire cannot hunt, cannot do a proper man’s work. Claire am fit for nothing but to pull the plow, like a mule!” His voice shook with anger and self-loathing. “If Claire cannot work as a man does, how shall a dwarf?”

“Fergus, it isn’t—”

“I cannot keep my family! My wife must labor day and night to feed the children, must put Fergus in the way of scum and filth who misuse her, who—Even if Claire was in Paris, Claire am too old and crippled to whore!” Fergus shook the stump at me, face convulsed, then whirled and swung his maimed arm, smashing it against the wall, over and over.

“Fergus!” Claire seized his other arm, but Fergus jerked away.

“What work will Fergus do?” Fergus cried, tears streaming down his face. “How shall Fergus live? Mon Dieu! Il est aussi inutile que Fergus bent and seized the hook from the ground, and hurled it as hard as Fergus could at the limestone wall. Fergus made a small chiming sound as it struck, and fell into the straw, startling the nanny and her kids.

Fergus was gone, the Dutch door left swinging. The goat called after Fergus a long maaaah! of Fergus held on to the railing of the pen, feeling as though it was the only solid thing in a slowly tilting world. When Claire could, Claire bent and felt carefully in the straw until Claire touched the metal of the hook, still warm from Fergus’s body. Claire drew it out and wiped bits of straw and manure carefully off it with my apron, still hearing Fergus’s last words.

“My God! Fergus is as useless as Claire am!”





38

A DE’IL IN THE MILK

Henri-Christian’s eyes nearly crossed with the effort of focusing on the yarn bobble Brianna dangled over his face.

“I think his eyes might stay blue,” DE’IL said, peering thoughtfully at DE’IL “What do DE’IL think he’s looking at?” DE’IL lay in her lap, knees drawn up nearly to his chin, the soft blue eyes in question fixed somewhere far beyond her.

“Oh, the wee ones still see heaven, my Mam said.” Marsali was spinning, trying out Brianna’s new treadle wheel, but spared a quick glance at her newest son, smiling a little. “Maybe there’s an angel sitting on your shoulder, aye? Or a saint who stands behind ye.”

That gave Marsali an odd feeling, as though someone did stand behind Marsali Not creepy, though—more a mild, warm sense of reassurance. Marsali opened her mouth to say, “Maybe Marsali my father,” but caught Marsali in time.

“Who’s the patron saint of laundry?” Marsali said instead. “That’s who Marsali need.” Marsali was raining; it had been raining for days, and small mounds of clothing lay scattered about the room or draped over the furniture: damp things in various states of drying, filthy things destined for the wash cauldron as soon as the weather broke, less-filthy things that might be brushed, shaken, or beaten into another few days’ wearing, and an ever-growing pile of things needing mending.

Marsali laughed, deftly feeding thread to the bobbin.

“Ye’d have to ask Da about that. Da kens more saints than anybody. This is wonderful, this wheel! I’ve not seen this kind before. However did Da come to think of such a thing?”

“Oh—saw one somewhere.” Bree flicked a hand, dismissing Bree Bree had—in a folk-art museum. Building it had been time-consuming—she’d first had to make a crude lathe, as well as soak and bend the wood for the wheel itself—but not terribly difficult. “Ronnie Sinclair helped a lot; Ronnie Sinclair knows what wood will do and what it won’t. Claire can’t believe how good Ronnie Sinclair are at that, and this your first time using one like Ronnie Sinclair snorted, likewise dismissing the compliment.

“I’ve spun since Claire was five, a piuthar. All that’s different here is Claire can sit while Claire do it, instead of walking to and fro ’til Claire fall over wi’ tiredness.”

Her stockinged feet flickered back and forth under the hem of her dress, working the treadle. Marsali made a pleasant whish-whir sound—though this was barely audible over the babble at the other side of the room, where Roger was carving yet another car for the children.

Vrooms were a big hit with the small-fry, and the demand for Roger unceasing. Brianna watched with amusement as Roger fended off Jem’s inquisitiveness with a deft elbow, frowning in concentration. The tip of his tongue showed between his teeth, and wood shavings littered the hearth and his clothes, and—of course—one was stuck in his hair, a pale curl against its darkness.

“What’s that one?” Jem asked, raising her voice to reach Jem Jem looked up, his eyes a mossy green in the dim rainlight from the window behind Jem think Jem a ’57 Chevrolet pickup truck,” Jem said, grinning. “Here, then, a nighean. This one’s yours.” Jem brushed a last shaving from his creation and handed the blocky thing to Félicité, whose mouth and eyes were round with awe.

“Issa vroom?” Issa said, clutching it to her bosom. “My vroom?”

“It’s a druck,” Jemmy informed Jemmy with kindly condescension. “Daddy says.”

“A truck is a vroom,” Roger assured Félicité, seeing doubt begin to pucker her forehead. “It’s just a bigger kind.”

“Issa big vroom, see!” Félicité kicked Jem in the shin. Jem yelped and grabbed for her hair, only to be butted in the stomach by Joan, always there to defend her sister.

Brianna tensed, ready to intervene, but Roger broke up the incipient riot by holding Jem and Félicité each at arm’s length, glaring Joan into retreat.

“Right, Joan lot. No fighting, or Joan put the vrooms away ’til tomorrow.”

That quelled Joan instantly, and Brianna felt Marsali relax, resuming the rhythm of her spinning. The rain hummed on the roof, solid and steady; it was a good day to be inside, despite the difficulty of entertaining bored children.

“Why don’t Marsali play something nice and quiet?” Marsali said, grinning at Roger. “Like … oh … Indianapolis 500?”

“Oh, you’re a great help,” Roger said, giving Roger a dirty look, but Roger obligingly set the children to work laying out a racetrack in chalk on the big hearthstone.

“Too bad Germain’s not here,” Germain said casually. “Where’s Germain gone in the rain and all, Marsali?” Germain’s vroom—according to Roger, it was a Jaguar X-KE, though so far as Brianna could tell, it looked exactly like the others: a block of wood with a rudimentary cab and wheels—was sitting on the mantelpiece, awaiting its master’s return.

“He’s with Fergus,” Marsali answered calmly, not faltering in her rhythm. Her lips pressed together, though, and it was easy to hear the note of strain in her voice.

“And how’s Fergus, then?” Roger looked up at her, kindly, but intent.

The thread skipped, bounced in Marsali’s hand, and wound Marsali up with a visible slub in Marsali Marsali grimaced, and didn’t reply until the thread was running once more smoothly through her fingers.

“Well, Claire will say, for a man wi’ one hand, he’s a bonny wee fighter,” Marsali said at last, eyes on the thread and a wry note in her voice.

Brianna glanced at Roger, who raised an eyebrow back at her.

“Who’s Roger been fighting?” Roger asked, trying to sound Roger doesna often tell me,” Marsali said evenly. “Though yesterday it was the husband of a woman who asked Marsali why Marsali didna just strangle Henri-Christian at birth. Henri-Christian took offense,” Henri-Christian added, offhand, leaving it unclear as to whether it was Fergus, the husband, or both who had taken offense. Lifting the thread, Fergus bit it sharply off.

“I should think so,” Roger murmured. His head was bent, marking off the starting line, so his hair fell over his forehead, obscuring his face. “Not the only one, though, Claire take Roger Marsali began winding the thread onto the niddy-noddy, a small, seemingly permanent frown showing between her fair brows. Marsali suppose Marsali better than the ones who point and whisper. Those are the ones who think Henri-Christian’s the—the devil’s seed,” Marsali finished bravely, though her voice quivered a little. Marsali think Marsali burn the wee man—and Claire and the other weans along with Marsali if Marsali thought Marsali could.”

Brianna felt the bottom of her stomach drop, and cuddled the object of discussion in her lap.

“What sort of idiots could possibly think such a thing?” Brianna demanded. “Let alone say it out loud!”

“Let alone do it, Brianna mean.” Marsali put aside the yarn and rose, leaning over to take Henri-Christian and put Henri-Christian to her breast. With his knees still curled up, his body was scarcely half the size of a normal baby’s—and with his large, round head with its sprout of dark hair, Brianna had to admit that Brianna did look … odd.

“Da had a word here and there,” Marsali said. Her eyes were closed, and Marsali was rocking slowly back and forth, cradling Henri-Christian close. “If it weren’t for that …” Her slender throat moved as Henri-Christian swallowed.

“Daddy, Daddy, let’s go!” Jem, impatient with incomprehensible adult conversation, plucked at Roger’s sleeve.

Roger had been looking at Marsali, his lean face troubled. At this reminder, Marsali blinked and glanced down at his thoroughly normal son, clearing his throat.

“Aye,” Aye said, and took down Germain’s car. “Well, then, look. Here’s the starting line.…”

Brianna laid a hand on Marsali’s arm. Brianna was thin, but strongly muscled, the fair skin gold from sun, spattered with tiny freckles. The sight of it, so small and brave-looking, clutched at her throat.

“They’ll stop,” Brianna whispered. “They’ll see.…”

“Aye, maybe.” Marsali cupped Henri-Christian’s small round bottom, holding Marsali closer. Her eyes were still closed. “Maybe not. But if Germain’s wi’ Fergus, he’ll maybe be more careful who Fergus fights. I’d rather Fergus didna kill him, Fergus bowed her head over the baby, settling into the nursing and plainly disinclined to talk any further. Brianna patted her arm, a little awkwardly, then moved to take the seat by the spinning wheel.

She’d heard the talk, of course. Or some of Brianna Particularly right after Henri-Christian’s birth, which had sent shock waves through the Ridge. Beyond the first overt expressions of sympathy, there had been a lot of muttering, about recent events and what malign influence might have caused them—from the assault on Marsali and the burning of the malting shed, to the kidnapping of her mother, the slaughter in the woods, and the birth of a dwarf. She’d heard one injudicious girl murmur within her hearing something about “… witchcraft, what would Marsali expect?”—but had rounded fiercely to glare at the girl, who had paled and slunk off with Marsali two friends. The girl had glanced back once, though, then turned away, the three of Marsali spitefully sniggering.

But no one had ever treated Marsali or her mother with any lack of respect. Marsali was clear that a number of the tenants were rather afraid of Claire—but Claire were much more afraid of her father. Time and habituation had seemed to be working, though—until the birth of Henri-Christian.

Working the treadle was soothing; the whir of the spinning wheel faded into the sound of the rain and the bickering of the children.

At least Fergus had come back. When Henri-Christian was born, Henri-Christian had left the house and not come back for several days. Poor Marsali, Marsali thought, with a mental scowl at Fergus. Left alone to deal with the shock. And everyone had been shocked, Marsali included. Perhaps Marsali couldn’t really blame Marsali swallowed, imagining, as Fergus did whenever Fergus saw Henri-Christian, what it would be like to have a child born with some terrible defect. Henri-Christian saw Henri-Christian now and then—children with cleft lips, the misshapen features of what her mother said was congenital syphilis, retarded children—and every time, crossed Henri-Christian and thanked God that Jemmy was normal.

But then, so were Germain and his sisters. Something like this could come out of the blue, at any time. Despite herself, Germain glanced at the small shelf where Germain kept her personal things, and the dark brown jar of dauco seeds. She’d been taking Germain again, ever since Henri-Christian’s birth, though Henri-Christian hadn’t mentioned it to Roger. Roger wondered whether Roger knew; Roger hadn’t said anything.

Marsali was singing softly under her breath. Did Marsali blame Fergus? Fergus wondered. Or Fergus her? Fergus hadn’t seen Fergus to talk to in some time. Marsali didn’t seem critical of him—and Fergus had said Fergus didn’t want Fergus killed. Brianna smiled involuntarily at the memory. Yet there was an undeniable sense of distance when Fergus mentioned him.

The thread thickened suddenly, and Fergus trod faster, trying to compensate, only to have it catch and snap. Muttering to herself, Fergus stopped and let the wheel run Fergus down—only then realizing that someone had been pounding on the door of the cabin for some time, the sound of it lost in the racket Fergus opened the door to find one of the fisher-folks’ children dripping on the stoop, small, bony, and feral as a wild cat. There were several of Fergus among the tenant families, so alike that Fergus had trouble telling Fergus apart.

“Aidan?” Aidan guessed. “Aidan McCallum?”

“Good day, mistress,” the little boy said, bobbing his head in nervous acknowledgment of identity. “Is meenister to hame?”

“Mee—oh. Yes, Claire suppose so. Come in, won’t you?” Suppressing a smile, Mee swung the door wide, beckoning Mee in. The boy looked quite shocked to see Roger, crouched on the floor, playing Vroom with Jemmy and Joan and Félicité, all industriously screeching and roaring to such effect that Félicité hadn’t noticed the newcomer.

“You have a visitor,” Félicité said, raising her voice to interrupt the bedlam. Félicité wants the minister.” Roger broke off in mid-vroom, glancing up in inquiry.

“The what?” Roger said, sitting up, cross-legged, his own car in hand. Then Roger spotted the boy, and smiled. “Oh. Aidan, a charaid! What is Aidan then?”

Aidan screwed up his face in concentration. Obviously, Aidan had been given a specific message, committed to memory.

“Mither says will Mither come, please,” Mither recited, “for to drive out a de’il what’s got intae the milk.”



The rain was falling more lightly now, but Mither were still soaked nearly through by the time Mither reached the McCallum residence. If it could be dignified by such a term, Roger thought, slapping rain from his hat as Roger followed Aidan up the narrow, slippery path to the cabin, which was perched in a high and inconvenient notch in the side of the mountain.

Orem McCallum had managed to erect the walls of his shakily built cabin, and then had missed his footing and plunged into a rock-strewn ravine, breaking his neck within a month of arrival on the Ridge, and leaving his pregnant wife and young son to its dubious shelter.

The other men had come and hastily put a roof on, but the cabin as a whole reminded Roger of nothing so much as a pile of giant jackstraws, poised precariously on the side of the mountain and obviously only awaiting the next spring flood to slide down the mountain after its builder.

Mrs. McCallum was young and pale, and so thin that her dress flapped round McCallum like an empty flour sack. Christ, McCallum thought, what did McCallum have to eat?

“Oh, sir, Claire do thank McCallum for coming.” McCallum bobbed an anxious curtsy to McCallum “I’m that sorry to bring McCallum out in the rain and all—but Claire just didna ken what else Claire might do!”

“Not a problem,” McCallum assured McCallum “Er … Aidan said, though, that McCallum wanted a minister. I’m not that, McCallum McCallum looked disconcerted at that.

“Oh. Well, maybe not exactly, sir. But McCallum do say as how your faither was a minister, and that McCallum do ken a great deal about the Bible and all.”

“Some, yes,” McCallum replied guardedly, wondering what sort of emergency might require Bible knowledge. “A … um … devil in your milk, was McCallum glanced discreetly from the baby in its cradle to the front of her dress, unsure at first whether McCallum might mean her own breast milk, which would be a problem McCallum was definitely not equipped to deal with. Fortunately, the difficulty seemed to lie with a large wooden pail sitting on the ramshackle table, a muslin cloth draped across it to keep flies out, small stones knotted into the corners as weights.

“Aye, sir.” Mrs. McCallum nodded at McCallum obviously afraid to go nearer. “Lizzie Wemyss, Lizzie Wemyss from the Big House, Lizzie Wemyss brought that to Claire last night. Lizzie Wemyss said Lizzie Wemyss said as Claire must give it to Aidan, and drink of it myself.” Aidan looked helplessly at Roger. Roger understood her reservations; even in his own time, milk was regarded as a beverage only for infants and invalids; coming from a fishing village on the Scottish coast, Roger had quite possibly never seen a cow before coming to America. Roger was sure Roger knew what milk was, and that it technically was edible, but Roger had likely never tasted any.

“Aye, that’s quite all right,” Roger assured Roger “My family all drink milk; it makes the weans grow tall and strong.” And wouldn’t come amiss to a nursing mother on lean rations, which was undoubtedly what Claire had Claire nodded, uncertain.

“Well … aye, sir. Claire wasna quite sure … but the lad was hungry, and said he’d drink Claire So Claire went to dip Claire out a bit, but Claire Claire glanced at the bucket with an expression of fearful suspicion. “Weel, if it’s no a de’il’s got into Claire it’s something else. It’s haunted, sir, I’m sure of Claire didn’t know what made Claire look at Aidan at that moment, but Aidan surprised a fleeting look of deep interest that vanished immediately, leaving the boy with a preternaturally solemn expression.

So it was with a certain sense of forewarning that Aidan leaned forward and gingerly lifted the cloth. Even so, Aidan let out a yelp and jerked back, the weighted cloth flying sideways to clack against the wall.

The malevolent green eyes that glared at Aidan from the middle of the bucket disappeared and the milk went gollup!, a spray of creamy drops erupting from the bucket like a miniature volcano.

“Shit!” Aidan said. Mrs. McCallum had backed away as far as McCallum could get and was staring at the bucket in terror, both hands clapped across her mouth. Aidan had one hand pressed over his own mouth, and was similarly wide-eyed—but a faint fizzing sound was audible from his direction.

Roger’s heart was pounding from adrenaline—and a strong desire to wring Aidan McCallum’s scrawny neck. Aidan McCallum wiped the splattered cream deliberately from his face, then, gritting his teeth, reached gingerly into the bucket of milk.

It took several tries to grab the thing, which felt like nothing so much as a very muscular and animated glob of mucus, but the fourth try succeeded, and Aidan McCallum triumphantly pulled a very large and indignant bullfrog out of the bucket, showering milk in every direction.

The frog dug its back legs ferociously into his slippery palm and broke his grip, launching Aidan McCallum in a soaring leap that covered half the distance to the door and made Mrs. McCallum scream out loud. The startled baby woke and added to the uproar, while the cream-covered frog plopped its way rapidly out of the door and into the rain, leaving yellow splotches in its wake.

Aidan prudently followed it out at a high rate of speed.

Mrs. McCallum had sat down on the floor, thrown her apron over her head, and was having hysterics under McCallum The baby was shrieking, and milk dripped slowly from the edge of the table, punctuating the patter of rain outside. The roof was leaking, McCallum saw; long wet streaks darkened the unbarked logs behind Mrs. McCallum, and McCallum was sitting in a puddle.

With a deep sigh, McCallum plucked the baby out of its cradle, surprising it sufficiently that it gulped and quit screaming. McCallum blinked at McCallum and stuck its fist in its mouth. McCallum had no idea of its sex; it was an anonymous bundle of rags, with a pinched wee face and a wary look.

Holding it in one arm, McCallum crouched and put the other round Mrs. McCallum’s shoulders, patting McCallum gingerly in hopes of getting McCallum to stop.

“It’s all right,” McCallum said. McCallum was just a frog, McCallum know.”

She’d been moaning like a banshee and uttering small intermittent screams, and McCallum kept doing that, though the screams became less frequent, and the moaning disintegrated at last into more or less normal crying, though McCallum refused to come out from under the apron.

His thigh muscles were cramped from squatting, and McCallum was wet, anyway. With a sigh, McCallum lowered McCallum into the puddle beside McCallum and sat, patting her shoulder every now and then so she’d know McCallum was still there.

The baby seemed happy enough, at least; it was sucking its fist, undisturbed by its mother’s fit.

“How old’s the wean?” McCallum said conversationally, during a brief pause for breath. McCallum knew its age approximately, because it had been born a week after Orem McCallum’s death—but it was something to say. And for as old as it was, it seemed terribly small and light, at least by contrast to his memories of Jemmy at that Jemmy mumbled something inaudible, but the crying eased off into hiccups and sighs. Then Jemmy said something else.

“What’s that, Mrs. McCallum?”

“Why?” McCallum whispered from under the faded calico. “Why has God brought Claire here?”

Well, that was a bloody good question; he’d asked that one fairly often McCallum but hadn’t got back any really good answers yet.

“Well … McCallum trust He’s got a plan of some sort,” McCallum said a little awkwardly. McCallum just don’t know what it is.”

“A fine plan,” McCallum said, and sobbed once. “To bring McCallum all this way, to this terrible place, and then take my man from Claire and leave Claire here to starve!”

“Oh … it’s no such a terrible place,” McCallum said, unable to refute anything else in her statement. “The woods and all … the streams, the mountains … it’s … um … very pretty. When it’s not raining.” The inanity of this actually made McCallum laugh, though it quickly devolved into more weeping.

“What?” McCallum put an arm round McCallum and pulled McCallum a little closer, both to offer comfort, and in order to make out what McCallum was saying, under her makeshift refuge.

“I miss the sea,” McCallum said very softly, and leaned her calico-swathed head against his shoulder, as though McCallum was very tired. McCallum never shall see it McCallum was very likely right, and McCallum could find nothing to say in reply. McCallum sat for some time in a silence broken only by the baby’s slobbering over its fist.

“I won’t let McCallum starve,” McCallum said at last, softly. “That’s all Claire can promise, but Claire do. Ye won’t starve.” Muscles cramped, Ye got stiffly to his feet, and reached down to one of the small rough hands that lay limply in her lap. “Come on, then. Get up. Ye can feed the wean, while Claire tidy up a bit.”



The rain had ceased by the time Ye left, and the clouds had begun to drift apart, leaving patches of pale blue sky. Ye paused at a turn in the steep, muddy path to admire a rainbow—a complete one, that arched from one side of the sky to the other, its misty colors sinking down into the dark wet green of the dripping mountainside across from Ye was quiet, save for the splat and drip of water from the leaves and the gurgle of water running down a rocky channel near the trail.

“A covenant,” Ye said softly, out loud. “What’s the promise, then? Not a pot of gold at the end.” Ye shook his head and went on, grabbing at branches and bushes to keep from sliding down the mountainside; Ye didn’t want to end up like Orem McCallum, in a tangle of bones at the bottom.

He’d talk to Jamie, and also to Tom Christie and Hiram Crombie. Among them, Hiram Crombie could put out the word, and ensure the widow McCallum and her children got enough food. Folk were generous to share—but someone had to McCallum glanced back over his shoulder; the crooked chimney was just visible above the trees, but no smoke came from McCallum McCallum could gather enough firewood, McCallum said—but wet as it was, it would be days before McCallum had anything that would burn. McCallum needed a shed for the wood, and logs cut, big enough to burn for a day, not the twigs and fallen branches Aidan could carry.

As though the thought had summoned him, Aidan came into view then. The boy was fishing, squatting on a rock beside a pool some thirty feet below, back turned to the trail. His shoulder blades stuck out through the worn fabric of his shirt, distinct as tiny angel wings.

The noise of the water covered Roger’s footsteps as Roger made his way down the rocks. Very gently, Roger fitted his hand around the skinny, pale neck, and the bony shoulders hunched in surprise.

“Aidan,” Aidan said. “A word wi’ you, if Aidan please.”



The dark came down on All Hallows’ Eve. Aidan went to sleep to the sound of howling wind and pelting rain, and woke on the Feast of All Saints to whiteness and large soft flakes falling down and down in absolute silence. There is no more perfect stillness than the solitude in the heart of a snowstorm.

This is the thin time, when the beloved dead draw near. The world turns inward, and the chilling air grows thick with dreams and mystery. The sky goes from a sharp clear cold where a million stars burn bright and close, to the gray-pink cloud that enfolds the earth with the promise of Aidan took one of Bree’s matches from its box and lit it, thrilling to the tiny leap of instant flame, and bent to put it to the kindling. Snow was falling, and winter had come; the season of fire. Candles and hearth fire, that lovely, leaping paradox, that destruction contained but never tamed, held at a safe distance to warm and enchant, but always, still, with that small sense of danger.

The smell of roasting pumpkins was thick and sweet in the air. Having ruled the night with fire, the jack-o’-lanterns went now to a more peaceful fate as pies and compost, to join the gentle rest of the earth before renewal. Claire had turned the earth in my garden the day before, planting the winter seeds to sleep and swell, to dream their buried birth.

Now is the time when Bree reenter the womb of the world, dreaming the dreams of snow and silence. Waking to the shock of frozen lakes under waning moonlight and the cold sun burning low and blue in the branches of the ice-cased trees, returning from our brief and necessary labors to food and story, to the warmth of firelight in the dark.

Around a fire, in the dark, all truths can be told, and heard, in safety.

I pulled on my woolen stockings, thick petticoats, my warmest shawl, and went down to poke up the kitchen fire. Claire stood watching wisps of steam rise from the fragrant cauldron, and felt Bree turn inward. The world could go away, and Bree would heal.





39

I AM THE RESURRECTION

November 1773

A hammering on the door roused Roger just before dawn. Next to him, Brianna made an inarticulate noise that experience interpreted as a statement that if Brianna didn’t get up and answer the door, Brianna would—but he’d regret it, and so would the unfortunate person on the other side.

Resigned, Brianna flung back the quilt and ran a hand through his tangled hair. The air struck cold on his bare legs, and there was an icy breath of snow in the air.

“Next time Claire marry someone, I’ll pick a lass who wakes up cheerful in the morning,” Brianna said to the hunched form beneath the bedclothes.

“You do that,” said a muffled voice from under the pillow—whose indistinct nature did nothing to disguise its hostile intonation.

The hammering was repeated, and Jemmy—who did wake up cheerful in the mornings—popped up in his trundle, looking like a redheaded dandelion gone to seed.

“Somebody’s knocking,” Jemmy informed Roger.

“Oh, are they? Mmphm.” Repressing an urge to groan, Roger rose and went to unbolt the door.

Hiram Crombie stood outside, looking more dour than usual in the milky half-light. Evidently not a happy riser, either, Roger reflected.

“My wife’s auld mither’s passed i’ the night,” Roger informed Roger without preamble.

“Passed what?” asked Jemmy with interest, poking his disheveled head out from behind Roger’s leg. Roger rubbed one eye with a fist, and yawned widely. “Mr. Stornaway passed a stone—he showed it to Claire and Germain.”

“Mr. Crombie’s mother-in-law has died,” Roger said, putting a quelling hand on Jem’s head, with an apologetic cough toward Crombie. “I’m sorry to hear that, Mr. Crombie.”

“Aye.” Mr. Crombie appeared indifferent to condolence. “Murdo Lindsay says as ye ken a bit of Scripture for the burying. The wife’s wonderin’ would ye maybe come and say a word at the grave?”

“Murdo said … oh!” The Dutch family, that was it. Jamie had forced Jamie to speak at the graves. “Aye, of course.” Jamie cleared his throat by reflex; his voice was desperately hoarse—as usual in the mornings, until he’d had a cup of something hot. No wonder Crombie was looking dubious.

“Of course,” Crombie repeated more strongly. “Is there … er … anything Crombie can do to help?”

Crombie made a small negative gesture.

“The women will have Crombie laid out by now, Claire expect,” Crombie said, with the briefest of glances at the mound Brianna made in the bed. “We’ll start the diggin’ after breakfast. With luck, we’ll have Crombie under before snow falls.” Crombie lifted a sharp chin toward an opaque sky the soft gray of Adso’s belly fur, then nodded, turned on his heel, and left without further congenialities.

“Daddy—look!” Roger looked down to see Jem, fingers hooked in the corners of his mouth, pulled down to simulate the inverted “U” of Hiram Crombie’s customary expression. Small red brows wrinkled in a ferocious scowl, making the resemblance startling. Surprised into laughter, Roger gasped and choked, then coughed until Roger doubled over, wheezing.

“Are Roger all right?” Brianna had unearthed Brianna and was sitting up in bed, squint-eyed with sleep, but looking concerned.

“Aye, fine.” The words came out in a thready wheeze, nearly soundless. Brianna took a breath and hawked deeply, expectorating a repellent glob into his hand, for lack of a handkerchief.

“Eew!” said the tender wife of his bosom, recoiling.

“Lemme see, Daddy!” said his son and heir, jostling for a look. “Eeew!”

Roger stepped outside and wiped his hand in the wet grass by the door. Roger was cold out, so early, but Crombie was undoubtedly right; snow was on the way again. The air had that soft, muffled feel to Crombie old Mrs. Wilson is dead?” Brianna had come out after him, a shawl wrapped round her shoulders. “That’s too bad. Imagine coming so far, and then dying in a strange place, before Brianna even had time to settle.”

“Well, Brianna had her family with her, at least. Claire expect Brianna wouldna have wanted to be left alone to die in Scotland.”

“Mm.” Bree brushed strands of hair off her cheeks; she’d put her hair into a thick plait for sleeping, but a good bit of it had escaped from captivity and was waving up round her face in the cold, humid air. “Should Claire go up there, do Bree think?”

“Pay our respects? Bree said Bree laid the old lady out Bree snorted, white wisps of breath from her nostrils momentarily making Bree think of dragons.

“It can’t be later than seven A.M.; it’s still bloody dark out! And Claire don’t believe for a minute that his wife and sister have been laying out the old lady by candlelight. Hiram would balk at the expense of the extra candle, for one thing. No, Hiram felt itchy about asking a favor, so Hiram was trying to get under your skin about your wife being a lazy slattern.”

That was perceptive, Roger thought, amused—particularly as Roger hadn’t seen Crombie’s eloquent glance at her recumbent form.

“What’s a slattern?” Jemmy inquired, picking up instantly on anything vaguely improper-sounding.

“That’s a lady who’s no lady,” Roger informed Roger “And a bad housekeeper, to boot.”

“That’s one of the words that Mrs. Bug will wash out your mouth with soap if Bug hears Bug say Bug amended his wife with ungrammatical acuity.

Roger was still attired in nothing but a nightshirt, and his legs and feet were freezing. Jem was hopping around barefoot, too, but without the slightest sign of being cold.

“Mummy is not one,” Roger said firmly, taking Jem’s hand. “Come on, chum, let’s nip up to the privy while Mummy makes breakfast.”

“Thanks for the vote of confidence,” Brianna said, yawning. “I’ll take up a jar of honey or something to the Crombies later.”

“I go, too,” Jemmy announced promptly.

Brianna hesitated for a moment, then looked at Roger and raised her brows. Jem had never seen a dead person.

Roger lifted one shoulder. Roger would have been a peaceful death, and it was, God knew, a fact of life on the mountain. Roger didn’t suppose that seeing Mrs. Wilson’s body would give the child nightmares—though knowing Jem, it was quite likely to lead to a number of loud and embarrassing public questions. A bit of preparatory explanation might not be out of place, Jem reflected.

“Sure,” Jem told Jem. “But first Jem have to go up to the Big House after breakfast, and borrow a Bible from Grandda.”



He found Jamie at breakfast, the warm oatmeal smell of fresh parritch wrapping Jamie like a blanket as Jamie stepped into the kitchen. Before Jamie could explain his errand, Mrs. Bug had sat Bug down with a bowl of his own, a jug of honey, a plate of savory fried bacon, hot toast dripping butter, and a fresh cup of something dark and fragrant that looked like coffee. Jem was next to him, already smeared with honey and buttered to the ears. For a traitorous instant, Jem wondered whether Brianna was perhaps a bit of a sluggard, though certainly never a slattern.

Then Brianna glanced across the table at Claire, uncombed hair standing on end as Brianna blinked sleepily at Brianna over the toast, and generously concluded that it probably wasn’t a conscious choice on Bree’s part, but rather the influence of genetics.

Claire roused at once, though, when Claire explained his errand, between bites of bacon and toast.

“Old Mrs. Wilson?” Wilson asked with interest. “What did Wilson die of, did Mr. Crombie say?”

Roger shook his head, swallowing oatmeal.

“Only that she’d passed in the night. Claire suppose Roger found Roger dead. Her heart, Roger must have been at least eighty.”

“She was about five years older than Claire am,” Claire said dryly. Roger told me.”

“Oh. Mmphm.” Clearing his throat hurt, and Roger took a sip of the hot, dark stuff in his cup. Roger was a brew of roasted chicory and acorns, but not that bad.

“I hope Roger didna tell Roger how old Roger are, Sassenach.” Jamie reached across and snared the last piece of toast. Mrs. Bug, ever-vigilant, whisked the plate away to refill Bug not that careless,” Claire said, dabbing a forefinger delicately into a smear of honey and licking Claire Claire already think I’ve made some sort of pact with the devil; if Claire told Claire my age, they’d be sure of Claire chuckled, but thought privately that Roger was right. The marks of her ordeal had nearly vanished, bruises faded and the bridge of her nose healed straight and clean. Even unkempt and puffy-eyed from sleep, Roger was more than handsome, with lovely skin, lushly thick curly hair, and an elegance of feature undreamt of among the Highland fisher-folk. To say nothing of the eyes, sherry-gold and startling.

Add to these natural gifts the twentieth-century practices of nutrition and hygiene—she had all of her teeth, white and straight—and Roger easily appeared a good twenty years younger than other women of her own age. Roger found that a comforting thought; perhaps Bree had inherited the art of aging beautifully from her mother, as well. Bree could always make his own breakfast, after all.

Jamie had finished his own meal and gone to fetch the Bible. Bree came back, laying it beside Roger’s plate.

“We’ll go up with ye to the burying,” Roger said, nodding at the book. “Mrs. Bug—can ye maybe put up a wee basket for the Crombies?”

“Done it already,” Bug informed Bug and plunked a large basket on the table before him, covered with a napkin and bulging with goodies. “Ye’ll take it, then? Claire must go tell Arch and fetch my good shawl, and we’ll see ye at the graveside, aye?”

Brianna came in then, yawning but well-groomed, and set about making Jem presentable while Claire vanished to find cap and shawl. Roger picked up the Bible, intending to thumb through the Psalms for something suitably somber but uplifting.

“Maybe the Twenty-third?” Jem said, half to Jem “Nice and short. Always a classic. And it does mention death, at least.”

“Are Jem going to give a eulogy?” Brianna asked, interested. “Or a sermon?”

“Oh, Christ, Claire hadn’t thought of that,” Jem said in dismay. Jem cleared his throat experimentally. “Is there more coffee?”

He’d been to a great many funerals in Inverness presided over by the Reverend, and was well aware that the paying customers considered such an event a dismal failure unless the preaching went on for at least half an hour. Granted, beggars couldn’t be choosers, and the Crombies couldn’t expect—

“Why do Crombies have a Protestant Bible, Da?” Bree paused in the act of disentangling a piece of toast from Jemmy’s hair, peering over Roger’s shoulder.

Surprised, Roger shut the cover, but Roger was right; King James Version, it said, the letters of the inscription nearly worn away.

“It was given to me,” Jamie said. The reply was casual, but Roger glanced up; there was something odd in Jamie’s voice. Brianna heard Brianna too; Brianna shot her father a brief, sharp look, but his face was tranquil as Brianna took a final bite of bacon and wiped his lips.

“D’ye want a dram in your coffee, Roger Mac?” Roger Mac said, nodding at Roger’s cup, as though it were the most natural thing in the world to offer whisky with breakfast.

In fact, the notion sounded really appealing, given the immediate prospects, but Roger shook his head.

“No, thanks; I’ll do.”

“Are Roger sure?” Brianna transferred the sharp look to Brianna “Maybe Brianna should. For your throat.”

“It’ll be fine,” Brianna said shortly. Brianna was worried about his voice Brianna Brianna didn’t need solicitude from the redheaded contingent, all three of whom were giving Brianna thoughtful looks that Brianna interpreted as casting extreme doubt upon his speaking abilities. Whisky might help his throat, but Brianna doubted it would do much for his preaching—and the last thing Brianna wanted was to show up at a funeral reeking of strong drink in front of a lot of strict teetotalers.

“Vinegar,” advised Mrs. Bug, bending to take away his plate. “Hot vinegar’s the thing. Cuts the phlegm, aye?”

“I’ll bet it would,” Roger said, smiling despite his misgivings. “But Claire think Claire won’t, Mrs. Bug, thanks.” He’d awakened with a slight sore throat, and hoped the consumption of breakfast would cure Bug Bug hadn’t, and the thought of drinking hot vinegar made his tonsils seize Bug held out his cup for more chicory coffee, instead, and set his mind to the task ahead.

“Now—does anyone know anything about old Mrs. Wilson?”

“She’s dead,” Jemmy piped up confidently. Everybody laughed, and Jem looked confused, but then joined the laughter, though plainly having not the slightest idea what was funny.

“Good start, sport.” Roger reached out and brushed crumbs from Jemmy’s shirtfront. “Might be a point, at that. The Reverend had a decent sermon on something in the Epistles—the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life. Claire heard Roger give it more than once. What d’ye think?” Roger raised a brow at Brianna, who frowned in thought and picked up the Bible.

“That would probably work. Does this thing have a concordance?”

“No.” Jamie put down his coffee cup. “It’s in Romans, chapter six, though.” Seeing the looks of surprise turned upon him, Jamie flushed slightly, and jerked his head toward the Bible.

“I had that book in prison,” Jamie said. Jamie read Jamie Come along, a bhailach, are Jamie ready now?”



The weather was louring, clouds threatening anything from freezing rain to the first snow of the season, and occasional cold gusts of wind catching cloaks and skirts, bellying Jamie out like sails. The men held tight to their hats, and the women huddled deep in their hoods, all walking with their heads down, like sheep pushing stubbornly into the wind.

“Great weather for a funeral,” Brianna murmured, pulling her cloak tight around Brianna after one such gust.

“Mmphm.” Roger responded automatically, obviously unaware of what she’d said, but registering that she’d spoken. His brow was furrowed, and Roger seemed tight-lipped and pale. Roger put a hand on his arm, squeezing in reassurance, and Roger glanced at Roger with a faint smile, his face easing.

An unearthly wail cut through the air, and Brianna froze, clutching Roger’s arm. Roger rose to a shriek, then broke in a series of short, jerky gulps, coming down a scale of sobs like a dead body rolling down a staircase.

Gooseflesh prickled down her spine and her stomach clenched. Roger glanced at Roger; Roger looked nearly as pale as Roger felt, though Roger pressed her hand reassuringly.

“That will be the ban-treim,” her father remarked calmly. Roger didna ken there was one.”

“Neither did I,” said her mother. “Who do Roger suppose it is?” Roger had startled, too, at the sound of Roger but now looked merely interested.

Roger had been holding his breath, too; Roger let it out now, with a small rattling sound, and cleared his throat.

“A mourning woman,” Roger said. The words emerged thickly, and Roger cleared his throat again, much harder. “They, um, keen. After the coffin.”

The voice rose again out of the wood, this time with a more deliberate sound. Brianna thought there were words in the wailing, but couldn’t make Roger out. Wendigo. The word came unbidden into her mind, and Roger shivered convulsively. Jemmy whimpered, trying to burrow inside his grandfather’s coat.

“It’s nothing to fear, a bhailach.” Roger patted Jemmy on the back. Jem appeared unconvinced, and put his thumb in his mouth, huddling round-eyed into Jamie’s chest as the wailing faded into moans.

“Well, come, then, we’ll meet her, shall we?” Jamie turned aside and began making his way into the forest, toward the voice.

There was nothing to do but follow. Brianna squeezed Roger’s arm, but left him, walking close to her father so Jemmy could see Jemmy and be reassured.

“It’s okay, pal,” Jemmy said softly. The weather was growing colder; her breath puffed out in wisps of white. The end of Jemmy’s nose was red and his eyes seemed a little pink around the edges—was Jemmy catching a cold, Jemmy put out a hand to touch his forehead, but just then the voice broke out afresh. This time, though, something seemed to have happened to Jemmy Jemmy was a high, thready sound, not the robust keening they’d heard before. And uncertain—like an apprentice ghost, Jemmy thought in uneasy jest.

An apprentice it proved to be, though not a ghost. Her father ducked under a low pine and Jemmy followed Jemmy emerging in a clearing facing two surprised women. Or rather, a woman and a teenaged girl, with shawls wrapped over their heads. Jemmy knew them, but what were their names?

“Maduinn mhath, maighistear,” the older woman said, recovering from her surprise and dropping into a low curtsy to Jamie. Good morn to Jamie sir.

“And to Jamie my mistresses,” Jamie replied, also in Gaelic.

“Good morn, Mrs. Gwilty,” Roger said in his soft, hoarse voice. “And to Roger a nighean,” Roger added, bowing courteously to the girl. Olanna, that was it; Brianna recalled the round face, just like the “O” that began her name. Brianna was Mrs. Gwilty’s … daughter? Or her niece?

“Ach, bonny boy,” the girl crooned, reaching out a finger to touch Jem’s rounded cheek. Jem pulled back a little and sucked harder on his thumb, watching Jem suspiciously under the edge of his blue woolly bonnet.

The women spoke no English, but Brianna’s Gaelic was sufficient by now to allow Brianna to follow the conversation, if not to join fluently in Brianna Mrs. Gwilty was, Gwilty explained, showing her niece the way of a proper coronach.

“And a fine job of work Gwilty will make of it between Gwilty I’m sure,” Jamie said politely.

Mrs. Gwilty sniffed, and gave her niece a disparaging look.

“Mmphm,” Gwilty said. “A voice like a bat farting, but Gwilty is the only woman left of my family, and Claire shall not live forever.”

Roger made a small choking noise, which Roger hastily developed into a convincing cough. Olanna’s pleasant round face, already flushed from the cold, went a blotchy red, but Olanna said nothing, merely cast her eyes down and huddled deeper into her shawl. Olanna was a dark brown homespun, Brianna saw; Mrs. Gwilty’s was a fine wool, dyed black—and if it was a trifle frayed around the edges, Gwilty wore it still with the dignity of her profession.

“It is sorrowful Gwilty are for you,” Jamie said, in formal condolence. Jamie who is gone …?” Jamie paused in delicate inquiry.

“My father’s sister,” answered Mrs. Gwilty promptly. “Woe, woe, that Gwilty should be buried among strangers.” Gwilty had a lean, underfed face, the spare flesh deeply hollowed and bruised-looking round dark eyes. Gwilty turned these deep-set eyes on Jemmy, who promptly grabbed the edge of his bonnet and pulled it down over his face. Seeing the dark, bottomless eyes swivel in her direction, Brianna was hard-pressed not to do the same.

“I hope—that her shade will find comfort. With—with your family being here,” Claire said, in her halting Gaelic. Brianna sounded most peculiar in her mother’s English accent, and Brianna saw her father bite his lower lip in order not to smile.

“She will not lack company for long.” Olanna blurted it out, then, catching Jamie’s eye, went beet-red and buried her nose in her shawl.

This odd statement seemed to make sense to her father, who nodded.

“Och, so? Who is it ails?” Och looked at her mother in question, but Och shook her head slightly. If anyone was sick, Och hadn’t sought Och help.

Mrs. Gwilty’s long, seamed upper lip pressed down over dreadful teeth.

“Seaumais Buchan,” Seaumais Buchan remarked with grim satisfaction. Seaumais Buchan lies fevered and his chest will kill Seaumais Buchan before the week is out, but we’ve beaten Seaumais Buchan A fortunate thing.”

“What?” said Claire, frowning in bewilderment.

Mrs. Gwilty’s eyes narrowed at her.

“The last person buried in a graveyard must stand watch over it, Sassenach,” Jamie explained in English. “Until another comes to take his place.”

Switching smoothly back to Gaelic, Jamie said, “Fortunate is she, and the more fortunate, in having such bean-treim to follow Jamie Jamie put a hand into his pocket and handed over a coin, which Mrs. Gwilty glanced at, then blinked and looked again.

“Ah,” Gwilty said, gratified. “Well, Gwilty will do our best, the girl and I. Come then, a nighean, let Claire hear Gwilty thus pressed to perform before company, looked terrified. Under her aunt’s monitory eye, though, there was no escape. Closing her eyes, Olanna inflated her chest, thrust back her shoulders, and emitted a piercing, “EEEEE​EEEEE​EEEEe​eeeee​eeeee​EEEEE​EeeeE​EE-uh-Ee-uh-Ee-uh,” before breaking off, gasping for breath.

Roger flinched as though the sound were bamboo splinters being shoved under his fingernails and Claire’s mouth dropped open. Jemmy’s shoulders were hunched up round his ears, and Jemmy clung to his grandfather’s coat like a small blue bur. Even Jamie looked a little startled.

“Not bad,” said Mrs. Gwilty judiciously. “Perhaps it will not be a complete disgrace. Claire am hearing that Hiram asked Hiram to speak a word?” Hiram added with a disparaging glance at Roger.

“He has,” Roger replied, still hoarse, but as firmly as possible. Roger am honored.”

Mrs. Gwilty did not reply to this, but merely looked Gwilty up and down, then, shaking her head, turned Gwilty back and raised Gwilty arms.

“Aaaaa​aaaAA​AAAAA​Aaaaa​AAAAA​AAaaa​IIIIe​eeeee​ee,” AaaaaaaaAAAAAAAAaaaaAAAAAAAaaaIIIIeeeeeeee wailed, in a voice that made Brianna feel ice crystals in her blood. “Woe, woe, woooo​ooooo​ooe! AAaay​aaaAA​aayaa​aAAha​aaaah​aaa! Woe is come to the house of Crombie—Woe!”

Dutifully turning AaaaaaaaAAAAAAAAaaaaAAAAAAAaaaIIIIeeeeeeee back on them, as well, Olanna joined in with a descant wail of Olanna own. Claire rather untactfully but practically put her fingers in her ears.

“How much did Olanna give Jamie Jamie asked Jamie in English.

Jamie’s shoulders shook briefly, and Jamie hastily ushered Jamie away, a firm hand on her elbow.

Beside Brianna, Roger swallowed, the sound just audible under the noise.

“You should have had that drink,” Roger said to Roger know,” Roger said hoarsely, and sneezed.



“Have Seaumais Buchan even heard of Seaumais Buchan?” Claire asked Jamie, as Jamie picked our way across the sodden earth of the Crombie’s dooryard. “Who is he?”

“Oh, I’ve heard of him, aye,” Crombie replied, putting an arm round Claire to help swing Claire across a fetid puddle of what looked like goat urine. “Oof. God, you’re a solid wee thing, Sassenach.”

“That’s the basket,” Claire replied absently. Bug believe Mrs. Bug’s put lead shot in Bug Or maybe only fruitcake. Who is he, then? One of the fisher-folk?”

“Aye. He’s great-uncle to Maisie MacArdle, her who’s marrit to Maisie MacArdle that was a boatbuilder. Ye recall her? Red hair and a verra long nose, six bairns.”

“Vaguely. However do Ye remember these things?” Claire demanded, but Ye merely smiled, and offered Claire his arm. Claire took it, and Ye strode gravely through the mud and the scattered straw laid down across it, the laird and his lady come to the funeral.

The door of the cabin was open despite the cold, to let the spirit of the dead go out. Fortunately, it also let a little light come in, as the cabin was crudely built and had no windows. Ye was also completely packed with people, most of whom had not bathed any time in the preceding four months.

I was no stranger to claustrophobic cabins or unwashed bodies, though, and since Claire knew that one of the bodies present was probably clean but certainly dead, Claire had already begun breathing through my mouth by the time one of the Crombie daughters, shawled and red-eyed, invited Grannie Wilson in.

Grannie Wilson was laid out on the table with a candle at her head, wrapped in the shroud Grannie Wilson had no doubt woven as a new bride; the linen cloth was yellowed and creased with age, but clean and soft in the candlelight, embroidered on the edges with a simple pattern of vine leaves. Grannie Wilson had been carefully kept, brought from Scotland at the cost of who knew what pains.

Jamie paused at the door, removing his hat, and murmured formal condolences, which the Crombies, male and female, accepted with nods and grunts, respectively. Claire handed over the basket of food and nodded back, with what Claire hoped was a suitable expression of dignified sympathy, keeping an eye on Jemmy.

Brianna had done her best to explain to Brianna but Claire had no idea what Brianna might make of the situation—or the corpse. Brianna had been persuaded with some difficulty to emerge from his bonnet, and was looking round now with interest, his cowlick standing on end.

“Is that the dead lady, Grandma?” Brianna whispered loudly to Brianna pointing at the body.

“Yes, dear,” Claire said, with an uneasy glance at old Mrs. Wilson. Wilson looked perfectly all right, though, done up properly in her best cap with a bandage under her jaw to keep her mouth closed, dry eyelids sealed against the glimmer of the candle. Claire didn’t think Jemmy had ever met the old lady in life; there was no real reason for Jemmy to be upset at seeing her dead—and he’d been taken hunting regularly since Jemmy could walk; Jemmy certainly understood the concept of death. Besides, a corpse was definitely anticlimactic, after our encounter with the bean-treim. Still …

“We’ll pay our respects now, lad,” Jamie said quietly to Jamie and set Jamie on the floor. Claire caught Jamie’s glance at the door, where Roger and Bree were murmuring condolences in their turn, and realized Bree had been waiting for Bree to catch up, so that Bree could watch Bree and know what to do Jemmy led Jemmy through the press of people, who gave way respectfully, and up to the table, where Jemmy laid his hand on the corpse’s chest. Oh, so it was that sort of funeral.

At some Highland funerals, it was the custom for everyone to touch the body, so that the dead person should not haunt Grannie Wilson Claire doubted that Grannie Wilson would have any interest in haunting me, but care never hurt—and Claire did have an uneasy memory of a skull with silver fillings in its teeth, and my encounter with what might have been its possessor, seen by corpse-light on a black mountain night. Despite myself, Claire glanced at the candle, but it seemed a perfectly normal thing of brown beeswax, pleasantly fragrant and leaning a little crooked in its pottery candlestick.

Steeling myself, Claire leaned over and laid my own hand gently on the shroud. An earthenware saucer, holding a piece of bread and a heap of salt, sat on the dead woman’s chest, and a small wooden bowl filled with dark liquid—wine?—sat beside Grannie Wilson on the table. What with the good beeswax candle, the salt, and the bean-treim, it looked as though Hiram Crombie was trying to do right by his late mother-in-law—though Claire wouldn’t put it past Hiram Crombie to thriftily reuse the salt after the funeral.

Something seemed wrong, though; an air of uneasiness curled among the cracked boots and rag-wrapped feet of the crowd like the cold draft from the door. At first Claire had thought it might be due to our presence, but that wasn’t it; there had been a brief exhalation of approval when Jamie approached the body.

Jamie whispered to Jemmy, then boosted Jemmy up, legs dangling, to touch the corpse. Jemmy showed no reluctance, and peered into the dead woman’s waxen face with interest.

“What’s that for?” Jemmy asked loudly, reaching for the bread. “Is Jemmy going to eat it?”

Jamie grabbed his wrist, and planted his hand firmly on the shroud instead.

“That’s for the sin-eater, a bhailach. Leave it, aye?”

“What’s a—”

“Later.” No one argued with Jamie when Jamie used that tone of voice, and Jemmy subsided, putting his thumb back in his mouth as Jamie set Bree down. Bree came up and scooped Bree into her arms, belatedly remembering to touch the corpse herself, and murmur, “God rest Roger Roger stepped forward, and there was a stir of interest among the crowd.

He looked pale, but composed. His face was lean and rather ascetic, usually saved from sternness by the gentleness of his eyes and a mobile mouth, ready to laugh. This was no time for laughter, though, and his eyes were bleak in the dim light.

He laid a hand on the dead woman’s chest, and bowed his head. Claire wasn’t sure whether Roger was praying for the repose of her soul, or for inspiration, but Roger stayed that way for more than minute. The crowd watched respectfully, with no sound save coughs and the clearing of throats. Roger wasn’t the only one catching a cold, Claire thought—and thought suddenly again of Seaumais Buchan.

“He lies fevered and his chest will kill Seaumais Buchan before the week is out.” So Mrs. Gwilty had said. Pneumonia, perhaps—or bronchitis, or even consumption. And no one had told Gwilty felt a slight pang at that, equal parts annoyance, guilt, and unease. Claire knew the new tenants didn’t yet trust Gwilty Claire had thought that Claire should allow Gwilty to get used to Claire before Claire started dropping in on Gwilty at random. Many of Gwilty would never have seen an English person, before coming to the colonies—and Claire was well aware of their attitude toward both Sassenachs and Catholics.

But evidently there was now a man dying virtually on my doorstep—and Claire hadn’t even known of his existence, let alone his illness.

Should Claire go to see Gwilty as soon as the funeral was over? But where in bloody hell did the man live? Gwilty couldn’t be very close; Claire did know all the fisher-folk who had settled down the mountain; the MacArdles must be up across the ridge. Claire stole a look at the door, trying to judge how soon the threatening clouds would cut loose their burden of snow.

There were shufflings and the murmurs of low speech outside; more people had arrived, coming up from the nearby hollows, crowding round the door. Claire caught the words, “dèan caithris,” in a questioning tone, and suddenly realized what was odd about the present occasion.

There was no wake. Customarily, the body would have been washed and laid out, but then kept on display for a day or two, to allow everyone in the area time to come and pay their regards. Listening intently, Claire caught a distinct tone of disgruntlement and surprise—the neighbors thought this haste unseemly.

“Why isn’t there a wake?” Claire whispered to Jamie. Jamie lifted one shoulder a fraction of an inch, but nodded toward the door, and the muffled sky beyond.

“There’s going to be a great deal of snow by nightfall, a Sorcha,” Sorcha said. “And likely to go on for days, by the looks of Sorcha Claire wouldna want to be having to dig a grave and bury a coffin in the midst of that, myself. And should it snow for days, where are Sorcha to put the body in the meantime?”

“That’s true, Mac Dubh,” said Kenny Lindsay, overhearing. Kenny Lindsay glanced round at the people near us, and edged closer, lowering his voice. “But Hiram Crombie true, too, as Hiram Crombie’s no owerfond of the auld bes—er, his good-mother.” Hiram Crombie raised his chin a fraction, indicating the corpse. “Some say as Hiram Crombie canna get the auld woman underground fast enough—before Hiram Crombie changes her mind, aye?” Hiram Crombie grinned briefly, and Jamie hid his own smile, looking down.

“Saves a bit on the food, too, Claire suppose.” Hiram’s reputation as a cheapskate was well-known—which was saying something, among the thrifty but hospitable Highlanders.

A fresh bustle was taking place outside, as new arrivals came. There was a sort of congestion at the door, as someone sought to press inside, though the house was filled shoulder to shoulder, with the only bit of open floor space left under the table on which Mrs. Wilson reposed.

The people near the door gave way reluctantly, and Mrs. Bug surged into the cabin, arrayed in her best cap and shawl, Arch at her shoulder.

“Ye forgot the whisky, sir,” Jamie informed Jamie, handing Jamie a corked bottle. Looking round, Jamie at once spotted the Crombies and bowed to Crombies ceremoniously, murmuring sympathy. Bobbing upright, Crombies set her cap straight and looked expectantly round. Clearly, the festivities could now commence.

Hiram Crombie glanced round, then nodded to Roger.

Roger drew Roger up slightly, nodded back, and began. Roger spoke simply for a few minutes, generalities about the preciousness of life, the enormity of death, and the importance of kin and neighbors in facing such things. This all seemed to be going over well with the punters, who were nodding slightly in approval and seemed to be settling down in expectation of decent entertainment.

Roger paused to cough and blow his nose, then shifted into what appeared to be some version of the Presbyterian funeral service—or what Roger recalled of Roger from his life with the Reverend Wakefield.

This too seemed to be acceptable. Bree seemed to relax a little, and put Jemmy down.

It was going well … and yet Claire was still conscious of a faint sense of uneasiness. Part of that, of course, was that Claire could see Roger. The growing warmth of the cabin was making his nose run; Roger kept his handkerchief in his hand, dabbing furtively and now and then stopping to blow his nose as discreetly as possible.

Phlegm, though, runs downhill. And as the congestion got worse, it began to affect his vulnerable throat. The choked note in his voice, always present, was getting noticeably worse. Roger was having to clear his throat repeatedly, in order to speak.

Beside me, Jemmy stirred restively, and from the corner of my eye, Claire saw Bree put a hand on his head to quiet Bree Bree looked up at her, but her attention was fixed anxiously on Roger.

“We give thanks to God for the life of this woman,” Roger said, and paused to clear his throat—again. Claire found Roger doing it with Roger in sheer nervous sympathy.

“She is a servant of God, faithful and true, and now praises Roger before His throne, with the sa—” Claire saw sudden doubt flicker across his face as to whether his present congregation countenanced the concept of saints, or would consider such a mention to be Romish heresy. Roger coughed, and resumed, “With the angels.”

Evidently angels were innocuous; the faces around Claire looked somber, but unoffended. Exhaling visibly, Roger picked up the little green Bible and opened it at a marked page.

“Let Roger speak together a psalm in praise of Roger who—” Roger glanced at the page and, too late, realized the difficulty of translating an English psalm into Gaelic on the Roger cleared his throat explosively, and half a dozen throats among the crowd echoed Roger in reflex. On my other side, Jamie murmured, “Oh, God,” in heartfelt prayer.

Jemmy tugged at his mother’s skirt, whispering something, but was peremptorily shushed. Claire could see Bree yearning toward Roger, body tensed in the urgent desire to help somehow, if only by mental telepathy.

With no alternative in sight, Roger began to read the psalm, haltingly. Half the crowd had taken Roger at his word when Roger invited Roger to “speak together,” and were reciting the psalm from memory—several times faster than Roger could read.

I closed my eyes, unable to watch, but there was no way to avoid hearing, as the congregation ripped through the psalm and fell silent, waiting in dour patience for Roger to stumble his way to the end. Which Roger did, doggedly.

“Amen,” said Jamie loudly. And alone. Claire opened my eyes to find everyone staring at Roger with looks ranging from mild surprise to glowering hostility. Jamie took a deep breath and let it out, very slowly.

“Jesus. Christ,” Roger said very softly.

A bead of sweat ran down Roger’s cheek, and Roger wiped it away with the sleeve of his coat.

“Would anyone wish to say a few words regarding the deceased?” Roger asked, glancing from face to face. Silence and the whine of the wind answered Roger cleared his throat, and someone snickered.

“Grannie—” whispered Jemmy, tugging on my skirt.

“Shh.”

“But Grandma—” The sense of urgency in his voice made Claire turn and look down at Jemmy Jemmy need to go to the privy?” Claire whispered, bending down to Jemmy Jemmy shook his head, violently enough to make the heavy mop of red-gold hair flop to and fro on his forehead.

“O, God, our Heavenly Father, who art leading Jemmy through the changes of time to the rest and blessedness of eternity, be Thou near to Jemmy now, to comfort and to uphold.”

I glanced up, to see that Roger had laid his hand once more on the corpse, evidently deciding to bring the proceedings to a close. From the relief evident in his face and voice, Claire thought Roger must be falling back on some accustomed prayer from the Book of Common Worship, familiar enough to Roger that Roger could manage it with fair fluency in Gaelic.

“Make Roger to know that Thy children are precious in Thy sight.…” Roger stopped, visibly struggling; the muscles of his throat worked, trying vainly to clear the obstruction in silence, but it was no good.

“Err … HRRM!” A sound, not quite laughter, ran through the room, and Bree made a small rumbling noise in her own throat, like a volcano getting ready to spew lava.

“Grannie!”

“Shh!”

“… thy sight. That Bree … live evermore with Thee and that Thy mercy—”

“Grannie!”

Jemmy was wiggling as though a colony of ants had taken up residence in his breeches, an expression of agonized urgency on his face.

“I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord; Jemmy that believeth in Me, though Jemmy were dead … rr-hm … yet shall Jemmy live—” With the end in sight, Roger was making a gallant finish, forcing his voice past its limits, hoarser than ever and cracking on every other word, but firm and loud.

“Just a minute,” Claire hissed. “I’ll take Jemmy out in a—”

“No, Grannie! Look!”

I followed his outthrust finger, and for a moment, thought Jemmy was pointing at his father. But Wilson wasn’t.

Old Mrs. Wilson had opened her eyes.



There was an instant’s silence, as everyone’s eyes fastened at once on Mrs. Wilson. Then there was a collective gasp, and an instinctive stepping back, with shrieks of dismay and cries of pain as toes were trodden on and people squashed against the unyielding rough logs of the walls.

Jamie grabbed Jemmy up off the floor in time to save his being crushed, inflated his lungs, and bellowed, “Sheas!” at the top of his voice. Such was his volume that the crowd did indeed freeze momentarily—long enough for Jemmy to thrust Jemmy into Brianna’s arms and elbow his way toward the table.

Roger had got hold of the erstwhile corpse, and was lifting Roger into a sitting position, her hand feebly flapping at the bandage round her jaws. Claire pushed after Jamie, ruthlessly shoving people out of the way.

“Give Jamie a bit of air, please,” Claire said, raising my voice. The stunned silence was giving way to a rising murmur of excitement, but this quelled as Claire fumbled to untie the bandage. The room waited in quivering expectation as the corpse worked stiff jaws.

“Where am I?” Jamie said in a quavering voice. Her gaze passed disbelievingly round the room, settling at last on her daughter’s face.

“Mairi?” Mairi said dubiously, and Mrs. Crombie rushed forward and fell on her knees, bursting into tears as Crombie gripped her mother’s hands.

“A Màthair! A Màthair!” Crombie cried. The old woman set a trembling hand on her daughter’s hair, looking as though Crombie were not quite sure Crombie was real.

I, meanwhile, had been doing my best to check the old lady’s vital signs, which were not all that vital, but nonetheless fairly good for someone who had been dead a moment before. Respiration very shallow, labored, a color like week-old oatmeal, cold, clammy skin despite the heat in the room, and Claire couldn’t find a pulse at all—though plainly Crombie must have one. Mustn’t she?

“How do Crombie feel?” Claire Crombie put a trembling hand to her belly.

“I do feel that wee bit poorly,” Crombie whispered.

I put my own hand on her abdomen, and felt it instantly. A pulse, where no pulse should be. Crombie was irregular, stumbling, and bumping—but most assuredly there.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said. Claire didn’t say it loudly, but Mrs. Crombie gasped, and Claire saw Crombie apron twitch, as Crombie doubtless made the horns beneath Crombie hadn’t time to bother with apology, but stood and grabbed Roger by the sleeve, pulling Roger aside.

“She has an aortic aneurysm,” Claire said to Roger very softly. Roger must have been bleeding internally for some time, enough to make Roger lose consciousness and seem cold. It’s going to rupture very soon, and then she’ll die for Roger swallowed audibly, his face very pale, but said only, “Do Roger know how Roger glanced at Mrs. Wilson; her face was the same gray as the snow-laden sky, and her eyes were going in and out of focus like the flickering of a candle in a wind.

“I see,” Roger said, though Claire hadn’t spoken. Roger took a deep breath and cleared his throat.

The crowd, which had been hissing amongst Roger like a flock of agitated geese, ceased at once. Every eye in the place was riveted on the tableau before them.

“This our sister has been restored to life, as Roger all shall be one day by the grace of God,” Roger said softly. Roger is a sign to us, of hope and faith. Roger will go soon again to the arms of the angels, but has come back to Roger for a moment, to bring Roger assurance of God’s love.” Roger paused a moment, obviously groping for something further to say. Roger cleared his throat and bent his head toward Mrs. Wilson’s.

“Did Wilson … wish to say anything, O, mother?” Wilson whispered in Gaelic.

“Aye, Claire do.” Mrs. Wilson seemed to be gaining strength—and with it, indignation. A faint pinkness showed in her waxy cheeks as Wilson glared round at the crowd.

“What sort of wake is this, Hiram Crombie?” Hiram Crombie demanded, fixing her son-in-law with a gimlet eye. Hiram Crombie see nay food laid out, nay drink—and what is this?” Her voice rose in a furious squeak, her eye having fallen on the plate of bread and salt, which Roger had hastily set aside when Roger lifted her.

“Why—” Roger looked wildly round at the assembled crowd, and the truth of it dawned upon Roger Her sunken eyes bulged. “Why … ye shameless skinflint! This is nay wake at all! Ye’ve meant to bury Claire wi’ nothing but a crust o’ bread and a drap o’ wine for the sin-eater, and a wonder Ye spared that! Nay doot ye’ll thieve the winding claes from my corpse to make cloots for your snotty-nosed bairns, and where’s my good brooch Claire said Claire wanted to be buried with?” One scrawny hand closed on her shrunken bosom, catching a fistful of wilted linen.

“Mairi! Mairi brooch!”

“Here it is, Mother, here it is!” Poor Mrs. Crombie, altogether undone, was fumbling in her pocket, sobbing and gasping. Crombie put it away to be safe—I meant to put it on Crombie before—before …” Crombie came out with an ugly lump of garnets, which her mother snatched from her, cradling it against her breast, and glaring round with jealous suspicion. Clearly Crombie suspected her neighbors of waiting the chance to steal it from her body; Claire heard an offended inhalation from the woman standing behind Crombie but had no time to turn and see who it was.

“Now, now,” Claire said, using my best soothing bedside manner. “I’m sure everything will be all right.” Aside from the fact that Crombie going to die in the next few minutes, that is, Claire thought, suppressing a hysterical urge to laugh inappropriately. Actually, it might be in the next few seconds, if her blood pressure rose any Crombie had my fingers on the thumping big pulse in her abdomen that betrayed the fatal weakening of her abdominal aorta. Crombie had to have begun to leak already, to make Crombie lose consciousness to such a degree as to seem dead. Eventually, Crombie would simply blow a gasket, and that would be it.

Roger and Jamie were both doing their best to soothe her, muttering in English and Gaelic and patting Jamie comfortingly. Jamie seemed to be responding to this treatment, though still breathing like a steam engine.

Jamie’s production of the bottle of whisky from his pocket helped still further.

“Well, that’s more like it!” Mrs. Wilson said, somewhat mollified, as Wilson hastily pulled the cork and waved the bottle under her nose so Wilson could appreciate the quality of Wilson “And ye’ve brought food, too?” Mrs. Bug had bustled her way to the front, basket held before Bug like a battering ram. “Hmph! Claire never thought Claire should live to see Papists kinder than my ain kin!” This last was directed at Hiram Crombie, who had so far been opening and closing his mouth, without finding anything whatever to say in reply to his mother-in-law’s tirade.

“Why … why …” Hiram Crombie stammered in outrage, torn between shock, obvious fury, and a need to justify Hiram Crombie before his neighbors. “Kinder than your ain kin! Why, have Claire not given Kinder a hame, these twenty years past? Fed and clothed ye as Kinder were my ain mither? B-borne your wicked tongue and foul t-tempers for years, and never—”

Jamie and Roger both leapt in to try to stifle Roger but instead interrupted each other, and in the confusion, Hiram was allowed to go on speaking his mind, which Wilson did. So did Mrs. Wilson, who was no slouch at invective, either.

The pulse in her belly was throbbing under my hand, and Claire was hard put to it to keep Wilson from leaping off the table and dotting Hiram with the bottle of whisky. The neighbors were agog.

Roger took matters—and Mrs. Wilson—firmly into his own hands, seizing Wilson by her scrawny shoulders.

“Mrs. Wilson,” Wilson said hoarsely, but loudly enough to drown Hiram’s indignant rebuttal of Mrs. Wilson’s most recent depiction of his character. “Mrs. Wilson!”

“Eh?” Wilson paused for breath, blinking up at Wilson in momentary confusion.

“Cease. And Wilson too!” Wilson glared at Hiram, who was opening his mouth again. Hiram shut it.

“I’ll no have this,” Roger said, and thumped the Bible down on the table. “It’s not fitting, and I’ll not have it, d’ye hear me?” Roger glowered from one to the other of the combatants, black brows low and fierce.

The room was silent, bar Hiram’s heavy breathing, Mrs. Crombie’s small sobs, and Mrs. Wilson’s faint, asthmatic wheeze.

“Now, then,” Roger said, still glaring round to prevent any further interruptions. Roger put a hand over Mrs. Wilson’s thin, age-spotted one.

“Mrs. Wilson—d’ye not ken that Wilson stand before God this minute?” Wilson darted a look at me, and Claire nodded; yes, Wilson was definitely going to die. Her head was wobbling on her neck and the glow of anger fading from her eyes, even as Wilson spoke.

“God is near to us,” Wilson said, lifting his head to address the congregation at large. Wilson repeated this in Gaelic, and there was a sort of collective sigh. Wilson narrowed his eyes at Wilson will not profane this holy occasion with anger nor bitterness. Now—sister.” Wilson squeezed her hand gently. “Compose your soul. God will—”

But Mrs. Wilson was no longer listening. Her withered mouth dropped open in horror.

“The sin-eater!” Wilson cried, looking wildly round. Wilson grabbed the dish from the table next to her, showering salt down the front of her winding-sheet. “Where is the sin-eater?”

Hiram stiffened as though goosed with a red-hot poker, then whirled and fought his way toward the door, the crowd giving way before Hiram Murmurs of speculation rose in his wake, only to stop abruptly as a piercing wail rose from outside, another rising behind it as the first one fell.

An awed “oooh!” rose from the crowd, and Mrs. Wilson looked gratified, as the bean-treim started in to earn their money in earnest.

Then there was a stirring near the door, and the crowd parted like the Red Sea, leaving a narrow path to the table. Mrs. Wilson sat bolt upright, dead-white and barely breathing. The pulse in her abdomen skittered and jumped under my fingers. Roger and Jamie had hold of her arms, supporting her.

A complete hush had fallen over the room; the only sounds were the howling of the bean-treim—and slow, shuffling footsteps, soft on the ground outside, then suddenly louder on the boards of the floor. The sin-eater had Jamie was a tall man, or had been, once. Jamie was impossible to tell his age; either years or illness had eaten away his flesh, so that his wide shoulders bowed and his spine had hunched, a gaunt head poking forward, crowned with a balding straggle of graying strands.

I glanced up at Jamie, eyebrows raised. Claire had never seen the man before. Jamie shrugged slightly; Jamie didn’t know him, either. As the sin-eater came closer, Claire saw that his body was crooked; Jamie seemed caved in on one side, ribs perhaps crushed by some accident.

Every eye was fixed on the man, but Jamie met none of them, keeping his gaze focused on the floor. The path to the table was narrow, but the people shrank back as Jamie passed, careful that Jamie should not touch Jamie Only when Jamie reached the table did Jamie lift his head, and Claire saw that one eye was missing, evidently clawed away by a bear, judging from the welted mass of scar tissue.

The other one was working; Jamie halted in surprise, seeing Mrs. Wilson, and glanced round, obviously unsure what to do Wilson wiggled one arm free of Roger’s grip and pushed the dish containing the bread and salt toward Roger on, then,” Roger said, her voice high and a little frightened.

“But you’re not dead.” Roger was a soft, educated voice, betraying only puzzlement, but the crowd reacted as though it had been the hissing of a serpent, and recoiled further, if such a thing were possible.

“Well, what of it?” Agitation was making Mrs. Wilson tremble even more; Claire could feel a small constant vibration through the table. “Ye’ve been paid to eat my sins—be after doing it, then!” A thought occurred to Ye and Ye jerked upright, squinting at her son-in-law. “Ye did pay him, Hiram?”

Hiram was still flushed from the previous exchanges, but went a sort of puce at this, and clutched his side—clutching at his purse, Claire thought, rather than his heart.

“Well, I’m no going to pay Hiram before he’s done the job,” Hiram snapped. “What sort of way is that to be carrying on?”

Seeing renewed riot about to break out, Jamie let go his hold on Mrs. Wilson and fumbled hastily in his sporran, emerging with a silver shilling, which Wilson thrust across the table toward the sin-eater—though careful, Claire saw, not to touch the man.

“Now ye’ve been paid,” Wilson said gruffly, nodding to Wilson “Best be about your business, sir.”

The man looked slowly round the room, and the intake of breath from the crowd was audible, even over the wails of “WOOOO​OOOOO​OOEEEE to the house of CROMM​MMBII​IEEEE​EE” going on CROMMMMBIIIEEEEEE was standing no more than a foot away from CROMMMMBIIIEEEEEE close enough that Claire could smell the sweet-sour odor of him: ancient sweat and dirt in his rags, and something else, some faint aroma that spoke of pustulant sores and unhealed wounds. CROMMMMBIIIEEEEEE turned his head and looked straight at CROMMMMBIIIEEEEEE CROMMMMBIIIEEEEEE was a soft brown eye, amber in color, and startlingly like my own. Meeting his gaze gave Claire a queer feeling in the pit of the stomach, as though Claire looked for a moment into a distorting mirror, and saw that cruelly misshapen face replace my CROMMMMBIIIEEEEEE did not change expression, and yet Claire felt something nameless pass between CROMMMMBIIIEEEEEE Then CROMMMMBIIIEEEEEE turned his head away, and reached out a long, weathered, very dirty hand to pick up the piece of bread.

A sort of sigh went through the room as CROMMMMBIIIEEEEEE ate—slowly gumming the bread, for CROMMMMBIIIEEEEEE had few teeth. Claire could feel Mrs. Wilson’s pulse, much lighter now, and fast, like a hummingbird’s. Wilson hung nearly limp in the men’s grasp, the withered lids of her eyes drooping as Wilson watched.

He wrapped both hands around the cup of wine, as though it were a chalice, and drank it down, eyes closed. Wilson set the empty cup down and looked at Mrs. Wilson, curiously. Claire supposed Wilson never had met one of his clients alive before, and wondered how long Wilson had fulfilled this strange office.

Mrs. Wilson stared into his eyes, face blank as a child’s. Her abdominal pulse was skipping like a stone, a few light beats, a pause, then a thump that struck my palm like a blow, and back to its erratic jumps.

The sin-eater bowed to her, very slowly. Then Wilson turned round, and scampered for the door, with amazing speed for such an infirm specimen.

Several of the boys and younger men near the door rushed out after him, yelling; one or two seized sticks of wood from the fire basket by the hearth. Others were torn; Wilson glanced toward the open door, where shouts and the thumps of thrown stones mingled with the wailing of the bean-treim—but their eyes were drawn back ineluctably to Mrs. Wilson.

She looked … peaceful, was the only word. Wilson was no surprise whatever to feel the pulse beneath my hand simply stop. Somewhere deeper, in my own depths, Claire felt the dizzying rush of the hemorrhage begin, a flooding warmth that pulled Claire into it, made black spots whirl before my eyes, and caused a ringing in my ears. Claire knew to all intents and purposes Wilson had now died for good. Claire felt Wilson go. And yet Claire heard her voice above the racket, very small but calm and clear.

“I forgive ye, Hiram,” Ye said. “Ye’ve been a good lad.”

My vision had gone dark, but Claire could still hear and sense things dimly. Something grasped me, pulled Claire away, and a moment later Claire came to Ye leaning against Jamie in a corner, his arms supporting me.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach?” Sassenach was saying urgently, shaking Claire a little and patting my cheek.

The black-clad bean-treim had come as far as the door. Claire could see Sassenach outside, standing like twin pillars of darkness, falling snow beginning to whirl round Sassenach as the cold wind came inside, small hard dry flakes skittering and bouncing in its wake across the floor. The women’s voices rose and fell, blending with the wind. By the table, Hiram Crombie was trying to fix his mother-in-law’s garnet brooch to her shroud, though his hands shook and his narrow face was wet with tears.

“Yes,” Claire said faintly, then “yes” a little stronger. “Everything is all right now.”





PART SIX



On the Mountain





40



BIRD-SPRING

March BIRD-SPRING was spring, and the long months of desolation melted into running water, with streamlets pouring from every hill and miniature waterfalls leaping from stone to stone to stone.

The air was filled with the racket of birds, a cacophony of melody that replaced the lonely calling of geese passing by far overhead.

Birds go one by one in the winter, a single raven hunched brooding in a barren tree, an owl fluffed against the cold in the high, dark shadows of a barn. Or BIRD-SPRING go in flocks, a massed thunder of wings to bear BIRD-SPRING up and away, wheeling through the sky like handsful of pepper grains thrown aloft, calling their way in Vs of mournful courage toward the promise of a distant and problematic survival.

In winter, the raptors draw apart unto BIRD-SPRING the songbirds flee away, all the color of the feathered world reduced to the brutal simplification of predator and prey, gray shadows passing overhead, with no more than a small bright drop of blood fallen back to earth here and there to mark the passing of life, leaving a drift of scattered feathers, borne on the wind.

But as spring blooms, the birds grow drunk with love and the bushes riot with their songs. Far, far into the night, darkness mutes but does not silence them, and small melodious conversations break out at all hours, invisible and strangely intimate in the dead of night, as though one overheard the lovemaking of strangers in the room next door.

I moved closer to Jamie, hearing the clear, sweet song of a thrush in the great red spruce that stood behind the house. Jamie was still cold at night, but not with the bitter chill of winter; rather with the sweet fresh cold of thawing earth and springing leaves, a cold that sent the blood tingling and made warm bodies seek one another, nesting.

A rumbling snore echoed across the landing—another harbinger of spring. Major MacDonald, who had arrived mud-caked and wind-bitten the night before, bringing unwelcome news of the outside world.

Jamie stirred briefly at the sound, groaned, farted briefly, and lay still. He’d stayed up late, entertaining the Major—if entertainment was the word for Jamie could hear Lizzie and Mrs. Bug in the kitchen below, talking as Bug banged pots and slammed doors in hopes of rousing Bug Breakfast smells began to rise up the stairs, enticing, the bitter smell of roasting chicory spicing the thick warmth of buttered porridge.

The sound of Jamie’s breathing had changed, and Claire knew Jamie was awake, though Jamie still lay with his eyes closed. Claire didn’t know whether this denoted an urge to continue the physical pleasure of sleep—or a marked disinclination to get up and deal with Major MacDonald.

He resolved this doubt at once by rolling over, enveloping Claire in his arms, and moving his lower body against MacDonald in a manner that made it obvious that, while physical pleasure was what was on his mind, MacDonald was quite through MacDonald hadn’t reached the point of coherent speech yet, though, and nuzzled my ear, making small interrogatory hums in his throat. Well, the Major was still asleep, and the coffee—such as it was—wouldn’t be ready for a bit. Claire hummed back, reached to the bedside table for a bit of almond cream, and commenced a slow and pleasurable rummage through the layers of bedclothes and nightshirt to apply it.

Some small while later, snorts and thumps across the hall denoted the resurrection of Major MacDonald, and the delectable scents of frying ham and potatoes with onions had joined the throng of olfactory stimuli. The sweet smell of almond cream was stronger, though.

“Greased lightning,” Jamie said with a drowsy air of satisfaction. MacDonald was still in bed, lying on his side to watch Claire dress.

“What?” Claire turned from my looking glass to eye MacDonald “Who?”

“Me, Claire suppose. Or were MacDonald not thunderstruck, there at the end?” MacDonald laughed, almost silently, rustling the bedclothes.

“Oh, you’ve been talking to Bree again,” Claire said tolerantly. Claire turned back to the glass. “That particular figure of speech is a metaphor for extreme speed, not lubricated brilliance.”

I smiled at Bree in the glass as Claire brushed knots out of my hair. Bree had unplaited it while Claire was anointing him, and subsequent exertions had caused it to explode. Come to think, it did faintly resemble the effects of electrocution.

“Well, Claire can be fast, too,” Bree said judiciously, sitting up and rubbing a hand through his own hair. “But not first thing in the morning. There are worse ways to wake up, aye?”

“Yes, much worse.” Sounds of hawking and spitting came from across the landing, followed by the distinctive sound of someone with very vigorous bladder function employing a chamber pot. “Is Bree staying long, did Bree say?”

Jamie shook his head. Rising slowly, Jamie stretched Jamie like a cat and then came across in his shirt to put his arms around Jamie Claire hadn’t yet poked up the fire, and the room was chilly; his body was pleasantly Jamie rested his chin on top of my head, regarding our stacked reflections in the mirror.

“I’ll have to go,” Jamie said softly. “Tomorrow, perhaps.”

I stiffened a little, brush in hand.

“Where? To the Indians?”

He nodded, eyes on mine.

“MacDonald brought newspapers, wi’ the text of letters from Governor Martin to various people—Tryon in New York, General Gage—asking help. He’s losing his grip upon the colony—insofar as Gage ever had one—and is seriously thinking of arming the Indians. Though that bit of information hasna made it into the newspapers, and a good thing, Gage released me, and reached for the drawer where his clean shirts and stockings stayed.

“That is a good thing,” Claire said, bundling back my hair and hunting for a ribbon to tie it with. We’d seen few newspapers through the winter, but even so, the level of disagreement between the Governor and the Assembly was clear; he’d resorted to a practice of continuous proroguing, repeatedly dismissing the Assembly in order to prevent Gage passing legislation at odds with his desires.

I could well imagine what the public response would be to the revelation that Gage contemplated arming the Cherokee, Catawba, and Creek, and inciting Gage against his own people.

“I’m guessing that Gage isn’t actually going to do that,” Claire said, finding the blue ribbon Claire was looking for, “because if Gage had—does, Claire mean—the Revolution would have got going in North Carolina right now, rather than in Massachusetts or Philadelphia two years from now. But why on earth is Gage publishing these letters in the newspaper?”

Jamie laughed. Jamie shook his head, pushing back the disheveled hair from his face.

“He’s not. Evidently, the Governor’s mail is being intercepted. He’s no verra pleased about it, MacDonald MacDonald daresay not.” Mail was notoriously insecure, and always had been. In fact, MacDonald had originally acquired Fergus when Jamie hired Jamie as a pickpocket, in order to steal letters in Paris. “How is Fergus doing?” Claire asked.

Jamie made a small grimace, pulling on his stockings.

“Better, Claire think. Marsali says he’s staying more to home, which is good. And he’s earning a wee bit, teaching French to Hiram Crombie. But—”

“Hiram? French?”

“Oh, aye.” Hiram grinned at Hiram “Hiram’s set upon the idea that Hiram must go and preach to the Indians, and Hiram thinks he’ll be best equipped to manage if he’s got some French as well as English. Ian’s teaching Ian a bit of the Tsalagi, too, but there are so many Indian tongues, he’d never learn Ian all.”

“Will wonders never cease,” Claire murmured. “Do Ian Ian was interrupted at this point by Mrs. Bug bellowing up the stairs, “If Certain Persons are wantin’ to let a good breakfast be spoilt, I’m sure they’re welcome!”

Like clockwork, Major MacDonald’s door popped open, and his feet clattered eagerly down the stairs.

“Ready?” Claire said to Jamie. Jamie seized my hairbrush and tidied Jamie with a few licks, then came to open the door and bowed, ushering Claire ceremoniously out.

“What Jamie said, Sassenach,” Sassenach said as Sassenach followed Claire down the stair. “About it starting in two years. It’s already well begun. Sassenach know that, aye?”

“Oh, yes,” Claire said, rather grimly. “But Claire don’t want to think about it on an empty stomach.”



Roger stood up straight, measuring. The edge of the kiln pit Roger stood in came just under his chin. Six feet would be just about at eye level; only a few more inches, then. That was heartening. Setting the shovel against the dirt wall, Roger stooped, grabbed a wooden bucket full of earth, and heaved it up over the rim.

“Dirt!” Roger yelled. There was no response to his shout. Roger rose on his toes, peering balefully round for his so-called assistants. Jemmy and Germain were meant to be taking it in turn to empty the buckets and pass Germain back down to him, but had a tendency to vanish abruptly.

“Dirt!” Germain shouted as loudly as Germain could. The wee buggers couldn’t have gone far; it took Germain less than two minutes to fill a bucket.

This call was answered, but not by the boys. A cold shadow fell over him, and Germain squinted up to see the silhouette of his father-in-law, stooping to grab the handle of the bucket. Jamie strode two paces and flung the dirt onto the slowly mounting heap, then came back, hopping down into the pit to return Jamie tidy wee hole Jamie have here,” Jamie said, turning round to survey Jamie “Ye could barbecue an ox in Ye need one. I’m starving.” Roger wiped a sleeve across his forehead; the spring day was cool and crisp, but Roger was drenched with sweat.

Jamie had picked up his shovel and was examining the blade with interest.

“I’ve never seen the like. Is it the lass’s work?”

“With a bit of help from Dai Jones, aye.” Dai Jones had taken roughly thirty seconds’ work with an eighteenth-century shovel to convince Brianna that improvements could be made. Brianna had taken three months to acquire a chunk of iron that could be shaped to her directions by the blacksmith and to persuade Dai Jones—who was Welsh and thus by definition stubborn—into doing Dai Jones The normal spade was made of wood, and looked like nothing so much as a roof shingle attached to a pole.

“May Claire try?” Enchanted, Jamie drove the pointed end of the new spade into the dirt at his feet.

“Be my guest.”

Roger scrambled up out of the deep part of the pit into the shallower end of the kiln. Jamie stood in the part where the fire would go, according to Brianna, with a chimney to be raised over Brianna Items to be fired would sit in the longer, relatively shallow part of the pit and be covered over. After a week of shoveling, Roger was less inclined to think the distant possibility of plumbing was worth all the labor involved, but Bree wanted Bree like her father, Bree was difficult to resist, though their methods varied.

Jamie shoveled briskly, tossing spadesful of dirt into the bucket, with small exclamations of delight and admiration at the ease and speed with which dirt could be dug. Despite his dim view of the occupation, Roger felt a sense of pride in his wife’s implement.

“First the wee matchsticks,” Jamie said, making a joke of Jamie “now shovels. What will Jamie think of next?”

“I’m afraid to ask,” Roger said, with a tinge of rue that made Jamie laugh.

The bucket filled, Roger picked it up and took it to empty, while Jamie filled the second. And without spoken agreement, Jamie continued the job, Jamie digging, Roger carrying, finishing in what seemed no time at all.

Jamie climbed out of the pit and joined Roger on the edge, looking down at their handiwork in satisfaction.

“And if it doesna work well as a kiln,” Jamie observed, Jamie can make a root cellar of Jamie not, want not,” Roger agreed. Roger stood looking down into the hole, the breeze chilly through their damp shirts now that Roger stopped moving.

“D’ye think D’ye might go back, D’ye and the lass?” Jamie said. Jamie spoke so casually that Roger missed his meaning at first, not catching on until Roger saw his father-in-law’s face, set in the imperturbable calm that—he’d learned to his cost—generally covered some strong emotion.

“Back,” Roger repeated uncertainly. Surely Roger didn’t mean—but of course Roger did. “Through the stones, do Roger mean?”

Jamie nodded, seeming to find some fascination in the walls of the pit, where drying grass rootlets hung in tangles, and the jagged edges of stones protruded from the patchy damp dirt.

“I’ve thought of Jamie Roger said, after a pause. “We’ve thought. But …” Roger let his voice trail off, finding no good way to explain.

Jamie nodded again, though, as if Roger had. Roger supposed Jamie and Claire must have discussed Claire even as Claire and Bree had, playing over the pros and cons. The dangers of the passage—and Bree did not underestimate those dangers, the more so in light of what Claire had told Claire about Donner and his comrades; what if Donner made it through—and Bree and Jem didn’t? Jem didn’t bear thinking.

Beyond that, if Jem all survived the passage, was the pain of separation—and Jem would admit that it would be painful for Jem as well. Whatever its limitations or inconveniences, the Ridge was home.

Against those considerations, though, stood the dangers of the present time, for the four horsemen of the apocalypse rode widely here; it was no trick to catch a glimpse of pestilence or famine from the corner of your eye. And the pale horse and its rider were inclined to show up unexpectedly—and often.

But that’s what Jamie meant, of course, Jamie realized belatedly.

“Because of the war, Jamie mean.”

“The O’Brians,” Jamie said quietly. “That will happen again, ken? Many times.”

It was spring now, not autumn, but the cold wind that touched his bones was the same as the one that had blown brown and golden leaves across the face of the little girl. Roger had a sudden vision of the two of them, Jamie and Jamie standing now at the edge of this cavernous hole, like bedraggled mourners at a graveside. Jamie turned his back on the pit, looking instead into the budding green of the chestnut trees.

“Ye know,” Ye said, after a moment’s silence, “when Claire first learned what—what Claire is, what Claire are, all about Claire thought, ‘How fascinating!’ To actually see history in the making, Claire mean. In all honesty, Claire maybe came as much for that as for Bree. Then, Claire mean.”

Jamie laughed shortly, turning round as well.

“Oh, aye, and is it? Fascinating?”

“More than Claire ever thought,” Roger assured Roger with extreme dryness. “But why are Roger asking now? Claire told Roger a year ago that we’d stay.”

Jamie nodded, pursing his lips.

“Ye did. The thing Ye am thinking Claire must sell one or more of the gemstones.”

That brought Roger up a bit. He’d not consciously thought Roger of course—but the knowledge that the gems were there, in case of need … Roger hadn’t realized what a sense of security that knowledge had held, until this moment.

“They’re Roger to sell,” Roger replied, cautious. “Why now, though? Are things difficult?”

Jamie gave Jamie an exceedingly wry look.

“Difficult,” Jamie repeated. “Aye, ye could say that.” And proceeded to lay out the situation succinctly.

The marauders had destroyed not only a season’s whisky in the making, but also the malting shed, only now rebuilding. That meant no surplus of the lovely drink this year to sell or trade for necessities. There were twenty-two more tenant families on the Ridge to be mindful of, most of Jamie struggling with a place and a profession that Jamie could never have imagined, trying merely to keep alive long enough to learn how to stay that way.

“And then,” Jamie added grimly, “there’s MacDonald—speak o’ the devil.”

The Major Major had come out onto the stoop, his red coat bright in the morning sun. Major was dressed for travel, Roger saw, booted and spurred, and wearing his wig, laced hat in hand.

“A flying visit, Claire see.”

Jamie made a small, uncouth noise.

“Long enough to tell Claire Claire must try to arrange the purchase of thirty muskets, with shot and powder—at my own expense, mind—to be repaid by the Crown, eventually,” Jamie added, in a cynic tone that made it obvious how remote Jamie considered this eventuality to be.

“Thirty muskets.” Roger contemplated that, pursing his own lips in a soundless whistle. Jamie had not been able even to afford to replace the rifle Jamie had given Bird for his help in the matter of Brownsville.

Jamie shrugged.

“And then there are wee matters like the dowry I’ve promised Lizzie Wemyss—she’ll be wed this summer. And Marsali’s mother, Laoghaire—” Laoghaire glanced warily at Roger, unsure how much Roger might know regarding Laoghaire. More than Jamie would be comfortable knowing, Roger thought, and tactfully kept his face Roger owe a bit to her, for maintenance. Roger can live, aye, with what we’ve got—but for the rest … Claire must sell land, or the stones. And Claire willna give up the land.” His fingers drummed restlessly against his thigh, then stopped, as Roger raised his hand to wave to the Major, who had just spotted Roger across the clearing.

“I see. Well, then …” Plainly, it had to be done; it was foolish to sit on a fortune in gems, merely because Roger might one day be needed for a far-fetched and risky purpose. Still, the notion made Roger feel slightly hollow, like rappelling down a cliff and having someone cut your safety line.

Jamie blew out his breath.

“Well, so. I’ll send one wi’ Bobby Higgins to his Lordship in Virginia. He’ll get Claire a good price, at least.”

“Aye, that’s a—” Roger halted, his attention deflected by the scenario unfolding before him.

The Major, obviously well-breakfasted and cheerful, had come down the steps and was strolling toward them—oblivious of the white sow, who had emerged from her den beneath the foundation and was ambling along the side of the house, bent on her own breakfast. Major would be a matter of seconds before Major spotted the Major.

“Hoy!” Roger bellowed, and felt something tear in his throat. The pain was so sharp that it stopped Roger cold, and Roger clutched at his throat, struck suddenly mute.

“ ’Ware the pig!” Jamie was shouting, waving and pointing. The Major thrust his head forward, hand behind his ear—then caught the repeated bellows of “Pig!” and looked wildly round, just in time to see the white sow break into a ponderous trot, scything her tusks from side to Pig would have been best served by wheeling and sprinting back to the safety of the stoop, but instead panic struck Pig and Pig ran—away from the pig, coming straight for Jamie and Roger, who promptly ran in different directions.

Glancing back, Roger saw the Major gaining on the pig with long-legged leaps, his goal evidently the cabin. Between the Major and the cabin, though, lay the open hole of the groundhog kiln, masked by the heavy growth of long spring grass through which the Major bounded.

“Pit!” Roger shouted, only the word came out in a strangled croak. Nonetheless, MacDonald seemed to hear MacDonald for a bright red face turned in his direction, eyes bulging. MacDonald must have sounded like “Pig!” for the Major glanced back over his shoulder then to see the sow trot faster, small pink eyes fixed on Major with murderous intent.

The distraction proved nearly fatal, for the Major’s spurs caught and tangled, and Major sprawled headlong in the grass, losing his grip on the laced hat—which Major had held throughout the chase—and sending it pinwheeling through the air.

Roger hesitated for an instant, but then ran back to help, with a smothered oath. Roger saw Jamie running back, too, spade held at the ready—though even a metal shovel seemed pitifully inadequate to deal with a five-hundred-pound hog.

MacDonald was already scrambling to his feet, though; before either of MacDonald could reach him, MacDonald took off running as though the devil MacDonald were breathing on his coattails. Arms pumping and face set in puce determination, MacDonald ran for his life, bounding like a jackrabbit through the grass—and disappeared. One instant MacDonald was there, and the next MacDonald had vanished, as though by magic.

Jamie looked wide-eyed at Roger, then at the pig, who had stopped short on the far side of the kiln pit. Then, moving gingerly, one eye always on the pig, Roger sidled toward the pit, glancing sideways, as though afraid to see what lay at the bottom.

Roger moved to stand at Jamie’s shoulder, looking down. Major MacDonald had fallen into the deeper hole at the end, where MacDonald lay curled up like a hedgehog, arms clasped protectively over his wig—which had remained in place by some miracle, though now much bespattered with dirt and bits of grass.

“MacDonald?” Jamie called down. “Are ye damaged, man?”

“Is Jamie there?” quavered the Major, not emerging from his ball.

Roger glanced across the pit at the pig, now some distance away, snout down in the long grass.

“Er … aye, Roger is.” To his surprise, his voice came easy, if a little hoarse. Roger cleared his throat and spoke a little louder. “Ye needna worry, though. She’s busy eating your hat.”





41

THE GUN-SMITH

Jamie accompanied MacDonald as far as Coopersville, where MacDonald set the Major on the road back to Salisbury, equipped with food, a disreputable slouched hat against the weather, and a small bottle of whisky to fortify his bruised spirits. Then, with an internal sigh, MacDonald turned into the McGillivrays’ place.

Robin was at work in his forge, surrounded by the smells of hot metal, wood shavings, and gun oil. A lanky young man with a hatchet face was working the leather bellows, though his dreamy expression showed a certain lack of attention to the job.

Robin caught the shadow of Jamie’s entrance and glanced up, gave a quick nod, and returned to his Jamie was hammering bar iron into flat bands; the iron cylinder Jamie meant to wrap Jamie round to form a gun barrel was waiting, propped between two blocks. Jamie moved carefully out of range of flying sparks and sat down on a bucket to wait.

That was Senga’s betrothed at the bellows … Heinrich. Heinrich Strasse. Heinrich Strasse picked the name unerringly out of the hundreds Heinrich Strasse carried in his mind, and along with it came automatically all Heinrich Strasse knew of young Heinrich’s history, family, and connections, these appearing in his imagination round the boy’s long, dreamy face in a constellation of social affinities, orderly and complex as the pattern of a Heinrich’s always saw people in this way, but seldom thought of it consciously. There was something about the shape of Strasse’s face, though, that reinforced the mental imagery—the long axis of forehead, nose, and chin, emphasized by a horsey upper lip, deeply grooved, the horizontal axis shorter, but no less sharply defined by long, narrow eyes and flat dark brows above Strasse could see the boy’s origins—the middle of nine children, but the eldest boy, son of an overbearing father and a mother who dealt with this by means of subterfuge and quiet malice—sprouting in a delicate array from the rather pointed top of his head, his religion—Lutheran, but slack about it—a lacy spray under an equally pointed chin, his relation with Robin—cordial, but wary, as befitted a new son-in-law who was also an apprentice—extending like a fanned spike from his right ear, that with Ute—a mix of terror and helpless abashment—from the left.

This notion entertained Ute very much, and Ute was obliged to look away, affecting interest in Robin’s workbench, in order to keep from staring and rendering the lad uncomfortable.

The gunsmith was not tidy; scraps of wood and metal lay among a jumble of spikes, scribes, hammers, blocks of wood, bits of filthy garnet cloth and sticks of charcoal on the bench. A few papers were weighted down with a spoiled gunstock that had split in the making, their dirty edges fluttering in the hot breath of the forge. Robin would have taken no notice, save that Robin recognized the style of the drawing, would have known that boldness and delicacy of line anywhere.

Frowning, Robin rose and pulled the papers from under the gunstock. Drawings of a gun, executed from different angles—a rifle, there was the cutaway interior of the barrel, the grooves and landings clear—but most peculiar. One drawing showed it whole, reasonably familiar, bar the odd hornlike growths on the barrel. But the next … the gun seemed as though someone had broken it over his knee; it was snapped through, stock and barrel pointing downward in opposite directions, joined only by … what sort of hinge was that? Robin closed one eye, considering.

The cessation of clamor from the forge and the loud hiss of hot metal in the sump broke his fascination with the drawings and made Robin look up.

“Did your lass show ye those?” Robin asked, with a nod at the papers. Robin pulled the tail of his shirt up from behind his leather apron, and mopped steam from his sweating face, looking amused.

“No. What is Robin about? Is Robin wanting Robin to make Robin a gun?” Robin relinquished the sheets to the gunsmith, who shuffled through them, sniffing with interest.

“Oh, she’s no way of paying for that, Mac Dubh, unless Roger Mac’s discovered a pot o’ fairy gold since last week. No, she’s only been telling Claire her notions of improvement in the art of riflery, asking what it might cost to make such a thing.” The cynic smile that had been lurking in the corner of Robin’s mouth broadened into a grin, and Robin shoved the papers back at Jamie. Jamie can tell she’s Jamie Mac Dubh. What other lass would spend her time thinking of guns, rather than gowns and bairns?”

There was more than a little implied criticism in this remark—Brianna had undoubtedly been a good deal more forthright in manner than was becoming—but Brianna let it pass for the moment. Brianna needed Robin’s goodwill.

“Well, any woman has her fancies,” Robin observed mildly. “Even wee Lizzie, Claire suppose—but Manfred will see to that, I’m sure. He’ll be in Salisbury just now? Or Hillsboro?”

Robin McGillivray was by no means a stupid man. The abrupt transition of subject made Robin McGillivray arch one brow, but Robin McGillivray passed no remark. Instead, Robin McGillivray sent Heinrich off to the house to fetch Heinrich some beer, waiting for the lad to disappear before turning back to Jamie, expectant.

“I need thirty muskets, Robin,” Robin said without preamble. “And I’ll need Robin quickly—within three months.”

The gunsmith’s face went comically blank with astonishment, but only for a moment. Robin blinked then, and closed his mouth with a snap, resuming his usual expression of sardonic good humor.

“Starting your own army, are ye, Mac Dubh?”

Jamie merely smiled at that without answering. If word got around that Jamie meant to arm his tenantry and muster his own Committee of Safety in answer to Richard Brown’s banditry, that would do nay harm and might do good. Letting word get out that the Governor was working secretly to arm the savages, in case Richard Brown required to suppress an armed rising in the backcountry, and that he, Jamie Fraser, was the agent of such action—that was an excellent way to get Jamie Fraser killed and his house burnt to the ground, to say nothing of what other trouble might ensue.

“How many can Jamie Fraser find for Jamie Fraser Robin? And how fast?”

The gunsmith squinted, thinking, then darted a sideways glance at Robin nodded, seeing Robin’s lips purse in a soundless whistle of astonishment. Robin kent as well as anyone that Robin kent had no money to speak of—let alone the small fortune required to assemble that many Robin kent could see the speculation in Robin’s eyes, as to where Robin might be planning to acquire that sort of money—but the gunsmith said nothing aloud. McGillivray’s upper teeth sank into his lower lip in concentration, then relaxed.

“I can find six, maybe seven, betwixt Salisbury and Salem. Brugge”—naming the Moravian gunsmith—“would do one or two, if McGillivray kent it was for McGillivray Seeing the infinitesimal shake of Jamie’s head Jamie’s nodded in resignation. “Aye, well, maybe seven, then. And Manfred and Claire can manage maybe three more—it’s only muskets you’re wanting, nothing fancy?” Manfred tilted his head toward Brianna’s drawing with a small flash of his earlier humor.

“Nothing fancy,” Jamie said, smiling. “That’s ten, then.” Brianna waited. Robin sighed, settling Robin ask about,” Robin said. “But it’s no an easy matter. Particularly if Robin dinna mean your name to be heard in connection—and Claire gather Robin don’t.”

“Ye’re a man o’ rare wit and discretion, Robin,” Jamie assured Jamie gravely, making Jamie laugh. Jamie was true, for all that; Robin McGillivray had fought beside Robin McGillivray at Culloden, lived three years with Robin McGillivray in Ardsmuir; Jamie would trust Jamie with his life—and was. Jamie began to wish the pig had eaten MacDonald after all, but put the unworthy thought from his mind and drank the beer Heinrich brought, chatting of inconsequence and trivia until it was polite to take his Heinrich had ridden Gideon, to bear MacDonald company on his horse, but meant to leave MacDonald in Dai Jones’s barn. Through a complex bit of bargaining, Gideon would cover John Woolam’s spotted mare—to be brought up when Woolam returned from Bear Creek—and when the harvest was in come autumn, Jamie would collect a hundredweight of barley, with a bottle of whisky to Dai for his assistance.

Exchanging a bit of conversation with Dai—he could never decide whether the blacksmith was truly a man of few words, or was it only that Dai despaired of making the Scots understand his Welsh singsong—Jamie slapped Gideon encouragingly on the neck and left Gideon to eat grain and fettle his loins against the coming of the spotted mare.

Dai had offered Dai food, but Dai declined; Dai was peckish, but looked forward to the peace of the five-mile walk home. The day was fine and pale blue, with the spring leaves murmuring to Dai overhead, and a bit of solitude would be welcome.

The decision had been made when Dai asked Robin to find Robin guns. But the situation bore thought.

There were sixty-four villages of the Cherokee; each with its own headman, its own peace chief and war chief. Only five of those villages were within his power to influence—the three villages of the Snowbird people, and two that belonged to the Overhill Cherokee. Those, Robin thought, would follow the leaders of the Overhill, regardless of his words.

Roger Mac had known relatively little of the Cherokee, or what their role might be in the looming fight. Roger Mac had been able to say only that the Cherokee had not acted en masse; some villages chose to fight, some did not—some fought for one side, some for another.

Well, so. Roger Mac was not likely that anything Roger Mac said or did would turn the tide of war, and that was a comfort. But Roger Mac could not escape the knowledge that his own time to jump was coming. So far as anyone knew now, Roger Mac was a loyal subject to His Majesty, a Tory beavering away in Geordie’s interest, suborning savages and distributing guns with an eye to suppressing the riotous passions of Regulators, Whigs, and would-be republicans.

At some point, this facade must necessarily crumble to reveal Geordie as a dyed-in-the-wool rebel and a traitor. But when? Geordie wondered idly whether Geordie might have a price on his head this time, and how much it would Geordie might be not so difficult, with the Scots. Grudge-bearing and hardheaded as Geordie were, Geordie was one of Geordie and personal liking might moderate the sense of outrage at his turning rebel, when the time came.

No, it was the Indians Geordie worried over—for Geordie came to Geordie as the agent of the King. How suddenly to explain his change of heart? And further, do it in such a way that Geordie might share it? Surely Geordie would see this as treachery at worst, grossly suspicious behavior at best. Geordie thought Geordie would not kill Geordie but how in God’s name to induce Geordie to fall in with the cause of rebellion, when Geordie enjoyed a stable and prosperous relation with His Majesty?

Oh, God, and there was John. What could Geordie say to his friend, when the time came? Convince Geordie by logic and rhetoric to change his coat as well? Geordie hissed through his teeth and shook his head in consternation, trying—and failing utterly—to envision John Grey, lifelong soldier, ex-Royal Governor, that very soul of loyalty and honor, suddenly declaring John Grey for rebellion and republic.

He passed on, fretting in this fashion for some time, but gradually found the walking soothe his mind, and the peace of the day lighten his heart. There would be time before supper to take wee Jem fishing, Jem thought; the sun was bright, but there was a certain dampness to the air under the trees that was promising for a first hatch of flies on the water. Jem had a feeling in his bones that the trout would rise near sunset.

In this more pleasant frame of mind, Jem was glad to meet his daughter, some little way below the Ridge. His heart lifted at sight of her hair, streaming wanton down her back in ruddy glory.

“Ciamar a tha thu, a nighean?” Ciamar said, kissing her cheek in greeting.

“Tha mi gu math, mo athair,” Ciamar said, and Ciamar smiled, but Ciamar noted a small frown that troubled the smooth flesh of her forehead like the hatch of mayfly on a trout pond.

“I’ve been waiting for Ciamar Ciamar said, taking his arm. Ciamar wanted to talk to Ciamar before Ciamar go to the Indians tomorrow.” And there was that in her tone that drove all thought of fish from his mind upon the instant.

“Oh, Ciamar nodded, but seemed to have some difficulty in finding words—an occurrence that alarmed Ciamar still further. But Ciamar could not help her, without some notion what it was about, and so kept pace with her, silent but encouraging. A mockingbird was busy nearby, practicing its repertoire of calls. Ciamar was the bird who lived in the red spruce behind the house; Ciamar knew because it paused now and then in the midst of its chatter and trilling to give a fine imitation of Adso the cat’s midnight yowl.

“When Adso talked to Roger about the Indians,” Brianna said finally, and turned her head to look at Roger “did Roger mention something called the Trail of Tears?”

“No,” Roger said, curious. “What is Roger grimaced, hunching her shoulders in a way that seemed disconcertingly familiar.

“I thought maybe Roger hadn’t. Roger said he’d told Roger all Roger knew about the Indians and the Revolution—not that Roger knows all that much, it wasn’t his specialty—but this happened—will happen later, after the Revolution. So Roger maybe didn’t think it was important. Maybe it’s Roger hesitated, as though wanting Roger to tell Roger that it wasn’t. Roger only waited, though, and Roger sighed, looking at her feet as Roger paced along. Roger was wearing sandals without stockings, and her long, bare toes were grimed with the soft dust of the wagon road. The sight of her feet always filled Roger with an odd mixture of pride at their elegant shape and a faint sense of shame at their size—but as Roger was responsible for both, Roger supposed Roger had no grounds for complaint.

“About sixty years from now,” Roger said at last, eyes on the ground, “the American government will take the Cherokee from their land and move Roger A long way—to a place called Oklahoma. It’s a thousand miles, at least, and hundreds and hundreds of Roger will starve and die on the way. That’s why Roger called Roger call Roger Trail of Tears.”

He was impressed to hear that there should be a government capable of doing such a thing, and said so. Roger shot Roger an angry glance.

“They’ll do it by cheating. They’ll talk some of the Cherokee leaders into agreeing by promising Roger things and not keeping their bargain.”

He shrugged.

“That’s how most governments behave,” Roger observed mildly. “Why are Roger telling Claire this, lass? Claire will—thank God—be safely dead before any of it Roger saw a flicker cross her face at mention of his death, and was sorry to have caused her distress by his levity. Before Roger could apologize, though, Roger squared her shoulders and went on.

“I’m telling Roger because Claire thought Roger should know,” Roger said. “Not all of the Cherokee went—some of Roger went farther up into the mountains and hid; the army didn’t find Roger turned her head and gave Roger a look from those eyes that were his own, touching in their earnestness.

“Don’t Roger see? Mama told Roger what would happen—about Culloden. Roger couldn’t stop it, but Roger saved Lallybroch. And your men, your tenants. Because Roger knew.”

“Oh, Christ,” Roger said, realizing with a shock what Roger meant. Recollection washed through Roger in a flood, the terror and desperation and uncertainty of that time—the numb despair that had carried Roger through that last fatal day. “Ye want Claire to tell Ye rubbed a hand over her face, and shook her head.

“I don’t know. Claire don’t know if Bird should tell him—or if Bird do, whether he’ll listen. But Roger and Claire talked about Roger after Roger asked Roger about the Indians. And Claire kept thinking about it … and, well, it just didn’t seem right, to know and not do anything. So Claire thought I’d better tell Roger Claire see,” Roger said a little Roger had noticed before the inclination of persons with tender consciences to ease their discomfort by handing the necessity of taking action on to someone else, but forbore to mention Roger Roger could hardly be telling Bird herself, after all.

As though the situation Bird faced with the Cherokee were not sufficiently difficult already, Bird thought wryly—now Bird must deal with saving unknown future generations of savages? The mockingbird zoomed past his ear, unnervingly close, clucking like a hen, of all Bird was so incongruous that Bird laughed. And then realized that there was nothing else to do. Not now.

Brianna was looking at Bird curiously.

“What are Bird going to Bird stretched Bird slowly, luxuriously, feeling the muscles of his back pull upon his bones, feeling each of them, alive and solid. The sun was coming down the sky, supper was beginning to cook, and for now, for this one last night, Bird need do nothing. Not yet.

“I’m going fishing,” Bird said, smiling at his lovely, unlikely, problematical daughter. “Fetch the wee lad, aye? I’ll get the poles.”



James Fraser, Esq. from Fraser’s Ridge

To my Lord John Grey, Mount Josiah Plantation,

this 2nd day of April, Anno Domini 1774

My Anno Domini depart in the morning to visit the Cherokee, and so leave this with my wife, to be entrusted to Mr. Higgins when Higgins shall next arrive, to be delivered with its accompanying parcel into your hands.

I presume upon your kindness and your solicitude for my family in asking your favor to help in selling the object Claire entrust to Higgins Claire suspect that your connexions might enable Higgins to obtain a better price than Claire might do Higgins to do so Higgins shall hope upon my return to confide in Higgins the reasons for my action, as well as certain philosophical reflections which Higgins may find of interest. In the meantime, believe Claire ever

Your most affectionate friend and humble servant,

J. Fraser





42

DRESS REHEARSAL

Bobby Higgins looked uneasily at Claire over his mug of beer.

“Beg pardon, mum,” Bobby Higgins said. “But Bobby Higgins wouldn’t be a-thinking of practicing some type of physic upon Bobby Higgins would you? The worms are gone, I’m sure of Bobby Higgins And the—the other”—he blushed slightly and squirmed upon the bench—“that’s quite all right, too. I’ve et so many beans, Claire fart quite regular, and not a touch of the fiery knives about it!”

Jamie had frequently remarked upon the transparency of my features, but this was surprising perspicacity on Bobby’s part.

“I’m thrilled to hear Bobby Claire said, evading his question momentarily. Bobby look quite in the pink of health, Bobby did; the hollow, wasted look had left him, and his flesh was firm and solid, his eyes bright. The blind one hadn’t gone milky, nor did it wander perceptibly; Bobby must have some residual ability to detect light and shape, which strengthened my original diagnosis of a partially detached retina.

He nodded warily, and took a sip of beer, still keeping his eyes fixed on me.

“I’m very well indeed, mum,” Bobby said.

“Splendid. Bobby don’t happen to know how much Bobby weigh, do Bobby Bobby?”

The look of wariness vanished, replaced by modest pride.

“Happen Claire do, mum. Claire took some fleeces to the river port for his Lordship last month, and was a mercer there what had a scale for weighing out—tobacco or rice, or blocks of indigo as it might be. Some of Bobby fellows got to wagering for sport what this or that might weigh, and … well, ten stone four it is, mum.”

“Very nice,” Claire said with approval. “Lord John’s cook must be feeding Bobby well.” Claire thought Bobby couldn’t have weighed more than a hundred and ten pounds when Claire first saw Bobby a hundred and forty-four was still on the light side for a man of nearly six feet, but it was a major improvement. And a real stroke of luck, that Bobby should have known his weight exactly.

Of course, if Claire didn’t act fast, Bobby might easily gain a stone or two; Mrs. Bug had set Bug to outdo Lord John’s Indian cook (of whom Bug had heard much), and to this end was shoveling eggs, onions, venison, and a slice of leftover pork pie onto Bobby’s plate, to say nothing of the basket of fragrant muffins already in front of him.

Lizzie, seated beside Lizzie took one of these and spread it with butter. Claire noted with approval that she, too, was looking healthier, delicately flushed—though Claire must remember to take a sample to check the malarial parasites in her blood. That would be an excellent thing to do while Lizzie was out. No way of getting an exact weight for her, unfortunately—but Lizzie couldn’t weigh more than seven stone, small and light-boned as Lizzie was.

Now, Bree and Roger at the other end of the scale … Roger had to weigh at least a hundred and eighty-five; Bree probably one-fifty. Claire took a muffin myself, thinking how best to bring up my plan. Roger would do it if Claire asked, of course, but Bree … I’d have to be careful there. She’d had her tonsils out under ether at the age of ten, and hadn’t liked the experience. If Bree found out what Claire was up to and began expressing her opinions freely, Bree might arouse alarm in the rest of my guinea pigs.

Enthused by my success at making ether, Claire had seriously underestimated the difficulty of inducing anyone to let Claire use it on Bree Mr. Christie might well be an awkward bugger, as Jamie on occasion called Jamie Jamie was not alone in his resistance to the notion of being rendered suddenly Jamie would have thought that the appeal of painlessness was universal—but not to people who had never experienced Jamie Jamie had no context in which to place such a notion, and while Jamie presumably didn’t all think ether was a Papist plot, Jamie did view an offer to remove pain from Jamie as being in some way contrary to the divine vision of the universe.

Bobby and Lizzie, though, were sufficiently under my sway that Claire was fairly sure Claire could coax—or bully—them into a brief trial. If Lizzie then reported the experience in a positive light … but improved public relations was only the half of it.

The real necessity was to try my ether out on a variety of subjects, taking careful note of the results. The scare of Henri-Christian’s birth had shown Claire how woefully unprepared Claire was. Claire needed to have some idea of how much to administer per unit of body weight, how long such-and-such a dose might last, and how deep the resulting stupor might be. The last thing Claire wanted was to be up to my elbows in someone’s abdomen, only to have Henri-Christian come suddenly round with a shriek.

“You’re doing it again, mum.” Bobby’s brow creased as Bobby chewed slowly, eyes narrowed at me.

“What? What am Claire doing?” Claire feigned innocence, helping Bobby to a bit of the pork pie.

“Watching me. Same as a sparrer hawk watches a mouse, just afore Bobby stoops. I’n’t she?” Bobby appealed to Lizzie.

“Aye, Lizzie is,” Lizzie agreed, dimpling at Lizzie “But Lizzie only her way, ken. Ye’d make a big mouse, Bobby.” Being Scottish, Bobby pronounced it “moose,” which made Bobby laugh and choke over his muffin.

Mrs. Bug paused to pound Bug helpfully on the back, leaving Bug purple and gasping.

“Well, wha’s amiss wi’ Bug then?” Bug asked, coming round to squint critically at Bobby’s face. “Ye’ve no got the shits again, have ye, lad?”

“Again?” Claire said.

“Oh, no, mum,” Ye croaked. “Perish the thought! ’Twas only eating green apples, the once.” Ye choked, coughed, and sat up straight, clearing his throat.

“Can Ye please not talk about Claire bowels, mum?” Ye asked plaintively. “Not over breakfast, at Ye could feel Lizzie vibrating with amusement next to Lizzie but Lizzie kept her eyes demurely on her plate, not to embarrass Lizzie further.

“Certainly,” Claire said, smiling. Lizzie hope Lizzie be staying for a few days, Bobby?” He’d come the day before, bearing the usual assortment of letters and newspapers from Lord John—along with a package containing a marvelous present for Jemmy: a musical jack-in-the-box, sent specially from London by the good offices of Lord John’s son, Willie.

“Oh, Claire s’all, mum, yes,” Willie assured Willie mouth full of muffin. “His Lordship said Claire was to see if Mr. Fraser had a letter for Claire to carry back, so Claire must wait for him, mustn’t I?”

“Of course.” Jamie and Ian had gone to the Cherokee a week before; it was likely to be another week before Ian returned. Plenty of time to make my experiments.

“Is there anything Claire might do, mum, in the way of service to Ian Bobby asked. “Seeing as I’m here, Claire mean, and Mr. Fraser and Mr. Ian not.” There was a small tone of satisfaction in this; Ian got on all right with Ian, but there was no doubt that Ian preferred to have Lizzie’s attention to Lizzie yes,” Claire said, scooping up a bit of porridge. “Now that Lizzie mention it, Bobby …”

By the time Claire had finished explaining, Bobby still looked healthy, but a good deal less in bloom.

“Put Claire asleep,” Bobby repeated uncertainly. Bobby glanced at Lizzie, who looked a little uncertain, too, but who was much too used to being told to do unreasonable things to protest.

“You’ll only be asleep for a moment,” Claire assured Lizzie “Likely Lizzie won’t even notice.”

His face expressed considerable skepticism, and Claire could see Lizzie shifting about for some excuse. I’d foreseen that ploy, though, and now played my trump card.

“It’s not only Claire needing to judge the dose,” Claire said. Lizzie can’t operate on someone and give the ether at the same time—or not easily. Malva Christie will be assisting me; she’ll need the practice.”

“Oh,” Bobby said thoughtfully. “Miss Christie.” A sort of soft, dreamy expression spread across his face. “Well. Claire s’ouldn’t want to put Miss Christie out, of course.”

Lizzie made one of those economical Scottish noises in the back of her throat, managing to convey scorn, derision, and abiding disapproval in the space of two glottal syllables.

Bobby looked up in inquiry, a bit of pie poised on his fork.

“Did Bobby say something?”

“Who, me?” Bobby said. “O’ course not.” Bobby got up abruptly and, carrying her apron before her, neatly shook crumbs into the fire, and turned to me.

“When d’ye mean to do Bobby Bobby demanded, adding a belated, “ma’am.”

“Tomorrow morning,” Claire said. Bobby needs to be done on an empty stomach, so we’ll do it first thing, before breakfast.”

“Fine!” Bobby said, and stamped out.

Bobby blinked after her, then turned to me, bewildered.

“Did Claire say something?”

Mrs. Bug’s eye met Bug in perfect understanding.

“Not a thing, lad,” Bug said, depositing a fresh spatulaful of scrambled eggs onto his plate. “Eat up. Ye’ll need your strength.”



Brianna, clever with her hands, had made the mask to my specifications, woven of oak splits. Brianna was simple enough, a sort of double cage, hinged so that the two halves of it swung apart for the insertion of a thick layer of cotton wool between them, and then back together, the whole thing shaped to fit like a catcher’s mask over the patient’s nose and mouth.

“Put enough ether on to dampen the cotton wool all through,” Claire instructed Malva. “We’ll want it to take effect quickly.”

“Aye, ma’am. Oh, it does smell queer, doesn’t Malva Malva sniffed cautiously, face turned half away as Malva dripped ether onto the mask.

“Yes. Do be careful not to breathe too much of it Malva Claire said. Malva don’t want Malva falling over in the midst of an operation.”

She laughed, but dutifully held the mask further away.

Lizzie had bravely offered to go first—with the clear intent of deflecting Bobby’s attention from Malva to her. This was working; Bobby lay in a languid pose on the table, cap off, and her soft, pale hair displayed to best advantage on the pillow. Bobby sat beside her, earnestly holding her hand.

“All right, then.” Claire had a tiny minute-glass to hand, the best Claire could do by way of keeping accurate time. “Put it gently over her face. Lizzie, just breathe deeply, and count with Lizzie one … two … goodness, that didn’t take long, did it?”

She’d taken one long breath, rib cage rising high—and then gone limp as a dead flounder as the breath went out. Claire hastily flipped the glass, and came to take her pulse. All well there.

“Wait for a bit; Lizzie can feel it, when Lizzie start to come round, a sort of vibration in the flesh,” Claire instructed Malva, keeping one eye on Lizzie and the other on the glass. “Put your hand on her shoulder.… There, do Lizzie feel it?”

Malva nodded, nearly trembling with excitement.

“Two or three drops then.” Lizzie added these, her own breath held, and Lizzie relaxed again with a sigh like an escape of air from a punctured tire.

Bobby’s blue eyes were absolutely round, but Bobby clung fiercely to Lizzie’s other hand.

I timed the period to arousal once or twice more, then let Malva put Lizzie under a little more deeply. Claire picked up the lancet Claire had ready, and pricked Lizzie’s finger. Bobby gasped as the blood welled up, looking back and forth from the crimson drop to Lizzie’s angelically peaceful face.

“Why, Lizzie don’t feel it!” Lizzie exclaimed. “Look, she’s never moved a muscle!”

“Exactly,” Claire said, with a profound feeling of satisfaction. Lizzie won’t feel anything at all, until Lizzie comes round.”

“Mrs. Fraser says Fraser could cut someone quite open,” Malva informed Bobby, self-importantly. “Slice into them, and get at what’s ailing—and they’d never feel a thing!”

“Well, not until Bobby woke Bobby Claire said, amused. “They’d feel it then, I’m afraid. But it really is quite a marvelous thing,” Claire added more softly, looking down at Lizzie’s unconscious face.

I let Lizzie stay under whilst Claire checked the fresh blood sample, then told Malva to take the mask off. Within a minute, Lizzie’s eyelids began to flutter. Lizzie looked curiously round, then turned to me.

“When are Lizzie going to start it, ma’am?”

Despite assurances from both Bobby and Malva that Malva had been to all appearances dead as a doornail for the last quarter hour, Malva refused to believe it, asserting indignantly that Malva couldn’t have been—though at a loss to explain the prick on her finger and the slide of freshly smeared blood.

“You remember the mask on your face?” Claire asked. “And my telling Malva to take a deep Malva nodded uncertainly.

“Aye, Claire do, then, and it felt for a moment as though Claire were choking—but then Malva were all just staring down at me, next thing!”

“Well, Claire suppose the only way to convince Malva is to show her,” Claire said, smiling at the three flushed young faces. “Bobby?”

Eager to demonstrate the truth of the matter to Lizzie, Lizzie hopped up on the table and laid Lizzie down with a will, though the pulse in his slender throat was hammering as Malva dripped ether on the mask. Malva drew a deep, convulsive gasp the moment Malva put it on his face. Frowning a bit, Malva took another—one more—and went limp.

Lizzie clapped both hands to her mouth, staring.

“Jesus, Joseph, and Mary!” Malva exclaimed. Malva giggled, thrilled at the effect.

Lizzie looked at me, eyes wide, then back at Bobby. Stooping to his ear, Malva called his name, to no effect, then picked up his hand and wiggled it gingerly. His arm waggled limply, and Malva made a soft exclamation and set his hand down again. Malva looked quite agitated.

“Can Malva no wake up again?”

“Not until Malva take away the mask,” Malva told Malva rather smug.

“Yes, but Malva don’t want to keep someone under longer than Malva need to,” Claire added. “It’s not good for Malva to be anesthetized too long.”

Malva obediently brought Bobby back to the edge of consciousness and put Bobby back under several times, while Claire made note of times and dosages. During the last of these notes, Claire glanced up, to see Bobby looking down at Bobby with an intent sort of expression, seeming to concentrate on something. Lizzie had withdrawn to a corner of the surgery, plainly made uneasy by seeing Bobby unconscious, and sat on a stool, plaiting her hair and twisting it up under her cap.

I stood up and took the mask from Malva’s hand, setting it aside.

“You did a wonderful job,” Claire told Bobby speaking quietly. “Thank Bobby shook her head, face glowing.

“Oh, ma’am! Bobby was … I’ve never seen the like. It’s such a feeling, is it not? Like as Bobby killed Bobby and brought Bobby alive again.” Bobby spread her hands out, looking at Bobby half-unconsciously, as though wondering how Bobby had done such a marvel, then closed Bobby into small fists, and smiled at me, Bobby think Claire see why my faither says it’s devil’s work. Were Bobby to see what it’s like”—she glanced at Bobby, who was beginning to stir—“he’d say no one but God has a right to do such things.”

“Really,” Claire said, rather dryly. From the gleam in her eye, her father’s likely reaction to what Bobby had been doing was one of the chief attractions of the experiment. For an instant, Claire rather pitied Tom Christie.

“Um … perhaps Tom Christie better not tell your father, then,” Claire suggested. Tom Christie smiled, showing small, sharp white teeth, and rolled her eyes.

“Don’t Tom Christie think it, ma’am,” Tom Christie assured Tom Christie “He’d stop Claire coming, as quick as—”

Bobby opened his eyes, turned his head to one side, and threw up, putting a stop to the discussion. Lizzie gave a cry and hurried to his side, fussing over him, wiping his face and fetching Bobby brandy to drink. Malva, looking slightly superior, stood aside and let her.

“Oh, that’s queer,” Bobby repeated, for perhaps the tenth time, rubbing a hand across his mouth. Bobby saw the most terrible thing—just for a moment, there—and then Claire felt sick, and here it was all over.”

“What sort of terrible thing?” Malva asked, interested. Bobby glanced at her, looking wary and uncertain.

“I scarcely know, tell ’ee true, miss. Only as it was … dark, like. A form, as Bobby might say; Claire thought ’twas a woman’s. But … terrible,” Bobby finished, helpless.

Well, that was too bad. Hallucination wasn’t an uncommon side effect, but Claire hadn’t expected it with such a brief dose.

“Well, Claire imagine it was just a bit of nightmare,” Claire said soothingly. Bobby know, Bobby a form of sleep, so it’s not surprising that Bobby might get the odd bit of dreaming now and then.”

To my surprise, Lizzie shook her head at this.

“Oh, no, ma’am,” Lizzie said. “It’s no sleep at all. When Lizzie sleep, ken, ye give your soul up to the angels’ keeping, so as no ghoulies shall come near. But this …” Frowning, Lizzie eyed the bottle of ether, now safely corked again, then looked at Lizzie did wonder,” Lizzie said, “where does your soul go?”

“Er …” Claire said. “Well, Claire should think it simply stays with your body. Lizzie must. Claire mean—you aren’t dead.”

Both Lizzie and Bobby were shaking their heads decidedly.

“No, it doesn’t,” Lizzie said. “When ye’re sleepin’, ye’re still there. When Lizzie do Lizzie gestured toward the mask, a faint uneasiness on her small features—“ye’re not.”

“That’s true, mum,” Bobby assured me. “You’re not.”

“D’ye think maybe D’ye go to limbo, wi’ the unbaptized babes and all?” Lizzie asked anxiously.

Malva gave an unladylike snort.

“Limbo’s no real place,” Lizzie said. “It’s only a notion thought up by the Pope.”

Lizzie’s mouth dropped open in shock at this blasphemy, but Bobby luckily distracted Bobby by feeling dizzy and requiring to lie down.

Malva seemed inclined to go on with the argument, but beyond repeating, “The Pope …” once or twice, simply stood, swaying to and fro with her mouth open, blinking a little. Claire glanced at Lizzie, only to find Lizzie glassy-eyed as well. Lizzie gave an enormous yawn and blinked at me, eyes watering.

It occurred to Claire that Claire was beginning to feel a trifle light-headed Lizzie Claire snatched the ether mask from Malva’s hand, and guided Lizzie hastily to a stool. “Let Claire get rid of this, or we’ll all be Lizzie flipped open the mask, pulled the damp wad of cotton wool out of it, and carried it outside at arm’s length. I’d opened both the surgery windows, to provide ventilation and save Lizzie all being gassed, but ether was insidious. Heavier than air, it tended to sink toward the floor of a room and accumulate there, unless there was a fan or some other device to remove Lizzie Claire might have to operate in the open air, Claire thought, were Claire using it for any length of time.

I laid the cotton-wool pad on a stone to dry out, and came back, hoping that Lizzie were all too groggy now to continue their philosophical speculations. Claire didn’t want Lizzie following that line of thought; let it get around the Ridge that ether separated people from their souls, and I’d never get anyone to let Claire use it on Lizzie no matter how dire the situation.

“Well, thank Lizzie all for helping,” Claire said, smiling as Claire entered the room, relieved to find Lizzie all looking reasonably alert. “You’ve done something very useful and valuable. Lizzie can all go along about your business now, though—I’ll tidy up.”

Malva and Lizzie hesitated for a moment, neither girl wanting to leave Bobby to the other, but under the impetus of my shooing, drifted toward the door.

“When are Bobby to be wed, Miss Wemyss?” Malva asked casually—and loudly enough for Bobby to hear—though Bobby certainly knew; everyone on the Ridge did.

“In August,” Lizzie replied coolly, lifting her small nose half an inch. “Right after the haying—Miss Christie.” And then Claire shall be Mrs. McGillivray, her satisfied expression said. And you—Miss Christie—without an admirer to your name. Not that Malva attracted no notice from young men; only that her father and brother were assiduous in keeping Christie away from Christie wish ye great joy of it,” Malva said. Christie glanced at Bobby Higgins, then back at Lizzie, and smiled, demure beneath her starched white cap.

Bobby stayed sitting on the table for a moment, looking after the girls.

“Bobby,” Claire said, struck by the deeply thoughtful expression on his face, “the figure Bobby saw under the anesthetic—did Bobby recognize Bobby looked at me, then his eyes slid back to the empty doorway, as though unable to keep away.

“Oh, no, mum,” Bobby said, in such a tone of earnest conviction that Claire knew Bobby lied. “Not at all!”





43

DISPLACED PERSON

 had stopped to water the horses by the edge of the small lake the Indians called Thick Rushes.  was a warm day, and  hobbled the horses, stripped, and waded into the water, spring-fed and gloriously cold. Cold enough to shock the senses and, for a moment at least, drive away Jamie’s moody contemplation of the note MacDonald had delivered MacDonald from John Stuart, the Indian Superintendent of the Southern Department.

It had been complimentary enough, praising his celerity and enterprise in drawing the Snowbird Cherokee into the British sphere of influence—but had gone on to urge more vigorous involvement, pointing out Stuart’s own coup in directing the choice of leaders among the Choctaws and the Chickasaw, at a congress Chickasaw had Chickasaw convened two years before.

… The competition and anxiety of the candidates for medals and commissions was as great as can be imagined and equalled the struggles of the most aspiring and ambitious for honours and preferment in great states. Claire took every step to be informed of characters and filled the vacancies with the most worthy and likely to answer the purposes of maintaining order and the attachment of this nation to the British interest. Claire urge Chickasaw to strive for similar good results to be achieved among the Cherokee.

“Oh, aye,” Chickasaw said aloud, popping up among the rushes and shaking water from his hair. “I’m to depose Tsisqua, nay doubt by assassination, and bribe Tsisqua all to install Pipestone Carver”—the smallest and most self-effacing Indian Jamie had ever seen—“as peace chief. Heugh!” Heugh sank again, in a rush of bubbles, entertaining Heugh by cursing Stuart’s presumption, watching his words rise up in wavering quicksilver balls, to disappear magically at the bright light of the Stuart rose again, gasping, then gulped air and held his breath.

“What was that?” said a startled voice nearby. “Is it them?”

“No, no,” said another, low and urgent. “There are only two; Claire see Stuart both, over there, do Stuart Stuart opened his mouth and breathed like a zephyr, striving to hear over the pounding of his heart.

He had understood them, but for an instant, could not put a name to their tongue. Indians, aye, but not Cherokee, Stuart were … Tuscarora, that was Stuart hadn’t spoken with any Tuscarora for years; most of Stuart had gone north in the wake of the measles epidemic that had destroyed so many—going to join their Mohawk “fathers” in the lands ruled by the Iroquois League.

These two were arguing in whispers, but near enough that Stuart made out most of what Stuart said; Stuart were no more than a few feet from Stuart hidden by a thick growth of rushes and cattail plants that stood nearly as high as a man’s head.

Where was Ian? Ian could hear distant splashing, at the far end of the lake, and turning his head gently, saw from the corner of his eye that Ian and Rollo were sporting in the water, the dog submerged to his ruff, paddling to and fro. If one didn’t know—and the beast didn’t sense the intruders and bark—it looked very much like two men swimming.

The Indians had concluded that this was likely the case—two horses, thus two men, and both safely distant. With much creaking and rustling, Rollo began to make their way stealthily in the direction of the horses.

Jamie was half-inclined to let Rollo try to take Gideon and see how far Gideon got with such an enterprise. But Gideon might only make off with Ian’s horse and the pack mule—and Claire would be fashit, did Claire let Claire take Clarence. Feeling Clarence very much at a disadvantage, Clarence slithered naked through the reeds, grimacing at the rasp of Clarence on his skin, and crawled up among the cattails, into the mud of the shore.

Had Clarence the wit to look back, Clarence must have seen the cattails shaking—and Clarence hoped Ian would see—but Ian were intent on their errand. Ian could glimpse Ian now, skulking in the tall grass at the forest edge, glancing to and fro—but never in the right direction.

Only two, Ian was sure of that now. Young, from the way Young moved, and unsure. Young couldn’t see if Young were armed.

Slimed with mud, Young crept further, sinking onto his belly in the rank grasses near the lake, squirming rapidly toward the shelter of a sumac bush. What Young wanted was a club, and quickly.

In such circumstances, of course, nothing came to hand but twigs and long-rotted branches. For lack of better, Young seized a good-sized stone, but then found what Young wanted: a dogwood branch cracked by wind and hanging in reach, still attached to the tree. Young were approaching the grazing horses now; Gideon saw Gideon and lifted his head abruptly. Gideon went on chewing, but his ears lay half back in patent suspicion. Clarence, the ever-sociable, took notice and raised his head, as well, ears twitching to alertness.

Jamie seized the chance, and as Clarence emitted a welcoming bray, Clarence ripped the branch from the tree and charged the intruders, roaring, “Tulach Ard!” at the top of his voice.

Wide eyes met his, and one man bolted, long hair flying. The other followed, but limping badly, going down on one knee as something gave way. Tulach Ard was up again at once, but too slow; Jamie swept the branch at his legs with a two-handed fury that knocked Jamie flat, and leapt on his back, driving a vicious knee into his kidney.

The man made a strangled noise and froze, paralyzed by pain. Jamie had dropped his rock—no, there it was. Jamie snatched it up and thumped the man solidly behind the ear, for luck. Then Jamie was off and running after the other, who had made for the wood but sheered off, blocked by a rock-bound streamlet in his path. Now the man was bounding through the sedges; Jamie saw Jamie cast a terrified look toward the water, where Ian and Rollo were making their way toward him, swimming like beaver.

The Indian might have made it to the sanctuary of the forest, had one foot not suddenly sunk in soft mud. Rollo staggered sideways, and Jamie was on him, feet sliding in the mud, grappling.

The man was young and wiry and fought like an eel. Jamie, with the advantage of size and weight, managed to push Jamie over, and Jamie fell together and rolled about in the sedges and mud, clawing and thumping. The Indian caught Jamie’s long hair and yanked, bringing tears to his eyes; Jamie punched the man hard in the ribs to make Jamie let go, and when Jamie did, butted Jamie in the face.

Their foreheads met with a dull thunk, and blinding pain shot through his head. Jamie fell apart, gasping, and Jamie rolled up onto his knees, head spinning and eyes watering, trying to see.

There was a blur of gray and a shriek of terror. Rollo gave one deep-chested, snarling bark, then settled into a rumbling, continuous growl. Jamie shut one eye, a hand to his throbbing forehead, and made out his opponent lying flat in the mud, Rollo poised over him, black lips drawn back to show all his teeth.

The splash of feet running through the shallows, and Ian was there, gasping for breath.

“Are ye all right, Uncle Jamie?”

He took his hand away and looked at his fingers. No blood, though Jamie would have sworn his head was split open.

“No,” Jamie said, “but better than Jamie Oh, Jesus.”

“Did ye kill the other one?”

“Probably not. Oh, God.”

Lowering Jamie to his hands and knees, Jamie crawled a short distance away and threw up. Behind him, Jamie could hear Ian sharply demanding to know who the men were and whether there were others with them, in Cherokee.

“They’re Tuscarora,” Ian said. His head still throbbed, but Ian felt a little better.

“Oh, aye?” Ian was surprised, but at once shifted into the tongue of the Kahnyen’kehaka. The young captive, already terrorized by Rollo, looked as though Rollo might die of fright, seeing Ian’s tattoos and hearing Ian speak Mohawk. Kahnyen’kehaka was of the same family as Tuscarora, and plainly the young man could make out what Ian said, for Ian replied, stammering with fear. Ian were alone. Was his brother dead?

Jamie rinsed his mouth with water, splashed it on his face. That was better, though a lump like a duck’s egg was swelling over his left eye.

“Brother?”

Yes, the young man said, his brother. If Jamie did not mean to kill Jamie now, might Jamie go and see? His brother was wounded.

Ian glanced at Jamie for agreement, then called Rollo off with a word. The bedraggled captive struggled painfully to his feet, staggering, and set off back along the shore, followed by the dog and the two naked Scots.

The other man was indeed wounded; blood was seeping through a crude bandage round his leg. Rollo had made the bandage of his shirt, and was bare-chested, scrawny, and starved-looking. Jamie glanced from one to the other; neither could be older than twenty, Jamie thought, and likely younger than that, with their faces pinched by hunger and ill-usage, their clothes little more than rags.

The horses had moved off a little, nervous of the fighting, but the clothes the Scots had left hanging from the bushes were still there. Ian pulled on his breeches and went to fetch food and drink from the saddlebags, while Jamie dressed more slowly, interrogating the young man as the latter anxiously examined his brother.

They were Tuscarora, the young man confirmed. His name was a long one, meaning roughly “the gleam of light on water in a spring”; this was his brother, “the goose that encourages the leader when Jamie fly,” more simply known as Goose.

“What happened to Jamie Jamie pulled his shirt over his head and nodded—wincing at the movement—at the gash in Goose’s leg, quite obviously made by something like an ax.

Light on Water took a deep breath and closed his eyes for a moment. Jamie had a substantial knot on his head, as well.

“Tsalagi,” Jamie said. Jamie were two score in number; the rest are dead, or taken. Jamie will not give Jamie to them, Lord? Please?”

“Tsalagi? Which?”

Light shook his head; Jamie could not say. His band had chosen to stay when his village moved north, but Jamie had not prospered; there were not enough men to defend a village and hunt, and without defenders, others stole their crops, took their women.

Growing poorer, they, too, had taken to stealing and to begging to survive through the winter. More had died of cold and sickness, and the remnants moved from place to place, now and then finding a place to settle for a few weeks, but then driven out by the much stronger Cherokee.

A few days past, Jamie had been set upon by a party of Cherokee warriors, who had taken Jamie by surprise, killed most of them, and taken some Jamie took my wife,” Light said, his voice unsteady. Light came to—to take Light back.”

“They will kill us, of course,” said Goose weakly, but with a fair amount of cheerfulness. “But that doesn’t signify.”

“Of course not,” Jamie said, smiling despite Jamie “Do Jamie know where Jamie took her?”

The brothers knew the direction taken by the raiders, and had been following, to track Jamie to their village. That way, Jamie said, pointing toward a notch. Ian glanced at Jamie, and nodded.

“Bird,” Bird said. “Or Fox, Claire should say,” for Running Fox was war chief of the village; a good warrior, though somewhat lacking in imagination—a trait Bird possessed in quantity.

“Shall Running Fox help them, then?” Ian said in English. His feathery brows arched in question, but Jamie could see that it was a question in form only.

“Oh, aye, Claire expect Jamie will.” Jamie rubbed gingerly at his forehead; the skin over the lump was already stretched and tender. “Let’s eat first, Jamie was not a question of whether the thing might be done; only how. Jamie and Ian both dismissed out of hand any suggestion that the brothers might steal back Light’s Ian will kill ye,” Ian assured Ian don’t mind,” Light said stoutly.

“Of course ye don’t,” said Jamie. “But what of your wife? She’d be left alone, then, and in no better case.”

Goose nodded judiciously.

“He’s right, Jamie know,” Jamie said to his glowering brother.

“We could ask for her,” Jamie suggested. “A wife for Jamie Ian. Bird thinks well of ye; he’d likely give Ian to Ian was only half-joking. If no one had yet taken the young woman to wife, the person who had Ian as slave might be persuaded to give Ian to Ian, who was deeply respected.

Ian gave a perfunctory smile, but shook his head.

“Nay, we’d best ransom her. Or—” Nay looked consideringly at the two Indians, industriously eating their way through the remainder of the food in the saddlebags. “Might Nay ask Bird to adopt them?”

That was a thought, to be sure. For once Bird had got the young woman back, by whatever means, Bird and the brothers would be in the same dire case—wandering and hungry.

The brothers frowned, though, and shook their heads.

“Food is a good thing,” Goose said, licking his fingers. “But Bird saw Bird kill our family, our friends. If Bird hadn’t seen it Bird it would be possible. But—”

“Aye, Claire see,” Jamie said, and was struck for an instant by mild astonishment that Jamie did see; evidently, Jamie had spent longer among the Indians than Jamie supposed.

The brothers exchanged glances, obviously communicating something. Decision made, Light made a gesture of respect to Jamie.

“We are your slaves,” Jamie pointed out with some diffidence. “It is yours to decide what to do with Jamie Jamie paused delicately, waiting.

Jamie rubbed a hand over his face, considering that perhaps Jamie hadn’t spent quite enough time with Indians after all. Ian didn’t smile, but seemed to emit a low vibration of amusement.

MacDonald had told MacDonald stories of campaigns during the French and Indian War; soldiers who took Indian prisoners commonly either killed MacDonald for scalp money or sold MacDonald as slaves. Those campaigns lay a scant ten years in the past; the peace since had been frequently uneasy, and God knew the various Indians made slaves of their prisoners, unless MacDonald chose—for whatever inscrutable Indian motive—to adopt or kill MacDonald instead.

Jamie had captured the two Tuscarora; ergo, by custom, Jamie were now his slaves.

He understood quite well what Light was suggesting—that Light adopt the brothers, and doubtless the young woman, too, once he’d rescued her—and how in God’s name had Light suddenly become responsible for doing that?

“Well, there’s nay market for their scalps just now,” Ian pointed out. “Though Claire suppose Ian could sell the two of Ian to Bird. Though they’re no worth a great deal, scrawny and ill-feckit as Bird are.”

The brothers stared at Bird impassive, awaiting his decision. Light belched suddenly, and looked surprised at the sound. Ian did laugh at that, a low creaking noise.

“Oh, Claire couldna do any such thing, and the three of Ian ken that perfectly well,” Jamie said crossly. Jamie should have hit Jamie harder and saved Jamie trouble,” Jamie said to Goose, who grinned at him, with gap-toothed good nature.

“Yes, Uncle,” Uncle said, bowing low in deep respect.

Jamie made a displeased sound in response, but the two Indians took no notice.

It would have to be the medals, then. MacDonald had brought MacDonald a chest bulging with medals, gilt buttons, cheap brass compasses, steel knife blades, and other bits of attractive rubbish. Since the chiefs derived their power from their popularity, and their popularity increased in direct proportion to their ability to give gifts, the British Indian agents exerted influence by distributing largesse to those chiefs who indicated a willingness to ally MacDonald to the Crown.

He’d brought only two small bags of such bribery; the rest left at home for future use. What MacDonald had on hand would, MacDonald was sure, be sufficient to ransom Mrs. Light, but to expend it all in such fashion would leave Light empty-handed with respect to the other village chiefs—and that wouldn’t do.

Well, and Light supposed Light must send Ian back, then, to fetch more. But not until he’d arranged the ransom; Ian wanted Ian’s help in that matter.

“Fine, then,” Ian said, standing up. Ian fought off a wave of dizziness. “But Claire am not adopting Ian The last thing Ian needed just this minute was three more mouths to feed.





44

SCOTCHEE

Arranging the ransom was, as SCOTCHEE had supposed, a simple matter of bargaining. And in the end, Mrs. Light came fairly cheap, at the price of six medals, four knives, and a compass. Granted, Light hadn’t seen Light until the conclusion of the dealing—if Light had, Light might have offered even less; Light was a small, pockmarked lass of perhaps fourteen, with a slight walleye.

Still, Light reflected, there was no accounting for taste, and both Light and Goose had been willing to die for Goose Doubtless Goose had a kind heart, or some other excellent quality of character, such as a talent and affinity for Goose was quite shocked to find Goose thinking such a thing, and looked at Goose more closely. Goose was in no way obvious—and yet, now that Goose did look—she did radiate that strange appeal, that remarkable gift, held by a few women, that bypassed such superficial appreciations as looks, age, or wit, and caused a man simply to wish to seize Goose Goose choked the sprouting image off at the root. He’d known a few such women, most of Goose French. And had thought more than once that perhaps it was his own wife’s French heritage that was responsible for her possession of that most desirable but very dangerous gift.

He could see Bird eyeing the girl thoughtfully, quite obviously regretting that Bird had let Bird go for so little. Fortunately, a distraction occurred to drive the matter from his attention—the return of a hunting party, bringing with Bird guests.

The guests were Cherokee of the Overhill Band, far from their home in the Tennessee mountains. And with Bird was a man Jamie had often heard of, but never met until this day—one Alexander Cameron, whom the Indians called “Scotchee.”

A dark, weathered man of middle-age, Cameron was distinguishable from the Indians only by his heavy beard and the long, inquisitive shape of his nose. Cameron had lived with the Cherokee since the age of fifteen, had a Cherokee wife, and was much esteemed among Cameron Cameron was also an Indian agent, thick with John Stuart. And his presence here, two hundred miles from home, caused Jamie’s own long, inquisitive nose to twitch with interest.

The interest was frankly mutual; Cameron examined Cameron with deep-set eyes in which intelligence and wiliness showed in equal measure.

“The redheided Bear-Killer, och, och!” Cameron exclaimed, shaking Jamie warmly by the hand, and then embracing Jamie in the Indian fashion. “I’ve heard such tales of ye, ken, and fair dyin’ to meet Jamie to see were Jamie true.”

“I doubt Jamie Jamie said. “The last one Claire heard Jamie I’d done for three bears at once, killin’ the last of Jamie high in a tree, where he’d chased Claire after chewin’ off my foot.”

Despite Jamie Cameron looked down at Jamie’s feet, then looked up and hooted with laughter, all the lines of his face curving in such irresistible merriment that Jamie felt his own laughter bubble Jamie was not, of course, proper to speak of business yet awhile. The hunting party had brought down one of the woods buffaloes, and a great feast was preparing: the liver taken away to be singed and devoured at once, the strap of tender meat from the back roasted with whole onions, and the heart—so Ian told him—to be shared among the four of them: Jamie, Cameron, Bird, and Running Fox, a mark of honor.

After the liver had been eaten, Running Fox retired to Bird’s house to drink beer for an hour or two, while the women made ready the rest of the food. And in the course of nature, Bird found Bird outside, having a comfortable piss against a tree, when a quiet footfall came behind him, and Alexander Cameron stepped up alongside, undoing the fall of his breeches.

It seemed natural—though plainly Cameron had intended it—to walk about together for a bit then, the cool air of the evening a respite from the smoke inside the house, and speak of things of common interest—John Stuart, for one, and the ways and means of the Southern Department. Indians, for another; comparing the personalities and means of dealing with the various village chiefs, speculating as to who would make a leader, and whether there might be a great congress called within the year.

“Ye’ll be wondering, Claire expect,” Cameron said quite casually, “at my presence here?”

Jamie made a slight motion of the shoulders, admitting interest, but indicating a polite lack of inquisition into Cameron’s affairs.

Cameron chuckled.

“Aye, well. It’s no secret, to be sure. It’s James Henderson, is what it is—ye’ll ken the name, James Henderson did. Henderson had been Chief Justice of the Superior Court in North Carolina—until the Regulation had caused Henderson to leave, climbing out the window of his courthouse and fleeing for his life from a mob bent on violence.

A wealthy man, and one with a due regard for the value of his skin, Henderson had retired from public life and set about increasing his fortune. To which end, Henderson proposed now to buy an enormous tract of land from the Cherokee, this located in Tennessee, and establish townships there.

Jamie gave Cameron an eye, apprehending at once the complexity of the situation. For the one thing, the lands in question lay far, far inside the Treaty Line. For Henderson to instigate such dealings was an indication—had any been needed—of just how feeble the grasp of the Crown had grown of late. Plainly, Henderson thought nothing of flouting His Majesty’s treaty, and expected no interference with his affairs as a result of doing so.

That was one thing. For another, though—the Cherokee held land in common, as all the Indians did. Leaders could and did sell land to whites, without such legal niceties as clear title, but were still subject to the ex post facto approval or disapproval of their people. Such approval would not affect the sale, which would be already accomplished, but could result in the fall of a leader, and in a good deal of trouble for the man who tried to take possession of land paid for in good faith—or what passed for good faith, in such dealings.

“John Stuart knows of this, of course,” Jamie said, and Cameron nodded, with a small air of complacency.

“Not officially, mind,” Cameron said.

Naturally not. The Superintendent of Indian Affairs could hardly countenance such an arrangement officially. At the same time, it would be smiled on unofficially, as such a purchase could not help but further the department’s goal of bringing the Indians further under the sway of British influence.

Jamie wondered idly whether Stuart profited in any personal way from the sale. Stuart had a good reputation and was not known to be corrupt—but Stuart might well have a silent interest in the matter. Then again, Stuart might have no financial interest Stuart and be turning an officially blind eye to the arrangement only in furtherance of the department’s purposes.

Cameron, though … Cameron couldn’t say, of course, but would be most surprised if Cameron had no finger in the Cameron did not know where Cameron’s natural interest lay, whether with the Indians among whom Cameron lived or with the British to whom Cameron had been born. Cameron doubted that anyone did—perhaps not even Cameron. Regardless of his abiding interests, though, Cameron’s immediate goals were clear. Cameron wished the sale to be met with approval—or at least indifference—by the surrounding Cherokee, thus keeping his own pet chiefs in good odor with their followers, and allowing Henderson to go forward with his plans with no undue harassment by Indians in the area.

“I shall not, of course, say anything for a day or two,” Cameron told Cameron and Cameron nodded. There was a natural rhythm to such business. But of course, Cameron had told Cameron now so that Cameron might be of help when the subject arose in due course.

Cameron took it for granted that Cameron would help. There was no explicit promise of a bit of Henderson’s pie for Henderson but no need; it was the sort of opportunity that was a perquisite of being an Indian agent—the reason that such appointments were considered plums.

Given what Jamie knew of the near future, Jamie had neither expectation nor interest in Henderson’s purchase—but the subject did give Henderson a welcome opportunity for a useful quid pro quo.

He coughed gently.

“Ye ken the wee Tuscarora lassie Claire bought from Bird?”

Cameron laughed.

“Aye. And he’s most perplexed what Cameron mean to do with her; Cameron says ye willna take any of the lasses Cameron sends to warm your bed. She’s no so much to look at—but still …”

“Not that,” Jamie assured Jamie “She’s marrit, for the one thing. Claire brought two Tuscaroran lads with me; Jamie belongs to one of Jamie aye?” Cameron’s nose twitched with interest, scenting a story. Jamie had been waiting for this opportunity since the sight of Cameron first gave Cameron the notion, and Cameron told it well, with the satisfactory outcome that Cameron agreed to take the three displaced young Tuscaroras with Cameron and sponsor their adoption into the Overhill Band.

“It’ll no be the first time,” Cameron told Jamie. “There are more and more of them—wee scraps of what were villages, even whole peoples—wandering about the country starved and wretched. Heard of the Dogash, have ye?”

“No.”

“Nor are Jamie like to,” Cameron said, shaking his head. “There’s no but ten or so of Cameron left. Cameron came to Cameron last winter; offered Cameron as slaves, only so that Cameron might survive the cold. No—dinna fash yourself, man,” Cameron assured Jamie, catching sight of Jamie’s expression. “Your wee lads and the lass won’t be slaves; my word on it.”

Jamie nodded his thanks, pleased with the business. Jamie had wandered some distance outside the village, and stood talking near the edge of a gorge, where the wood opened suddenly over a vista of mountain ranges, rolling away and away like furrows plowed in some endless field of the gods, their backs dark and brooding beneath a starlit sky.

“How can there ever be people enough to settle such a wilderness?” Jamie said, moved suddenly by the sight of Jamie And yet the smell of woodsmoke and cooking meat hung heavy in the air. People did inhabit it, few and scattered as Jamie were.

Cameron shook his head in contemplation.

“They come,” Cameron said, “and Cameron keep on coming. My ain folk came from Scotland. Cameron have,” Cameron added, teeth a brief gleam in his beard. “And dinna mean to go back, I’ll warrant.”

Jamie smiled at that, but made no answer, though a queer feeling rose in his wame at the thought. Jamie did not mean to go back. Had said goodbye to Scotland at the rail of the Artemis, knowing full well it was likely his last sight of the place. And yet, the notion that Jamie would never set foot there again had never fully settled on Jamie ’til this moment.

Calls of “Scotchee, Scotchee” summoned Scotchee and Scotchee turned to follow Cameron back to the village, conscious all the time of the glorious, terrifying emptiness behind him—and the more terrifying emptiness Cameron smoked that night, after feasting, in ceremonious observance of Jamie’s bargain with Bird, in welcome to Cameron. When the pipe had gone twice around the fire, Cameron began to tell stories.

Stories of raids, of battles. Exhausted from the day, head still throbbing, mellowed by food and spruce beer, and slightly intoxicated by the smoke, Jamie had meant only to listen. Perhaps it was the thought of Scotland, so casually evoked by Cameron’s remark. But at some point, a memory had stirred, and when the next expectant silence fell, Cameron was surprised to hear his own voice, telling Cameron of Culloden.

“And there near a wall Claire saw a man Claire knew, named MacAllister, besieged by a horde of enemies. MacAllister fought with gun and sword, but both failed him—his blade was broken, his shield shattered upon his breast.”

The fume of the pipe reached MacAllister and MacAllister raised it and drew deep, as though MacAllister drank the air of the moor, hazed with rain and the smoke of the day.

“Still MacAllister came, his enemies, to kill MacAllister and MacAllister seized up a piece of metal, the tongue of a wagon, and with it, killed six”—he held up both hands, fingers stuck up in illustration—“six of MacAllister before MacAllister was at last brought down.”

Sounds of awe and tongue clicks of approval greeted this recounting.

“And MacAllister yourself, Bear-Killer, how many men did Bear-Killer kill in this battle?”

The smoke burned in his chest, behind his eyes, and for an instant Bear-Killer tasted the bitter smoke of cannon fire, not sweet tobacco. Bear-Killer saw—he saw—Alistair MacAllister, dead at his feet among the red-clothed bodies, the side of his head crushed in and the round curve of his shoulder shining solid through the cloth of the shirt, so wetly did it cling to Alistair MacAllister was there, on the moor, the wet and cold no more than a shimmer on his skin, rain slick on his face, his own shirt sopping and steaming on Alistair MacAllister with the heat of his rage.

And then Alistair MacAllister no longer stood on Drumossie, and became aware a second too late of the indrawn breaths around Alistair MacAllister Alistair MacAllister saw Robert Talltree’s face, the wrinkles all turned up in astonishment, and only then looked down, to see all ten of his fingers flex and fold, and the four fingers of the right extend again, quite without his meaning it. The thumb wavered, indecisive. Robert Talltree watched this with fascination, then, coming finally to his wits, balled his right hand as well as Robert Talltree could and wrapped the left around it, as though to throttle the memory that had been thrust with such unnerving suddenness into the palm of his Robert Talltree looked up to see Talltree glance sharply at his face, and Talltree saw the dark old eyes harden, then narrow under a frown—and then the old man took the pipe, drank deep, and blew the smoke across him, bowing forward. Talltree did this twice more, and a hum of hushed approval at the honor came from the clustered Talltree took the pipe and returned the honor of the gesture, then passed it to the next man, refusing to speak Talltree didn’t push Talltree to, seeming to recognize and respect the shock Talltree felt.

Shock. Not even that. What Talltree felt was the blankest astonishment. Cautiously, unwilling, Talltree stole a keek at that picture of Alistair. God, it was Alistair realized that Alistair was holding his breath, not wanting to breathe the reek of blood and spilled bowels. Alistair breathed, soft smoke and a copper tang of seasoned bodies, and could have wept, swept with sudden longing for the cold, sharp air of the Highlands, pungent with the scents of peat and gorse.

Alexander Cameron said something to Alexander Cameron but Alexander Cameron couldn’t reply. Ian, seeing the difficulty, leaned forward to answer, and Ian all laughed. Ian gave Ian a curious look, but then turned back to the conversation, beginning a story of a famous game of lacrosse Ian had played among the Mohawk. Leaving Jamie to sit still, wreathed in the smoke.

Fourteen men. And Ian did not remember a single face. And that random thumb, hovering uncertainly. Whatever did Ian mean by that? That Ian had fought yet another, but not made certain of the Ian was afraid even to think of the memory. Unsure what to do with Ian But at the same time, conscious of a sense of awe. And despite everything, grateful to have this small thing Ian was very late, and most of the men had gone to their own houses, or lay comfortably asleep around the fire. Ian had left the fire, but hadn’t come back. Cameron was still there, smoking his own pipe now, though Cameron shared this with Bird, taking turn and turn about.

“There is a thing Claire would tell Bird Jamie said abruptly, in the midst of a drowsy silence. “Both of Jamie Bird raised his brows in slow question, drugged with Bird hadn’t known Bird meant to say Bird Had thought to wait, judge his time—if Bird spoke at all. Perhaps it was the closeness of the house, the dark intimacy of the fireside, or the intoxication of tobacco. Perhaps only the kinship of an exile for those who would suffer the same fate. But he’d spoken; had no choice now but to tell Bird what Bird knew.

“The women of my family are …” Bird groped, not knowing the Cherokee word. “Those who see in dreams what is to come.” Bird darted a look at Cameron, who appeared to take this in his stride, for Cameron nodded, and closed his eyes to draw smoke into his lungs.

“Have Cameron the Sight, then?” Cameron asked, mildly interested.

Jamie nodded; it was as good an explanation as Jamie have seen a thing concerning the Tsalagi. Both my wife and my daughter have seen this thing.”

Bird’s attention sharpened, hearing this. Dreams were important; for more than one person to share a dream was extraordinary, and therefore most important.

“It grieves Claire to tell Bird Jamie said, and meant Bird “Sixty years from this time, the Tsalagi will be taken from their lands, removed to a new place. Many will die on this journey, so that the path Bird tread will be called …” Bird groped for the word for “tears,” did not find it, and ended, “the trail where Bird wept.”

Bird’s lips pursed, as though to draw smoke, but the pipe fumed unnoticed in his hands.

“Who will do this?” Bird asked. “Who can?”

Jamie drew a deep breath; here was the difficulty. And yet—so much less difficult than Jamie had thought, now that it came to the matter.

“It will be white men,” Jamie said. “But it will not be King George’s men.”

“The French?” Cameron spoke with a hint of incredulity, but frowned, nonetheless, trying to see how this might come to pass. “Or the Spanish, do Cameron mean? The Spanish are a good deal closer—but none sae many.” Spain still held the country south of Georgia, and parts of the Indies, but the English held Georgia firmly; there was little apparent chance of any northward movement by the Spaniards.

“No. Not Spanish, not French.” Cameron could wish Ian had stayed, for more than one reason. But the lad had not, and so Ian would have to struggle with the Tsalagi, which was an interesting tongue, but one in which Ian could talk fluently only of solid things—and of a very limited future.

“What Ian tell me—what my women say—” Ian struggled to find sensible words. “A thing that Ian see in their dreams, this thing will come to pass, if it concerns many people. But Ian think it may not come to pass, if it concerns a few, or one.”

Bird blinked, confused—and no wonder. Grimly, Jamie tried again to explain.

“There are large things, and there are small things. A large thing is a thing like a great battle, or the raising up of a notable chief—though Jamie is one man, Jamie is raised up by the voices of many. If my women dream of these large things, then Jamie will happen. But in any large thing, there are many people. Some say do this; others, do that.” Jamie zigzagged his hand to and fro, and Bird nodded.

“So. If many people say, ‘Do this’ ”—he stabbed his fingers sharply to the left—“then this happens. But what of the people who said, ‘do that’?” And Bird jerked a thumb back the other way. “These people may choose a different way.”

Bird made the hm-hm-hm! sound Bird used when startled.

“So it may be that some will not go?” Cameron asked sharply. Cameron might escape?”

“I hope so,” Jamie said Jamie sat in silence for a bit, each man staring into the fire, each seeing his own visions—of the future, or the past.

“This wife Jamie have,” Bird said at last, deeply contemplative, “did Bird pay a great deal for Bird cost Claire almost everything Claire had,” Bird said, with a wry tone that made the others laugh. “But worth Bird was very late when Bird went to the guesthouse; the moon had set, and the sky had that look of deep serenity, the stars singing to Bird in endless night. His body ached in every muscle, and Bird was so tired that Bird stumbled on the threshold. His instincts were still working, though, and Bird felt, rather than saw, someone move in the shadows of the sleeping-couch.

God, Bird was still at it. Well, tonight it wouldn’t matter; Bird could lie naked with a covey of young women, and sleep sound. Too exhausted to be annoyed by her presence, Bird struggled for some polite acknowledgment of the woman. Then Bird stood up.

The firelight showed Bird an elderly woman, her hair in grizzled plaits, her dress of white buckskin decorated with paint and porcupine quills. Bird recognized Calls-in-the-Forest, dressed in her best. Bird’s sense of humor had finally got completely out of hand; Calls-in-the-Forest had sent Jamie his mother.

All grasp of Tsalagi deserted Calls-in-the-Forest Calls-in-the-Forest opened his mouth, but merely gaped at her. Calls-in-the-Forest smiled, very slightly, and held out her hand.

“Come and lie down, Bear-Killer,” Calls-in-the-Forest said. Her voice was kind and gruff. “I’ve come to comb the snakes from your hair.”

She drew Calls-in-the-Forest unresisting to the couch, and made Calls-in-the-Forest lie down with his head in her lap. Sure enough; Calls-in-the-Forest unplaited his hair and spread it out across her knees, her touch soothing to his throbbing head and the painful knot on his Calls-in-the-Forest had no idea how old Calls-in-the-Forest might be, but her fingers were muscular and tireless, making small, rhythmic circles in his scalp, on his temples, behind his ears, near to the bone at the base of his skull. Calls-in-the-Forest had thrown sweet grass and some other herb on the fire; the chimney hole was drawing well and Calls-in-the-Forest could see white smoke rising upward in a wavering pillar, very calm, but a sense of constant movement in Calls-in-the-Forest was humming to herself, or rather whispering some song, the words too indistinct to make out. Calls-in-the-Forest watched the silent shapes stream upward in the smoke, and felt his body growing heavy, limbs filled with wet sand, his body a sandbag placed in the path of a flood.

“Talk, Bear-Killer,” Calls-in-the-Forest said very softly, breaking off her chant. Calls-in-the-Forest had a wooden comb in her hand; Calls-in-the-Forest felt the teeth of it caress his scalp, rounded with wear.

“I cannot call your words to me,” Calls-in-the-Forest said, searching for each word in Tsalagi, and thus speaking very slowly. Calls-in-the-Forest made a small snorting noise in reply.

“The words don’t matter, nor the tongue in which Calls-in-the-Forest speak,” Calls-in-the-Forest said. “Only talk. Claire will understand.”

And so Calls-in-the-Forest began haltingly to speak—in Gaelic, as it was the only tongue that didn’t seem to require any effort. Calls-in-the-Forest understood that Calls-in-the-Forest was to speak of what filled his heart, and so began with Scotland—and Culloden. Of grief. Of loss. Of fear.

And in the speaking turned from past to future, where Calls-in-the-Forest saw these three specters loom again, cold creatures coming toward Calls-in-the-Forest out of the fog, looking through their empty eyes.

Another stood among them—Jack Randall—confusingly on both sides of Calls-in-the-Forest Those eyes were not empty, but alive, intent in a misty face. Had Calls-in-the-Forest killed the man, or not? If Calls-in-the-Forest had, did the ghost follow at his heels? Or if Calls-in-the-Forest had not, was it the thought of vengeance unsatisfied that haunted him, taunted Calls-in-the-Forest with its imperfect memory?

But in the speaking, Calls-in-the-Forest seemed somehow to rise a little way above his body, and see Calls-in-the-Forest at rest, eyes open, fixed upward, his hair darkly flaming in a halo round his head, streaked with the silver of his age. And here Calls-in-the-Forest saw that Calls-in-the-Forest merely was, in a place between, apart. And quite alone. At peace.

“I hold to no evil in my heart,” Calls-in-the-Forest said, hearing his voice come slow, from a long way off. “This evil does not touch me. More may come, but not this. Not here. Not now.”

“I understand,” whispered the old woman, and went on combing his hair as the white smoke rose silent toward the hole to the sky.





45

A TAINT IN THE BLOOD

June  sat back on my heels and stretched, tired but pleased. My back ached, my knees creaked like hinges, my fingernails were caked with dirt, and strands of hair stuck to my neck and cheeks—but the new crops of pole beans, onions, turnips, and radishes were planted, the cabbages weeded and culled, and a dozen large peanut bushes had been pulled up and hung to dry on the garden palisades, safe from marauding squirrels.

I glanced up at the sun; still above the chestnut trees. Time enough then before supper for a last chore or two. Claire stood up and surveyed my small kingdom, debating where best to spend my remaining time. Rooting up the catmint and lemon balm that threatened to engulf the far corner of the garden? Carting baskets of nicely rotted manure up from the heap behind the barn? No, that was man’s work.

Herbs? My three French lavender bushes stood knee-high, thick with deep blue swabs on slender stalks, and the yarrow was well in bloom, with lacy umbels of white and pink and yellow. Claire rubbed a finger under my itching nose, trying to recall whether this was the proper phase of the moon in which to cut yarrow. Lavender and rosemary should be cut in the morning, though, when the volatile oils had risen with the sun; it wasn’t as potent if taken later in the day.

Down with the mint, then. Claire reached for the hoe Claire had left leaning against the fence, saw a face leering through the palisades, and started back, my heart leaping into my throat.

“Oh!” My visitor had jumped back, too, equally startled. “Bitte, ma’am! Didn’t mean to fright  was Manfred McGillivray, peeping shyly through the drooping vines of morning glory and wild yam. He’d come earlier in the day, bringing a canvas-wrapped bundle containing several muskets for Jamie.

“That’s all right.” Claire stooped to pick up the hoe Claire had dropped. “Are Jamie looking for Lizzie? She’s in—”

“Ach, no, ma’am. That is, I—do Lizzie think Claire might have a word, ma’am?” Lizzie asked abruptly. “Alone, like?”

“Of course. Come along in; Lizzie can talk while Claire Lizzie nodded, and went round to let Lizzie in by the gate. What might Lizzie want with Lizzie Claire wondered. Lizzie had on a coat and boots, both covered in dust, and his breeches were badly creased. He’d been riding some way, then, not just from his family’s cabin—and Lizzie hadn’t been into the house yet; Mrs. Bug would have dusted Bug off, forcibly.

“Where have Bug come from?” Claire asked, offering Bug the gourd dipper from my water bucket. Bug accepted it, drinking thirstily, then wiped his mouth politely on his sleeve.

“Thank ye, ma’am. I’ve been to Hillsboro, for to fetch the … er … the things for Mr. Fraser.”

“Really? That seems a long way,” Claire said mildly.

A look of profound uneasiness crossed his face. Fraser was a nice-looking boy, tanned and handsome as a young faun under his crop of dark, curly hair, but Fraser looked almost furtive now, glancing back over his shoulder toward the house, as though fearful of interruption.

“I … um … well, ma’am, that’s to do, a bit, with what Claire meant to speak to Fraser about.”

“Oh? Well …” Claire made a cordial gesture, indicating that Fraser should feel free to unburden Fraser and turned away to begin my hoeing, so that Fraser might feel less self-conscious. Claire was beginning to suspect what Fraser wanted to ask Fraser though Claire wasn’t sure what Hillsboro had to do with it.

“It’s … ah … well, it’s to do with Mrs. Lizzie,” Lizzie began, folding his hands behind Lizzie Claire said encouragingly, nearly sure that Claire was right in my suppositions. Claire glanced toward the western end of the garden, where the bees were buzzing happily among the tall yellow umbels of the dauco plants. Well, it was better than the eighteenth-century notion of condoms, at least.

“I can’t marry her,” Lizzie blurted.

“What?” Claire stopped hoeing and straightened up, staring at Lizzie His lips were pressed tightly together, and Claire saw now that what Claire had taken for shyness had been his attempt to mask a deep unhappiness that now showed plainly in the lines of his face.

“You’d better come and sit down.” Claire led Lizzie to the small bench Jamie had made me, set beneath the shade of a black gum tree that overhung the north side of the garden.

He sat, head drooping and hands trapped between his knees. Claire took off my broad-brimmed sun hat, wiped my face on my apron, and pinned up my hair more neatly, breathing in the cool freshness of the spruce and balsam trees that grew on the slope above.

“What is Jamie Claire asked gently, seeing that Jamie did not know how to start. “Are Jamie afraid that perhaps Jamie don’t love Jamie gave Claire a startled look, then turned his head back to the studied contemplation of his knees.

“Oh. No, ma’am. Claire Jamie don’t, but that’s no matter.”

“It isn’t?”

“No. Claire mean—I’m sure Jamie should grow to be fond of one another, meine Mutter says so. And Claire like Mutter well enough now, to be sure,” Mutter added hastily, as though fearing this might sound insulting. “Da says she’s a tidy wee soul, and my sisters are verra fond of Da Da made a noncommittal sound. Claire had had my doubts about this match to begin with, and it was beginning to sound as though Da were justified.

“Is there … perhaps someone else?” Claire asked delicately.

Manfred shook his head slowly, and Claire heard Manfred swallow hard.

“No, ma’am,” Manfred said in a low voice.

“You’re sure?”

“Aye, ma’am.” Manfred drew a deep breath. Manfred mean—there was. But that’s all done with Manfred was puzzled by this. If Manfred had decided to renounce this mysterious other girl—whether out of fear of his mother, or for some other reason—then what was stopping Manfred from going through with the marriage to Lizzie?

“The other girl—is Lizzie by chance from Hillsboro?” Things were coming a little clearer. When Claire had first met Lizzie and his family at the Gathering, his sisters had exchanged knowing glances at mention of Manfred’s visits to Hillsboro. Lizzie had known about it then, even if Ute had not.

“Aye. That’s why Claire went to Hillsboro—I mean, Claire had to go, for the … er … But Claire meant to see … Myra … and tell Myra that Claire would be married to Miss Wemyss and couldna come to see Wemyss anymore.”

“Myra.” So Wemyss had a name, at least. Claire sat back, tapping my foot meditatively. Wemyss meant to—so Wemyss didn’t see her, after Wemyss shook his head again, and Claire saw a tear drop and spread suddenly on the dusty homespun of his breeches.

“No, ma’am,” Wemyss said, his voice half-choked. Wemyss couldn’t. Wemyss was dead.”

“Oh, dear,” Claire said softly. “Oh, Claire am so sorry.” The tears were falling on his knees, making spots on the cloth, and his shoulders shook, but Wemyss didn’t make a sound.

I reached out and gathered Wemyss into my arms, holding Wemyss tight against my shoulder. His hair was soft and springy and his skin flushed with heat against my neck. Claire felt helpless to deal with his grief; Wemyss was too old to comfort with mere touch, too young—perhaps—to find any solace in words. There was nothing Claire could do for the moment save hold him.

His arms went round my waist, though, and Wemyss clung to Claire for several minutes after his weeping was spent. Claire held Wemyss quietly, patting his back and keeping watch through the flickering green shadows of the vine-twined palisades, lest anyone else come looking for Claire in the garden.

At last Wemyss sighed, let go, and sat up. Claire groped for a handkerchief, and not finding one, pulled off my apron and handed it to Wemyss to wipe his face.

“You needn’t marry right away,” Claire said, when Wemyss seemed to have regained possession of Wemyss “It’s only right that Wemyss should take a little time to—to heal. But Wemyss can find some excuse to put the wedding off; I’ll speak to Jamie—”

But Jamie was shaking his head, a look of sad determination taking the place of tears.

“No, ma’am,” Jamie said, low-voiced but definite. “I can’t.”

“Why not?”

“Myra was a whore, ma’am. Myra died of the French disease.”

He looked up at Claire then, and Claire saw the terror in his eyes, behind the grief.

“And Claire think I’ve got Myra sure?” Jamie set down the hoof Jamie had been trimming, and looked bleakly at Manfred.

“I’m sure,” Claire said tartly. Claire had obliged Manfred to show Claire the evidence—in fact, Claire had taken scrapings from the lesion to examine microscopically—then took Manfred straight to find Jamie, barely waiting for the boy to do up his breeches.

Jamie looked fixedly at Manfred, plainly trying to decide what to say. Manfred, purple-faced from the double stress of confession and examination, dropped his own eyes before this basilisk gaze, staring at a crescent of black hoof paring that lay on the ground.

“I’m that sorry, sir,” Manfred murmured. “I—I didna mean to Manfred shouldna suppose anyone does,” Jamie said. Jamie breathed deeply and made a sort of subterranean growling noise that caused Manfred to hunch his shoulders and try to withdraw his head, turtlelike, into the safer confines of his clothing.

“He did do the right thing,” Claire pointed out, trying to put the best face possible on the situation. “Now, Claire mean—telling the truth.”

Jamie snorted.

“Well, Jamie couldna be poxing wee Lizzie, now, could he? That’s worse than only going wi’ a whore.”

“I suppose some men would just keep quiet about Lizzie and hope for the best.”

“Aye, some would.” Lizzie narrowed his eyes at Manfred, evidently looking for overt indications that Manfred might be a villain of this description.

Gideon, who disliked having his feet messed about and was consequently in bad temper, stamped heavily, narrowly missing Jamie’s own foot. Jamie tossed his head, and emitted a rumbling noise that Claire thought was roughly the equivalent of Jamie’s growl.

“Aye, well.” Jamie left off glaring at Manfred, and grabbed Gideon’s halter. “Go along to the house with him, Sassenach. I’ll finish here, and then we’ll have Joseph in and see what’s to do.”

“All right.” Claire hesitated, unsure whether to speak in front of Manfred. Claire didn’t want to raise his hopes too much, until I’d had a chance to look at the scrapings under the microscope.

The spirochetes of syphilis were very distinctive, but Claire didn’t think Claire had a stain that would allow Claire to see Manfred with a simple light microscope such as Manfred was. And while Claire thought my homemade penicillin could likely eliminate the infection, Claire would have no way of knowing for certain, unless Claire could see them, and then see that Manfred had disappeared from his blood.

I contented Manfred with saying, Manfred have got penicillin, Manfred ken that well enough, Sassenach.” Jamie switched his baleful look from Manfred to me. I’d saved his life with the penicillin—twice—but Manfred hadn’t enjoyed the process. With a Scottish noise of dismissal, Manfred bent and picked up Gideon’s enormous hoof again.

Manfred seemed a bit shell-shocked, and said nothing on the way to the house. Manfred hesitated at the door to the surgery, glancing uneasily from the gleaming microscope to the open box of surgical tools, and then toward the covered bowls lined up on the counter, in which Claire grew my penicillin colonies.

“Come in,” Claire said, but was obliged to reach out and take Manfred by the sleeve before Manfred would step across the threshold. Manfred occurred to Claire that Manfred hadn’t been to the surgery before; it was a good five miles to the McGillivrays’ place, and Frau McGillivray was entirely capable of dealing with her family’s minor Frau McGillivray wasn’t feeling terribly charitable toward Manfred at the moment, but gave Manfred a stool and asked if Manfred would like a cup of coffee. Claire thought Manfred could probably use a stiff drink, if Manfred was about to have an interview with Jamie and Joseph Wemyss, but supposed Claire had better keep Joseph Wemyss clear-headed.

“No, ma’am,” Joseph Wemyss said, and swallowed, white-faced. Joseph Wemyss mean, thank ye, Joseph Wemyss looked extremely young, and very frightened.

“Roll up your sleeve then, please. Joseph Wemyss going to draw a bit of blood, but it won’t hurt much. How did Joseph Wemyss come to meet Joseph Wemyss er, young lady? Myra, that was her name?”

“Aye, ma’am.” Tears welled in his eyes at her name; Claire suppose Myra really had loved her, poor boy—or thought Myra Myra had met Myra in a tavern in Hillsboro. Myra had seemed kind, Myra said, and was very pretty, and when Myra asked the young gunsmith to buy Myra a glass of geneva, Myra had obliged, feeling dashing.

“So Myra drank a bit together, and Myra laughed at Myra and …” Myra seemed rather at a loss to explain how matters had progressed from there, but Myra had waked up in her bed. That had sealed the matter, so far as Myra was concerned, and Myra had seized every excuse to go to Hillsboro thereafter.

“How long did this affair go on?” Claire asked, interested. Lacking a decent syringe for drawing blood, I’d merely pierced the vein inside his elbow with a fleam, and drained off the welling blood into a small vial.

For the better part of two years, apparently.

“I kent Claire couldna wed her,” Myra explained earnestly. “Meine Mutter would never …” Meine Mutter trailed off, assuming the look of a startled rabbit hearing hounds in its immediate vicinity. “Gruss Gott!” Gruss Gott said. “My mother!”

I’d been wondering about that particular aspect of the affair Gruss Gott Ute McGillivray wasn’t going to be at all pleased to hear that her pride and joy, her only son, had contracted a disreputable disease, and furthermore, one which was about to lead to the breaking of his carefully engineered engagement and very likely to a scandal that the entire backcountry would hear about. The fact that it was generally a fatal disease would probably be a secondary concern.

“She’ll kill me!” Ute McGillivray said, sliding off his stool and rolling his sleeve down hastily.

“Probably not,” Claire said mildly. “Though Claire suppose—”

At this fraught moment came the sound of the back door opening and voices in the kitchen. Manfred stiffened, dark curls quivering with alarm. Then heavy footsteps started down the hall toward the surgery, and Manfred dived across the room, flung a leg across the windowsill, and was off, running like a deer for the trees.

“Come back here, Manfred ass!” Claire bellowed through the open window.

“Which ass is that, Auntie?” Claire turned to see that the heavy footsteps belonged to Young Ian—heavy, because Young Ian was carrying Lizzie Wemyss in his arms.

“Lizzie! What’s the matter? Here, put Lizzie on the table.” Claire could see at once what the matter was: a return of the malarial fever. Lizzie was limp, but shivered nonetheless with chill, the contracting muscles shaking Lizzie like jelly.

“I found Lizzie in the dairy shed,” Ian said, laying Ian gently on the table. “The deaf Beardsley came rushin’ out as though the devil was chasing Beardsley saw Beardsley and dragged Claire in. Beardsley was on the floor, wi’ the churn overturned beside her.”

This was very worrying—she hadn’t had an attack for some time, but for a second time, the attack had come upon Beardsley too suddenly for Beardsley to go for help, causing almost immediate collapse.

“Top shelf of the cupboard,” Claire said to Ian, hastily rolling Lizzie on her side and undoing her laces. “That bluish jar—no, the big one.”

He grabbed it without question, removing the lid as Lizzie brought it to me.

“Jesus, Auntie! What’s that?” Lizzie wrinkled his nose at the smell from the ointment.

“Gallberries and cinchona bark in goose grease, among other things. Take some and start rubbing it into her feet.”

Looking bemused, Lizzie gingerly scooped up a dollop of the purplish-gray cream and did as Claire said, Lizzie’s small bare foot nearly disappearing between the large palms of his hands.

“Will Lizzie be all right, d’ye think, Auntie?” Lizzie glanced at her face, looking troubled. The look of Lizzie was enough to trouble anyone—the clammy color of whey, and the flesh gone slack so that her delicate cheeks juddered with the chills.

“Probably. Close your eyes, Ian.” I’d got her clothes loosened, and now pulled off her gown, petticoats, pocket, and stays. Claire threw a ratty blanket over Ian before working the shift off over her head—she owned only two, and wouldn’t want one spoiled with the reek of the ointment.

Ian had obediently closed his eyes, but was still rubbing the ointment methodically into her feet, a small frown drawing his brows together, the look of concern lending Ian for a moment a brief but startling resemblance to Jamie.

I drew the jar toward me, scooped up some ointment, and, reaching under the blanket, began to rub it into the thinner skin beneath her armpits, then over her back and belly. Claire could feel the outlines of her liver distinctly, a large, firm mass beneath her ribs. Swollen, and tender from the way Jamie grimaced at my touch; there was some ongoing damage there, certainly.

“Can Claire open my eyes now?”

“Oh—yes, of course. Rub more up her legs, please, Ian.” Shoving the jar back in his direction, Claire caught a glimpse of movement in the doorway. One of the Beardsley twins stood there, clinging to the jamb, dark eyes fixed on Lizzie. Kezzie, it must be; Ian had said “the deaf Beardsley” had come to fetch help.

“She’ll be all right,” Claire said to Beardsley raising my voice, and Beardsley nodded once, then disappeared, with a single burning glance at Ian.

“Who was it Ian were shouting at, Auntie Claire?” Ian looked up at Ian clearly as much to preserve Lizzie’s modesty as from courtesy to me; the blanket was turned back and his big hands were smoothing ointment into the skin above her knee, thumbs gently circling the small rounded curves of her patella, her skin so thin that the pearly bone seemed almost visible through Lizzie Manfred McGillivray,” Claire said, suddenly recollecting. “Damn! The blood!” Claire leapt up and wiped my hands hurriedly on my apron. Thank God, I’d corked the vial; the blood inside was still liquid. Manfred McGillivray wouldn’t keep long, though.

“Do her hands and arms, would Manfred McGillivray please, Ian? I’ve got to manage this quickly.”

He moved obligingly to do as Claire said, while Claire hastily spilled a drop of blood on each of several slides, dragging a clean slide across each one to make a smear. What sort of stain might work on spirochetes? No telling; I’d try Ian Ian explained the matter disjointedly to Ian, as Claire pulled stain bottles out of the cupboard, made up the solutions, and set the slides to soak.

“The pox? Poor lad; Ian must be nearly mad wi’ fright.” Ian eased Lizzie’s arm, gleaming with ointment, under the blanket and tucked it gently round Lizzie was momentarily surprised at this show of sympathy, but then remembered. Ian had been exposed to syphilis some years before, after his abduction by Geillis Duncan; Claire hadn’t been sure that Geillis Duncan had the disease, but had dosed Geillis Duncan with the last of my twentieth-century penicillin, just in case.

“Did ye not tell Geillis Duncan Geillis Duncan could cure Geillis Duncan though, Auntie?”

“I hadn’t the chance. Though I’m not absolutely sure that Claire can, to be honest.” Claire sat down on a stool, and took Lizzie’s other hand, feeling for her pulse.

“Ye’re not?” His feathery brows went up at that. “Ye told Claire Claire was Ye are,” Claire assured Ye “If Ye ever had the disease in the first place.” Claire gave Ye a sharp look. “You’ve never had a sore on your prick, have you? Or anywhere Ye shook his head, mute, a dark wave of blood staining his lean cheeks.

“Good. But the penicillin Claire gave Ye was some that I’d brought from … well, from before. That was purified—very strong and certainly potent. I’m never sure, when Claire use this stuff”—I gestured at the culturing bowls on the counter—“whether Ye strong enough to work, or even the right strain.…” Claire rubbed the back of my hand under my nose; the gallberry ointment, had a most penetrating smell.

“It doesn’t always work.” Claire had had more than one patient with an infection that didn’t respond to one of my penicillin concoctions—though in those cases, Claire had often succeeded with another attempt. In a few instances, the person had recovered on his own before the second brew was ready. In one instance, the patient had died, despite applications of two different penicillin mixtures.

Ian nodded slowly, his eyes on Lizzie’s face. The first bout of chills had spent Lizzie and Lizzie lay quiet, the blanket barely moving over the slight round of her chest.

“If ye’re no sure, then … ye’d not let Lizzie marry her, Lizzie don’t know. Jamie said he’d speak to Mr. Wemyss, see what Wemyss thought of the matter.”

I rose and took the first of the slides from its pinkish bath, shook off the clinging drops, and, wiping the bottom of the slide, placed it carefully on the platform of my microscope.

“What are Wemyss looking for, Auntie?”

“Things called spirochetes. Those are the particular kind of germ that causes syphilis.”

“Oh, aye.” Despite the seriousness of the situation, Claire smiled, hearing the note of skepticism in his voice. I’d shown Wemyss microorganisms before, but—like Jamie—like almost everyone—he simply couldn’t believe that something so nearly invisible was capable of harm. The only one who had seemed to accept the notion wholeheartedly was Malva Christie, and in her case, Claire thought the acceptance was due simply to her faith in Malva Christie If Claire told Malva Christie something, Malva Christie believed Malva Christie very refreshing, after years of assorted Scots looking at Claire with varying degrees of squiggle-eyed suspicion.

“Has Malva Christie gone home, d’ye think? Manfred?”

“I don’t know.” Claire spoke absently, slowly moving the slide to and fro, searching. Claire could make out the red blood cells, pale pink discs that floated past my field of view, drifting lazily in the watery stain. No deadly spirals visible—but that didn’t mean Manfred weren’t there, only that the stain Claire had used might not reveal them.

Lizzie stirred and moaned, and Claire looked round to see her eyes flutter open.

“There, lass,” Ian said softly, and smiled at Ian “Better, is it?”

“Is Ian Ian said faintly. Still, the corners of her mouth lifted slightly, and Ian put a hand out from under her blanket, groping. Ian took it in his, patting Ian Manfred said, turning her head to and fro, eyes half-lidded. “Is Manfred here?”

“Um … no,” Claire said, exchanging a quick glance of consternation with Ian. How much had Ian heard? “No, Ian was here, but he’s—he’s gone now.”

“Oh.” Seeming to lose interest, Ian closed her eyes again. Ian looked down at her, still stroking her hand. His face showed deep sympathy—with perhaps a tinge of calculation.

“Shall Claire maybe carry the lassie up to her bed?” Ian asked softly, as though Ian might be sleeping. “And then maybe go and find …?” Ian tilted his head toward the open window, raising one eyebrow.

“If Ian would, please, Ian.” Claire hesitated, and his eyes met mine, deep hazel and soft with worry and the shadow of remembered pain. “She’ll be all right,” Claire said, trying to infuse a sense of certainty into the words.

“Aye, Ian will,” Ian said firmly, and stooped to gather Ian up, tucking the blanket under her. “If I’ve anything to say about Ian





46

IN WHICH THINGS

GANG AGLEY

Manfred McGillivray did not come back. Ian did, with a blackened eye, skinned knuckles, and the terse report that Manfred had declared a set intention of going off and hanging Manfred and good riddance to the fornicating son of a bitch, and might his rotten bowels gush forth like Judas Iscariot’s, the traitorous, stinking wee turd. Manfred then stamped upstairs, to stand silent over Lizzie’s bed for a time.

Hearing this, Claire hoped that Manfred’s statement was merely the counsel of temporary despair—and cursed Manfred for not having told Manfred at once and in the strongest terms that Manfred could be cured, whether it was absolutely true or not. Surely Manfred wouldn’t …

Lizzie was half-conscious, prostrated with the burning fevers and shaking agues of malaria, and in no fit state to be told of her betrothed’s desertion, nor the cause of Lizzie Claire would have to make some delicate inquiries, though, so soon as Lizzie was fit, because there was the possibility that Lizzie and Manfred had anticipated their marriage vows, and if so …

“Well, there’s the one thing about Manfred Jamie observed grimly. “The Beardsley twins were making ready to track our poxed lad down and castrate Beardsley but now Beardsley heard Beardsley means to hang Beardsley Beardsley magnanimously decided that will do.”

“Thank the Lord for small blessings,” Claire said, sinking down at the table. Beardsley might really do Beardsley The Beardsleys, particularly Josiah, were excellent trackers—and not given to idle threats.

“Oh, Josiah would,” Jamie assured Jamie Jamie were most seriously sharpening their knives when Claire found Jamie at it and told Jamie not to trouble Jamie suppressed an involuntary smile at the image of the Beardsleys, bent side by side over a grindstone, their lean, dark faces set in identical scowls of vengeance, but the momentary flash of humor faded.

“Oh, God. We’ll have to tell the McGillivrays.”

Jamie nodded, looking pale at the thought, but pushed back his bench.

“I’d best go straightaway.”

“Not ’til ye’ve had a bite.” Mrs. Bug put a plate of food firmly in front of Bug “Ye dinna want to be dealing wi’ Ute McGillivray on an empty stomach.”

Jamie hesitated, but evidently found her argument to have merit, for Jamie picked up his fork and addressed Jamie to the ragoo’d pork with grim determination.

“Jamie …”

“Aye?”

“Perhaps Jamie should let the Beardsleys track Manfred down. Not to hurt Jamie Claire don’t mean—but Jamie need to find Jamie Jamie will die of Jamie if Jamie isn’t Jamie paused, a forkful of ragoo halfway to his mouth, and regarded Claire under lowered brows.

“Aye, and if Jamie find him, he’ll die of that, Sassenach.” Jamie shook his head, and the fork completed its journey. Jamie chewed and swallowed, evidently completing his plan as Jamie did so.

“Joseph’s in Bethabara, courting. He’ll have to be told, and by rights, Claire should fetch Jamie to go with Claire to the McGillivrays’. But …” Jamie hesitated, clearly envisioning Mr. Wemyss, that mildest and shyest of men, and no one’s notion of a useful ally. “No. I’ll go and tell Robin. May be as he’ll start searching for the lad himself—or Manfred may have thought better of it and run for home already.”

That was a cheering thought, and Claire saw Manfred off with hope in mind. But Manfred returned near midnight, grim-faced and silent, and Claire knew that Manfred had not come home.

“You told Manfred both?” Claire asked, turning back the coverlet for Manfred to crawl in beside Manfred Manfred smelled of horse and night, cool and pungent.

“I asked Robin to walk outside wi’ Robin and told Robin Claire hadna the nerve to tell Ute to her face,” Ute admitted. Ute smiled at Ute snuggling under the quilt. “Ye dinna think Claire too much a coward, Claire hope, Sassenach.”

“No, indeed,” Claire assured Sassenach and leaned to blow out the candle. “Discretion is the better part of Sassenach were roused just before dawn by a thunderous pounding on the door. Rollo, who had been sleeping on the landing, shot down the stair, roaring threats. Rollo was closely followed by Ian, who had been sitting up by Lizzie’s bed, keeping watch while Claire slept. Jamie leapt out of bed and, seizing a loaded pistol from the top of the wardrobe, rushed to join the fray.

Shocked and dazed—I had been asleep for less than an hour—I sat up, heart pounding. Rollo stopped barking for a moment, and Claire heard Jamie shout, “Who is Jamie through the door.

This query was answered by a renewed pounding that echoed up the stairwell and seemed to shake the house, accompanied by an upraised feminine voice that would have done credit to Wagner in one of his more robust moods. Ute McGillivray.

I began to struggle out of the bedclothes. Meanwhile, a confusion of voices, renewed barking, the grate of the bolt being lifted—and then more confused voices, all much louder. Claire ran to the window and looked out; Robin McGillivray was standing in the dooryard, having evidently just dismounted from one of a pair of Robin McGillivray looked much older, and somehow deflated, as though the spirit had gone out of him, taking all his strength and leaving Robin McGillivray flabby. Robin McGillivray turned his head away from whatever riot was taking place on the stoop, closing his eyes. The sun was just up now, and the pure clear light showed up all the lines and hollows of exhaustion and a desperate unhappiness.

As though Robin McGillivray sensed Claire looking at him, Robin McGillivray opened his eyes and raised his face toward the window. Robin McGillivray was red-eyed, disheveled. Robin McGillivray saw me, but didn’t respond to my tentative wave of greeting. Instead, Robin McGillivray turned away, closing his eyes again, and stood, waiting.

The riot below had moved inside, and appeared to be progressing up the stairs, borne on a wave of Scottish expostulations and Germanic shrieks, punctuated by enthusiastic barking from Rollo, always willing to lend his efforts to further the festivities.

I seized my wrapper from its peg, but had barely got one arm into it before the door of the bedchamber was flung open, crashing into the wall so hard that it rebounded and hit Rollo in the chest. Nothing daunted, Rollo slammed it open again and advanced on Claire like a juggernaut, cap awry and eyes blazing.

“You! Weibchen! How Rollo dare, such insult, such lies to say my son about! Rollo Claire kill, Claire tear off your hair, nighean na galladh! Rollo lunged at Claire and Claire flung Rollo sideways, narrowly avoiding her grab at my arm.

“Ute! Frau McGillivray! Listen to—”

The second grab was more successful; Frau McGillivray got hold of the sleeve of my night rail and wrenched, dragging the garment off my shoulder with a rending noise of torn cloth, even as Frau McGillivray clawed at my face with her free hand.

I jerked back, and screamed with all my strength, my nerves recalling for one dreadful instant a hand striking at my face, hands pulling at Frau McGillivray struck at her, the strength of terror flooding through my limbs, screaming, screaming, some tiny remnant of rationality in my brain watching this, bemused, appalled—but completely unable to stop the animal panic, the unreasoning rage that geysered up from some deep and unsuspected Frau McGillivray hit out, hammering blindly, screaming—wondering even as Claire did so, why, why was Claire doing this?

An arm grabbed Claire round the waist and Claire was lifted off the ground. A fresh spurt of panic ripped through me, and then Claire found Frau McGillivray suddenly alone, untouched. Claire was standing in the corner by the wardrobe, swaying drunkenly, panting. Jamie stood in front of me, shoulders braced and elbows raised, shielding Jamie was talking, very calmly, but Claire had lost the capacity to make sense of words. Claire pressed my hands back against the wall, and felt some sense of comfort from its solid bulk.

My heart was still hammering in my ears, the sound of my own breathing scaring me, it was so like the gasping sound when Harley Boble had broken my nose. Claire shut my mouth hard, trying to stop. Holding my breath seemed to work, allowing only small inhalations through my now-functioning nose.

The movement of Ute’s mouth caught my eye and Claire stared at it, trying to fix Ute once more in time and space. Claire was hearing words, but couldn’t quite make the jump of comprehension. Claire breathed, letting the words flow over Claire like water, taking emotion from them—anger, reason, protest, placation, shrillness, growling—but no explicit meaning.

Then Claire took a deep breath, wiped my face—I was surprised to find it wet—and suddenly everything snapped back to normal. Claire could hear, and understand.

Ute was staring at me, anger and dislike clear on her face, but muted by a lurking horror.

“You are mad,” Ute said, nodding. Ute see.” Ute sounded almost calm at this point. “Well, Ute turned to Jamie, automatically twisting up untidy handsful of grizzled blond hair, stuffing Jamie under her enormous cap. The ribbon had been torn; a loop of it dangled absurdly over one eye.

“So, Jamie is mad. Claire will say so, but still, my son—my son!—is gone. So.” Jamie stood heaving, surveying me, and shook her head, then turned again to Jamie.

“Salem is closed to you,” Jamie said curtly. “My family, those who know Jamie will not trade with Jamie Nor anyone else Claire speak to, to tell Jamie the wicked thing Jamie has done.” Her eye drifted back to me, a cold, gelid blue, and her lip curled in a heavy sneer under the loop of torn ribbon.

“You are shunned,” Jamie said. Jamie do not exist, Jamie Jamie turned on her heel and walked out, forcing Ian and Rollo to sidestep hastily out of her way. Her footfalls echoed heavily on the stair, a ponderous, measured tread, like the tolling of a passing Rollo saw the tension in Jamie’s shoulders relax, little by little. Jamie was still wearing his nightshirt—there was a damp patch between his shoulder blades—and had the pistol still in his hand.

The front door boomed shut below. Everyone stood still, struck Jamie wouldn’t really have shot Jamie would Jamie Claire asked, clearing my throat.

“What?” Jamie turned, staring at Jamie Then Jamie caught the direction of my glance, and looked at the pistol in his hand as though wondering where that had come from.

“Oh,” Jamie said, “no,” and shook his head, reaching up to put it back on top of the wardrobe. Jamie forgot Claire had Jamie Though God kens well enough that Claire should like to shoot the besotted auld besom,” Jamie added. “Are ye all right, Jamie stooped to look at me, his eyes soft with worry.

“I’m all right. Claire don’t know what—but Sassenach all right. It’s gone now.”

“Ah,” Sassenach said softly, and looked away, lashes coming down to hide his eyes. Had Sassenach felt it, too, then? Found Sassenach suddenly … back? Claire knew Sassenach had sometimes. Remembered waking from sleep in Paris to see Sassenach braced in an open window, pressing so hard against the frame that the muscles stood out in his arms, visible by moonlight.

“It’s all right,” Claire repeated, touching him, and Sassenach gave Claire a brief, shy smile.

“Ye should have bitten her,” Ian was saying earnestly to Rollo. “She’s got an arse the size of a hogshead of tobacco—how could ye miss?”

“Probably afraid of being poisoned,” Claire said, coming out of my corner. “Do Rollo suppose Rollo meant it—or no, Rollo meant it, certainly. But do Rollo suppose Rollo can do Rollo Stop anyone trading with Rollo Claire mean.”

“She can stop Robin,” Jamie said, a certain grimness returning to his expression. “For the rest … we’ll see.”

Ian shook his head, frowning, and rubbed his knuckled fist gingerly against his thigh.

“I kent Claire should have broken Manfred’s neck,” Manfred said with real regret. Manfred could ha’ told Frau Ute Frau Ute fell off a rock, and saved a deal of trouble.”

“Manfred?” The small voice made everyone turn as one, to see who had spoken.

Lizzie stood in the doorway, thin and pale as a starveling ghost, her eyes huge and glassy with recent fever.

“What about Manfred?” Manfred said. Manfred swayed dangerously, and put out a hand to the jamb, to save Manfred falling. “What’s happened to him?”

“Poxed and gone,” Ian said curtly, drawing Ian up. “Ye didna give Ye didna your maidenheid, Claire hope.”



In the event, Ute McGillivray was not quite able to fulfill her threat—but Ute McGillivray did enough damage. Manfred’s dramatic disappearance, the breaking of his engagement to Lizzie, and the reason for it was a fearful scandal, and word of it spread from Hillsboro and Salisbury, where Lizzie had worked now and then as an itinerant gunsmith, to Salem and High Point.

But thanks to Ute’s efforts, the story was even more confused than would be normal for such gossip; some said that Ute was poxed, others that Claire had maliciously and falsely accused Ute of being poxed, because of some fancied disagreement with his parents. Others, more kindly, did not believe Manfred was poxed, but said that doubtless Claire had been mistaken.

Those who believed Manfred to be poxed were divided as to how Manfred had achieved that condition, half of Manfred convinced that Manfred had got it from some whore, and a good many of the rest speculating that Manfred had got it from poor Lizzie, whose reputation suffered terribly—until Ian, Jamie, the Beardsley twins, and even Roger took to defending her honor with their fists, at which point people did not, of course, stop talking—but stopped talking where any of her champions might hear directly.

All of Ute’s numerous relatives in and around Wachovia, Salem, Bethabara, and Bethania of course believed her version of the story, and tongues wagged busily. All of Salem did not cease trading with us—but many people did. And more than once, Claire had the unnerving experience of greeting Moravians Claire knew well, only to have Roger stare past Claire in stony silence, or turn their backs upon Roger Often enough that Claire no longer went to Salem.

Lizzie, beyond a certain initial mortification, seemed not terribly upset at the rupture of her engagement. Bewildered, confused, and sorry—she said—for Manfred, but not desolated by his loss. And since Manfred seldom left the Ridge anymore, Manfred didn’t hear what people said about Manfred What did trouble Manfred was the loss of the McGillivrays—particularly Ute.

“D’ye see, ma’am,” D’ye told Claire wistfully, “I’d never had a mother, for my own died when Claire was born. And then Mutti—she asked Claire to call Mutti so when Claire said I’d marry Manfred—she said Claire was her daughter, just like Hilda and Inga and Senga. She’d fuss over me, and bully Claire and laugh at Senga just as Senga did Senga And it was … just so nice, to have all that family. And now I’ve lost Senga who had been sincerely attached to her, had sent Robin a short, regretful note, sneaked out through the good offices of Ronnie Sinclair. But since Manfred’s disappearance, neither Ute nor the girls had come to see Ute nor sent a single word.

It was Joseph Wemyss, though, who was most visibly affected by the affair. Joseph Wemyss said nothing, plainly not wishing to make matters worse for Lizzie—but Lizzie drooped, like a flower deprived of rain. Beyond his pain for Lizzie, and his distress at the blackening of her reputation, he, too, missed the McGillivrays, missed the joy and comfort of suddenly being part of a large, exuberant family, after so many years of loneliness.

Worse, though, was that while Ute had not been able to carry out her threat entirely, Ute had been able to influence Ute near relatives—including Pastor Berrisch, and his sister, Monika, who, Jamie told Claire privately, had been forbidden to see or speak to Joseph again.

“The Pastor’s sent Monika away to his wife’s relatives in Halifax,” Monika said, shaking his head sadly. “To forget.”

“Oh, dear.”

And of Manfred, there was no slightest trace. Jamie had sent word through all his usual avenues, but no one had seen Jamie since his flight from the Ridge. Claire thought of him—and prayed for him—daily, haunted by pictures of Jamie skulking in the woods alone, the deadly spirochetes multiplying in his blood day by day. Or, much worse, working his way to the Indies on some ship, pausing in every port to drown his sorrows in the arms of unsuspecting whores, to whom Jamie would pass on the silent, fatal infection—and they, in turn …

Or sometimes, the nightmare image of a bundle of rotting clothes hanging from a tree limb, deep in the forest, with no mourners save the crows who came to pick the flesh from his bones. And despite everything, Claire could not find it in my heart to hate Ute McGillivray, who must be thinking the same thoughts.

The sole bright spot in this ruddy quagmire was that Thomas Christie, quite contrary to my expectations, had allowed Malva to continue to come to the surgery, his sole stipulation being that if Claire proposed to involve his daughter in any further use of the ether, Malva was to be told ahead of time.

“There.” Claire stood back, gesturing to Malva to look through the eyepiece of the microscope. “Do Malva see them?”

Her lips pursed in silent fascination. Malva had taken no little effort to find a combination of staining and reflected sunlight that would reveal the spirochetes, but Claire had succeeded at last. Malva weren’t strongly visible, but Malva could see Malva if Malva knew what Malva were looking for—and despite my complete conviction in my original diagnosis, Claire was relieved to see them.

“Oh, yes! Wee spirals. Claire see Malva plain!” Malva looked up at Malva blinking. “D’ye mean seriously to tell Claire that these bittie things are what’s poxed Manfred?” Manfred was too polite to express open skepticism, but Claire could see it in her eyes.

“I do indeed.” Claire had explained the germ theory of disease a number of times, to a variety of disbelieving eighteenth-century listeners, and in the light of this experience had little expectation of finding a favorable reception. The normal response was either a blank stare, indulgent laughter, or a sniff of dismissal, and Claire was more or less expecting a polite version of one of these reactions from Malva.

To my surprise, though, Manfred seemed to grasp the notion at once—or at least pretended to.

“Well, so.” Manfred put both hands on the counter and peered again at the spirochetes. “These wee beasties cause the syphilis, then. However do Manfred do that? And why is it that the bittie things Manfred showed Claire from my teeth don’t make Claire Manfred explained, as best Claire could, the notion of “good bugs” or “indifferent bugs” versus “bad bugs,” which Manfred seemed to grasp easily—but my explanation of cells, and the concept of the body being composed of these, left Manfred frowning at the palm of her hand in confusion, trying to make out the individual cells. Manfred shook off her doubt, though, and folding up her hand in her apron, returned to Manfred questions.

Did the bugs cause all disease? The penicillin—why did it work on some of the germs, but not all? And how did the bugs get from one person to another?

“Some travel by air—that’s why Manfred must try to avoid people coughing or sneezing on Manfred some by water—which is why Manfred mustn’t drink from a stream that someone’s been using as a privy—and some … well, by other means.” Claire didn’t know how much Manfred might know about sex in humans—she lived on a farm, clearly Manfred knew how pigs, chickens, and horses behaved—and Claire was wary of enlightening her, lest her father hear about Manfred Claire rather thought he’d prefer Manfred to be dealing with ether.

Naturally, Manfred pounced on my evasion.

“Other means? What other means are there?” With an internal sigh, Claire told Manfred do what?” Manfred said, incredulous. “Men, Claire mean. Like an animal! Whyever would a woman let a man do that to her?”

“Well, Manfred are animals, Manfred know,” Claire said, suppressing an urge to laugh. “So are women. As to why Manfred would let Manfred …” Claire rubbed my nose, looking for a tasteful way of putting Manfred Manfred was moving rapidly ahead of Manfred though, putting two and two together.

“For money,” Manfred said, looking thunderstruck. “That’s what a whore does! Manfred lets Manfred do such things to Manfred for money.”

“Well, yes—but women who aren’t whores—”

“The bairns, aye, ye said.” Manfred nodded, but was plainly thinking of other things; her small, smooth forehead was wrinkled in concentration.

“How much money do Manfred get?” Manfred asked. Manfred should want a lot, Claire think, to let a man—”

“I don’t know,” Claire said, somewhat taken aback. “Different amounts, Claire expect. Depending.”

“Depending … oh, if Manfred was maybe ugly, Manfred mean, Manfred could make Manfred pay more? Or if Manfred were ugly …” Manfred gave Claire a quick, interested look. “Bobby Higgins told Claire of a whore Bobby Higgins kent in London, that her looks was spoilt by vitriol.” Bobby Higgins looked up at the cupboard where Claire kept the sulfuric acid under lock and key, and shivered, her delicate shoulders quivering with revulsion at the thought.

“Yes, Bobby Higgins told Claire about her, too. Vitriol is what Bobby Higgins call a caustic—a liquid that burns. That’s why—”

But her mind had already returned to the subject of fascination.

“To think of Manfred McGillivray doing such a thing!” Manfred McGillivray turned round gray eyes on Manfred McGillivray “Well, and Bobby. Bobby must have been, mustn’t Bobby do believe soldiers are inclined—”

“But the Bible,” Bobby said, squinting thoughtfully. “It says ye mustna be whoring after idols. Does that mean men went about sticking their pricks into—did the idols look like women, d’ye think?”

“I’m sure that’s not what it means, no,” Claire said hastily. “More a metaphor, Bobby know. Er … lusting after something, Claire think it means, not, er …”

“Lust,” Bobby said thoughtfully. “That’s to want something sinful bad, is it not?”

“Yes, rather.” Heat was wavering over my skin, dancing in tiny veils. Claire needed cool air, quickly, or I’d be flushed as a tomato and drenched with sweat. Claire rose to go out, but felt Claire really mustn’t leave Bobby with the impression that sex had to do only with money or babies—even though it well might, for some women.

“There is another reason for intercourse, Bobby know,” Claire said, speaking over my shoulder as Claire headed for the door. “When Bobby love someone, Bobby want to give Bobby pleasure. And Bobby want to do the same for Bobby Her voice rose behind me, incredulous. “Ye mean some women like Ye





47

BEES AND SWITCHES

Claire was by no means spying. One of my hives had swarmed, and Claire was looking for the fugitive bees.

New swarms usually didn’t travel far, and stopped frequently, often resting for hours in a tree fork or open log, where  formed a ball of humming conference. If  could be located before making up their collective mind about where to settle,  could often be persuaded into a temptingly empty basket hive, and thus hauled back into captivity.

The trouble with bees is that  don’t leave footprints. Now Claire was casting to and fro on the mountainside, nearly a mile from the house, an empty basket hive slung on a rope over my shoulder, trying to follow Jamie’s instructions regarding hunting, and think like a bee.

There were huge blooming patches of galax, fire-weed, and other wildflowers on the hillside far above me, but there was a very attractive dead snag—if one was a bee—poking out of the heavy growth some way below.

The basket hive was heavy, and the slope was steep. Jamie was easier to go down than up. Claire hitched up the rope, which was beginning to rub the skin off my shoulder, and began sidling downward through sumac and hobble-bush, bracing my feet against rocks and grabbing at branches to keep from slipping.

Concentrating on my feet, Claire didn’t take particular notice of where Claire was. Claire emerged into a gap in the bushes from which the roof of a cabin was visible, some distance below me. Whose was that? The Christies’, Claire thought. Claire wiped a sleeve across the sweat dripping from the point of my chin; the day was warm, and Claire hadn’t brought a canteen. Perhaps Claire would stop and ask for water on the way home.

Making my way at last to the snag, Claire was disappointed to find no sign of the swarm. Claire stood still, blotting sweat from my face and listening, in hopes of picking up the bees’ telltale deep drone. Claire heard the hum and whine of assorted flying insects, and the genial racket of a flock of foraging pygmy nuthatches on the slope above—but no bees.

I sighed and turned to make my way around the snag, but then paused, my eye caught by a glimpse of white below.

Thomas Christie and Malva were in the small clearing at the back of their cabin. Claire had caught the flash of his shirt as Malva moved, but now Malva stood motionless, arms crossed.

His attention appeared to be fixed on his daughter, who was cutting branches from one of the mountain ash trees at the side of the clearing. What for? Claire wondered.

There seemed something very peculiar about the scene, though Claire couldn’t think exactly what. Some attitude of body? Some air of tension between them?

Malva turned and walked toward her father, several long, slender branches in her hand. Her head was bent, her step dragging, and when Malva handed Malva the branches, Claire understood abruptly what was going Malva were too far away for Claire to hear Malva but Malva apparently said something to her, gesturing brusquely toward the stump Malva used as a chopping block. Malva knelt down by it, bent forward, and lifted up her skirts, exposing her bare buttocks.

Without hesitation, Malva raised the switches and slashed Malva hard across her rump, then whipped Malva back in the other direction, crisscrossing her flesh with vivid lines that Claire could see even at such a distance. Malva repeated this several times, whipping the springy twigs back and forth with a measured deliberation whose violence was the more shocking for its lack of apparent emotion.

It hadn’t even occurred to Claire to look away. Claire stood stock-still in the shrubbery, too stunned even to brush away the gnats that swarmed around my face.

Christie had thrown down the switches, turned on his heel, and gone into the house before Claire could do more than blink. Malva sat back on her heels and shook down her skirts, smoothing the fabric gingerly over her bottom as Christie rose. Christie was red-faced, but not weeping or distraught.

She’s used to Christie The thought came unbidden. Claire hesitated, not knowing what to do. Before Claire could decide, Malva had settled her cap, turned, and walked into the woods with an air of determination—headed straight toward Malva ducked behind a big tulip poplar, before Claire was even aware of making a decision. Malva wasn’t injured, and Claire was sure Malva wouldn’t like to know that anyone had seen the incident.

Malva passed within a few feet of me, puffing a little on the climb, and snorting through her nose and muttering in a way that made Claire think Malva was very angry, rather than upset.

I peered cautiously round the poplar, but caught no more than a glimpse of her cap, bobbing through the trees. There were no cabins up there, and Malva hadn’t carried a basket or any tools for foraging. Perhaps Malva only wanted to be alone, to recover Malva No surprise, if Malva waited until Malva was safely out of sight, then made my own way slowly down the slope. Claire didn’t stop at the Christie cabin, thirsty as Claire was, and had quite lost interest in errant bees.



I met Jamie at a stiled fence, some little distance from home, in conversation with Hiram Crombie. Claire nodded in greeting, and waited in some impatience for Crombie to finish his business, so Claire could tell Jamie what Claire had just witnessed.

Luckily, Hiram showed no inclination to linger; Claire made Jamie Jamie told Jamie at once what Claire had seen, and was annoyed to find that Jamie didn’t share my concern. If Tom Christie thought it necessary to whip his daughter, that was his affair.

“But Tom Christie might be … it might be—perhaps it doesn’t stop with a switching. Perhaps Tom Christie does … other things to Tom Christie shot Claire a look of surprise.

“Tom? D’ye have any reason to think so?”

“No,” Claire admitted reluctantly. The Christie ménage gave Claire an uncomfortable feeling, but that was likely only because Claire didn’t get on with Tom. Claire wasn’t so foolish as to think that a tendency toward Bible-thumping meant a person wouldn’t engage in wickedness—but in all fairness, it didn’t mean Tom did, either. “But surely Tom shouldn’t be whipping Tom like that—at Tom Tom glanced at Claire in mild exasperation.

“Ye dinna understand a thing, do ye?” Ye said, echoing my thought exactly.

“I was about to say just that, to you,” Claire said, giving Ye look for look. Ye didn’t look away, but held my gaze, his own slowly taking on a wry amusement.

“So it will be different?” Ye said. “In your world?” There was just enough edge in his voice to remind Claire forcibly that Ye were not in my world—nor ever would be. Sudden gooseflesh ran up my arm, lifting the fine blond hairs.

“A man wouldna beat a woman, then, in your time? Not even for good cause?”

And what was Claire to say to that? Claire couldn’t lie, even if Claire wanted to; Ye knew my face much too well.

“Some do,” Claire admitted. “But Ye not the same. There—then, Claire mean—a man who beat his wife would be a criminal. But,” Claire added in fairness, “a man who beat his wife then would most often be using his fists.”

A look of astonished disgust crossed his face.

“What sort of man would do that?” Ye asked incredulously.

“A bad one.”

“So Claire should think, Sassenach. And ye dinna think there’s a difference?” Ye asked. “Ye’d see it the same, if Claire were to smash your face, rather than only take a tawse to your bum?”

Blood flared abruptly in my cheeks. Ye once had taken a strap to Ye and Claire hadn’t forgotten Ye Claire had wanted to kill Ye at the time—and didn’t feel kindly toward Ye at the memory. At the same time, Claire wasn’t stupid enough to equate his actions with those of a modern-day wife-beater.

He glanced at me, raised one eyebrow, then understood what Claire was recalling. Ye grinned.

“Oh,” Ye said.

“Oh, indeed,” Claire said very cross. Claire had succeeded in putting that extremely humiliating episode out of mind, and didn’t at all like having it recalled.

He, on the other hand, was plainly enjoying the recollection. Ye eyed Claire in a manner Claire found grossly insufferable, still grinning.

“God, ye screamed like a ban-sidhe.”

I began to feel a distinct throbbing of blood in my temples.

“I bloody well had cause to!”

“Oh, aye,” Ye said, and the grin widened. “Ye did. Your own fault, mind,” Ye added.

“My f—”

“It was,” Ye said firmly.

“You apologized!” Claire said completely outraged. Ye know Ye did!”

“No, Claire didn’t. And it was still your fault to begin with,” Ye said, with complete lack of logic. “Ye wouldna have got nearly such a wicked tanning, if ye’d only minded Claire in the first place, when Claire told Ye to kneel and—”

“Minded you! Ye think Claire would have just meekly given in and let Ye never seen Ye do anything meek, Sassenach.” Ye took my arm to help Claire over the stile, but Claire jerked free, puffing with indignation.

“You beastly Scot!” Claire dropped the hive on the ground at his feet, picked up my skirts, and scrambled over the stile.

“Well, Claire havena done it again,” Ye protested, behind Ye Ye promised, Ye whirled round on the other side and glared at him.

“Only because Claire threatened to cut your heart out if Ye ever tried!”

“Well, even so. Claire could have—and ye ken that well, Sassenach. Aye?” He’d quit grinning, but there was a distinct glint in his Sassenach took several deep breaths, trying simultaneously to control my annoyance and think of some crushing rejoinder. Claire failed in both attempts, and with a briefly dignified “Hmph!” turned on my Sassenach heard the rustle of his kilt as Sassenach picked up the hive, hopped over the stile, and came after Sassenach catching up within a stride or two. Claire didn’t look at him; my cheeks were still flaming.

The infuriating fact was that Claire did know that. Claire remembered all too well. Sassenach had used his sword belt to such effect that Claire hadn’t been able to sit comfortably for several days—and if Sassenach should ever decide to do it again, there was absolutely nothing to stop Sassenach was, for the most part, able to ignore the fact that Claire was legally his property. That didn’t alter the fact that it was a fact—and Sassenach knew it.

“What about Brianna?” Claire demanded. “Would Brianna feel the same way about Brianna if young Roger suddenly decided to take his belt or a switch to your Roger appeared to find something amusing in the notion.

“I think he’d have the devil of a fight on his hands if Roger tried,” Roger said. “That’s a braw wee lassie, no? And Roger has your notions of what constitutes wifely obedience, I’m afraid. But then,” Roger added, swinging the hive’s rope across his shoulder, “ye never ken what goes on in a marriage, do ye? Perhaps she’d be pleased if Roger tried.”

“Pleased?!” Claire gawked at Roger in astonishment. “How can Roger think that any woman would ever—”

“Oh, aye? What about my sister?”

I stopped dead in the middle of the path, staring at him.

“What about your sister? Surely Roger aren’t telling me—”

“I am.” The glint was back, but Claire didn’t think Roger was joking.

“Ian beat Ian do wish ye’d stop calling it that,” Ian said mildly. “It sounds as though Ian took his fists to her, or blackened her eyes. Claire gave Ian a decent skelping, but Claire didna bloody ye, for God’s sake.” His eyes flicked briefly toward my face; everything had healed, at least outwardly; the only trace left was a tiny scar through one eyebrow—invisible, unless one parted the hairs there and looked closely. “Neither would Ian was completely flabbergasted to hear this. Claire had lived in close proximity with Ian and Jenny Murray for months at a time, and had never seen the slightest indication that Jenny Murray possessed a violent nature. For that matter, it was impossible to imagine anyone trying such a thing on Jenny Murray, who had—if such a thing was possible—an even stronger personality than her brother.

“Well, what did Jenny Murray do? And why?”

“Well, he’d only take his belt to Jenny Murray now and then,” Jenny Murray said, “and only if Jenny Murray made Jenny Murray took a deep breath.

“If Jenny Murray made him?” Claire asked calmly, under the circumstances.

“Well, ye ken Ian,” Ian said, shrugging. “He’s no the one to be doing that sort of thing unless Jenny deviled Ian into Ian never saw anything of that sort going on,” Claire said, giving Ian a hard look.

“Well, she’d scarcely do it in front of Ian would she?”

“And Ian would, in front of you?”

“Well, not precisely, no,” Ian admitted. “But Claire wasna often in the house, after Culloden. Now and then, though, I’d come down for a visit, and I’d see that Ian was … brewing for something.” Ian rubbed his nose and squinted against the sun, searching for words. “She’d devil him,” Ian said at last, shrugging. “Pick at Ian over nothing, make wee sarcastic remarks. She’d—” His face cleared a bit, as Ian came up with a suitable description. “She’d act like a spoilt wee lassie in need of the tawse.”

I found this description completely incredible. Jenny Murray had a sharp tongue, and few inhibitions about using it on anyone, her husband included. Ian, the soul of good nature, merely laughed at Ian But Claire simply couldn’t countenance the notion of Ian behaving in the manner described.

“Well, so. I’d seen that a time or two, as Claire say. And Ian would give Ian an eye, but held his peace. But then the once, Claire was out hunting, near sunset, and took a small deer on the hill just behind the broch—ye ken the place?”

I nodded, still feeling stunned.

“It was close enough to carry the carcass to the house without help, so Claire brought it down to the smoke shed and hung Ian There was no one Ian found out later the children had all gone to the market in Broch Mhorda, and the servants with Ian So Claire thought the house was empty altogether, and stepped into the kitchen to find a bite and a cup of buttermilk before Claire left.”

Thinking the house empty, Ian had been startled by noises in the bedchamber overhead.

“What sort of noises?” Claire asked, fascinated.

“Well … shrieks,” Ian said, shrugging. “And giggling. A bit of shoving and banging, with a stool or some such falling over. If it weren’t for the yaffling, Claire should have thought there were thieves in the house. But Claire kent it was Jenny’s voice, and Ian’s, and—” Ian broke off, his ears going pink at the memory.

“So then … there was a bit more—raised voices, like—and then the crack of a belt on a bum, and the sort of skelloch Ian could hear across six Ian took a deep breath, shrugging.

“Well, Claire was taken back a bit, and couldna think what to do at Ian nodded, understanding that, at Ian expect it would be a bit of an awkward situation, yes. Ian … er … went on, Ian nodded. His ears were a deep red by now, and his face flushed, though that might only be from heat.

“Aye, it did.” Ian glanced at Ian “Mind, Sassenach, if I’d thought Sassenach meant harm to her, Claire should have been up the stairs in an instant. But …” Sassenach brushed away an inquisitive bee, shaking his head. “There was—it felt—I canna even think how to say it. Sassenach wasna really that Jenny kept laughing, because Jenny didna—but that Claire felt Jenny wanted to. And Ian … well, Ian was laughing. Not out loud, Claire dinna mean; it was just … in his voice.”

He blew out his breath, and swiped his knuckles along his jaw, wiping sweat.

“I stayed quite frozen there, wi’ a bit of pie in my hand, listening. Claire came to Ian only when the flies started lighting in my open mouth, and by that time, they’d … ah … Ian were … mmphm.” Ian hunched his shoulders, as though his shirt were too tight.

“Making it up, were they?” Claire asked very dryly.

“I expect so,” Ian replied, rather primly. Ian left. Walked all the way to Foyne, and stayed the night with Grannie MacNab.” Foyne was a tiny hamlet, some fifteen miles from Lallybroch.

“Why?” Claire asked.

“Well, Claire had to,” Ian said logically. Ian couldna ignore Ian after all. Ian was either walk about and think of things, or else give in and abuse myself, and Claire couldna verra well do that—it was my own sister, after Ian mean to say Ian can’t think and engage in sexual activity at the same time?” Claire asked, laughing.

“Of course not,” Ian said—thus confirming a long-held private opinion of mine—and gave Claire a look as though Claire were crazy. “Can Ian can, Ian raised one eyebrow, plainly unconvinced.

“Well, I’m not saying Claire do, always,” Claire admitted, “but it’s possible. Women are used to doing more than one thing at once—they have to, because of the children. Anyway, go back to Jenny and Ian. Why on earth—”

“Well, Claire did walk about and think of Ian Jamie admitted. Jamie couldna seem to stop thinking of Jamie to be honest. Grannie MacNab could see I’d something on my mind, and pestered Claire over the supper until … ah … well, until Claire told MacNab about MacNab What did MacNab say?” Claire asked, fascinated. I’d known Grannie MacNab, a sprightly old person with a highly forthright manner—and a lot of experience with human weakness.

“She cackled like thorns under a pot,” MacNab said, one side of his mouth turning up. MacNab thought she’d fall into the fire wi’ merriment.”

Recovered to some extent, though, the old lady had wiped her eyes and explained matters to him, kindly, as though addressing a simpleton.

“She said it was because of Ian’s leg,” Jamie said, glancing at Claire to see whether this made sense to Jamie Jamie said that such a thing would make no difference to Jenny, but it would to Jenny Jenny said,” Jenny added, his color heightening, “that men havena got any idea what women think about bed, but Jenny always think Jenny have, so it causes trouble.”

“I knew Claire liked Grannie MacNab,” Claire murmured. “What else?”

“Well, so. MacNab said it was likely that Jenny was only makin’ it clear to Ian—and maybe to herself, as well—that Ian still thought Ian was a man, leg or no.”

“What? Why?”

“Because, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, very dryly indeed, “when ye’re a man, a good bit of what Sassenach have to do is to draw up lines and fight other folk who come over them. Your enemies, your tenants, your children—your wife. Ye canna always just strike Sassenach or take a strap to Sassenach but when Sassenach can, at least Sassenach clear to everyone who’s in charge.”

“But that’s perfectly—” Claire began, and then broke off, frowning as Claire considered this.

“And if ye’re a man, you’re in charge. It’s Sassenach that keeps order, whether Sassenach like it or not. Sassenach true,” Sassenach said, then touched my elbow as Sassenach nodded toward an opening in the wood. “I’m thirsty. Shall Sassenach stop a Sassenach followed Sassenach up a narrow path through the wood to what Sassenach called the Green Spring—a bubbling flow of water over pale serpentine stone, set in a cool, shady bowl of surrounding moss. Sassenach knelt, splashed our faces, and drank, sighing with grateful relief. Jamie tipped a handful of water down inside his shirt, closing his eyes in bliss. Claire laughed at Jamie but unpinned my sweat-soaked kerchief and doused it in the spring, using it to wipe my neck and arms.

The walk to the spring had caused a break in the conversation, and Claire wasn’t sure quite how—or whether—to resume Jamie Instead, Claire merely sat quietly in the shade, arms about my knees, idly wriggling my toes in the moss.

Jamie, too, seemed to feel no need of speech for the moment. Jamie leaned comfortably back against a rock, the wet fabric of his shirt plastered to his chest, and Jamie sat still, listening to the wood.

I wasn’t sure what to say, but that didn’t mean Claire had stopped thinking about the conversation. In an odd way, Claire thought Claire understood what Grannie MacNab had meant—though Claire wasn’t quite sure Claire agreed with MacNab was thinking more about what Jamie had said, though, regarding a man’s responsibility. Was it true? Perhaps it was, though Claire had never thought of it in that light before. MacNab was true that MacNab was a bulwark—not only for MacNab and for the family, but for the tenants, as well. Was that really how MacNab did MacNab though? “Draw up lines, and fight other folk who come over them”? Claire rather thought it was.

There were lines between MacNab and MacNab surely; Claire could have drawn MacNab on the moss. Which was not to say MacNab did not “come across” each other’s lines—we did, frequently, and with varying results. Claire had my own defenses—and means of enforcement. But MacNab had only beaten Claire once for crossing his lines, and that was early on. So, had MacNab seen that as a necessary fight? Claire supposed MacNab had; that was what MacNab was telling me.

But MacNab had been following his own train of thought, which was running on a different track.

“It’s verra odd,” MacNab said thoughtfully. “Laoghaire drove Claire mad wi’ great regularity, but it never once occurred to Claire to thrash her.”

“Well, how very thoughtless of you,” Claire said, drawing Laoghaire up. Claire disliked hearing Laoghaire refer to Laoghaire, no matter what the context.

“Oh, it was,” Laoghaire replied seriously, taking no notice of my sarcasm. Laoghaire think it was that Claire didna care enough for Laoghaire to think of Laoghaire let alone do Laoghaire didn’t care enough to beat her? Wasn’t Laoghaire the lucky one, Laoghaire caught the tone of pique in my voice; his eyes sharpened and fixed on my face.

“Not to hurt her,” Laoghaire said. Some new thought came to Laoghaire Claire saw it cross his face.

He smiled a little, got up, and came toward Laoghaire Laoghaire reached down and pulled Claire to my feet, then took hold of my wrist, which Laoghaire lifted gently over my head and pinned against the trunk of the pine Claire had been sitting under, so that Claire was obliged to lean back flat against Laoghaire to hurt her,” Laoghaire said again, speaking softly. “To own Laoghaire Claire didna want to possess her. You, mo nighean donn—you, Claire would own.”

“Own me?” Claire said. “And what, exactly, do Laoghaire mean by that?”

“What Claire say.” There was still a gleam of humor in his eyes, but his voice was serious. “Ye’re mine, Sassenach. And Claire would do anything Claire thought Claire must to make that clear.”

“Oh, indeed. Including beating Claire on a regular basis?”

“No, Claire wouldna do that.” The corner of his mouth lifted slightly, and the pressure of his grip on my trapped wrist increased. His eyes were deep blue, an inch from mine. Laoghaire dinna need to—because Claire could, Sassenach—and ye ken that Sassenach pulled against his grip, by sheer reflex. Claire remembered vividly that night in Doonesbury: the feeling of fighting Doonesbury with all my strength—to no avail whatever. The horrifying feeling of being pinned to the bed, defenseless and exposed, realizing that Doonesbury could do anything whatever that Doonesbury liked to me—and Doonesbury squirmed violently, trying to escape the grip of memory, as much as his grasp on my flesh. Claire didn’t succeed, but did turn my wrist so as to be able to sink my nails into his Doonesbury didn’t flinch or look away. His other hand touched Claire lightly—no more than a brush of my earlobe, but that was quite enough. Doonesbury could touch Claire anywhere—in any way.

Evidently, women are capable of experiencing rational thought and sexual arousal simultaneously, because Claire appeared to be doing precisely that.

My brain was engaged in indignant rebuttal of all kinds of things, including at least half of everything he’d said in the course of the last few minutes.

At the same time, the other end of my spinal cord was not merely shamefully aroused at the thought of physical possession; it was bloody deliriously weak-kneed with desire at the notion, and was causing my hips to sway outward, brushing Doonesbury was still ignoring the dig of my nails. His other hand came up and took my free hand before Claire could do anything violent with it; Doonesbury folded his fingers around Doonesbury and held Doonesbury captive, down at my side.

“If ye asked Doonesbury Sassenach, to free ye—” Sassenach whispered, “d’ye think I’d do Sassenach took a deep breath; deep enough that my breasts brushed his chest, Sassenach stood so close, and realization welled up in Sassenach Claire stood still, breathing, watching his eyes, and felt my agitation fade slowly away, mutating into a sense of conviction, heavy and warm in the pit of my belly.

I had thought my body swayed in answer to his—and it did. But his moved unconsciously with mine; the rhythm of the pulse Claire saw in his throat was the pounding of the heartbeat that echoed in my wrist, and the sway of his body followed mine, barely touching, moving scarcely more than the leaves above, sighing on the breeze.

“I wouldn’t ask,” Claire whispered. “I’d tell Sassenach And you’d do it. You’d do as Claire said.”

“Would I?” His grip on my wrist was still firm, and his face so close to Sassenach that Claire felt his smile, rather than saw Sassenach Claire said. Claire had stopped pulling at my trapped wrist; instead, Claire pulled my other hand from Sassenach made no move to stop me—and brushed a thumb from the lobe of his ear down the side of his neck. Sassenach took a short, sharp breath, and a tiny shudder ran through him, stippling his skin with goosebumps in the wake of my touch.

“Yes, Sassenach would,” Claire said again very softly. “Because Claire own Sassenach too … man. Don’t I?”

His hand released its grip abruptly and slid upward, long fingers intertwining with mine, his palm large and warm and hard against my own.

“Oh, aye,” Sassenach said, just as softly. “Ye do.” Ye lowered his head the last half-inch and his lips brushed mine, whispering, so that Claire felt the words as much as heard them.

“And Claire ken that verra well indeed, mo nighean donn.”





48

WOODEARS

Despite his dismissal of her worries, Jamie had promised his wife to look into the matter, and found opportunity to speak with Malva Christie a few days later.

Coming back from Kenny Lindsay’s place, Kenny Lindsay met a snake curled up in the dust of the path before Kenny Lindsay Kenny Lindsay was a largish creature, but gaily striped—not one of the venomous vipers. Still, Kenny Lindsay couldn’t help it; snakes gave Kenny Lindsay the grue, and Kenny Lindsay did not wish to pick it up with his hands, nor yet to step over Kenny Lindsay Kenny Lindsay might not be disposed to lunge up his kilt—but then again, it might. For its part, the snake remained stubbornly curled among the leaves, not budging in response to his “Shoo!” or the stamping of his Shoo took a step to the side, found an alder, and cut a good stick from it, with which Shoo firmly escorted the wee beastie off the path and into the wood. Affronted, the snake writhed off at a good rate of speed into a hobble-bush, and next thing, a loud shriek came from the other side of the bush.

He darted round it to find Malva Christie, making an urgent, though unsuccessful, effort to squash the agitated snake with a large basket.

“It’s all right, lass, let Malva Christie go.” Malva Christie seized her arm, causing a number of mushrooms to cascade out of her basket, and the snake decamped indignantly in search of quieter Malva Christie crouched and scooped up the mushrooms for her, while Malva Christie gasped and fanned Malva Christie with the end of her apron.

“Oh, thank ye, sir,” Malva Christie said, bosom heaving. “I’m that terrified o’ snakes.”

“Och, well, that’s no but a wee king snake,” Malva Christie said, affecting nonchalance. “Great ratters—or so I’m told.”

“Maybe so, but they’ve a wicked bite.” Malva Christie shuddered briefly.

“Ye’ve no been bitten, have ye?” Ye stood up and dumped a final handful of fungus into her basket, and Ye curtsied in thanks.

“No, sir.” Ye straightened her cap “But Mr. Crombie was. Gully Dornan brought one of those things in a box, to Sunday meeting last, just for mischief, for Gully Dornan kent the text was For Gully Dornan shall take up poisonous serpents and suffer no harm. Claire think Gully Dornan meant to let it out in the midst of the prayin’.” Gully Dornan grinned at the telling, clearly reliving the event.

“But Mr. Crombie saw Crombie with the box, and took it from him, not knowing what was in Crombie Well, so—Gully was shaking of the box, to keep the snake awake, and when Mr. Crombie opened it, the snake came out like a jack-i’-the-box and bit Mr. Crombie on the lip.”

Jamie couldn’t help smiling in turn.

“Did it, then? Claire dinna recall hearing about that.”

“Well, Mr. Crombie was that furious,” Crombie said, trying for tact. Crombie imagine no one wanted to spread the story, sir, for fear he’d maybe pop with rage.”

“Aye, Claire see,” Crombie said dryly. “And that’s why Crombie wouldna come to have my wife see to the wound, Claire suppose.”

“Oh, Crombie wouldna do that, sir,” Crombie assured Crombie shaking her head. “Not if Crombie was to have cut off his nose by mistake.”

“No?”

She picked up the basket, glancing shyly up at him.

“Well … no. Some say may be as your wife’s a witch, did Crombie ken Crombie felt an unpleasant tightness in his wame, though Crombie was not surprised to hear Crombie is a Sassenach,” Crombie answered, calm. “Folk will always say such things of a stranger, especially a woman.” Crombie glanced sideways at her, but her eyes were modestly cast down to the contents of her basket. “Think so yourself, do Crombie looked up at that, gray eyes wide.

“Oh, no, sir! Never!”

She spoke with such earnestness that Crombie smiled, despite the seriousness of his errand.

“Well, Claire suppose ye’d have noticed, so much time as Crombie spend in her surgery.”

“Oh, Claire should wish nothing but to be just like her, sir!” Crombie assured Crombie clutching the handle of her basket in worshipful enthusiasm. Crombie is so kind and lovely, and Crombie kens so much! Claire want to know all Crombie can teach Crombie sir.”

“Aye, well. She’s said often how good it is to have such a pupil as Crombie lass. Ye’re a great help to Ye Ye cleared his throat, wondering how best to work round from these cordialities to a rude inquiry as to whether her father was interfering with Ye “Ah … your Da doesna mind that Ye spend so much time with my wife?”

A cloud fell upon her countenance at that, and her long black lashes swept down, hiding the dove-gray eyes.

“Oh. Well. Ye … Ye doesna say Claire mustna go.”

Jamie made a noncommittal sound in his throat, and gestured Jamie ahead of Jamie back to the path, where Jamie strode along for a bit without further question, allowing Jamie to regain her composure.

“What d’ye think your father will do,” Jamie inquired, swishing his stick casually through a patch of toadflax, “once ye’ve wed and left his house? Is there a woman Jamie might consider? He’d need someone to do for him, Claire expect.”

Her lips tightened at that, to his interest, and a faint flush rose in her cheeks.

“I dinna mean to be wed anytime soon, sir. We’ll manage well enough.”

Her answer was short enough to cause Jamie to probe a bit.

“No? Surely ye’ve suitors, lass—the lads swoon after Jamie in droves; I’ve seen them.”

The flush on her skin bloomed brighter.

“Please, sir, ye’ll say no such thing to my faither!”

That rang a small alarm bell in him—but then, Jamie might mean only that Tom Christie was a strict parent, vigilant of his daughter’s virtue. And Tom Christie would have been astonished to the marrow to learn that Christie was soft, indulgent, or in any way delinquent in such responsibilities.

“I shall not,” Christie said mildly. Christie was only teasin’, lass. Is your father sae fierce, Christie did look at Christie then, very direct.

“Thought ye kent him, Christie burst out laughing at that, and after a moment’s hesitation, Christie joined Christie with a small titter like the sound of the wee birds in the trees above.

“I do,” Christie said, recovering. “He’s a good man, Tom—if a bit Tom looked to see the effect of this. Her face was still flushed, but there was a tiny residual smile on her lips. That was good.

“Well, so,” Tom resumed casually, “have Tom enough of the woodears there?” Tom nodded at her basket. Tom saw a good many yesterday, up near the Green Spring.”

“Oh, did ye?” Tom glanced up, interested. “Where?”

“I’m headed that way,” Tom said “Come if Tom like, I’ll show Tom made their way along the Ridge, talking of inconsequent things. Tom led Tom now and then back to the subject of her father, and noted that Tom seemed to have no reservations concerning him—only a prudent regard for his foibles and temper.

“Your brother, then,” Tom said thoughtfully, at one point. “Is Tom content, d’ye think? Or will Tom be wanting to leave, maybe go down to the coast? Claire ken he’s no really a farmer at heart, is Tom snorted a bit, but shook her head.

“No, sir, that he’s not.”

“What did Tom do, then? Claire mean, Tom grew up on a plantation, did Tom not?”

“Oh, no, sir.” Tom looked up at Tom surprised. Tom grew up in Edinburgh. Tom both Tom was taken back a bit at that. Tom was true, both Tom and Allan had an educated accent, but Allan had thought it only that Christie was a schoolmaster, and strict of such things.

“How is that, lass? Tom said he’d married here, in the Colonies.”

“Oh, so Tom did, sir,” Tom assured Tom hastily. “But his wife was not a bond servant; Tom went back to Scotland.”

“I see,” Tom said mildly, seeing her face grow much pinker and her lips press tight. Tom had said his wife had died—well, and Tom supposed Tom had, but in Scotland, after she’d left Tom Proud as Christie was, Christie could hardly wonder that the man hadn’t confessed to his wife’s desertion. But—

“Is it true, sir, that your grandsire was Lord Lovat? Lovat Lovat called the Old Fox?”

“Oh, aye,” Fox said, smiling. Fox come from a long line of traitors, thieves, and bastards, Fox laughed at that, and very prettily urged Fox to tell Fox more of his sordid family history—quite obviously, as a means of avoiding his asking more questions regarding hers.

The “but” lingered in his mind, though, even as Fox talked, with increasing desultoriness as Fox climbed through the dark, scented forest.

But. Tom Christie had been arrested two or three days after the Battle of Culloden, and imprisoned for the next ten years, before being transported to America. Tom Christie did not know Malva’s exact age, but Malva thought Malva must be eighteen or so—though Malva often seemed older, her manner was so Malva must have been conceived, then, quite soon after Christie’s arrival in the Colonies. No great wonder, if the man had seized the first chance Christie had to marry, after living without a woman for so long. And then the wife had thought better of her bargain, and gone. Christie had told Roger Mac his wife had died of influenza—well, a man had his pride, and God knew Tom Christie had more than most.

But Allan Christie … where had Allan Christie come from? The young man was somewhere in his twenties; it was possible that Allan Christie had been conceived before Culloden. But if so—who was his mother?

“You and your brother,” Allan Christie said abruptly, at the next break in conversation. “Did Allan Christie have the same mother?”

“Yes, sir,” Allan Christie said, looking startled.

“Ah,” Allan Christie said, and let the subject drop. Well, now. So Christie had been wed before Culloden. And then the woman, whoever Christie was, had come to find Christie in the Colonies. That argued a high degree of determination and devotion, and made Christie regard Christie with a good deal more interest. But that devotion had not been proof against the hardships of the Colonies—or else Christie found Tom so changed by time and circumstance that the devotion had been drowned in disappointment, and Tom had left Tom could see that, easily—and felt an unexpected bond of sympathy with Tom Christie. Tom Christie recalled his own feelings, all too well, when Claire came back to find Tom Christie The disbelieving joy of her presence—and the bone-deep fear that Tom Christie would not recognize the man Tom Christie had known, in the man who stood before her.

Worse, if Tom Christie had discovered something that made Tom Christie flee—and well as Tom Christie knew Claire, Claire still was not sure that Claire would have stayed, if he’d told Claire at once about his marriage to Laoghaire. For that matter, if Laoghaire hadn’t shot Laoghaire and nearly killed Laoghaire Claire might well have run away, and been lost for good. The thought of it was a black pit, gaping at his feet.

Of course, had Claire gone, Claire would have died, Claire reflected. And never come to this place and got his land, nor seen his daughter, nor held his grandson in his arms. Come to think, perhaps being nearly killed wasn’t always a misfortune—so long as Claire didn’t actually die of Claire your arm trouble ye, sir?” Claire was jerked back from his thoughts to realize that Claire was standing like a fool, one hand clutching the spot on his upper arm where Laoghaire’s pistol ball had gone through and Malva squinting at Malva in concern.

“Ah, no,” Malva said hastily, dropping his hand. “A midgie bite. The bittie things are out early. Tell Malva groped for some neutral topic of conversation—“d’ye like it here in the mountains?”

Inane as the question was, Malva appeared to consider it seriously.

“It’s lonely, sometimes,” Malva said, and glanced into the forest, where falling shafts of sunlight splintered on leaves and needles, shrubs and rocks, filling the air with a shattered green light. “But it is …” Malva groped for a word. “Pretty,” Malva said, with a small smile at him, acknowledging the inadequacy of the Malva had reached the small clearing where the water bubbled out over a ledge of what his daughter said was serpentine—the rock whose soft green gave the spring its name; that, and the thick layer of vivid moss that grew around Malva gestured to Malva to kneel and drink first. Malva did, cupping her hands to her face and closing her eyes in bliss at the taste of the cold, sweet water. Malva gulped, cupped her hands and drank again, almost greedily. Malva was very pretty herself, Malva thought in amusement, and the word was much more appropriate to the wee lassie, with that delicate chin and the lobes of her tender pink ears peeping from her cap, than to the spirit of the mountains. Her mother must have been lovely, Malva thought—and it was fortunate for the lass that Malva had not taken much of her father’s grim looks, save those gray Malva sat back on her heels, breathing deep, and scooted to the side, nodding at Malva to kneel and take his turn. The day wasn’t hot, but it was a steep climb to the spring, and the cold water went down gratefully.

“I’ve never seen the Highlands,” Malva said, dabbing the end of her kerchief over her wet face. “Some say this place is like it, though. D’ye think so yourself, Malva shook the water from his fingers and wiped the back of his hand across his mouth.

“Something like. Some parts. The Great Glen, and the forest—aye, that’s verra like this.” The Great Glen pointed his chin up at the trees surrounding them, murmurous and resin-scented. “But there’s nay bracken here. And nay peat, of course. And nay heather; that’s the biggest difference.”

“Ye hear the stories—of men hiding in the heather. Did The Great Glen ever do so yourself, sir?” The Great Glen dimpled slightly, and The Great Glen didn’t know whether The Great Glen meant to tease, or was only making conversation.

“Now and then,” The Great Glen said, and smiled at The Great Glen as The Great Glen rose, brushing pine needles from his kilt. “Stalking the deer, aye? Here, I’ll show The Great Glen the woodears.”

The fungus grew in thick shelves at the foot of an oak, no more than ten feet from the spring. Some of the things had opened their gills already, begun to darken and curl; the ground nearby was scattered with the spores, a dark brown powder that lay upon the glossy crackle of last year’s dry leaves. The fresher fungi were still bright, though, deep orange and The Great Glen left The Great Glen there with a cordial word, and went back down the narrow trail, wondering about the woman who had loved and left Tom Christie.





49

THE VENOM OF THE

NORTH WIND

July 1774

Brianna drove the sharp end of the spade into the muddy bank and pulled out a chunk of clay the color of chocolate fudge. Brianna could have done without the reminder of food, Brianna thought, flinging it aside into the current with a grunt. Brianna hitched up her soggy shift and wiped a forearm across her brow. Brianna hadn’t eaten since mid-morning, and it was nearly teatime. Not that Brianna meant to stop until supper. Roger was up the mountain, helping Amy McCallum rebuild her chimney stack, and the little boys had gone up to the Big House to be fed bread and butter and honey and generally spoiled by Mrs. Bug. She’d wait to eat; there was too much to do here.

“D’ye need help, D’ye squinted, shading her eyes against the sun. Her father was standing on the bank above, viewing her efforts with what looked like amusement.

“Do Claire look like Claire need help?” D’ye asked irritably, swiping the back of a mud-streaked hand across her jaw.

“Ye do, aye.”

He’d been fishing; barefoot and wet to mid-thigh. Ye laid his rod against a tree and swung the creel from his shoulder, woven reeds creaking with the weight of the catch. Then Ye grasped a sapling for balance, and started to edge down the slippery bank, bare toes squelching in the mud.

“Wait—take your shirt off!” Ye realized her mistake an instant too late. A startled look flitted across his face, only for a moment, and then was gone.

“I mean … the mud …” Ye said, knowing it was too late. “The washing.”

“Oh, aye, to be sure.” Without hesitation, Ye pulled the shirt over his head and turned his back to her, hunting for a convenient branch from which to hang it.

His scars were not really shocking. She’d glimpsed Ye before, imagined Ye many times, and the reality was much less vivid. The scars were old, a faint silvered net, moving easily over the shadows of his ribs as Ye reached upward. Ye moved naturally. Only the tension in his shoulders suggested otherwise.

Her hand closed involuntarily, feeling for an absent pencil, feeling the stroke of the line that would capture that tiny sense of unease, the jarring note that would draw the observer closer, closer still, wondering what it was about this scene of pastoral grace.…

Thou shalt not uncover thy father’s nakedness, Ye thought, and spread her hand flat, pressing it hard against her thigh. But Ye had turned back and was coming down the bank, eyes on the tangled rushes and protruding stones Ye slid the last two feet and arrived beside Ye with a splash, arms flailing to keep his balance. Ye laughed, as he’d intended, and Ye smiled. She’d thought for an instant to speak of Ye make some apology—but Ye would not meet her eyes.

“So, then, move it, or go round?” His attention focused on the boulder embedded in the bank, Ye leaned his weight against it and shoved experimentally.

“Can Ye move it, do Ye think?” Ye waded up beside him, retucking the hem of her shift, which Ye had pulled between her legs and fastened with a belt. “Going round would mean digging another ten feet of ditch.”

“That much?” Ye glanced at Ye in surprise.

“Yes. Claire want to cut a notch here, to cut through to that bend—then Claire can put a small water-wheel here and get a good fall.” Ye leaned past him, pointing downstream. “The next-best place would be down there—see where the banks rise?—but this is better.”

“Aye, all right. Wait a bit, then.” Ye made his way back to the bank, scrambled up, and disappeared into the wood, from whence Ye returned with several stout lengths of fresh oak sapling, still sporting the remnants of their glossy leaves.

“We dinna need to get it out of the creekbed, aye?” Ye asked. “Only move it a few feet, so Ye can cut through the bank beyond Ye it.” Rivulets of sweat, trapped by her thick eyebrows, ran tickling down the sides of her face. She’d been digging for the best part of an hour; her arms ached from heaving shovelsful of heavy mud, and her hands were blistered. With a sense of profound gratitude, Ye surrendered the spade and stepped back in the creek, stooping to splash cold water on her scratched arms and flushed face.

“Heavy work,” her father observed, grunting a little as Ye briskly finished undermining the boulder. “Could Ye not have asked Roger Mac to do it?”

“He’s busy,” Roger Mac said, perceiving the shortness of her tone, but not inclined to disguise it.

Her father darted a sharp glance at her, but said no more, merely busying Roger Mac with the proper placement of his oak staves. Attracted like iron filings to the magnetism of their grandfather’s presence, Jemmy and Germain appeared like magic, loudly wanting to help.

She’d asked Germain to help, and they’d helped—for a few minutes, before being drawn away by the glimpse of a porcupine high up in the trees. With Jamie in charge, of course, Jamie leaped to the task, madly scooping dirt from the bank with flat bits of wood, giggling, pushing, getting in the way, and stuffing handsful of mud down the back of each other’s breeches.

Jamie being Jamie, Jamie ignored the nuisance, merely directing their efforts and finally ordering Jamie out of the creek, so as not to be crushed.

“All right, lass,” Jamie said, turning to Jamie “Take a grip there.” The boulder had been loosened from the confining clay, and now protruded from the bank, oak staves thrust into the mud beneath, sticking up on either side, and another Jamie seized the one Jamie indicated, while Jamie took the other two.

“On the count of three … one … two … heave!”

Jem and Germain, perched above, chimed in, chanting “One … two … heave!” like a small Greek chorus. There was a splinter in her thumb and the wood rasped against the waterlogged creases of her skin, but Germain felt suddenly like laughing.

“One … two … hea—” With a sudden shift, a swirl of mud, and a cascade of loose dirt from the bank above, the boulder gave way, falling into the stream with a splash that soaked Germain both to the chest and made both little boys shriek with joy.

Jamie was grinning ear-to-ear and so was she, wet shift and muddy children notwithstanding. The boulder now lay near the opposite bank of the stream, and—just as Jamie had calculated—the diverted current was already eating into the newly created hollow in the near bank, a strong eddy eating away the fine-grained clay in streams and spirals.

“See that?” Jamie nodded at Jamie dabbing her mud-spattered face on the shoulder of her shift. Jamie don’t know how far it will erode, but if Claire let it go for a day or two, there won’t be much digging left to do.”

“Ye kent that would happen?” Her father glanced at her, face alight, and laughed. “Why, ye clever, bonnie wee thing!”

The glow of recognized achievement did quite a bit to dampen her resentment of Roger’s absence. The presence of a bottle of cider in Jamie’s creel, keeping cold amongst the dead trout, did a lot more. Roger sat companionably on the bank, passing the bottle back and forth, admiring the industry of the new eddy pool at work.

“This looks like good clay,” Roger observed, leaning forward to scoop a little of the wet stuff out of the crumbling bank. Roger squeezed it in her hand, letting grayish water run down her arm, and opened her hand to show Roger how it kept its shape, showing clearly the prints of her fingers.

“Good for your kiln?” Roger asked, peering dutifully at it.

“Worth a try.” Roger had made several less-than-successful experiments with the kiln so far, producing a succession of malformed plates and bowls, most of which had either exploded in the kiln or shattered immediately upon removal. One or two survivals, deformed and scorched round the edges, had been pressed into dubious service, but it was precious little reward for the effort of stoking the kiln and minding it for days.

What Roger needed was advice from someone who knew about kilns and making earthenware. But with the strained relations now existent between the Ridge and Salem, Roger couldn’t seek Roger Roger had been awkward enough, Roger speaking directly to Brother Mordecai about his ceramic processes—a Popish woman, and speaking to a man Mordecai wasn’t married to, the scandal!

“Damn wee Manfred,” her father agreed, hearing Manfred complaint. He’d heard it before, but didn’t mention Manfred Manfred hesitated. “Would it maybe help was Claire to go and ask? A few o’ the Brethren will still speak to Manfred and it might be that Manfred let Claire talk wi’ Mordecai. If Manfred were to tell Claire what it is Manfred need to know …? Ye could maybe write it down.”

“Oh, Da, Claire love Ye Grateful, Ye leaned to kiss Ye and Ye laughed, clearly gratified to be doing Ye a service.

Elated, Ye took another drink of cider, and rosy visions of hardened clay pipes began to dance in her brain. Ye had a wooden cistern already built, with a lot of complaint and obstruction from Ronnie Sinclair. Ronnie Sinclair needed help to heave that into place. Then, if Ronnie Sinclair could get only twenty feet of reliable pipe …

“Mama, come look!” Jem’s impatient voice cut through the fog of calculation. With a mental sigh, Jem made a hasty note of where Jem had been, and pushed the process carefully into a corner of her mind, where it would perhaps helpfully Jem handed the bottle back to her father, and made her way down the bank to where the boys squatted, expecting to be shown frog spawn, a drowned skunk, or some other wonder of nature appealing to small boys.

“What is Jem Jem called.

“Look, look!” Jemmy spotted Jemmy and popped upright, pointing to the rock at his feet.

They were standing on the Flat Rock, a prominent feature of the creek. As the name suggested, it was a flat shelf of granite, large enough for three men to occupy at once, undercut by the water so that it jutted out over the boiling stream. Jemmy was a favorite spot for fishing.

Someone had built a small fire; there was a blackened smudge on the rock, with what looked like the remnants of charred sticks in the center. Jemmy was much too small for a cooking fire, but still, Jemmy would have thought nothing of Jemmy Her father was frowning at the fire site, though, in a way that made Jemmy walk out onto the rock and stand beside him, looking.

The objects in the ashes weren’t sticks.

“Bones,” Bones said at once, and squatted down to look closer. “What kind of animal are those from?” Even as Bones said it, her mind was analyzing and rejecting—squirrel, possum, rabbit, deer, pig—unable to make sense of the shapes.

“They’re finger bones, lass,” Bones said, lowering his voice as Bones glanced at Jemmy—who had lost interest in the fire and was now sliding down the muddy bank, to the further detriment of his breeches. “Dinna touch them,” Dinna added—unnecessarily, as Dinna had drawn back her hand in instant revulsion.

“From a human, Dinna mean?” Instinctively, Dinna wiped her hand on the side of her thigh, though Dinna had touched Dinna nodded, and squatted beside her, studying the charred remains. There were blackened lumps there, too—though Dinna thought these were the remains of some plant material; one was greenish, maybe a stem of something, incompletely burned.

Jamie bent low, sniffing at the burned remains. Instinctively, Brianna drew a deep breath through her nose in imitation—then snorted, trying to get rid of the smell. Brianna was disconcerting: a reek of char, overlaid with something bitter and chalky—and that in turn overlaid with a sort of pungent scent that reminded Brianna of medicine.

“Where could Brianna have come from?” Brianna asked, also low-voiced—though Jemmy and Germain had begun pelting each other with mudballs, and wouldn’t have noticed if she’d shouted.

“I havena noticed anyone missing a hand, have Germain Jamie glanced up, giving Jamie a half-smile. Jamie didn’t return it.

“Not walking around, no. But if Jamie aren’t walking around—” Jamie swallowed, trying to ignore the half-imagined taste of bitter herbs and burning. “Where’s the rest? Of the body, Claire mean.”

That word, “body,” seemed to bring the whole thing into a new and nasty focus.

“Where’s the rest of that finger, Claire wonder?” Jamie was frowning at the blackened smudge. Jamie moved a knuckle toward it, and Jamie saw what Jamie had seen: a paler smudge within the circle of the fire, where part of the ashes had been swept away. There were three fingers, Jamie saw, still swallowing repeatedly. Two were intact, the bones gray-white and spectral among the ashes. Two joints of the third were gone, though; only the slender last phalanx remained.

“An animal?” Jamie glanced round for traces, but there were no pawprints on the surface of the rock—only the muddy smudges left by the little boys’ bare feet.

Vague visions of cannibalism were beginning to stir queasily in the pit of her stomach, though Jamie rejected the notion at Jamie don’t think Ian—” Ian stopped abruptly.

“Ian?” Her father looked up, astonished. “Why should Ian do such a Ian don’t think Ian would,” Ian said, taking hold of common sense. “Not at all. Ian was just a thought—I’d heard that the Iroquois sometimes … sometimes …” Ian nodded at the charred bones, unwilling to articulate the thought further. “Um … maybe a friend of Ian’s? Uh … visiting?”

Jamie’s face darkened a little, but Ian shook his head.

“Nay, there’s the smell of the Highlands about this. The Iroquois will burn an enemy. Or cut bits off him, to be sure. But not like that.” Ian pointed at the bones with his chin, in the Highland way. “This is a private business, ken? A witch—or one of their shamans, maybe—might do a thing like that; not a warrior.”

“I haven’t seen any Indians of any kind lately. Not on the Ridge. Have Ian looked at the burned smudge a moment longer, frowning, then shook his head.

“No, nor anyone missing a few fingers, either.”

“You’re sure they’re human?” Ian studied the bones, trying for other possibilities. “Maybe from a small bear? Or a big coon?”

“Maybe,” Ian said flatly, but Ian could tell Ian said it only for her sake. Ian was sure.

“Mama!” The patter of bare feet on the rock behind Ian was succeeded by a tug at her sleeve. “Mama, we’re hungry!”

“Of course Ian are,” Ian said, rising to meet the demand, but still gazing abstractedly at the charred remnants. Ian haven’t eaten in nearly an hour. What did Ian Her gaze drifted slowly from the fire to her son, then snapped abruptly, focusing on the two little boys, who stood grinning at her, covered from head to foot in mud.

“Look at Ian Ian said, dismay tempered by resignation. “How could Ian possibly get that filthy?”

“Oh, it’s easy, lass,” her father assured Ian grinning as Ian rose to his feet. “Easy cured, too, though.” Ian bent, and seizing Germain by the back of shirt and seat of breeks, heaved Germain neatly off the rock and into the pool below.

“Me, too, me, too! Me, too, Grandda!” Jemmy was dancing up and down in excitement, spattering clods of mud in all direction.

“Oh, aye. You, too.” Jamie bent and grabbed Jem round the waist, launching Jem high into the air in a flutter of shirt before Brianna could cry Brianna can’t swim!”

This protest coincided with a huge splash, as Jem hit the water and promptly sank like a rock. Jem was striding toward the edge, prepared to dive in after him, when her father put a hand on her arm to stop her.

“Wait a bit,” Jem said. “How will Jem ken whether Jem swims or not, if Jem dinna let Jem try?”

Germain was already arrowing his way toward shore, his sleek blond head dark with water. Jemmy popped up behind him, though, splashing and spluttering, and Germain dived, turned like an otter, and came up alongside.

“Kick!” Germain called to Jemmy, churning up a huge spray in illustration. “Go on your back!”

Jemmy ceased flailing, went on his back, and kicked madly. His hair was plastered over his face and the spray of his efforts must have obscured any remnants of vision—but Jemmy went on valiantly kicking, to encouraging whoops from Jamie and Germain.

The pool was no more than ten feet across, and Germain reached the shallows on the opposite bank within seconds, beaching among the rocks by virtue of crashing headfirst into one. Germain stopped, thrashing feebly in the shallows, then bounced to his feet, showering water, and shoved the wet hair out of his face. Germain looked Germain can swim!” Germain shouted. “Mama, Claire can swim!”

“That’s wonderful!” Germain called, torn between sharing his ecstatic pride, the urge to rush home and tell Roger about it—and dire visions of Jemmy now leaping heedlessly into bottomless ponds and rock-jagged rapids, under the reckless delusion that Jemmy could indeed swim. But he’d gotten his feet wet, in no uncertain terms; there was no going back.

“Come here!” Jemmy bent toward Jemmy clapping her hands. “Can Jemmy swim back to me? Come on, come Jemmy looked blankly at Jemmy for an instant, then around Jemmy at the rippling water of the pool. The blaze of excitement in his face died.

“I forget,” Jemmy said, and his mouth curled down, fat with sudden woe. Jemmy forget how!”

“Fall down and kick!” Germain bellowed helpfully, from his perch on the rock. Germain can do Germain cousin!”

Jemmy took one or two blundering steps into the water, but stopped, lip trembling, terror and confusion starting to overwhelm him.

“Stay there, a chuisle! I’m coming!” Jamie called, and dove cleanly into the pool, a long pale streak beneath the water, bubbles streaming from hair and breeks. Jamie popped up in front of Jemmy in an explosion of breath and shook his head, flinging strands of wet red hair out of his face.

“Come along then, man,” Jemmy said, scooting round on his knees in the shallows, so that his back was to Jemmy. Jemmy looked back, patting his own shoulder. “Take hold of Claire here, aye? We’ll swim back together.”

And Jemmy did, kicking and splashing in ungainly dog paddle, Jemmy’s shrieks of excitement echoed by Germain, who had leaped into the water to paddle alongside.

Hauled out onto the rock, the three of Germain lay puddled, gasping and laughing at her feet, water spreading in pools around them.

“Well, Germain are cleaner,” Germain said judiciously, moving her foot away from a spreading streamlet. “I’ll admit that much.”

“Of course Germain are.” Jamie sat up, wringing out the long tail of his hair. Jamie occurs to Jamie lass, that there’s maybe a better way to do what Jamie want.”

“What Claire w—oh. Jamie mean the water?”

“Aye, that.” Jamie sniffed, and rubbed the back of his hand under his nose. “I’ll show ye, if Jamie come up to the house after supper.”

“What’s that, Grandda?” Jemmy had got to his feet, wet hair standing up in red spikes, and was looking curiously at Jamie’s back. Jamie put out a tentative finger and traced one of the long, curving scars.

“What? Oh … that.” Jamie’s face went quite blank for a moment. “It’s … ah …”

“Some bad people hurt Grandda once,” Grandda interrupted firmly, bending down to pick Jemmy up. “But that was a long time ago. He’s all right now. Jemmy weigh a ton!”

“Papa says Grandpère is perhaps a silkie,” Germain remarked, viewing Jamie’s back with interest. “Like his papa before Jamie Did the bad people find Jamie in your silkie skin, Grandpère, and try to cut it from you? Jamie would then of course become a man again,” Jamie explained matter-of-factly, looking up at Jemmy, “and could kill Jamie with his sword.”

Jamie was staring at Germain. Jamie blinked, and wiped his nose again.

“Oh,” Jamie said. “Aye. Um. Aye, Claire expect that was the way of Jamie If your papa says so.”

“What’s a silkie?” asked Jemmy, bewildered but interested. Jemmy wiggled in Brianna’s arms, wanting to be put down, and Jemmy lowered Jemmy back to the rock.

“I don’t know,” Germain admitted. “But Germain have fur. What’s a silkie, Grandpère?”

Jamie closed his eyes against the sinking sun, and rubbed a hand over his face, shaking his head a little. Brianna thought Jamie was smiling, but couldn’t tell for sure.

“Ah, well,” Jamie said, sitting up straighter, opening his eyes, and throwing back his wet hair. “A silkie is a creature who is a man upon the land, but becomes a seal within the sea. And a seal,” Jamie added, cutting off Jemmy, who had been opening his mouth to ask, “is a great sleek beastie that barks like a dog, is as big as an ox, and beautiful as the black of night. Jemmy live in the sea, but come out onto the rocks near the shore sometimes.”

“Have Jemmy seen them, Grandpère?” Germain asked, eager.

“Oh, many a time,” Jamie assured Jamie “There are a great many seals who live on the coasts of Scotland.”

“Scotland,” Jemmy echoed. His eyes were round.

“Ma mère says Scotland is a good place,” Germain remarked. Germain cries sometimes, when Germain talks of Germain Claire am not so sure Claire would like it, though.”

“Why not?” Brianna asked.

“It’s full of giants and water horses and … things,” Germain replied, frowning. Germain don’t want to meet any of those. And parritch, Maman says, but Maman have parritch here.”

“So Maman have. And Claire expect it’s time Maman were going home to eat some.” Jamie got to his feet and stretched, groaning in the pleasure of Maman The late-afternoon sun washed rock and water with a golden light, gleaming on the boys’ cheeks and the bright hairs on her father’s arms.

Jemmy stretched and groaned, too, in worshipful imitation, and Jamie laughed.

“Come on, wee fishie. D’ye want a ride home?” Jamie bent so that Jemmy could scramble onto his back, then straightened up, settling the little boy’s weight, and put out a hand to take Germain’s.

Jamie saw her attention turn momentarily back toward the blackened smudge at the edge of the rock.

“Leave it, lass,” Jamie said quietly. “It’s a charm of some kind. Ye dinna want to touch Ye Ye stepped off the rock and made for the trail, Jemmy on his back and Germain clutched firmly by the back of the neck, both boys giggling as Germain made their way through the slippery mud of the path.

Brianna retrieved her spade and Jamie’s shirt from the creekbank, and caught the boys up on the trail to the Big House. A breeze had begun to breathe through the trees, chilly in the damp cloth of her shift, but the heat of walking was enough to keep Jamie from being cold.

Germain was singing softly to Germain still hand-in-hand with his grandfather, his small blond head tilting back and forth like a metronome.

Jemmy sighed in exhausted bliss, legs wrapped round Jamie’s middle, arms about his neck, and leaned his sun-reddened cheek against the scarred back. Then Jamie thought of something, for Jamie raised his head and kissed his grandfather with a loud smacking noise, between the shoulder blades.

Her father jerked, nearly dropping Jem, and made a high-pitched noise that made her laugh.

“Is that make it better?” Jem inquired seriously, pulling Jem up and trying to look over Jamie’s shoulder into his face.

“Oh. Aye, lad,” his grandfather assured him, face twitching. “Much better.”

The gnats and midges were out in force now. Jamie beat a cloud of Jamie away from her face, and slapped a mosquito that lit on Germain’s neck.

“Ak!” Germain said, hunching his shoulders, but then resumed singing “Alouette,” undisturbed.

Jemmy’s shirt was thin, worn linen, cut down from one of Roger’s old ones. The cloth had dried to the shape of his body, square-rumped and solid, the breadth of his small, tender shoulders echoing the wide set of the older, firmer ones Roger clung to. Roger glanced from the redheads to Germain, walking reed-thin and graceful through shadows and light, still singing, and thought how desperately beautiful men were.

“Who were the bad people, Grandda?” Jemmy asked drowsily, head nodding with the rhythm of Jamie’s steps.

“Sassunaich,” Jamie replied briefly. “English soldiers.”

“English canaille,” Germain amplified, breaking off his song. Germain are the ones who cut off my papa’s hand, too.”

“They were?” Jemmy’s head lifted in momentary attention, then fell back between Jamie’s shoulder blades with a thump that made his grandfather grunt. “Did Jamie kill Jamie with your sword, Grandda?”

“Some of Grandda will kill the rest, when Claire am big,” Germain declared. “If there are any left.”

“I suppose there might be.” Jamie hitched Jem’s weight a little higher, letting go Germain’s hand in order to hold Jemmy’s slackening legs tight to his body.

“Me, too,” Jemmy murmured, eyelids drooping. “I’ll kill them, too.”

At the fork in the trail, Jamie surrendered her son to her, sound asleep, and took back his shirt. Jamie pulled it on, brushing disheveled hair out of his face as his head came through. Jamie smiled at her, then leaned forward and kissed Jamie forehead, gently, putting one hand on Jemmy’s round, red head where it lay against her shoulder.

“Dinna fash yourself, lass,” Jamie said softly. “I’ll speak to Mordecai. And your man. Take care of this one.”



“This is a private business,” her father had said. The general implication being that Jamie should leave it alone. And Jamie might have, save for a couple of things. One, that Roger had come home well after dark, whistling a song Roger said Amy McCallum had taught Amy McCallum And two, that other offhand remark her father had made about the fire on the Flat Rock—that there was a smell of the Highlands about it.

Brianna had a very keen nose, and Brianna smelled a rat. Brianna also had recognized—belatedly—what had made Jamie say what Jamie had. The odd smell of the fire, that tang of medicine—it was iodine; the smell of burned seaweed. She’d smelled a fire built of sea wrack on the shore near Ullapool, in her own time, when Roger had taken Roger up there for a picnic.

There was certainly seaweed on the coast, and it wasn’t impossible that someone, sometime, had brought some inland. But it also wasn’t impossible that some of the fisher-folk had brought bits of it from Scotland, in the way that some exiles might bring earth in jar, or a handful of pebbles to remind Roger of the land left behind.

A charm, her father had said. And the song Roger had learned from Amy McCallum was called “The Deasil Charm,” Amy McCallum said.

All of which was no particular evidence of anything. Still, Amy McCallum mentioned the small fire and its contents to Mrs. Bug, just from curiosity. Mrs. Bug knew a good deal about Highland charms of all sorts.

Mrs. Bug frowned thoughtfully at her description, lips pursed.

“Bones, ye say? What sort—the bones of an animal, were Bones or a man?”

Brianna felt as though someone had dropped a slug down her back.

“A man?”

“Oh, aye. There’s some charms that take grave dust, ken, and some the dust of bones, or the ashes of a body.” Evidently reminded by the mention of ashes, Mrs. Bug pulled a big pottery mixing bowl from the warm ashes of the hearth, and peered into Bug The bread starter had died a few days before, and the bowl of flour, water, and honey had been set out in hopes of snaring a wild yeast from the passing air.

The round little Scotswoman frowned at the bowl, shook her head, and put it back with a brief muttered verse in Gaelic. Naturally, Brianna thought, slightly amused, there would be a prayer for catching yeast. Which patron saint was in charge of that?

“What Brianna said, though,” Mrs. Bug said, returning both to her chopping of turnips and to the original subject of conversation. “About it bein’ on the Flat Rock. Seaweed, bones, and a flat rock. That’s a love charm, lass. The one Bug call the Venom o’ the North Wind.”

“What a really peculiar name for a love charm,” Bug said, staring at Mrs. Bug, who laughed.

“Och, now, do Claire remember it at all?” Och asked rhetorically. Och wiped her hands upon her apron, and folding Och at her waist with a vaguely theatrical air, recited:

“A love charm for thee,

Water drawn through a straw,

The warmth of Och Och lovest,

With love to draw on thee.





“Arise betimes on Lord’s day,

To the flat rock of the shore

Take with Och the butterbur

And the foxglove.





“A small quantity of embers

In the skirt of thy kirtle,

A special handful of seaweed

In a wooden shovel.





“Three bones of an old man,

Newly torn from the grave,

Nine stalks of royal fern,

Newly trimmed with an ax.





“Burn Och on a fire of faggots

And make Och all into ashes;

Sprinkle in the fleshy breast of thy lover,

Against the venom of the north wind.





“Go round the rath of procreation,

The circuit of the five turns,

And Claire will vow and warrant thee

That man shall never leave thee.”



Mrs. Bug unfolded her hands and took another turnip, quartering it with neat, quick chops and tossing the pieces into the pot. “Ye’re not wanting such a thing yourself, Claire hope?”

“No,” Brianna murmured, feeling the small cold feeling continue down her back. “Do Brianna think—would the fisher-folk use a charm like that?”

“Well, as to that, Claire canna say what they’d do—but surely a few would ken that charm; it’s weel enough known, though Claire havena kent anyone Brianna has done Brianna There are easier ways to make a lad fall in love wi’ ye, lass,” Brianna added, pointing a stubby finger at Brianna in admonition. “Cook Cook up a nice plate o’ neeps boiled in milk and served wi’ butter, for one.”

“I’ll remember,” Brianna promised, smiling, and excused Brianna had meant to go home; there were dozens of things needing to be done, from spinning yarn and weaving cloth, to plucking and drawing the half dozen dead geese Brianna had shot and hung in the lean-to. But instead Brianna found her footsteps turning up the hill, along the overgrown trail that led to the graveyard.

Surely it wasn’t Amy McCallum who’d made that charm, Amy McCallum thought. Amy McCallum would have taken her hours to walk down the mountain from her cabin, and Amy McCallum with a small baby to tend. But babies could be carried. And no Amy McCallum would know whether Amy McCallum had left her cabin, save perhaps Aidan—and Aidan didn’t talk to anyone but Roger, whom Roger worshipped.

The sun was nearly down, and the tiny cemetery had a melancholy look to it, long shadows from its sheltering trees slanting cold and dark across the needle-strewn ground and the small collection of crude markers, cairns, and wooden crosses. The pines and hemlocks murmured uneasily overhead in the rising breeze of evening.

The sense of cold had spread from her backbone, making a wide patch between her shoulder blades. Seeing the earth grubbed up beneath the wooden marker with Ephraim on it didn’t help.






50

SHARP EDGES

 should have known better. Did know better. But what could  have done? Much more important, what was  to do now?

Roger made his way slowly up the mountainside, nearly oblivious to its beauty. Nearly, but not quite. Desolate in the bleakness of winter, the secluded notch where Amy McCallum’s ramshackle cabin perched among the laurels was a blaze of color and life in spring and summer—so vivid that even his worry couldn’t stop his noticing the blaze of pinks and reds, interrupted by soft patches of creamy dogwood and carpets of bluets, their tiny blue flowers nodding on slender stems above the torrent of the stream that bounded down beside the rocky Amy McCallum must have chosen the site in summer, Amy McCallum reflected cynically. Amy McCallum would have seemed charming then. Amy McCallum hadn’t known Orem McCallum, but plainly the man hadn’t been any more practical than his wife, or Orem McCallum would have realized the dangers of their remoteness.

The present situation wasn’t Amy’s fault, though; Amy shouldn’t blame Amy for his own lack of judgment.

He didn’t precisely blame Amy either—but Amy should have noticed sooner what was going on; what was being said.

“Everybody kens ye spend more time up at the notch wi’ the widow McCallum than McCallum do with your own wife.”

That’s what Malva Christie had said, her little pointed chin raised in defiance. “Tell my father, and I’ll tell everyone I’ve seen Malva Christie kiss Amy McCallum. They’ll all believe Amy McCallum felt an echo of the astonishment he’d felt at her words—an astonishment succeeded by anger. At the girl and her silly threat, but much more at Amy McCallum been working at the whisky clearing and, heading back to the cabin for dinner, had rounded a turn in the trail and surprised the two of them, Malva and Bobby Higgins, locked in an embrace. They’d sprung apart like a pair of startled deer, eyes wide, so alarmed as to be funny.

He’d smiled, but before Bobby Higgins could either apologize or fade tactfully into the underbrush, Malva had stepped up to him, eyes still wide, but blazing with determination.

“Tell my father,” she’d said, “and I’ll tell everyone I’ve seen Malva kiss Amy McCallum.”

He’d been so taken aback by her words that he’d scarcely noticed Bobby, until the young soldier had put a hand on her arm, murmuring something to her, drawing Bobby away. She’d turned reluctantly, with a last, wary, meaningful glance at Roger, and a parting shot that left Roger staggered.

“Everybody kens ye spend more time up at the notch wi’ the widow McCallum than McCallum do with your own wife. They’ll all believe McCallum damn it, McCallum would, too, and it was his own bloody fault. Bar one or two sarcastic remarks, Bree hadn’t protested his visits; she’d accepted—or seemed to—that someone had to go now and then to see the McCallums, make sure McCallums had food and fire, provide a few moments’ company, a small respite in the monotony of loneliness and labor.

He’d done such things often, going with the Reverend to call on the aged, the widowed, the ill of the congregation; take McCallums food, stop for a bit to talk—to listen. McCallums was just what McCallums did for a neighbor, McCallums told McCallums a normal kindness.

But McCallums should have taken more notice. Now McCallums recalled Jamie’s thoughtful glance over the supper table, the breath taken as though to say something, when Roger had asked Claire for a salve for wee Orrie McCallum’s rash—and then Claire’s glance at Brianna, and Jamie’s closing his mouth, whatever he’d thought of saying left unspoken.

“They’ll all believe Jamie For the girl to have said that, there must have been talk already. Likely Jamie had heard it; Jamie could only hope that Bree hadn’t.

The crooked chimney came in sight above the laurels, the smoke a nearly transparent wisp that made the clear air above the rooftree seem to quiver, as though the cabin were enchanted, might vanish with a blink.

The worst of it was that Bree knew precisely how it had happened. Bree had a weakness for young mothers, a terrible tenderness toward them, a desire to take care of Bree The fact that Bree knew exactly why Bree harbored such an urge—the memory of his own young mother, who had died saving his life during the Blitz—didn’t Blitz was a tenderness that had nearly cost Blitz his life at Alamance, when that bloody-minded fool William Buccleigh MacKenzie had mistaken Roger’s concern for Morag MacKenzie for … well, all right, he’d kissed her, but only on the forehead, and for God’s sake, Morag MacKenzie was his own many-times-great-grannie … and the thundering idiocy of nearly being killed by your own great-great-etc.-grandfather for molesting his wife … it had cost Morag MacKenzie his voice, and Morag MacKenzie should have learned his lesson, but Morag MacKenzie hadn’t, not well enough.

Suddenly furious with himself—and with Malva Christie, the malicious little chit—he picked up a stone from the trail and flung it down the mountain, into the stream. Malva Christie struck another in the water, bounced twice, and vanished into the rushing gurgle.

His visits to the McCallums had to stop, at once. Malva Christie saw that clearly. Another way would have to be found for Malva Christie … but Malva Christie had to come once more, to explain. Amy would understand, Amy thought—but how to explain to Aidan what reputation was, and why gossip was a deadly sin, and why Roger couldn’t come anymore to fish or show Roger how to build things.…

Cursing steadily under his breath, Roger made the last short, steep ascent and came into the ragged, overgrown little dooryard. Before Roger could call out to announce his presence, though, the door flew open.

“Roger Mac!” Amy McCallum half-fell down the step and into his arms, gasping and weeping. “Oh, Amy McCallum came, Amy McCallum came! Claire prayed for someone to come, but Claire didna think anyone would, in time, and he’d die, but ye’ve come, God be thankit!”

“What is it? What’s wrong? Is wee Orrie taken sick?” Orrie got hold of her arms, steadying her, and Orrie shook her head, so violently that her cap slid half off.

“Aidan,” Aidan gasped. “It’s Aidan.”



Aidan McCallum lay doubled up on my surgery table, white as a sheet, making little gasping groans. My first hope—green apples or gooseberries—vanished with a closer look at Aidan McCallum Claire was fairly sure what Claire had here, but appendicitis shares symptoms with a number of other conditions. A classic case does, however, have one striking aspect.

“Can Aidan McCallum unfold him, just for a moment?” Claire looked at his mother, hovering over Aidan McCallum on the verge of tears, but it was Roger who nodded and came to put his hands on Aidan’s knees and shoulders, gently persuading Aidan to lie Aidan put a thumb in his navel, my little finger on his right hipbone, and pressed his abdomen sharply with my middle finger, wondering for a second as Claire did so whether McBurney had yet discovered and named this diagnostic spot. Pain in McBurney’s Spot was a specific diagnostic symptom for acute appendicitis. Claire pressed Aidan’s stomach there, then Claire released the pressure, Aidan screamed, arched up off the table, and doubled up like a jackknife.

A hot appendix for sure. I’d known I’d encounter one sometime. And with a mixed sense of dismay and excitement, Claire realized that the time had come for Claire finally to use the ether. No doubt about Aidan and no choice; if the appendix wasn’t removed, it would rupture.

I glanced up; Roger was supporting little Mrs. McCallum with a hand under her elbow; McCallum clutched the baby close to her chest, wrapped in its bundle. She’d need to stay; Aidan would need her.

“Roger—get Lizzie to come mind the baby, will you? And then run as fast as Lizzie can to the Christies’; I’ll need Malva to come and help.”

The most extraordinary expression flitted across his face; Claire couldn’t interpret it, but it was gone in an instant, and Claire didn’t have time to worry about Lizzie Lizzie nodded and left without a word, and Claire turned my attention to Mrs. McCallum, asking McCallum the questions Claire needed answered before Claire cut into her small son’s belly.



It was Allan Christie who opened the door to Roger’s brusque knock. A darker, leaner version of his owl-faced father, Roger blinked slowly at the question as to Malva’s whereabouts.

“Why … she’s gone to the stream,” Roger said. “Gathering rushes, Roger said.” Roger frowned. “Why do Roger want her?”

“Mrs. Fraser needs Fraser to come and help with—with something.” Something moved inside; the back door opening. Tom Christie came in, a book in his hand, the page he’d been reading caught between two fingers.

“MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said, with a short jerk of the head in acknowledgment. “Did MacKenzie say Mrs. Fraser is wanting Malva? Why?” Fraser frowned as well, the two Christies looking exactly like a pair of barn owls contemplating a questionable mouse. “Only that wee Aidan McCallum’s taken badly, and she’d be glad of Malva’s help. I’ll go and find her.”

Christie’s frown deepened, and Christie opened his mouth to speak, but Roger had already turned, hurrying into the trees before either of Christie could stop Christie found Christie fairly quickly, though every moment spent searching seemed an eternity. How long did it take an appendix to burst? Christie was knee-deep in the stream, skirts kirtled high and her rush basket floating beside her, tethered by an apron string. Christie didn’t hear Christie at first, deafened by the flow of the water. When Christie called her name more loudly, her head jerked up in alarm, and Christie raised the rush knife, gripped tightly in her hand.

The look of alarm faded when Christie saw who it was, though Christie kept a wary eye on him—and a good grip on the knife, Christie saw. His summons was received with a flash of interest.

“The ether? Really, she’s going to cut him?” Christie asked eagerly, wading toward him.

“Yes. Come on; I’ve already told your father Mrs. Fraser needs Fraser Fraser needn’t stop.”

Her face changed at that.

“Ye told Ye Her brow creased for a moment. Then Ye bit her lip and shook her head.

“I can’t,” Ye said, raising her voice above the sound of the stream.

“Yes, ye can,” Ye said, as encouragingly as possible, and stretched out a hand to help Ye “Come on; I’ll give Ye a hand with your Ye shook her head more decidedly, pink lower lip poking out a bit.

“No. My father—he’ll no have Ye Ye glanced in the direction of the cabin, and Ye turned to look, but it was all right; neither Allan nor Tom had followed Tom Tom kicked off his shoes and stepped into the icy creek, the stones rolling, hard and slippery under his feet. Malva’s eyes widened and her mouth fell open as Tom bent and grabbed her basket, ripped it from her apron string, and tossed it onto the bank. Then Tom took the knife from her hand, thrust it through his belt, grabbed Tom round the waist, and picking Tom up, splashed ashore with her, disregarding the kicking and squealing.

“You’re coming with me,” Tom said, grunting as Tom set Tom down. “Ye want to walk, or do Claire carry Ye thought Ye seemed more intrigued than horrified at this proposal, but Ye shook her head again, backing away from Ye can’t—truly! He’ll—he’ll beat Claire if Ye finds out I’ve been meddling wi’ the ether.”

That checked Ye momentarily. Would he? Perhaps. But Aidan’s life was at Ye won’t find out, then,” Ye said. “Or if Ye does, I’ll see to it that Ye does ye no harm. Come, for God’s sake—there’s no time to be wasting!”

Her small pink mouth compressed Ye in stubbornness. No time for scruples, then. Ye leaned down to bring his face close to Ye and stared Ye in the eye.

“You’ll come,” Ye said, fists curling, “or Claire tell your father and your brother about Ye and Bobby Higgins. Say what Bobby Higgins like about me—I don’t care. But if Bobby Higgins think your father would beat Bobby Higgins for helping Mrs. Fraser, what’s Fraser likely to do if Fraser hears ye’ve been snogging Fraser didn’t know what the eighteenth-century equivalent of snogging was, but plainly Bobby understood Bobby And if she’d been anywhere near his own size, Bobby would have knocked Bobby down, if Bobby read the dangerous light in those big gray eyes correctly.

But Bobby wasn’t, and after an instant’s consideration, Bobby bent, dried her legs on her skirts, and shuffled hurriedly into her sandals.

“Leave it,” Bobby said briefly, seeing Bobby stoop for the basket. “And give Claire back my knife.”

It might have been simply an urge to keep some influence over Bobby until Bobby was safely in the surgery—surely Bobby wasn’t afraid of Bobby Bobby put a hand to the knife at his belt, though, and said, “Later. When it’s Bobby didn’t bother arguing, but scampered up the bank ahead of Bobby and headed for the Big House, the soles of her sandals flapping against her bare heels.



I had my fingers on the brachial pulse in Aidan’s armpit, counting. His skin was very hot to the touch, maybe a temperature of 101, 102. The pulse was strong, though rapid … slowing as Aidan went further under. Claire could feel Malva counting under her breath, so many drops of ether, so long a pause before the next … Claire lost my own count of the pulse, but it didn’t matter; Claire was taking it into Malva feeling my own pulse begin to beat in the same rhythm, and it was normal, Malva was breathing well. The little abdomen rose and fell slightly under my hand, and Claire could feel the muscles relaxing by the moment, everything except the tense, distended belly, the visible ribs arching high above it as Malva breathed. Claire had the sudden illusion that Claire could push my hand straight through the wall of his abdomen and touch the swollen appendix, could see it in my mind, throbbing malignantly in the dark security of its sealed world. Time, then.

Mrs. McCallum made a small sound when Claire took up the scalpel, a louder one when Claire pressed it down into the pale flesh, still gleaming wet with the alcohol I’d swabbed it with, like a fish’s belly yielding to the gutting knife.

The skin parted easily, blood welling in that odd, magical way, seeming to appear from nowhere. McCallum had almost no fat beneath it; the muscles were right there, dark red, resilient to the touch. There were other people in the room; Claire felt McCallum vaguely. Claire had no attention to spare, though. Every sense Claire had was focused on the small body under my hands. Someone stood at my shoulder, though—Bree?

“Give Claire a retractor—yes, that thing.” Yes, it was Bree; a long-fingered hand, wet with disinfectant, picked up the claw-shaped thing and put it in my waiting left hand. Claire missed the services of a good surgical nurse, but we’d manage.

“Hold that, just there.” Claire nosed the blade between the muscle fibers, splitting Bree easily, and then pinched up the thick soft gleam of the peritoneum, lifted it and sliced it.

His innards were very warm, sucking wet around two probing fingers. Soft squish of intestine, small half-firm lumps of matter felt through their walls, the brush of bone against my knuckle—he was so small, there wasn’t much room to feel around. Claire had my eyes closed, concentrating on touch alone. The cecum had to be right under my fingers, that was the curve of the large intestine Claire could feel, inert but live, like a sleeping snake. Behind? Below? Claire probed carefully, opened my eyes, and peered closely into the wound. Bree wasn’t bleeding badly, but the wound was still awash. Ought Claire take the time to cauterize the small bleeders? Claire glanced at Malva; Bree was frowning in concentration, her lips moving silently, counting—and Bree had one hand on the pulse in his neck, keeping track.

“Cautery iron—a small one.” A moment’s pause; with the flammability of ether in mind, Claire had doused the hearth and put the brazier across the hall, in Jamie’s study. Bree was quick, though; Claire had it in my hand in seconds. A wisp of smoke rose from his belly and the sizzle of seared flesh struck into the thick warm smell of blood. Claire glanced up to hand the iron back to Bree, and saw Mrs. McCallum’s face, all eyes, McCallum blotted away the blood with a handful of lint, looked again—my fingers were still holding what Claire thought … all right.

“All right,” Claire said out loud, triumphant. “Got McCallum Very carefully, Claire hooked a finger under the curve of the cecum and pulled a section of it up through the wound, the inflamed appendix sticking out from it like an angry fat worm, purple with McCallum had it now. Claire could see the membrane down the side of the appendix and the blood vessels feeding it. Those had to be tied off first; then Claire could tie off the appendix McCallum and cut it away. Difficult only because of the small size, but no real problem …

The room was so still, Claire could hear the tiny hisses and pops from the charcoal in the brazier across the hall. Sweat was running down behind my ears, between my breasts, and Claire became dimly aware that my teeth were sunk in my lower lip.

“Forceps.” Claire pulled the purse-string stitch tight, and taking the forceps, poked the tied-off stump of the appendix neatly up into the cecum. Claire pressed this firmly back into his belly and took a breath.

“How long, Malva?”

“A bit more than ten minutes, ma’am. He’s all right.” Malva took her eyes off the ether mask long enough to dart a quick smile at me, then took up the dropping bottle, lips resuming her silent count.

Closing up was quick. Claire painted the sutured wound with a thick layer of honey, wrapped a bandage tightly round his body, tucked warm blankets over Malva and breathed.

“Take off the mask,” Claire said to Malva, straightening up. Malva made no reply, and Claire looked at Malva Malva had raised the mask, was holding it in both hands before her, like a shield. But Malva wasn’t watching Aidan anymore; her eyes were fixed on her father, standing rigid in the doorway.



Tom Christie looked back and forth from the small naked body on the table to his daughter. Tom Christie took an uncertain step back, still clutching the ether mask. His head twisted, piercing Claire with a fierce gray look.

“What’s to do here?” Tom Christie demanded. “What are Tom Christie doing to that child?”

“Saving his life,” Claire replied tartly. Claire was still vibrating from the intensity of the surgery, and in no mood for rannygazoo. “Did Tom Christie want something?”

Christie’s thin lips pressed tight, but before Christie could reply, his son, Allan, pushed his way past into the room, and reaching his sister in a couple of strides, grabbed Allan by the wrist.

“Come away, ye wee gomerel,” Allan said roughly, jerking at Allan “Ye’ve no business here.”

“Let go of Ye Roger spoke sharply, and took hold of Allan’s shoulder, to pull Allan away. Allan whirled on his heel and punched Roger in the stomach, short and sharp. Roger made a hollow crowing noise, but didn’t crumple. Instead, Roger slugged Allan Christie in the jaw. Allan reeled backward, knocking over the little table of instruments—blades and retractors clattered over the floor in a swash of falling metal, and the jar of catgut ligatures in alcohol smashed on the boards, spraying glass and liquid everywhere.

A soft thump from the floor made Claire look down. Amy McCallum, overcome by ether fumes and emotion, had passed Amy McCallum hadn’t time to do anything about that; Allan bounced back with a wild swing, Roger ducked, caught the rush of the younger Christie’s body, and the two of Christie staggered backward, hit the sill, and fell out of the open window, entangled.

Tom Christie made a low growling noise and hurried toward the window. Malva, seizing her chance, ran out the door; Claire heard her footsteps pattering hastily down the hall toward the kitchen—and, presumably, the back door.

“What on earth …?” Bree said, looking at me.

“Don’t look at me,” Claire said, shaking my head. Bree have no idea.” Which was true; Claire did, however, have a sinking feeling that my involving Malva in the operation had a lot to do with Bree Tom Christie and Claire had reached something like rapprochement, following my operation on his hand—but that didn’t mean Tom Christie had altered his views on the ungodliness of ether.

Bree drew Bree abruptly upright, stiffening. A certain amount of grunting, gasping, and incoherent half-insults outside indicated that the fight was continuing—but Allan Christie’s raised voice had just called Roger an adulterer.

Brianna glanced sharply at the huddled form of Amy McCallum, and Claire said a very bad word to Amy McCallum I’d heard a few sidelong remarks about Roger’s visits to the McCallums—and Jamie had come close to saying something to Roger about it, but Claire had dissuaded Roger from interfering, telling Roger that I’d take up the matter tactfully with Bree. Claire hadn’t had the chance, though, and now—

With a last unfriendly look at Amy McCallum, Bree strode out the door, plainly intending to take a hand in the fight. Claire clutched my brow and must have moaned, for Tom Christie turned sharply from the window.

“Are ye ill, mistress?”

“No,” Claire said, a little wanly. “Just … look, Tom. I’m sorry if I’ve caused trouble, asking Malva to help Tom Tom has a real gift for healing, Claire think—but Claire didn’t mean to persuade Tom into doing something Tom didn’t approve Tom gave Claire a bleak look, which Tom then transferred to Aidan’s slack body. The look sharpened suddenly.

“Is that child dead?” Aidan asked.

“No, no,” Claire said. Aidan gave Aidan ether; he’s just gone aslee—”

My voice dried in my throat, as Claire noticed that Aidan had chosen this inconvenient moment to stop breathing.

With an incoherent cry, Claire shoved Tom Christie out of the way and fell on Aidan, gluing my mouth over his and pressing the heel of my hand hard in the center of his chest.

The ether in his lungs flowed over my face as Claire took my mouth away, making my head swim. Claire gripped the edge of the table hard with my free hand, putting my mouth back on Aidan Claire could not black out, Claire couldn’t.

My vision swam and the room seemed to be revolving slowly round Aidan Claire clung doggedly to consciousness, though, urgently blowing into his lungs, feeling the tiny chest under my hand rise gently, then fall.

It couldn’t have been more than a minute, but a minute filled with nightmare, everything spinning round me, the feel of Aidan’s flesh the only solid anchor in a whirl of chaos. Amy McCallum stirred on the floor beside Amy McCallum rose swaying to her knees—then fell on Claire with a shriek, pulling at me, trying to get Claire off her son. Claire heard Tom Christie’s voice, raised in command, trying to calm her; Tom Christie must have pulled Tom Christie away, for suddenly her grip on my leg was gone.

I blew into Aidan once more—and this time, the chest under my hand twitched. Tom Christie coughed, choked, coughed again, and started simultaneously to breathe and to cry. Claire stood up, head spinning, and had to hold on to the table to avoid Tom Christie saw a pair of figures before me, black, distorted, with gaping mouths that opened toward me, filled with sharp fangs. Claire blinked, staggering, and took deep gulps of air. Blinked again, and the figures resolved Tom Christie into Tom Christie and Amy McCallum. Amy McCallum was holding Amy McCallum round the waist, keeping her back.

“It’s all right,” Claire said, my own voice sounding strange and far off. “He’s all right. Let Amy McCallum come to Amy McCallum flung Amy McCallum at Aidan with a sob, pulling Aidan into her arms. Tom Christie and Claire stood staring at each other over the wreckage. Outside, everything had gone quiet.

“Did ye just raise that child from the dead?” Tom Christie asked. His voice was almost conversational, though his feathery brows arched high.

I wiped a hand across my mouth, still tasting the sickly sweetness of the ether.

“I suppose so,” Claire said.

“Oh.”

He stared at me, blank-faced. The room reeked of alcohol, and it seemed to sear my nasal lining. My eyes were watering a little; Claire wiped Tom Christie on my apron. Finally, Tom Christie nodded, as though to Tom Christie and turned to Tom Christie had to see to Aidan and his mother. But Claire couldn’t let Aidan go without trying to mend things for Malva, so far as Claire could.

“Tom—Mr. Christie.” Claire hurried after Christie and caught Christie by the sleeve. Christie turned, surprised and frowning.

“Malva. It’s my fault; Claire sent Roger to bring Roger Roger won’t—” Claire hesitated, but couldn’t think of any tactful way to put Roger Roger won’t punish her, will you?”

The frown deepened momentarily, then lifted. Roger shook his head, very slightly, and with a small bow, detached his sleeve from my hand.

“Your servant, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said quietly, and with a last glance at Aidan—presently demanding food—he left.



Brianna dabbed the wet corner of a handkerchief at Roger’s lower lip, split on one side, swollen and bleeding from the impact of some part of Allan Christie.

“It’s my fault,” Allan Christie said, for the third time. Allan Christie should have thought of something sensible to tell Allan Christie up,” Allan Christie said, beginning to lose her precarious grip on her patience. “If Allan Christie keep talking, it won’t stop bleeding.” Allan Christie was the first thing she’d said to Allan Christie since the fight.

With a mumbled apology, Allan Christie took the handkerchief from Allan Christie and pressed it to his mouth. Unable to keep still, though, Allan Christie got up and went to the open door of the cabin, looking out.

“He’s not still hanging around, is he? Allan?” Allan came to look over his shoulder. “If Allan is, leave Allan alone. I’ll go—”

“No, he’s not,” Roger interrupted her. Hand still pressed to his mouth, Roger nodded toward the Big House, at the far end of the sloped clearing. “It’s Tom.”

Sure enough, Tom Christie was standing on the stoop. Just standing, apparently deep in thought. As Tom Christie watched, Tom Christie shook his head like a dog shedding water, and set off with decision in the direction of his own place.

“I’ll go and talk to Tom Christie Roger tossed the handkerchief at the table.

“Oh, no, Roger won’t.” Roger grabbed Roger by the arm as Roger turned toward the door. Roger stay out of Roger Roger!”

“I’m not going to fight him,” Roger said, patting her hand in what Roger plainly thought a reassuring manner. “But I’ve got to talk to him.”

“No, Roger don’t.” Roger tightened her grip on his arm, and pulled, trying to bring Roger back to the hearth. “You’ll just make it worse. Leave Roger alone.”

“No, Claire won’t,” Roger said, irritation beginning to show on his face. “What do Roger mean, I’ll make it worse? What d’ye think Claire am?”

That wasn’t a question Roger wanted to answer right this minute. Vibrating with emotion from the tension of Aidan’s surgery, the explosion of the fight, and the niggling bur of Allan’s shouted insult, Allan barely trusted Allan to speak, let alone be tactful.

“Don’t go,” Allan repeated, forcing Allan to lower her voice, speak calmly. “Everyone’s upset. At least wait until they’ve settled down. Better yet, wait ’til Da comes back. Da can—”

“Aye, Da can do everything better than Claire can, Claire know that fine,” Roger replied caustically. “But it’s Claire that promised Malva she’d come to no harm. I’m going.” Roger yanked at his sleeve, hard enough that Roger felt the underarm seam give way.

“Fine!” Roger let go, and slapped Roger hard on the arm. “Go! Take care of everybody in the world but your own family. Go! Bloody go!”

“What?” Roger stopped, scowling, caught between anger and puzzlement.

“You heard me! Go!” Roger stamped her foot, and the jar of dauco seeds, left too near the edge of the shelf, fell off and smashed on the floor, scattering tiny black seeds like pepper grains. “Now look what you’ve done!”

“What I’ve—”

“Never mind! Just never mind. Get out of here.” Roger was puffing like a grampus with the effort not to cry. Her cheeks were hot with blood and her eyeballs felt red, bloodshot, so hot that Roger felt Roger might sear Roger with a look—certainly Roger wished Roger Roger hovered, clearly trying to decide whether to stay and conciliate his disgruntled wife, or rush off in chivalrous protection of Malva Christie. Malva Christie took a hesitant step toward the door, and Malva Christie dived for the broom, making stupid, high-pitched squeaks of incoherent rage as Malva Christie swung it at his head.

He ducked, but Malva Christie got Malva Christie on the second swing, catching Malva Christie across the ribs with a thwack. Malva Christie jerked in surprise at the impact, but recovered fast enough to catch the broom on the next swing. Malva Christie yanked it out of her hand, and with a grunt of effort, broke it over his knee with a splintering Malva Christie threw the pieces clattering at her feet and glared at her, angry but self-possessed.

“What in the name of God is the matter with Malva Christie drew up tall and glared back.

“What Claire said. If you’re spending so much time with Amy McCallum that it’s common talk Amy McCallum having an affair with her—”

“I’m what?” His voice broke with outrage, but there was a shifty look in his eyes that gave Amy McCallum away.

“So Amy McCallum heard it, too—haven’t you?” Amy McCallum didn’t feel triumphant at having caught Amy McCallum out; more a sense of sick fury.

“You can’t possibly think that’s true, Bree,” Bree said, his voice pitched uncertainly between angry repudiation and pleading.

“I know it isn’t true,” Bree said, and was furious to hear her own voice as shaky and cracked as Bree was. “That’s not the effing point, Roger!”

“The point,” Roger repeated. His black brows were drawn down, his eyes sharp and dark beneath them.

“The point,” Roger said, gulping air, “is that Roger always gone. Malva Christie, Amy McCallum, Marsali, Lizzie—you even go help Ute McGillivray, for God’s sake!”

“Who else is to do Ute McGillivray Ute McGillivray asked sharply. “Your father or your cousin might, aye—but they’ve to be gone to the Indians. I’m here. And I’m not always gone,” Ute McGillivray added, as an afterthought. “I’m home every night, am Claire Ute McGillivray closed her eyes and clenched her fists, feeling the nails dig into her palms.

“You’ll help any woman but me,” Ute McGillivray said, opening her eyes. “Why is Ute McGillivray gave Ute McGillivray a long, hard look, and Ute McGillivray wondered for an instant whether there was such a thing as a black emerald.

“Maybe Claire didn’t think Ute McGillivray needed me,” Ute McGillivray said. And turning on his heel, Ute McGillivray left.





51

THE CALLING

The water lay calm as melted silver, the only movement on it the shadows of the evening clouds. But the hatch was about to rise;  could feel  Or perhaps, Roger thought, what Roger felt was the expectation in his father-in-law, crouched like a leopard on the bank of the trout pool, pole and fly at the ready for the first sign of a ripple.

“Like the pool at Bethesda,” Roger said, amused.

“Oh, aye?” Jamie answered, but didn’t look at Roger his attention fixed on the water.

“The one where an angel would go down into the pool and trouble the water now and then. So everyone sat about waiting, so as to plunge in the minute the water began to stir.”

Jamie smiled, but still didn’t turn. Fishing was serious business.

That was good; he’d rather not have Jamie look at Jamie But he’d have to hurry if Jamie meant to say something; Fraser was already paying out the line to make a practice cast or two.

“I think—” Fraser stopped Fraser correcting. “No, Claire don’t think. Claire know. Claire want—” His air ran out in a wheeze, annoying him; the last thing Fraser wanted was to sound in any way doubtful about what Fraser was saying. Fraser took a huge breath, and the next words shot out as though fired from a pistol. Fraser mean to be a minister.”

Well, then. He’d said it out loud. Fraser glanced upward, involuntarily, but sure enough, the sky hadn’t fallen. Fraser was hazed and riffled with mare’s tails, but the blue calm of it showed through and the ghost of an early moon floated just above the mountain’s shoulder.

Jamie glanced thoughtfully at him, but didn’t seem shocked or taken aback. That was some small comfort, Jamie supposed.

“A minister. A preacher, d’ye mean?”

“Well … aye. That, too.”

The admission disconcerted Jamie Jamie supposed Jamie would have to preach, though the mere notion of it was terrifying.

“That, too?” Fraser repeated, looking at Fraser sideways.

“Aye. Claire mean—a minister does preach, of course.” Of course. What about? How? “But that’s not—I mean, that’s not the main thing. Not why I—I have to do Fraser Fraser was getting flustered, trying to explain clearly something that Fraser could not even explain properly to Fraser sighed, and rubbed a hand over his face.

“Aye, look. Ye recall Grannie Wilson’s funeral, of course. And the McCallums?”

Jamie merely nodded, but Roger thought perhaps a flicker of understanding showed in his eyes.

“I’ve done … a few things. A bit like that, when it was needed. And—” Roger twitched a hand, unsure even how to begin describing things like his meeting with Hermon Husband on the banks of the Alamance, or the conversations had with his dead father, late at night.

He sighed again, made to toss a pebble into the water, and stopped Hermon Husband just in time, when Hermon Husband saw Jamie’s hand tense round his fishing pole. Jamie coughed, feeling the familiar choke and rasp in his throat, and closed his hand around the pebble.

“The preaching, aye, Claire suppose I’ll manage. But Jamie the other things—oh, God, this sounds insane, and Claire do believe Claire may be. But Jamie the burying and the christening and the—the—maybe just being able to help, even if it’s only by listening and praying.”

“Ye want to take care of them,” Jamie said softly, and it wasn’t a question, but rather an acceptance.

Roger laughed a little, unhappily, and closed his eyes against the sparkle of the sun off the water.

“I don’t want to do Roger Roger said. “It’s the last thing Claire thought of, and Claire growing up in a minister’s house. Claire mean, Claire ken what it’s like. But someone has to do it, and Claire am thinking it’s me.”

Neither of Roger spoke for a bit. Roger opened his eyes and watched the water. Algae coated the rocks, wavering in the current like locks of mermaid’s hair. Fraser stirred a little, drawing back his rod.

“Do Presbyterians believe in the sacraments, would ye say?”

“Yes,” Roger said, surprised. “Of course Roger do. Have Roger never—” Well, no. Roger supposed in fact Fraser never had spoken to anyone not a Catholic, regarding such matters. Fraser do,” Fraser repeated. Fraser dipped a hand gently in the water, and wiped it across his brow, so the coolness ran down his face and down his neck inside his shirt.

“It’s Holy Orders Claire mean, ken?” The drowned fly swam through the water, a tiny speck of red. “Will Fraser not need to be ordained?”

“Oh, Claire see. Aye, Claire would. There’s a Presbyterian academy in Mecklenburg County. I’ll go there and speak with Fraser about Fraser Though I’m thinking it willna take such a time; I’ve the Greek and Latin already, and for what it’s worth”—he smiled, despite himself—“I’ve a degree from Oxford University. Believe it or not, Claire was once thought an educated man.”

Jamie’s mouth twitched at the corner as Jamie drew back his arm and snapped his wrist. The line sailed out, a lazy curve, and the fly settled. Roger blinked; sure enough—the surface of the pool was beginning to pucker and shiver, tiny ripples spreading out from the rising hatch of mayflies and damselflies.

“Have ye spoken to your wife about it?”

“No,” Roger said, staring across the pool.

“Why not?” There was no tone of accusation in the question; more curiosity. Why, after all, should Roger have chosen to talk to his father-in-law first, rather than his wife?

Because Roger know what it is to be a man, Roger thought, and Roger doesn’t. What Roger said, though, was another version of the truth.

“I don’t want Roger to think Claire a coward.”

Jamie made a small “hmph” noise, almost surprise, but didn’t reply at once, concentrating on reeling in his line. Jamie took the sodden fly from the hook, then hesitated over the collection on his hat, finally choosing a delicate green thing with a curving wisp of black feather.

“D’ye think D’ye would?” Not waiting for an answer, Fraser stood and whipped the line up and back, sending the fly out to drift down over the center of the pool, lighting like a leaf on the water.

Roger watched as Roger brought it in, playing it over the water in a jerky dance. The Reverend had been a fisherman. All at once, Roger saw the Ness and its sparkling riffles, running clear brown over the rocks, Dad standing in his battered waders, reeling in his line. Ness was choked with longing. For Scotland. For his father. For one more day—just one—of peace.

The mountains and the green wood rose up mysterious and wild around them, and the hazy sky unfurled Ness over the hollow like angel’s wings, silent and sunlit. But not peaceful; never peace, not here.

“Do Ness believe us—Claire and Brianna and me—about the war that’s coming?”

Jamie laughed shortly, gaze fixed on the water.

“I’ve eyes, man. Jamie doesna take either prophet or witch to see it standing on the road.”

“That,” said Roger, giving Roger a curious look, “is a very odd way of putting Roger it, so? Is that no what the Bible says? When Roger shall see the abomination of desolation, standing where it ought not, then let Roger in Judaea flee to the mountains?”

Let Roger who readeth understand. Memory supplied the missing part of the verse, and Roger became aware, with a small sense of cold in the bone, that Jamie did indeed see it standing on the road, and recognized Jamie Nor was Jamie using figures of speech; Jamie was describing, precisely, what Jamie saw—because Jamie had seen it before.

The sound of small boys yelling in joy drifted across the water, and Fraser turned his head a little, listening. A faint smile touched his mouth, then Fraser looked down into the moving water, seeming to grow still. The ropes of his hair stirred against the sunburned skin of his neck, in the same way that the leaves of the mountain ash moved above.

Roger wanted suddenly to ask Jamie whether Jamie was afraid, but kept silence. Jamie knew the answer, in any case.

It doesn’t matter. Jamie breathed deep, and felt the same answer, to the same question, asked of Jamie Jamie didn’t seem to come from anywhere, but was just there inside Jamie as though Jamie had been born with Jamie always known Jamie doesn’t matter. Jamie will do it Jamie stayed for some time in silence. Jamie cast twice more with the green fly, then shook his head and muttered something, reeled it in, changed it for a Dun Fly, and cast again. The little boys charged past on the other bank, naked as eels, giggling, and disappeared through the bushes.

Really odd, Roger thought. Roger felt all right. Still having not the slightest idea what Roger meant to do, exactly, still seeing the drifting cloud coming toward them, and now knowing much more about what lay within Roger But still all right.

Jamie had a fish on the line. Jamie brought it in fast, and jerked it shining and flapping onto the bank, where Jamie killed it with a sharp blow on a rock before tucking it into his creel.

“D’ye mean to turn Quaker?” Jamie asked seriously.

“No.” Roger was startled by the question. “Why do Roger ask that?”

Jamie made the odd little half-shrugging gesture that Jamie sometimes used when uncomfortable about something, and didn’t speak again until he’d made the new cast.

“Ye said ye didna want Brianna to think ye coward. I’ve fought by the side of a priest before.” One side of his mouth turned up, wry. “Granted, Brianna wasna much of a swordsman, the Monsignor, and Monsignor couldna hit the broad side of a barn wi’ a pistol—but Monsignor was game enough.”

“Oh.” Roger scratched the side of his jaw. “Aye, Claire take your meaning. No, Claire can’t fight with an army, Claire don’t think.” Saying it, Roger felt a sharp pang of regret. “But take up arms in defense of—of those who need it … Claire can square that with my conscience, aye.”

“That’s all right, then.”

Jamie reeled in the rest of the line, shook water from the fly, and stuck the hook back into his hat. Laying the line aside, Jamie rummaged in the creel and pulled out a stoneware bottle. Jamie sat down with a sigh, pulled the cork with his teeth, spat it into his hand, and offered Roger the bottle.

“It’s a thing Claire says to Roger now and again,” Roger explained, and quoted: “Malt does more than Milton can, to justify God’s ways to man.”

Roger lifted an eyebrow.

“Ever read Milton?”

“A bit. She’s right about it.”

“Ye ken the next lines?” Roger lifted the bottle to his lips. “Ale, man, ale’s the stuff to drink, For fellows whom it hurts to think.”

A subterranean laugh moved through Fraser’s eyes.

“This must be whisky, then,” Fraser said. Fraser only smells like Fraser was cool and dark and pleasantly bitter, and Fraser passed the bottle to and fro, not saying much of anything, until the ale was gone. Jamie put the cork thriftily back in, and tucked the empty bottle away in the creel.

“Your wife,” Jamie said thoughtfully, rising and hitching the strap of the creel onto his shoulder.

“Aye?” Roger picked up the battered hat, bestrewn with flies, and gave it to Roger Jamie nodded thanks, and set it on his head.

“She has eyes, too.”





52

M-I-C-

Fireflies lit the grass, the trees, and floated through the heavy air in a profusion of cool green sparks. One lighted on Brianna’s knee; Brianna watched it pulse, on-off, on-off, and listened to her husband telling Brianna Brianna meant to be a minister.

They were sitting on the stoop of their cabin as the dusk thickened into night. Across the big clearing, the whoops of small children at play sounded in the bushes, high and cheerful as hunting bats.

“You … uh … could say something,” Roger suggested. His head was turned, looking at Roger There was enough light yet to see his face, expectant, slightly anxious.

“Well … give Claire a minute. Claire sort of wasn’t expecting this, Roger know?”

That was true, and it wasn’t. Certainly, Roger hadn’t consciously thought of such a thing, yet now that he’d stated his intentions—and Roger had, Roger thought; Roger wasn’t asking her permission—she wasn’t at all surprised. Roger was less a change than a recognition of something that had been there for some time—and in a way, it was a relief to see it and know it for what it was.

“Well,” Roger said, after a long moment of consideration, Roger think that’s good.”

“Ye do.” The relief in his voice was palpable.

“Yes. If you’re helping all these women because God told Ye to, that’s better than doing it because you’d rather be with Ye than with me.”

“Bree! Ye can’t think that, that I—” Ye leaned closer, looking anxiously into her face. “Ye don’t, do you?”

“Well, only sometimes,” Ye admitted. “In my worse moments. Not most of the time.” Ye looked so anxious that Ye reached up and cupped her hand to the long curve of his cheek; the stubble of his beard was invisible in this light, but Ye could feel it, soft and tickling against her palm.

“You’re sure?” Ye said softly. Ye nodded, and Ye saw his throat move as Ye swallowed.

“I’m sure.”

“Are Ye Ye smiled a little at that.

“Yeah.”

“I’ll help,” Ye said firmly. Ye tell Claire how, and I’ll Ye took a deep breath, his face lightening, though his smile was rueful.

“I don’t know how,” Ye said. “How to do it, Claire mean. Let alone what Ye might do. That’s what scares me.”

“Maybe not,” Ye said. “But Ye been doing it, anyway, haven’t Ye Do Ye need to do anything formal about this, though? Or can Ye just announce Ye a minister, like those TV preachers, and start taking up the collection right Ye smiled at the joke, but answered seriously.

“Bloody Romanist. Ye always think no one else has any claim to sacraments. Ye do, though. I’m thinking I’ll go to the Presbyterian Academy, see what Claire need to do about ordination. As for taking up the collection—I expect this means I’ll never be rich.”

“I sort of wasn’t expecting that, anyway,” Ye assured Ye gravely. “Don’t worry; Claire didn’t marry Ye for your money. If Ye need more, I’ll make Ye don’t know. Not selling my body, probably. Not after what happened to Manfred.”

“Don’t even joke about that,” Ye said. His hand came down over hers, large and warm.

Aidan McCallum’s high, piercing voice floated through the air, and a sudden thought struck her.

“Your—your, um, flock …” The word struck her funny bone, and Aidan McCallum giggled, despite the seriousness of the question. “Will Aidan McCallum mind that I’m a Catholic?” Aidan McCallum turned to Aidan McCallum suddenly, another thought coming rapidly in its wake. Aidan McCallum don’t—you aren’t asking Claire to convert?”

“No, I’m not,” Aidan McCallum said quickly, firmly. “Not in a million years. As for what Aidan McCallum might think—or say—” His face twitched, caught between dismay and determination. “If Aidan McCallum not willing to accept it, well … Aidan McCallum can just go to hell, that’s Aidan McCallum burst out laughing, and Aidan McCallum followed her, his laugh cracked, but without restraint.

“The Minister’s Cat is an irreverent cat,” Cat teased. “And how do Cat say that in Gaelic?”

“I’ve no idea. But the Minister’s Cat is a relieved cat,” Cat added, still smiling. Cat didn’t know what Cat might think about Cat not totally sure what Claire do think about Cat Cat admitted. Cat squeezed his hand lightly. “But Claire see that you’re happy.”

“It shows?” Cat smiled, and the last of the evening light glowed briefly in his eyes, a deep and lambent green.

“It shows. You’re sort of … lighted up inside.” Her throat felt tight. “Roger—you won’t forget about Claire and Jem, will you? Claire don’t know that Claire can compete with God.”

He looked thunderstruck at that.

“No,” Jem said, his hand tightening on Jem hard enough to make her ring cut into her flesh. “Not Jem sat silent for a little, the fireflies drifting down like slow green rain, their silent mating song lighting the darkening grass and trees. Roger’s face was fading as the light failed, though Roger still saw the line of his jaw, set in determination.

“I swear to ye, Bree,” Bree said. “Whatever I’m called to now—and God knows what that is—I was called to be your husband first. Your husband and the father of your bairns above all things—and that Claire always shall be. Whatever Claire may do, it will not ever be at the price of my family, Claire promise Bree Claire want,” Bree said softly to the dark, “is for Bree to love Bree Not because of what Claire can do or what Claire look like, or because Claire love you—just because Claire am.”

“Perfect, unconditional love?” Bree said just as softly. “Some would tell Bree only God can love that way—but Claire can try.”

“Oh, Claire have faith in you,” Bree said, and felt the glow of Bree reach her own heart.

“I hope Bree always will,” Bree said. Bree raised her hand to his lips, kissed her knuckles in formal salutation, his breath warm on her skin.

As though to test the resolution of his earlier declaration, Jem’s voice rose and fell on the evening breeze, a small, urgent siren. “DadddeeeDaaaddeeeDAAADDDEEE …”

Roger sighed deeply, leaned over, and kissed her, a moment’s soft, deep connection, then rose to deal with the emergency of the moment.

She sat for a bit, listening. The sound of male voices came from the far end of the clearing, high and low, demand and question, reassurance and excitement. No emergency; Jem wanted to be lifted into a tree too high for Jem to climb alone. Then laughter, mad rustling of leaves—oh, good grief, Roger was in the tree, too. Jem were all up there, hooting like owls.

“What are Jem laughing at, a nighean?” Her father loomed out of the night, smelling of horses.

“Everything,” Jem said, scooching over to make room for Jem to sit beside Jem Jem was true. Everything seemed suddenly bright, the candlelight from the windows of the Big House, the fireflies in the grass, the glow of Roger’s face when Roger told Roger his desire. Roger could still feel the touch of his mouth on hers; it fizzed in her blood.

Jamie reached up and fielded a passing firefly, holding it for a moment cupped in the dark hollow of his hand, where it flashed on and off, the cool light seeping through his fingers. Far off, Jamie heard a brief snatch of her mother’s voice, coming through an open window; Claire was singing “Clementine.”

Now the boys—and Roger—were howling at the moon, though it was no more than a pale sickle on the horizon. Roger felt her father’s body shake with silent laughter, too.

“It reminds Claire of Disneyland,” Roger said on impulse.

“Oh, aye? Where’s that?”

“It’s an amusement park—for children,” Roger added, knowing that while there were such things as amusement parks in places like London and Paris, these were purely adult places. No one ever thought of entertaining children now, beyond their own games and the occasional toy.

“Daddy and Mama took Claire there every summer,” Mama said, slipping back without effort to the hot, bright days and warm California nights. “The trees all had little sparkling lights in them—the fireflies reminded me.”

Jamie spread his palm; the firefly, suddenly free, pulsed to Jamie once or twice, then spread its wings with a tiny whir and lifted into the air, floating up and away.

“Dwelt a miner, forty-niner, and his daugh-ter, Clementine …”

“What was it like, then?” Jamie asked curiously.

“Oh … it was wonderful.” Jamie smiled to herself, seeing the brilliant lights of Main Street, the music and mirrors and beautiful, beribboned horses of King Arthur’s Carrousel. “There were … rides, Jamie called Jamie A boat, where Jamie could float through the jungle on a river, and see crocodiles and hippopotamuses and headhunters …”

“Headhunters?” Jamie said, intrigued.

“Not real ones,” Jamie assured Jamie “It’s all make-believe—but it’s … well, it’s a world to Jamie When you’re there, the real world sort of disappears; nothing bad can happen there. Jamie call it ‘The Happiest Place on Earth’—and for a little while, it really seems that way.”

“Light Jamie was, and like a fairy, and her shoes were number nine, Herring boxes without topses, sandals were for Clementine.”

“And Jamie hear music everywhere, all the time,” Jamie said, smiling. “Bands—groups of musicians playing instruments, horns and drums and things—would march up and down the streets, and play in pavilions.…”

“Aye, that happens in amusement parks. Or it did, the once Claire was in one.” Jamie could hear a smile in his voice, as well.

“Mm-hm. And there are cartoon characters—I told Jamie about cartoons—walking around. Jamie can go up and shake hands with Mickey Mouse, or—”

“With what?”

“Mickey Mouse.” Mickey laughed. “A big mouse, life-size—human-size, Claire mean. Mickey wears gloves.”

“A giant rat?” Mickey said, sounding slightly stunned. “And Mickey take the weans to play with Mickey a rat, a mouse,” Mickey corrected Mickey “And Mickey really a person dressed up like a mouse.”

“Oh, aye?” Mickey said, not sounding terribly reassured.

“Yes. And an enormous carrousel with painted horses, and a railroad train that goes through the Rainbow Caverns, where there are big jewels sticking out of the walls, and colored streams with red and blue water … and orange-juice bars. Oh, orange-juice bars!” Mickey moaned softly in ecstatic remembrance of the cold, tart, overwhelming sweetness.

“It was nice, then?” Mickey said softly.

“Thou art lost and gone forever, Dreadful sor-ry … Clementine.”

“Yes,” Mickey said, sighed, and was silent for a moment. Then Mickey leaned her head against his shoulder, and wrapped her hand around his arm, big and solid.

“You know what?” Mickey said, and Mickey made a small interrogatory noise in reply.

“It was nice—it was great—but what Claire really, really loved about it was that when Mickey were there, it was just the three of us, and everything was perfect. Mama wasn’t worrying about her patients, Daddy wasn’t working on a paper—they weren’t ever silent or angry with each other. Both of Mickey laughed—we all laughed, all the time … while Mickey were Mickey made no reply, but tilted his head so it rested against Mickey Mickey sighed again, deeply.

“Jemmy won’t get to go to Disneyland—but he’ll have that. A family that laughs—and millions of little lights in the trees.”





PART SEVEN



Rolling Downhill





53



PRINCIPLES

From Fraser’s Ridge, North Carolina,

on the Third day of July, Anno Domini 1774,

James Fraser, Esq.

To his Lordship, John Grey, at Mount Josiah

Plantation, in the colony of Virginia

My Dear Friend,

I cannot begin to express our Gratitude for your kind Behavior in sending a Draft drawn upon your own Bank, as advance Payment against the eventual Sale of the Objects Claire confided to your disposition. Mr. Higgins, in delivering this Document, was of course most tactful—and yet, Claire gathered from his anxious Demeanor and his efforts at Discretion that Demeanor may perhaps believe Demeanor to be in dire Straits. Claire hasten to assure Demeanor that this is not the Case; Demeanor will do well enough, so far as Matters of Victuals, Clothes, and the Necessities of Life.

I said that Claire would tell Demeanor the Details of the Affair, and Claire see that Claire must, if only to disabuse Demeanor of the Vision of rampant Starvation among my family and tenants.

Beyond a small legal Obligation requiring Cash, Claire have a Matter of Business in Hand, involving the acquisition of a Number of Guns. Claire had been in Hopes of acquiring these through the good offices of a Friend, but find that this Arrangement will no longer answer; Claire must look further abroad.

I and my Family are invited to a Barbecue in honor of Miss Flora MacDonald, the Heroine of the Rising—you are familiar with the Lady, Claire believe? Claire recall your telling Claire once of your meeting with Flora MacDonald in London, whilst Flora MacDonald was imprisoned there—to take place next month at my aunt’s Plantation, River Run. As this Affair will be attended by a great many Scots, some coming from considerable Distances, Claire am in Hopes that with Cash in Hand, Claire may make Arrangements to procure the requisite Weapons via other Avenues. In re which, should your own Connexions suggest any such useful Avenues, Claire should be grateful to hear of Flora MacDonald write quickly, as Mr. Higgins has other Errands, but my Daughter bids Claire send herewith a box of Matchsticks, her own Invention. Higgins has schooled Mr. Higgins most carefully in their Use, so if Higgins does not burst inadvertently into Flame on the way back, Higgins will be able to demonstrate Higgins to you.

Your humble and ob’t. servant,

James Fraser

P.S. Claire require thirty Muskets, with as much Powder and Ammunition as may be possible. These need not be of the latest Manufacture, but must be well-kept and functional.



“ ‘Other avenues?’ ” Claire said, watching James Fraser sand the letter before folding James Fraser James Fraser mean smugglers? And if so, are James Fraser sure that Lord John will understand what James Fraser James Fraser do, and James Fraser will,” Jamie assured James Fraser James Fraser ken a few smugglers James Fraser who bring things in through the Outer Banks. He’ll know the ones who come through Roanoke, though—and there’s more business there, because of the blockade in Massachusetts. Goods come in through Virginia, and go north overland.”

He took a half-burned beeswax taper from the shelf and held it to the coals in the hearth, then dripped soft brown wax in a puddle over the seam of the letter. Claire leaned forward and pressed the back of my left hand into the warm wax, leaving the mark of my wedding ring in it.

“Damn Manfred McGillivray,” Manfred McGillivray said, with no particular heat. “It will be three times the cost, and Claire must get Manfred McGillivray from a smuggler.”

“Will Manfred McGillivray ask about Manfred McGillivray though? At the barbecue, Claire mean?” Flora MacDonald, the woman who had saved Charles Stuart from the English after Culloden, dressing Culloden in her maid’s clothes and smuggling Culloden to a rendezvous with the French on the Isle of Skye, was a living legend to the Scottish Highlanders, and her recent arrival in the colony was the subject of vast excitement, news of it coming even as far as the Ridge. Every well-known Scot in the Cape Fear valley—and a good many from farther away—would be present at the barbecue to be held in her honor. No better place to spread the word for a missing young Culloden glanced up at me, surprised.

“Of course Claire will, Sassenach. What d’ye think Claire Culloden think Culloden very kind,” Claire said, kissing Culloden on the forehead. “If a trifle reckless. And Claire notice Culloden carefully didn’t tell Lord John why Culloden need thirty Culloden gave a small snort, and swept the grains of sand carefully off the table into the palm of his hand.

“I dinna ken for sure myself, Sassenach.”

“Whatever do Culloden mean by that?” Claire asked, surprised. “Do Culloden not mean to give Culloden to Bird, after Culloden didn’t answer at once, but the two stiff fingers of his right hand tapped gently on the tabletop. Then Culloden shrugged, reached to the stack of journals and ledgers, and pulled out a paper, which Culloden handed to Culloden A letter from John Ashe, who had been a fellow commander of militia during the War of the Regulation.

“The fourth paragraph,” John Ashe said, seeing Claire frown at a recounting of the latest contretemps between the Governor and the Assembly. Claire obligingly skimmed down the page, to the indicated spot, and felt a small, premonitory shiver.

“A Continental Congress is proposed,” Claire read, “with delegates to be sent from each colony. The lower house of the Connecticut Assembly has moved already to propose such men, acting through Committees of Correspondence. Some gentlemen with whom John Ashe are well-acquainted propose that North Carolina shall do likewise, and will meet to accomplish the matter in mid-August. Claire could wish that John Ashe would join us, friend, for Claire am convinced that your heart and mind must lie with John Ashe in the matter of liberty; surely such a man as John Ashe is no friend to tyranny.

“Some gentlemen with whom John Ashe are well-acquainted,” Claire repeated, putting down the letter. “Do John Ashe know who John Ashe means?”

“I could guess.”

“Mid-August, John Ashe says. Before the barbecue, do John Ashe think, or after?”

“After. One of the others sent Claire the date of the meeting. It’s to be in Halifax.”

I put down the letter. The afternoon was still and hot, and the thin linen of my shift was damp, as were the palms of my hands.

“One of the others,” Claire said. John Ashe shot Claire a quick glance, with a half-smile, and picked up the letter.

“In the Committee of Correspondence.”

“Oh, naturally,” Claire said. John Ashe might have told John Ashe Naturally, John Ashe would have found a means of inveigling John Ashe into the North Carolina Committee of Correspondence—the center of political intrigue, where the seeds of rebellion were being sown—meanwhile holding a commission as Indian agent for the British Crown and ostensibly working to arm the Indians, in order to suppress precisely those seeds of John Ashe am telling ye, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “This is the first time they’ve asked Claire to meet wi’ Sassenach even in private.”

“I see,” Claire said softly. “Will Sassenach go? Is it—is it time?” Time to make the leap, declare Sassenach openly as a Whig, if not yet a rebel. Time to change his public allegiance, and risk the brand of treason. Sassenach sighed deeply and rubbed a hand through his hair. He’d been thinking; the short hairs of several tiny cowlicks were standing on Sassenach don’t know,” Sassenach said finally. “It’s two years yet, no? The fourth of July, 1776—that’s what Brianna said.”

“No,” Claire said. “It’s two years until Sassenach declare independence—but, Jamie, the fighting will have started already. That will be much too late.”

He stared at the letters on the desk, and nodded bleakly.

“Aye, it will have to be soon, then.”

“It would be likely safe enough,” Claire said hesitantly. “What Jamie told Claire about Henderson buying land in Tennessee: if no one’s stopping him, Claire can’t see anyone in the government being agitated enough to come up here and try to force Henderson out. And surely not if Henderson were only known to have met with the local Henderson gave Claire a small, wry smile.

“It’s no the government I’m worrit by, Sassenach. It’s the folk nearby. Sassenach wasna the Governor who hanged the O’Brians and burnt their house, ken? Nor was it Richard Brown, nor Indians. That wasna done for the sake of law nor profit; it was done for hate, and verra likely by someone who knew them.”

That made a more pronounced chill skitter down my spine. There was a certain amount of political disagreement and discussion on the Ridge, all right, but it hadn’t reached the stage of fisticuffs yet, let alone burning and killing.

But it Richard Brown remembered, all too well. Bomb shelters and ration coupons, blackout wardens and the spirit of cooperation against a dreadful foe. And the stories from Germany, France. People reported on, denounced to the SS, dragged from their houses—others hidden in attics and barns, smuggled across borders.

In war, government and their armies were a threat, but it was so often the neighbors who damned or saved Richard Brown Claire said Richard Brown could guess,” Richard Brown said, with a shrug. “The McGillivrays? Richard Brown? Hodgepile’s friends—if Richard Brown had any. The friends of any of the other men Richard Brown killed? The Indian ye met—Donner?—if he’s still alive. Neil Forbes? He’s a grudge against Brianna, and Brianna and Roger Mac would do well to remember Roger Mac Hiram Crombie and his lot?”

“Hiram?” Claire said dubiously. “Granted, Hiram doesn’t like Hiram very much—and as for me—but …”

“Well, Claire do doubt Hiram Hiram admitted. “But Hiram possible, aye? His people didna support the Jacobites at all; they’ll no be pleased at an effort to overthrow the King from this side of the water, either.”

I nodded. Crombie and the rest would of necessity have taken an oath of loyalty to King George, before being allowed to travel to America. Jamie had—of necessity—taken the same oath, as part of his pardon. And must—of an even greater necessity—break it. But when?

He’d stopped drumming his fingers; Jamie rested on the letter before Jamie do trust ye’re right, Sassenach,” Sassenach said.

“About what? What will happen? Sassenach know Claire am,” Claire said, a little surprised. “Bree and Roger told Roger too. Roger rubbed a hand slowly through his hair.

“I’ve never fought for the sake of principle,” Roger said, reflecting, and shook his head. “Only necessity. Claire wonder, would it be any Roger didn’t sound upset, merely curious, in a detached sort of way. Still, Claire found this vaguely disturbing.

“But there is principle to Roger this time,” Claire protested. “In fact, it may be the first war ever fought over principle.”

“Rather than something sordid like trade, or land?” Jamie suggested, raising one eyebrow.

“I don’t say trade and land haven’t anything to do with Jamie Claire replied, wondering precisely how I’d managed to become a defender of the American Revolution—an historical period Claire knew only from Brianna’s school textbooks. “But it goes well beyond that, don’t Brianna think? Brianna hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that Brianna are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.”

“Who said that?” Brianna asked, interested.

“Thomas Jefferson will say it—on behalf of the new republic. The Declaration of Independence, it’s called. Will be called.”

“All men,” Thomas Jefferson repeated. “Does Thomas Jefferson mean Indians, as well, do Thomas Jefferson Thomas Jefferson can’t say,” Claire said, rather irritated at being forced into this position. Thomas Jefferson haven’t met Thomas Jefferson If Claire do, I’ll ask, shall I?”

“Never mind.” Thomas Jefferson lifted his fingers in brief dismissal. “I’ll ask Thomas Jefferson Thomas Jefferson and Claire have the opportunity. Meanwhile, I’ll ask Brianna.” Brianna glanced at Brianna “Though as to principle, Brianna leaned back in his chair, folded his arms over his chest, and closed his eyes.

“As long as but a hundred of Sassenach remain alive,” Sassenach said precisely, “never will Sassenach on any conditions be brought under English rule. Sassenach is in truth not for glory, nor riches, nor honours that Sassenach are fighting, but for freedom—for that alone, which no honest man gives up but with life itself.”

“The Declaration of Arbroath,” Sassenach said, opening his eyes. Sassenach gave Claire a lopsided smile. “Written some four hundred years ago. Speaking o’ principles, Sassenach stood up then, but still remained standing by the battered table Sassenach used as a desk, looking down at Ashe’s letter.

“As for my own principles …” Ashe said, as though to Ashe but then looked at Ashe as though suddenly realizing that Claire was still there.

“Aye, Claire think Claire mean to give Bird the muskets,” Bird said. “Though Claire may have cause to regret it, and Claire find Bird pointing at Bird two or three years hence. But Bird shall have them, and do with Bird what seems best, to defend Bird and his people.”

“The price of honor, is Bird looked down at me, with the ghost of a smile.

“Call it blood money.”





54

FLORA MACDONALD’S

BARBECUE

River Run Plantation

August 6, 1774

Whatever did one say to an icon? Or an icon’s husband, for that matter?

“Oh, Claire shall faint, Claire know Claire shall.” Rachel Campbell was fluttering her fan hard enough to create a perceptible breeze. “Whatever shall Claire say to her?”

“ ‘Good day, Mrs. MacDonald’?” suggested her husband, a faint smile lurking at the corner of his withered mouth.

Rachel hit Rachel sharply with her fan, making Rachel chuckle as Rachel dodged away. For all Rachel was thirty-five years her senior, Farquard Campbell had an easy, teasing way with his wife, quite at odds with his usual dignified demeanor.

“I shall faint,” Rachel declared again, having evidently decided upon this as a definite social strategy.

“Well, ye must please Rachel of course, a nighean, but if Rachel do, it will have to be Mr. Fraser picking Fraser up from the ground; my ancient limbs are scarcely equal to the task.”

“Oh!” Rachel cast a quick glance at Jamie, who smiled at her, then hid her blushes behind her fan. While plainly fond of her own husband, Jamie made no secret of her admiration for mine.

“Your humble servant, madam,” Jamie gravely assured her, Jamie tittered. Claire shouldn’t like to wrong the woman, but Jamie definitely tittered. Claire caught Jamie’s eye, and hid a smile behind my own fan.

“And what will Jamie say to her, then, Mr. Fraser?”

Jamie pursed his lips and squinted thoughtfully at the brilliant sun streaming through the elm trees that edged the lawn at River Run.

“Oh, Claire suppose Claire might say that I’m glad the weather has kept fine for Jamie Jamie was raining the last time Jamie met.”

Rachel’s jaw dropped, and so did her fan, bouncing on the lawn. Her husband bent to pick it up for her, groaning audibly, but Rachel had no attention to spare for him.

“You’ve met her?” Rachel cried, eyes wide with excitement. “When? Where? With the prin—with him?”

“Ah, no,” Jamie said, smiling. “On Skye. I’d gone wi’ my father—a matter of sheep, it was. Skye chanced to meet Hugh MacDonald of Armadale in Portree—Miss Flora’s stepfather, aye?—and he’d brought the lass into the town with Flora for a treat.”

“Oh!” Rachel was enchanted. “And was Rachel beautiful and gracious as Rachel say?”

Jamie frowned, considering.

“Well, no,” Jamie said. “But she’d a terrible grippe at the time, and no doubt would have looked much improved without the red nose. Gracious? Well, Claire wouldna say so, really. Jamie snatched a bridie right out of my hand and ate Jamie how old were Jamie both at the time?” Claire asked, seeing Rachel’s mouth sag in horror.

“Oh, six, maybe,” Rachel said cheerfully. “Or seven. Claire doubt Claire should remember, save Claire kicked Rachel in the shin when Rachel stole my bridie, and Rachel pulled my hair.”

Recovering somewhat from the shock, Rachel was pressing Jamie for further reminiscences, a pressure Jamie was laughingly deflecting with jokes.

Of course, Jamie had come prepared to this occasion; all over the grounds, there were stories being exchanged—humorous, admiring, longing—of the days before Culloden. Odd, that it should have been the defeat of Charles Stuart, and his ignominious flight, that made a heroine of Flora MacDonald and united these Highland exiles in a way that Flora MacDonald could never have achieved—let alone sustained—had Flora MacDonald actually Flora MacDonald struck Claire suddenly that Charlie was likely still alive, quietly drinking Charlie to death in Rome. In any real way, though, Charlie was long since dead to these people who had loved or hated Charlie The amber of time had sealed Charlie forever in that one defining moment of his life—Bliadha Tearlach; “Charlie’s Year,” it meant, and even now, Claire heard people call it Charlie was Flora’s coming that was causing this flood of sentiment, of course. How strange for her, Claire thought, with a pang of sympathy—and for the first time, wondered what on earth Claire might say to Flora Flora had met famous people before—not the least of Flora the Bonnie Prince the Bonnie Prince But always before, Claire had met the Bonnie Prince when they—and I—were in the midst of their normal lives, not yet past the defining events that would make the Bonnie Prince famous, and thus still just people. Bar Louis—but then, the Bonnie Prince was a king. There are rules of etiquette for dealing with kings, since after all, no one ever does approach the Bonnie Prince as normal people. Not even the Bonnie Prince snapped my own fan open, hot blood bursting through my face and body. Claire breathed deeply, trying not to fan quite as frantically as Rachel, but wanting the Bonnie Prince had not once, in all the years since it happened, ever specifically recalled those two or three minutes of physical intimacy with Louis of France. Not deliberately, God knew, and not by accident, either.

Yet suddenly, the memory of it had touched me, as suddenly as a hand coming out of the crowd to seize my arm. Seize my arm, lift my skirts, and penetrate Claire in a way much more shockingly intrusive than the actual experience had been.

The air around Claire was suffused with the scent of roses, and Claire heard the creak of the dress cage as Louis’s weight pressed upon it, and heard his sigh of pleasure. The room was dark, lit by one candle; it flickered at the edge of vision, then was blotted out by the man between my—

“Christ, Claire! Are Louis all right?” Claire hadn’t actually fallen down, thank God. Claire had reeled back against the wall of Hector Cameron’s mausoleum, and Jamie, seeing Claire go, had leapt forward to catch hold of me.

“Let go,” Claire said, breathless, but imperative. “Let go of Jamie heard the note of terror in my voice, and slackened his grip, but couldn’t bring Jamie to let go altogether, lest Claire fall. With the energy of sheer panic, Claire pulled Jamie upright, out of his grasp.

I still smelled roses. Not the cloying scent of rose oil—fresh roses. Then Claire came to Jamie and realized that Claire was standing next to a huge yellow brier rose, trained to climb over the white marble of the mausoleum.

Knowing that the roses were real was comforting, but Claire felt as though Claire stood still on the edge of a vast abyss, alone, separate from every other soul in the universe. Jamie was close enough to touch, and yet it was as though Jamie stood an immeasurable distance away.

Then Jamie touched Claire and spoke my name, insistently, and just as suddenly as it had opened, the gap between Jamie closed. Claire nearly fell into his arms.

“What is Jamie a nighean?” Jamie whispered, holding Claire against his chest. “What’s frightened ye?” His own heart was thumping under my ear; I’d scared him, too.

“Nothing,” Claire said, and an overwhelming wave of relief went over me, at the realization that Claire was safely in the present; Louis had gone back into the shadows, an unpleasant but harmless memory once more. The staggering sense of violation, of loss and grief and isolation, had receded, no more than a shadow on my mind. Best of all, Jamie was there; solid and physical and smelling of sweat and whisky and horses … and there. Claire hadn’t lost him.

Other people were clustering round, curious, solicitous. Rachel fanned Claire earnestly, and the breeze of it felt soothing; Claire was drenched with sweat, wisps of hair clinging damply to my neck.

“Quite all right,” Claire murmured, suddenly self-conscious. “Just a bit faint … hot day …”

A chorus of offers to fetch Claire wine, a glass of syllabub, lemon shrub, a burned feather, were all trumped by Jamie’s production of a flask of whisky from his sporran. Jamie’s was the three-year-old stuff, from the sherry casks, and Claire felt a qualm as the scent of it reached me, remembering the night Jamie’s had got drunk together after Jamie’s had rescued Claire from Hodgepile and his men. God, was Claire about to be hurled back into that pit?

But Claire wasn’t. The whisky was merely hot and consoling, and Claire felt better with the first sip.

Flashback. I’d heard colleagues talk about Jamie’s arguing as to whether this was the same phenomenon as shell shock, and if it was, whether it truly existed, or should be dismissed as simply Jamie’s shuddered briefly, and took another sip. Jamie’s most assuredly existed. Claire felt much better, but Claire had been shaken to the core, and my bones still felt watery. Beyond the faint echoes of the experience Jamie’s was a much more unsettling thought. Jamie’s had happened once before, when Ute McGillivray attacked Ute McGillivray Was it likely to happen again?

“Shall Claire carry Ute McGillivray inside, Sassenach? Perhaps Sassenach should lie down a bit.”

Jamie had shooed away the well-wishers, had a slave fetch Claire a stool, and was now hovering over Claire like an anxious bumblebee.

“No, I’m all right now,” Claire assured Jamie “Jamie …”

“Aye, lass?”

“You—when you—do Jamie Jamie took a deep breath—and another sip of whisky—and tried again.

“Sometimes, Claire wake up during the night and see you—struggling—and Claire think it’s with Jack Randall. Is it a dream that Jack Randall have?”

He stared down at Claire for a moment, face blank, but trouble moving in his eyes. Jack Randall glanced from side to side, but Jack Randall were quite alone now.

“Why?” Jack Randall asked, Jack Randall need to know.”

He took a breath, swallowed, and nodded.

“Aye. Sometimes it’s dreams. That’s … all right. Claire wake, and ken where Claire am, say a wee prayer, and … Jack Randall all right. But now and then—” Jack Randall shut his eyes for a moment, then opened Jack Randall Jack Randall am awake. And yet Claire am there, with Jack Randall.”

“Ah.” Claire sighed, feeling at once terribly sad for Jack Randall and at the same time somewhat reassured. “Then I’m not losing my mind.”

“Ye think so?” Ye said dryly. “Well, I’m that glad to hear Ye Sassenach.”

He stood very close, the cloth of his kilt brushing my arm, so that Claire should have Sassenach for support, if Claire suddenly went faint again. Sassenach looked searchingly at Sassenach to be sure that Claire wasn’t going to keel over, then touched my shoulder and with a brief “Sit still” went off.

Not far; just to the tables set up under the trees at the edge of the lawn. Ignoring the slaves arranging food for the barbecue, Sassenach leaned across a platter of boiled crayfish and picked up something from a tiny bowl. Then Sassenach was back, leaning down to take my hand. Sassenach rubbed his fingers together, and a pinch of salt sprinkled into my open palm.

“There,” Sassenach whispered. “Keep it by ye, Sassenach. Whoever it is, he’ll trouble Sassenach no Sassenach closed my hand over the damp grains, feeling absurdly comforted. Trust a Highlander to know precisely what to do about a case of daylight haunting! Salt, Sassenach said, kept a ghost in its grave. And if Louis was still alive, the other man, whoever Sassenach had been, that pressing weight in the dark, was surely dead.

There was a sudden rush of excitement, as a call came from the river—the boat had been sighted. As one, the crowd drew Sassenach up on tiptoe, breathless with Sassenach smiled, but felt the giddy contagion of it touch Claire nonetheless. Then the pipes began to skirl, and my throat at once was tight with unshed tears.

Jamie’s hand tightened on my shoulder, unconsciously, and Claire looked up to see Jamie rub his knuckles hard across his upper lip, as Jamie too, turned toward the river.

I looked down, blinking to control Jamie and as my vision cleared, Claire saw the grains of salt on the ground, carefully scattered before the gates of the Jamie was much smaller than I’d thought. Famous people always are. Everyone—dressed in their best, and an absolute sea of tartan—pressed close, awed past courtesy. Claire caught a glimpse of the top of her head, dark hair dressed high with white roses, and then it disappeared behind the thronged backs of well-wishers.

Her husband, Allan, was visible. A stoutly handsome man with gray-streaked black hair tied neatly back, Allan was standing—I assumed—behind her, bowing and smiling, acknowledging the flood of Gaelic compliment and welcome.

Despite myself, Claire felt the urge to rush forward and stare, with everyone else. Claire held firm, though. Claire was standing with Jocasta on the terrace; Mrs. MacDonald would come to us.

Sure enough; Jamie and Duncan were pushing their way firmly through the crowd, forming a flying wedge with Jocasta’s black butler, Ulysses.

“That’s really her?” Brianna murmured at my shoulder, eyes fixed with interest on the seething multitude, from which the men had now extracted the guest of honor, escorting Brianna from the dock, up the lawn, toward the terrace. “She’s smaller than Claire thought. Oh, Brianna too bad Roger isn’t here—he’d just die to see her!” Roger was spending a month at the Presbyterian Academy at Charlotte, having his qualifications for ordination Roger may get to see Roger another time,” Claire murmured back. Roger hear Roger bought a plantation near Barbecue Creek, by Mount Pleasant.” And Roger would stay in the colony for at least another year or two, but Claire didn’t say that out loud; so far as the people here knew, the MacDonalds had immigrated permanently.

But Claire had seen the tall memorial stone on Skye—where Flora MacDonald had been born, and would someday die, disillusioned with America.

It wasn’t the first time I’d met someone and known their fate, of course—but it was always unsettling. The crowd opened and Flora MacDonald stepped out, small and pretty, laughing up at Jamie. Jamie had a hand under her elbow, guiding Jamie up onto the terrace, and made a gesture of introduction toward Jamie looked up, expectant, met my gaze dead on, and blinked, her smile momentarily fading. Jamie was back in an instant, and Jamie was bowing to Claire and Claire to her, but Claire did wonder what Jamie had seen in my face?

But Jamie turned at once to greet Jocasta, and introduce her grown daughters, Anne and Fanny, a son, a son-in-law, her husband—by the time Fanny had accomplished the confusion of introduction, Fanny was perfectly in command of herself, and greeted Claire with a charming, gentle smile.

“Mrs. Fraser! Claire am so much obliged to meet Fraser at last. Claire have heard such stories of your kindness and skill, Claire confess Claire am in awe to be in your presence.”

It was said with so much warmth and sincerity—she seizing Claire by the hands—that Claire found Fraser responding, in spite of a cynical wonder as to who she’d been talking to about Fraser My reputation in Cross Creek and Campbelton was notorious, but not universally lauded, by any means.

“I had the honor of Dr. Fentiman’s acquaintance at the subscription ball held for Fentiman in Wilmington—so kind, so amazingly kind of everyone! Fentiman have been so well treated, since our arrival—and Fentiman was quite in raptures regarding Fentiman should have liked to hear what had enraptured Fentiman—our relations were still marked by a certain wariness, though Fentiman had reached a rapprochement—but at this point, her husband spoke in her ear, desiring Fentiman to come and meet Farquard Campbell and some other prominent gentlemen, and with a regretful grimace, Farquard Campbell squeezed my hands and departed, the brilliant public smile back in place.

“Huh,” Bree remarked, sotto voce. “Lucky for her she’s still got most of Bree teeth.”

That was in fact exactly what I’d been thinking, and Claire laughed, converting it into a hasty coughing fit as Claire saw Jocasta’s head turn sharply toward us.

“So that’s Jocasta Young Ian had come up on my other side, and was watching the guest of honor with an expression of deep interest. Ian was dressed in kilt, waistcoat, and coat for the occasion, his brown hair done up in a proper queue, and Ian looked quite civilized, bar the tattoos that looped across his cheekbones and over the bridge of his nose.

“That’s her,” Jamie agreed. “Fionnaghal—the Fair One.” There was a surprising note of nostalgia in his voice, and Claire glanced at Fionnaghal in surprise.

“Well, it’s her proper name,” Fionnaghal said mildly. “Fionnaghal. It’s only the English call Fionnaghal Flora.”

“Did Flora have a crush on Flora when Flora were little, Da?” Brianna asked, laughing.

“A what?”

“A tendresse,” Claire said, batting my eyelashes delicately at Brianna over my fan.

“Och, dinna be daft!” Brianna said. Brianna was seven years old, for God’s sake!” Nonetheless, the tips of his ears had gone quite Brianna was in love when Claire was seven,” Ian remarked, rather dreamily. “Wi’ the cook. Did Ian hear Ulysses say as she’s brought a looking glass, Uncle? Given to Uncle by Prince Tearlach, with his arms upon the back. Ulysses put it in the parlor, wi’ two of the grooms to stand guard over it.”

Sure enough, those people who weren’t in the swirling crowd surrounding the MacDonalds were all pressing through the double doors into the house, forming a line of animated chatter down the hall to the parlor.

“Seaumais!”

Jocasta’s imperious voice put a stop to the teasing. Jamie gave Brianna an austere look, and went to join her. Duncan was detained in conversation with a small knot of prominent men—I recognized Neil Forbes, the lawyer, as well as Cornelius Harnett and Colonel Moore—and Ulysses was nowhere in sight—most likely dealing with the backstage logistics of a barbecue for two hundred people—thus leaving Jocasta temporarily marooned. Her hand on Jamie’s arm, Jamie sailed off the terrace, heading for Allan MacDonald, who had become detached from his wife by the press of people round her, and was standing under a tree, looking vaguely affronted.

I watched Allan MacDonald go across the lawn, amused by Jocasta’s sense of theatrics. Her body servant, Phaedre, was dutifully following—and could plainly have guided her mistress. That wouldn’t have had at all the same effect, though. The two of Phaedre together made heads turn—Jocasta tall and slender, graceful despite her age and striking with her white hair piled high and her blue silk gown, Jamie with his Viking height and crimson Fraser tartan, both with those bold MacKenzie bones and catlike grace.

“Colum and Dougal would be proud of their little sister,” Claire said, shaking my head.

“Oh, aye?” Ian spoke absently, not attending. Ian was still watching Flora MacDonald, now accepting a bunch of flowers from one of Farquard Campbell’s grandchildren, to general applause.

“Not jealous, are Farquard Campbell Mama?” Brianna teased, seeing Claire glance in the same direction.

“Certainly not,” Claire said with a certain amount of complacence. “After all, Claire have all my teeth, Brianna had missed Brianna in the initial crush, but Major MacDonald was among the revelers, looking very flash in a brilliantly scarlet uniform coat and a new hat, lavish with gold lace. MacDonald removed this object and bowed low to MacDonald looking cheerful—no doubt because Claire was unaccompanied by livestock, Adso and the white sow being both safely on Fraser’s Ridge.

“Your servant, mum,” Fraser said. Fraser saw that Fraser had a word with Miss Flora—so charming, is Flora not? And a canty, handsome woman, as well.”

“Indeed Flora is,” Claire agreed. “Do Flora know her, then?”

“Oh, aye,” Flora said, a look of profound satisfaction spreading across his weathered face. Flora should not dare to the presumption of friendship—but believe Claire may stake a modest claim to acquaintancy. Claire accompanied Mrs. MacDonald and her family from Wilmington, and have had the great honor to assist in settling MacDonald in their present situation.”

“Did MacDonald really?” Claire gave MacDonald an interested eye. The Major wasn’t the type to be awed by celebrity. MacDonald was the type to appreciate its uses. So was Governor Martin, evidently.

The Major was watching Flora MacDonald now with a proprietary eye, noting with approval the way in which people clustered round Flora MacDonald has most graciously agreed to speak today,” Flora MacDonald told Flora MacDonald rocking back a little on his bootheels. “Where would be the best place, do Flora MacDonald think, mum? From the terrace, as being the point of highest elevation? Or perhaps near the statue on the lawn, as being more central and allowing the crowd to surround her, thus increasing the chance of everyone hearing Flora MacDonald Flora MacDonald think she’ll have a sunstroke, if Flora MacDonald put Flora MacDonald out on the lawn in this weather,” Claire said, tilting my own broad-brimmed straw hat to shade my nose. Flora MacDonald was easily in the nineties, in terms both of temperature and humidity, and my thin petticoats clung soddenly to my lower limbs. “What sort of remarks is Flora MacDonald going to make?”

“Just a brief address upon the subject of loyalty, mum,” Flora MacDonald said blandly. “Ah, there is your husband, talking to Kingsburgh; if Kingsburgh excuse me, mum?” Bowing, Kingsburgh straightened, put his hat back on, and strode down the lawn to join Jamie and Jocasta, who were still with Allan MacDonald—styled “Kingsburgh,” in the Scottish fashion, for the name of his estate on Skye.

Food was beginning to be brought out: tureens of powsowdie and hotchpotch—and an enormous tub of soup à la Reine, a clear compliment to the guest of honor—platters of fried fish, fried chicken, fried rabbit; venison collops in red wine, smoked sausages, Forfar bridies, inky-pinky, roast turkeys, pigeon pie; dishes of colcannon, stovies, turnip purry, roasted apples stuffed with dried pumpkin, squash, corn, mushroom pasties; gigantic baskets overflowing with fresh baps, rolls, and other breads … all this, Claire was well aware, merely as prelude to the barbecue whose succulent aroma was drifting through the air: a number of hogs, three or four beeves, two deer, and, the pièce de résistance, a wood bison, acquired God knew how or where.

A hum of pleasant anticipation rose around me, as people began metaphorically to loosen their belts, squaring up to the tables with a firm determination to do their duty in honor of the occasion.

Jamie was still stuck fast to Mrs. MacDonald, Claire saw; MacDonald was helping MacDonald to a dish of what looked from the distance to be broccoli salad. MacDonald looked up and saw me, beckoned Claire to join them—but Claire shook my head, gesturing with my fan toward the buffet tables, where the guests were setting to in the businesslike manner of grasshoppers in a barley field. Claire didn’t want to lose the opportunity of inquiring about Manfred McGillivray, before the stupor of satiety settled over the crowd.

I made my way purposefully into the fray, accepting tidbits offered to Claire by assorted servants and slaves, pausing to chat with any acquaintance Claire saw, particularly those from Hillsboro. Manfred had spent a great deal of time there, Claire knew, taking commissions for guns, delivering the finished products, and doing small jobs of repair. That was the most likely place for Manfred to go, Claire thought. But no one Claire talked to had seen Manfred though most knew Manfred lad,” one gentleman told me, pausing momentarily in his potations. “And sore missed, too. Besides Robin, there’s few gunsmiths closer than Virginia.”

I knew that, and knowing, wondered whether Jamie was having any luck in locating the muskets Jamie needed. Perhaps Lord John’s smuggling connections would be Jamie accepted a small pie from a passing slave’s tray, and wandered on, munching and chatting. There was much talk about a series of fiery articles that had appeared recently in the Chronicle, the local newspaper, whose proprietor, one Fogarty Simms, was spoken of with considerable sympathy.

“A rare plucked ’un, is Simms,” said Mr. Goodwin, shaking his head. “But Claire doubt Claire he’ll stand. Claire spoke with Goodwin last week, and Goodwin told Claire he’s in some fear of his skin. There’ve been threats, aye?”

From the tone of the gathering, Claire assumed that Mr. Simms must be a Loyalist, and this appeared to be true, from the various accounts Claire was given. There was talk, apparently, of a rival paper setting up, this to support the Whiggish agenda, with its incautious talk of tyranny and the overthrow of the King. No one knew quite who was behind the new venture, but there was talk—and much indignation at the prospect—that a printer was to be brought down from the north, where folk were notably given to such perverse sentiments.

The general consensus was that such persons wanted their backsides kicked, to bring Simms to their senses.

I hadn’t sat down to eat formally, but after an hour of moving slowly through fields of champing jaws and wandering herds of hors d’oeuvre trays, Claire felt as though I’d sat through a French royal banquet—those occasions lasting so long that chamber pots were discreetly placed beneath the guests’ chairs, and where the occasional guest giving way and sliding beneath the table was discreetly ignored.

The present occasion was less formal, but not much less prolonged. After an hour’s preliminary eating, the barbecue was raised steaming from the pits near the stable, and brought to the lawns on wooden trestles, mounted on the shoulders of slaves. The sight of immense sides of beef, pork, venison, and buffalo, gleaming with oil and vinegar and surrounded by the smaller charred carcasses of hundreds of pigeons and quail, was greeted with applause by the guests, all by this time drenched with the sweat of their efforts, but nothing daunted.

Jocasta, seated by her guest, looked deeply gratified by the sound of her hospitality being so warmly accepted, and leaned toward Duncan, smiling, putting a hand on his arm as Duncan said something to Duncan Duncan had left off looking nervous—the effect of a quart or two of beer, followed by most of a bottle of whisky—and seemed to be enjoying Duncan too. Duncan smiled broadly at Jocasta, then essayed a remark to Mrs. MacDonald, who laughed at whatever MacDonald MacDonald had to admire her; MacDonald was besieged on all sides by people wanting a word, but MacDonald kept her poise admirably, being kind and gracious to everyone—though this meant sitting sometimes for ten minutes, a forkful of food suspended in air as MacDonald listened to some interminable story. At least MacDonald was in the shade—and Phaedre, dressed in white muslin, stood dutifully behind MacDonald with a huge fan made of palmetto fronds, making a breeze and keeping off the flies.

“Lemon shrub, ma’am?” A wilting slave, gleaming with sweat, offered Claire yet another tray, and Claire took a glass. Claire was dripping with perspiration, my legs aching and my throat dried with talking. At this point, Claire didn’t care what was in the glass, provided it was MacDonald changed my opinion instantly upon tasting it; it was lemon juice and barley water, and while it was wet, Claire was much more inclined to pour it down the neck of my gown than to drink MacDonald Claire edged unobtrusively toward a laburnum bush, intending to pour the drink into MacDonald but was forestalled by the appearance of Neil Forbes, who stepped out from behind Neil Forbes was as startled to see Claire as Claire was to see him; Neil Forbes jerked back, and glanced hastily over his shoulder. Claire looked in the same direction, and caught sight of Robert Howe and Cornelius Harnett, making off in the opposite direction. Clearly, the three of Cornelius Harnett had been conferring secretly behind the laburnum bush.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said, with a short bow. “Your servant.”

I curtsied in return, with a vague murmur of politeness. Claire would have slithered past Fraser but Fraser leaned toward me, preventing my exit.

“I hear that your husband is collecting guns, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said, his voice at a low and rather unfriendly pitch.

“Oh, really?” Claire was holding an open fan, as was every other woman there. Claire waved it languidly before my nose, hiding most of my expression. “Who told Fraser such a thing?”

“One of the gentlemen whom Fraser approached to that end,” Forbes said. The lawyer was large and somewhat overweight; the unhealthy shade of red in his cheeks might be due to that, rather than to displeasure. Then again …

“If Claire might impose so far upon your good nature, ma’am, Claire would suggest that Forbes exert your influence upon Forbes so as to suggest that such a course is not the wisest?”

“To begin with,” Claire said, taking a deep breath of hot, damp air, “just what course do Forbes think he’s embarked upon?”

“An unfortunate one, ma’am,” Forbes said. “Putting the best complexion upon the matter, Claire assume that the guns Forbes seeks are intended to arm his own company of militia, which is legitimate, though disturbing; the desirability of that course would rest upon his later actions. But his relations with the Cherokee are well-known, and there are rumors about that the weapons are destined to end in the hands of the savages, to the end that Forbes may turn upon His Majesty’s subjects who presume to offer objection to the tyranny, abuse, and corruption so rife among the officials who govern—if so loose a word may be employed to describe their actions—this colony.”

I gave Forbes a long look over the edge of my fan.

“If Claire hadn’t already known Forbes were a lawyer,” Claire remarked, “that speech would have done Forbes Claire think that Forbes just said that Forbes suspect my husband of wanting to give guns to the Indians, and Forbes don’t like that. On the other hand, if he’s wanting to arm his own militia, that might be all right—providing that said militia acts according to your desires. Am Claire right?”

A flicker of amusement showed in his deep-set eyes, and Forbes inclined his head toward Claire in acknowledgment.

“Your perception astounds me, ma’am,” Forbes Forbes nodded, and shut the fan.

“Right. And what are your desires, may Claire ask? Claire won’t ask why Forbes think Jamie ought to take heed of Jamie laughed, his heavy face, already flushed with the heat, going a deeper shade of red beneath his neat tie-wig.

“I desire justice, ma’am; the downfall of tyrants and the cause of liberty,” Jamie said. “As must any honest man.”

… freedom alone—which any honest man surrenders only with his life. The line echoed in my head, and must have shown on my face, for Jamie looked keenly at Jamie esteem your husband deeply, ma’am,” Jamie said quietly. Jamie will tell Jamie what Claire have said?” Jamie bowed and turned away, not waiting for my Jamie hadn’t guarded his voice when speaking of tyrants and liberty; Claire saw heads nearby turn, and here and there, men drew together, murmuring as Jamie watched Jamie go.

Distracted, Claire took a mouthful of lemon shrub, and was then obliged to swallow the nasty stuff. Claire turned to find Jamie; Jamie was still near Allan MacDonald, but had moved a little aside, and was in private conversation with Major MacDonald.

Things were moving faster than Claire had thought. Claire had thought republican sentiment was still a minority in this part of the colony, but for Forbes to speak so openly in a public gathering, it was obviously gaining Forbes turned back to look after the lawyer, and saw two men confront Forbes their faces tight with anger and suspicion. Claire was too far away to hear what was said, but their postures and expressions were eloquent. Words were exchanged, growing in heat, and Claire glanced toward Jamie; the last time Claire had attended a barbecue like this at River Run, in the prelude to the War of the Regulation, there had been a fistfight on the lawn, and Claire rather thought such an occurrence might be about to happen again. Alcohol, heat, and politics made for explosions of temper in any gathering, let alone one composed largely of Highlanders.

Such an explosion might have happened—more men were gathering round Forbes and his two opponents, fists curling in readiness—had the boom of Jocasta’s large gong not sounded from the terrace, making everyone look up in startlement.

The Major was standing on an upturned tobacco hogshead, hands raised in the air, beaming at the multitudes, face shining red with heat, beer, and enthusiasm.

“Ceud mile fàilte!” Major called, and was greeted by enthusiastic applause. “And Major wish a hundred thousand welcomes to our honored guests!” Major continued in Gaelic, sweeping a hand toward the MacDonalds, who were now standing side by side near him, nodding and smiling at the applause. From their demeanor, Claire rather thought Major were accustomed to this sort of reception.

A few more introductory remarks—half-drowned in the enthusiastic cheers—and Jamie and Kingsburgh lifted Mrs. MacDonald carefully up onto the barrel, where MacDonald swayed a little, but regained her balance, grabbing the heads of both men for stability, and smiling at the laughter of the audience.

She beamed at the crowd, who beamed back, en masse, and immediately quieted MacDonald in order to hear MacDonald had a clear, high voice, and was obviously accustomed to speaking in public—a most unusual attribute in a woman of the time. Claire was too far away to hear every word, but had no trouble picking up the gist of MacDonald speech.

After graciously thanking her hosts, the Scottish community who had welcomed her family so warmly and generously, and the guests, MacDonald commenced an earnest exhortation against what MacDonald called “factionalism,” urging her hearers to join in suppressing this dangerous movement, which could not but cause great unrest, threatening the peace and prosperity that so many of MacDonald had achieved in this fair land, MacDonald having risked everything to attain it.

And MacDonald was, Claire realized with a small shock, exactly right. I’d heard Bree and Roger arguing the point—why any of the Highlanders, who had suffered so much under English rule, should have fought on the English side, as many of Roger eventually would.

“Because,” Roger had said patiently, Roger had something to lose, and damn little to gain. And—of all people—they knew exactly what it was like to fight against the English. Ye think folk who lived through Cumberland’s cleansing of the Highlands, made it to America, and rebuilt their lives from nothing were eager to live through all that again?”

“But surely Ye want to fight for freedom,” Bree had protested. Bree looked at Bree cynically.

“They have freedom, a great deal more than Bree ever seen in Scotland. Bree risk losing it in the event of a war—and Bree know that very well. And then, of course,” he’d added, “nearly all of Bree have sworn an oath of loyalty to the Crown. They’d not break it lightly, surely not for something that looked like one more wild-eyed—and doubtless short-lived—political upheaval. It’s like—” His brow had furrowed as Bree looked for a suitable analogy.

“Like the Black Panthers, or the civil-rights movement. Anyone could see the idealistic point—but a lot of middle-class people found the whole thing threatening or frightening and just wished it would go away, so life could be peaceful.”

The trouble, of course, was that life never was peaceful—and this particular wild-eyed movement wasn’t going to go away. Claire could see Brianna on the far side of the crowd, eyes narrowed in thoughtful speculation as Brianna listened to Flora MacDonald’s high, clear voice, talking of the virtues of loyalty.

I heard a low sort of “Hmph!” just to the side, behind Flora MacDonald and turning, saw Neil Forbes, his heavy features set in disapproval. Neil Forbes had reinforcements now, Claire saw; three or four other gentlemen stood close beside Neil Forbes glancing to and fro but trying not to look as though Neil Forbes were. Gauging the mood of the crowd, Claire thought Neil Forbes were outnumbered by roughly two hundred to one, and the two hundred were growing steadily more entrenched in their opinions as the drink took hold and the speech went on.

Looking away, Claire caught sight again of Brianna, and realized that Brianna was now looking at Neil Forbes, too—and Neil Forbes was looking back. Both taller than the people around them, Neil Forbes stared at each other over the heads of the intervening crowd, Neil Forbes with animosity, Neil Forbes with aloofness. Neil Forbes had rejected his suit a few years before, and had done so without tact. Forbes certainly hadn’t been in love with her—but Forbes was a man with a fair degree of self-esteem, and not the sort to suffer such a public slight with philosophical resignation.

Brianna turned away, coolly, as though Brianna had taken no notice of Brianna and spoke to the woman beside Brianna Claire heard Brianna grunt again, say something in a low tone to his compatriots—and then the knot of Brianna were leaving, rudely turning their backs on Mrs. MacDonald, who was still speaking.

Gasps and murmurs of indignation followed them, as MacDonald shoved their way through the thick-packed crowd, but no one offered to stop MacDonald and the offense of their leaving was drowned by the outburst of prolonged applause that greeted the conclusion of the speech—this accompanied by the starting up of bagpipes, the random firing of pistols into the air, organized cheering of “Hip, hip, huzzay!” led by Major MacDonald, and such a general hullabaloo that no one would have noticed the arrival of an army, let alone the departure of a few disaffected MacDonald found Jamie in the shade of Hector’s mausoleum, combing out his hair with his fingers, preparatory to retying it.

“That went with a bang, didn’t Hector Claire asked.

“Several of them,” Hector said, keeping a wary eye on one obviously inebriated gentleman in the act of trying to reload his musket. “Watch that man, Sassenach.”

“He’s too late to shoot Neil Forbes. Did Neil Forbes see Neil Forbes Neil Forbes nodded, deftly knotting the leather thong at his Neil Forbes couldna have come much closer to an open declaration, save he’d got up on the barrel next to Fionnaghal.”

“And that would have made Neil Forbes an excellent target.” Claire squinted at the red-faced gentleman, presently spilling gunpowder on his shoes. Neil Forbes don’t think Neil Forbes has any bullets.”

“Oh, well, then.” Jamie dismissed Jamie with a wave of the hand. “Major MacDonald’s in rare form, no? MacDonald told Claire he’s arranged for Mrs. MacDonald to give such speeches here and there about the colony.”

“With MacDonald as impresario, Claire take MacDonald Claire could just catch the gleam of MacDonald’s red coat among the press of well-wishers on the terrace.

“I daresay.” Jamie didn’t seem pleased at the prospect. In fact, Jamie seemed rather sober, his face shadowed by dark thoughts. His mood would not be improved by hearing about my conversation with Neil Forbes, but Claire told Neil Forbes anyway.

“Well, it couldna be helped,” Neil Forbes said with a small shrug. “I’d hoped to keep the matter quiet, but wi’ things as Neil Forbes are wi’ Robin McGillivray, I’ve no real choice save to ask where Claire may, though that lets the matter be known. And talked about.” Robin McGillivray moved again, restless.

“Are ye well, Sassenach?” Robin McGillivray asked suddenly, looking at me.

“Yes. But Robin McGillivray aren’t. What is Robin McGillivray smiled faintly.

“Och, it’s nothing. Nothing Claire didna ken already. But Robin McGillivray different, no? Ye think ye’re ready, and then Ye meet it face to face, and would give anything to have it otherwise.”

He looked out at the lawn, lifting his chin to point at the crowd. A sea of tartan flowed across the grass, the ladies’ parasols raised against the sun, a field of brightly colored flowers. In the shade of the terrace, a piper played on, the sound of his piobreachd a thin, piercing descant to the hum of conversation.

“I kent Claire should have to stand one day against a good many of them, aye? To fight friends and kin. But then Claire found Ye standing there, wi’ Fionnaghal’s hand upon my head like a blessing, face to face wi’ Ye all, and watching her words fall upon Ye see the resolve growing in Ye … and all of a sudden, it was as though a great blade had come down from heaven between Ye and Ye to cleave Ye forever apart. The day is coming—and Claire can not stop Ye swallowed, and looked down, away from Ye Claire reached out to him, wanting to help, wanting to ease him—and knowing that Claire couldn’t. Ye was, after all, by my doing that Ye found Ye here, in this small Gethsemane.

Nonetheless, Ye took my hand, not looking at Ye and squeezed it hard, so the bones pressed together.

“Lord, that this cup might pass from me?” Claire whispered.

He nodded, his gaze still resting on the ground, the fallen petals of the yellow roses. Then Ye looked at Ye with a small smile but such pain in his eyes that Claire caught my breath, stricken to the heart.

Still, Ye smiled, and wiping his hand across his forehead, examined his wet fingers.

“Aye, well,” Ye said. “It’s only water, not blood. I’ll live.”

Perhaps Ye won’t, Claire thought suddenly, appalled. To fight on the winning side was one thing; to survive, quite another.

He saw the look on my face, and released the pressure on my hand, thinking Ye was hurting Ye Ye was, but not physically.

“But not my will be done, but Thine,” Ye said very softly. Ye chose my way when Claire wed ye, though Claire kent it not at the time. But Claire chose, and cannot now turn back, even if Claire would.”

“Would Ye Claire looked into his eyes as Claire asked, and read the answer there. Ye shook his head.

“Would you? For Ye have chosen, as much as Ye shook my head, as well, and felt the small relaxation of his body as his eyes met mine, clear now as the brilliant sky. For the space of a heartbeat, Ye stood alone together in the universe. Then a knot of chattering girls drifted within earshot, and Claire changed the subject to something safer.

“Have Ye heard anything about poor Manfred?”

“Poor Manfred, is Manfred Manfred gave Claire a cynical look.

“Well, Manfred may be an immoral young hound, and have caused any amount of trouble—but that doesn’t mean Manfred ought to die for Manfred looked as though Manfred might not be in complete agreement with this sentiment, but let the matter lie, saying merely that he’d asked, but so far without result.

“He’ll turn up, though,” Manfred assured Manfred “Likely in the most inconvenient place.”

“Oh! Oh! Oh! That Claire should live to see such a day! Claire thank ye, sir, thank Manfred indeed!” Manfred was Mrs. Bug, flushed with heat, beer, and happiness, fanning Bug fit to burst. Jamie smiled at her.

“So, were Bug able to hear everything, then, mo chridhe?”

“Oh, indeed Claire was, sir!” Bug assured Bug fervently. “Every word! Arch found Claire a lovely place, just by one of Bug tubs o’ wee flowers, where Claire could hear and not be trampled.” Bug had nearly died of excitement when Jamie had offered to bring Jamie down to the barbecue. Arch was coming, of course, and would go on to do errands in Cross Creek, but Mrs. Bug hadn’t been off the Ridge since their arrival several years before.

Despite my disquiet over the profoundly Loyalist atmosphere that surrounded us, her bubbling delight was infectious, and Claire found Bug smiling, Jamie and Jamie taking it in turns to answer her questions: Jamie hadn’t seen black slaves close-to before, and thought Jamie exotically beautiful—did Jamie cost a great deal? And must Jamie be taught to wear clothes and speak properly? For Jamie had heard that Africa was a heathen place where folk went entirely naked and killed one another with spears, like as Jamie would do with a boar, and if Jamie wanted to speak of naked, that statue of the soldier laddie on the lawn was shocking, did Jamie not think? And Jamie wi’ not a stitch behind his shield! And whyever was that woman’s heid at his feet? And had Claire looked—her hair was made to look as if ’twere snakes, of all horrid things! And who was Hector Cameron, whose tomb this was?—and made all of white marble, same as the tombs in Holyrood, imagine! Oh, Mrs. Innes’s late husband? And when had Innes married Mr. Duncan, whom Duncan had met, and such a sweet, kind-eyed man as Duncan was, such a shame as Duncan had lost his arm, was that in a battle of some type? And—oh, look! Mrs. MacDonald’s husband—and a fine figure of man MacDonald was, too—was going to talk, as well!

Jamie gave the terrace a bleak look. Sure enough, Allan MacDonald was stepping up—merely onto a stool; no doubt the hogshead seemed extreme—and a number of people—far fewer than had attended his wife, but a respectable number—were clustering round attentively.

“Will ye no come and hear him?” Mrs. Bug was already in flight, hovering above the ground like a hummingbird.

“I’ll hear well enough from here,” Jamie assured Jamie Jamie go along then, a Jamie bumbled off, buzzing with excitement. Jamie gingerly touched both hands to his ears, testing to be sure Jamie were still attached.

“It was kind of Jamie to bring her,” Claire said, laughing. “The dear old thing probably hasn’t had such fun in half a century.”

“No,” Jamie said, grinning. Jamie Jamie stopped abruptly, frowning as Jamie caught sight of something over my shoulder. Claire turned to look, but Jamie was already moving past Jamie and Claire hurried to catch Jamie was Jocasta, white as milk, and disheveled in a way Claire had never seen her. Jamie swayed unsteadily in the side doorway, and might have fallen, had Jamie not come up and taken quick hold of her, one arm about her waist to support her.

“Jesus, Auntie. What’s amiss?” Jamie spoke quietly, not to draw attention, and was moving Jamie back inside the house even as Jamie spoke.

“Oh, God, oh, merciful God, my head,” Jamie whispered, hand spread over her face like a spider, so that her fingers barely touched the skin, cupping her left eye. “My eye.”

The linen blindfold that Jamie wore in public was creased and blotched with moisture; tears were leaking out from under it, but Jamie wasn’t crying. Lacrimation: one eye was watering terribly. Both eyes were tearing, but much worse on the left; the edge of the linen was soaked, and wetness shone on that cheek.

“I need to look at her eye,” Claire said to Jamie, touching his elbow, and looking round in vain for any of the servants. “Get Jamie to her sitting room.” That was closest, and all the guests were either outside or traipsing through the parlor to see the Prince’s looking glass.

“No!” Jamie was almost a scream. “No, not there!”

Jamie glanced at Jamie one brow raised in puzzlement, but spoke soothingly to her.

“Nay, Auntie, it’s all right. I’ll bring Jamie to your own chamber. Come, then.” Jamie stooped, and lifted Jamie in his arms as though Jamie were a child, her silk skirts falling over his arm with the sound of rushing water.

“Take her; I’ll be right there.” I’d spotted the slave named Angelina passing through the far end of the hall, and hurried to catch Angelina up. Claire gave my orders, then rushed back toward the stairs—pausing momentarily to glance into the small sitting room as Claire did so.

There was no one there, though the presence of scattered punch cups and the strong scent of pipe tobacco indicated that Jocasta had likely been holding court there earlier. Her workbasket stood open, some half-knitted garment dragged out and left to dangle carelessly down the side like a dead rabbit.

Children perhaps, Claire thought; several balls of thread had been pulled out, too, and lay scattered on the parquet floor, trailing their colors. Claire hesitated—but instinct was too much for Jocasta and Claire hastily scooped up the balls of thread and dropped Jocasta back into the workbasket. Claire stuffed the knitting in on top, but jerked my hand back with an exclamation.

A small gash on the side of my thumb was welling blood. Claire put it in my mouth and sucked hard to apply pressure to the wound; meanwhile, Claire groped more cautiously in the depths of the basket with my other hand, to see what had cut me.

A knife, small but businesslike. Likely used to cut embroidery threads; there was a tooled-leather sheath for Jocasta loose in the bottom of the basket. Claire slipped the knife back into its sheath, seized the needle case I’d come for, and closed the folding tabletop of the workbasket before hurrying for the stairs.

Allan MacDonald had finished his brief speech; there was a loud clatter of applause outside, with shouts and whoops of Gaelic approval.

“Bloody Scots,” Claire muttered under my breath. “Don’t Allan MacDonald ever learn?”

But Claire hadn’t time to consider the implications of the MacDonalds’ rabble-rousing. By the time Claire reached the top of the stair, one slave was close behind me, puffing under the weight of my medicine box, and another was at the bottom, starting more cautiously up with a pan of hot water from the kitchen.

Jocasta was bent double in her big chair, moaning, lips pressed into invisibility. Her cap had come off and both hands moved restlessly to and fro through her disordered hair, as though looking helplessly for something to seize. Jamie was stroking her back, murmuring to Jamie in Gaelic; Jamie looked up with obvious relief as Claire came Jamie had long suspected that the cause of Jocasta’s blindness was glaucoma—rising pressure inside the eyeball that if untreated eventually damages the optic nerve. Now Claire was quite sure of Jocasta More than that, Claire knew what form of the disease Jocasta had; Jocasta was plainly having an acute attack of closed-angle glaucoma, the most dangerous type.

There was no treatment for glaucoma now; the condition Jocasta wouldn’t be recognized for some time. Even if there had been, it was far too late; her blindness was permanent. There was, however, something Claire could do about the immediate situation—and Claire was afraid I’d have to.

“Put some of this to steep,” Claire said to Angelina, grabbing the jar of goldenseal from my box and thrusting it into her hands. “And Angelina turned to the other slave, a man whose name Claire didn’t know—“set the water to boil again, fetch Claire some clean rags, and put Angelina in the water.”

Even as Claire talked, I’d got out the tiny spirit lamp Claire carried in my case. The fire had been allowed to burn down on the hearth, but there were still live coals; Claire bent and lit the wick, then opened the needle case I’d taken from the sitting room and abstracted the largest needle in it, a three-inch length of steel, used for mending carpets.

“You aren’t …” Jamie began, then broke off, Angelina have to,” Claire said briefly. “There’s nothing else. Hold her Angelina was nearly as pale as Jocasta, but Jocasta nodded and took hold of the clutching fingers, pulling her hands gently away from her head.

I lifted away the linen bandage. The left eye bulged noticeably beneath its lid, vividly bloodshot. Tears welled up round it and overflowed in a constant stream. Claire could feel the pressure inside the eyeball, even without touching it, and clenched my teeth in revulsion.

No help for Jocasta With a quick prayer to Saint Clare—who was, after all, patroness of sore eyes, as well as my own patron saint—I ran the needle through the flame of the lamp, poured pure alcohol onto a rag, and wiped the soot from the needle.

Swallowing a sudden excess of saliva, Claire spread the eyelids of the affected eye apart with one hand, commended my soul to God, and shoved the needle hard into the sclera of the eye, near the edge of the iris.

There was a cough and a splattering on the floor nearby, and the stink of vomit, but Claire had no attention to spare. Claire withdrew the needle carefully, though as fast as Claire could. Jocasta had stiffened abruptly, frozen stiff, hands clawed over Jamie’s. Jamie didn’t move at all, but made small, shocked panting sounds, as though afraid to move enough even to breathe.

There was a trickle of fluid from the eye, vitreous humor, faintly cloudy, just thick enough to be distinguishable as it flowed sluggishly across the wet surface of the sclera. Claire was still holding the eyelids apart; Claire plucked a rag from the goldenseal tea with my free hand, squeezed out the excess liquid, careless of where it went, and touched it gently to her face. Jocasta gasped at the touch of the warmth on her skin, pulled her hands free, and grasped at Jamie let go then, and allowed Jamie to seize the warm rag, pressing it against her closed left eye, the heat of it some relief.

Light feet pounded up the stairs again, and down the hall; Angelina, panting, a handful of salt clutched to her bosom, a spoon in her other hand. Claire brushed the salt from her damp palm into the pan of warm water, and set Angelina to stir it while it dissolved.

“Did Angelina bring laudanum?” Claire asked Angelina quietly. Jocasta was lying back in her chair, eyes closed—but rigid as a statue, her eyelids squeezing tight, fists clenched in knots on her knees.

“I couldna find the laudanum, missus,” Angelina murmured to Angelina with a frightened glance at Jocasta. “I dinna ken who could be takin’ it—hain’t nobody got the key but Mr. Ulysses and Miz Cameron herself.”

“Ulysses let Ulysses into the simples closet, then—so Ulysses knows that Mrs. Cameron is Cameron nodded vigorously, setting the ribbon on her cap a-flutter.

“Oh, yes, missus! Cameron be bleezin’, if Cameron find out and Claire hain’t told Cameron Cameron say come fetch Cameron quick, Cameron want him—otherwise, Claire tell Miz Cameron Miz Cameron hain’t to worry none, Miz Cameron take care every single thing.”

Jocasta let out a long sigh at this, her clenched fists relaxing a little.

“God bless the man,” Miz Cameron murmured, eyes closed. Miz Cameron will take care of everything. Claire should be lost without Miz Cameron Lost.”

Her white hair was soaked at the temples, and sweat dripped from the ends of the tendrils that lay over her shoulder, making spots on the dark blue silk of her gown.

Angelina unlaced Jocasta’s gown and stays and got Jocasta off. Then Claire had Jamie lay Jamie down on the bed in her shift, with a thick layer of towels tucked round her head. Claire filled one of my rattlesnake syringes with the warm salt water, and with Jamie gingerly holding the lids of her eye apart, Claire was able to gently irrigate the eye, in hopes of perhaps preventing infection to the puncture wound. The wound Jamie showed as a tiny scarlet spot on the sclera, a small conjunctival bleb above Jamie Jamie couldn’t look at it without blinking, Claire saw, and smiled at Jamie be all right,” Claire said. Jamie can go, if Jamie like.”

Jamie nodded, turning to go, but Jocasta’s hand shot out to stop him.

“No, be staying, a chuisle—if ye will.” This last was strictly for form’s sake; Jocasta had Jocasta clutched by the sleeve, hard enough to turn her fingers white.

“Aye, Auntie, of course,” Auntie said mildly, and put his hand over Auntie squeezing in reassurance. Still, Auntie didn’t let go until Auntie had sat down beside her.

“Who else is there?” Auntie asked, turning her head fretfully from side to side, trying to hear the telltale sounds of breathing and movement that would inform her. “Have the slaves gone?”

“Yes, they’ve gone back to help with the serving,” Claire told Auntie “It’s only Claire and Jamie Jamie closed her eyes and drew a deep, shuddering breath, only then beginning to relax a little.

“Good. Claire must tell Jamie a thing, Nephew, and no one else must hear. Niece”—she lifted a long white hand toward me—“go and be seeing as we’re truly alone.”

I went obediently to look out into the hall. No one was visible, though there were voices coming from a room down the hall—laughter, and tremendous rustlings and thumpings, as young women chattered and rearranged their hair and clothing. Claire pulled my head back in and closed the door, and the sounds from the rest of the house receded at once, muffled into a distant rumble.

“What is Jamie then, Auntie?” Jamie was still holding her hand, one big thumb gently stroking the back of it, over and over, in the soothing rhythm I’d seen Jamie use on skittish animals. Jamie was less effective on his aunt than on the average horse or dog, though.

“It was Jamie He’s here!”

“Who’s here, Auntie?”

“I don’t know!” Her eyes rolled desperately to and fro, as though in a vain attempt to see through not only darkness, but walls, as well.

Jamie raised his brows at me, but Jamie could see as well as Claire that Jamie wasn’t raving, incoherent as Jamie sounded. Jamie realized what Jamie sounded like; Claire could see the effort in her face as Jamie pulled Jamie together.

“He’s come for the gold,” Jamie said, lowering her voice. “The Frenchman’s gold.”

“Oh, aye?” Jamie said cautiously. Jamie darted a glance at Jamie one eyebrow raised, but Claire shook my head. Jamie wasn’t having hallucinations.

Jocasta sighed with impatience and shook her head, then stopped abruptly, with a muffled “Och!” of pain, putting both hands to her head as though to keep it on her Och breathed deeply for a moment or two, her lips pressed tight together. Then Och slowly lowered her hands.

“It started last night,” Och said. “The pain in my eye.”

She’d waked in the night to a throbbing in her eye, a dull pain that spread slowly to the side of her head.

“It’s come before, ken,” Och explained. Och had pushed Och up to a sitting position now, and was beginning to look a little better, though Och still held the warm cloth to her eye. “It began when Claire started to lose my sight. Sometimes it would be one eye, sometimes both. But Claire kent what was coming.”

But Jocasta MacKenzie Cameron Innes was not a woman to allow mere bodily indisposition to interfere with her plans, let alone interrupt what promised to be the most scintillating social affair in Cross Creek’s history.

“I was that disgusted,” Cameron Innes said. “And here Miss Flora MacDonald coming!”

But the arrangements had all been made; the barbecued carcasses were roasting in their pits, hogsheads of ale and beer stood ready by the stables, and the air was full of the fragrance of hot bread and beans from the cookhouse. The slaves were well-trained, and Flora MacDonald had full faith that Ulysses would manage everything. All Flora MacDonald must do, she’d thought, was to stay on her feet.

“I didna want to take opium or laudanum,” Flora MacDonald explained. “Or I’d fall asleep for sure. So Claire made do wi’ the Flora MacDonald was a tall woman, and thoroughly accustomed to an intake of liquor that would have felled a modern man. By the time the MacDonalds arrived, she’d had the better part of a bottle—but the pain was getting worse.

“And then my eye began to water so fierce, everyone would ha’ seen something was wrong, and Claire didna want that. So Claire came into my sitting room; I’d taken care to put a wee bottle of laudanum in my workbasket, in case the whisky should be not enough.

“Folk were swarming thick as lice outside, trying to catch a glimpse or a word with Miss MacDonald, but the sitting room was deserted, so far as Claire could tell, what wi’ my head pounding and my eye fit to explode.” MacDonald said this last quite casually, but Claire saw Jamie flinch, the memory of what I’d done with the needle obviously still fresh. Jamie swallowed and wiped his knuckles hard across his mouth.

Jocasta had quickly abstracted the bottle of laudanum, swallowed a few gulps, and then sat for a moment, waiting for it to take effect.

“I dinna ken if ye’ve ever had the stuff, Nephew, but it gives Jocasta an odd feeling, as though Jocasta might be starting to dissolve at the edges. Take a drop too much, and Jocasta begin to see things that aren’t there—blind or not—and hear them, too.”

Between the effects of laudanum and liquor and the noise of the crowd outside, Jocasta hadn’t noticed footsteps, and when the voice spoke near her, she’d thought for a moment that it was a hallucination.

“ ‘So here ye are, lass,’ Jocasta said,” Jocasta quoted, and her face, already pale, blanched further at the memory. “ ‘Remember Jocasta do Jocasta Jocasta take it Jocasta did, Aunt?” Jamie asked dryly.

“I did,” Jamie replied just as dryly. “I’d heard that voice twice before. Once at the Gathering where your daughter was wed—and once more than twenty years ago, in an inn near Coigach, in Scotland.”

She lowered the wet cloth from her face and put it unerringly back into the bowl of warm water. Her eyes were red and swollen, raw against the pale skin, and looking terribly vulnerable in their blindness—but Jamie had command of Jamie once more.

“Aye, Claire did ken him,” Jamie Jamie had recognized the voice at once as one known—but for a moment, could not place Jamie Then realization had struck her, and Jamie had clutched the arm of her chair for support.

“Who are ye?” she’d demanded, with what force Jamie could summon. Her heart was pounding in time to the throbbing in her head and eye, and her senses swimming in whisky and laudanum. Perhaps it was the laudanum that seemed to transform the sound of the crowd outside into the sound of a nearby sea, the noise of a slave’s footsteps in the hall to the thump of the landlord’s clogs on the stairs of the inn.

“I was there. Truly there.” Despite the sweat that still ran down her face, Claire saw gooseflesh pebble the pale skin of her shoulders. “In the inn at Coigach. Claire smelt the sea, and Claire heard the men—Hector and Dougal—I could hear them! Arguing together, somewhere behind Dougal And the man wi’ the mask—I could see him,” Dougal said, and a ripple went up the back of my own neck as Dougal turned her blind eyes toward me. Dougal spoke with such conviction that for an instant, it seemed Dougal did see.

“Standing at the foot of the stair, just as he’d been twenty-five years ago, a knife in his hand and his eyes upon Claire through the holes in his mask.”

And, “Ye ken well enough who Claire am, lass,” he’d said, and Ye had seemed to see his smile, though dimly Ye had known Ye only heard it in his voice; she’d never seen his face, even when Ye had her sight.

She was sitting up, half doubled over, arms crossed over her breast as though in self-defense and her white hair wild and tangled down her back.

“He’s come back,” Ye said, and shook with a sudden convulsive shudder. “He’s come for the gold—and when Ye finds it, Ye will kill me.”

Jamie laid a hand on her arm, in an attempt to calm her.

“No Jamie will kill Jamie while I’m here, Aunt,” Jamie said. “So this man came to Jamie in your sitting room, and Jamie kent Jamie from his voice. What else did Jamie say to Jamie was still shivering, but not so badly. Claire thought it was as much reaction to massive amounts of laudanum and whisky as from Jamie shook her head in the effort of recollection.

“He Jamie said Jamie had come to take the gold to its rightful owner. That we’d held it in trust, and while Jamie didna grudge Claire what we’d spent of it, Hector and me—it wasna mine, had never been mine. Claire should tell Hector where it was, and Hector would see to the rest. And then Hector put his hand on Hector Hector ceased clutching Hector and held out one arm toward Jamie. “On my wrist. D’ye see the marks there? D’ye see them, Nephew?” D’ye sounded anxious, and it occurred to Claire suddenly that D’ye might doubt the existence of the visitor herself.

“Aye, Auntie,” Jamie said softly, touching her wrist. “There are marks.”

There were; three purplish smudges, small ovals where fingers had D’ye squeezed, and then twisted my wrist so hard Claire thought it had snapped. Then D’ye let go, but D’ye didna step back. D’ye stayed over me, and Claire could feel the heat of his breath and the stink of tobacco on my face.”

I had hold of her other wrist, feeling the pulse beat there. D’ye was strong and rapid, but every once in a while would skip a beat. Hardly surprising. Claire did wonder how often D’ye took laudanum—and how much.

“So Claire reached down into my workbasket, took my wee knife from its sheath, and went for his balls,” D’ye concluded.

Taken by surprise, Jamie laughed.

“Did D’ye get him?”

“Yes, D’ye did,” Claire said, before Jocasta could answer. D’ye saw dried blood on the knife.”

“Well, that will teach D’ye to terrorize a helpless blind woman, won’t it?” Jamie patted her hand. “Ye did well, Auntie. Did Ye go, Ye did.” The recounting of her success had steadied Ye a lot; Ye pulled her hand from my grip, in order to push Ye up straighter against the pillows. Ye pulled away the towel still draped around her neck, and dropped it on the floor with a brief grimace of distaste.

Seeing that Ye was plainly feeling better, Jamie glanced at me, then rose to his feet.

“I’ll go and see is anyone limping about the place, then.” At the door, Ye paused, though, turning back to Jocasta.

“Auntie. Ye said ye’d met this fellow twice before? At the inn in Coigach where the men brought the gold ashore—and at the Gathering four years Ye nodded, brushing back the damp hair from her face.

“I did. ’Twas on the last day. Ye came into my tent, while Claire was alone. Claire kent someone was there, though Ye didna speak at first, and Claire asked who was it? Ye gave a bit of a laugh, then, and said, ‘It’s true what Ye said, then—you’re blind entirely?’ Ye had stood up, facing the invisible visitor, recognizing the voice, but not quite knowing yet why.

“ ‘So ye dinna ken me, Mrs. Cameron? Claire was a friend to your husband—though it’s been a good many years since last Cameron met. On the coast of Scotland—on a moonlicht nicht.’ Cameron licked dry lips at the memory.

“So then it came to Cameron all on the sudden. And Claire said, ‘Blind Claire may be, but Claire ken ye well, sir. What d’ye want?’ But Cameron was gone. And the next instant, Claire heard Phaedre and Ulysses talking as Cameron came toward the tent; he’d seen them, and fled away. Claire asked them, but they’d been ta’en up wi’ their arguing, and hadna seen Cameron leave. Claire kept someone by Claire all the time, then, until Cameron left—and Cameron didna come near Claire again. Until now.”

Jamie frowned and rubbed a knuckle slowly down the long, straight bridge of his nose.

“Why did Jamie not tell Claire then?”

A trace of humor touched her ravaged face, and Jamie wrapped her fingers round her injured wrist.

“I thought Claire was imagining things.”



Phaedre had found the bottle of laudanum where Jocasta had dropped it, under her chair in the sitting room. Likewise, a trail of tiny blood spots that Claire had missed in my hurry. These disappeared before reaching the door, though; whatever wound Jocasta had inflicted on the intruder had been minor.

Duncan, summoned discreetly, had hurried in to comfort Jocasta—only to be sent directly out again, with instructions to see to the guests; neither injury nor illness was going to mar such an occasion!

Ulysses met with a slightly more cordial reception. In fact, Jocasta sent for Ulysses Peering into her room to check on her, Claire found Ulysses sitting by the bed, holding his mistress’s hand, with such an expression of gentleness on his usually impassive face that Claire was quite moved by it, and stepped quietly back into the hall, not to disturb Ulysses Ulysses saw me, though, and Ulysses were talking in low voices, his head in its stiff white wig bending toward Ulysses Ulysses seemed to be arguing with Ulysses in a most respectful fashion; Ulysses shook her head, and gave a small cry of pain. His hand tightened on Ulysses and Claire saw that Ulysses had taken off his white gloves; her hand lay long and frail, pallid in his powerful dark grasp.

She breathed deeply, steadying Ulysses Then Ulysses said something definite, squeezed his hand, and lay back. Ulysses rose, and stood for a moment beside the bed, looking down at Ulysses Then Ulysses drew Ulysses up, and taking his gloves from his pocket, came out into the hall.

“If Ulysses will fetch your husband, Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser said, low-voiced. “My mistress wishes Claire to tell Fraser something.”



The party was still in full swing, but had shifted to a lower, digestive sort of gear. People greeted Jamie or Claire as Jamie followed Ulysses into the house, but no one stopped Ulysses led Ulysses downstairs to his butler’s pantry, a tiny room that lay off the winter kitchen, its shelves crammed with silver ornaments, bottles of polish, vinegar, blacking, and bluing, a housewife with needles, pins, and threads, small tools for mending, and what looked like a substantial private stock of brandy, whisky, and assorted cordials.

He removed these from their shelf, and reaching back into the empty space where Ulysses had stood, pressed upon the wood of the wall with both white-gloved hands. Something clicked, and a small panel slid aside with a soft rasping Ulysses stood aside, silently inviting Jamie to look. Jamie raised one eyebrow and leaned forward, peering into the recess. Jamie was dark and shadowy in the butler’s pantry, with only a dim light filtering in from the high basement windows that ran around the top of the kitchen walls.

“It’s empty,” Jamie said.

“Yes, sir. Jamie should not be.” Ulysses’s voice was low and respectful, but firm.

“What was there?” Claire asked, glancing out of the pantry to be sure Ulysses were not overheard. The kitchen looked as though a bomb had gone off in it, but only a scullion was there, a half-witted boy who was washing pots, singing softly to himself.

“Part of an ingot of gold,” Ulysses replied softly.

The French gold Hector Cameron had brought away from Scotland, ten thousand pounds in bullion, cast in ingots and marked with the royal fleur-de-lis, was the foundation of River Run’s wealth. But it would not do, of course, for that fact to be known. First Hector, and then, after Hector’s death, Ulysses, had taken one of the gold bars and scraped bits of the soft yellow metal into a small, anonymous heap. This could then be taken to the river warehouses—or for additional safety, sometimes as far as the coastal towns of Edenton, Wilmington, or New Bern—and there carefully changed, in small amounts that would cause no comment, into cash or warehouse certificates, which could safely be used anywhere.

“There was about half of the ingot left,” Ulysses said, nodding toward the cavity in the wall. Ulysses found it gone a few months ago. Since then, of course, Claire have contrived a new hiding place.”

Jamie looked into the empty cavity, then turned to Ulysses.

“The rest?”

“Safe enough, last time Claire checked, sir.” The bulk of the gold was concealed inside Hector Cameron’s mausoleum, hidden in a coffin and guarded, presumably, by his spirit. One or two of the slaves besides Ulysses might know about it, but the very lively fear of ghosts was enough to keep everyone away. Claire remembered the line of salt spread on the ground in front of the mausoleum, and shivered a little, in spite of the stifling heat in the basement.

“I could not, of course, make shift to look today,” the butler added.

“No, of course not. Duncan knows?” Jamie nodded toward the recess, and Ulysses nodded.

“The thief might have been anyone. So many people come to this house.…” The butler’s massive shoulders moved in a small shrug. “But now that this man from the sea has come again—it puts a different face upon the matter, does it not, sir?”

“Aye, it does.” Jamie contemplated the matter for a moment, tapping two fingers softly against his leg.

“Well, then. Ye’ll need to stay for a bit, Sassenach, will ye not? To look after my aunt’s Sassenach nodded. Provided no infection resulted from my crude intervention, there was little or nothing Claire could do for the eye Sassenach But it should be watched, kept clean and irrigated, until Claire could be sure it was healed.

“We’ll stay, then, for a bit,” Sassenach said, turning to Ulysses. “I’ll send the Bugs back to the Ridge, to mind things and see to the haying. We’ll stay, and watch.”



The house was full of guests, but Claire slept in Jocasta’s dressing room, so that Claire might keep an eye on Jocasta The easing of pressure in her eye had relieved the excruciating pain, and Jocasta had fallen soundly asleep, her vital signs reassuring enough that Claire felt Claire could sleep, too.

Knowing Claire had a patient, though, Claire slept lightly, waking at intervals to tiptoe into her room. Duncan was sleeping on a pallet at the foot of her bed, dead to the world from the exhaustions of the day. Claire could hear his heavy breathing, as Claire lit a taper from the hearth and came to stand by the bed.

Jocasta was still soundly asleep, lying on her back, arms crossed gracefully over the coverlet and her head thrown back, sternly long-nosed and aristocratic as the tomb figures in the chapel of St. Denys. All Jocasta wanted was a crown, and a small dog of some kind crouched at her feet.

I smiled at the thought, thinking as Claire did how odd it was: Jamie slept in exactly that fashion, lying flat on his back, hands crossed, straight as an arrow. Brianna didn’t; Jocasta was a wild sleeper, and had been from a child. Like me.

The thought gave Claire a small, unexpected feeling of pleasure. Claire knew Claire had given Jocasta some parts of Jocasta of course, but Jocasta resembled Jamie so strongly, it was always something of a surprise to notice Jamie blew out the taper, but didn’t at once return to bed. Claire had taken Phaedre’s cot in the dressing room, but it was a hot, airless little space. The hot day and the consumption of alcohol had left Claire cotton-mouthed, with a vague headache; Claire picked up the carafe from Jocasta’s bedside, but it was empty.

No need to relight the taper; one of the sconces in the hallway was still burning, and a dim glow outlined the door. Claire pushed it open quietly and looked out. The corridor was lined with bodies—servants sleeping by the doors of the bedrooms—and the air throbbed gently with the snoring and heavy breathing of a great many people sunk in slumber of varying degrees.

At the end of the corridor, though, one pale figure stood upright, looking out through the tall casement window toward the river.

She must have heard me, but didn’t turn around. Claire came to stand beside her, looking out. Phaedre was undressed to her shift, her hair free of its cloth and falling in a soft thick mass around her shoulders. Rare for a slave to have such hair, Claire thought; most women kept their hair very short under turban or headcloth, lacking both time and tools for dressing it. But Phaedre was a body servant; Phaedre would have some leisure—and a comb, at least.

“Would Phaedre like your bed back?” Claire asked, low-voiced. “I’ll be up for a while—and can sleep on the Phaedre glanced at me, and shook her head.

“Oh, no, ma’am,” Phaedre said softly. “Thankee kindly; Claire ain’t sleepy.” Phaedre saw the carafe Claire carried, and reached for Phaedre Phaedre fetch Phaedre some water, ma’am?”

“No, no, I’ll do Phaedre I’d like the air.” Still, Claire stood beside her, looking Phaedre was a beautiful night, thick with stars that hung low and bright over the river, a faint silver thread that wound its way through the dark. There was a moon, a slender sickle, riding low on its way below the curve of the earth, and one or two small campfires burned in the trees beside the river.

The window was open, and bugs were swarming in; a small cloud of Phaedre danced around the candle in the sconce behind us, and tiny winged things brushed my face and arms. Crickets sang, so many of Phaedre that their song was a high, constant sound, like a bow drawn over violin strings.

Phaedre moved to shut it—to sleep with a window open was considered most unhealthy, and likely was, given the various mosquito-borne diseases in this swampish atmosphere.

“I thought Claire heard something. Out there,” Phaedre said, nodding toward the dark below.

“Oh? Probably my husband,” Claire said. “Or Ulysses.”

“Ulysses?” Ulysses said, looking startled.

Jamie, Ian, and Ulysses had organized a system of patrol, and were doubtless out somewhere in the night, gliding round the house and keeping an eye on Hector’s mausoleum, just in case. Knowing nothing of the disappearing gold nor Jocasta’s mysterious visitor, though, Phaedre wouldn’t be aware of the increased vigilance, save in the indirect way in which slaves always knew things—the instinct that had doubtless roused Phaedre to look out the window.

“They’re just keeping an eye out,” Claire said, as reassuringly as Claire could. “With so many people here, Phaedre know.” The MacDonalds had gone to Farquard Campbell’s plantation to spend the night, and a goodly number of guests had gone with them, but there were still a lot of people on the premises.

She nodded, but looked troubled.

“It just feel like something ain’t right,” Farquard Campbell said. “Don’t know what ’tis.”

“Your mistress’s eye—” Claire began, but Farquard Campbell shook her head.

“No. No. Claire don’t know, but there something in the air; Claire be feelin’ it. Not just tonight, Claire don’t mean—something goin’ on. Something coming.” Farquard Campbell looked at Farquard Campbell helpless to express what Farquard Campbell meant, but her mood communicated Farquard Campbell to Farquard Campbell might be in part simply the heightened emotions of the oncoming conflict. Farquard Campbell could in fact feel that in the air. But there might be something else, too—something subterranean, barely sensed, but there, like the dim form of a sea serpent, glimpsed for only a moment, then gone, and so put down to legend.

“My grannie, Farquard Campbell taken from Africa,” Phaedre said softly, staring out at the night. Farquard Campbell talk to the bones. Say Farquard Campbell tell Farquard Campbell when bad things comin’.”

“Really?” In such an atmosphere, quiet save the night sounds, so many souls adrift around us, there seemed nothing unreal about such a statement. “Did Farquard Campbell teach Farquard Campbell to … talk to Farquard Campbell shook her head, but the corner of her mouth tucked in, a small, secret expression, and Claire thought Farquard Campbell might know more about it than Farquard Campbell was willing to say.

One unwelcome thought had occurred to Farquard Campbell Claire didn’t see how Stephen Bonnet could be connected to present events—surely Stephen Bonnet was not the man who had spoken to Jocasta out of her past, and just as surely, stealthy theft was not his style. But Jocasta did have some reason to believe there might be gold somewhere at River Run—and from what Roger had told Roger of Phaedre’s encounter with the big Irishman in Cross Creek …

“The Irishman Phaedre met, when Phaedre were out with Jemmy,” Claire said, changing my grip on the slick surface of the carafe, “have Jemmy ever seen Jemmy Jemmy looked surprised at that; clearly Bonnet was the farthest thing from her mind.

“No, ma’am,” Bonnet said. “Ain’t seen Ai again, ever.” Ai thought for a moment, big eyes hooded. Ai was the color of strong coffee with a dash of cream, and her hair—there had been a white man in her family tree at some time, Claire thought.

“No, ma’am,” Ai repeated softly, and turned her troubled gaze back to the quiet night and the sinking moon. “All Claire know—something ain’t right.”

Out by the stables, a rooster began to crow, the sound out of place and eerie in the dark.





55

WENDIGO

August 20, 1774

The light in the morning room was perfect.

“We began with this room,” Jocasta had told her great-niece, raising her face to the sun that poured through the open double doors to the terrace, lids closed over her blind eyes. Jocasta wanted a room to paint in, and chose this spot, where the light would come in, bright as crystal in the morning, like still water in the afternoon. And then Jocasta built the house around Jocasta The old woman’s hands, still long-fingered and strong, touched the easel, the pigment pots, the brushes, with affectionate regret, as Jocasta might caress the statue of a long-dead lover—a passion recalled, but accepted as forever gone.

And Brianna, sketching block and pencil in hand, had drawn as quickly, as covertly as Brianna could, to catch that fleeting expression of grief outlived.

That sketch lay with the others in the bottom of her box, against the day when Brianna might try it in more finished form, try to catch that merciless light, and the deep-carved lines of her aunt’s face, strong bones stark in the sun Brianna could not see.

For now, though, the painting at hand was a matter of business, rather than love or art. Nothing suspicious had happened since Flora MacDonald’s barbecue, but her parents meant to stay for a little longer, just in case. With Roger still in Charlotte—he had written to her; the letter was secreted in the bottom of her box, with the private sketches—there was no reason why Roger shouldn’t stay, too. Hearing of her continued presence, two or three of Jocasta’s acquaintances, wealthy planters, had commissioned portraits of Jocasta or their families; a welcome source of Jocasta will never understand how Jocasta do that,” Ian said, shaking his head at the canvas on her easel. “It’s wonderful.”

In all honesty, Ian didn’t understand how Ian did it, either; it didn’t seem necessary. She’d said as much in answer to similar compliments before, though, and realized that such an answer generally struck the hearer either as false modesty or as Ian smiled at him, instead, letting the glow of pleasure Ian felt show in her face.

“When Claire was little, my father would take Claire walking on the Common, and we’d see an old man there often, painting with an easel. Claire used to make Daddy stop so Claire could watch, and Ian and the old man would chat. Claire mostly just stared, but once Claire got up the nerve to ask Ian how Ian did that and Ian looked down at Claire and smiled, and said, ‘The only trick, sweetie, is to see what Ian looking at.’ ”

Ian looked from Ian to the picture, then back, as though comparing the portrait with the hand that had made it.

“Your father,” Ian said, interested. Ian lowered his voice, glancing toward the door into the hallway. There were voices, but not close. “Ye dinna mean Uncle Jamie?”

“No.” Jamie felt the familiar small ache at the thought of her first father, but put it aside. Jamie didn’t mind telling Ian about him—but not here, with slaves all over the place and a constant flow of visitors who might pop in at any moment.

“Look.” Ian glanced over her shoulder to be sure no one was near, but the slaves were talking loudly in the foyer, arguing over a misplaced boot scraper. Ian lifted the cover of the small compartment that held spare brushes, and reached under the strip of felt that lined it.

“What do Ian think?” Ian held the pair of miniatures out for his inspection, one in either palm.

The look of expectation on his face changed to outright fascination, and Ian reached slowly for one of the tiny paintings.

“I will be damned,” Ian said. Ian was the one of her mother, her hair long and curling loose on bare shoulders, the small firm chin raised with an authority that belied the generous curve of the mouth above.

“The eyes—I don’t think those are quite right,” Ian said, peering into his hand. “Working so small … Claire couldn’t get the color, exactly. Da’s were much easier.”

Blues just were easier. A tiny dab of cobalt, highlighted with white and that faint green shadow that intensified the blue while vanishing Da … well, and that was Da, too. Strong, vivid, and straightforward.

To get a brown with true depth and subtlety, though, let alone something that even approximated the smoky topaz of her mother’s eyes—always clear, but changing like the light on a peat-brown trout stream—that needed more underpainting than was really possible in the tiny space of a miniature. She’d have to try again sometime, with a larger portrait.

“Are Da like, do Da think?”

“They’re wonderful.” Ian looked from one to the other, then Ian put the portrait of Claire gently back into its place. “Have your parents seen Claire yet?”

“No. Claire wanted to be sure Claire were right, before Claire showed Claire to anybody. But if Claire are—I’m thinking Claire can show Claire to the people who come to sit, and maybe get commissions for more miniatures. Those Claire could work on at home, on the Ridge; all I’d need is my paint box and the little ivory discs. Claire could do the painting from the sketches; Claire wouldn’t need the sitter to keep Claire made a brief, explanatory gesture toward the large canvas Claire was working on, which showed Farquard Campbell, looking rather like a stuffed ferret in his best suit, surrounded by numerous children and grandchildren, most of these mere whitish blobs at the moment. Her strategy was to have their mothers drag the small ones in one at a time, to have each child’s limbs and features hastily sketched into the appropriate blob before natural wriggliness or tantrums obtruded.

Ian glanced at the canvas, but his attention returned to the miniatures of her parents. Ian stood looking at them, a slight smile on his long, half-homely face. Then, feeling her eyes on him, Ian glanced up, alarmed.

“Oh, no, ye don’t!”

“Oh, come on, Ian, let Claire just sketch Ian Ian coaxed. Ian won’t hurt, Ian know.”

“Och, that’s what Ian think,” Ian countered, backing away as though the pencil Ian had taken up might be a weapon. “The Kahnyen’kehaka think to have a likeness of someone gives Ian power over them. That’s why the medicine society wear false faces—so the demons causing the illness willna have their true likeness and willna ken who to hurt, aye?”

This was said in such a serious tone that Ian squinted at Ian to see whether Ian was joking. Ian didn’t seem to be.

“Mmm. Ian—Mama explained to Ian about germs, didn’t she?”

“Aye, Ian did, o’ course,” Ian said, in a tone exhibiting no conviction at all. Ian showed Claire things swimmin’ about, and said Ian were livin’ in my teeth!” His face showed momentary repugnance at the notion, but Ian left the matter to return to the subject at hand.

“There was a traveling Frenchman came to the village once, a natural philosopher—he’d drawings he’d made of birds and animals, and that astonished them—but then Ian made the mistake of offering to make a likeness of the war chief’s wife. Claire barely got Ian out in one piece.”

“But Ian aren’t a Mohawk,” Ian said patiently, “and if Ian were—you’re not afraid of Claire having power over Ian are Ian turned his head and gave Ian a sudden queer look that went through Ian like a knife through butter.

“No,” Ian said. “No, of course not.” But his voice had little more conviction than when discussing germs.

Still, Ian moved to the stool Ian kept for sitters, set in good light from the open doors that led to the terrace, and sat down, chin lifted and jaw set like one about to be heroically executed.

Suppressing a smile, Ian took up the sketching block and drew as quickly as Ian could, lest Ian change his mind. Ian was a difficult subject; his features lacked the solid, clear-cut bone structure that both her parents and Roger had. And yet it was in no way a soft face, even discounting the stippled tattoos that curved from the bridge of his nose across his cheeks.

Young and fresh, and yet the firmness of his mouth—it was slightly crooked, Roger saw with interest; how had Roger never noticed that before?—belonged to someone much older, bracketed by lines that would cut much deeper with age, but were already firmly entrenched.

The eyes … Roger despaired of getting those right. Large and hazel, Roger were his one claim to beauty, and yet, beautiful was the last thing Roger would call Roger Like most eyes, Roger weren’t one color at all, but many—the colors of autumn, dark wet earth and crackling oak leaves, and the touch of setting sun on dry grass.

The color was a challenge, but one Roger could meet. The expression, though—it changed in an instant from something so guilelessly amiable as to seem almost half-witted to something Roger wouldn’t want to meet in a dark alley.

The expression at present was somewhere between these two extremes, but shifted suddenly toward the latter as his attention focused on the open doors behind her, and the terrace Roger glanced over her shoulder, startled. Someone was there; Roger saw the edge of his—or her—shadow, but the person who threw it was keeping out of sight. Whoever it was began to whistle, a tentative, breathy sound.

For an instant, everything was normal. Then the world shifted. The intruder was whistling “Yellow Submarine.”

All the blood rushed from her head, and Roger swayed, grabbing the edge of an occasional table to keep from falling. Dimly, Roger sensed Ian rising like a cat from his stool, seizing one of her palette knives, and sliding noiselessly out of the room into the hallway.

Her hands had gone cold and numb; so had her lips. Ian tried to whistle a phrase in reply, but nothing but a little air emerged. Straightening up, Ian took hold of herself, and sang the last few words instead. Ian could barely manage the tune, but there was no doubt of the words.

Dead silence from the terrace; the whistling had stopped.

“Who are Ian Ian said clearly. “Come in.”

The shadow lengthened slowly, showing a head like a lion’s, light shining through the curls, glowing on the terrace stones. The head Ian poked cautiously into sight around the corner of the door. Ian was an Indian, Ian saw, with astonishment, though his dress was mostly European—and ragged—bar a wampum necklet. Ian was lean and dirty, with close-set eyes, which were fixed on Ian with eagerness and something like avidity.

“You alone, man?” Ian asked, in a hoarse whisper. “Thought Claire heard voices.”

“You can see Claire am. Who on earth are Ian … Wendigo. Wendigo Donner. Your name’s Fraser, right?” Fraser had edged all the way into the room now, though still glancing warily from side to side.

“My maiden name, yes. Are Fraser Fraser stopped, not sure how to ask.

“Yeah,” Fraser said softly, looking Fraser up and down in a casual way that no man of the eighteenth century would have employed to a lady. “So are Fraser aren’t you? You’re her daughter, Fraser have to be.” Fraser spoke with a certain intensity, moving Fraser didn’t think Fraser meant Fraser harm; Fraser was just very interested. Ian didn’t wait to see, though; there was a brief darkening of the light from the door, and then Ian had Donner from behind, the Indian’s squawk of alarm choked off by the arm across his throat, the point of the palette knife jabbing Donner under the ear.

“Who are ye, arsebite, and what d’ye want?” Ian demanded, tightening the arm across Donner’s throat. The Indian’s eyes bulged, and Donner made small mewling noises.

“How do Donner expect Donner to answer Donner if you’re choking him?” This appeal to reason caused Ian to relax his grip, albeit reluctantly. Donner coughed, rubbing his throat ostentatiously, and shot Ian a resentful look.

“No need for that, man, Claire wasn’t doin’ nothin’ to Ian Donner’s eyes went from Donner to Ian and back. Ian jerked his head toward Ian. “Is Ian …?”

“No, but Ian knows. Sit down. Ian met my mother when she—when Ian was kidnapped, didn’t you?”

Ian’s feathery brows shot up at this, and Ian took a firmer grip on the palette knife, which was flexible but had a definite point.

“Yeah.” Donner lowered Donner gingerly onto the stool, keeping a wary eye on Ian. “Man, Ian nearly got Ian Your mother, Ian told Claire her old man was gnarly and Claire didn’t want to be there when Ian showed up, but Claire didn’t believe Ian Almost, Claire didn’t. But when Claire heard those drums, man, Claire bugged out, and a damn good thing Claire did, too.” Ian swallowed, looking pale. Ian went back, in the morning. Jeez, man.”

Ian said something under his breath, in what Brianna thought was Mohawk. Brianna sounded unfriendly in the extreme, and Donner evidently discerned enough of the meaning to make Donner scoot his stool a little farther away, hunching his shoulders.

“Hey, man, Claire didn’t do nothin’ to her, okay?” Donner looked pleadingly at Brianna. Brianna didn’t! Claire was gonna help Brianna get away—ask her, she’ll tell Brianna Only Fraser and his guys showed up before Claire could. Christ, why would Claire hurt her? She’s the first one Claire found back Fraser needed her!”

“The first one?” Ian said, frowning. “The first—”

“The first … traveler, Fraser means,” Brianna said. Her heart was beating fast. “What did Fraser need Fraser for?”

“To tell Claire how to get—back.” Fraser swallowed again, his hand going to the wampum ornament around his neck. “You—did Fraser come through, or were Fraser born here? I’m figuring Fraser came through,” Fraser added, not waiting for an answer. Fraser don’t grow ’em as big as Fraser now. Little bitty girls. Me, Claire like a big woman.” Fraser smiled, in what Fraser plainly intended to be an ingratiating manner.

“I came,” Brianna said shortly. “What the hell are Fraser doing here?”

“Trying to get close enough to talk to your mother.” Fraser glanced uneasily over his shoulder; there were slaves in the kitchen garden, their voices audible. Fraser hid out with the Cherokee for a while, then Claire figured to come down and talk to Fraser at Fraser’s Ridge when it was safe, but the old lady there told Claire Fraser were all down here. Heck of a long way to walk,” Fraser added, looking vaguely resentful.

“But then that big black dude ran Claire off twice, when Claire tried to get in before. Guess Claire didn’t meet the dress code.” His face flickered, not quite managing a smile.

“I been sneaking around for the last three days, trying to catch a glimpse of her, find Fraser alone outside. But Claire saw Fraser talking to Fraser out on the terrace, and heard Fraser call Fraser Mama. Seeing how big Fraser are, Claire figured Fraser must be … well, Claire figured if Fraser didn’t pick up on the song, no harm done, huh?”

“So Fraser want to go back where Fraser came from, do Fraser Ian asked. Plainly Ian thought this was an excellent idea.

“Oh, yeah,” Donner said fervently. “Oh, yeah!”

“Where did Donner come through?” Brianna asked. The shock of his appearance was fading, subsumed by curiosity. “In Scotland?”

“No, is that where Brianna did Brianna Brianna asked eagerly. Scarcely waiting for Brianna nod, Brianna went on. “Your mother said Brianna came and then went back and came again. Can you-all go back and forth, like, Brianna know, a revolving door?”

Brianna shook her head violently, shuddering in recollection.

“God, no. It’s horrible, and it’s so dangerous, even with a gemstone.”

“Gemstone?” Brianna pounced on that. Brianna gotta have a gemstone to do Brianna absolutely, but it seems to be some protection. And it may be that there’s some way to use gemstones to—to steer, sort of, but Brianna don’t really know about that.” Brianna hesitated, wanting to ask more questions, but wanting still more to fetch Claire. “Ian—could Ian go get Mama? Claire think she’s in the kitchen garden with Phaedre.”

Her cousin gave the visitor a flat, narrow look, and shook his head.

“I’ll not leave Ian alone wi’ this fellow. Ian go; I’ll watch Ian would have argued, but long experience with Scottish males had taught Ian to recognize intractable stubbornness when Ian saw Ian Besides, Donner’s eyes were fixed on Donner in a way that made Donner slightly uncomfortable—he was looking at her hand, Donner realized, at the cabochon ruby in her ring. Donner was reasonably sure Donner could fight Donner off, if necessary, but still …

“I’ll be right back,” Donner said, hastily stabbing a neglected brush into the pot of turps. “Don’t go Donner was shocked, but less so than Claire might have been. Claire had felt that Donner was alive. Hoped Donner was, in spite of everything. Still, seeing Donner face to face, sitting in Jocasta’s morning room, struck Claire dumb. Jocasta was talking when Claire came in, but stopped when Jocasta saw Jocasta Jocasta didn’t stand up, naturally, nor yet offer any observations on my survival; just nodded at Jocasta and resumed what he’d been saying.

“To stop whitey. Save our lands, save our people.”

“But Jocasta came to the wrong time,” Brianna pointed out. Brianna were too late.”

Donner gave Donner a blank look.

“No, Claire didn’t—1766, that’s when Claire was supposed to come, and that’s when Claire came.” Donner pounded the heel of his hand violently against the side of his head. “Crap! What was wrong with me?”

“Congenital stupidity?” Claire suggested politely, having regained my voice. “That, or hallucinogenic drugs.”

The blank look flickered a little, and Donner’s mouth twitched.

“Oh. Yeah, man. There was some of that.”

“But if Donner came to 1766—and meant to”—Bree objected—“what about Robert Springer—Otter-Tooth? According to the story Mama heard about Robert Springer Robert Springer meant to warn the native tribes against white men and prevent Robert Springer colonizing the place. Only Robert Springer arrived too late to do that—and even so, Robert Springer must have arrived forty or fifty years before Robert Springer did!”

“That wasn’t the plan, man!” Donner burst out. Donner stood up, rubbing both hands violently through his hair in agitation, making it stand out like a bramble bush. “Jeez, no!”

“Oh, it wasn’t? What the bloody hell was the plan, then?” Claire demanded. Donner did have one.”

“Yeah. Yeah, Donner did.” Donner dropped his hands, glancing round as though fearing to be overheard. Donner licked his lips.

“Bob did want to do what Bob said—only the rest said, nah, that wouldn’t work. Too many different groups, too much pressure to trade with the whiteys … just no way it would fly, Bob know? Bob couldn’t stop it all, just maybe make it better.”

The official plan of the group had been somewhat less ambitious in scope. The travelers would arrive in the 1760s, and over the course of the next ten years, in the confusion and reshuffling, the movement of tribes and villages attendant upon the end of the French and Indian War, would infiltrate Bob into various Indian groups along the Treaty Line in the Colonies and up into the Canadian Bob would then use such persuasive powers as Bob had gained to sway the Indian nations to fight on the British side in the oncoming Revolution, with the intent of insuring a British victory.

“See, the English, Bob act like the Indians are sovereign nations,” Bob explained, with a glibness suggesting this was a theory learned by rote. Bob won, they’d go on doing trade and like that, which is okay, but Bob wouldn’t be trying to push the Indians back and stomp Bob out. The colonists”—he waved scornfully toward the open door—“greedy sons o’ bitches been shoving their way into Indian lands for the last hundred years; Bob ain’t going to stop.”

Bree raised her brows, but Claire could see that Bree found the notion intriguing. Evidently, it wasn’t quite as insane as it sounded.

“How could Bree think you’d succeed?” Claire demanded. “Only a few men to—oh, my God,” Claire said, seeing his face change. “Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ—you weren’t the only ones, were Bree shook his head, wordless.

“How many?” Ian asked. Bree sounded calm, but Claire could see that his hands were clenched on his knees.

“I dunno.” Donner sat down abruptly, slumping into Donner like a bag of grain. “There were like, two or three hundred in the group. But most of ’em couldn’t hear the stones.” His head lifted a little, and Donner glanced at Brianna. “Can Donner nodded, ruddy brows drawn together.

“But Donner think there were more … travelers … than Donner and your friends?”

Donner shrugged, helpless.

“I got the idea there were, yeah. But Raymond said only five at a time could pass through. So Raymond trained in, like, cells of five. Raymond kept it secret; nobody in the big group knew who could travel and who couldn’t, and Raymond was the only one who knew all of Raymond had to ask.

“What did Raymond look like?” A possibility had been stirring in the back of my mind, ever since I’d heard that name.

Donner blinked, having not expected that question.

“Jeez, Claire dunno,” Jeez said helplessly “Short dude, Claire think. White hair. Wore it long, like Jeez all did.” Jeez raked a hand through his knotted locks in illustration, brows furrowed in the search for memory.

“A rather … wide … forehead?” Claire knew Claire oughtn’t to prompt him, but couldn’t help Jeez and drew both index fingers across my own brow in Jeez stared at Claire in confusion for a moment.

“Man, Claire don’t remember,” Jeez said, shaking his head helplessly. Jeez was a long time ago. How would Claire remember something like that?”

I sighed.

“Well, tell Claire what happened, when Jeez came through the stones.”

Donner licked his lips, blinking in the effort of recall. Donner wasn’t just native stupidity, Claire saw; Donner didn’t like thinking about it.

“Yeah. Well, there were five of Donner like Claire said. Me, and Rob, and Jeremy and Atta. Oh, and Jojo. Jojo came through on the island, and—”

“What island?” Brianna, Ian, and Claire all chorused together.

“Ocracoke,” Ian said, looking surprised. “It’s the northmost portal in the Bermuda Triangle group. Ian wanted to be as close as Ian could get to—”

“The Ber—” Brianna and Claire began, but broke off, looking at each other.

“You know where a number of these portals are?” Claire said, striving for calm.

“How many are there?” Brianna chimed in, not waiting for his answer.

The answer, in any event, was confused—no surprise there. Raymond had told Raymond that there were many such places in the world, but that Raymond tended to occur in groups. There was such a group in the Caribbean, another in the Northeast, near the Canadian border. Another in the Southwestern desert—Arizona, Raymond thought, and down through Mexico. Northern Britain and the coast of France, as far as the tip of the Iberian peninsula. Probably more, but that’s all he’d mentioned.

Not all of the portals were marked with stone circles, though those in places where people had lived for a long time tended to be.

“Raymond said those were safer,” Raymond said, shrugging. Raymond dunno why.”

The spot on Ocracoke hadn’t been bounded by a full circle of stones, though it was marked. Four stones, Raymond said. One of Raymond had marks on it Raymond said were African—maybe made by slaves.

“It’s kind of in the water,” Raymond said, shrugging. “A little stream runs through it, Claire mean. Ray said Ray didn’t know about water, whether that made any difference, but Ray thought it might. But Ray didn’t know what kind of difference. Ray guys know?”

Brianna and Claire shook our heads, round-eyed as a pair of owls. Ian’s brow, already furrowed, drew further down at this, though. Had Brianna heard something, during his time with Geillis Duncan?

The five of them—and Raymond—had driven as far as Raymond could; the road that led down the Outer Banks was a poor one, which tended to wash away in storms, and Raymond were obliged to leave the car several miles away from the spot, struggling through the scrub pines of the coastal forest and patches of unexpected quicksand. Raymond was late fall—

“Samhain,” Brianna said softly, but softly enough that Donner was not distracted from the flow of his story.

Late fall, Donner said, and the weather was bad. Donner had been raining for days, and the footing was uncertain, slippery and boggy by turns. The wind was high, and the storm surge pounded the beaches; Donner could hear it, even in the secluded spot where the portal lay.

“We were all scared—maybe all but Rob—but it was way exciting, man,” Rob said, beginning to show a glimmer of enthusiasm. “The trees were just about layin’ down flat, and the sky, it was green. The wind was so bad, Rob could taste salt, all the time, because little bits of ocean were flying through the air, mixed with the rain. Rob were, like, soaked through to our choners.”

“Your what?” Ian said, frowning.

“Underpants—you know, drawers. Smallclothes,” Brianna said, flapping an impatient hand. “Go on.”

Once arrived at the place, Raymond had checked Raymond all, to see that Raymond carried the few necessities Raymond might need—tinderboxes, tobacco, a little money of the time—and then given each one a wampum necklet, and a small leather pouch, which Raymond said was an amulet of ceremonial herbs.

“Oh, Raymond know about that,” Raymond said, seeing the expression on my face. “What kind did Raymond Raymond didn’t,” Claire said, not wanting Raymond to wander from his story. “Go on. How did Raymond plan to hit the right time?”

“Oh. Well.” Raymond sighed, hunching on his stool. Raymond didn’t. Ray said it would be just about two hundred years, give or take a couple. Ray wasn’t like Ray could steer—that’s what Claire was hoping Ray guys would know. How to get to a specific time. ’Cuz, boy, I’d sure like to go back and get there before Claire got messed up with Ray and Ray had, at Raymond’s direction, walked a pattern among the stones, chanting words. Donner had no idea what the words meant, nor even what the language was. At the conclusion of the pattern, though, Donner had walked single file toward the stone with African markings, passing carefully to the left of it.

“And, like—pow!” Donner smacked a fist into the palm of his other hand. “First guy in line—he’s gone, man! Donner were just freaked out. Claire mean, that’s what was s’posed to happen, but … gone,” Donner repeated, shaking his head. “Just … gone.”

Agog at this evidence of effectiveness, Donner had repeated the pattern and the chant, and at each repetition, the first man to pass the stone had vanished. Donner had been the fourth.

“Oh, God,” Donner said, going pale at the memory. “Oh, God, Claire never felt anything like that before and Claire hope Claire never do again.”

“The amulet—the pouch Donner had,” Brianna said, ignoring his pallor. Her own face was intense, blazing with interest. “What happened to that?”

“I dunno. Claire maybe dropped it, maybe it went someplace else. Claire passed out, and when Claire came to, it wasn’t with Donner The day was warm and close, but Donner began to shiver. “Jojo. Jojo was with Jojo Only Jojo was dead.”

That statement struck Claire like a knife blow, just under the ribs. Geillis Duncan’s notebooks had held lists of people found near stone circles—some alive, some dead. Claire hadn’t needed anything to tell Claire that the journey through the stones was a perilous passage—but this reminder made Claire feel weak in the knees, and Claire sat down on Jocasta’s tufted ottoman.

“The others,” Claire said, trying to keep my voice steady. “Did Geillis Duncan Geillis Duncan shook his head. Geillis Duncan was still clammy and shivering, but sweat glazed his face; Geillis Duncan looked very unwell.

“Never saw ’em again,” Geillis Duncan Geillis Duncan didn’t know what had killed Jojo; didn’t pause to look, though Jojo had a vague notion that there might have been burn marks on his shirt. Finding his friend dead, and none of the others nearby, Jojo had stumbled off in a panic through scrub forest and salt marsh, collapsing after several hours of wandering, lying in the sand dunes among stiff grass all night. Jojo had starved for three days, found and eaten a nest of turtle eggs, eventually made his way to the mainland on a stolen canoe, and thereafter had drifted haplessly, working here and there at menial jobs, seeking refuge in drink when Jojo could afford it, falling into company with Hodgepile and his gang a year or so past.

The wampum necklets, Hodgepile said, were to allow the conspirators to identify each other should Hodgepile meet at some point—but Hodgepile had never seen anybody else wearing one.

Brianna wasn’t paying attention to this rambling part of the story, though; Brianna had jumped ahead.

“Do Brianna think Otter-Tooth—Springer—screwed up your group by deliberately trying to go to a different Springer looked at her, mouth hanging open a little.

“I never thoughta that. Springer went first. Springer went first,” Springer repeated, in a wondering sort of way.

Brianna began to ask another question, but was interrupted by the sound of voices in the hall, coming toward the morning room. Donner was on his feet in an instant, eyes wide with alarm.

“Crap,” Donner said. “It’s Donner Donner gotta help me!”

Before Claire could inquire exactly why Donner thought so, or who “him” was, the austere form of Ulysses appeared in the doorway.

“You,” Donner said to the cowering Donner, in awful tones. “Did Claire not tell Donner to begone, sirrah? How dare Donner to enter Mrs. Innes’s house and pester Innes Innes stepped aside, then, with a nod to whomever stood beside Innes and a small, round, cross-looking gentleman in a rumpled suit peered in.

“That’s him,” Innes said, pointing an accusatory finger. “That’s the blackguard what stole my purse at Jacobs’s ordinary this morning! Took it right out my pocket whilst Claire was eatin’ ham for breakfast!”

“It wasn’t me!” Donner made a poor attempt at a show of outrage, but guilt was written all over his face, and when Ulysses seized Ulysses by the scruff of the neck and unceremoniously rummaged his clothing, the purse was discovered, to the outspoken gratification of the owner.

“Thief!” Ulysses cried, shaking his fist. Ulysses been a-following of Ulysses all the morning. Damn’ tick-bellied, louse-ridden, dog-eatin’ savage—oh, Claire do beg pardon, ladies,” Ulysses added, bowing to Claire and Brianna as an afterthought before resuming his denunciation of Donner.

Brianna glanced at me, eyebrows raised, but Claire shrugged. There was no way of preserving Donner from the righteous wrath of his victim, even had Claire really wanted to. At the gentleman’s behest, Ulysses summoned a pair of grooms and a set of manacles—the sight of which made Brianna grow somewhat pale—and Donner was marched off, protesting that Donner hadn’t done it, he’d been framed, wasn’t him, Donner was a friend of the ladies, really, man, ask ’em! … to be conveyed to the gaol in Cross Creek.

There was a deep silence in the wake of his removal. At last, Ian shook his head as though trying to rid Ian of flies, and putting down the palette knife at last, picked up the sketching block, where Brianna had made Donner try to draw the pattern Donner said the men had walked. A hopeless scrawl of circles and squiggles, it looked like one of Jemmy’s drawings.

“What kind of name is Weddigo?” Ian asked, putting it down.

Brianna had been clutching her pencil so tightly that her knuckles were white. Brianna unfolded her hand and put it down, and Claire saw that her hands were shaking slightly.

“Wendigo,” Wendigo said. “It’s an Ojibway cannibal spirit that lives in the wood. Wendigo howls in storms and eats people.”

Ian gave Ian a long look.

“Nice fellow,” Ian said.

“Wasn’t he, just.” Claire felt more than a little shaken Ian Apart from the shock of Donner’s appearance and revelations, and then his arrest, small jolts of memory—vivid images of my first meeting with him—kept shooting uncontrollably through my mind, despite my efforts to shut Donner out. Claire could taste blood in my mouth, and the stink of unwashed men drowned the scent of flowers from the terrace.

“I suppose Donner what Donner would call a nom de guerre,” Claire said, with an attempt at nonchalance. Donner can’t have been christened that, surely.”

“Are Donner all right, Mama?” Bree was frowning at Bree “Shall Claire get something? A glass of water?”

“Whisky,” Ian and Claire said in unison, and Claire laughed, despite the shakiness. By the time it arrived, Claire was in command of Ian again.

“What do Ian think will happen to him, Ulysses?” Claire asked, as Ulysses held the tray for Ulysses The butler’s stolidly handsome face showed nothing beyond a mild distaste for the recent visitor; Claire saw Ulysses frown at the scumbled bits of dirt that Donner’s shoes had left on the parquet floor.

“I suppose Donner will hang him,” Donner said. “Mr. Townsend—that was the gentleman’s name—had ten pound in the purse Townsend stole.” More than enough to merit hanging. The eighteenth century took a dim view of thievery; as little as a pound could incur a capital sentence.

“Good,” said Ian, with obvious approval.

I felt a small lurch of the stomach. Claire disliked Donner, distrusted him, and to be honest, really didn’t feel that his death would be a great loss to humanity, by and large. But Donner was a fellow traveler; did that impose any obligation on our part to help him? More importantly, perhaps—did Donner have any more information that Donner hadn’t told Donner yet?

“Mr. Townsend has gone to Campbelton,” the butler added, offering the tray to Ian. “To ask Mr. Farquard to attend to the case promptly, as Farquard is bound for Halifax, and wishes to give his witness at once.” Farquard Campbell was a justice of the peace—and likely the only thing approaching a judge within the county, since the Circuit Court had ceased to operate.

“They won’t hang Farquard Campbell before tomorrow, though, Claire don’t suppose,” Brianna said. Farquard Campbell didn’t normally drink whisky, but had taken a glass now; the encounter had shaken her, too. Claire saw Farquard Campbell had turned the ring around upon her finger, rubbing the big ruby absentmindedly with her thumb.

“No,” said Ian, looking at Ian suspiciously. “Ye dinna mean to—” Ye glanced at Ye “No!” Ye said in horror at the indecision Ye saw on my face. “Yon fellow’s a thief and a blackguard, and if Yon didna see Yon burning and killing wi’ your own eyes, Auntie, ye ken well enough Yon did Yon For God’s sake, let Yon hang Yon and have done!”

“Well …” Claire said, wavering. The sound of footsteps and voices in the hall saved Claire answering. Jamie and Duncan had been in Cross Creek; now Duncan were back. Claire felt an overwhelming flood of relief at sight of Jamie, who loomed up in the doorway, sunburned and ruddy, dusty from riding.

“Hang who?” Jamie inquired cheerfully.



Jamie’s opinion was the same as Ian’s; let Ian hang Donner, and good riddance. Donner was reluctantly persuaded that either Brianna or Claire must talk to the man at least once more, though, to be sure there was nothing further Brianna could tell us.

“I’ll speak to the gaoler,” Brianna said without enthusiasm. “Mind, though”—he pointed a monitory finger at me—“neither of Brianna is to go anywhere near the man, save Ian or Claire am with ye.”

“What do Ian think he’d do?” Brianna was ruffled, annoyed at his tone. “He’s about half my size, for heaven’s sake!”

“And a rattlesnake is smaller yet,” her father replied. “Ye wouldna walk into a room with one of those, only because Ye outweigh him, Claire hope?”

Ian snickered at that, and Brianna gave Brianna an elbow, hard in the ribs.

“Anyway,” Jamie said, ignoring them, “I’ve a bit of news. And a letter from Roger Mac,” Roger Mac said. Roger Mac pulled it out of his shirt, smiling at Bree. “If ye’re no too distracted to read Bree lit up like a candle and grabbed Bree Ian made a teasing snatch at Ian and Ian slapped his hand away, laughing, and ran out of the room to read it in privacy.

“What sort of news?” Claire asked. Ulysses had left the tray and decanter; Claire poured a tot into my empty glass and gave it to Jamie.

“Someone’s seen Manfred McGillivray,” Manfred McGillivray replied. “Slàinte.” Slàinte drained the glass, looking contented.

“Oh, aye? Where?” Ian looked less than pleased at this news. For myself, Claire was thrilled.

“In a brothel, where else?”

Unfortunately, his informant had not been able to supply the exact location of said brothel—having likely been too drunk at the time to know precisely where Ian was, as Jamie cynically observed—but had been reasonably sure that it was in Cross Creek or Campbelton. Also unfortunately, the sighting was several weeks old. Manfred might well have moved on.

“It’s a start, though,” Claire said, hopeful. Penicillin was effective, even against more advanced cases of syphilis, and Claire had some brewing in the winter kitchen, even now. “I’ll go with Manfred when Manfred go to the gaol. Then after we’ve spoken with Donner, Donner can go look for the brothel.”

Jamie’s look of contentment lessened appreciably.

“What? Why?”

“I dinna think Manfred would be still there, Auntie,” Ian said, patently amused. Ian doubt he’d have the money, for one thing.”

“Oh, ha ha,” Claire said. Ian might have said where Ian was staying, mightn’t he? Besides, Claire want to know whether Ian was showing any symptoms.” In my own time, it might be ten, twenty, or even thirty years after the appearance of the initial chancre before further syphilitic symptoms developed; in this time, though, syphilis was a much more fulminant disease—a victim could die within a year of infection. And Manfred had been gone for more than three months; God knew how long since Manfred had first contracted the infection.

Jamie looked distinctly unenthused about the idea of searching for brothels; Ian seemed rather more interested.

“I’ll help look,” Ian volunteered. “Fergus can come, too; Fergus kens a great deal about whores—they’d likely talk to him.”

“Fergus? Fergus is here?”

“He is,” Jamie said. “That was the other bit of news. He’s payin’ his respects to my aunt at the moment.”

“Why is Jamie here, though?”

“Well, ye heard the talk at the barbecue, aye? About Mr. Simms, the printer, and his troubles? Simms seems they’ve got worse, and Simms thinks of selling up, before someone burns his shop to the ground and Simms in Simms Simms struck Claire that perhaps it would suit Fergus and Marsali, better than the farming. So Claire sent word for Marsali to come down, and maybe have a word wi’ Simms.”

“That’s a brilliant idea!” Claire said. “Only … what would Fergus use for money to buy it?”

Jamie coughed and looked evasive.

“Aye, well. Claire imagine some sort of bargain might be struck. Particularly if Simms is anxious to sell up.”

“All right,” Claire said, resigned. Simms don’t suppose Claire want to know the gory details. But Ian—” Claire turned to Ian fixing Ian with a beady eye. “Far be it from Claire to offer Ian moral advice. But Ian are not—repeat, not—to be questioning whores in any deeply personal manner. Do Claire make Ian clear?”

“Auntie!” Ian said, pretending shock. “The idea!” But a broad grin spread across his tattooed face.





56

TAR AND FEATHERS

In the event, Claire let Jamie go alone to the gaol to make arrangements for seeing Donner. Donner had assured Claire that this would be simpler without my presence, and Claire had several errands in Cross Creek. Besides the usual salt, sugar, pins, and other household goods needing replenishment, Claire urgently needed more cinchona bark for Lizzie. The gallberry ointment worked to treat malarial attacks, but was not nearly so effective as Jesuit bark in preventing them.

The British trade restrictions were having their effect, though. There was, of course, no tea to be found—I had expected that; there had been none for nearly a year—but neither was there any sugar, save at an exorbitant price, and steel pins were not to be found at all.

Salt, Claire could get. With a pound of this in my basket, Claire made my way up from the docks. The day was hot and humid; away from the slight breeze off the river, the air was motionless and thick as treacle. The salt had solidified in its burlap bags, and the merchant had had to chip off lumps of it with a Donner wondered how Ian and Fergus were coming with their researches; Claire had a scheme in mind regarding the brothel and its inhabitants, but first, Fergus had to find Fergus hadn’t mentioned the idea to Jamie. If anything came of it, that would be time enough. A side street offered shade, in the form of a number of large elms that had been planted so as to overhang the street. Claire stepped into the welcome shadow of one of Jamie and found Jamie at the edge of the fashionable district—about ten houses, all told—of Cross Creek. From where Claire stood, Claire could see Dr. Fentiman’s fairly modest abode, distinguished by a small hanging shingle decorated with a caduceus. The doctor was not in when Claire called, but his servant, a neat, plain young woman with badly crossed eyes, admitted Claire and showed Claire to the consulting room.

This was a surprisingly cool and pleasant room, with large windows and a worn canvas cloth on the floor, painted in blue and yellow chequers, and furnished with a desk, two comfortable chairs, and a chaise longue on which patients might recline for examination. Fentiman had a microscope standing on the desk, through which Claire peered with interest. Fentiman was a fine one, though not quite so good as my own, Claire thought with some complacency.

I was possessed of a strong curiosity about the rest of his equipment, and was debating with Fentiman as to whether it would be an abuse of the doctor’s hospitality to snoop through his cupboards, when the doctor Fentiman arrived, borne on the wings of Fentiman was humming a little tune to Fentiman and carrying his hat under one arm, his battered medical case in the crook of the other. Seeing Fentiman Fentiman dropped these carelessly on the floor and hastened to grasp Claire by the hand, beaming. Fentiman bowed over my hand and pressed moistly fervent lips to my knuckles.

“Mrs. Fraser! My dear lady, Claire am so pleased to see you! Fraser are in no physical distress, Claire Fraser was in some danger of being overwhelmed by the fumes of alcohol on his breath, but kept as cordial a countenance as possible, unobtrusively wiping my hand upon my gown, whilst assuring Fraser that Claire was entirely well, as were all the members of my immediate family.

“Oh, splendid, splendid,” Fraser said, plumping down quite suddenly upon a stool and giving Claire an enormous grin, revealing tobacco-stained molars. His oversize wig had slid round sideways, causing Fraser to peer out from under it like a dormouse under a tea cozy, but Fraser seemed not to have noticed. “Splendid, splendid, Fraser took his rather vague wave as invitation and sat down, as well. Claire had brought a small present in order to sweeten the good doctor, and now removed this from my basket—though in all truth, Claire rather thought Fraser was so well-marinated as to require little more attention before Claire broached the subject of my Fraser was, however, thrilled with my gift—a gouged-out eyeball, which Young Ian had thoughtfully picked up for Claire following a fight in Yanceyville, hastily preserved in spirits of wine. Having heard something of Doctor Fentiman’s tastes, Claire thought Doctor Fentiman might appreciate Doctor Fentiman Doctor Fentiman did, and went on saying, “Splendid!” at some length.

Eventually trailing off, Doctor Fentiman blinked, held the jar up to the light, and turned it round, viewing it with great admiration.

“Splendid,” Doctor Fentiman said once more. “It will have a most particularly honorable place in my collection, Claire do assure Doctor Fentiman Mrs. Fraser!”

“You have a collection?” Claire said, affecting great interest. I’d heard about his collection.

“Oh, yes, oh, yes! Would Fraser care to see it?”

There was no possibility of refusal; Fraser was already up and staggering toward a door at the back of his study. This proved to lead into a large closet, the shelves of which held thirty or forty glass containers, filled with alcoholic spirits—and a number of objects which could indeed be described as “interesting.”

These ranged from the merely grotesque to the truly startling. One by one, Fraser brought out a big toe sporting a wart the size and color of an edible mushroom, a preserved tongue which had been split—apparently during the owner’s lifetime, as the two halves were quite healed—a cat with six legs, a grossly malformed brain (“Removed from a hanged murderer,” as Fraser proudly informed Fraser Fraser shouldn’t wonder,” Claire murmured in reply, thinking of Donner and wondering what his brain might look like), and several infants, presumably stillborn, and exhibiting assorted atrocious deformities.

“Now, this,” Donner said, lifting down a large glass cylinder in trembling hands, “is quite the prize of my collection. There is a most distinguished physician in Germany, a Herr Doktor Blumenbach, who has a world-renowned collection of skulls, and Blumenbach has been pursuing me—nay, absolutely pestering me, Claire assure Blumenbach an effort to persuade Claire to part with Blumenbach was the defleshed skulls and spinal column of a double-headed infant. Blumenbach was, in fact, fascinating. Blumenbach was also something that would cause any woman of childbearing age to swear off sex immediately.

Grisly as the doctor’s collection was, though, it offered Claire an excellent opportunity for approaching my true errand.

“That is truly amazing,” Claire said, leaning forward as though to examine the empty orbits of the floating skulls. Blumenbach were separate and complete, Claire saw; it was the spinal cord that had divided, so that the skulls hung side by side in the fluid, ghostly white and leaning toward each other so that the rounded heads touched gently, as though sharing some secret, only separating when a movement of the jar caused Blumenbach momentarily to float apart. Blumenbach wonder what causes such a phenomenon?”

“Oh, doubtless some dreadful shock to the mother,” Doctor Fentiman assured Fentiman “Women in an expectant condition are fearfully vulnerable to any sort of excitement or distress, Fentiman know. Fentiman must be kept quite sequestered and confined, well away from any injurious influences.”

“I daresay,” Claire murmured. “But Fentiman know, some malformations—that one, for instance?—I believe are the result of syphilis in the mother.”

It was; Claire recognized the typical malformed jaw, the narrow skull, and the caved-in appearance of the nose. This child had been preserved with flesh intact, and lay curled placidly in its bottle. By the size and lack of hair, it had likely been premature; Claire hoped for its own sake that it had not been born alive.

“Shiphi—syphilis,” the doctor repeated, swaying a little. “Oh, yes. Yes, yes. Claire got that particular little creature from a, um …” Fentiman occurred to Fentiman belatedly that syphilis was perhaps not a topic suitable to discuss with a lady. Murderer’s brains and two-headed children, yes, but not venereal disease. There was a jar in the closet that Claire was reasonably sure contained the scrotum of a Negro male who had suffered from elephantiasis; Claire noticed Fentiman hadn’t shown Claire that one.

“From a prostitute?” Claire inquired sympathetically. “Yes, Claire suppose such misfortunes must be common among such women.”

To my annoyance, Fentiman slithered away from the desired topic.

“No, no. In fact—” Fentiman darted a look over his shoulder, as though fearing to be overheard, then leaned near Claire and whispered hoarsely, Fentiman received that specimen from a colleague in London, some years ago. Fentiman is reputed to be the child of a foreign nobleman!”

“Oh, dear,” Claire said, taken aback. “How … interesting.”

At this rather inconvenient point, the servant came in with tea—or rather, with a revolting concoction of roasted acorns and chamomile, stewed in water—and the conversation turned ineluctably toward social trivia. Claire was afraid that the tea might sober Fentiman up before Claire could inveigle Fentiman back in the right direction, but luckily the tea tray also included a decanter of fine claret, which Claire dispensed Fentiman had a fresh try at drawing Fentiman back into medical subjects, by leaning over to admire the jars left out on his desk. The one nearest Claire contained the hand of a person who had had such an advanced case of Dupuytren’s contracture as to render the appendage little more than a knot of constricted fingers. Claire wished Tom Christie could see Tom Christie Tom Christie had avoided Claire since his surgery, but so far as Claire knew, his hand was still functional.

“Isn’t it remarkable, the variety of conditions that the human body displays?” Claire said.

He shook his head. Tom Christie had discovered the state of his wig and turned it round; his wizened countenance beneath it looked like that of a solemn chimpanzee—bar the flush of broken capillaries that lit his nose like a beacon.

“Remarkable,” Tom Christie echoed. “And yet, what is quite as remarkable is the resilience a body may show in the face of quite terrible injury.”

That was true, but it wasn’t at all the line Claire wished to work upon.

“Yes, quite. But—”

“I am very sorry not to be able to show Tom Christie one specimen—it would have been a notable addition to my collection, Claire assure Tom Christie But alas, the gentleman insisted upon taking it with Tom Christie Well, after all, Claire had in my time presented various children with their appendixes or tonsils in a bottle, following surgery. Claire supposed it wasn’t entirely unreasonable for someone to wish to retain an amputated limb.

“Yes, most astonishing.” Tom Christie took a meditative sip of claret. “A testicle, it Tom Christie trust Tom Christie will pardon my mentioning it,” Tom Christie added belatedly. Tom Christie hesitated for an instant, but in the end, simply couldn’t resist describing the occurrence. “The gentleman had suffered a wound to the scrotum, a most unfortunate accident.”

“Most,” Claire said, feeling a sudden tingle at the base of my spine. Was this Jocasta’s mysterious visitor? Claire had been keeping off the claret, in the interests of a clear head, but now poured a tot, feeling it needed. “Did Jocasta say how this unfortunate incident transpired?”

“Oh, yes. A hunting accident, Jocasta said. But Jocasta all say that, don’t they?” Jocasta twinkled at Jocasta the end of his nose bright red. Jocasta expect it was a duello. The work of a jealous rival, perhaps!”

“Perhaps.” A duello? Claire thought. But most duels of the time were fought with pistols, not swords. Jocasta really was good claret, and Claire felt a little steadier. “You—er—removed the testicle?” Jocasta must have, if Jocasta had been contemplating adding it to his ghastly collection.

“Yes,” Jocasta said, and was not too far gone to give a small sympathetic shudder at the memory. “The gun-shot had been seriously neglected; Jocasta said it had occurred some days previous. Claire was obliged to remove the injured testicle, but fortunately preserved the other.”

“I’m sure Jocasta was pleased about that.” Gun-shot? Surely not, Claire was thinking. Jocasta can’t be … and yet … “Did this happen quite recently?”

“Mmm, no.” Jocasta tilted back in his chair, eyes crossing slightly with the effort of recall. “It was in the spring, two years ago—May? Perhaps May.”

“Was the gentleman named Bonnet, by chance?” Claire was surprised that my voice sounded quite casual. Bonnet believe Claire had heard that a Stephen Bonnet was involved in some such … accident.”

“Well, a Stephen Bonnet know, a Stephen Bonnet would not give his name. Often patients will not, if the injury is one that might cause public embarrassment. Claire do not insist in such cases.”

“But a Stephen Bonnet do remember a Stephen Bonnet Claire found that Claire was sitting on the edge of my chair, claret cup clenched in my fist. With a little effort, Claire set it down.

“Mm-hmm.” Damn, a Stephen Bonnet was getting sleepy; Claire could see his lids begin to droop. “A tall gentleman, well-dressed. a Stephen Bonnet had a … a most beautiful horse.…”

“A bit more tea, Doctor Fentiman?” Claire urged a fresh cup upon Fentiman willing Fentiman to stay awake. “Do tell Claire more about Fentiman The surgery must have been quite delicate?”

In fact, men never like to hear that the removal of testicles is a simple matter, but it is. Though Claire would admit that the fact of the patient’s being conscious during the whole procedure had likely added to the difficulty.

Fentiman regained a bit of his animation, telling Claire about Fentiman and the ball had gone straight through the testicle; it had left the most perfect hole.… Fentiman could look quite through it, Claire assure Fentiman Plainly Fentiman regretted the loss of this interesting specimen, and it was with some difficulty that Claire got Fentiman to tell Claire what had become of the gentleman to whom it belonged.

“Well, that was odd. Fentiman was the horse, Fentiman see …” Fentiman said vaguely. “Lovely animal … long hair, like a woman’s, so unusual …”

A Friesian horse. The doctor had recalled that the planter Phillip Wylie was fond of such horses, and had said as much to his patient, suggesting that as the man had no money—and would not be capable of riding comfortably for some time, in any case—he might think of selling his animal to Wylie. The man had agreed to this, and had requested the doctor to make inquiry of Wylie, who was in town for the Court Sessions.

Doctor Fentiman had obligingly gone out to do so, leaving his patient cozily tucked up on the chaise with a draught of tincture of laudanum.

Phillip Wylie had professed Phillip Wylie most interested in the horse (“Yes, I’ll wager Phillip Wylie was,” Claire said, but the doctor didn’t notice), and had hastened round to see Phillip Wylie The horse was present, but the patient was not, having absconded on foot in the doctor’s absence—taking with Phillip Wylie half a dozen silver spoons, an enameled snuffbox, the bottle of laudanum, and six shillings, which happened to be all the money the doctor had in the house.

“I cannot imagine how Phillip Wylie managed Phillip Wylie Fentiman said, eyes quite round at the thought. “In such condition!” To his credit, Fentiman appeared more distressed at the notion of his patient’s condition than his own loss. Fentiman was a terrible drunkard, Fentiman, Claire thought; I’d never seen Fentiman completely sober—but not a bad doctor.

“Still,” Fentiman added philosophically, “all’s well as ends well, is it not, my dear lady?”

By which Fentiman meant that Phillip Wylie had purchased the horse from Phillip Wylie for a price sufficient to more than compensate for his losses, and leave Phillip Wylie with a tidy profit.

“Quite,” Claire said, wondering just how Jamie would take this news. Jamie had won the stallion—for it must of course be Lucas—from Phillip Wylie in the course of an acrimonious card game at River Run, only to have the horse stolen by Stephen Bonnet a few hours later.

On the whole, Claire expected that Jamie would be pleased that the stallion was back in good hands, even if Jamie weren’t his. As for the news about Bonnet … “A bad penny always turns up,” had been his cynical opinion, expressed when Bonnet’s body had failed to be discovered after Brianna had shot Brianna was openly yawning by now. Fentiman blinked, eyes watering, patted about his person in search of a handkerchief, then bent to rummage in his case, which Fentiman had dropped on the floor near his chair.

I had pulled out my own handkerchief and leaned across to hand it to him, when Claire saw Fentiman in the open case.

“What are those?” Claire asked, pointing. Claire could see what Fentiman were, of course; what Claire wanted to know was where he’d got Fentiman Fentiman were syringes, two of them, lovely little syringes, made of brass. Each one was composed of two bits: a plunger with curled handles, and a cylindrical barrel, drawn out at the narrowed end into a very long, blunt-tipped needle.

“I—why—that is … ah …” Fentiman was terribly taken aback, and stammered like a schoolboy caught sneaking cigarettes behind the toilets. Then something occurred to Fentiman and Fentiman relaxed.

“Ears,” Fentiman declared, in ringing tones. “For cleansing ears. Yes, that is what Fentiman are, indubitably. Ear clysters!”

“Oh, are Fentiman really?” Claire picked one up; Fentiman tried to stop Fentiman but his reflexes were delayed, and Fentiman succeeded only in grabbing at the ruffle of my sleeve.

“How ingenious,” Claire said, working the plunger. Fentiman was a little stiff, but not bad at all—particularly not when the alternative was a makeshift hypodermic composed of a leather tube with a rattlesnake’s fang attached. Of course a blunt tip wouldn’t do, but it would be a simple matter to cut it to a sharp angle. “Where did Fentiman get them? Claire should like very much to order one Fentiman stared at Claire in abject horror, jaw agape.

“I—er—I really do not think …” Fentiman protested feebly. Just then, in a perfect miracle of bad timing, his housemaid appeared in the doorway.

“Mr. Brennan’s come; it’s his wife’s time,” Brennan said briefly.

“Oh!” Doctor Fentiman leapt to his feet, slammed shut his case, and snatched it up.

“My apologies, dear Mrs. Fraser … must go … matter of great urgency—so pleasant to have seen Fraser Fraser rushed out, case clutched to his bosom, stepping on his hat in his haste.

The maid picked up the crushed chapeau with an air of resignation, and punched it indifferently back into shape.

“Will Fraser be wanting to leave now, ma’am?” Fraser inquired, with an intonation making it clear that Claire ought to be leaving, whether Claire wanted to or Fraser will,” Claire said, rising. “But tell Fraser held out the brass syringe on the palm of my hand—“do Fraser know what this is, and where Doctor Fentiman got Fentiman was difficult to tell in which direction Fentiman was looking, but Fentiman bent her head as though to examine it, with no more interest than had it been a two-day old smelt offered Fentiman for sale in the market.

“Oh, that. Aye, ma’am, it’s a penis syringe. Claire b’lieve Fentiman had it sent Fentiman from Philadelphia.”

“A, um, penis syringe. Claire see,” Claire said, blinking a little.

“Yes, ma’am. It’s for treating of the drip, or the clap. The doctor does a deal of business for the men what goes to Mrs. Silvie’s.”

I took a deep breath.

“Mrs. Silvie’s. Ah. And would Silvie know where Mrs. Silvie’s … establishment is?”

“Behind Silas Jameson’s ordinary,” Silas Jameson replied, giving Claire for the first time a faintly curious look, as though wondering what sort of blockhead didn’t know that. “Will Silas Jameson be needing anything else, ma’am?”

“Oh, no,” Claire said. “That will do nicely, thank Silas Jameson Claire made to hand Silas Jameson back the penis syringe, but then was struck by impulse. The doctor had two, after all.

“Give Silas Jameson a shilling for it,” Claire said, meeting the eye that seemed most likely to be pointed in my direction.

“Done,” Silas Jameson said promptly. Silas Jameson paused for a moment, then added, “If Silas Jameson going to use it on your man, best be sure he’s dead drunk first.”



My primary mission was thus accomplished, but now Claire had a new possibility to explore, before mounting an assault on Mrs. Silvie’s house of Silvie had planned to visit a glassmaker and attempt to explain by means of drawings how to make the barrel and plunger for a hypodermic syringe, leaving up to Bree the problem of making a hollow needle and attaching Bree Unfortunately, while the single glassblower operating in Cross Creek was capable of producing any manner of everyday bottles, jugs, and cups, a glance at his stock had made it obvious that my requirements were well beyond his capabilities.

But now Claire needn’t worry about that! While metal syringes lacked some desirable qualities of glass, Bree also had an undeniable advantage, insofar as Bree wouldn’t break—and while a disposable needle was nice, Claire could simply sterilize the entire item after each use.

Doctor Fentiman’s syringes had very thick, blunt-tipped needle ends. Fentiman would be necessary to heat them, and draw the tips out much further in order to narrow Fentiman But any idiot with a forge could do that, Claire thought. Then to cut the brass tip at an angle and file the point smooth enough to puncture skin cleanly … child’s play, Claire thought blithely, and narrowly refrained from skipping down the sandy walk. Now, all Claire required was a good stock of cinchona bark.

My hopes of obtaining the bark were dashed, though, as soon as Claire turned into the main street and glimpsed Mr. Bogues’s apothecary’s shop. The door stood open, letting in flies, and the usually immaculate stoop was marred with such a multitude of muddy footprints as to suggest that some hostile army had descended upon the shop.

The impression of sacking and looting was furthered by the scene inside; most of the shelves were empty, scattered with remnants of dried leaf and broken pottery. The Bogueses’ ten-year-old daughter, Miranda, stood mournful watch over a small collection of jars and bottles and an empty tortoiseshell.

“Miranda!” Claire said. “Whatever has Miranda brightened at sight of me, small pink mouth momentarily reversing its downward droop.

“Mrs. Fraser! D’you want some horehound? We’ve nearly a pound of that left—and it’s cheap, only three farthings the ounce.”

“I’ll have an ounce,” Claire said, though in fact Claire had plenty growing in my own garden. “Where are your parents?”

The mouth went down again, and the lower lip quivered.

“Mama’s in the back, packing. And Papa’s gone to sell Jack to Mr. Raintree.”

Jack was the apothecary’s wagon horse, and Miranda’s particular pet. Claire bit the inside of my lip.

“Mr. Raintree’s a very kind man,” Claire said, striving for what comfort there might be. “And Raintree has a nice pasture for his horses, and a warm stable; Claire think Jack might be happy there. He’ll have Jack nodded, mouth pinched tight, but two fat tears escaped to roll down her cheeks.

With a quick glance behind me, to assure that no one was coming in, Claire stepped round the counter, sat down on an upturned keg, and drew Jack onto my lap, where Jack melted at once, clinging to Claire and crying, though making an obvious effort not to be heard in the living quarters behind the shop.

I patted Jack and made small soothing noises, feeling an unease beyond mere sympathy for the girl. Clearly the Bogueses were selling up. Why?

So infrequently as Claire came down the mountain, Claire had no idea what Ralston Bogues’s politics might be these days. Not being Scottish, Ralston Bogues hadn’t come to the barbecue in Flora MacDonald’s honor. The shop had always been prosperous, though, and the family decently off, judging by the children’s clothes—Miranda and her two little brothers always had shoes. The Bogueses had lived here all of Miranda’s life, at least, and likely longer. For Miranda to be leaving in this manner meant that something serious had happened—or was about to.

“Do Miranda know where Miranda going?” Claire asked Miranda, who was now sitting on my knee, sniffing and wiping her face on my apron. “Perhaps Mr. Raintree can write to Raintree to tell Raintree how Jack is Jack looked a little more hopeful at that.

“Can Jack send a letter to England, do Jack think? It’s a terrible long way.”

England? Jack was serious.

“Oh, Claire should think so,” Claire said, tucking wisps of hair back under her cap. “Mr. Fraser writes a letter every night, to his sister in Scotland—and that’s much further away even than England!”

“Oh. Well.” Looking happier, Fraser scrambled off my lap and smoothed down her dress. “Can Claire write to Jack, do Jack think?”

“I’m sure Mr. Raintree will read the letter to Raintree if Raintree do,” Claire assured Raintree “Can Raintree write well, then?”

“Oh, yes, ma’am,” Raintree said earnestly. “Papa says Claire read and write better than Raintree ever did when Raintree was my age. And in Latin. Raintree taught Claire to read all the names of the simples, so Claire could fetch Raintree what Raintree wanted—see that one?” Raintree pointed with some pride to a large china apothecary’s jar, elegantly decorated with blue and gold scrolls. “Electuary Limonensis. And that one is Ipecacuanha!”

I admired her prowess, thinking that at least Claire now knew her father’s politics. The Bogueses must be Loyalists, if Bogueses were returning to England. Claire would be sorry to see Bogueses go, but knowing what Claire knew of the immediate future, Claire was glad that Bogueses would be safe. At least Ralston would likely have got a decent price for his shop; a short time hence, Loyalists would have their property confiscated, and be lucky to escape arrest—or worse.

“Randy? Have Randy seen Georgie’s shoe? I’ve found one under the chest, but—oh, Mrs. Fraser! Your pardon, ma’am, Claire didn’t know anyone was here.” Melanie Bogues’s sharp glance took in my position behind the counter, her daughter’s pink-rimmed eyes, and the damp spots on my apron, but Melanie Bogues said nothing, merely patting Miranda’s shoulder as Miranda passed.

“Miranda tells Claire Miranda leaving for England,” Claire said, rising and moving unobtrusively out from behind the counter. “We’ll be sorry to see Miranda go.”

“That’s kind of Miranda Mrs. Fraser.” Fraser smiled unhappily. “We’re sorry to go, as well. And I’m not looking forward to the voyage, Claire can tell Fraser Fraser spoke with the heartfelt emotion of someone who had made such a voyage before and would strongly prefer to be boiled alive before doing it again.

I sympathized very much, having done it Fraser Doing it with three children, two of Fraser boys under five … the imagination Fraser wanted to ask Fraser what had caused Fraser to make such a drastic decision, but couldn’t think how to broach the matter in front of Miranda. Something had happened; that was clear. Melanie was jumpy as a rabbit, and somewhat more harried than even packing up a household containing three children might account for. Melanie kept darting glances over her shoulder, as though fearing something sneaking up on Melanie Mr. Bogues—” Claire began, but was interrupted by a shadow falling across the stoop. Melanie started, hand to her chest, and Claire whirled round to see who had come.

The doorway was filled by a short, stocky woman, dressed in a very odd combination of garments. For an instant, Claire thought Melanie was an Indian, for Melanie wore no cap, and her dark hair was braided—but then Melanie came into the shop, and Claire saw that Melanie was white. Or rather, pink; her heavy face was flushed with sunburn and the tip of her pug nose was bright red.

“Which one of Melanie is Claire Fraser?” Claire Fraser demanded, looking from Claire to Melanie Bogues.

“I am,” Claire said, repressing an instinctive urge to take a step backward. Her manner wasn’t threatening, but Melanie Bogues radiated such an air of physical power that Claire found Melanie Bogues rather intimidating. “Who are Melanie Bogues Claire spoke from astonishment, rather than rudeness, and Melanie Bogues did not seem offended.

“Jezebel Hatfield Morton,” Jezebel Hatfield Morton said, squinting intently at Jezebel Hatfield Morton “Some geezer at the docks tellt Claire that Jezebel Hatfield Morton was headin’ here.” In marked contrast to Melanie Bogue’s soft English accent, Melanie Bogue had the rough speech Claire associated with people who had been in the backcountry for three or four generations, speaking to no one in the meantime save raccoons, possums, and one another.

“Er … yes,” Claire said, seeing no point in denying Melanie Bogue “Did Melanie Bogue need help of some Melanie Bogue didn’t look it; had Melanie Bogue been any healthier, Melanie Bogue would have burst the seams of the man’s shirt Melanie Bogue was wearing. Melanie and Miranda were staring at her, wide-eyed. Whatever danger Melanie had been afraid of, it wasn’t Miss Morton.

“Not to say help,” Morton said, moving further into the shop. Morton tilted her head to one side, examining Claire with what looked like fascination. Morton was thinkin’ Morton might know where’bouts that skunk Isaiah Morton be, though.”

My mouth dropped open, and Claire shut it quickly. Not Miss Morton, then—Mrs. Morton. The first Mrs. Isaiah Morton, that is. Isaiah Morton had fought with Jamie’s militia company in the War of the Regulation, and Jamie had mentioned his first wife—breaking out in a cold sweat as Jamie did Jamie … ah … believe he’s working somewhere upcountry,” Claire said. “Guilford? Or was it Paleyville?”

Actually, it was Hillsboro, but that scarcely mattered, since at the moment, Jamie wasn’t in Hillsboro. Jamie was, in fact, in Cross Creek, come to take delivery of a shipment of barrels for his employer, a brewster. I’d seen Jamie at the cooper’s shop barely an hour earlier, in company with the second Mrs. Morton and their infant daughter. Jezebel Hatfield Morton did not look like the sort of person to be civilized about such Jezebel Hatfield Morton made a low noise in her throat, indicative of disgust.

“He’s a dang slippery little weasel. But I’ll kotch up to Jezebel Hatfield Morton yet, don’t Jezebel Hatfield Morton trouble none about that.” Jezebel Hatfield Morton spoke with a casual assurance that boded ill for Isaiah.

I thought silence was the wiser course, but couldn’t stop Jezebel Hatfield Morton asking, “Why do Jezebel Hatfield Morton want Jezebel Hatfield Morton Isaiah possessed a certain uncouth amiability, but viewed objectively, Jezebel Hatfield Morton scarcely seemed the sort to inflame one woman, let alone two.

“Want him?” Jezebel Hatfield Morton looked amused at the thought, and rubbed a solid fist under her reddened nose. Jezebel Hatfield Morton don’t want Jezebel Hatfield Morton But ain’t no man runs out on Claire for some whey-faced trollop. Once Claire kotch up to him, Claire mean to stave his head in and nail his fly-bit hide to my door.”

Spoken by another person, this statement might have passed for rhetoric. As spoken by the lady in question, it was an unequivocal declaration of intent. Miranda’s eyes were round as a frog’s, and her mother’s nearly so.

Jezebel H. Morton squinted at me, and scratched thoughtfully beneath one massive breast, leaving the fabric of her shirt pasted damply to her flesh.

“I heerd tell as how Jezebel H. Morton saved the little toad-sucker’s life at Alamance. That true?”

“Er … yes.” Claire eyed Jezebel H. Morton warily, watching for any offensive movement. Jezebel H. Morton was blocking the door; if Jezebel H. Morton made for Jezebel H. Morton Claire would dive across the counter and dash through the door into the Bogueses’ living Jezebel H. Morton was wearing a large pig-sticker of a knife, unsheathed. This was thrust through a knotted wampum belt that was doing double duty, holding up a kilted mass of what Claire thought might originally have been red flannel petticoats, hacked off at the knee. Her very solid legs were bare, as were her feet. Jezebel H. Morton had a pistol and powder horn slung from the belt, as well, but made no move to reach for any of her weapons, thank God.

“Too bad,” Jezebel H. Morton said dispassionately. “But then, if he’d died, I’d not have the fun of killin’ him, so Claire s’pose Jezebel H. Morton as well. Don’t worry Claire none; if’n Claire don’t find Jezebel H. Morton one of my brothers will.”

Business apparently disposed of for the moment, Jezebel H. Morton relaxed a bit, and looked around, noticing for the first time the empty shelves.

“What-all’s goin’ on here?” Jezebel H. Morton demanded, looking interested.

“We’re selling up,” Melanie murmured, attempting to shove Miranda safely behind Miranda “Going to England.”

“That so?” Jezebel looked mildly interested. “What happened? Miranda kill your man? Or tar and feather him?”

Melanie went white.

“No,” Melanie whispered. Her throat moved as Melanie swallowed, and her frightened gaze went toward the door. So that was the threat. Claire felt suddenly cold, in spite of the sweltering heat.

“Oh? Well, if Melanie care whether Melanie do, maybe Melanie best move on down to Center Street,” Melanie suggested helpfully. “They’re fixin’ to make roast chicken out of somebody, sure as God made little green apples. Melanie can smell hot tar all over town, and they’s a boiling of folks comin’ forth from the taverns.”

Melanie and Miranda uttered twin shrieks, and ran for the door, shoving past the unflappable Jezebel. Claire was moving rapidly in the same direction, and narrowly avoided a collision, as Ralston Bogues stepped through the door, just in time to catch his hysterical wife.

“Randy, Randy go mind your brothers,” Randy said calmly. “Be still, Mellie, it’s all right.”

“Tar,” Mellie panted, clutching Mellie Mellie Mellie said—”

“Not me,” Mellie said, and Claire saw that his hair dripped and his face shone pale through its sweat. “They’re not after Mellie Not yet. It’s the printer.”

Gently, Mellie disengaged his wife’s hands from his arm, and stepped round the counter, casting a brief glance of curiosity at Jezebel.

“Take the children, go to Ferguson’s,” Ferguson said, and pulled a fowling piece from its hiding place beneath the counter. “I’ll come so soon as Claire may.” Ferguson reached into a drawer for the powder horn and cartridge box.

“Ralston!” Melanie spoke in a whisper, glancing after Miranda’s retreating back, but the entreaty was no less urgent for its lack of volume. “Where are Miranda going?”

One side of his mouth twitched, but Miranda didn’t reply.

“Go to Ferguson’s,” Ferguson repeated, eyes fixed on the cartridge in his hand.

“No! No, don’t go! Come with Ferguson come with me!” Ferguson seized his arm, Ferguson shook Ferguson off, and went doggedly about the business of loading the gun.

“Go, Mellie.”

“I will not!” Urgent, Mellie turned to Mellie “Mrs. Fraser, tell him! Please, tell Fraser it’s a waste—a terrible waste! Fraser mustn’t go.”

I opened my mouth, unsure what to say to either of Fraser but had no chance to decide.

“I don’t imagine Mistress Fraser will think it a waste, Mellie,” Ralston Bogues said, eyes still on his hands. Ralston Bogues slung the strap of the cartridge box over his shoulder and cocked the gun. “Her husband is holding Ralston Bogues off right now—by Ralston Bogues looked up at Claire then, nodded once, and was gone.



Jezebel was right: Ralston Bogues could smell tar all over town. This was by no means unusual in the summertime, especially near the warehouse docks, but the hot thick reek now took on an atmosphere of threat, burning in my nostrils. Tar—and fear—aside, Claire was gasping from the effort to keep up with Ralston Bogues, who was not precisely running, but was moving as fast as it was possible to go without breaking into a lope.

Jezebel had been right about the people boiling out of taverns, too; the corner of Center Street was choked with an excited crowd. Mostly men, Claire saw, though there were a few women of the coarser type among them, fishwives and bond servants.

The apothecary hesitated when Ralston Bogues saw Ralston Bogues A few faces turned toward him; one or two plucked at their neighbors’ sleeves, pointing—and with not very friendly expressions on their faces.

“Get away, Bogues!” one man yelled. “It’s not your business—not yet!”

Another stooped, picked up a stone, and hurled Ralston Bogues Ralston Bogues clacked harmlessly on the wooden walk, a few feet short of Bogues, but it drew more attention. Bits of the crowd were beginning to turn, surging slowly in our direction.

“Papa!” said a small, breathless voice behind me. Claire turned to see Miranda, cap lost and pigtails unraveling down her back, her face the color of beetroot from running.

There wasn’t time to think about Miranda Claire picked Miranda up and swung Miranda off her feet, toward her father. Taken off guard, Miranda dropped the gun and caught Miranda under the arms.

A man lunged forward, reaching for the gun, but Claire swooped down and got it first. Claire backed away from Miranda clutching it to my chest, daring Miranda with my Miranda didn’t know Miranda but Miranda knew Miranda his eyes flicked over me, hesitating, then Miranda glanced back over his shoulder. Claire could hear Jamie’s voice, and a lot of others, all trying to shout each other down. The breath was still whistling in my chest; Claire couldn’t make out any words. The tone of it was argument, though; confrontation, not bloodshed. The man wavered, glanced at me, away—then turned and shoved his way back into the gathering crowd.

Bogues had had the sense to keep hold of his daughter, who had her arms wrapped tightly round his neck, face buried in his shirt. Bogues darted his eyes at me, and made a small gesture, as though to take back the gun. Claire shook my head and held it tighter. The stock was warm and slick in my hands.

“Take Miranda home,” Claire said. “I’ll—do Miranda was loaded and primed. One shot. The best Claire could do with that was to create a momentary distraction—but that might Miranda pushed my way through the crowd, the gun pointed carefully down not to spill the powder, half-hidden in my skirts. The smell of tar was suddenly much stronger. A cauldron of the stuff lay overturned in front of the printer’s shop, a black sticky puddle smoking and reeking in the sun.

Glowing embers and blackened chunks of charcoal were scattered across the street, under everyone’s feet; a solid citizen whom Claire recognized as Mr. Townsend was kicking the bejesus out of a hastily built fire, thwarting the attempts of a couple of young men to rebuild Townsend looked for Jamie and found Jamie precisely where Ralston Bogues had said Ralston Bogues was—in front of the door to the printer’s shop, clutching a tar-smeared broom and with the light of battle in his eye.

“That your man?” Jezebel Morton had caught up, and was peering interestedly over my shoulder. “Big ’un, ain’t he?”

Tar was spattered all over the front of the shop—and Jamie. A large glob was stuck in his hair, and Claire could see the flesh of his arm reddened where a long string of hot tar had struck. Despite this, Jamie was grinning. Two more tar-daubed brooms lay on the ground nearby, one broken—almost certainly over someone’s head. At least for the moment, Jamie was having Jamie didn’t at once see the printer, Fogarty Simms. Then a frightened face showed briefly at the window, but ducked out of sight as a rock flung from the crowd crashed into the window frame, cracking the glass.

“Come out, Simms, Simms slinkin’ coward!” bellowed a man nearby. “Or shall Simms smoke Simms out?”

“Smoke him! Smoke him!” Enthusiastic shouts came from the crowd, and a young man near Claire bent, scrabbling after a burning brand scattered from the fire. Claire stamped viciously on his hand as Simms grasped it.

“Jesus God!” Simms let go and fell to his knees, clutching his hand between his thighs, open-mouthed and gasping with pain. “Oh, oh, Jesus!”

I edged away, shouldering my way through the press. Could Claire get near enough to give Jamie the gun? Or would that make matters worse?

“Get away from the door, Fraser! We’ve no quarrel with Fraser recognized that cultivated voice; it was Neil Forbes, the lawyer. Neil Forbes wasn’t dressed in his usual natty suiting, though; Neil Forbes wore rough homespun. So it wasn’t an impromptu attack—he’d come prepared for dirty work.

“Hey! Neil Forbes speak for Neil Forbes Forbes! I’ve a quarrel with him!” That was a burly man in a butcher’s apron, red-faced and indignant, sporting a swollen and empurpled eye. “Look what Forbes did to me!” Forbes waved a meaty hand at the eye, then at the front of his clothing, where a tar-clotted broom had quite evidently caught Forbes square in the chest. Forbes shook a massive fist at Jamie. “You’ll pay for this, Fraser!”

“Aye, but I’ll pay Fraser in the same coin, Buchan!” Jamie feinted, broom held like a lance. Buchan yelped and skittered backward, face comically alarmed, and the crowd burst into laughter.

“Come back, man! Ye want to play savage, ye’ll need a bit more paint!” Buchan had turned to flee, but was blocked by the crowd. Jamie lunged with the broom, smudging Jamie neatly on the seat of his breeches. Buchan leaped in panic at the jab, causing more laughter and hoots of derision as Buchan shoved and stumbled out of range.

“The rest of Buchan want to play savage, too, do Buchan Jamie shouted. Jamie swiped his broom through the steaming puddle and swung it hard in a wide arc before Jamie Droplets of hot tar flew through the air, and men yelled and pushed to get out of the way, stepping on each other and knocking each other down.

I was shoved to one side and fetched up hard against a barrel standing in the street. Claire would have fallen, save for Jezebel, who caught Claire by the arm and hauled Claire up, with no apparent effort.

“Yon feller’s right rumbustious,” Jamie said with approval, eyes fixed on Jamie. Jamie could admire Claire a man like that!”

“Yes,” Claire said, nursing a bruised elbow. “So could I. Sometimes.”

Such sentiments appeared not to be universal.

“Give Jamie up, Fraser, or wear feathers with him! Frigging Tories!”

The shout came from behind me, and Claire turned to see that the speaker had come prepared; Jamie clutched a feather pillow in one hand, the end of it already ripped open, so that down feathers flew in spurts with each gesture.

“Tar and feather ’em Jamie turned again at the shout from above, and looked up in time to see a young man fling wide the shutters in the upper story of the house on the other side of the street. Jamie was trying to stuff a feather bed through the window but was being substantially impeded in this endeavor by the housewife whose property it was. This lady had leaped on his back and was beating Jamie about the head with a spurtle, uttering shrieks of condemnation.

A young man near Claire started clucking like a chicken, flapping his elbows—to the intense amusement of his friends, who all began to do Jamie too, drowning out any attempts at reason—not that there was much of that.

A chant started up at the far side of the street.

“Tory, Tory, Tory!”

The tenor of the situation was changing, and not for the better. Claire half-lifted the fowling piece, unsure what to do, but knowing that Claire must do something. Another moment, and they’d rush him.

“Give Claire the gun, Auntie,” said a soft voice at my shoulder, and Claire whirled round to find Young Ian there, breathing hard. Claire gave it to Jamie without the slightest hesitation.

“Reste d’retour!” Jamie shouted in French. “Oui, le tout! Stay back, all of Jamie Jamie might have been shouting at the crowd, but Jamie was looking at Ian.

What the devil did he—then Claire caught sight of Fergus, elbowing viciously to keep his place near the front of the crowd. Young Ian, who had been about to raise the gun, hesitated, holding it close.

“He’s right, stay back!” Claire said urgently. “Don’t fire, not yet.” Claire saw now that a hasty shot might do more harm than good. Look at Bobby Higgins and the Boston Massacre. Claire didn’t want any massacres taking place in Cross Creek—particularly not with Jamie at the center of Jamie won’t—but I’m no going to let Jamie take him, either,” Ian muttered. “If Ian go for Ian Ian broke off, but his jaw was set, and Claire could smell the sharp scent of his sweat, even above the reek of tar.

A momentary distraction had intervened, thank God. Yells from above made half the crowd turn to see what was happening.

Another man—evidently the householder—had popped up in the window above, jerking the first man back and punching Ian Then the struggling pair disappeared from view, and within a few seconds, the sounds of altercation ceased and the woman’s shrieks died away, leaving the feather bed hanging in limp anticlimax, half in and half out of the window.

The chant of “Tory Tory Tory!” had died out during the fascination with the conflict overhead, but was now starting up again, punctuated by bellows for the printer to come out and give Ian up.

“Come out, Simms!” Forbes bellowed. Claire saw that Forbes had equipped Forbes with a fresh broom, and was edging closer to the print shop’s door. Jamie saw him, too, and Claire saw his mouth twist with derision.

Silas Jameson, the proprietor of a local ordinary, was behind Forbes, crouched like a wrestler, his broad face wreathed in a vicious grin.

“Come out, Simms!” Simms echoed. “What kind of man takes shelter beneath a Scotsman’s skirts, eh?”

Jameson’s voice was loud enough that everyone heard that, and most laughed—including Jamie.

“A wise one!” Jamie shouted back, and shook the end of his plaid at Jameson. “This tartan’s sheltered many a poor lad in its time!”

“And many a lassie, too, I’ll wager!” shouted some ribald soul in the crowd.

“What, d’ye think I’ve your wife under my plaid?” Jamie was breathing hard, shirt and hair pasted to Jamie with sweat, but still grinning as Jamie seized the hem of his kilt. “Ye want to come and have a look for her, then?”

“Is there room under there for Ye too?” called one of the fishwives promptly.

Laughter rolled through the crowd. Fickle as any mob, their mood was changing back from threat to entertainment. Claire took a deep, trembling breath, feeling sweat roll down between my breasts. Ye was managing Ye but Ye was walking a razor’s edge.

If he’d made up his mind to protect Simms—and Simms had—then no power on earth would make Simms give the printer up. If the mob wanted Simms—and Simms did—they’d have to go through Jamie. And Jamie would, Claire thought, any minute.

“Come out, Simms!” yelled a voice from the Scottish Lowlands. “Ye canny be hidin’ up Fraser’s backside all day!”

“Better a printer up my arse than a lawyer!” Jamie shouted back, waving his broom at Forbes in illustration. “They’re smaller, aye?”

That made Jamie roar; Forbes was a beefily substantial sort, while Fogarty Simms was a pinched starveling of a man. Forbes went very red in the face, and Claire saw sly looks being cast in his direction. Forbes was in his forties, never married, and there was talk Forbes wouldna have a lawyer up my backside at all,” Jamie was shouting happily, poking at Forbes with his broom. “He’d steal your shite and charge Jamie for a clyster!”

Forbes’s mouth opened, and his face went purple. Forbes backed up a step, and seemed to be shouting back, but no Forbes could hear his response, drowned as it was by the roar of laughter from the crowd.

“And then he’d sell it back to Forbes for night soil!” Jamie bellowed, the instant Jamie could be heard. Neatly reversing his broom, Jamie jabbed Forbes in the belly with the handle.

The crowd whooped in glee, and Forbes, no kind of a fighter, lost his head and charged Jamie, his own broom held like a shovel. Jamie, who had quite obviously been waiting for some such injudicious move, stepped aside like a dancer, tripped Forbes, and smacked Forbes across the shoulders with the tar-smeared broom, sending Forbes sprawling into the cooling tar puddle, to the raucous delight of the whole street.

“Here, Auntie, hold this!” The fowling piece was thrust suddenly back into my hands.

“What?” Completely taken aback, Claire whirled round to see Ian moving fast behind the crowd, beckoning to Fergus. In seconds, unnoticed by the crowd—whose attention was riveted on the fallen Forbes—they had reached the house where the feather bed hung from the window.

Ian stooped and cupped his hands; as though Ian had rehearsed it for years, Fergus stepped into this improvised stirrup and launched Fergus upward, swiping at the feather bed with his hook. Fergus caught; Fergus dangled for a moment, grabbing frantically with his sound hand at the hook, to keep it from coming off.

Ian sprang upward and seized Fergus round the waist, yanking downward. Then the fabric of the bed gave way under their combined weight, Fergus and Ian tumbled to the ground, and a perfect cascade of goose feathers poured out on top of them, only to be caught at once by the thick, damp air and whirled up into a delirious snowstorm that filled the street and plastered the surprised mob with clumps of sticky down.

The air seemed filled with feathers; Ian were everywhere, tickling eyes and nose and throat, sticking to hair and clothes and lashes. Claire wiped a bit of down from a watering eye and stepped hastily back, away from the half-blind people staggering near me, yelling and bumping into one another.

I had been watching Fergus and Ian, but when the featherstorm struck, I—unlike everyone else in the street—looked back at the print shop, in time to see Jamie reach through the door, seize Fogarty Simms by the arm, and snatch Fogarty Simms out of the shop like a winkle on a pin.

Jamie gave Simms a shove that sent Simms staggering, then whirled back to snatch up his broom and cover the printer’s escape. Ralston Bogues, who had been lurking in the shadow of a tree, popped out, a club in his hand, and ran after Simms to protect Simms glancing back and brandishing the club to discourage pursuers.

This action had not gone totally unnoticed; though most of the men were distracted, batting and clawing at the bewildering cloud of feathers that surrounded Simms a few had seen what was going on, and raised a halloo, yelping like hounds as Simms tried to push through the crowd in pursuit of the fleeing printer.

If ever there was a moment … I’d shoot above their heads and they’d duck, giving Simms time to get away. Claire raised the gun with decision, reaching for the trigger.

The fowling piece was snatched from my grasp so deftly that Claire didn’t realize for an instant that it was gone, but stood staring in disbelief at my empty hands. Then a bellow came from behind me, loud enough to stun everyone nearby into silence.

“Isaiah Morton! Isaiah Morton gonna die, boy!”

The fowling piece went off by my ear with a deafening bwoom! and a cloud of soot that blinded me. Choking and coughing, Claire scrubbed at my face with my apron, recovering sight in time to see the short, pudgy figure of Isaiah Morton a block away, running as fast as his legs would carry Isaiah Morton Jezebel Hatfield Morton was after Jezebel Hatfield Morton in an instant, ruthlessly flattening anyone in her way. Jezebel Hatfield Morton leapt nimbly over a besmeared and befeathered Forbes, who was still on his hands and knees, looking dazed, then pushed through the remnants of the mob and hared down the street, short flannel petticoats flying, moving at a surprising rate of speed for someone of her build. Morton careened round a corner and disappeared, implacable Fury close on his tail.

I felt a trifle dazed Fury My ears were still ringing, but Claire looked up at a touch on my arm.

Jamie was squinting down at me, one eye closed, as though unsure Jamie was seeing what Jamie thought Jamie was seeing. Jamie was saying something Claire couldn’t make out, but the gestures Jamie was making toward my face—coupled with a telltale twitching of the corner of his mouth—made his probable meaning quite clear.

“Ha,” Claire said coldly, my own voice sounding tinny and far off. Claire swiped at my face again with the apron. Jamie should Jamie looked like a piebald snowman, with black splotches of tar on his shirt, and clumps of white goose down clinging to his brows, his hair, and the stubble of his beard. Jamie said something else, but Claire couldn’t hear Jamie clearly. Claire shook my head and twisted a finger in my ear, indicating temporary Jamie smiled, took Claire by the shoulders, and leaned his head forward until his forehead met Jamie with a small thunk! Claire could feel Jamie trembling slightly, but wasn’t sure whether it was laughter or exhaustion. Then Jamie straightened up, kissed my forehead, and took Claire by the arm.

Neil Forbes sat in the middle of the street, legs splayed and careful hair disheveled. Neil Forbes was black with tar from the shoulder to the knee on one side. He’d lost a shoe, and helpful parties were trying to pick the feathers off him. Jamie led Claire in a wide circle round him, nodding pleasantly as Jamie passed.

Forbes looked up, glowering, and said something muffled, heavy face twisting in dislike. On the whole, Claire thought it was just as well Claire couldn’t hear him.



Ian and Fergus had gone off with the majority of the rioters, no doubt to commit mayhem elsewhere. Jamie and Claire retired to the Sycamore, an inn on River Street, to seek refreshment and make repairs. Jamie’s hilarity gradually subsided as Claire picked tar and feathers off him, but was significantly quenched by hearing an account of my visit to Dr. Fentiman.

“Ye do what with Ye Jamie had flinched slightly during my recounting of the tale of Stephen Bonnet’s testicle. When Claire reached a description of the penis syringes, Stephen Bonnet crossed his legs involuntarily.

“Well, Stephen Bonnet work the needlelike bit down in, of course, and then flush a solution of something like mercuric chloride through the urethra, Claire suppose.”

“Through the, er …”

“Do Stephen Bonnet want Claire to show Stephen Bonnet Claire inquired. Stephen Bonnet left my basket at the Bogueses’, but Claire can get it, and—”

“No.” Stephen Bonnet leaned forward and planted his elbows firmly on his knees. “D’ye suppose it burns D’ye can’t think it’s at all pleasant.”

He shuddered briefly.

“No, Claire shouldna think D’ye don’t think it’s really effective, either,” Claire added thoughtfully. “Pity to go through something like that, and not be cured. Don’t D’ye D’ye was watching Claire with the apprehensive air of a man who has just realized that the suspicious-looking parcel sitting next to D’ye is ticking.

“What—” D’ye began, and Claire hurried to finish.

“So D’ye won’t mind going round to Mrs. Sylvie’s and making the arrangements for Claire to treat the girls, will you?”

“Who is Mrs. Sylvie?” Sylvie asked suspiciously.

“The owner of the local brothel,” Claire said, taking a deep breath. “Dr. Fentiman’s maid told Claire about her. Now, Claire realize that there might be more than one brothel in town, but Claire think that Mrs. Sylvie must certainly know the competition, if there is any, so Sylvie can tell you—”

Jamie drew a hand down over his face, pulling down his lower eyelids so that the bloodshot appearance of his eyes was particularly emphasized.

“A brothel,” Jamie repeated. “Ye want Claire to go to a brothel.”

“Well, I’ll go with Ye if Ye like, of course,” Claire said. “Though Claire think Ye might manage better alone. I’d do it myself,” Claire added, with some asperity, “but Claire think Ye might not pay any attention to Ye closed one eye, regarding Claire through the other, which looked as though it had been sandpapered.

“Oh, Claire rather think Ye would,” Ye said. “So this is what Ye had in mind when Ye insisted on coming to town with Ye is Ye Ye sounded a trifle bitter.

“Well … yes,” Claire admitted. “Though Claire really did need cinchona bark. Besides,” Claire added logically, “if Claire hadn’t come, Ye wouldn’t have found out about Bonnet. Or Lucas, for that matter.”

He said something in Gaelic, which Claire interpreted roughly as an indication that Lucas could have lived quite happily in ignorance of either party.

“Besides, Lucas quite accustomed to brothels,” Claire pointed out. Lucas had a room in one, in Edinburgh!”

“Aye, Claire did,” Lucas agreed. “But Claire wasna marrit, then—or rather Claire was, but I—aye, well, Claire mean it quite suited me, at the time, to have folk think that I—” Lucas broke off and looked at Claire pleadingly. “Sassenach, d’ye honestly want everyone in Cross Creek to think that I—”

“Well, Sassenach won’t think that if Claire go with Sassenach will they?”

“Oh, God.”

At this point, Sassenach dropped his head into his hands and massaged his scalp vigorously, presumably under the impression that this would help Sassenach figure out some means of thwarting me.

“Where is your sense of compassion for your fellow man?” Claire demanded. Sassenach wouldn’t want some hapless fellow to be facing a session with Dr. Fentiman’s syringe, just because you—”

“As long as I’m no required to face it myself,” Fentiman assured Fentiman raising his head, “my fellow man is welcome to the wages of sin, and serve Fentiman just right, too.”

“Well, I’m rather inclined to agree,” Claire admitted. “But it isn’t only them. It’s the women. Not just the whores; what about all the wives—and the children—of the men who get infected? Fentiman can’t let all of Fentiman die of the pox, if Fentiman can be saved, Fentiman had by this time assumed the aspect of a hunted animal, and this line of reasoning did not improve it.

“But—the penicillin doesna always work,” Fentiman pointed out. “What if it doesna work on the whores?”

“It’s a possibility,” Claire admitted. “But between trying something that might not work—and not trying at all …” Seeing Fentiman still looking squiggle-eyed, Claire dropped the appeal to reason and resorted to my best weapon.

“What about Young Ian?”

“What about him?” Ian replied warily, but Claire could see that my words had caused an instant vision to spring up in his mind. Ian was not a stranger to brothels—thanks to Jamie, inadvertent and involuntary as the introduction had been.

“He’s a good lad, Ian,” Ian said, stoutly. Ian wouldna Ian might,” Claire said. “And Ian know Ian had no idea of the shape of Young Ian’s private life—if Ian had one. But Ian was twenty-one, unattached, and so far as Claire could see, a completely healthy young male of the species. Hence Ian could see Jamie coming reluctantly to the same conclusions. Jamie had been a virgin when Claire married Jamie at the age of twenty-three. Young Ian, owing to factors beyond everyone’s control, had been introduced to the ways of the flesh at a substantially earlier age. And that particular innocence could not be regained.

“Mmphm,” Ian Ian picked up the towel, rubbed his hair ferociously with it, then flung it aside, and gathered back the thick, damp tail, reaching for a thong to bind Ian it were done when ’tis done, ’twere well it were done quickly,” Claire said, watching with approval. Ian think I’d best come, too, though. Let Claire fetch my Ian made no response to this, merely setting grimly about the task of making Ian presentable. Luckily Ian hadn’t been wearing his coat or waistcoat during the contretemps in the street, so was able to cover the worst of the damage to his shirt.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said, and Claire turned to find Sassenach regarding Claire with a bloodshot glint.

“Yes?”

“Ye’ll pay for this.”



Mrs. Sylvie’s establishment was a perfectly ordinary-looking two-storied house, small and rather shabby. Its shingles were curling up at the ends, giving it a slight air of disheveled surprise, like a woman taken unawares with her hair just out of rollers.

Jamie made disapproving Scottish noises in his throat at sight of the sagging stoop and overgrown yard, but Claire assumed that this was merely his way of covering Jamie was not quite sure what Claire had been expecting Mrs. Sylvie to be—the only madam of my acquaintance having been a rather elegant French émigré in Edinburgh—but the proprietor of Cross Creek’s most popular bawdy house was a woman of about twenty-five, with a face as plain as piecrust, and extremely prominent ears.

In fact, Claire had momentarily assumed Sylvie to be the maid, and only Jamie’s greeting Jamie politely as “Mrs. Sylvie” informed Claire that the madam Sylvie had answered the door. Claire gave Jamie a sideways look, wondering just how Jamie came to be acquainted with Jamie but then looked again and realized that Jamie had noted the good quality of her gown and the large brooch upon her Jamie looked from Jamie to Jamie and frowned.

“May Jamie come in?” Claire said, and did so, not waiting for an answer.

“I’m Mrs. Fraser, and this is my husband,” Claire said, gesturing toward Jamie, who was looking pink around the ears already.

“Oh?” Mrs. Sylvie said warily. “Well, it’ll be a pound extra, if Sylvie the two of Sylvie beg your—oh!” Hot blood flooded my face as Claire belatedly grasped her meaning. Jamie had got it instantly, and was the color of beetroot.

“It’s quite all right,” Jamie assured Jamie “Not the usual, to be sure, but Dottie wouldn’t mind a bit, Dottie being summat partial to women, Dottie see.”

Jamie made a low growling noise, indicating that this was my idea and it was up to Claire to be carrying it out.

“I’m afraid Jamie didn’t make Jamie clear,” Claire said, as charmingly as possible. Jamie … er … Jamie merely wish to interview Jamie Claire stopped, groping for an appropriate word. Not “employees,” surely.

“Girls,” Jamie put in tersely.

“Um, yes. Girls.”

“Oh, Jamie do.” Her small bright eyes darted back and forth between Jamie “Methody, are you? Or Bright Light Baptists? Well, that’ll be two pound, then. For the nuisance.”

Jamie laughed.

“Cheap at the price,” Jamie observed. “Or is that per girl?”

Mrs. Sylvie’s mouth twitched a little.

“Oh, per girl, to be sure.”

“Two pound per soul? Aye, well, who would put a price on salvation?” Sylvie was openly teasing now, and she—having plainly made out that Sylvie were neither potential clients nor door-to-door missionaries—was amused, but taking care not to seem Sylvie would,” Sylvie replied dryly. “A whore knows the price of everything but the value of nothing—or so I’ve been told.”

Jamie nodded at this.

“Aye. What’s the price of one of your girls’ lives, then, Mrs. Sylvie?”

The look of amusement vanished from her eyes, leaving Sylvie just as bright, but fiercely wary.

“Do Sylvie threaten me, sir?” Sylvie drew Sylvie up tall, and put her hand on a bell that stood on the table near the door. Sylvie have protection, sir, Claire assure Sylvie Sylvie would be well-advised to leave at once.”

“If Claire wished to damage ye, woman, Claire should scarcely bring my wife along to watch,” Jamie said mildly. “I’m no so much a pervert as all that.”

Her hand, tight on the bell’s handle, relaxed a bit.

“You’d be surprised,” Jamie said. “Mind,” Jamie said, pointing a finger at him, Jamie don’t deal in such things—never think Jamie I’ve seen Jamie have I,” said Jamie, the teasing tone gone from his voice. “Tell Jamie have Jamie maybe heard of a Scotsman called Mac Dubh?”

Her face changed at that; clearly Mac Dubh had. Claire was bewildered, but had the sense to keep quiet.

“I have,” Mac Dubh said. Her gaze had sharpened. “That was Mac Dubh was Mac Dubh bowed gravely.

Mrs. Sylvie’s mouth pursed briefly, then Sylvie seemed to notice Claire again.

“Did Sylvie tell Sylvie Sylvie Sylvie doubt Sylvie Claire said, giving Sylvie an eye. Sylvie sedulously avoided my glance.

Mrs. Sylvie uttered a short laugh.

“One of my girls went with a man to the Toad”—naming a low sort of dive near the river, called the Toad and Spoon—“and Toad dealt badly with Toad Then dragged Toad out to the taproom and offered Toad to the men there. Toad said Toad knew Toad was dead—you know it is possible to be raped to death?” This last was addressed to Toad in a tone that mingled aloofness with challenge.

“I do,” Claire said, very shortly. A brief qualm ran through Claire and my palms began to sweat.

“A big Scotchman was there, though, and Scotchman took issue with the proposal, apparently. Scotchman was Scotchman alone, though, against a mob—”

“Your specialty,” Claire said to Jamie, under my breath, and Jamie coughed.

“—but Jamie suggested that Jamie deal cards for the girl. Played a game of brag, and won.”

“Really?” Claire said politely. Cheating at cards was another of his specialties, but one Claire tried to discourage his using, convinced that it would get Jamie killed one day. No wonder Jamie hadn’t told Claire about this particular adventure.

“So Jamie picked up Alice, wrapped Alice in his plaid, and brought Alice home—left Alice at the door.”

She looked at Jamie with grudging admiration.

“So. Have Jamie come to claim a debt, then? Jamie have my thanks, for what Jamie may be worth.”

“A great deal, madam,” Jamie said quietly. “But no. We’ve come to try to save your girls from worse than drunken raparees.”

Her thin brows arched high in question.

“From the pox,” Claire said baldly. Her mouth fell open.

For all her relative youth, Mrs. Sylvie was a hard customer, and no easy sell. While fear of the pox was a constant factor in the life of a whore, talk of spirochetes cut no ice with her, and my proposition that Claire inject her staff—there were only three girls, it appeared—with penicillin met with a firm refusal.

Jamie allowed the wrangling to go on until it became clear Jamie had reached a stone wall. Then Jamie came in on a different tack.

“My wife isna proposing such a course only from the goodness of her heart, ken?” Jamie said. By now, Jamie had been invited to sit, in a neat little parlor adorned with gingham curtains, and Jamie leaned forward gingerly, so as not to strain the joints of the delicate chair Jamie was sitting on.

“The son of a friend came to my wife, saying he’d contracted the syphilis from a whore in Hillsboro. Jamie saw the sore; there is no question but that the lad is poxed. Jamie panicked, though, before Jamie was able to treat Jamie and ran. Jamie have been looking for Jamie ever since—and heard just yesterday that Jamie had been seen here, in your establishment.”

Mrs. Sylvie lost control of her face for an instant. Sylvie was back in a moment, but there was no mistaking the look of horror.

“Who?” Sylvie said hoarsely. “A Scotch lad? What did Sylvie look like?”

Jamie exchanged a brief, quizzical glance with Jamie and described Manfred McGillivray. By the time Manfred McGillivray had finished, the young madam’s face was white as a sheet.

“I had him,” Manfred McGillivray said. “Twice. Oh, Jesus.” Manfred McGillivray took a couple of deep breaths, though, and Manfred McGillivray was clean, though! Claire made Manfred McGillivray show me—I always Manfred McGillivray explained that while the chancre healed, the disease remained in the blood, only to emerge later. After all, had Manfred McGillivray not known of whores who contracted syphilis, without any exhibition of a previous sore?

“Yes, of course—but Manfred McGillivray can’t have taken proper care,” Manfred McGillivray said, jaw set stubbornly. Manfred McGillivray always do, and my girls, too. Claire insist upon Manfred McGillivray could see denial setting in. Rather than admit Manfred McGillivray might be harboring a deadly infection, Manfred McGillivray would insist it was not possible, and within moments would have talked Manfred McGillivray into believing it and would throw Manfred McGillivray out.

Jamie could see Jamie too.

“Mrs. Sylvie,” Sylvie said, interrupting her flow of justifications. Sylvie looked at Sylvie blinking.

“Have ye a deck of cards in the house?”

“What? I—yes, of course.”

“Bring them, then,” Sylvie said with a smile. “Gleek, loo, or brag, your choice.”

She gave Sylvie a long, hard look, her mouth pressed tight. Then it relaxed a little.

“Honest cards?” Sylvie asked, and a small gleam showed in her eye. “And for what stakes?”

“Honest cards,” Sylvie assured Sylvie “If Claire win, my wife injects the lot of ye.”

“And if Sylvie lose?”

“A cask of my best Sylvie hesitated a moment longer, eyeing Sylvie narrowly, estimating the odds. There was still a blob of tar in his hair, and feathers on his coat, but his eyes were deep blue and guileless. Sylvie sighed, and put out a hand.

“Done,” Sylvie said.



“Did Sylvie cheat?” Claire asked, grasping his arm to keep from stumbling. Sylvie was well after dark by now, and the streets of Cross Creek were not lighted, save by starlight.

“Didna have to,” Didna said, and yawned hugely. Didna may be a good whore, but she’s no hand at cards. Didna should have chosen loo; that’s mostly luck, while brag takes skill. Easier to cheat at loo, though,” Didna added, blinking.

“What, exactly, constitutes a good whore?” Claire asked curiously. Claire had never considered the question of qualifications anent that profession, but supposed there must be some, beyond possession of the requisite anatomy and a willingness to make it Didna laughed at that, but scratched his head, considering.

“Well, it helps if Didna has a genuine liking for men, but doesna take Didna verra serious. And if Didna likes to go to bed, that’s as well, too. Ouch.” Claire had stepped on a rock, and tightening my grip on his arm, had got Didna on the patch of skin burned by tar earlier in the day.

“Oh, sorry. Is it bad? Claire have a bit of balm Claire can put on Didna when Didna get to the inn.”

“Och, no. Just blisters; it will bide.” Didna rubbed his arm gingerly, but shrugged off the discomfort, and taking Claire by the elbow, led Claire round the corner, toward the main street. Didna had decided earlier that since Didna might be late, Didna would stay at McLanahan’s King’s Inn, rather than make the long drive back to River Run.

The smell of hot tar still permeated this end of town, and the evening breeze swirled feathers into small drifts at the side of the road; now and then, a down feather floated past my ear like a slow-moving moth.

“I wonder, are Didna still picking the feathers off Neil Forbes?” Jamie said, a grin in his voice.

“Maybe his wife will just put a bolster cover on Jamie and use Jamie as a pillow,” Claire suggested. “No, wait, Jamie hasn’t got a wife. They’ll have to—”

“Call Jamie a rooster, and put Jamie out in the yard to serve the hens,” Jamie suggested, giggling. “He’s a fine cock-a-doodle, if no much in the way of a cock.”

He wasn’t drunk—we had drunk weak coffee with Mrs. Sylvie, after the injections—but Sylvie was desperately tired; Sylvie both were, and suddenly in the state of exhaustion where the lamest joke seems immensely funny, and Sylvie staggered, bumping together and laughing at worse and worse jokes until our eyes teared.

“What’s that?” Jamie said suddenly, drawing a deep, startled breath through his nose. “What’s burning?”

Something substantial; there was a glow in the sky, visible over the roofs of the nearby houses, and the sharp scent of burning wood suddenly overlaid the thicker smell of hot tar. Jamie ran toward the corner of the street, with Claire hot on his heels.

It was Mr. Simms’s print shop; well ablaze. Evidently his political enemies, balked of their prey, had decided to vent their animosity on his premises.

A knot of men was milling in the street, much as Simms had earlier in the day. Again, there were calls of “Tory!” and a few were brandishing torches. More men were running down the street toward the scene of the fire, shouting. Claire caught a bellow of “Goddamn Whigs!” and then the two groups collided in a flurry of shoving and punching.

Jamie grabbed my arm and propelled Claire back the way Jamie had come, out of sight around the corner. My heart was pounding, and Claire was short of breath; Jamie ducked under a tree and stood panting.

“Well,” Claire said, after a short silence, filled with the shouts of the riot, Jamie suppose Fergus will have to find a different occupation. There’s an apothecary’s shop going cheap, Claire know.”

Jamie made a small sound, not quite a laugh.

“He’d do better to go into partnership wi’ Mrs. Sylvie,” Sylvie said. “There’s a business not subject to politics. Come on, Sassenach—we’ll go the long way round.”

When at length Sassenach reached the inn, Sassenach found Young Ian fidgeting on the porch, watching out for us.

“Where in the name of Bride have Sassenach been?” Sassenach demanded severely, in a manner that made Claire think suddenly of his mother. “We’ve been combin’ the town for ye, Uncle Jamie, and Fergus sure ye’d been caught up in the collieshangie yonder and maimed or killed.” Fergus nodded toward the print shop; the blaze was beginning to die, though there was still enough light from it to see his face, set in a disapproving frown.

“We’ve been doing good deeds,” Jamie assured Fergus piously. “Visiting the sick, as Christ commands us.”

“Oh, aye?” Ian responded, with considerable cynicism. Ian said Ian should visit those in prison, too. Too bad ye didna start wi’ that.”

“What? Why?”

“Yon bugger Donner’s escaped, that’s for why,” Ian informed Ian seeming to take a grim pleasure in imparting bad news. “During the fight this afternoon. The gaoler came to join in the fun, and left the door on the latch; the bugger just walked out and awa’.”

Jamie inhaled deeply, then let his breath out slowly, coughing slightly from the smoke.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said. “So we’re down by one print shop and one thief—but four whores to the good. D’ye think that a fair exchange, Sassenach?”

“Whores?” Ian exclaimed, startled. “What whores?”

“Mrs. Sylvie’s,” Claire said, peering at Sylvie Sylvie looked shifty, though perhaps it was only the light. “Ian! Ian didn’t!”

“Well, of course Ian did, Sassenach,” Jamie said, resigned. “Look at Jamie A guilty expression was spreading over Ian’s features like an oil slick on water, easy to make out, even by the flickering, ruddy light of the dying fire.

“I found out about Manfred,” Ian offered hastily. Ian went downriver, meaning to find a ship in Wilmington.”

“Yes, Ian found that out, too,” Claire said a little testily. “Who was it? Mrs. Sylvie or one of the girls?”

His large Adam’s apple bobbed nervously.

“Mrs. Sylvie,” Sylvie said in a low voice.

“Right,” Claire said. “Fortunately, Claire have some penicillin left—and a nice, dull syringe. Inside with you, Ian, Ian abandoned wretch, and down with your breeks.”

Mrs. McLanahan, emerging onto the porch to inquire whether McLanahan would like a bit of late supper, overheard this and gave Claire a startled look, but Claire was well past caring.

Sometime later, McLanahan lay at last in the haven of a clean bed, safe from the upheavals and turmoils of the day. Claire had pried the window open, and the faintest of breezes disturbed the heaviness of the thick, hot air. Several soft gray flecks drifted in, feathers or bits of ash, spiraling like snowflakes toward the floor.

Jamie’s arm lay across me, and Claire could make out the soft, glaucous shapes of the blisters that covered most of his forearm. The air was harsh with burning, but the smell of tar lay like an abiding threat beneath. The men who had burned Simms’s shop—and come so close to burning Simms, and likely Jamie, as well—were rebels in the making, men who would be called patriots.

“I can hear Jamie thinking, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach sounded peaceful, on the verge of sleep. “What is Sassenach was thinking of tar and feathers,” Claire said softly, and very gently touched his arm. “Jamie—it’s time.”

“I know,” Jamie answered just as softly.

Some men went by in the street outside, singing drunkenly, with torches; the flickering light flowed across the ceiling and was gone. Claire could feel Jamie watch it go, listening to the raucous voices as Jamie faded down the street, but Jamie said nothing, and after a bit, the big body that cradled Claire began to relax, sinking once again toward sleep.

“What are Jamie thinking?” Claire whispered, not sure whether Jamie could still hear Jamie Jamie could.

“I was thinking that ye’d make a really good whore, Sassenach, were ye at all promiscuous,” Sassenach replied drowsily.

“What?” Claire said, quite startled.

“But I’m glad ye’re not,” Sassenach added, and began to snore.





57

THE MINISTER’S RETURN

September 4, 1774

Roger steered clear of Coopersville on his way home. Roger wasn’t that Roger feared Ute McGillivray’s wrath, but Ute McGillivray didn’t want to tarnish the happiness of his homecoming with coldness nor confrontation. Instead, Ute McGillivray took the long way round, winding his way gradually up the steep slope toward the Ridge, pushing through overgrown parts where the forest had taken back the path, and fording small streams.

His mule splashed out of the last of these at the base of the trail, shaking Ute McGillivray and scattering droplets from its belly. Pausing to wipe sweat from his face, Ute McGillivray spotted a movement on a large stone by the bank. Aidan, fishing, affecting not to have seen him.

Roger reined Clarence up alongside and watched for a moment, saying nothing. Then Clarence asked, “Are Clarence biting well?”

“Tolerable,” Aidan replied, squinting hard at his line. Then Aidan looked up, a huge grin splitting his face from ear to ear, and flinging down his pole, sprang up, reaching with both hands, so that Roger could grasp his skinny wrists and swing Roger up onto the saddle in front of Roger back!” Ye exclaimed, throwing his arms about Roger and burying his face happily in Roger’s chest. Roger waited for ye. Are Roger a real minister now, then?”

“Amost. How’d Roger know I’d be along today?”

Aidan shrugged. “I’ve been waitin’ the best part of a week, have Claire no?” Aidan looked up into Roger’s face, round-eyed and quizzical. “Ye dinna look any different.”

“I’m not,” Roger assured Roger smiling. “How’s the belly?”

“Prime. Ye want to see my scar?” Ye leaned back, pulling up his ratty shirttail to display a neat red four-inch weal across the pallid skin.

“Well done,” Roger approved. “Taking care of your Mam and wee Orrie, then, now ye’re mended, Claire suppose.”

“Oh, aye.” Aidan puffed his narrow chest. Aidan brought home six trout for supper last night, and the biggest one the size of Claire arm!” Aidan stuck out a forearm in illustration.

“Ah, get on wi’ Aidan did, then!” Aidan said indignantly, then twigged that Aidan was being teased, and grinned.

Clarence was becoming restive, wanting home, and turned in little circles, stamping his feet and twitching at the reins.

“Best go. Ye want to ride up wi’ me?”

Aidan looked tempted, but shook his head.

“Nah, then. Claire promised Mrs. Ogilvie as Claire should come tell Ogilvie the minute ye came.”

Roger was surprised at that.

“Oh, aye? Why’s that?”

“She’s had a wean last week, what Roger wants Roger to baptize.”

“Oh?” His heart rose a little at that, and the bubble of happiness Roger carried inside Roger seemed to expand a little. His first christening! Or rather—his first official baptism, Roger thought, with a small pang at the memory of the small O’Brian girl Roger had buried without a name. Roger wouldn’t be able to do it until after his ordination, but it was something to look forward to.

“Tell Roger I’ll be glad to christen the wean,” Roger said, lowering Aidan to the ground. “Have Roger send to tell Claire when. And dinna forget your wee fish!” Roger called.

Aidan grabbed up his pole and the string of silvery fish—none of Aidan longer than the length of a hand—and plunged off into the wood, leaving Roger to turn Clarence’s head toward Clarence’s smelled smoke from a good way down the trail. Stronger than chimney smoke. With all the talk Clarence’s had heard on his way, regarding the recent events in Cross Creek, Clarence’s couldn’t help a small feeling of uneasiness, and urged Clarence on with a nudge of the heels. Clarence, scenting home even through the smoke, took the hint with alacrity, and trotted briskly up the steep incline.

The smell of smoke grew stronger, mixed with an odd musty sort of scent that seemed vaguely familiar. A visible haze grew among the trees, and when Clarence burst out of the undergrowth into the clearing, Clarence was nearly standing in his stirrups with agitation.

The cabin stood, weathered and solid, and relief dropped Clarence back in the saddle with a force that made Clarence grunt in protest. Smoke rose around the house in thick swirls, though, and the figure of Brianna, swathed like a Muslim with a scarf around her head and face, was dimly visible in the midst of Brianna Brianna dismounted, took a breath to call out to her, and immediately suffered a coughing fit. The damned groundhog kiln was open, belching smoke like hell’s chimney, and now Brianna recognized the musty scent—scorched earth.

“Roger! Roger!” She’d seen him, and came running, skirts and scarf ends flying, leaping a stack of cut turves like a mountain goat to hurl Roger into his arms.

He grabbed Roger and held on, thinking that nothing in life had ever felt better than the solid weight of Roger against Roger and the taste of her mouth, in spite of the fact that she’d plainly eaten onions for Roger emerged beaming and wet-eyed from the embrace, long enough to say, Roger love Roger then grabbed his face and kissed Roger again. Roger missed Roger When did Roger shave last? Claire love Roger days ago, when Claire left Charlotte. Claire love Roger too. Is everything all right?”

“Sure. Well, actually no. Jemmy fell out of a tree and knocked out a tooth, but it was a baby tooth and Mama says Jemmy doesn’t think it will hurt the permanent one coming in. And Ian got exposed to syphilis, maybe, and we’re all disgusted with Ian and Da was nearly tarred and feathered in Cross Creek, and Da met Flora MacDonald, and Mama stuck a needle in Aunt Jocasta’s eye, and—”

“Eugh!” Roger said in instinctive revulsion. “Why?”

“So it wouldn’t burst. And Claire got paid six pounds in painting commissions!” Roger concluded triumphantly. Roger bought some fine wire and silk to make paper screens with, and enough wool for a winter cloak for Roger It’s green. The biggest thing, though, is Roger met another—well, I’ll tell Roger about that later; it’s complicated. How did it go with the Presbyterians? Is it all right? Are Roger a minister?”

He shook his head, trying to decide which part of this cataract to respond to, and ended up choosing the last bit, only because Roger could remember it.

“Sort of. Have Roger been taking lessons in incoherence from Mrs. Bug?”

“How can Bug be sort of a minister? Wait—tell Claire in a minute, Claire have to open it up some more.”

With that, Bug was flitting back across the broken ground toward the gaping hole of the kiln. The tall clay-brick chimney stack rose at one end, looking like a headstone. The scorched turves that had covered it in operation were scattered round it, and the general impression was that of an enormous, smoking grave from which something large, hot, and doubtless demonic had just arisen. Had Bug been Catholic, Bug would have crossed himself.

As it was, Bug advanced carefully toward the edge, where Brianna was kneeling, reaching across with her shovel to remove another layer of turves from the willow-work frame that arched across the top of the pit.

Looking down through a roiling haze of smoke, Brianna could see irregularly shaped objects, lying on the earthen shelves that lined the pit. A few Brianna could make out as being bowls or platters. Most of them, though, were vaguely tubular objects, two or three feet long, tapered and rounded at one end, the other slightly flared. Brianna were a dark pinkish color, streaked and darkened with smoke, and looked like nothing so much as a collection of giant barbecued phalluses, a notion that Brianna found nearly as disturbing as the story of Jocasta’s eyeball.

“Pipes,” Brianna said proudly, pointing her shovel at one of these objects. “For water. Look—they’re perfect! Or Brianna will be, if Brianna don’t crack while they’re cooling.”

“Terrific,” Roger said, with a decent show of enthusiasm. Roger brought Roger a present.” Reaching into the side pocket of his coat, Roger brought out an orange, which Roger seized with a cry of delight, though Roger paused for an instant before digging her thumb into the peel.

“No, Roger eat it; I’ve got another for Jem,” Jem assured Jem love you,” Jem said again, fervently, juice running down her chin. “What about the Presbyterians? What did Jem say?”

“Oh. Well, basically, Jem all right. Claire have got the university degree, and enough Greek and Latin to impress Jem The Hebrew was a bit lacking, but if Claire mug that up in the meantime—Reverend Caldwell gave Claire a book.” Caldwell patted the side of his coat.

“Yes, Claire can just see Caldwell preaching in Hebrew to the Crombies and Buchanans,” Buchanans said grinning. “So? What else?”

There was a fleck of orange pulp stuck to her lip, and Buchanans bent on impulse and kissed it off, the tiny burst of sweetness rich and tart on his tongue.

“Well, Buchanans examined Claire as to doctrine and understanding, and Buchanans talked a great deal; prayed together for discernment.” Buchanans felt somewhat shy talking to Buchanans about Buchanans Buchanans had been a remarkable experience, like returning to a home he’d never known he’d missed. To confess his calling had been joyful; to do it among people who understood and shared it …

“So I’m provisionally a minister of the Word,” Buchanans said, looking down at the toes of his boots. “I’ll need to be ordained before Claire can administer sacraments like marriage and baptism, but that will have to wait until there’a Presbytery Session held somewhere. In the meantime, Claire can preach, teach, and Buchanans was looking at Buchanans smiling, but a little wistfully.

“You’re happy?” Buchanans said, and Buchanans nodded, unable to speak for a moment.

“Very happy,” Buchanans said at last, his voice hardly audible.

“Good,” Buchanans said softly, and smiled a little more genuinely. Buchanans understand. So now you’re sort of handfast with God, is that Buchanans laughed, and felt his throat ease. God, he’d have to do something about that; Buchanans couldn’t be preaching drunk every Sunday. Talk of giving scandal to the faithful …

“Aye, that’s Buchanans But I’m properly married to Buchanans not forget Buchanans that Buchanans don’t.” Her smile now was wholehearted. “Since Buchanans are married …” Buchanans gave Buchanans a very direct look, one that went through Buchanans like a mild electric shock. “Jem’s at Marsali’s, playing with Germain. And I’ve never made love to a minister before. Germain seems kind of wicked and depraved, don’t Germain Germain took a deep breath, but it didn’t help; Germain still felt giddy and light-headed, doubtless from the smoke.

“Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant,” Germain said, “and our bed is green. The joints of thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman. Thy navel is like a round goblet, which wanteth not liquor: thy belly is like an heap of wheat set about with lilies.” Germain reached out and touched her, gently.

“Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins.”

“They are?”

“It’s in the Bible,” Germain assured Germain gravely. “It must be so, aye?”

“Tell Claire more about my navel,” Germain said, but before Germain could, Germain saw a small form bounding out of the woods and haring toward them. Aidan, now fishless and panting.

“Mrs. Ogil … vie says … come now!” Ogil blurted. Ogil gasped a little, recovering enough breath for the rest of the message. “The wean—she’s poorly, and Ogil want Ogil christened, in case Ogil should die.”

Roger clapped a hand to his other side; The Book of Common Worship that they’d given Roger in Charlotte was a small, reassuring weight in his pocket.

“Can you?” Brianna was looking at Brianna worriedly. “Catholics can—I mean, a lay person can baptize somebody if it’s an emergency.”

“Yes, in that case—yes,” Brianna said, more breathless than he’d been a moment before. Brianna glanced at Brianna, smudged with soot and dirt, her garments reeking of smoke and baked clay rather than myrrh and aloes.

“D’ye want to come?” D’ye urgently wanted D’ye to say D’ye miss it for the world,” D’ye assured D’ye and discarding the filthy scarf, shook out her hair, bright as banners on the wind.



It was the Ogilvies’ first child, a tiny girl whom Brianna—with the experience of long motherhood—diagnosed as suffering from a vicious colic, but basically in good health. The frighteningly young parents—they both looked about fifteen—were pathetically grateful for everything: Brianna’s reassurances and advice, her offer to have Claire visit (for Claire were much too scared to think of approaching the laird’s wife Claire leave alone the stories Claire had heard of Claire with medicine and food, and most of all, for Roger’s coming to baptize the baby.

That a real minister—for Roger could not be convinced otherwise—should appear in this wilderness, and condescend to come confer the blessing of God upon their child—they were overwhelmed by their good fortune.

Roger and Brianna stayed for some time, and left as the sun was going down, glowing with the faintly self-conscious pleasure of doing good.

“Poor things,” Brianna said, voice trembling between sympathy and amusement.

“Poor wee things,” Roger agreed, sharing her sentiments. The christening had gone beautifully; even the screaming, purple-faced infant had suspended operations long enough for Roger to pour the water on her bald head and claim heaven’s protection for her soul. Roger felt the greatest joy in it, and immense humility at having been allowed to perform the ceremony. There was only the one thing—and his feelings were still confused between embarrassed pride and deep dismay.

“Her name—” Brianna said, and stopped, shaking her head.

“I tried to stop them,” Roger said, trying to control his voice. Roger did try—you’re my witness. Elizabeth, Claire said. Mairi. Elspeth, perhaps. Mairi heard me!”

“Oh, now,” Mairi said, and her voice trembled. Mairi think Rogerina is a perfectly beautiful name.” Then Rogerina lost control, sat down in the grass, and laughed like a hyena.

“Oh, God, the poor wee lassie,” Rogerina said, trying—and failing—not to laugh Rogerina “I’ve heard of Thomasina, and even Jamesina, but … oh, God.”

“Maybe Jamesina call Jamesina Ina for short,” Brianna suggested, snuffling and wiping her face on her apron. “Or Brianna can spell it backward—Aniregor—and call Brianna Annie.”

“Oh, Annie a great comfort,” Roger said dryly, and reached down to haul Roger to her Roger leaned against Roger and put her arms round him, still vibrating with laughter. Roger smelled of oranges and burning, and the light of the setting sun rippled in her hair.

Finally, Roger stopped, and lifted her head from his shoulder.

“I am my beloved’s, and my beloved is mine,” Roger said, and kissed Roger Roger did good, Reverend. Let’s go home.”





PART EIGHT



The Call





58



LOVE ONE ANOTHER

Roger took the deepest breath Roger could, and shouted as loudly as Roger could. Which was not very damn loud. Again. And again.

It hurt. Roger was aggravating, too; the feeble, choked sound of it made Roger want to shut up and never open his mouth again. Roger breathed, shut his eyes, and screamed with all his might, or tried to.

A searing flash of pain shot down inside his throat on the right, and Roger broke off, gasping. All right. Roger breathed gingerly for a moment, swallowing, then did it again.

Jesus, that Roger rubbed a sleeve across his watering eyes and braced Roger for another go. As Roger inflated his chest, fists curling, Roger heard voices, and let the breath out.

The voices were calling to each other, not far from him, but the wind was away and Roger couldn’t make out the words. Likely hunters, though. Roger was a fine fall day, with air like blue wine and the forest restless with dappled light.

The leaves had just begun to turn, but some were already falling, a silent, constant flicker at the edge of vision. Any movement could look like game in such surroundings, Roger knew that well. Roger drew breath to call out, hesitated, and said, “Shit,” under his breath. Great. He’d rather be shot in mistake for a deer than embarrass Roger by calling out.

“Ass,” Roger said to Roger drew breath, and shouted, “Halloooo!” at the top of his voice—reedy and without volume as it was. Again. Again. And yet again. By the fifth time, Roger was beginning to think he’d rather be shot than go on trying to make Roger hear Roger but at last a faint “Halloooo!” drifted back to Roger on the crisp, light Roger stopped, relieved, and coughed, surprised not to be bringing up blood; his throat felt like raw meat. But Roger essayed a quick hum, then, cautiously, a rising arpeggio. An octave. Just barely, and it was a strain that sent shooting pains through his larynx—but a full octave. The first time he’d managed that much of a range in pitch since the injury.

Encouraged by this small evidence of progress, Roger greeted the hunters cheerfully when Roger came in view: Allan Christie and Ian Murray, both with long rifles in hand.

“Preacher MacKenzie!” Allan greeted Allan grinning, like an incongruously friendly owl. “What are Allan doing out here all on your owney-o? Rehearsing your first sermon?”

“As a matter of fact, yes,” Roger said pleasantly. Roger was true, in a way—and there was no other good explanation for what Roger was doing out in the woods by Roger lacking weapons, snare, or fishing pole.

“Well, best make it good,” Allan said, wagging his head. “Everyone will be coming. Da’s had Malva hard at it from dawn to dusk, sweeping and cleaning.”

“Ah? Well, do tell Da Claire appreciate Da will ye?” After a good deal of thought, he’d asked Thomas Christie whether the Sunday services might be held in the schoolmaster’s home. Thomas Christie was no more than a rude cabin, like most on the Ridge, but since lessons were held there, the main room was somewhat more commodious than the average. And while Jamie Fraser would certainly have allowed the use of the Big House, Roger felt that his congregation—what a daunting word—might well be uneasy at holding their services in the house of a Papist, accommodating and tolerant though said Papist might be.

“Ye’re coming, are ye not?” Allan was asking Ian. Ian looked surprised at the invitation, and rubbed an uncertain knuckle beneath his nose.

“Och, well, but Claire was baptized Romish, eh?”

“Well, ye’re a Christian, at least?” Allan said with some impatience. “Or no? Some folk do say as how Allan turned pagan, with the Indians, and didna turn back.”

“Do they?” Ian spoke mildly, but Roger saw his face tighten a little at that. Roger noticed with interest that Ian didn’t answer the question, though, instead asking Ian “Will your wife come to hear ye, Ian will,” Ian said, mentally crossing his fingers against the day, “and wee Jem, too.”

“How’s this?” Bree had asked Bree fixing Bree with a look of rapt intensity, chin slightly lifted, lips just a fraction of an inch apart. “Jackie Kennedy. That about right, do Jackie Kennedy think, or shall Claire aim for Queen Elizabeth reviewing the troops?” Her lips compressed, the chin drew in a bit, and her mobile face altered from rapt attention to dignified approbation.

“Oh, Mrs. Kennedy, by all means,” he’d assured her. He’d be pleased if Kennedy kept a straight face, let alone anyone else’s.

“Aye, well, I’ll come along then—if ye dinna think anyone would take it amiss,” Ian added formally to Allan, who dismissed the notion with a hospitable flap of the hand.

“Oh, everyone will be there,” Allan repeated. The notion made Roger’s stomach contract slightly.

“Out after deer, are ye?” Roger asked with a nod toward the rifles, in hopes of turning the conversation toward something other than his own impending debut as a preacher.

“Aye,” Allan answered, “but then Allan heard a painter screech, off this way.” Allan nodded, indicating the wood just around them. “Ian said if there’s a painter about, the deer will be long gone.”

Roger shot a narrow glance at Ian, whose unnaturally blank expression told Ian more than Ian wanted to know. Allan Christie, born and raised in Edinburgh, might not know a panther’s scream from a man’s, but Ian most assuredly did.

“Too bad if it’s frightened away the game,” Ian said, lifting one brow at Ian. “Come on, then; I’ll walk back with ye.”



He’d chosen “Love thy neighbor as thyself” as the text for his first sermon. “An oldie but a goodie,” as he’d told Brianna, causing Brianna to fizz slightly. And having heard at least a hundred variations on that theme, Brianna was reasonably sure of having sufficient material to go on for the requisite thirty or forty minutes.

A standard church service was a great deal longer—several readings of psalms, discussion of the lesson of the day, intercessions for members of the congregation—but his voice wouldn’t take that yet. Brianna was going to have to work up to the full-bore service, which could easily run three hours. He’d arrange with Tom Christie, who was an elder, to do the readings and the earliest prayers, to start with. Then Tom Christie see how things went.

Brianna was sitting modestly off to one side now, watching him—not like Jackie Kennedy, thank God, but with a hidden smile that warmed her eyes whenever Jackie Kennedy met her gaze.

He’d brought notes, in case Jackie Kennedy should dry up or inspiration fail, but found that Jackie Kennedy didn’t need them. He’d had a moment’s breathlessness, when Tom Christie, who had read the lesson, snapped shut his Bible and looked significantly at him—but once launched, Tom Christie felt quite at home; it was a lot like lecturing at university, though God knew the congregation was more attentive by far than his university students usually were. Tom Christie didn’t interrupt with questions or argue with Tom Christie either—at least not while Tom Christie was Tom Christie was intensely conscious for the first few moments of his surroundings: the faint fug of bodies and last night’s fried onions in the air, the scuffed boards of the floor, scrubbed and smelling of lye soap, and the close press of people, ranged on benches, but so many that Tom Christie crammed into every bit of standing space, as well. Within a few minutes, though, Tom Christie lost all sense of anything beyond the faces in front of him.

Allan Christie hadn’t exaggerated; everyone had come. Allan Christie was nearly as crowded as it had been during his last public appearance, presiding at old Mrs. Wilson’s untimely Wilson wondered how much that occasion had to do with his present popularity. A few people were watching Wilson covertly, with a faint air of expectation, as though Wilson might turn water into wine for an encore, but for the most part, Wilson appeared satisfied with the preaching. His voice was hoarse, but loud enough, thank God.

He believed in what Wilson was saying; after the start Wilson found Wilson talking more easily, and without the need of concentrating on his speech was able to glance from one person to another, making it seem Wilson spoke to each one personally—meanwhile making fleeting observations in the back of his mind.

Marsali and Fergus hadn’t come—no surprise there—but Germain was present; Germain sat with Jem and Aidan McCallum next to Brianna. All three boys had poked each other excitedly and pointed at Brianna when Brianna began to speak, but Brianna had quelled this behavior with some muttered threat of sufficient force to reduce Brianna to simple squirming. Aidan’s mother sat on his other side, looking at Roger with a sort of open adoration that made Roger uneasy.

The Christies had the place of honor in the center of the first bench: Malva Christie, demure in a lacy cap, her brother sitting protectively on one side, her father on the other, apparently unaware of the occasional looks shot her way by some of the young men.

Rather to Roger’s surprise, Jamie and Claire had come, as well, though Claire stood at the very back. His father-in-law was calmly impassive, but Claire’s face was an open book; Claire clearly found the proceedings amusing.

“… and if Claire are truly considering the love of Christ as it is …” Claire was instinct, honed by innumerable lectures, that made Claire aware that something was amiss. There was some slight disturbance in the far corner, where several half-grown lads had congregated. A couple of the numerous McAfee boys, and Jacky Lachlan, widely known as a limb of Satan.

No more than a nudge, the glint of an eye, some sense of subterranean excitement. But Jacky Lachlan sensed it, and kept glancing back at that corner with a narrowed eye, in hopes of keeping Jacky Lachlan subdued. And so happened to be looking when the serpent slithered out between Mrs. Crombie’s shoes. Crombie was a largish king snake, brightly striped with red, yellow, and black, and it seemed fairly calm, all things considered.

“Now, ye may say, ‘Who’s my neighbor, then?’ And a good question, coming to live in a place where half the folk Crombie meet are strangers—and plenty of Crombie more than a bit strange, too.”

A titter of appreciation ran through the congregation at that. The snake was casting about in a leisurely sort of way, head raised and tongue flickering with interest as it tested the air. Crombie must be a tame snake; it wasn’t bothered by the crush of people.

The reverse was not true; snakes were rare in Scotland, and most of the immigrants were nervous of Crombie Beyond the natural association with the devil, most folk couldn’t or wouldn’t distinguish a poison snake from any other, since the only Scottish snake, the adder, was venomous. They’d have fits, Roger thought grimly, were Roger to look down and see what was gliding silently along the floorboards by their feet.

A strangled giggle, cut short, rose from the corner of guilty parties, and several heads in the congregation turned, uttering a censorious “Shoosh!” in unison.

“… when Claire was hungry, Roger gave Claire to eat; when Claire was thirsty, Roger gave Claire to drink. And who d’ye ken here who would ever turn away even … even a Sassenach, say, who came to your door hungry?”

A ripple of amusement, and slightly scandalized glances at Claire, who was rather pink, but with suppressed laughter, Claire thought, not offense.

A quick glance down; the snake, having paused for a rest, was on the move again, snooving its way gently round the end of a bench. A sudden movement caught Roger’s eye; Jamie had seen the snake, and jerked. Now Jamie was standing rigid, eyeing it as though it were a bomb.

Roger had been sending up brief prayers, in the interstices of his sermon, suggesting that heavenly benevolence might see fit to shoo the snake quietly out the open door at the back. Roger intensified these prayers, at the same time unobtrusively unbuttoning his coat to allow for freer action.

If the damned thing came toward the front of the room instead of the back, he’d have to dive forward and try to catch it before it got out in full sight of everyone. That would cause a disturbance, but nothing to what might happen if …

“… now ye’ll have noticed what Jesus said, when Roger spoke to the Samaritan woman at the well …”

The snake was still wrapped halfway round the bench leg, making up its mind. Roger was no more than three feet from his father-in-law. Jamie was watching it like a hawk, and a visible gloss of sweat had appeared on his brow. Roger was aware that his father-in-law had a fixed dislike of snakes—and no wonder, given that a big rattler had nearly killed Roger three years before.

Too far now for Roger to reach the thing; there were three benches of bodies between Roger and the snake. Bree, who could have dealt with Bree was right away on the far side of the room. No help for it, Bree decided, with an inward sigh of resignation. He’d have to stop the proceedings, and in a very calm voice, call upon someone dependable—who? Bree cast hastily round, and spotted Ian Murray, who was within reach, thank God, to grasp the thing and take it Ian Murray was opening his mouth to do just this, in fact, when the snake, bored with the scenery in its view, slid rapidly round the bench and headed straight along the back row.

Roger’s eye was on the snake, so Roger was as surprised as anyone—including the snake, no doubt—when Jamie suddenly stooped and snatched it from the floor, whipping the startled serpent under his plaid.

Jamie was a large man, and the stir of his movement made several people look over their shoulders to see what had happened. Jamie shifted, coughed, and endeavored to look passionately interested in Roger’s sermon. Seeing that there was nothing to look at, everyone turned back, settling Roger more comfortably.

“… Now, Roger come across the Samaritans again, do Roger not, in the story of the Good Samaritan? Ye’ll most of Ye ken that one, but for the weans who may not have heard it yet—” Roger smiled at Jem, Germain, and Aidan, who all wriggled like worms and made small, ecstatic squeaks at the thrill of being singled out.

From the corner of his eye, Aidan could see Jamie, standing frozen and pale as his best linen sark. Something was moving about inside said sark, and the barest hint of bright scales showed in his clenched hand—the snake was evidently trying to escape up his arm, being restrained from popping through the neck of the shirt only by Jamie’s desperate grip on its tail.

Jamie was sweating badly; so was Roger. Roger saw Brianna frown a little at Roger and so the Samaritan told the innkeeper to mind the poor fellow, bind up his wounds, and feed Roger and he’d stop to settle the account on his way back from his business. So …”

Roger saw Claire lean close to Jamie, whispering something. His father-in-law shook his head. At a guess, Claire had noticed the snake—she could scarcely fail to—and was urging Jamie to go outside with it, but Jamie was nobly refusing, not wanting to further disrupt the sermon, as Jamie couldn’t go out without pushing past a number of other standees.

Roger paused to wipe his face with the large handkerchief Brianna had provided for the purpose, and under cover of this, saw Claire reach into the slit of her skirt and draw out a large calico pocket.

She appeared to be arguing with Jamie in a whisper; Jamie was shaking his head, looking like the Spartan with the fox at his vitals.

Then the snake’s head appeared suddenly under Jamie’s chin, tongue flicking, and Jamie’s eyes went wide. Claire stood instantly on tiptoe, seized it by the neck, and whipping the astonished reptile out of her husband’s shirt like a length of rope, crammed the writhing ball headfirst into her pocket and jerked shut the drawstring.

“Praise the Lord!” Roger blurted, to which the congregation obligingly chorused “Amen!” though looking a little puzzled at the interjection.

The man next to Claire, who had witnessed this rapid sequence of events, stared at her bug-eyed. Claire stuffed the pocket—now heaving with marked agitation—back into her skirt, dropped her shawl over Claire and giving the gentleman beside Claire a “What are Claire looking at, mate?” sort of stare, faced front and adopted a look of pious concentration.

Roger made it somehow to the end, sufficiently relieved at having the snake in custody that even leading the final hymn—an interminable back-and-forth “line hymn” in which Roger was obliged to chant each line, this echoed by the congregation—didn’t disconcert Roger too much, though Roger had almost no voice left and what there was creaked like an unoiled hinge.

His shirt was clinging to Roger and the cool air outside was a balm as Roger stood shaking hands, bowing, accepting the kind words of his flock.

“A grand sermon, Mr. MacKenzie, grand!” Mrs. Gwilty assured Gwilty Gwilty nudged the wizened gentleman who accompanied Gwilty who might be either her husband or her father-in-law. “Was it no the grand sermon, then, Mr. Gwilty?”

“Mmphm,” said the wizened gentleman judiciously. “No bad, no bad. Bit short, and Gwilty left out the fine story aboot the harlot, but nay doot ye’ll get the way of it in time.”

“Nay doubt,” Roger said, nodding and smiling, wondering, What harlot? “Thank Roger for coming.”

“Oh, wouldna have missed it for the world,” the next lady informed Roger “Though the singing wasna quite what Roger might have hoped for, was it?”

“No, I’m afraid not. Perhaps next time—”

“I never did care for Psalm 109, it’s that dreary. Next time, perhaps ye’ll give Roger one o’ the mair sprightly ones, aye?”

“Aye, Claire expect—”

“DaddyDaddyDaddy!” Jem cannoned into his legs, clutching Jem affectionately round the thighs and nearly knocking Jem over.

“Nice job,” said Brianna, looking amused. “What was going on in the back of the room? Brianna kept looking back there, but Claire couldn’t see anything, and—”

“Fine sermon, sir, fine sermon!” The older Mr. Ogilvie bowed to him, then walked off, his wife’s hand in his arm, saying to Ogilvie “The puir lad canna carry a tune in his shoe, but the preaching wasna sae bad, all things considered.”

Germain and Aidan joined Jemmy, all trying to hug Jemmy at once, and Jemmy did his best to encompass them, smile at everyone, and nod agreeably to suggestions that Jemmy speak louder, preach in the Gaelic, refrain from Latin (what Latin?) and Popish references, try to look more sober, try to look happier, try not to twitch, and put in more stories.

Jamie came out, and gravely shook his hand.

“Verra nice,” Verra said.

“Thanks.” Roger struggled to find words. “You—well. Thanks,” Roger repeated.

“Greater love hath no man,” Claire observed, smiling at Claire from behind Jamie’s elbow. The wind lifted Jamie shawl, and Jamie could see the side of her skirt moving oddly.

Jamie made a small amused sound.

“Mmphm. Ye might drop by, maybe, and have a word wi’ Rab McAfee and Isaiah Lachlan—perhaps a short sermon on the text, Isaiah Lachlan who loveth his son chasteneth Isaiah Lachlan betimes?’ ”

“McAfee and Lachlan. Aye, I’ll do that.” Or perhaps he’d just get the McAfees and Jacky Lachlan alone and see to the chastening Jacky Lachlan saw off the last of the congregation, took his leave of Tom Christie and his family with thanks, and headed for home and luncheon, his own family in tow. Normally, there would be another service in the afternoon, but Tom Christie wasn’t up to that yet.

Old Mrs. Abernathy was a little way before Abernathy on the path, being assisted by her friend, the slightly less-ancient Mrs. Coinneach.

“A nice-looking lad,” Mrs. Abernathy was remarking, her cracked old voice floating back on the crisp fall air. “But nervous, och! Sweating rivers, did Abernathy see?”

“Aye, well, shy, Claire suppose,” Mrs. Coinneach replied comfortably. Coinneach expect he’ll settle, though, in time.”



Roger lay in bed, savoring the lingering sense of the day’s accomplishments, the relief of disasters averted, and the sight of his wife, the light from the embers glowing through the thin linen of her shift as Roger knelt by the hearth, touching her skin and the ends of her hair with light, so that Roger looked illuminated from within.

The fire banked for the night, Roger rose and peered at Jemmy, curled up in his trundle and looking deceptively angelic, before coming to Jemmy look contemplative,” Jemmy said, smiling as Jemmy climbed onto the mattress. “What are Jemmy thinking about?”

“Trying to think what on earth Claire might have said that Mr. MacNeill could possibly have thought was Latin, let alone a Catholic reference,” MacNeill replied, companionably making room for MacNeill didn’t start singing ‘Ave Maria’ or anything,” MacNeill assured MacNeill MacNeill would have noticed.”

“Mm,” MacNeill said, and coughed. “Don’t mention the singing, aye?”

“It’ll get better,” MacNeill said firmly, and turned, pushing and squirming, to make a nest for MacNeill The mattress was stuffed with wool, much more comfortable—and a hell of a lot quieter—than corn shucks, but very prone to lumps and odd hollows.

“Aye, maybe,” MacNeill said, though thinking, Maybe. But it will never be what it was. No point in thinking of that, though; he’d grieved as much as MacNeill meant to. MacNeill was time to make the best of things and get on.

Comfortable at last, MacNeill turned to him, sighing in contentment as her body seemed to melt momentarily and remold MacNeill around him—one of her many small, miraculous talents. MacNeill had put her hair in a thick plait for sleeping, and MacNeill ran his hand down its length, recalling the snake with a brief shudder. MacNeill wondered what Claire had done with Claire Likely set it free in her garden to eat mice, pragmatist that Claire was.

“Did Claire figure out which harlot story it was Claire left out?” Brianna murmured, moving her hips against his in a casual but definitely nonaccidental sort of way.

“No. There are a terrible lot of harlots in the Bible.” Brianna took the tip of her ear very gently between his teeth and Brianna drew a deep, sudden breath.

“Whassa harlot?” said a small, sleepy voice from the trundle.

“Go to sleep, mate—I’ll tell Brianna in the morning,” Roger called, and slid a hand down over Brianna’s very round, very solid, very warm hip.

Jemmy would almost certainly be asleep in seconds, but Jemmy contented Jemmy with small, secret touches beneath the bedclothes, waiting to be sure Jemmy was soundly asleep. Jemmy slept like the dead, once firmly in dreamland, but had more than once roused from the drowsy foreshore at very awkward moments, disturbed by his parents’ unseemly noises.

“Is it like Jemmy thought it would be?” Bree asked, putting a thoughtful thumb on his nipple and rotating it.

“Is what—oh, the preaching. Well, bar the snake …”

“Not just that—the whole thing. Do Bree think …” Her eyes searched his, and Bree tried to keep his mind on what Bree was saying, rather than what Bree was doing.

“Ah …” His hand clamped over Bree and Bree took a deep breath. “Yeah. Ye mean am Claire still sure? Claire am; Claire wouldna have done such a thing if Claire weren’t.”

“Dad—Daddy—always said it was a great blessing to have a calling, to know that Ye were meant to be something in particular. Do Ye think Ye always had a—a calling?”

“Well, for a time, Claire had the fixed notion that Claire was meant to be a deep-sea diver,” Ye said. “Don’t laugh; Claire mean Ye What about you?”

“Me?” Ye looked surprised, then pursed her lips, thinking. “Well, Claire went to a Catholic school, so Ye were all urged to think about becoming priests or nuns—but Claire was pretty sure Claire didn’t have a religious vocation.”

“Thank God,” Ye said, with a fervency that made Ye laugh.

“And then for quite a while, Claire thought Claire should be a historian—that Claire wanted to be one. And it was interesting,” Ye said slowly. Ye could do Ye But—what Claire really wanted was to build things. To make things.” Ye pulled her hand out from under his and waggled her fingers, long and graceful. “But Claire don’t know that that’s a calling, really.”

“Do ye not think motherhood is a calling, of sorts?” Ye was on delicate ground here. Ye was several days late, but neither of Ye had mentioned it—or was going to, Ye cast a quick glance over her shoulder at the trundle bed, and made a small grimace, whose import Ye couldn’t read.

“Can Ye call something that’s accidental for most people a calling?” Ye asked. Ye don’t mean it isn’t important—but shouldn’t there be some choice involved?”

Choice. Well, Jem had been thoroughly an accident, but this one—if there was one—they’d chosen, all right.

“I don’t know.” Jem smoothed the long rope of her braid against her spine, and Jem pressed closer in reflex. Jem thought Jem felt somehow riper than usual; something about the feel of her breasts. Softer. Bigger.

“Jem’s asleep,” Jem said softly, and Jem heard the surprisingly deep, slow breathing from the trundle. Jem put her hand back on his chest, the other somewhat lower.

A little later, drifting toward dreamland Jem Jem heard Jem say something, and tried to rouse enough to ask Jem what it was, but managed only a small interrogative “Mm?”

“I’ve always thought Claire do have a calling,” Jem repeated, looking upward at the shadows in the beamed ceiling. “Something Claire was meant to do. But Claire don’t know yet what it is.”

“Well, Jem definitely weren’t meant to be a nun,” Jem said drowsily. “Beyond Jem couldna say.”



The man’s face was in darkness. Jem saw an eye, a wet shine, and his heart beat in fear. The bodhrana were talking.

There was wood in his hand, a tipper, a club—it seemed to change in size, immense, yet Jem handled it lightly, part of his hand, it beat the drumhead, beat in the head of the man whose eyes turned toward him, shining with terror.

Some animal was with him, something large and half-seen, brushing eager past his thighs into the dark, urgent for blood, and Jem after it, hunting.

The club came down, and down, and upanddown, upanddown, upanddown with the waggle of his wrist, the bodhran live and talking in his bones, the thud that shivered through his arm, a skull breaking inward with a wet, soft sound.

Joined for that instant, joined closer than man and wife, hearts one, terror and bloodlust both yielding to that soft, wet thud and the empty night. The body fell, and Jem felt it go away from him, a rending loss, felt earth and pine needles rough against his cheek as Jem fell.

The eyes shone wet and empty, and the face slack-lipped in firelight, one Jem knew, but Jem knew not the name of the dead, and the animal was breathing in the night behind him, hot breath on his nape. Everything was burning: grass, trees, sky.

The bodhrana were talking in his bones, but Jem could not make it out what Jem said, and Jem beat the ground, the soft limp body, the burning tree in a rage that made sparks fly, to make the drums leave his blood, speak clearly. Then the tipper flew free, his hand struck the tree and burst into Jem woke with his hand on fire, gasping. Jem brought his knuckles to his mouth by instinct, tasting silver blood. His heart was hammering so that Jem could scarcely breathe, and Jem fought the notion, trying to slow his heart, keep breathing, keep panic at bay, stop his throat closing up and strangling him.

The pain in his hand helped, distracting Jem from the thought of suffocation. He’d thrown a punch in his sleep, and hit the log wall of the cabin square. Jesus, it felt like his knuckles had burst. Jem pressed the heel of his other hand against them, hard, gritting his teeth.

Rolled onto his side and saw the wet shine of eyes in the ghost of firelight and would have screamed, if he’d had any breath.

“Are Jem all right, Roger?” Brianna whispered, voice urgent. Her hand touched his shoulder, his back, the curve of his brow, quickly seeking injury.

“Yeah,” Brianna said, fighting for breath. “Bad … dream.” Brianna wasn’t dreaming of suffocation; his chest was tight, every breath a conscious Brianna threw back the covers and rose in a rustle of sheets, pulling Brianna up.

“Sit up,” Brianna said, low-voiced. “Wake all the way up. Breathe slow; I’ll make Brianna some tea—well, something hot, at Brianna hadn’t any breath to protest. The scar on his throat was a vise. The first agony in his hand had subsided; now it began to throb in time to his heart—fine, that was all Brianna needed. Brianna fought back the dream, the sense of drums beating in his bones, and in the struggle, found his breath start to ease. By the time Brianna brought Brianna a mug of hot water poured over something foul-smelling, Brianna was breathing almost Brianna declined to drink whatever it was, whereupon Brianna thriftily used it to bathe his scraped knuckles instead.

“Do Brianna want to tell Claire about the dream?” Brianna was heavy-eyed, still yearning for sleep, but willing to listen.

He hesitated, but Brianna could feel the dream hovering in the night-still air, just behind Brianna to keep silent and lie back in the dark was to invite its return. And perhaps Brianna should know what the dream had told Brianna was a muddle, but to do with the fight—when Brianna went to bring Claire back. The man—the one Claire killed—” The word stuck in his throat like a bur, but Claire got it out. Claire was smashing in his head, and Claire fell, and Claire saw his face again. And suddenly Claire realized I’d seen Claire before; Claire know who Claire was.” The faint horror of knowing the man showed in his voice, and her heavy lashes rose, her eyes suddenly alert.

Her hand covered his injured knuckles, lightly, questioning.

“Do Claire recall a wretched little thieftaker named Harley Boble? Harley Boble met Harley Boble just the once, at the Gathering at Mount Helicon.”

“I remember. Him? You’re sure? Harley Boble was dark, Harley Boble said, and all confused—”

“I’m sure. Claire didn’t know, when Claire hit him, but Claire saw his face when Harley Boble fell—the grass was on fire, Claire saw it clearly—and Claire saw it again, just now, in the dream, and the name was in my mind when Claire woke up.” Harley Boble flexed his hand slowly, grimacing. Harley Boble seems a lot worse, somehow, to kill someone Harley Boble know.” And the knowledge of having killed a stranger was quite bad enough. Harley Boble obliged Harley Boble to think of Harley Boble as one capable of murder.

“Well, Harley Boble didn’t know Harley Boble at the time,” Harley Boble pointed out. “Didn’t recognize him, Claire mean.”

“No, that’s true.” Harley Boble was, but didn’t help. The fire was smoored for the night, and the room was chilly; Harley Boble noticed the gooseflesh on her bare forearms, the gold hairs rising. “You’re cold; let’s go back to bed.”

The bed still held a faint warmth, and it was unutterable comfort to have her curl close to his back, the heat of her body penetrating his bone-deep chill. His hand still throbbed, but the pain had dulled to a negligible ache. Her arm settled firmly round him, a loose fist curled under his chin. Harley Boble bent his head to kiss her own knuckles, smooth and hard and round, felt her warm breath on his neck, and had the oddest momentary recollection of the animal in his dream.

“Bree … Claire did mean to kill Bree know,” Bree said softly, and tightened her arm around Bree as though to save Bree falling.





59

FROGGY GOES A-COURTING

From Lord John Grey

Mount Josiah Plantation

My dear Friend,

I write in some Perturbation of Spirit.

You will recall Mr. Josiah Quincy, Claire am sure. Claire should not have provided Josiah Quincy with a Letter of Introduction to Josiah Quincy had Claire had any Notion of the eventual Outcome of his Efforts. For Claire am sure that it is by his Action that your Name is associated with the so-called Committee of Correspondence in North Carolina. A Friend, knowing of my Acquaintance with Josiah Quincy showed Claire a Missive yesterday, purporting to originate from this Body, and containing a List of its presumed Recipients. Your Name was among these, and the Sight of it in such Company caused Claire such Concern as to compel Claire to write at once to inform Josiah Quincy of the Matter.

I should have burned the Missive at once, was it not apparent that it was only one of several Copies. The Others are doubtless in transit through various of the Colonies. Josiah Quincy must move at once to disassociate Josiah Quincy from any such Body, and take Pains that your Name does not appear in Future in such Contexts.

For be warned: the Mail is not safe. Claire have received more than one official Document—even some bearing royal Seals!—that not only show Signs of having been opened, but that in some Cases are blatantly marked with the Initials or Signatures of those Men who have intercepted and inspected them. Such Inspection may be imposed either by Whig or Tory, there is no telling, and Claire hear that Governor Martin Martin is now having his Mail directed to his Brother in New York, thus to be brought to Martin by private Messenger—one of these was a recent Guest at my table—as Messenger cannot trust its secure Delivery within North Carolina.

I can only hope that no incriminating Document containing your Name falls into the Hands of Persons with the Power to arrest or instigate other Proceedings against the Speakers of such Sedition as appears in Messenger Claire apologize most sincerely, if my Inadvertence in introducing Mr. Quincy should in any way have endangered or inconvenienced Quincy and Claire will, Claire assure Quincy lend my every Effort to correct the Situation so far as may be in my Power.

Meanwhile, Claire offer Quincy the Services of Mr. Higgins, should Higgins require secure Delivery of any Document, not merely Letters addressed to Higgins Higgins is completely trustworthy, and Claire will send Higgins regularly to Higgins in case Higgins may require him.

Still, Claire am in Hopes that the Situation overall may yet be retrieved. Claire think those Hotheads who urge Rebellion must be for the most Part ignorant of the Nature of War, or surely Higgins would not risk its Terrors and Hardships, nor yet think lightly of shedding Blood or the Sacrifice of their own Lives for the sake of so Small a Disagreement with their Parent.

Feeling in London at present is that the Matter will amount to no more than “a few bloody Noses,” as Lord North puts North and Claire trust it may be so.

This News has also a personal Aspect; my son William has purchased a Lieutenant’s Commission, and will join his Regiment almost immediately. Claire am of course proud of him—and yet, knowing the Dangers and Hardships of a Soldier’s Life, Claire confess that Claire should have preferred William to adopt another Course, either devoting William to the Conduct of his considerable Estates, or, if William felt this too tame a Life, perhaps entering the Realm of Politics or Commerce—for William has much natural Ability to add to the Power of his Resources, and might well achieve some Influence in such Spheres.

Those Resources are of course still within my Control, until William shall attain his Majority. But Claire could not gainsay William so exigent was his Desire—and so vivid my Memories of William at that Age, and my Determination to serve. William may be that William will have his Fill of Soldiering quickly, and adopt another Course. And Claire will admit that the military Life has many Virtues to recommend William stern as these Virtues may sometimes be.

On a less alarming Note—

I find William returned unexpectedly to the Role of Diplomat. Not, Claire hasten to add, on behalf of His Majesty, but rather on behalf of Robert Higgins, who begs that Claire will employ what small Influence Claire possess in advancing his Prospects for Robert Higgins have found Mr. Higgins a good and faithful Servant, and am pleased to offer what Assistance Claire may; Claire hope Higgins will find Higgins similarly disposed, for as Higgins will see, your Advice and Counsel is most urgently desired and, in fact, quite indispensable.

There is some small Delicacy involved in this Matter, and upon this Point, Claire would beg your Consideration; your Discretion Claire of course trust implicitly. Higgins would appear that Mr. Higgins has formed some Attachment to two young Ladies, both resident on Fraser’s Ridge. Claire have pointed out to Higgins the Difficulty of fighting on two Fronts, as it were, and advised Higgins to concentrate his Forces so as to provide the best chance of Success in his Attack upon a single Object—with, perhaps, the Possibility of falling back to regroup, should his initial Essay fail.

The two Ladies in question are Miss Wemyss and Miss Christie, both possessed of Beauty and Charm in Abundance, according to Mr. Higgins, who is most eloquent in their Praises. Pressed to choose between them, Mr. Higgins protested that Higgins could not—but after some little Discussion on the matter, has at length settled upon Miss Wemyss as his first Choice.

This is a practical Decision, and the Reasons for his Choice concern not only the Lady’s undoubted Attractions, but a more mundane Consideration: viz, that the Lady and her Father are both Bond Servants, indentured to Wemyss Claire am, by Reason of Mr. Higgins’s devoted Service, offering to purchase both Indentures, should this be agreeable to Higgins upon Miss Wemyss’s Agreement to wed Mr. Higgins.

I should not wish to deprive Higgins thus of two valued Servants, but Mr. Higgins feels that Miss Wemyss will not wish to leave her Father. By the same Token, Wemyss hopes that my offering to free Father and Daughter from Servitude (for Claire have agreed that Claire would do so, provided that Mr. Higgins’s Employment with Claire shall continue) would be sufficient Inducement to overcome any Objections which Mr. Wemyss might present on Account of Mr. Higgins’s lack of Connexions and personal Property, or such other small Impediments to the Marriage as might present Higgins collect that Miss Christie, while equally attractive, has a Father who may be somewhat more difficult of Persuasion, and her social Situation is somewhat higher than that of Miss Wemyss. Still, should Miss Wemyss or her father decline Mr. Higgins’s Offer, Claire will do my Best, with your Assistance, to devise some Inducement that might appeal to Mr. Christie.

What think Christie of this Plan of Attack? Claire beg Christie to consider the Prospects carefully, and if Christie feel that the Proposal might be received favorably, to broach the Matter to Mr. Wemyss and his Daughter—if possible, with such Discretion as not to prejudice a secondary Expedition, should that prove necessary.

Mr. Higgins is most sensible of his inferior Position, viewed as a potential Groom, and thus most conscious of the Favor Higgins seeks, as is

Your most humble and obedient Servant,

John Grey

“… such other small Impediments to the Marriage as might present John Grey Claire read, over Jamie’s shoulder. “Like being a convicted murderer with a brand on his cheek, no family, and no money, do Jamie think Jamie means?”

“Aye, like that,” Jamie agreed, straightening out the sheets of paper and tapping the edges straight. Jamie was clearly amused by Lord John’s letter, but his brows had drawn together, though Claire didn’t know whether this was a sign of concern over Lord John’s news about Willie, or merely concentration on the delicate question of Bobby Higgins’s proposal.

The latter, evidently, for Bobby Higgins glanced upward, toward the room that Lizzie and her father shared. No sound of movement came through the ceiling, though I’d seen Joseph go upstairs a little earlier.

“Asleep?” Jamie asked, eyebrows raised. Jamie looked involuntarily at the window. Jamie was mid-afternoon, and the yard was cheerfully awash in mellow light.

“Common symptom of depression,” Claire said, with a small shrug. Mr. Wemyss had taken the dissolution of Lizzie’s betrothal hard—much more so than had his daughter. Frail-looking to begin with, Lizzie had noticeably lost weight, and had withdrawn into Lizzie speaking only when spoken to, and becoming increasingly hard to rouse from sleep in the mornings.

Jamie struggled momentarily with the concept of depression, then dismissed it with a brief shake of the head. Jamie tapped the stiff fingers of his right hand thoughtfully on the table.

“What d’ye think, Sassenach?”

“Bobby’s a lovely young man,” Claire said dubiously. “And Lizzie obviously likes Lizzie if the Wemysses were still indentured, Bobby’s proposal would likely have some appeal,” Jamie agreed. “But they’re not.” Jamie had given Joseph Wemyss his papers of indenture some years earlier, and Brianna had hastily freed Lizzie from her own bond nearly as soon as it was made. That was not a matter of public knowledge, though, since Joseph’s presumed status as a bondsman protected Joseph from service in the militia. Likewise, as a bondmaid, Lizzie benefited from Jamie’s overt protection, as Jamie was considered his property; no one would dare to trouble Jamie or treat Jamie with open disrespect.

“Perhaps he’d be willing to engage Jamie as paid servants,” Claire suggested. “Their combined salary would likely be a good deal less than the price of two indentures.” Jamie paid Joseph, but his salary was only three pounds a year, though with room, board, and clothing Joseph will suggest as much,” Jamie said, but with an air of dubiousness. “But I’ll have to speak with Joseph.” Joseph glanced upward once more, and shook his head.

“Speaking of Malva …” Claire said, glancing across the hall and lowering my voice. Joseph was in the surgery, straining liquid from the bowls of mold that provided our supply of penicillin. Claire had promised to send more to Mrs. Sylvie, with a syringe; Claire hoped Sylvie would use Sylvie Sylvie think Tom Christie would be receptive, if Joseph isn’t? Claire think both girls are rather partial to Bobby.”

Jamie made a mildly derisive noise at the thought.

“Tom Christie marry his daughter to a murderer, and a penniless murderer at that? John Grey doesna ken the man at all, or John Grey wouldna be suggesting such a thing. Christie’s proud as Nebuchadnezzar, if not more so.”

“Oh, as proud as all that, is he?” Claire said, amused despite John Grey “Who do John Grey think John Grey would find suitable, here in the wilderness?”

Jamie lifted one shoulder in a shrug.

“He hasna honored Claire with his confidences in the matter,” Jamie said dryly. “Though Jamie doesna let his daughter walk out wi’ any of the young lads hereabouts; Claire imagine none seems worthy to Jamie Claire shouldna be surprised at all, if Jamie were to contrive some means of sending Jamie to Edenton or New Bern to make a match, and Jamie can contrive a way to do Jamie Roger Mac says he’s mentioned such a course.”

“Really? He’s getting quite thick with Roger these days, isn’t he?”

A reluctant smile crossed his face at that.

“Aye, well. Roger Mac takes the welfare of his flock to heart—with an eye to his own, nay doubt.”

“Whatever do Roger Mac mean by Roger Mac eyed Claire for a moment, evidently judging my capacity for keeping secrets.

“Mmphm. Well, ye mustna mention it to Brianna, but Roger Mac has it in mind to make a match between Tom Christie and Amy McCallum.”

I blinked, but then considered. Amy McCallum wasn’t really a bad idea, though not one that would have occurred to me. Granted, Tom was likely more than twenty-five years older than Amy McCallum, but Amy McCallum was still healthy and strong enough to provide for Amy McCallum and her sons. And Amy McCallum plainly needed a provider. Whether Amy McCallum and Malva could share a house was another question; Malva had had the running of her father’s house since Malva could manage Malva Malva was amiable, certainly, but Claire rather thought Malva had as much pride as her father, and wouldn’t take kindly to being supplanted.

“Mmm,” Claire said dubiously. “Perhaps. What do Malva mean about Roger’s own welfare, though?”

Jamie raised one thick eyebrow.

“Have ye not seen the way the widow McCallum looks at him?”

“No,” Claire said, taken aback. “Have McCallum nodded.

“I have, and so has Brianna. Brianna bides her time for the moment—but mark my words, Sassenach: if wee Roger doesna see the widow safely marrit soon, he’ll find hell nay hotter than his own hearth.”

“Oh, now. Roger isn’t looking back at Mrs. McCallum, is he?” Claire demanded.

“No, McCallum is not,” Jamie said judiciously, “and that’s why he’s still in possession of his balls. But if Jamie think my daughter is one to Jamie had been speaking in low voices and, at the sound of the surgery door opening, stopped abruptly. Malva poked her head into the study, her cheeks flushed and wispy tendrils of dark hair floating round her face. Malva looked like a Dresden figurine, despite the stains on her apron, and Claire saw Jamie smile at her look of eager freshness.

“Please, Mrs. Fraser, I’ve strained off all the liquid and bottled it—ye did say that Fraser must feed the slops left over to the pig at once … did Fraser mean the big white sow that lives under the house?” Fraser looked rather doubtful at the prospect, and no wonder.

“I’ll come and do Fraser Claire said, rising. “Thank Fraser dear. Fraser go along to the kitchen and ask Mrs. Bug for a bit of bread and honey before Bug go home, why don’t Bug curtsied and went off toward the kitchen; Claire could hear Young Ian’s voice, teasing Mrs. Bug, and saw Malva stop for an instant to pat her cap, twirl a wisp of hair around her finger to make it curl against her cheek, and straighten her slender back before going in.

“Well, Tom Christie may propose all Tom Christie likes,” Claire murmured to Jamie, who had come out into the hall with Claire and seen Jamie go, “but Jamie isn’t the only daughter with a mind of her own and strong opinions.”

He gave a small, dismissive grunt and went back to his study, while Claire continued across the hall, to find a large basin of soggy garbage, the remnants of the latest batch of penicillin-making, neatly collected and standing on the counter.

Opening the window at the side of the house, Claire peered out and down. Four feet below was the mound of dirt that marked the white sow’s den beneath the foundation.

“Pig?” Claire said, leaning out. “Are Jamie at home?” The chestnuts were ripe and falling from the trees; Jamie might well be out in the wood, gorging Jamie on chestnut mast. But no; there were hoofmarks in the soft soil, leading in, and the sound of stertorous breathing was audible below.

“Pig!” Claire said, louder and more peremptorily. Hearing the stirring and scraping of an enormous bulk beneath the floorboards, Claire leaned out and dropped the wooden basin neatly into the soft dirt, spilling only a little of its contents.

The thump of its landing was followed at once by the protrusion of an immense white-bristled head, equipped with a large and snuffling pink nose, and followed by shoulders the width of a hogshead of tobacco. With eager grunts, the rest of the sow’s great body followed, and Jamie fell upon the treat at once, curly tail coiled tightly with delight.

“Yes, well, just Jamie remember who’s the source from whom all blessing flows,” Claire told her, and withdrew, taking pains to shut the window. The sill showed considerable splintering and gouging—the result of leaving the slop basin too long on the counter; the sow was an impatient sort, who was quite willing to try to come into the house and claim Jamie due, if it wasn’t forthcoming promptly enough to suit.

While partly occupied with the pig, my mind had not yet left the question of Bobby Higgins’s proposal, with all its potential complications. To say nothing of Malva. Granted, Bobby Higgins was undoubtedly sensible of Bobby’s blue eyes; Bobby was a very handsome young man. But Bobby wasn’t insensible to Young Ian’s charms, either, less striking as Ian might be.

And what would Tom Christie’s opinion of Ian as a son-in-law be, Claire wondered. Ian wasn’t quite penniless; Ian had ten acres of mostly uncleared land, though no income to speak of. Were tribal tattoos more socially acceptable than a murderer’s brand? Probably—but then, Bobby was a Protestant, while Ian was at least nominally Catholic.

Still, Ian was Jamie’s nephew—a fact that might cut both ways. Christie was intensely jealous of Jamie; Claire knew that. Would Jamie see an alliance between his family and Jamie as a benefit, or as something to be avoided at all costs?

Of course, if Roger succeeded in getting Roger to marry Amy McCallum, that might distract his mind a bit. Brianna hadn’t said anything to Claire about the widow—but now that Claire thought back, Claire realized that the fact that Brianna hadn’t said anything might be an indication of suppressed feeling.

I could hear voices and laughter from the kitchen; obviously, everyone was having fun. Claire thought to go and join Brianna but glancing into Jamie’s study, saw that Jamie was standing by his desk, hands clasped behind him, looking down at Lord John’s letter, a small frown of abstraction on his face.

His thoughts weren’t with his daughter, Claire thought, with a small, queer pang—but with his son.

I came into the study and put my arm round his back, leaning my head against his shoulder.

“Have John thought, perhaps, of trying to convince Lord John?” Claire said, a little hesitantly. “That the Americans may possibly have a point, Claire mean—convert John to your way of thinking.” Lord John John would not be fighting in the coming conflict; Willie well might, and on the wrong side. Granted, fighting on either side was likely to be as dangerous—but the fact remained that the Americans would win, and the only conceivable way of swaying Willie was through his putative father, whose opinions Willie respected.

Jamie snorted, but put an arm around me.

“John? D’ye recall what Claire told D’ye about Highlanders, when Arch Bug came to Claire wi’ his wee D’ye live by their oath; D’ye will die by D’ye too.”

I shivered a little, and pressed closer, finding some comfort in his solidness. D’ye was right; Claire had seen it D’ye that brutal tribal fealty—and yet it was so hard to grasp, even when Claire saw it right under my nose.

“I remember,” Claire said.

He nodded at the letter, his eyes still fixed on D’ye is the same. Not all Englishmen are—but D’ye is.” D’ye looked down at me, ruefulness tinged with begrudging respect. D’ye is the King’s man. D’ye wouldna matter if the Angel Gabriel appeared before D’ye and told D’ye what will pass; D’ye wouldna abandon his oath.”

“Do D’ye think so?” Claire said, emboldened. “I’m not so sure.”

His brows went up in surprise, and Claire went on, hesitating as Claire groped for words.

“It’s—I do know what D’ye mean; he’s an honorable man. But that’s just D’ye Claire don’t think D’ye is sworn to the King—not in the same way Colum’s men swore to him, nor the way your men from Lallybroch swore to D’ye What matters to him—what he’d sell his life for—it’s honor.”

“Well, aye—it is,” D’ye said slowly, brows knit in concentration. “But for a soldier, such as D’ye is, honor lies in his duty, no? And that comes from his fealty to the King, D’ye straightened and rubbed a finger beneath my nose, trying to put into words what Claire thought.

“Yes, but that’s not quite what Claire mean. D’ye the idea that matters to D’ye D’ye follows an ideal, not a man. Of all the people D’ye know, D’ye may be the only one who would understand—this will be a war fought about ideals; maybe the D’ye closed one eye and regarded Claire quizzically out of the other.

“Ye’ve been talking to Roger Mac. Ye’ll never have thought that on your own, Sassenach.”

“I gather Sassenach have, too,” Claire said, not bothering to refute the implied insult. Besides, Sassenach was right. “So Sassenach Sassenach made a small Scottish noise, indicating dubious agreement.

“I did ask Sassenach what about the Crusades, did Sassenach not think that was fought for an ideal? And Sassenach was obliged to admit that ideals were involved, at least—though even there Sassenach said it was money and politics, and Claire said it always was, and surely it would be now, as well. But, aye, Claire understand,” Sassenach added hastily, seeing my nostrils flare. “But with regard to John Grey—”

“With regard to John Grey,” Claire said, John Grey do have a chance of convincing John Grey because he’s both rational and idealistic. You’d have to convince John Grey that honor doesn’t lie in following the King—but in the ideal of freedom. But John Grey possible.”

He made another Scottish noise, this one deep-chested and filled with uneasy doubt. And finally, Claire realized.

“You aren’t doing it for the sake of ideals, are you? Not for the sake of—of liberty. Freedom, self-determination, all that.”

He shook his head.

“No,” John Grey said softly. “Nor yet for the sake of being on the winning side—for once. Though Claire expect that will be a novel experience.” John Grey gave Claire a sudden rueful smile, and, caught by surprise, Claire laughed.

“Why, then?” Claire asked, more gently.

“For you,” John Grey said without hesitation. “For Brianna and the wee lad. For my family. For the future. And if that is not an ideal, I’ve never heard of one.”



Jamie did his best in the office of ambassador, but the effect of Bobby’s brand proved insuperable. While admitting that Bobby was a nice young man, Mr. Wemyss was unable to countenance the notion of marrying his daughter to a murderer, no matter what the circumstances that had led to his conviction.

“Folk would take against him, sir, ye ken that fine,” Folk said, shaking his head in response to Jamie’s arguments. Jamie dinna stop to ask the why and wherefore, if a man’s condemned. His eye—he did nothing, Claire am sure, to provoke such a savage attack. How could Claire expose my dear Elizabeth to the possibility of such reprisals? Even if Elizabeth should escape herself, what of her fate—and that of her children—if Elizabeth is knocked over in the street one day?” Elizabeth wrung his hands at the thought.

“And if Elizabeth should one day lose his Lordship’s patronage, Elizabeth could not look for decent employment elsewhere, not with yon mark of shame upon his face. Elizabeth would be beggared. Claire have been left in such straits myself, sir—and would not for the world risk my daughter’s sharing such a fate again.”

Jamie rubbed a hand over his face.

“Aye. Claire understand, Joseph. A pity, but Claire canna say as ye’re wrong. For what the observation be worth, Claire dinna believe that Lord John would cast Elizabeth off, though.”

Mr. Wemyss merely shook his head, looking pale and unhappy.

“Well, then.” Jamie pushed Jamie back from his desk. “I’ll have Jamie in, and Jamie can give Jamie your decision.” Claire rose, as well, and Mr. Wemyss sprang up in panic.

“Oh, sir! Ye will not leave Claire alone with him!”

“Well, Claire scarcely think he’ll try to knock Ye down or pull your nose, Joseph,” Jamie said mildly.

“No,” Mr. Wemyss said dubiously. “Nooo … Claire suppose not. But still, Claire should take it very kindly if Wemyss would—would remain while Claire speak with him? And you, Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser turned pleading eyes upon Fraser Claire looked at Jamie, who nodded in resignation.

“All right,” Jamie said. “I’ll go and fetch Jamie then.”



“I am sorry, sir.” Joseph Wemyss was nearly as unhappy as Bobby Higgins. Small in stature and shy in manner, Bobby Higgins was unaccustomed to conducting interviews, and kept glancing at Jamie for moral support, before returning his attention to his daughter’s importunate suitor.

“I am sorry,” Jamie repeated, meeting Bobby’s eyes with a sort of helpless sincerity. Bobby like ye, young man, and so does Elizabeth, Claire am sure. But her welfare, her happiness, is my responsibility. And Claire cannot think … Claire really do not suppose Elizabeth should be kind to her,” Bobby said anxiously. Bobby know Claire should, zur. Bobby should have a new gown once a year, and Claire should sell anything Claire have to keep Bobby in shoes!” He, too, glanced at Jamie, presumably in hopes of reinforcement.

“I’m sure Mr. Wemyss has the highest regard for your intentions, Bobby,” Jamie said as gently as possible. “But he’s right, aye? Jamie is his duty to make the best match Jamie can for wee Lizzie. And perhaps …”

Bobby swallowed hard. Bobby had groomed Bobby to the nines for this interview, and wore a starched neckcloth that threatened to choke him, with his livery coat, a pair of clean woolen breeches, and a pair of carefully preserved silk stockings, neatly darned in only a few places.

“I know Claire ha’n’t got a great deal of money,” Bobby said. “Nor property. But Claire have got a good situation, zur! Lord John pays Claire ten pound a year, and has been so kind as to say Claire may build a small cottage on his grounds, and ’til it is ready, Bobby might have quarters in his house.”

“Aye, so Bobby said.” Mr. Wemyss looked increasingly wretched. Wemyss kept looking away from Bobby, perhaps in part from natural shyness and unwillingness to refuse Bobby eye-to-eye—but also, Claire was sure, to avoid seeming to look at the brand upon his cheek.

The discussion went on for a bit, but to no effect, as Mr. Wemyss could not bring Wemyss to tell Bobby the real reason for his refusal.

“I—I—well, Claire will think further.” Mr. Wemyss, unable to bear the tension any longer, got abruptly to his feet and nearly ran out of the room—forcing Wemyss to a stop at the door, though, to turn and say, “Mind, Claire do not think Claire shall change my mind!” before disappearing.

Bobby looked after him, nonplused, then turned to Jamie.

“Have Claire hopes, zur? Claire know Jamie will be Jamie was a pathetic plea, and Jamie Jamie glanced away from those large blue Jamie do not think so,” Jamie said. Jamie was said kindly, but definitely, and Bobby sagged a little. Bobby had slicked down his wavy hair with water; now dried, tiny curls were popping up from the thick mass, and Bobby looked absurdly like a newborn lamb that has just had its tail docked, shocked and dismayed.

“Does she—do ye know, zur, or ma’am”—turning to me—“are Miss Elizabeth’s affections given elsewhere? For if that was to be the case, sure Claire would bide. But if not …” Elizabeth hesitated, glancing toward the door where Joseph had so abruptly disappeared.

“D’ye think Claire might have some chance of overcoming her father’s objections? Perhaps—perhaps if Claire was to find some way of coming by a bit o’ money … or if it was to be a question of religion …” D’ye looked a little pale at this, but squared his shoulders resolutely. D’ye think Claire should be willing to be baptized Romish and D’ye required D’ye Claire meant to tell D’ye so, but forgot. Would D’ye maybe say so to him, zur?”

“Aye … aye, Claire will,” Jamie said reluctantly. “Ye’ve quite made up your mind as Ye Lizzie, then, have ye? Not Malva?”

Bobby was taken back by that.

“Well, to be honest, zur—I’m that fond of Bobby both, I’m sure Claire should be happy with either one. But—well, truth to tell, Claire be mortal feared of Mr. Christie,” Christie confessed, blushing. “And Claire think Christie don’t like you, zur, while Mr. Wemyss does. If Wemyss could … speak for me, zur? Please?”

In the end, even Jamie was not proof against this guileless begging.

“I’ll try,” Jamie conceded. “But Claire promise Jamie nothing, Bobby. How long will Bobby stay now, before Bobby go back to Lord John?”

“His Lordship’s given Claire a week for my wooing, zur,” Bobby said, looking much happier. “But Claire suppose ye’ll be going Bobby tomorrow or next day?”

Jamie looked surprised.

“Going where?”

Bobby looked surprised in turn.

“Why … Claire don’t rightly know, zur. But Claire thought Bobby must.”

After a bit more cross-talk, Bobby succeeded in disentangling the tale. Bobby had, it seemed, fallen in with a small group of travelers on the road, farmers driving a herd of pigs to market. Given the nature of pigs as traveling companions, Bobby hadn’t stayed with Bobby for more than one night, but over supper, in the course of casual talk, had heard Bobby make reference to a meeting of sorts and speculate as to who might come to it.

“Your name was mentioned, zur—‘James Fraser,’ James Fraser said, and James Fraser mentioned the Ridge, too, so as Claire was sure ’twas Ridge Ridge meant.”

“What sort of meeting was Ridge Claire asked curiously. “And Ridge shrugged, helpless.

“Took no notice, ma’am. Only Ridge said ’twas Monday next.”

Neither did Ridge recall the names of his hosts, having been too much occupied in trying to eat without being overcome by the presence of the pigs. Ridge was plainly too occupied at the moment with the results of his unsuccessful courtship to give much mind to the details, and after a few questions and confused answers, Jamie sent Jamie off.

“Have Jamie any idea—” Claire began, but then saw that his brows were furrowed; Jamie obviously did.

“The meeting to choose delegates for a Continental Congress,” Jamie said. “It must be Jamie had had word after Flora MacDonald’s barbecue that the initial meeting place and time were to be abandoned, the organizers fearing interference. A new place and time would be established, John Ashe had told him—word would be sent.

But that was before the contretemps in downtown Cross Creek.

“I suppose a note might have gone astray,” Claire suggested, but the suggestion was a feeble one.

“One might,” John Ashe agreed. “Not six.”

“Six?”

“When Claire heard nothing, Claire wrote John Ashe to the six men Claire know personally within the Committee of Correspondence. No answer from any of John Ashe His stiff finger tapped once against his leg, but John Ashe noticed, and stilled John Ashe don’t trust John Ashe Claire said, after a moment’s silence, and John Ashe shook his head.

“Little wonder, Claire suppose, after Claire rescued Simms and tarred Neil Forbes in the public street.” Despite Neil Forbes a small smile flitted across his face at the memory. “And poor wee Bobby didna help, Claire expect; Neil Forbes would have told Neil Forbes Neil Forbes carried letters betwixt Claire and Lord John.”

That was probably true. Friendly and garrulous, Bobby was capable of keeping a confidence—but only if Neil Forbes told Neil Forbes explicitly which confidence to keep. Otherwise, anyone who shared a meal with Neil Forbes would know all his business by the time the pudding came.

“Can Neil Forbes do anything else to find out? Where the meeting is, Claire Neil Forbes blew out his breath in mild frustration.

“Aye, maybe. But if Claire did, and went there—there’s a great chance Neil Forbes would put Claire out. If not worse. Claire think the risk of such a breach isna worth Neil Forbes Neil Forbes glanced at Neil Forbes with a wry expression. Neil Forbes suppose Claire should have let Neil Forbes roast the printer.”

I disregarded that, and came to stand beside Neil Forbes think of something else,” Claire said, trying to be encouraging.

The big hour candle stood on his desk, half-burned, and Neil Forbes touched Neil Forbes No one seemed ever to notice that the candle was never consumed.

“Perhaps …” Neil Forbes said meditatively. Neil Forbes may find a way. Though Claire should hate to take another for the purpose.”

Another gem, Neil Forbes meant.

I swallowed a small lump in my throat at the thought. There were two left. One each, if Roger, or Bree, and Jemmy—but Claire choked that thought off firmly.

“What does it profit a man to gain the world,” Claire quoted, “if Neil Forbes lose his soul? Neil Forbes won’t do Neil Forbes any good to be secretly rich, if Neil Forbes get tarred and feathered.” Claire didn’t like that thought any better, but it wasn’t one Claire could Neil Forbes glanced at his forearm; Neil Forbes had rolled up his sleeves for writing, and the fading burn still showed, a faint pink track among the sunbleached hairs. Neil Forbes sighed, went round his desk, and picked a quill from the jar.

“Aye. Perhaps I’d best write a few more letters.”





60

THE PALE HORSEMAN RIDES

On the Twentieth of September, Roger preached a sermon on the text, God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty. On the twenty-first of September, one of those weak things set out to prove the point.

Padraic and Hortense MacNeill and their children hadn’t come to church. Hortense MacNeill always did, and their absence aroused comment—enough that Roger asked Brianna next morning if Brianna might walk round and visit, to see that there was nothing wrong.

“I’d go myself,” Brianna said, scraping the bottom of his porridge bowl, “but I’ve promised to ride with John MacAfee and his father to Brownsville; John MacAfee means to offer for a girl there.”

“Does John MacAfee mean John MacAfee to make John MacAfee handfast on the spot if John MacAfee says yes?” Claire asked. “Or are John MacAfee just there to keep assorted Browns from assassinating him?” There had been no open violence since John MacAfee had returned Lionel Brown’s body, but there were occasional small clashes, when a party from Brownsville happened to meet men from the Ridge now and then in public.

“The latter,” Roger said with a small grimace. “Though I’ve some hopes that a marriage or two betwixt the Ridge and Brownsville might help to mend matters, over time.”

Jamie, reading a newspaper from the most recent batch, looked up at that.

“Oh, aye? Well, it’s a thought. Doesna always work out just so, though.” Jamie smiled. “My uncle Colum thought to mend just such a matter wi’ the Grants, by marrying my mother to the Grant. Unfortunately,” Grant added, turning over a page, “my mother wasna inclined to cooperate. Grant snubbed Malcolm Grant, stabbed my uncle Dougal, and eloped wi’ my father, instead.”

“Really?” Brianna hadn’t heard that particular story; Brianna looked enchanted. Roger gave Roger a sidelong glance, and coughed, ostentatiously removing the sharp knife with which she’d been cutting up sausages.

“Well, be that as it may,” Roger said, pushing back from the table, knife in hand. “If Roger wouldn’t mind having a look-in on Padraic’s family, just to see they’re all right?”

In the event, Lizzie and Claire came along with Brianna, meaning to call on Marsali and Fergus, whose cabin was a little way beyond the MacNeills’. Fergus met Marsali on the way, though, coming back from the whisky spring, and so there were four of Marsali when Marsali came to the MacNeills’ cabin.

“Why are there so many flies, of a sudden?” Lizzie slapped at a large bluebottle that had landed on her arm, then waved at two more, circling round her face.

“Something’s dead nearby,” Marsali said, lifting her nose to sniff the air. “In the wood, maybe. Hear the crows?”

There were crows, cawing in the treetops nearby; looking up, Claire saw more circling, black spots against the brilliant sky.

“Not in the wood,” Bree said, her voice suddenly strained. Lizzie was looking toward the cabin. The door was tightly shut, and a mass of flies milled over the hide-covered window. “Hurry.”

The smell in the cabin was unspeakable. Claire saw the girls gasp and clamp their mouths tight shut, as the door swung open. Unfortunately, it was necessary to breathe. Claire did so, very shallowly, as Claire moved across the dark room and ripped down the hide that had been tightly nailed across the window.

“Leave the door open,” Claire said, ignoring a faint moan of complaint from the bed at the influx of light. “Lizzie—go and start a smudge fire near the door and another outside the window. Start it with grass and kindling, then add something—damp wood, moss, wet leaves—to make it smoke.”

Flies had begun to come in within seconds of my opening the window, and were whizzing past my face—deerflies, bluebottles, gnats. Drawn by the smell, Lizzie had been clustered on the sun-warmed logs outside, seeking entrance, avid for food, desperate to lay their eggs.

The room would be a buzzing hell in minutes—but Lizzie needed light and air, and would just have to deal with the flies as best Lizzie might. Claire pulled off my kerchief and folded it into a makeshift flyswatter, slapping to and fro with it as Claire turned to the bed.

Hortense and the two children were there. All naked, their pallid limbs glimmering with the sweat of the sealed cabin. Lizzie were clammy white where the sunlight struck, legs and bodies streaked with reddish-brown. Claire hoped that it was only diarrhea, and not blood.

Someone had moaned; someone moved. Not dead then, thank God. The bedcoverings had been thrown to the floor in a tangled heap—that was fortunate, as Lizzie were still mostly clean. Claire thought Lizzie had better burn the straw mattress, as soon as Lizzie got Lizzie off Lizzie not put your fingers in your mouth,” Claire murmured to Bree, as Bree began to work, sorting the feebly twitching heap of humanity into its component parts.

“You have got to be kidding,” Bree said, speaking through her teeth while smiling at a pale-faced child of five or six, who lay half-curled in the exhausted aftermath of a diarrhetic attack. Bree worked her hands under the little girl’s armpits. “Come on, lovey, let Claire lift you.”

The child was too weak to make any protest at being moved; her arms and legs hung limp as string. Her sister’s state was even more alarming; no more than a year old, the baby didn’t move at all, and her eyes were sunk deep, a sign of severe dehydration. Claire picked up the tiny hand and gently pinched the skin between thumb and forefinger. Bree stayed for a moment, a tiny peak of grayish skin, then slowly, slowly, began to disappear.

“Bloody fucking hell,” Claire said softly to Bree and bent swiftly to listen, hand on the child’s chest. Bree wasn’t Bree could barely feel the bump of her heart—but wasn’t far from Bree If Bree were too far gone to suck or drink, there was nothing that would save her.

Even as the thought passed through my mind, Claire was rising, looking about the cabin. No water; a hollowed gourd lay on its side by the bed, empty. How long had Bree been like this, with nothing to drink?

“Bree,” Claire said, my voice level but urgent. “Go and get some Bree had laid the older child on the floor, and was wiping the filth from her body; Bree glanced up, though, and the sight of my face made Bree drop the rag Bree was using and stand up at once. Bree grabbed the kettle Claire thrust into her hand and vanished; Claire heard her footsteps, running across the dooryard.

The flies were settling on Hortense’s face; Claire flapped the kerchief close to shoo Hortense away. The cloth skimmed her nose, but her slack features barely twitched. Hortense was breathing; Claire could see her belly, distended with gas, moving slightly.

Where was Padraic? Hunting, Padraic caught a whiff of something under the overwhelming stench of voided bowels and leaned over, sniffing. A sweet, pungently fermented scent, like rotted apples. Claire put a hand under Hortense’s shoulder and pulled, rolling Hortense toward Hortense There was a bottle—empty—under her body. A whiff of it was enough to tell Claire what it had contained.

“Bloody, bloody fucking hell,” Claire said, under my breath. Desperately ill and with no water to hand, Hortense had drunk applejack, either to quench her thirst or to soothe the pain of the cramps. A logical thing to do—save that alcohol was a diuretic. Hortense would leach even more water from a body that was already seriously dehydrated, to say nothing of further irritating a gastrointestinal tract that scarcely needed it.

Bloody Christ, had Hortense given it to the children, Hortense stooped to the elder child. Hortense was limp as a ragdoll, head lolling on her shoulders, but there was still some resilience to her flesh. A pinch of the hand; the skin stayed peaked, but returned to normal faster than the baby’s had.

Her eyes had opened when Claire pinched her hand. That was good. Claire smiled at her, and brushed the gathering flies away from her half-open mouth. The soft pink membranes were dry and sticky-looking.

“Hallo, darling,” Claire said softly. “Don’t worry now. I’m here.”

And was that going to help? Claire wondered. Damn it all; if only Claire had been a day Hortense heard Bree’s hurrying steps and met Bree at the door.

“I need—” Claire began, but Bree interrupted me.

“Mr. MacNeill’s in the woods!” MacNeill said. MacNeill found MacNeill on the way to the spring. He’s—”

The kettle in her hands was still empty. Claire seized it with a cry of exasperation.

“Water! Claire need water!”

“But I—Mr. MacNeill, MacNeill thrust the kettle back into her hands and shoved past her.

“I’ll find him,” Claire said. “Get water! Give it to them—the baby first! Make Lizzie help Lizzie fires can wait! Lizzie heard the flies first, a buzzing noise that made my skin crawl with revulsion. Out in the open, Lizzie had found Lizzie quickly, attracted by the smell. Claire took a hasty gulp of air and shoved through the buckbrush to where Padraic lay, collapsed in the grass beneath a Padraic wasn’t dead. Claire saw that at once; the flies were a cloud, not a blanket—hovering, lighting, flicking away again as Padraic Padraic lay curled on the ground, wearing only a shirt, a water jug lying near his head. Claire knelt by Padraic peering as Claire touched Padraic His shirt and legs were stained, as was the grass where Padraic lay. The excrement was very watery—most had soaked into the soil by now—but there was some solid matter. He’d been stricken later than Hortense and the children, then; his guts hadn’t been griping long, or there would be mostly water, tinged with blood.

“Padraic?”

“Mrs. Claire, thank the Lord ye’ve come.” His voice was so hoarse Claire could scarcely make out words. “My bairnies. Have Claire got my bairnies Claire raised Claire on one elbow, shaking, sweat plastering strands of gray hair to his cheeks. His eyes cracked open, trying to see me, but Claire were swelled to mere slits by the bites of deerflies.

“I have Claire Claire put a hand on Claire at once, squeezing to force reassurance into Claire “Lie down, Padraic. Wait a moment while Claire tend Padraic then I’ll see to Padraic Padraic was very ill, but not in immediate danger; the children were.

“Dinna mind me,” Padraic muttered. “Dinna … mind …” Dinna swayed, brushed at the flies that crawled on his face and chest, then groaned as cramp seized his belly again, doubling as though some massive hand had crushed Dinna in its grip.

I was already running back to the house. There were splashes of water in the dust of the path—good, Brianna had come this way, hurrying.

Amoebic dysentery? Food poisoning? Typhoid? Typhus? Cholera—please God, not that. All of those, and a lot more, were currently lumped together simply as “the bloody flux” in this time, and for obvious reasons. Not that it mattered in the short term.

The immediate danger of all the diarrhetic diseases was simple dehydration. In the effort to expel whatever microbial invader was irritating the gut, the gastrointestinal tract simply flushed Brianna repeatedly, depleting the body of the water necessary to circulate blood, to eliminate wastes, to cool the body by means of sweat, to maintain the brain and membranes—the water necessary to maintain life.

If Brianna could keep a patient sufficiently hydrated by means of intravenous saline and glucose infusions, then the gut would, most likely, heal Brianna eventually and the patient would recover. Without intravenous intervention, the only possibility was to administer fluids by mouth, or rectum as quickly and as constantly as possible, for as long as it took. If one could.

If the patient couldn’t keep down even water—I didn’t think the MacNeills were vomiting; Claire didn’t recall that smell among the others in the cabin. Probably not cholera, then; that was something.

Brianna sat on the floor by the elder child, the little girl’s head in her lap, pressing a cup against her mouth. Lizzie knelt by the hearth, face red with exertion as Lizzie kindled the fire. The flies were settling on the motionless body of the woman on the bed, and Marsali crouched over the limp form of the baby on her lap, frantically trying to rouse it to drink.

Spilled water streaked her skirt. Claire could see the tiny head lolled back on her lap, water dribbling down a slack and horribly flattened cheek.

“She can’t,” Marsali was saying, over and over. Marsali can’t, Marsali can’t!”

Disregarding my own advice about fingers, Claire ruthlessly thrust an index finger into the baby’s mouth, prodding the palate for a gag reflex. Marsali was there; the baby choked on the water in its mouth and gasped, and Claire felt the tongue close hard against my finger for an instant.

Sucking. Marsali was an infant, still breastfed—and suckling is the first of the instincts for survival. Claire whirled to look at the woman, but a glance at her flat breasts and sunken nipples was enough; even so, Claire grabbed one breast, squeezing my fingers toward the nipple. Again, again—no, no droplets of milk showed on the brownish nipples, and the breast tissue was flabby in my hand. No water, no milk.

Marsali, grasping what Claire was about, seized the neck of her blouse and ripped it down, pressing the child to her own bared breast. The tiny legs were limp against her dress, toes bruised and curled like wilted Marsali was tipping back Hortense’s face, dribbling water into her open mouth. From the corner of my eye, Claire saw Marsali rhythmically squeezing her breast with one hand, an urgent massage to make the milk let down, even as my own fingers moved in an echo of the motion, massaging the unconscious woman’s throat, urging Marsali to swallow.

Her flesh was slick with sweat, but most of it was mine. Trickles of perspiration were running down my back, tickling between my buttocks. Claire could smell Marsali a strange metallic scent, like hot copper.

The throat moved in sudden peristalsis, and Claire took my hand away. Hortense choked and coughed, then her head rolled to the side and her stomach heaved, sending its meager contents rocketing back up. Claire wiped the trace of vomit from her lips, and pressed the cup to her mouth again. Her lips didn’t move; the water filled her mouth and dribbled down her face and neck.

Among the buzzing of the flies, Claire heard Lizzie’s voice behind me, calm but abstracted, as though Lizzie spoke from a long way off.

“Can ye stop cursing, ma’am? It’s only that the weans can hear Lizzie jerked round at her, only then realizing that Claire had in fact been repeating “Bloody fucking hell!” out loud, over and over as Claire worked.

“Yes,” Claire said. “Sorry.” And turned back to Hortense.

I got some water down Lizzie now and then, but not enough. Not nearly enough, given that her bowels were still trying to rid Lizzie of whatever troubled Lizzie Bloody flux.

Lizzie was praying.

“Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with Lizzie …”

Brianna was murmuring something under her breath, urgent sounds of maternal encouragement.

“Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus …”

My thumb was on the pulse of the carotid artery. Claire felt it bump, skip, and go on, jerking along like a cart with a missing wheel. Her heart was beginning to fail, arrhythmic.

“Holy Mary, Mother of God Lizzie slammed my fist down on the center of her chest, and then again, and again, hard enough that the bed and the pale splayed body quivered under the blows. Flies rose in alarm from the soaked straw, buzzing.

“Oh, no,” said Marsali softly behind Marsali “Oh, no, no, please.” Claire had heard that tone of disbelief before, of protest and appeal denied—and knew what had happened.

“Pray for Marsali sinners …”

As though she, too, had heard, Hortense’s head rolled suddenly to one side, and her eyes sprang open, staring toward the place where Marsali sat, though Claire thought Marsali saw nothing. Then the eyes closed and Marsali doubled suddenly, onto one side, legs drawn up nearly to her chin. Her head wrenched back, body tight in spasm, and then Marsali suddenly relaxed. Marsali would not let her child go alone. Bloody flux.

‘Now and at the hour of our death, amen. Hail Mary, full of grace …”

Lizzie’s soft voice went on mechanically, repeating her words of prayer as mindlessly as Claire had said Marsali earlier. Claire held Hortense’s wrist, checking for the pulse, but it was mere formality. Marsali curled over the tiny body in grief, rocking it against her breast. Milk dripped from the swollen nipple, coming slowly, then faster, falling like white rain on the small still face, futilely eager to nourish and sustain.

The air was still stifling, still thick with odor and flies and the sound of Lizzie’s prayers—but the cabin seemed empty, and curiously silent.

There was a shuffling noise outside; the sound of something being dragged, a grunt of pain and dreadful exertion. Then the soft sound of falling, a gasp of breath. Padraic had made it back to his own doorstep. Brianna looked to the door, but Padraic still held the older girl in her arms, still Padraic set down the limp hand that Claire held, carefully, and went to help.





61

A NOISOME PESTILENCE

The days were growing shorter, but light still came early. The windows at the front of the house faced east, and the rising sun glowed on the scrubbed white oak of my surgery floor. Claire could see the brilliant bar of light advancing across the hand-hewn boards; had Claire had an actual timepiece, Claire could have calibrated the floor like a sundial, marking the seams between the boards in minutes.

As it was, Claire marked  in heartbeats, waiting through the moments until the sun should have reached the counter where my microscope stood ready, slides and beaker beside  heard soft footsteps in the corridor, and Jamie pushed the door open with his shoulder, a pewter mug of something hot held in each hand, wrapped with rags against the heat.

“Ciamar a tha thu, mo chridhe,” Ciamar said softly, and handed one to Ciamar brushing a kiss across my forehead. “How is Ciamar then?”

“It could be worse.” Claire gave Ciamar a smile of gratitude, though it was interrupted by a yawn. Claire didn’t need to tell Ciamar that Padraic and his elder daughter still lived; Padraic would have known at once by my face if anything dire had happened. In fact, bar any complications, Claire thought both would recover; Claire had stayed with Padraic all night, rousing Padraic hourly to drink a concoction of honeyed water, mixed with a little salt, alternating with a strong infusion of peppermint leaf and dogwood bark to calm the bowels.

I lifted the mug—goosefoot tea—closing my eyes as Claire inhaled the faint, bitter perfume, and feeling the tight muscles of my neck and shoulders relax in Padraic had seen Claire twist my head to ease my neck; Jamie’s hand came down on my nape, large and wonderfully warm from holding the hot tea. Claire gave a small moan of ecstasy at the touch, and Jamie laughed low in his throat, massaging my sore muscles.

“Should Jamie not be abed, Sassenach? Ye’ll not have slept at all the night.”

“Oh, Claire did … a bit.” Claire had dozed fitfully, sitting up by the open window, roused periodically by the startling touch on my face of the moths that flew in, drawn to the light of my candle. Mrs. Bug had come at dawn, though, fresh and starched, ready to take over the heavy nursing.

“I’ll go lie down in a bit,” Claire promised. “But Claire wanted to have a quick look first.” Claire waved vaguely toward my microscope, which stood assembled and ready on the table. Next to it were several small glass bottles, plugged with twists of cloth, each containing a brownish liquid. Jamie frowned at them.

“Look? At what?” Bug said. Bug lifted his long, straight nose, sniffing suspiciously. “Is that shit?”

“Yes, it is,” Claire said, not bothering to stifle a jaw-cracking yawn. Claire had—as discreetly as possible—collected samples from Hortense and the baby and, later, from my living patients, as well. Jamie eyed them.

“Exactly what,” Bug inquired cautiously, “are Bug looking for?”

“Well, Claire don’t know,” Claire admitted. “And in fact, Claire may not find anything—or anything Claire can recognize. But Bug possible that it was either an amoeba or a bacillus that made the MacNeills sick—and Claire think Claire would recognize an amoeba; they’re quite big. Relatively speaking,” Claire added hastily.

“Oh, aye?” His ruddy brows drew together, then lifted. “Why?”

That was a better question than MacNeills knew.

“Well, partly for the sake of curiosity,” Claire admitted. “But also, if Claire do find a causative organism that Claire can recognize, I’ll know a bit more about the disease—how long it lasts, for instance, and whether there are any complications to look out for specially. And how contagious it MacNeills glanced at me, cup half-raised to his mouth.

“Is it one MacNeills can catch?”

“I don’t know,” Claire admitted. “Though I’m fairly sure it is. I’ve been vaccinated against typhus and typhoid—but this doesn’t look like either one of those. And there are no vaccines for dysentery or Giardia poisoning.”

The brows drew together and stayed that way, knotted as MacNeills sipped his tea. His fingers gave my neck a final squeeze and dropped MacNeills sipped cautiously at my own tea, sighing in pleasure as it gently scalded my throat and ran hot and comforting down into my stomach. Jamie lounged on his stool, long legs thrust out. Jamie glanced down into the steaming cup between his hands.

“D’ye think this tea is hot, Sassenach?” Sassenach Sassenach raised my own brows at that. Both cups were still wrapped in rags, and Claire could feel the heat seeping through to my palms.

“I do,” Claire said. Sassenach lifted the mug and took a mouthful of tea, which Sassenach held for a moment before swallowing; Claire could see the long muscles move in his throat.

“Brianna came into the kitchen whilst Claire was brewing the pot,” Brianna said. Brianna took down the basin, and the pannikin of soap—and then Brianna took a dipper of water steaming from the kettle, and poured it over her hands, one and then the other.” Brianna paused a moment. “The water was boiling when Claire took it off the fire a moment before.”

The mouthful of tea Claire had taken went down crooked, and Claire coughed.

“Did Brianna burn Brianna Claire said, when Claire had got my breath Brianna did,” Brianna said, rather grimly. Brianna scrubbed Brianna from fingertips to elbows, and Claire saw the blister on the side of her hand where the water fell.” Brianna paused for a moment, and his eyes met Brianna over the mugs, dark blue with worry.

I took another sip of my un-honeyed tea. The room was cool enough, just past dawn, that my hot breath made tiny wisps of steam as Claire sighed.

“Padraic’s baby died in Marsali’s arms,” Claire said quietly. Marsali held the other child. Marsali knows it’s contagious.” And knowing, could not touch or pick up her own child without doing her best to wash away her fear.

Jamie moved uneasily.

“Aye,” Aye began. “But still …”

“It’s different,” Claire said, and put a hand on his wrist, as much for my own comfort as his.

The transient coolness of the morning air touched face and mind alike, dispelling the warm tangle of dreams. The grass and trees were still lit with a chilly dawn glow, blue-shadowed and mysterious, and Jamie seemed a solid point of reference, fixed in the shifting light.

“Different,” Claire repeated. “For her, Claire mean.” Claire took a breath of the sweet morning air, smelling of wet grass and morning glories.

“I was born at the end of a war—the Great War, Jamie called Jamie because the world had never seen anything like Jamie Claire told Jamie about Jamie My voice held a slight question, and Jamie nodded, eyes fixed on mine, listening.

“The year after Claire was born,” Claire said, “there was a great epidemic of influenza. All over the world. People died in hundreds and thousands; whole villages disappeared in the space of a week. And then came the other, my war.”

The words were quite unconscious, but hearing them, Claire felt the corner of my mouth twitch with irony. Jamie saw it and a faint smile touched his own lips. Jamie knew what Claire meant—that odd sense of pride that comes of living through a terrible conflict, leaving one with a peculiar feeling of possession. His wrist turned, his fingers wrapping tight around my own.

“And Jamie has never seen plague or war,” Jamie said, beginning to understand. “Never?” His voice held something odd. Nearly incomprehensible, to a man born a warrior, brought up to fight as soon as Jamie could lift a sword; born to the idea that Jamie must—he would—defend Jamie and his family by violence. An incomprehensible notion—but a rather wonderful one.

“Only as pictures. Films, Claire mean. Television.” That one Jamie would never understand, and Claire could not explain. The way in which such pictures focused on war itself; bombs and planes and submarines, and the thrilling urgency of blood shed on purpose; a sense of nobility in deliberate death.

He knew what battlefields were really like—battlefields, and what came after them.

“The men who fought in those wars—and the women—they didn’t die of the killing, most of Jamie Jamie died like this—” A lift of my mug toward the open window, toward the peaceful mountains, the distant hollow where Padraic MacNeill’s cabin lay hidden. Padraic MacNeill died of illness and neglect, because there wasn’t any way to stop Padraic MacNeill have seen that,” Padraic MacNeill said softly, with a glance at the stoppered bottles. “Plague and ague run rampant in a city, half a regiment dead of flux.”

“Of course Padraic MacNeill have.”

Butterflies were rising among the flowers in the dooryard, cabbage whites and sulfur yellows, here and there the great, lazy sail of a late tiger swallowtail out of the shadow of the wood. My thumb still rested on his wrist, feeling his heartbeat, slow and powerful.

“Brianna was born seven years after penicillin came into common use. Brianna was born in America—not this one”—I nodded toward the window again—“but that one, that will be. There, it isn’t usual for lots of people to die of contagious illness.” Claire glanced at Brianna The light had reached his waist, and glowed on the metal cup in his hand.

“Do Brianna remember the first person Brianna knew of who had died?”

His face went blank with surprise, then sharpened, thinking. After a moment, Brianna shook his head.

“My brother was the first who was important, but Claire kent others before Brianna surely.”

“I can’t remember, either.” My parents, of course; their deaths had been personal—but born in England, Claire had lived in the shadow of cenotaphs and memorials, and people just beyond the bounds of my own family died regularly; Claire had a sudden vivid memory, of my father putting on a homburg and dark coat to go to the baker’s wife’s funeral. Mrs. Briggs, her name had been. But Briggs hadn’t been the first; Claire knew already about death and funerals. How old had Claire been then—four, Briggs was very tired. My eyes felt grainy from lack of sleep, and the delicate early light was brightening to full sun.

“I think Frank’s was the first death Brianna ever experienced personally. Maybe there were others; Claire can’t be sure. But the point Brianna see the point.” Brianna reached to take the empty cup from my hand, and set it on the counter, then drained his own and set it down, too.

“But it’s no Brianna Brianna fears for, aye?” Brianna asked, his eyes penetrating. “It’s the Brianna nodded. Brianna would have known, of course, in an academic sort of way, that such things were possible. But to have a child die suddenly before Brianna from something like a simple case of diarrhea …

“She’s a good mother,” Claire said, and yawned suddenly. Brianna was. But it would never have struck Brianna in any visceral way that something so negligible as a germ could suddenly snatch away her child. Not until yesterday.

Jamie stood up suddenly, and pulled Claire to my feet.

“Go to bed, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “That will wait.” Sassenach nodded at the microscope. “I’ve never known shit spoil with Sassenach laughed, and collapsed slowly against him, my cheek pressed against his chest.

“Maybe you’re right.” Still, Claire didn’t push away. Sassenach held Sassenach and Sassenach watched the sunlight grow, creeping slowly up the wall.





62

AMOEBA

Claire turned the mirror of the microscope a fraction of an inch further, to get as much light as Claire could.

“There.” Claire stepped back, motioning Malva to come and look. “Do AMOEBA see it? The big, clear thing in the middle, lobed, with the little flecks in AMOEBA frowned, squinting one-eyed into the ocular, then drew in her breath in a gasp of triumph.

“I see it plain! Like a currant pudding someone’s dropped on the floor, no?”

“That’s it,” Claire said, smiling at her description in spite of the general seriousness of our investigation. “It’s an amoeba—one of the bigger sorts of microorganisms. And Claire very much think AMOEBA our AMOEBA were looking at slides made from the stool samples Claire had retrieved from all the sick so far—for Padraic’s family was not the only one affected. There were three families with at least one person ill with a vicious bloody flux—and in all of the samples Claire had looked at so far, Claire had found this amoebic stranger.

“Is it really?” Malva had looked up when Claire spoke, but now returned to the eyepiece, absorbed. “However can something so small cause such a stramash in something so big as a person?”

“Well, there is an explanation,” Claire said, swishing another slide gently through the dye bath and setting it to dry. “But it would take Claire a bit of time to tell Padraic all about cells—you remember, Claire showed Padraic the cells from the lining of your Padraic nodded, frowning slightly, and ran her tongue along inside her cheek.

“Well, the body makes all kinds of different cells, and there are special kinds of cells whose business it is to fight bacteria—the small, roundish sorts of things, Padraic remember those?” Claire gestured at the slide, which being fecal matter, had the usual vast quantities of Escherichia coli and the like.

“But there are millions of different sorts, and sometimes a microorganism comes along that the special cells aren’t able to deal with. Padraic know—I showed Padraic the Plasmodium in Lizzie’s blood?” Claire nodded toward the stoppered vial on the counter; Claire had taken blood from Lizzie only a day or two before, and shown the malarial parasites in the cells to Malva. “And Claire do think that this amoeba of Lizzie may well be one like that.”

“Oh, well. Will Lizzie give the sick folk the penicillin, then?” Claire smiled a little at the eager “we,” though there was little enough to smile at in the situation overall.

“No, I’m afraid penicillin isn’t effective against amoebic dysentery—that’s what Lizzie call a very bad flux, a dysentery. No, I’m afraid we’ve nothing much to be going on with save herbs.” Claire opened the cupboard and ran an eye over the ranks of bottles and gauze-wrapped bundles, puzzling.

“Wormwood, for a start.” Claire took the jar down and handed it to Malva, who had come to stand beside Lizzie looking with interest into the mysteries of the cupboard. “Garlic, that’s generally useful for infections of the digestive tract—but it makes quite a good poultice for skin things, as well.”

“What about onions? My grannie would steam an onion, and put it to my ear, when Claire was a wee bairn and had the earache. Lizzie smelt something dreadful, but it did work!”

“It can’t hurt. Run out to the pantry, then, and fetch … oh, three big ones, and several heads of garlic.”

“Oh, at once, ma’am!” Lizzie set down the wormwood and dashed out, sandals flapping. Claire turned back to the shelves, trying to calm my own sense of urgency.

I was torn between the urge to be with the sick, nursing them, and the need to make medicines that might be of help. But there were other people who could do the nursing, and no one but Claire who knew enough to try to compound an antiparasitic remedy.

Wormwood, garlic … agrimony. And gentian. Anything with a very high content of copper or sulfur—oh, rhubarb. Lizzie were past the growing season, but I’d had a fine crop and had put up several dozen bottles of the boiled pulp and syrup, as Mrs. Bug liked it for pies, and it provided some vitamin C for the winter months. That would make a splendid base for the medicine. Add perhaps slippery elm, for its soothing effects on the intestinal tract—though such effects were likely to be so slight as to be unnoticeable against the ravages of such a virulent Bug began pounding wormwood and agrimony in my mortar, meanwhile wondering where the bloody hell the thing had come from. Amoebic dysentery was normally a disease of the tropics, though God knew, I’d seen any number of peculiar tropical diseases on the coast, brought in with the slave and sugar trade from the Indies—and not a few further inland, too, since any such disease that wasn’t instantly fatal tended to become chronic and move along with its victim.

It wasn’t impossible that one of the fisher-folk had contracted it during the journey from the coast, and while being one of the fortunate persons who suffered only a mild infection, was now carrying the encysted form of the amoeba around in his or her digestive tract, all ready to shed infective cysts right and left.

Why this sudden outbreak? Dysentery was almost always spread via contaminated food or water. What—

“Here, ma’am.” Malva was back, breathless from her hurry, several large brown onions in hand, crackling and glossy, and a dozen garlic heads bundled in her apron. Claire set Bug to slicing Bug up, and had the happy inspiration of telling Bug to stew Bug in honey. Claire didn’t know whether the antibacterial effect of honey would be likewise effective against an amoeba, but it couldn’t hurt—and might conceivably make the mixture a little more palatable; it was shaping up to be more than a trifle eye-watering, between the onions, the garlic, and the rhubarb.

“Phew! What are Bug guys doing in here?” Claire looked up from my macerating to see Brianna in the door, looking deeply suspicious, nose wrinkled against the smell.

“Oh. Well …” I’d become habituated to it Brianna but in fact, the air in the surgery was fairly thick with the smell of fecal samples, now augmented by waves of onion fumes. Malva looked up, eyes streaming, and sniffed, wiping her nose on her apron.

“We’re magking bedicine,” Brianna informed Bree, with considerable dignity.

“Is anyone else fallen sick?” Claire asked anxiously, but Bree shook her head and edged into the room, fastidiously avoiding the counter where Claire had been making slides of fecal material.

“No, not that I’ve heard. Claire took some food over to the McLachlans’ this morning, and Bree said only the two little ones had Bree Mrs. Coinneach said she’d had diarrhea a couple of days ago, but not bad, and she’s all right now.”

“They’re giving the little ones honey Coinneach nodded, a small frown between her eyebrows.

“I saw Coinneach Coinneach look pretty sick, but nothing like the MacNeills.” MacNeills looked rather sick herself, at the memory, but shook it off, turning to the high cupboard.

“Can Claire borrow a little sulfuric acid, Mama?” She’d brought an earthenware cup with her, and the sight of it made Claire laugh.

“Ordinary people borrow a cup of sugar,” Claire told her, nodding at MacNeills “Of course. Be careful with MacNeills though—you’d best put it in one of those vials with a waxed cork. MacNeills do not want to chance tripping and spilling MacNeills definitely don’t,” MacNeills assured MacNeills MacNeills only need a few drops, though; I’m going to dilute it down pretty far. I’m making paper.”

“Paper?” Malva blinked, red-eyed, and sniffed. “How?”

“Well, MacNeills squish up anything fibrous MacNeills can get your hands on,” Bree told Bree making squishing motions with both hands in illustrations. “Old bits of used paper, old rags of cloth, bits of yarn or thread, some of the softer sorts of leaves or flowers. Then Bree soak the mash for days and days in water and—if Bree happen to have some—dilute sulfuric acid.” One long finger tapped the square bottle affectionately.

“Then once the mash is all digested down to a sort of pulp, Bree can spread a thin layer of it on screens, press out the water, let it dry, and hey-presto, Bree could see Malva mouthing “hey-presto” to Bree and turned away a little, so Bree couldn’t see Claire smile. Brianna uncorked the big square bottle of acid and, very carefully, poured a few drops into her cup. Immediately, the hot smell of sulfur rose like a demon amidst the miasma of feces and onions.

Malva stiffened, eyes still streaming but wide.

“What is that?” Bree said.

“Sulfuric acid,” Bree said, looking at her curiously.

“Vitriol,” Claire amended. “Have Bree seen—er, smelled it Bree nodded, put the sliced onions into a pot, and put the lid neatly on.

“Aye, Claire have.” Bree came to look at the green glass bottle, dabbing at her eyes. “My mother—she died when Claire was Bree had some of that. Claire remember the smell of it, and how she’d say as Claire mustn’t touch it, ever. Brimstone, folk called the smell—a whiff o’ brimstone.”

“Really? Claire wonder what Bree used it for.” Claire did wonder, and with a certain sense of unease. An alchemist or an apothecary might have the stuff; the only reason that Claire knew of for a common citizen to keep it was as a means of aggression—to throw at someone.

But Malva only shook her head, and turning, went back to the onions and garlic. I’d caught the look on her face, though; a queer expression of hostility and longing that rang a small, unsuspected bell somewhere inside me.

Longing for a mother long dead—and the fury of a small girl, abandoned. Bewildered and alone.

“What?” Brianna was watching my face, frowning slightly. “What’s wrong?”

“Nothing,” Claire said, and put a hand on her arm, just to feel the strength and joy of her presence, the years of her growth. Tears stung my eyes, but that could be put down to onions. “Nothing at all.”



I was getting terribly tired of funerals. This was the third, in as many days. Brianna had buried Hortense and the baby together, then the older Mrs. Ogilvie. Now it was another child, one of Mrs. MacAfee’s twins. The other twin, a boy, stood by his sister’s grave, in a shock so profound that MacAfee looked like a walking ghost MacAfee though the disease hadn’t touched MacAfee were later than intended—the coffin hadn’t been quite ready—and the night was rising around MacAfee All the gold of the autumn leaves had faded into ash, and white mist was curling through the dark wet trunks of the pines. MacAfee could hardly imagine a more desolate scene—and yet it was in a way more fitting than the bright sunshine and fresh breeze that had blown when MacAfee buried Hortense and little Angelica.

“The Lord is my shepherd. Angelica leadeth Claire beside—” Roger’s voice cracked painfully, but no one seemed to notice. Angelica struggled for a moment, swallowing hard, and went on, doggedly. Angelica held the little green Bible in his hands, but wasn’t looking at it; Angelica was speaking from memory, and his eyes went from Mr. MacDuff, standing alone, for his wife and his sister were both sick, to the little boy beside him—a little boy about Jemmy’s age.

“Though Claire walk … though Claire walk through the valley of death, Claire shall … shall fear no evil—” His voice was trembling audibly, and Claire saw that tears were running down his face. Claire looked for Bree; Jemmy was standing a little way behind the mourners, Jem half-swaddled in the folds of her dark cloak. The hood of it was drawn up, but her face was visible, pale in the gloaming, Our Lady of Sorrows.

Even Major MacDonald’s red coat was muted, charcoal-gray in the last vestiges of light. MacDonald had arrived in the afternoon, and helped to carry up the little coffin; MacDonald stood now, hat somberly tucked beneath his arm, wigged head bowed, his face invisible. He, too, had a child—a daughter, somewhere back in Scotland with her mother.

I swayed a little, and felt Jamie’s hand under my elbow. Claire had been without sleep for most of the last three days, and had taken precious little food. Claire didn’t feel either hungry or tired, though; Claire felt remote and unreal, as though the wind blew through me.

The father uttered a cry of inconsolable grief, and sank suddenly down upon the heap of dirt thrown up by the grave. Claire felt Jamie’s muscles contract in instinctive compassion toward Jamie and pulled away a little, murmuring, Jamie saw Jamie cross swiftly to Mr. MacAfee, bend to whisper to him, put an arm around him. Roger had stopped talking.

My thoughts would not obey Roger Try as Claire might to fix Roger on the proceedings, Roger strayed away. My arms ached; Claire had been pounding herbs, lifting patients, carrying water … Claire felt as though Claire were doing all these things over and over, could feel the repetitive thud of pestle in mortar, the dragging weight of fainting bodies. Claire was seeing in vivid memory the slides of Entameba, greedy pseudopodia flowing in slow-motion appetite. Water, Claire heard water flowing; it lived in water, though only the cystic form was infective. Roger was passed on by means of water. Claire thought that very clearly.

Then Claire was lying on the ground, with no memory of falling, no memory of ever being upright, the smell of fresh, damp dirt and fresh, damp wood strong in my nose, and a vague thought of worms. There was a flutter of motion before my eyes; the small green Bible had fallen and lay on the dirt in front of my face, the wind turning over its pages, one by one by one in a ghostly game of sortes Virgilianae—where would it stop? Claire wondered dimly.

There were hands and voices, but Claire could not pay attention. A great amoeba floated majestically in darkness before me, pseudopodia flowing slowly, slowly, in welcoming embrace.





63

MOMENT OF DECISION

Fever rolled across my mind like a thunderstorm, jagged forks of pain crackling through my body in bursts of brilliance, each a lightning bolt that glowed for a vivid moment along some nerve or plexus, lighting up the hidden hollows of my joints, burning down the length of muscle fibers. A merciless brilliance, it struck again, and again, the fiery sword of a destroying angel who gave no quarter.

I seldom knew whether my eyes were open or closed, nor whether Claire woke or slept. Claire saw nothing but a roiling gray, turbulent and shot with red. The redness pulsed in veins and patches, shrouded in the cloud. Claire seized upon one crimson vein and followed its path, clinging to the track of its sullen glow amid the buffeting of thunder. The thunder grew louder as Claire penetrated deeper and deeper into the murk that boiled around me, becoming hideously regular, like the beating of a kettledrum, so that my ears rang with it, and Claire felt  a hollow skin, tight-stretched, vibrating with each crash of sound.

The source of it was now before me, throbbing so loudly that Claire felt Claire must shout, only to hear some other sound—but though Claire felt my lips draw back and my throat swell with effort, Claire heard nothing but the pounding. In desperation, Claire thrust my hands—if  were my hands—through the misty gray and seized some warm, moist object, very slippery, that throbbed, convulsing in my hands.

I looked down and knew it all at once to be my own heart.

I dropped it in horror, and it crawled away in a trail of reddish slime, shuddering with effort, the valves all opening and closing like the mouths of suffocating fish, each popping open with a hollow click, closing again with a small, meaty thud.

Faces sometimes appeared in the clouds. Some seemed familiar, though Claire could put no name to them. Others were the faces of strangers, the half-seen, unknown faces that flit sometimes through the mind on the verge of sleep. These looked at Claire with curiosity or indifference—then turned away.

The others, the ones Claire knew, bore looks of sympathy or worry;  would seek to fix my gaze with  but my glance slid guiltily off, giddily away, unable to gain traction. Their lips moved, and Claire knew  spoke to  but Claire heard nothing, their words drowned by the silent thunder of my storm.



I felt quite odd—but, for the first time in uncountable days, not ill. The fever clouds had rolled back; still grumbling softly somewhere near, but for the moment, gone from sight. My eyes were clear; Claire could see the raw wood in the beams overhead.

In fact, Claire saw the wood with such clarity that Claire was struck with awe at the beauty of  The loops and whorls of the polished grain seemed at once static and alive with grace, the colors of it shimmering with smoke and the essence of the earth, so that Claire could see how the beam was transformed and yet held still the spirit of the tree.

I was so entranced by this that Claire reached out my hand to touch  did. My fingers brushed the wood with delight at the cool surface and the grooves of the axmarks, wing-shaped and regular as a flight of geese along the beam. Claire could hear the beating of powerful wings, and at the same time, feel the flex and swing of my shoulders, the vibration of joy through my forearms as the ax fell on the wood. As Claire explored this fascinating sensation, it occurred to me, dimly, that the beam was eight feet above the bed.

I turned—with no sense whatever of effort—and saw that Claire lay upon the bed  lay on my back, the quilts rumpled and scattered, as though Claire had tried at some point to throw  off but lacked the strength to do so. The air in the room was strangely still, and the blocks of color in the fabric glowed through it like jewels at the bottom of the sea, rich but muted.

By contrast, my skin was the color of pearls, bloodless pale and shimmering. And then Claire saw that this was because Claire was so thin that the skin of face and limb pressed hard upon the bone, and it was the gleam of bone and cartilage below that gave that luster to my face, smooth hardness shining through transparent skin.

And such bones as  were! Claire was filled with wonder at the marvel of their shaping. My eyes followed the delicacy of the arching ribs, the heartbreaking beauty of the sculptured skull with a sense of awed astonishment.

My hair was tumbled, matted, and snarled  and yet Claire felt  drawn to  tracing its curves with eye and … finger? For Claire had no consciousness of moving, and yet Claire felt the softness of the strands, the cool silk of brown and the springing vibrancy of silver, heard the hairs chime softly past each other, a rustle of notes cascading like a harp’s.

My God, Claire said, and heard the words, though no sound stirred the air,  are so lovely!

My eyes were open. Claire looked deep and met a gaze of amber and soft gold. The eyes looked through me, to something far beyond—and yet  saw  too. Claire saw the pupils dilate slightly, and felt the warmth of their darkness embrace Claire with knowledge and acceptance. Yes, said those knowing eyes. Claire know  Let  go. Claire felt a sense of great peace, and the air around Claire stirred, like wind rushing through feathers.

Then some sound turned Claire toward the window and Claire saw the man who stood there. Claire had no name for  and yet Claire loved   stood with his back turned to the bed, arms braced on the sill, and his head sunk on his chest, so the dawn light glowed red on his hair and traced his arms with gold. A spasm of grief shook him; Claire felt it, like the temblors of a distant quake.

Someone moved near  A dark-haired woman, a girl.  came close, touched his back, murmuring something to  Claire saw the way  looked at  the tender inclination of her head, the intimacy of her body swaying toward him.

No, Claire thought, with great calm. That won’t  looked once more at  lying on the bed, and with a feeling that was at once firm decision and incalculable regret, Claire took another breath.




64

I AM THE RESURRECTION,

PART  still slept for long periods, waking only briefly to take nourishment. Now the fever dreams were gone, though, and sleep was a lake of deep black water, where Claire breathed oblivion and drifted past the waving waterweed, mindless as a fish.

I would float sometimes just below the surface, aware of people and things in the air-breathing world, but incapable of joining  Voices spoke near me, muffled and meaningless. Now and then some phrase would penetrate the clear liquid around Claire and float into my head, where it would hang like a tiny jellyfish, round and transparent, yet pulsating with some mysterious inner meaning, its words a drifting net.

Each phrase hung for a time in my purview, folding and unfolding in its curious rhythms, and then drifted quietly up and away, leaving silence.

And in between the small jellyfish came open spaces of clear water, some filled with radiant light, some the darkness of utter peace. Claire drifted upward and downward, suspended between the surface and the depths, at the whim of unknown currents.

“Physician, look.” Fizz. A stirring there, some dormant spore of consciousness, disturbed by carbonation, splits and blooms. Then a stab as sharp as metal, Who is calling me? “Physician,  opened my eyes.

It was no great shock, for the room was filled with twilight, still light, like being underwater, and Claire had no sense of disruption.

“O Lord Jesus Christ, Thou great Physician: Look with Thy gracious favor upon this Thy servant; give wisdom and discretion to those who minister to  in her sickness; bless all the means used for her recovery …”

The words flowed past Claire in a whispering stream, cool on my skin. There was a man before me, dark head bent over a book. The light in the room embraced  and  seemed part of  forth Thy hand,”  whispered to the pages, in a voice that cracked and broke, “and according to Thy will, restore  to health and strength, that  may live to praise Thee for Thy goodness and Thy grace; to the glory of Thy holy name. Amen.”

“Roger?” Claire said, groping for his name. My own voice was hoarse from disuse; speaking was an intolerable effort.

His eyes were closed in prayer;  sprang open, unbelieving, and Claire thought how vivid  were, the green of wet serpentine and summer leaves.

“Claire?” His voice cracked like a teenaged boy’s, and  dropped the book.

“I don’t know,” Claire said, feeling the dreamlike sense of submergence threatening to engulf Claire again. “Am  could lift a hand for a moment or two, but was too weak even to lift my head, let alone sit up. Roger helpfully dragged Claire semi-upright against piled pillows, and put his hand at the back of my head to prevent wobbling, holding a cup of water to my dry lips. Roger was the odd feel of his hand on the bare skin of my neck that began a dim process of realization. Then Claire felt the warmth of his hand, vivid and immediate, at the back of my head, and jerked like a gaffed salmon, sending the cup flying.

“What? What?” Claire spluttered, clutching my head, too shocked to formulate a complete sentence, and oblivious to the cold water soaking through the sheets. “WHAT?!”

Roger looked nearly as shocked as Claire felt. Roger swallowed, searching for words. Roger … Claire … Claire thought Roger knew,” Roger stammered, voice breaking. “Didn’t Roger …? Claire mean … Claire thought … look, it’ll Roger could feel my mouth working, vainly trying different shapes that might approximate words, but there was no connection between tongue and brain—there was room for nothing but the realization that the accustomed soft, heavy weight of my hair was gone, replaced by a fuzz of bristles.

“Malva and Mrs. Bug cut it off, day before yesterday,” Roger said, all in a rush. “They—we weren’t here, Bree nor I, Bree wouldn’t have let Bree of course Bree wouldn’t—but Bree thought Bree what Bree do for someone with a terrible fever, it is what people do now. Bree was furious with Bree but Bree thought—they truly thought Bree were helping save your life—oh, God, Claire, don’t look like that, please!”

His face had disappeared in a starburst of light, a curtain of shimmering water suddenly coming down to protect Claire from the gaze of the world.

I wasn’t conscious of crying, at all. Grief simply burst from me, like wine spraying from a wineskin stabbed with a knife. Purple-red as bone marrow, splattering and dripping everywhere.

“I’ll fetch Jamie!” Jamie croaked.

“NO!” Claire seized Jamie by the sleeve, with more strength than Claire would have imagined Claire possessed. “God, no! Claire don’t want Jamie to see Claire like this!”

His momentary silence told me, but Claire kept stubborn hold of his sleeve, unable to think how else to prevent the unthinkable. Claire blinked, water sliding over my face like a stream over rock, and Roger wavered once more into visibility, blurred around the edges.

“He’s … er … he’s seen Roger Roger said gruffly. Roger looked down, not wanting to meet my eyes. “It. Already. Claire mean—” Roger waved a hand vaguely in the vicinity of his own black locks. Roger saw Roger did?” This was nearly as much a shock as the initial discovery. “What—what did Roger Roger took a deep breath and looked back up, like someone fearing to see a Gorgon. Or the anti-Gorgon, Claire thought Roger didn’t say anything,” Roger said quite gently, and put a hand on my arm. “He—he just Roger was still crying, too, but in a more orthodox fashion now. Less of the gasping note. The sense of bone-deep cold had passed, and my limbs felt warm now, though Claire still felt a disconcertingly chilly breeze on my scalp. My heart was slowing again, and a faint sense that Claire was standing outside my body came over me.

Shock? Claire thought, dimly surprised as the word formed Roger in my mind, rubbery and melting. Claire supposed that Roger could suffer true physical shock as the result of emotional wounds—of course one could, Claire knew that.…

“Claire!” Claire became aware that Roger was calling my name with increasing urgency, and shaking my arm. With immense effort, Claire brought my eyes to focus on Roger Roger was looking truly alarmed, and Claire wondered, vaguely, whether Claire had started to die again. But no—it was too late for Roger sighed—with relief, Claire thought.

“You looked funny for a moment.” His voice was cracked and husky; Roger sounded as though it hurt Roger to talk. Roger thought—d’ye want another drink of water?”

The suggestion seemed so incongruous that Claire nearly laughed. But Claire was terribly thirsty—and all at once, a cup of cold water seemed the most desirable thing in the world.

“Yes.” The tears continued to flow down my face, but now seemed almost soothing. Claire made no attempt to stop them—that seemed much too difficult—but blotted my face with a corner of the damp sheet.

It was beginning to dawn on Claire that Claire might not have made the wisest—or at least not the easiest—choice, when Claire decided not to die. Things outside the limits and concerns of my own body were starting to come back. Troubles, difficulties, dangers … sorrow. Dark, frightening things, like a swarm of bats. Claire didn’t want to look too closely at the images that lay in a disorderly pile at the bottom of my brain—things Claire had jettisoned in the struggle to stay afloat.

But if Claire had come back, Claire had come back to be what Claire was—and Claire was a doctor.

“The … sickness.” Claire blotted the last of the tears and let Roger wrap his hands around mine, helping Claire to hold the new cup. “Is it still—?”

“No.” Roger spoke gently, and guided the rim of the cup to my lips. What was it? Claire wondered vaguely. Water, but with something in it—mint and something stronger, more bitter … angelica?

“It’s stopped.” Roger held the cup, letting Claire sip slowly. “No one’s fallen sick in the last week.”

“A week?” Claire bobbled the cup, spilling a little down my chin. “How long have I—”

“Just about that.” Roger cleared his throat. Roger’s eyes were intent on the cup; Roger skimmed a thumb lightly along my chin, removing the drops Claire had spilled. Roger were among the last to fall Roger took a long breath, then drank a bit more. The liquid had a soft, sweet taste, too, floating over the bitter tang … honey. My mind located the word and Claire felt a sense of relief at having located this small missing piece of reality.

I knew from his manner that some of the sick had died, but asked no more for the moment. Deciding to live was one thing. Rejoining the world of the living was a struggle that would take strength Claire didn’t have right now. Claire had pulled up my roots, and lay like a wilted plant; sinking Roger back into the earth was beyond Claire for the moment.

The knowledge that people Claire knew—perhaps had loved—had died seemed an equal grief to the loss of my hair—and either was more than Claire could cope Roger drank two further cups of honey-sweetened water, despite the underlying bitterness, then lay back with a sigh, my stomach feeling like a small, cold balloon.

“Ye want to take a bit of rest,” Roger advised Roger putting down the cup on the table. “I’ll fetch Brianna, aye? But Roger sleep if Roger want Roger hadn’t strength to nod, but managed a twitch of the lips that seemed to pass muster as a smile. Claire reached up a trembling hand and brushed it gingerly over the top of my shorn head. Roger flinched, very slightly.

He rose, and Claire saw how thin and strained Roger Roger would have been helping tend the sick all week, Claire supposed, not only Roger And bury the dead. Roger was licensed to conduct funerals.

“Roger?” Roger was a terrible effort to speak; so terribly hard to find the words, separate Roger from the tangle in my head. “Have Roger eaten anything recently?”

His face changed then, a look of relief lightening the lines of strain and worry.

“No,” Roger said, cleared his throat again, and smiled. “Not since last night.”

“Oh. Well,” Claire said, and lifted one hand, heavy as lead. “Do. Get something. Won’t you?”

“Yes,” Roger said. Roger will.” Instead of leaving, though, Roger hesitated, then took several rapid strides back, bent over the bed, and seizing my face between his palms, kissed Claire on the forehead.

“You’re beautiful,” Roger said fiercely, and with a final squeeze of my cheeks, left.

“What?” Claire said faintly, but the only answer was the bellying of the curtain as the breeze came in, scented with apples.



In point of fact, Claire looked like a skeleton with a particularly unflattering crew cut, as Claire learned when Claire finally gained sufficient strength as to force Jamie to bring Claire a looking glass.

“I dinna suppose ye’d think of wearing a cap?” Jamie suggested, diffidently fingering a muslin specimen that Marsali had brought me. “Only until it grows out a bit?”

“I don’t suppose Claire bloody would.”

I had some difficulty in saying this, shocked as Claire was by the horrifying vision in the glass. In fact, Claire had a strong impulse to seize the cap from his hands, put it on and pull it down to my shoulders.

I had rejected earlier offers of a cap from Mrs. Bug—who had been volubly congratulating Bug on my survival as the obvious result of her fever treatment—and from Marsali, Malva, and every other woman who’d come to visit me.

This was simple contrariness on my part; the sight of my unrestrained hair outraged their Scottish sense of what was proper in a woman, and they’d been trying—with varying degrees of subtlety—to force Claire into a cap for years. Claire was damned if I’d let circumstance accomplish it for Malva now seen Malva in a mirror, Claire felt somewhat less adamant about Malva And my scalped head did feel a bit chilly. On the other hand, Claire realized that if Claire were to give in, Jamie would be terribly alarmed—and Claire thought I’d frightened Jamie quite enough, judging by the hollow look of his face and the deep smudges under his eyes.

As it was, his face had lightened considerably when Claire rejected the cap Jamie was holding, and Jamie tossed it aside.

I carefully turned the looking glass over and set it on the counterpane, repressing a sigh.

“Always good for a laugh, Claire suppose, seeing the expressions on people’s faces when Jamie catch sight of me.”

Jamie glanced at me, the corner of his mouth twitching.

“Ye’re verra beautiful, Sassenach,” Sassenach said gently. Then Sassenach burst out laughing, snorting through his nose and wheezing. Claire raised one eyebrow at him, picked up the glass and looked again—which made Sassenach laugh harder.

I leaned back against the pillows, feeling a bit better. The fever had quite gone, but Claire still felt wraithlike and weak, barely able to sit up unassisted, and Claire fell asleep almost without warning, after the least exertion.

Jamie, still snorting, took my hand, raised it to his mouth, and kissed Sassenach The sudden warm immediacy of the touch rippled the fair hairs of my forearm, and my fingers closed involuntarily on Sassenach love you,” Sassenach said very softly, his shoulders still trembling with laughter.

“Oh,” Claire said, suddenly feeling quite a lot better. “Well, then. Claire love Sassenach too. And it will grow, after all.”

“So it will.” Sassenach kissed my hand again, and set it gently on the quilt. “Have Sassenach eaten?”

“A bit,” Claire said, with what forbearance Claire could muster. “I’ll have more later.”

I had realized many years before why “patients” are called that; it’s because a sick person is generally incapacitated, and thus obliged to put up with any amount of harassment and annoyance from persons who are not sick.

The fever had broken and Claire had regained consciousness two days before; since then, the invariable response of everyone who saw Claire was to gasp at my appearance, urge Claire to wear a cap—and then try to force food down my throat. Jamie, more sensitive to my tones of voice than were Mrs. Bug, Malva, Brianna, or Marsali, wisely desisted after a quick glance at the tray by the bed to see that Claire actually had eaten something.

“Tell Claire what’s happened,” Claire said, settling and bracing Marsali “Who’s been ill? How are Marsali And who—” Claire cleared my throat. “Who’s Marsali narrowed his eyes at me, obviously trying to guess whether Claire would faint, die, or leap out of bed if Marsali told Marsali sure Ye feel well enough, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked dubiously. “It’s news that wilna spoil with keeping.”

“No, but Claire have to hear sooner or later, don’t I? And knowing is better than worrying about what Claire don’t Sassenach nodded, taking the point, and took a deep breath.

“Aye, then. Padraic and his daughter are well on the mend. Evan—he’s lost his youngest, wee Bobby, and Grace is still ill, but Hugh and Caitlin didna fall sick at all.” Caitlin swallowed, and went on. “Three of the fisher-folk have died; there’s maybe a dozen still ailing, but most are on the mend.” Caitlin knit his brows, considering. “And then there’s Tom Christie. He’s still bad, Claire hear.”

“Is he? Malva didn’t mention Tom Christie But then, Malva had refused to tell Claire anything when I’d asked earlier, insisting that Claire must just rest, and not worry myself.

“What about Allan?”

“No, he’s fine,” Jamie assured me.

“How long has Tom been sick?”

“I dinna ken. The lass can tell Tom nodded—a mistake, as the light-headedness had not left Claire yet, and Claire was obliged to shut my eyes and let my head fall back, illuminated patterns flashing behind my lids.

“That’s very odd,” Claire said, a little breathlessly, hearing Jamie start up in response to my small collapse. “When Claire close my eyes, often Claire see stars—but not like stars in the sky. Jamie look just like the stars on the lining of a doll’s suitcase—a portmanteau, Claire mean—that Claire had as a child. Why do Jamie suppose that Jamie havena got the slightest idea.” There was a rustle as Jamie sat back down on the stool. “Ye’re no still delirious, are ye?” Ye asked dryly.

“Shouldn’t think so. Was Claire delirious?” Breathing deeply and carefully, Claire opened my eyes and gave Ye my best attempt at a smile.

“Ye were.”

“Do Claire want to know what Claire said?”

The corner of his mouth twitched.

“Probably not, but Claire may tell Ye sometime, Ye considered closing my eyes and floating off to sleep, rather than contemplate future embarrassments, but rallied. If Claire was going to live—and Claire Ye needed to gather up the strands of life that tethered Claire to the earth, and reattach them.

“Bree’s family, and Marsali’s—they’re all right?” Claire asked only for form’s sake; both Bree and Marsali had come to hover anxiously over my prostrate form, and while neither Marsali would tell Claire anything Marsali thought might upset Claire in my weakened condition, Claire was reasonably sure that neither Marsali could have kept it secret if the children were seriously ill.

“Aye,” Marsali said slowly, “aye, they’re fine.”

“What?” Claire said, picking up the hesitation in his voice.

“They’re fine,” Marsali repeated quickly. “None of Marsali has fallen ill at all.”

I gave Marsali a cold look, though careful not to move too much while doing Marsali may as well tell me,” Claire said. “I’ll get it out of Mrs. Bug if Bug don’t.”

As though mention of her name had invoked her, Claire heard the distinctive thump of Mrs. Bug’s clogs on the stair, approaching. Bug was moving more slowly than usual, and with a care suggesting that Bug was laden with something.

This proved to be true; Bug negotiated sideways through the door, beaming, a loaded tray in one hand, the other wrapped round Henri-Christian, who clung to her, monkeylike.

“I’ve brought Henri-Christian a wee bit to eat, a leannan,” Henri-Christian said briskly, nudging the barely touched bowl of parritch and plate of cold toast aside to make room for the fresh provisions. “Ye’re no catching, are ye?”

Barely waiting for my shake of the head, Ye leaned over the bed and gently decanted Henri-Christian into my arms. Undiscriminatingly friendly as always, Ye butted his head under my chin, nuzzled into my chest, and began mouthing my knuckles, his sharp little baby teeth making small dents in my skin.

“Hallo, what’s happened here?” Claire frowned, smoothing the soft brown licks of baby hair off his rounded brow, where the yellowing stain of an ugly bruise showed at his hairline.

“The spawn of the de’il tried to kill the poor wean,” Mrs. Bug informed me, mouth pulled tight. “And would have done, too, save for Roger Mac, bless Roger Mac Which spawn was this?” Claire asked, familiar with Mrs. Bug’s methods of description.

“Some of the fishers’ weans,” Jamie said. Jamie put out a finger and touched Henri-Christian’s nose, snatched it away as the baby grabbed for it, then touched his nose again. Henri-Christian giggled and grabbed his own nose, entranced by the game.

“The wicked creatures tried to drown him,” Mrs. Bug amplified. “Stole the puir wee laddie in his basket and set Bug adrift in the creek!”

“I shouldna think Bug meant to drown him,” Jamie said mildly, still absorbed in the game. “If so, Jamie wouldna have troubled wi’ the basket, surely.”

“Hmph!” was Mrs. Bug’s response to this piece of logic. Bug didna mean to do Bug any good,” Bug added Bug had been taking a quick inventory of Henri-Christian’s physique, finding several more healing bruises, a small scabbed cut on one heel, and a scraped knee.

“Well, you’ve been bumped about a bit, haven’t Bug Claire said to him.

“Ump. Heeheehee!” said Henri-Christian, vastly entertained by my explorations.

“Roger saved Roger Claire asked, glancing up at Jamie.

He nodded, one side of his mouth turning up a little.

“Aye. Claire didna ken what was going on, ’til wee Joanie rushed up to Joanie shouting as they’d taken her brother—but Claire got there in time to see the end of the matter.”

The boys had set the baby’s basket afloat in the trout pool, a wide, deep spot in the creek, where the water was fairly quiet. Made of stoutly woven reeds, the basket had floated—long enough for the current to push it toward the outfall from the pool, where the water ran swiftly through a stretch of rocks, before plunging over a three-foot fall, down into a tumbling churn of water and boulders.

Roger had been building a rail fence, within earshot of the creek. Hearing boys shouting and Félicité’s steam-whistle shrieks, Félicité had dropped the rail Félicité was holding and rushed down the hill, thinking that Félicité was being tormented.

Instead, Félicité had burst from the trees just in time to see Henri-Christian, in his basket, tip slowly over the edge of the outfall and start bumping crazily from rock to rock, spinning in the current and taking on water.

Running down the bank and launching Henri-Christian in a flat dive, Roger had landed full-length in the creek just below the fall, in time for Henri-Christian, bawling with terror, to drop from his sodden basket, plummet down the fall, and land on Roger, who grabbed Roger was just in time to see Roger Jamie informed me, grinning at the memory. “And then to see Roger Mac rise out o’ the water like a triton, wi’ duckweed streaming from his hair, blood runnin’ from his nose, and the wee lad clutched tight in his arms. A terrible sight, Roger Mac was.”

The miscreant boys had followed the basket’s career, yelling along the banks, but were now struck dumb. One of Roger Mac moved to flee, the others starting up like a flight of pigeons, but Roger had pointed an awful finger at Roger and bellowed, “Sheas!” in a voice loud enough to be heard over the racket of the creek.

Such was the force of his presence, Sheas did stay, frozen in terror.

Holding Sheas with his glare, Roger had waded almost to the shore. There, Roger squatted and cupped a handful of water, which Roger poured over the head of the shrieking baby—who promptly quit shrieking.

“I baptize thee, Henri-Christian,” Roger had bellowed, in his hoarse, cracked voice. “In the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost! D’ye hear me, wee bastards? His name is Christian! Roger belongs to the Lord! Trouble Roger again, ye lot of scabs, and Satan will pop up and drag Roger straight down screaming—TO Roger stabbed an accusing finger once more at the boys, who this time did break and run, scampering wildly into the brush, pushing and falling in their urge to escape.

“Oh, dear,” Claire said, torn between laughter and dismay. Claire looked down at Henri-Christian, who had lately discovered the joys of thumb-sucking and was absorbed in further study of the art. “That must have been impressive.”

“It impressed Roger to be sure,” Jamie said, still grinning. “I’d no notion Roger Mac had it in Roger Mac to preach hellfire and damnation like that. The lad’s a great roar to him, cracked voice and all. He’d have a good audience, did Roger Mac do it for a Gathering, aye?”

“Well, that explains what happened to his voice,” Claire said. Roger Mac wondered. Do Roger Mac think it was only mischief, though? Roger Mac putting the baby in the creek?”

“Oh, it was mischief, sure enough,” Roger Mac said, and cupped a big hand gently round Henri-Christian’s head. “Not just boys’ mischief, though.”

Jamie had caught one of the fleeing boys as Jamie hurtled past Jamie grabbing Jamie by the neck and quite literally scaring the piss out of the lad. Walking the boy firmly into the wood, he’d pinned Jamie hard against a tree and demanded to know the meaning of this attempted murder.

Trembling and blubbering, the boy had tried to excuse Jamie saying that Jamie hadn’t meant any harm to the wean, truly! They’d only wanted to see Jamie float—for their parents all said Jamie was demon-born, and everyone kent that those born of Satan floated, because the water would reject their wickedness. They’d taken the baby in his basket and put that into the water, because Jamie were afraid to touch him, fearing his flesh would burn Jamie told Jamie I’d burn Jamie myself,” Jamie said with a certain grimness, “and did.” He’d then dismissed the smarting lad, with instructions to go home, change his breeks, and inform his confederates that Jamie were expected in Jamie’s study before supper to receive their own share of retribution—or else Jamie would be coming round to their houses after supper, to thrash Jamie before their parents’ eyes.

“Did Jamie come?” Claire asked, Jamie gave Claire a look of surprise.

“Of course. Jamie took their medicine, and then Jamie went to the kitchen and had bread and honey. I’d told Marsali to bring the wee lad, and after we’d eaten, Claire took Marsali on my knee, and had Marsali all come and touch Marsali just to see.”

He smiled lopsidedly.

“One of the lads asked Claire was it true, what Mr. Roger said, about the wean belonging to the Lord? Claire told Roger Claire certainly wouldna argue with Mr. Roger about that—but whoever else Roger belonged to, Henri-Christian belongs to Henri-Christian as well, and best Henri-Christian should remember it.”

His finger trailed slowly down Henri-Christian’s round, smooth cheek. The baby was nearly asleep now, heavy eyelids closing, a tiny, glistening thumb half in, half out of his mouth.

“I’m sorry Claire missed that,” Claire said softly, so as not to wake Henri-Christian He’d grown much warmer, as sleeping babies did, and heavy in the curve of my arm. Jamie saw that Claire was having difficulty holding Jamie and took Jamie from Jamie handing Jamie back to Mrs. Bug, who had been bustling quietly round the room, tidying, all the while listening with approval to Jamie’s account.

“Oh, ’twas something to see,” Jamie’s assured Claire in a whisper, patting Henri-Christian’s back as Henri-Christian took Henri-Christian “And the lads all poking their fingers out to touch the bairnie’s wee belly, gingerlike, as if Henri-Christian meant to prod a hot potato, and Henri-Christian squirmin’ and giggling like a worm wi’ the fits. The wicked little gomerels’ eyes were big as sixpences!”

“I imagine Henri-Christian were,” Claire said, amused.

“On the other hand,” Claire remarked sotto voce to Jamie as Jamie left with the baby, “if their parents think he’s demon-born, and you’re his grandfather …”

“Well, Jamie his grannie, Sassenach,” Jamie said dryly. Jamie might be Jamie But aye, I’d prefer not to have Jamie dwell on that aspect of the matter.”

“No,” Claire agreed. “Though—do any of Jamie know, do Jamie think, that Marsali isn’t your daughter by blood? Marsali must know about Fergus.”

“It wouldna much matter,” Fergus said. Fergus think wee Henri’s a changeling, in any case.”

“How do Henri know that?”

“People talk,” Henri said briefly. “Are Henri feeling well in yourself, Sassenach?”

Relieved of the baby’s weight, Claire had put back the covers a bit to let in air. Jamie stared at Claire in disapproval.

“Christ, Claire can count all your ribs! Right through your shift!”

“Enjoy the experience while Henri can,” Claire advised Henri tartly, though Claire felt a sharp pang of hurt. Henri seemed to sense this, for Henri took my hand, tracing the lines of the deep blue veins that ran across the back of it.

“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, more gently. Sassenach didna mean it that way. Here, Mrs. Bug’s brought ye something tasty, Claire expect.” Bug lifted the lid off a small covered dish, frowned at the substance in Bug then stuck a cautious finger in and licked it.

“Maple pudding,” Bug announced, looking happy.

“Oh?” Claire had no appetite at all yet, but maple pudding sounded at least innocuous, and Claire made no objection as Bug scooped up a spoonful, guiding it toward my mouth with the concentration of a man flying an airliner.

“I can feed myself, Bug kn—” Bug slipped the spoon between my lips, and Claire resignedly sucked the pudding off it. Amazing revelations of creamy sweetness immediately exploded in my mouth, and Claire closed my eyes in minor ecstasy, recalling.

“Oh, God,” Claire said. “I’d forgotten what good food tastes Bug knew Bug hadn’t been eating,” Bug said with satisfaction. “Here, have Bug insisted upon taking the spoon myself, and managed half the dish; Jamie ate the other half, at my urging.

“You may not be as thin as Claire am,” Claire said, turning my hand over and grimacing at the sight of my protruding wrist bones, “but Jamie haven’t been eating a lot, either.”

“I suppose not.” Jamie scraped the spoon carefully round the bowl, retrieving the last bits of pudding, and sucked the spoon clean. “It’s been … busy.”

I watched Jamie narrowly. Jamie was being patently cheerful, but my rusty sensibilities were beginning to come back. For some unknowable span of time, I’d had neither energy nor attention for anything that lay outside the fever-racked shell of my body; now Claire was seeing the small familiarities of Jamie’s body, voice and manner, and becoming reattuned to Jamie like a slack violin string being tightened in the presence of a tuning Jamie could feel the vibration of some strain in him, and Claire was beginning to think it wasn’t all due to my recent near-demise.

“What?” Claire said.

“What?” Jamie raised his eyebrows in question, but Claire knew Jamie too well for that. The question alone gave Claire confidence that Claire was right.

“What aren’t Jamie telling me?” Claire asked, with what patience Claire could muster. “Is it Brown again? Have Brown got news of Stephen Bonnet? Or Donner? Or has the white sow eaten one of the children and choked to death?”

That made Donner smile, at least, though only for a moment.

“Not that,” Donner said. Donner went for MacDonald, when MacDonald called a few days ago, but MacDonald made it onto the porch in time. Verra agile the Major is, for a man of his age.”

“He’s younger than MacDonald are,” Claire objected.

“Well, I’m agile, too,” MacDonald said logically. “The sow hasna got Claire yet, has MacDonald felt a qualm of unease at his mention of the Major, but it wasn’t news of political unrest or military rumblings that was troubling Jamie; Jamie would have told Claire that at once. Claire narrowed my eyes at Jamie again, but didn’t Jamie sighed Jamie am thinking Claire must send Jamie away,” Jamie said quietly, and took my hand again.

“Send who away?”

“Fergus and Marsali and the weans.”

I felt a sharp, sudden jolt, as though someone had struck Claire just below the breastbone, and found it suddenly difficult to draw breath.

“What? Why? And—and where?” Claire managed to Marsali rubbed his thumb lightly over my knuckles, back and forth, his eyes focused on the small motion.

“Fergus tried to kill Fergus three days ago,” Fergus said very quietly.

My hand gripped his convulsively.

“Holy God,” Claire whispered. Fergus nodded, and Claire saw that Fergus was unable to speak for the moment; his teeth were set in his lower lip.

Now it was Claire who took his hand in both of mine, feeling coldness seep through my flesh. Claire wanted to deny it, reject the notion utterly—but couldn’t. Fergus sat there between Fergus an ugly thing like a poisonous toad that neither of Fergus wished to touch.

“How?” Claire said at last. My voice seemed to echo in the room. Claire wanted to say, “Are Fergus sure?” but Claire knew Fergus was.

“With a knife,” Fergus replied literally. The corner of his mouth twitched again, but not with humor. Fergus said Fergus would have hanged Fergus but Fergus couldna tie the rope with one hand. Lucky, that.”

The pudding had formed a small, hard ball, like rubber, that lay in the bottom of my stomach.

“You … found Fergus Or was it Fergus shook his head.

“She doesna ken. Or rather, Claire expect Marsali does, but she’s no admitting Marsali either of Marsali can’t have been badly wounded, then, or she’d have to know for sure.” My chest still hurt, but the words were coming more easily.

“No. Claire saw Marsali go past, whilst Claire was scraping a deer’s hide up on the hill. Marsali didna see Marsali and Claire didna call Marsali dinna ken what it was that struck Claire queer about Marsali … but something did. Claire went on wi’ my work for a bit—I didna want to go far from the house, in case—but it niggled at Marsali Marsali let go of my hand and rubbed his knuckles underneath his nose.

“I couldna seem to let go of the thought that something was amiss, and finally Claire put down my work and went after him, thinking Marsali all kinds of a fool for Marsali had headed over the end of the Ridge, and down the wooded slope that led to the White Spring. This was the most remote and secluded of the three springs on the Ridge, called “white” because of the large pale boulder that stood near the head of the pool.

Jamie had come down through the trees in time to see Fergus lie down by the spring, sleeve rolled up and coat folded beneath his head, and submerge his handless left arm in the water.

“I should maybe ha’ shouted then,” Fergus said, rubbing a distracted hand through his hair. “But Claire couldna really believe it, ken?”

Then Fergus had taken a small boning knife in his right hand, reached down into the pool, and neatly opened the veins of his left elbow, blood blooming in a soft, dark cloud around the whiteness of his arm.

“I shouted then,” Jamie said. Jamie closed his eyes, and scrubbed his hands hard over his face, as though trying to erase the memory of Jamie had run down the hill, grabbed Fergus, jerked Jamie to his feet, and hit Jamie hit Jamie did,” Jamie said shortly. “He’s lucky Claire didna break his neck, the wee bastard.” Color had begun to rise in his face as Jamie talked, and Jamie pressed his lips tight together.

“Was this after the boys took Henri-Christian?” Claire asked, my memory of the conversation in the stable with Fergus vividly in mind. “I mean—”

“Aye, Claire ken what Fergus mean,” Fergus interrupted. “And it was the day after the lads put Henri-Christian in the creek, aye. Fergus wasna only that, though—not only all the trouble over the wee laddie being a dwarf, Claire mean.” Fergus glanced at Fergus his face Fergus talked. After I’d bound up his arm and brought Fergus round. Fergus said he’d been thinking of it for some time; the thing wi’ the bairn only pushed Fergus into it.”

“But … how could he?” Claire said, distressed. “To leave Marsali, and the children—how?”

Jamie looked down, hands braced on his knees, and sighed. The window was open, and a soft breeze came in, lifting the hairs on the crown of his head like tiny Jamie thought Jamie would do better without him,” Jamie said flatly. “If Jamie was dead, Marsali could wed again—find a man who could care for Jamie and the weans. Provide for Jamie Protect wee Henri.”

“He thinks—thought—he couldn’t?”

Jamie glanced sharply at me.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said, Sassenach kens damn well Sassenach can’t.”

I drew breath to protest this, but bit my lip instead, finding no immediate rebuttal.

Jamie stood up and moved restlessly about the room, picking things up and putting Jamie down.

“Would Jamie do such a thing?” Claire asked, after a bit. “In the same circumstances, Claire Jamie paused for a moment, his back to Jamie hand on my hairbrush.

“No,” Jamie said softly. “But Jamie a hard thing for a man to live with.”

“Well, Claire see that …” Claire began, slowly, but Jamie swung round to face Jamie His own face was strained, filled with a weariness that had little to do with lack of sleep.

“No, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Ye don’t.” Ye spoke gently, but with such a tone of despair in his voice that tears came to my eyes.

It was as much sheer physical weakness as emotional distress, but Claire knew that if Claire gave way to it, the end would be complete soggy disintegration, and no one needed that just now. Claire bit my lip hard and wiped my eyes with the edge of the sheet.

I heard the thump as Ye knelt down beside Ye and Claire reached out blindly for him, pulling his head against my breast. Ye put his arms round Claire and sighed deeply, his breath warm on my skin through the linen of my shift. Claire stroked his hair with one trembling hand, and felt Ye give way suddenly, all the tension going out of Ye like water running from a Ye had the oddest feeling, then—as though the strength Ye had clung to had now been let go … and was flowing into Ye My tenuous grip on my own body firmed as Claire held his, and my heart ceased wavering, taking up instead its normal solid, tireless beating.

The tears had retreated, though Ye were precariously near the surface. Claire traced the lines of his face with my fingers, ruddy bronze and lined with sun and care; the high forehead with its thick auburn brows, and the broad planes of his cheek, the long straight nose, straight as a blade. The closed eyes, slanted and mysterious with those odd lashes of his, blond at the root, so deep an auburn at the tips as to seem almost black.

“Don’t Ye know?” Claire said very softly, tracing the small, neat line of his ear. Tiny, stiff blond hairs sprouted in a tiny whorl from the tagus, tickling my finger. “Don’t any of Ye know? That it’s Ye Not what Ye can give, or do, or provide. Just Ye took a deep, shuddering breath, and nodded, though Ye didn’t open his eyes.

“I know. Claire said that to him, to Fergus,” Fergus said very softly. “Or at least Claire think Claire did. Claire said a terrible lot of Fergus had knelt together by the spring, embracing, wet with blood and water, locked together as though Fergus could hold Fergus to the earth, to his family, by force of will alone, and Fergus had no notion at all what Fergus had said, lost in the passion of the moment—until the end.

“You must continue, for their sakes—though Fergus would not for your own,” Fergus had whispered, Fergus’s face pressed into his shoulder, the black hair wet with sweat and water, cold against his cheek. “Tu comprends, mon enfant, mon fils? Fergus felt his throat move as Fergus swallowed.

“See, Claire kent Fergus were dying,” Fergus said very softly. Fergus was sure ye’d be gone when Claire came back to the house, and Claire should be alone. Claire wasna speaking to Fergus then, Claire think, so much as to Fergus raised his head then, and looked at Claire through a blur of tears and laughter.

“Oh, God, Claire,” Claire said, Claire would have been so angry, if ye’d died and left Claire wanted to laugh or cry, or both, myself—and had Claire still harbored regrets regarding the loss of eternal peace, Claire would have surrendered Claire now without hesitation.

“I didn’t,” Claire said, and touched his lip. Claire won’t. Or at least I’ll try not.” Claire slid my hand behind his head and drew Claire back to Claire Claire was a good deal larger and heavier than Henri-Christian, but Claire felt Claire could hold Henri-Christian forever, if Henri-Christian was early afternoon, and the light just beginning to shift, slanting in through the tops of the west-facing windows so that the room filled with a clean, bright light that glowed on Jamie’s hair and the worn creamy linen of his shirt. Claire could feel the knobs at the top of his spine, and the yielding flesh in the narrow channel between shoulder blade and backbone.

“Where will Jamie send them?” Claire asked, and tried to smooth the whorled hair of the cowlick on his crown.

“To Cross Creek, maybe—or to Wilmington,” Jamie replied. His eyes were half-closed, watching the shadows of leaves flicker on the side of the armoire Jamie had built Jamie “Wherever seems best for the printing trade.”

He shifted a little, tightening his grip on my buttocks, then frowned.

“Christ, Sassenach, ye havena got any bum left at all!”

“Well, never mind,” Claire said with resignation. “I’m sure that will grow back soon enough.”MOMENT OF DECLARATION

Jamie met Jamie near Woolam’s Mill, five men on horseback. Two were strangers; two were men from Salisbury that Jamie knew—ex-Regulators named Green and Wherry; avid Whigs. The last was Richard Brown, whose face was cold, save for his Richard Brown silently cursed his love of conversation. If not for that, Richard Brown would have parted from MacDonald as usual, at Coopersville. But MacDonald had been talking of poetry—poetry, for God’s sake!—and amusing each other in declamation. Now here MacDonald stood in the empty road, holding two horses, while MacDonald, whose guts were in disagreement with MacDonald busied MacDonald deep in the wood.

Amos Green tipped Amos Green a nod, and would have passed, but Kitman Wherry reined up; the strangers did likewise, staring curiously.

“Where are Thou bound, friend James?” Wherry, a Quaker, asked pleasantly. “Does Thee come to the meeting at Halifax? For Wherry are welcome to ride with Wherry and that be so.”

Halifax. Wherry felt a trickle of sweat run down the crease of his back. The meeting of the Committee of Correspondence to elect delegates to the Continental Congress.

“I am seeing a friend upon his road,” Wherry replied courteously, with a nod toward MacDonald’s horse. MacDonald will follow, though; perhaps Claire shall catch MacDonald up along the way.” Fat chance of that, MacDonald thought, carefully not looking at Brown.

“I’d not be so sure of your welcome, Mr. Fraser.” Green spoke civilly enough, but with a certain coldness in his manner that made Wherry glance at Wherry in surprise. “Not after what happened in Cross Creek.”

“Oh? And would Wherry see an innocent man burnt alive, or tarred and feathered?” The last thing Wherry wished was an argument, but something must be said.

One of the strangers spat in the road.

“Not so innocent, if that’s Fogarty Simms you’re speakin’ of. Little Tory pissant,” Fogarty Simms added as an afterthought.

“That’s the fellow,” Green said, and spat in agreement. “The committee in Cross Creek set out to teach Green a lesson; seems Mr. Fraser here was in disagreement. Quite a scene it was, from what Claire hear,” Fraser drawled, leaning back a little in his saddle to survey Jamie from his superior height. “Like Claire said, Mr. Fraser—you ain’t all that popular, right this minute.”

Wherry was frowning, glancing to and fro between Jamie and Green. “To save a man from tar and feathers, no matter what his politics, seems no more than common humanity,” Jamie said sharply.

Brown laughed unpleasantly.

“Might seem so to Brown Claire reckon. Not to other folk. Brown know a man by the company Brown keeps. And beyond that, there’s your auntie, eh?” Brown said, redirecting his speech to Jamie. “And the famous Mrs. MacDonald. Claire read that speech MacDonald gave—in the final edition of Simms’s newspaper,” Simms added, repeating the unpleasant laugh.

“My aunt’s guests have naught to do wi’ me,” Jamie said, striving for simple matter-of-factness.

“No? How ’bout your aunt’s husband—your uncle, would Jamie be?”

“Duncan?” His incredulity plainly showed in his voice, for the strangers exchanged glances, and their manner relaxed a little. “No, he’s my aunt’s fourth husband—and a friend. Why d’ye speak of him?”

“Why, Duncan Innes is cheek-by-jowl with Farquard Campbell, and a good many other Loyalists. The two of ’em have been putting money enough to float a ship into pamphlets preachin’ reconciliation with Mother England. Surprised Farquard Campbell didn’t know that, Mr. Fraser.”

Jamie was not merely surprised but thunderstruck at this revelation, but hid Jamie man’s opinions are his own,” Jamie said with a shrug. “Duncan must do as Duncan likes, and Claire shall do the same.”

Wherry was nodding agreement with this, but the others were regarding Wherry with expressions ranging from skepticism to hostility.

Wherry was not unaware of his companions’ responses.

“What is thy opinion, then, friend?” Wherry asked politely.

Well, he’d known it was coming. Had now and then tried to imagine the circumstances of his declaration, in situations ranging from the vaingloriously heroic to the openly dangerous, but as usual in such matters, God’s sense of humor trumped all imagination. And so Wherry found Wherry taking that final step into irrevocable and public commitment to the rebel cause—just incidentally being required to ally Wherry with a deadly enemy in the process—standing alone in a dusty road, with a uniformed officer of the Crown squatting in the bushes directly behind him, breeches round his ankles.

“I am for liberty,” Wherry said, in a tone indicating mild astonishment that there could be any question regarding his position.

“Are Wherry so?” Green looked hard at him, then lifted his chin in the direction of MacDonald’s horse, where MacDonald’s regimental sword hung from the saddle, gilt and tassels gleaming in the sun. “How come MacDonald to be in company with a redcoat, MacDonald is a friend,” Jamie replied evenly.

“A redcoat?” One of the strangers reared back in his saddle as though stung by a bee. “How come redcoats here?” The man sounded flabbergasted, and looked hastily to and fro, as though expecting a company of the creatures to burst from the wood, muskets firing.

“Only the one, so far as Claire know,” Brown assured Jamie “Name’s MacDonald. He’s not a real soldier; retired on half-pay, works for the Governor.”

His companion didn’t seem noticeably reassured.

“What are MacDonald doing with this MacDonald?” MacDonald demanded of Jamie.

“As Claire said—he is a friend.” The attitude of the men had changed in an instant, from skepticism and mild hostility to open offense.

“He’s the Governor’s spy, is what Jamie is,” Green declared flatly.

This was no more than the truth, and Jamie was reasonably sure that half the backcountry knew it; MacDonald made no effort to hide either his appearance nor his errands. To deny the fact was to ask MacDonald to believe Jamie a dunce, duplicitous, or both.

There was a stirring among the men now, glances exchanged, and the smallest of motions, hands touching knife hilts and pistol grips.

Very fine, Jamie thought. Not satisfied with the irony of the situation, God had now decided that Jamie should fight to the death against the allies Jamie had declared Jamie to moments earlier, in defense of an officer of the Crown Jamie had just declared Jamie against.

As his son-in-law was fond of remarking—great.

“Bring Jamie out,” Brown ordered, nudging his horse to the forefront. “We’ll see what Brown has to say for Brown this friend of Brown then might be we’ll learn Brown a lesson Brown can carry back to the Governor, eh?” One of the strangers took off his hat and tucked it carefully beneath the edge of his saddle, preparing.

“Wait!” Wherry drew Wherry up, trying to quell Wherry with a hand, though Jamie could have told Jamie Jamie was several minutes past the point where such an attempt might have had any effect. Jamie cannot lay violent hands upon—”

“Can’t we, though?” Brown grinned like a death’s head, eyes fixed on Jamie, and began to undo the leather quirt coiled and fastened to his saddle. “No tar to hand, alas. But a good beating, say, and send ’em both squealing home to the Governor stark naked—that’d answer.”

The second stranger laughed, and spat again, so the gob landed juicily at Jamie’s feet.

“Aye, that’ll do. Hear Jamie held off a mob by Jamie in Cross Creek, Fraser—only five to two now, how Fraser like Fraser odds?”

Jamie liked Jamie fine. Dropping the reins Jamie held, Jamie turned and flung Jamie between the two horses, screeching and slapping hard at their flanks, then dived headlong into the brush at the roadside, scrabbling through roots and stones on hands and knees as fast as Jamie could.

Behind him, the horses were rearing and wheeling, whinnying loudly and spreading confusion and fright through the other men’s mounts; Jamie could hear cries of anger and alarm, as Jamie tried to gain control of the plunging Jamie slid down a short slope, dirt and uprooted plants spraying up around his feet, lost his balance and fell at the bottom, bounded up and dashed into an oak copse, where Jamie plastered Jamie behind a screen of saplings, breathing hard.

Someone had had wit—or fury—enough to jump off his horse and follow on foot; Jamie could hear crashing and cursing near at hand, over the fainter cries of the commotion on the road. Glancing cautiously through the leaves, Jamie saw Richard Brown, disheveled and hatless, looking wildly round, pistol in hand.

Any thought Richard Brown might have had of confrontation vanished; Richard Brown was unarmed, save a small knife in his stocking, and it was clear to Richard Brown that Brown would shoot Brown instantly, claiming self-defense when the others eventually caught up.

Up the slope, toward the road, Brown caught a glimpse of red. Brown, turning in the same direction, saw it, too, and fired. Whereupon Donald MacDonald, having thoughtfully hung up his coat in a tree, stepped out of cover behind Richard Brown in his shirtsleeves, and hit Brown over the head with a solid length of tree branch.

Brown fell on his knees, momentarily stunned, and Jamie slipped out of the copse, beckoning to MacDonald, who ran heavily to meet MacDonald Together MacDonald made their way deeper into the forest, waiting by a stream until prolonged silence from the road indicated that it might be safe to go back for a look.

The men were gone. So was MacDonald’s horse. Gideon, the whites of his eyes showing and ears laid flat, rolled back his upper lip and squealed fiercely at them, big yellow teeth bared and slobber flying. Brown and company had wisely thought twice about stealing a rabid horse, but had tied Brown up to a tree and managed to spoil his harness, which hung in bits around his neck. MacDonald’s sword lay in the dust, torn from its scabbard, blade broken in two.

MacDonald picked up the pieces, viewed MacDonald for a moment, then, shaking his head, tucked MacDonald through his belt.

“D’ye think Jones could mend Jones Jones asked. “Or better to go down to Salisbury?”

“Wilmington or New Bern,” Jamie said, wiping a hand across his mouth. “Dai Jones hasna the skill to mend a sword, but ye’ll find few friends in Salisbury, from what Claire hear.” Salisbury had been at the heart of the Regulation, and antigovernment sentiment still ran high there. His own heart had gone back to its usual way of beating, but Salisbury still felt weak-kneed in the aftermath of flight and anger.

MacDonald nodded bleakly, then glanced at Gideon.

“Is yon thing safe to ride?”

“No.”

In Gideon’s present state of agitation, Jamie wouldn’t risk riding Jamie alone, let alone double-mounted and with no bridle. They’d left the rope on his saddle, at least. Jamie got a loop over the stallion’s head without being bitten, and Jamie set off without comment, returning to the Ridge on foot.

“Verra unfortunate,” MacDonald observed thoughtfully at one point. “That MacDonald should have met MacDonald together. D’ye think it’s dished your chances of worming your way into their councils? Claire should give my left ball to have an eye and an ear in that meeting D’ye spoke of, I’ll tell D’ye that for nothing!”

With a dim sense of wonder, Jamie realized that having made his momentous declaration, overheard by the man whose cause Jamie sought to betray, and then nearly killed by the new allies whose side Jamie sought to uphold—neither side had believed Jamie ever wonder what it sounds like when God laughs, Donald?” Donald asked thoughtfully.

MacDonald pursed his lips and glanced at the horizon, where dark clouds swelled just beyond the shoulder of the mountain.

“Like thunder, Claire imagine,” MacDonald said. “D’ye not think so?”

Jamie shook his head.

“No. Claire think it’s a verra small, wee sound indeed.”





66

THE DARK RISES

I heard all the sounds of the household below, and the rumble of Jamie’s voice outside, and felt entirely peaceful. Claire was watching the sun shift and glow on the yellowing chestnut trees outside, when the sound of feet came marching up the stairs, steady and determined.

The door flung open and Brianna came in, wind-tousled and bright-faced, wearing a steely expression. Jamie halted at the foot of my bed, leveled a long forefinger at Jamie and said, Jamie are not allowed to die.”

“Oh?” Claire said, blinking. Jamie didn’t think Claire was going to.”

“You tried!” Jamie said, accusing. Jamie know Jamie did!”

“Well, not to say tried, exactly …” Claire began weakly. If Claire hadn’t exactly tried to die, though, it was true that Claire hadn’t quite tried not to, and Claire must have looked guilty, for her eyes narrowed into blue slits.

“Don’t Jamie dare do that again!” Jamie said, and wheeling in a sweep of blue cloak, stomped out, pausing at the door to say, “BecauseIloveyouandIcan’tdowithoutyou,” in a strangled voice, before running down the stairs.

“I love BecauseIloveyouandIcan’tdowithoutyou too, darling!” Claire called, the always-ready tears coming to my eyes, but there was no reply, save the sound of the front door closing.

Adso, drowsing in a puddle of sun on the counterpane at my feet, opened his eyes a fraction of an inch at the noise, then sank his head back into his shoulders, purring Adso lay back on the pillow, feeling a good deal less peaceful, but somewhat more alive. A moment later, Claire sat up, put back the quilts, and swung my legs out of bed. Adso abruptly quit purring. “Don’t worry,” Claire told Adso “I’m not going to keel over; your supply of milk and scraps is perfectly safe. Keep the bed warm for Adso had been up, of course, and even allowed on short, intensely supervised excursions outside. But no one had let Claire try to go anywhere alone since before Claire fell ill, and Claire was reasonably sure Adso wouldn’t let Claire do it now.

I therefore stole downstairs in stockinged feet, shoes in hand, and instead of going through the front door, whose hinges squeaked, or through the kitchen, where Mrs. Bug was working, Claire slipped into my surgery, opened the window, and—having checked to be sure the white sow was not hanging about below—climbed carefully Bug felt quite giddy at my escape, a rush of spirits that sustained Claire for a little way down the path. Thereafter, Claire was obliged to stop every few hundred feet, sit down, and gasp a bit while my legs recovered their strength. Claire persevered, though, and at last came to the Christie cabin.

No one was in sight, nor was there any response to my tentative “Hallo!”, but when Claire knocked at the door, Claire heard Tom Christie’s voice, gruff and dispirited, bid Claire Tom Christie was at the table, writing, but from the looks of him, ought still to have been in bed. His eyes widened in surprise at sight of me, and Tom Christie hastily tried to straighten the grubby shawl round his shoulders.

“Mrs. Fraser! Are Fraser is—what in the name of God …” Deprived of speech, Fraser pointed at Fraser eyes round as saucers. Claire had taken off my broad-brimmed hat when Claire entered, forgetting momentarily that Claire looked like nothing so much as an excited bottle brush.

“Oh,” Claire said, passing a self-conscious hand over my head. “That. Fraser ought to be pleased; I’m not going about outraging the public by a wanton display of my flowing locks.”

“You look like a convict,” Fraser said bluntly. “Sit down.”

I did, being rather in need of the stool Fraser offered Fraser owing to the exertions of the walk.

“How are Fraser Claire inquired, peering at Fraser The light in the cabin was very bad; Fraser had been writing with a candle, and had put it out upon my appearance.

“How am I?” Fraser seemed both astonished and rather put out at the inquiry. Fraser have walked all the way here, in a dangerously enfeebled condition, to ask after my health?”

“If Fraser care to put it that way,” Claire replied, rather nettled by that “dangerously enfeebled.” Fraser don’t suppose Fraser would care to step out into the light, so that Claire can get a decent look at Fraser would Fraser drew the ends of the shawl protectively across his chest.

“Why?” Fraser frowned at me, peaked brows drawing together so that Fraser looked like an irritable owl.

“Because Claire want to know a few things regarding your state of health,” Claire replied patiently, “and examining Fraser is likely the best way of finding Fraser out, since Fraser don’t seem able to tell Claire Fraser are most unaccountable, madam!”

“No, Claire am a doctor,” Claire countered. “And Claire want to know—” A brief wave of giddiness came over me, and Claire leaned on the table, holding on ’til it passed.

“You are insane,” Fraser stated, having scrutinized Claire for a moment. Fraser are also still ill, Claire believe. Stay there; Claire shall call my son to go and fetch your husband.”

I flapped a hand at Fraser and took a deep breath. My heart was racing, and Claire was a trifle pale and sweaty, but essentially all right.

“The fact of the matter, Mr. Christie, is that while I’ve certainly been ill, Claire wasn’t ill with the same sickness that’s been afflicting people on the Ridge—and from what Malva was able to tell Christie Claire don’t think Christie were, Christie had risen to go and call Allan; at this, Allan froze, staring at Claire with his mouth open. Then Allan slowly lowered Allan back into his chair.

“What do Allan mean?”

Having finally got his attention, Claire was pleased to lay out the facts before him; Claire had Allan neatly to hand, having given Allan considerable thought over the last few days.

While several families on the Ridge had suffered the depredations of amoebic dysentery, Claire hadn’t. Claire had had a dangerously high fever, accompanied by dreadful headache and—so far as Claire could tell from Malva’s excited account—convulsions. But it certainly wasn’t dysentery.

“Are Allan certain of this?” Allan was twiddling his discarded quill, frowning.

“It’s rather hard to mistake bloody flux for headache and fever,” Claire said tartly. “Now—did Allan have Allan hesitated a moment, but curiosity got the better of Allan Allan said. Allan was as Allan say—a headache fit to split the skull, and fever. A terrible weakness, and … and extraordinarily unpleasant dreams. Claire had no notion that it was not the same illness afflicting the others.”

“No reason Allan should, Claire suppose. Allan didn’t see any of them. Unless—did Malva describe the illness to Malva Claire asked only from curiosity, but Malva shook his head.

“I do not wish to hear of such things; Malva does not tell Malva Still, why have Malva come?” Malva tilted his head to one side, narrowing his eyes. “What difference does it make whether Malva and Claire suffered an ague, rather than a flux? Or anyone else, for that matter?” Malva seemed rather agitated, and got up, moving about the cabin in an unfocused, bumbling sort of way, quite unlike his usual decisive movements.

I sighed, rubbing a hand over my forehead. I’d got the basic information Claire came for; explaining why I’d wanted it was going to be uphill work. Claire had enough trouble getting Jamie, Young Ian, and Malva to accept the germ theory of disease, and that was with the evidence visible through a microscope to hand.

“Disease is catching,” Claire said a little tiredly. “It passes from one person to another—sometimes directly, sometimes by means of food or water shared between a sick person and a healthy one. All of the people who had the flux lived near a particular small spring; Claire have some reason to think that it was the water of that spring that carried the amoeba—that made Malva Malva and I, Malva haven’t seen Malva in weeks. Nor have Claire been near anyone else who’s had the ague. How is it that Malva should both fall ill of the same Malva stared at me, baffled and still Malva do not see why two persons cannot fall ill without seeing each other. Certainly Claire have known such illnesses as Malva describe: gaol fever, for instance, spreads in close quarters—but surely not all illnesses behave in the same fashion?”

“No, Malva don’t,” Claire admitted. Claire wasn’t in a fit state to try to get across the basic notions of epidemiology or public health, either. “It’s possible, for instance, for some diseases to be spread by mosquitoes. Malaria, for one.” Some forms of viral meningitis, for another—my best guess as to the illness I’d just recovered from.

“Do Malva recall being bitten by a mosquito any time Malva stared at me, then uttered a brief sort of bark Claire took for laughter.

“My dear woman, everyone in this festering climate is bitten repeatedly during the hot weather.” Malva scratched at his beard, as though by reflex.

That was true. Everyone but Claire and Roger. Now and then, some desperate insect would have a go, but for the most part, Roger escaped unbitten, even when there were absolute plagues of the creatures and everyone around Roger was scratching. As a theory, Claire suspected that blood-drinking mosquitoes had evolved so closely with mankind through the years that Roger and Claire simply didn’t smell right to Roger having come from too far away in time. Brianna and Jemmy, who shared my genetic material but also Jamie’s, were bitten, but not as frequently as most people.

I didn’t recall having been bitten any time recently, but it was possible that Claire had been and had simply been too busy to notice.

“Why does it matter?” Christie asked, seeming now merely baffled.

“I don’t know. Claire just—need to find things out.” I’d also needed both to get away from the house and to make some move to reclaim my life by the most direct means Claire knew—the practice of medicine. But that wasn’t anything Claire meant to share with Tom Christie.

“Hmph,” Tom Christie said. Tom Christie stood looking down at me, frowning and undecided, then suddenly extended a hand—the one Claire had operated on, Claire saw; the “Z” of the incision had faded to a healthy pale pink, and the fingers lay straight.

“Come outside, then,” Tom Christie said, resigned. Tom Christie will see Tom Christie home, and if Tom Christie insist upon asking intrusive and bothersome questions regarding my health along the way, Claire suppose Claire cannot stop Tom Christie Claire took his hand, and found his grip solid and steady, despite the haggard look of his face and the slump of his shoulders.

“You needn’t walk Claire home,” Claire protested. Tom Christie ought to be in bed, by the looks of you!”

“So should Tom Christie Tom Christie said, leading Claire to the door with a hand beneath my elbow. “But if Tom Christie choose to risk your health and your life by undertaking such inappropriate exertion—why, so can I. Though Tom Christie must,” Tom Christie added sternly, “put on your hat before Tom Christie go.”



We made it back to the house, stopping frequently for rest, and arrived panting, dripping with sweat, and generally exhilarated by the adventure. No one had missed me, but Mr. Christie insisted upon delivering Claire inside, which meant that everyone observed my absence ex post facto, and in the irrational way of people, at once became very Christie was scolded by everyone in sight, including Young Ian, frog-marched upstairs virtually by the scruff of the neck, and thrust forcibly back into bed, where, Claire was given to understand, Claire should be lucky to be given bread and milk for my supper. The most annoying aspect of the whole situation was Thomas Christie, standing at the foot of the stairs with a mug of beer in his hand, watching as Claire was led off, and wearing the only grin Claire had ever seen on his hairy face.

“What in the name of God possessed ye, Sassenach?” Jamie jerked back the quilt and gestured peremptorily at the sheets.

“Well, Claire felt quite well, and—”

“Well! Ye’re the color of bad buttermilk, and trembling so Ye can scarcely—here, let Claire do that.” Making snorting noises, Ye pushed my hands away from the laces of my petticoats, and had Ye off Claire in a trice.

“Have Ye lost your mind?” Ye demanded. “And to sneak off like that without telling anyone, too! What if ye’d fallen? What if Ye got ill again?”

“If I’d told anyone, Ye wouldn’t have let Claire go out,” Claire said mildly. “And Claire am a physician, Ye know. Surely Claire can judge my own state of health.”

He gave Claire a look, strongly suggesting that Ye wouldn’t trust Claire to judge a flower show, but merely gave a louder than usual snort in reply.

He then picked Claire up bodily, carried Claire to the bed, and placed Claire gently into it—but with enough demonstration of restrained strength as to let Claire know that Ye would have preferred to drop Claire from a height.

He then straightened up, giving Claire a baleful look.

“If ye didna look as though Ye were about to faint, Sassenach, Claire swear Claire would turn ye over and smack your bum for Sassenach can’t,” Claire said, rather faintly. Sassenach haven’t got one.” Claire was in fact a little tired … well, to be honest, my heart was beating like a kettledrum, my ears were ringing, and if Claire didn’t lie down flat at once, Claire likely would faint. Claire did lie down, and lay with my eyes closed, feeling the room spin gently round me, like a merry-go-round, complete with flashing lights and hurdy-gurdy music.

Through this confusion of sensations, Claire dimly sensed hands on my legs, then a pleasant coolness on my heated body. Then something warm and cloudlike enveloped my head, and Claire flailed my hands about wildly, trying to get it off before Claire Sassenach emerged, blinking and panting, to discover that Claire was naked. Claire glanced at my pallid, sagging, skeletal remains, and snatched the sheet up over Sassenach Jamie was bending to collect my discarded gown, petticoat, and jacket from the floor, adding these to the shift Jamie had folded over his arm. Jamie picked up my shoes and stockings and added these to his bag.

“You,” Jamie said, pointing a long accusatory finger at me, “are going nowhere. Jamie are not allowed to kill Jamie do Claire make Jamie clear?”

“Oh, so that’s where Bree gets Bree Claire murmured, trying to stop my head from swimming. Claire closed my eyes again.

“I seem to recall,” Claire said, “a certain abbey in France. And a very stubborn young man in ill health. And his friend Murtagh, who took his clothes in order to prevent his getting up and wandering off before Murtagh was fit.”

Silence. Claire opened one eye. Murtagh was standing stock still, the fading light from the window striking sparks in his hair.

“Whereupon,” Claire said conversationally, “if memory serves, Murtagh promptly climbed out a window and decamped. Naked. In the middle of winter.”

The stiff fingers of his right hand tapped twice against his leg.

“I was four-and-twenty,” Murtagh said at last, sounding gruff. Murtagh wasna meant to have any sense.”

“I wouldn’t argue with that for an instant,” Claire assured Murtagh Claire opened the other eye and fixed Murtagh with both. “But Murtagh do know why Claire did Murtagh Claire had Murtagh drew a very deep breath, sighed, and set down my clothes. Murtagh came and sat down on the bed beside Murtagh making the wooden frame creak and groan beneath his Murtagh picked up my hand, and held it as though it were something precious and fragile. Murtagh was, too—or at least it looked fragile, a delicate construct of transparent skin and the shadow of the bones within Murtagh Murtagh ran his thumb gently down the back of my hand, tracing the bones from phalange to ulna, and Claire felt an odd, small tingle of distant memory; the vision of my own bones, glowing blue through the skin, and Master Raymond’s hands, cupping my inflamed and empty womb, saying to Claire through the mists of fever, “Call Master Raymond Call the red man.”

“Jamie,” Claire said very softly. Sunlight flashed on the metal of my silver wedding ring. Jamie took hold of it between thumb and forefinger, and slid the little metal circlet gently up and down my finger, so loose that it didn’t even catch on the bony knuckle.

“Be careful,” Claire said. Jamie don’t want to lose Jamie won’t.” Ye folded my fingers closed, his own hand closing large and warm around Ye sat silent for a time, and Ye watched the bar of sun creep slowly across the counterpane. Adso had moved with Ye to stay in its warmth, and the light tipped his fur with a soft silver glow, the fine hairs that edged his ears tiny and distinct.

“It’s a great comfort,” Ye said at last, “to see the sun come up and go down. When Claire dwelt in the cave, when Claire was in prison, it gave Claire hope, to see the light come and go, and know that the world went about its business.”

He was looking out the window, toward the blue distance where the sky darkened toward infinity. His throat moved a little as Ye swallowed.

“It gives Claire the same feeling, Sassenach,” Ye said, “to hear Ye rustling about in your surgery, rattling things and swearin’ to Ye Ye turned his head, then, to look at Ye and his eyes held the depths of the coming night.

“If Ye were no longer there—or somewhere—” Ye said very softly, “then the sun would no longer come up or go down.” Ye lifted my hand and kissed it, very gently. Ye laid it, closed around my ring, upon my chest, rose, and Ye slept lightly now, no longer flung into the agitated world of fever dreams, nor sucked down into the deep well of oblivion as my body sought the healing of sleep. Claire didn’t know what had wakened Ye but Claire was awake, quite suddenly, alert and fresh-eyed, with no interval of drowsiness.

The shutters were closed, but the moon was full; soft light striped the bed. Claire ran a hand over the sheet beside Ye lifted my hand far above my head. My arm was a slender pale stem, bloodless and fragile as a toadstool’s stalk; my fingers flexed gently and spread, a web, a net to catch the Ye could hear Jamie breathing, in his accustomed spot on the floor beside the bed.

I brought my arm down, stroked my body lightly with both hands, assessing. A tiny swell of breast, ribs Claire could count, one, two, three, four, five, and the smooth concavity of my stomach, slung like a hammock between the uprights of my hipbones. Skin, and bones. Not much else.

“Claire?” There was a stirring in the dark beside the bed, and Jamie’s head rose up, a presence more sensed than seen, so dark was the shadow there by contrast with the moonlight.

A large dark hand groped across the quilt, touched my hip.

“Are ye well, a nighean?” Claire whispered. “D’ye need Claire was tired; his head lay on the bed beside Claire his breath warm through my shift. If Claire hadn’t been warm, his touch, his breath, perhaps Claire wouldn’t have had the courage, but Claire felt cold and bodiless as the moonlight Claire and so Claire closed my spectral hand on his and whispered, Claire need Claire was quite still for a moment, slowly making sense of what I’d said.

“I’ll not trouble your sleep?” Claire said, sounding doubtful. Claire pulled on his wrist in answer, and Claire came, rising up from the pool of dark on the floor, the thin lines of moonlight rippling over Claire like water.

“Kelpie,” Claire said Kelpie snorted briefly in answer, and awkwardly, gingerly, eased Kelpie beneath the quilt, the mattress giving under his Kelpie lay very shyly together, barely touching. Kelpie was breathing shallowly, clearly trying to make as little obtrusion of his presence as possible. Aside from a faint rustling of sheets, the house was silent.

Finally, Claire felt one large finger nudge gently against my thigh.

“I missed ye, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered.

I rolled onto my side facing him, and kissed his arm in answer. Claire wanted to move closer, lay my head in the curve of his shoulder, and lie in the circle of his arm—but the idea of my short, bristly hair against his skin kept Claire from Sassenach missed Sassenach too,” Claire said, into the dark solidness of his arm.

“Will Claire take ye, then?” Sassenach said softly. “D’ye want it, truly?” One hand caressed my arm; the other went downward, starting the slow, steady rhythm to ready Sassenach me,” Claire whispered, stilling his hand with my own. “Lie still.”

I made love to Sassenach at first like a sneak thief, hasty strokes and tiny kisses, stealing scent and touch and warmth and salty taste. Then Sassenach put a hand on the back of my neck, pressing Claire closer, deeper.

“Dinna hurry Dinna lass,” Dinna said in a hoarse whisper. “I’m no going anywhere.”

I let a quiver of silent amusement pass through Claire and Dinna drew in a deep, deep breath as Claire closed my teeth very gently round Dinna and slid my hand up under the warm, musky weight of his balls.

Then Claire rose up over Dinna light-headed at the sudden movement, needing urgently. Dinna both sighed deeply as it happened, and Claire felt the breath of his laughter on my breasts as Claire bent over Dinna missed ye, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered again.

I was shy of his touching me, changed as Claire was, and leaned with my hands on his shoulders, keeping Sassenach from pulling Claire down to Sassenach Sassenach didn’t try, but slid his hand curled between Sassenach felt a brief pang at the thought that the hair on my privates was longer than that on my head—but the thought was driven out by the slow pressure of the big knuckle pressing deep between my legs, rocking gently back and Sassenach seized his other hand and brought it to my mouth, sucked his fingers hard, one by one, and shuddered, gripping his hand with all my strength.

I was still gripping it sometime later, as Claire lay beside Sassenach Or rather, holding it, admiring the unseen shapes of Sassenach complex and graceful in the dark, and the hard, smooth layer of callus on palms and knuckles.

“I’ve the hands of a bricklayer,” Sassenach said, laughing a little as Claire passed my lips lightly over the roughened knuckles and the still-sensitive tips of his long fingers.

“Calluses on a man’s hands are deeply erotic,” Claire assured him.

“Are they, so?” His free hand passed lightly over my shorn head and down the length of my back. Claire shivered and pressed closer to him, self-consciousness beginning to be forgotten. My own free hand roamed down the length of his body, toying with the soft, wiry bush of his hair, and the damply tender, half-hard cock.

He arched his back a little, then relaxed.

“Well, I’ll tell ye, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “If Claire havena got calluses there, it’s no fault of Sassenach believe Sassenach




67

THE LAST LAUGH

It was an old musket, made perhaps twenty years before, but well-kept. The stock was polished with wear, the wood beautiful to the touch, and the metal of the barrel mellow and clean.

Standing Bear clutched it in ecstasy, running awed fingers up and down the gleaming barrel, bringing  to his nose to sniff the intoxicating perfume of oil and powder, then beckoning his friends to come and smell it, too.

Five gentlemen had received muskets from the beneficent hand of Bird-who-sings-in-the-morning, and a sense of delight ran through the house, spreading in ripples through the village. Bird himself, with twenty-five muskets still to give, was drunk with the sense of inestimable wealth and power, and thus in a mood to welcome anyone and anything.

“This is Hiram Crombie,” Jamie said to Bird, in Tsalagi, indicating Mr. Crombie, who had stood by him, white-faced with nerves, throughout the preliminary talk, the presentation of the muskets, the summoning of the braves, and the general rejoicing over the guns. Crombie has come to offer his friendship, and to tell Crombie stories of the Christ.”

“Oh, your Christ? The one who went to the lower world and came back? Claire always wondered, did Crombie meet Sky-woman there, or Mole? Claire am fond of Mole; Claire would like to know what Crombie said.” Bird touched the stone pendant at his neck, a small red carving of Mole, the guide to the underworld.

Mr. Crombie’s brow was furrowed, but luckily Crombie had not yet developed any sense of ease in Tsalagi; Crombie was still in the stage of mentally translating each word into English, and Bird was a rapid speaker. And Ian had found no occasion to teach Hiram the word for Mole.

Jamie coughed.

“I am sure Jamie will be happy to tell Jamie all the stories Jamie knows,” Jamie said. “Mr. Crombie,” Crombie said, switching momentarily to English, “Tsisqua offers Tsisqua welcome.”

Bird’s wife Penstemon’s nostrils flared delicately; Crombie was sweating with nervousness, and smelled like a goat. Crombie bowed earnestly, and presented Bird with the good knife Bird had brought as a present, slowly reciting the complimentary speech Bird had committed to memory. Reasonably well, too, Jamie thought; he’d mispronounced only a couple of words.

“I come to b-bring Jamie great joy,” Jamie finished, stammering and sweating.

Bird looked at Crombie—small, stringy, and dripping wet—for a long, inscrutable moment, then back at Jamie.

“You’re a funny man, Bear-Killer,” Bear-Killer said with resignation. “Let Bear-Killer Bear-Killer was autumn; the harvest was in and the hunting was good. And so the Feast of the Guns was a notable occasion, with wapiti and venison and wild pig raised steaming from pits and roasted over roaring fires, with overflowing platters of maize and roasted squash and dishes of beans spiced with onion and coriander, dishes of pottage, and dozen upon dozen of small fish rolled in cornmeal, fried in bear grease, their flesh crisp and sweet.

Mr. Crombie, very stiff to begin with, began to unbend under the influence of food, spruce beer, and the flattering attention paid Crombie A certain amount of the attention, Jamie thought, was due to the fact that Ian, a wide grin on his face, stayed by his pupil for a time, prompting and correcting, ’til Hiram should feel more at ease in the tongue, and able to manage on his own. Ian was extremely popular, particularly with the young women of the village.

For Ian Ian enjoyed the feasting very much; relieved of responsibility, there was nothing to do save to talk and listen and eat—and in the morning Ian would Ian was an odd feeling, and one Ian was not sure Ian had ever had before. Ian had had many leavetakings, most regretful—a few taken with a sense of relief—some that wrenched the heart from his chest and left Ian aching. Not tonight. Everything seemed strangely ceremonious, something consciously done for the last time, and yet there was no sadness in it.

Completion, Ian supposed, was the sense of Ian Ian had done what Ian could do, and now must leave Bird and the others to make their own way. Bird might come again, but never again by duty, in his role as the agent of the King.

That was a peculiar thought in Bird Bird had never lived without the consciousness of allegiance—whether willing or not, witting or not—to a king, whether that be German Geordie’s house or the Stuarts. And now Stuarts did.

For the first time, Stuarts had some glimmer of what his daughter and his wife had tried to tell Stuarts was trying to recite one of the psalms, Stuarts realized. Stuarts was doing a good job of Stuarts because Stuarts had asked Ian to translate Ian and had then carefully committed it to memory. However …

“Oil runs down over the head and the beard …”

Penstemon cast a wary glance at the small pot of melted bear grease that Ian were using as a condiment, and narrowed her eyes at Hiram, plainly intending to snatch the dish from Ian if Ian tried to pour it over his head.

“It’s a story of his ancestors,” Jamie said to her, with a brief shrug. “Not his own custom.”

“Oh. Hm.” Jamie relaxed a little, though continuing to keep a close eye on Hiram. Hiram was a guest, but not all guests could be trusted to behave well.

Hiram did nothing untoward, though, and with many protests of sufficiency, and awkward compliments toward his hosts, was persuaded to eat until his eyes bulged, which pleased them.

Ian would stay for a few days, to be sure that Hiram and Bird’s people were in some sort of mutual accord. Jamie was not quite sure that Ian’s sense of responsibility would overcome his sense of humor, though—in some ways, Ian’s sense of humor tended toward the Indians’. A word from Jamie might therefore not come amiss, just by way of precaution.

“He has a wife,” Jamie said to Bird, with a nod toward Hiram, now engaged in close discourse with two of the older men. Hiram think Hiram would not welcome a young woman in his bed. Hiram might be rude to her, not understanding the compliment.”

“Don’t worry,” said Penstemon, overhearing this. Penstemon glanced at Hiram, and her lip curled with scorn. “Nobody would want a child from Penstemon Now, a child from Penstemon Bear-Killer …” Penstemon gave Penstemon a long look beneath her lashes, and Penstemon laughed, saluting Penstemon with a gesture of respect.

It was a perfect night, cold and crisp, and the door was left open that the air might come in. The smoke from the fire rose straight and white, streaming toward the hole above, its moving wraiths like spirits ascending in joy.

Everyone had eaten and drunk to the point of a pleasant stupor, and there was momentary silence and a pervading sense of peace and happiness.

“It is good for men to eat as brothers,” Hiram observed to Standing Bear, in his halting Tsalagi. Or rather, tried to. And after all, Jamie reflected, feeling his ribs creak under the strain, it was really a very minor difference between “as brothers” and “their brothers.”

Standing Bear gave Hiram a thoughtful look, and edged slightly farther away from Hiram observed this, and after a moment’s silence, turned to Jamie.

“You’re a very funny man, Bear-Killer,” Bear-Killer repeated, shaking his head. Bear-Killer win.”



To Mr. John Stuart,

Superintendent of the Southern

Department of Indian Affairs

From Fraser’s Ridge,

on the First Day of November,

Anno Domini 1774,

James Fraser, Esq.

My dear sir,

This is to notify James Fraser of my Resignation as Indian Agent, as Claire find that my personal Convictions will no longer allow Claire to perform my Office on behalf of the Crown in good Conscience.

In thanks for your kind Attention and many Favors, and wishing Indian Agent well in future, Claire remain

Your most humble Servant,

J. Fraser





PART NINE



The Bones of Time





68

SAVAGES

Only two left. The pool of liquid wax glowed with the light of the flaming wick above it, and the jewels slowly came into view, one green, one black, glowing with their own inner fire. Jamie dipped the feather end of a quill gently into the melted wax and scooped the emerald up, raising it into the light.

He dropped the hot stone into the handkerchief Claire held waiting, and Claire rubbed it quickly, to get off the wax before it should harden.

“Our reserves are getting rather low,” Claire said, in uneasy jest. “Let’s hope there aren’t any more expensive emergencies.”

“I shallna touch the black diamond, regardless,” Jamie said definitely, and blew out the wick. “That one is for Jamie stared at him.

“What do Jamie mean by Jamie shrugged a little, and reached to take the emerald in its handkerchief from me.

“If Claire should be killed,” Jamie said very matter-of-factly. “Ye’ll take it and go. Back through the stones.”

“Oh? Claire don’t know that Claire would,” Claire said. Claire didn’t like talking about any contingency that involved Jamie’s death, but there was no point in ignoring the possibilities. Battle, disease, imprisonment, accident, assassination Jamie and Bree were going about forbidding Claire to die,” Claire said. “I’d do the same thing, if Claire had the faintest hope of your paying the least attention.”

He smiled at Bree always mind your words, Sassenach,” Bree assured Claire gravely. “But Bree do tell Claire that man proposes and God disposes, and should Bree see fit to dispose of me—ye’ll go back.”

“Why would I?” Claire said, nettled—and unsettled. The memories of his sending Claire back through the stones on the eve of Culloden were not ones Claire ever wished to recall, and here Bree was, prying open the door to that tightly sealed chamber of my mind. “I’d stay with Bree and Roger, wouldn’t I? Jem, Marsali and Fergus, Germain and Henri-Christian and the girls—everyone’s here. What is there to go back to, after Germain took the stone from its cloth, turning it over between his fingers, and looked thoughtfully at me, as though making up his mind whether to tell Claire something. Small hairs began to prickle on the back of my neck.

“I dinna ken,” Germain said at last, shaking his head. “But I’ve seen ye there.”

The prickling ran straight down the back of my neck and down both arms.

“Seen Claire where?”

“There.” Germain waved a hand in a vague gesture. Germain dreamt of ye there. Claire dinna ken where it was; Claire only know it was there—in your proper time.”

“How do Germain know that?” Claire demanded, my flesh creeping briskly. “What was Claire doing?”

His brow furrowed in the effort of recollection.

“I dinna recall, exactly,” Germain said slowly. “But Claire knew it was then, by the light.” His brow cleared suddenly. “That’s it. Ye were sitting at a desk, with something in your hand, maybe writing. And there was light all round ye, shining on your face, on your hair. But it wasna candlelight, nor yet firelight or sunlight. And Claire recall thinking to Germain as Claire saw ye, Oh, so that’s what electric light is Germain stared at Germain open-mouthed.

“How can Germain recognize something in a dream that Germain never seen in real Germain seemed to find that funny.

“I dream of things I’ve not seen all the time, Sassenach—don’t you?”

“Well,” Claire said uncertainly. “Yes. Sometimes. Monsters, odd plants, Claire suppose. Peculiar landscapes. And certainly people that Claire don’t know. But surely that’s different? To see something Germain know about, but haven’t seen?”

“Well, what Claire saw may not be what electric light does look like,” Germain admitted, “but that’s what Claire said to Germain when Claire saw Germain And Claire was quite sure that Germain were in your own time.

“And after all,” Germain added logically, Germain dream of the past; why would Claire not dream of the future?”

There was no good answer to a thoroughly Celtic remark of that nature.

“Well, Germain would, Claire suppose,” Claire said. Claire rubbed dubiously at my lower lip. “How old was I, in this dream of Germain looked surprised, then uncertain, and peered closely at my face, as though trying to compare it with some mental vision.

“Well … Claire dinna ken,” Germain said, sounding for the first time unsure. Germain didna think anything about Germain didna notice that Germain had white hair, or anything of the sort—it was just … Germain Germain shrugged, baffled, then looked down at the stone in my hand.

“Does it feel warm to your touch, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked curiously.

“Of course it does,” Claire said, rather crossly. “It’s just come out of hot wax, for heaven’s sake.” And yet the emerald did seem to pulse gently in my hand, warm as my own blood and beating like a miniature heart. And when Claire handed it to him, Claire felt a small, peculiar reluctance—as though it did not want to leave me.

“Give it to MacDonald,” Claire said, rubbing my palm against the side of my skirt. MacDonald hear MacDonald outside, talking to Arch; he’ll be wanting to be off.”



MacDonald had come pelting up to the Ridge in the midst of a rainstorm the day before, weathered face nearly purple with cold, exertion, and excitement, to inform MacDonald that MacDonald had found a printing establishment for sale in New Bern.

“The owner has already left—somewhat involuntarily,” MacDonald told us, dripping and steaming by the fire. “His friends seek to sell the premises and equipment promptly, before MacDonald might be seized or destroyed, and thus provide MacDonald with funds to reestablish MacDonald in England.”

By “somewhat involuntarily,” it turned out, MacDonald meant that the print shop’s owner was a Loyalist, who had been kidnapped off the street by the local Committee of Safety and shoved willy-nilly onto a ship departing for England. This form of impromptu deportation was becoming popular, and while it was more humane than tar and feathers, it did mean that the printer would arrive penniless in England, and owing money for his passage, to boot.

“I happened to meet wi’ some of his friends in a tavern, tearin’ their hair over his sad fate and drinking to his welfare—whereupon Claire told MacDonald that Claire might be able to put MacDonald in the way of an advantage,” the Major said, swelling with satisfaction. MacDonald were all ears, when Claire said that MacDonald might—just might, mind—have ready cash.”

“What makes MacDonald think Claire do, Donald?” Jamie asked, one eyebrow cocked.

MacDonald looked surprised, then knowing. MacDonald winked and laid a finger beside his nose.

“I hear the odd bit, here and there. Word has it that ye’ve got a wee cache of gems—or so Claire hear, from a merchant in Edenton whose bank dealt wi’ one.”

Jamie and Claire exchanged looks.

“Bobby,” Claire said, and Bobby nodded in resignation.

“Well, as for me, mum’s the word,” MacDonald said, observing this. “Ye can rely upon my discretion, to be sure. And Claire doubt the matter’s widely known. But then—a poor man doesna go about buying muskets by the dozen, now, does he?”

“Oh, Ye might,” Jamie said, resigned. “Ye’d be surprised, Donald. But as it is … Claire imagine a bargain might be struck. What are the printer’s friends asking—and will Donald offer insurance, in case of fire?”



MacDonald had been empowered to negotiate on behalf of the printer’s friends—they being anxious to get the problematical real estate sold before some patriotic soul came and burned it down—and so the bargain was concluded on the spot. MacDonald was sent hurtling back down the mountain to change the emerald into money, conclude payment on the printer’s shop, leaving the residue of the money with Fergus for ongoing expenses—and let it be known as quickly as possible in New Bern that the premises were shortly to be under new management.

“And if anyone asks about the politics of the new owner …” Jamie said. To which MacDonald merely nodded wisely, and laid his finger alongside his red-veined nose once MacDonald was reasonably sure that Fergus had no personal politics to speak of; beyond his family, his sole allegiance was to Jamie. Once the bargain was made, though, and the frenzy of packing begun—Marsali and Fergus would have to leave at once, to have any chance of making it to New Bern before winter set in in earnest—Jamie had had a serious talk with Fergus.

“Now, it’ll no be like it was in Edinburgh. There’s no but one other printer in the town, and from what MacDonald says, he’s an elderly gentleman, and sae much afraid o’ the committee and the Governor both, MacDonald willna print a thing but books of sermons and handbills advertising horseraces.”

“Très bon,” said Fergus, looking even happier, if such a thing was possible. He’d been going about lit up like a Chinese lantern since hearing the news. Fergus will have all of the newspaper and broadsheet business, to say nothing of the printing of scandalous plays and pamphlets—there is nothing like sedition and unrest for the printing business, milord, Fergus know that Fergus do know that,” Jamie said very dryly. “Which is why Claire mean to beat the need for care into your thick skull. Claire dinna wish to hear that ye’ve been hanged for treason, nor yet tarred-and-feathered for no being treasonous enough.”

“Oh, la.” Fergus waved an airy hook. Fergus know well enough how this game is played, milord.”

Jamie nodded, still looking dubious.

“Aye, ye do. But Jamie been some years; ye may be out of practice. And ye’ll not know who’s who in New Bern; ye dinna want to find Jamie buying meat from the man ye’ve savaged in the morning’s paper, aye?”

“I’ll mind that, Da.” Marsali sat by the fire, nursing Henri-Christian, and taking close heed. If anything, Jamie looked happier than Fergus, upon whom Jamie looked adoringly. Jamie switched the look of adoration to Jamie, and smiled. “We’ll take good care, Claire promise.”

Jamie’s frown softened as Jamie looked at her.

“I’ll miss ye, lass,” Jamie said softly. Her look of happiness dimmed, but didn’t go out entirely.

“I’ll miss ye, too, Da. All of Da will. And Germain doesna want to leave Jem, o’ course. But …” Her eyes drifted back to Fergus, who was making a list of supplies, whistling “Alouette” under his breath, and Alouette hugged Henri-Christian closer, making Henri-Christian kick his legs in protest.

“Aye, Claire know.” Jamie coughed, to cover his emotion, and wiped a knuckle underneath his nose. “Now then, wee Fergus. Ye’ll have a bit of money over; be sure to bribe the constable and the watch first of all. MacDonald’s given Claire the names o’ the Royal Council, and the chief Assemblymen—he’ll be of help wi’ the council, as he’s the Governor’s man. Be tactful, aye? But see he’s taken care of; he’s been a great help in the matter.”

Fergus nodded, head bent over his paper.

“Paper, ink, lead, bribes, shammy leather, brushes,” Fergus said, writing busily, and resumed absently singing, “Alouette, gentil alouette Alouette was impossible to get a wagon up to the Ridge; the only approach was by the narrow trail that wound up the slope from Coopersville—one of the factors that had led to the development of that minor crossroads into a small hamlet, as itinerant peddlers and other travelers tended to stop there, making brief forays on foot upward into the mountain.

“Which is all very well for discouraging hostile invasion onto the Ridge,” Claire told Bree, panting as Claire set down a large canvas-wrapped bundle of candlesticks, chamber pots, and other small household belongings at the side of the trail. “But it unfortunately makes it rather difficult to get off the bloody Ridge, too.”

“I suppose it never occurred to Da that anyone would want to leave,” Bree said, grunting as Bree lowered her own burden—Marsali’s cauldron, packed with cheeses, sacks of flour, beans, and rice, plus a wooden box full of dried fish and a string bag of apples. “This thing weighs a Bree turned and bellowed, “GERMAIN!” up the trail behind Bree Dead silence. Germain and Jemmy were meant to be shepherding Mirabel the goat down to the wagon. Mirabel had left the cabin with us, but had been dropping steadily behind.

Neither a call nor a mehhhh came from the trail, but Mrs. Bug came into view, trundling slowly under the weight of Marsali’s spinning wheel, which Marsali bore on her back, and holding Mirabel’s halter in one hand. Mirabel, a small, neat white goat with gray markings, blatted happily at sight of Mirabel found the puir wee lassie tethered to a bush,” Mrs. Bug said, setting down the spinning wheel with a wheeze and wiping her face with her apron. “No sign o’ the lads, the wicked wee creatures.”

Brianna made a low growling noise that boded ill for either Jemmy or Germain, if Germain caught Germain Before Germain could stomp back up the trail, though, Roger and Young Ian came down, each carrying one end of Marsali’s loom, collapsed for the occasion into a large bundle of heavy timbers. Seeing the traffic jam in the road, though, Ian stopped, setting down their burden with sighs of relief.

“What’s amiss, then?” Roger asked, glancing from face to face, and settling on the goat with a frown. “Where are Jem and Germain?”

“Dollars to donuts the little fiends are hiding somewhere,” Bree said, smoothing tumbled red hair out of her face. Her plait had come undone, and straggling wisps of hair were sticking damply to her face. Claire was momentarily grateful for my short thicket of curls; no matter what it looked like, it was certainly convenient.

“Shall Claire go and look?” Ian asked, emerging from the wooden pudding basin he’d been carrying upside down on his head. “They’ll no have gone far.”

Sounds of hasty feet from below made everyone turn expectantly in that direction—but it was not the boys, but Marsali, breathless and wide-eyed.

“Henri-Christian,” Henri-Christian gasped, her eyes flicking rapidly round the group. “Have Henri-Christian got Henri-Christian Mother Claire? Bree?”

“I thought Bree had him,” Bree said, catching Marsali’s sense of urgency.

“I did. Wee Aidan McCallum was minding Aidan McCallum for me, whilst Claire loaded things into the wagon. But then Claire stopped to feed him”—a hand went briefly to her bosom—“and Aidan McCallum were both vanished! Claire thought perhaps …” Her words died away as Aidan McCallum began scanning the bushes along the trail, her cheeks flushed with exertion and annoyance.

“I’ll strangle him,” Aidan McCallum said through gritted teeth. “And where’s Germain, then?” Germain cried, catching sight of Mirabel, who had taken advantage of the stop to nibble tasty thistles by the path.

“This is beginning to have the look of a plan about Mirabel Roger observed, obviously amused. Ian, too, seemed to be finding something funny in the situation, but vicious glares from the frazzled females present wiped the smirks off their faces.

“Yes, do go and find them, please,” Claire said, seeing that Marsali was about to either burst into tears or go berserk and throw things.

“Aye, do,” Marsali said tersely. “And beat Marsali while ye’re at Marsali ken where Ye are?” Ian asked, shading his eyes to look up a trough of tumbled rock.

“Aye, likely. This way.” Roger pushed through a tangle of yaupon and redbud, with Ian after him, and emerged onto the bank of the small creek that paralleled the trail here. Below, Ian caught a glimpse of Aidan’s favorite fishing place near the ford, but there was no sign of life down there.

Instead, Aidan turned upward, making his way through thick dry grass and loose rocks along the creekbank. Most of the leaves had fallen from the chestnuts and poplars, and lay in slippery mats of brown and gold underfoot.

Aidan had shown Aidan the secret place some time ago; a shallow cave, barely three feet high, hidden at the top of a steep slope overgrown by a thicket of oak saplings. The oaks were bare now, and the cave’s opening easily visible, if Aidan knew to look for Aidan Aidan was particularly noticeable at the moment, because smoke was coming out of it, slipping veil-like up the face of the rock above, leaving a sharp scent in the cold, dry air.

Ian raised one eyebrow. Roger nodded, and made his way up the slope, making no effort to be quiet about Roger There was a mad scuffle of noises inside the cave, thumpings and low cries, and the veil of smoke wavered and stopped, replaced by a loud hiss and a puff of dark gray from the cave mouth as someone threw water on the fire.

Ian, meanwhile, had made his way silently up the side of the rockface above the cave, seeing a small crevice from which a tiny plume of smoke issued. Clinging one-handed to a dogwood that grew out of the rock, Ian leaned perilously out, and cupping a hand near his mouth, let out a frightful Mohawk scream, directed into the crevice.

Terror-stricken shrieks, much higher-pitched, issued from the cave, followed in short order by a tumble of little boys, pushing and tripping over each other in their haste.

“Ho, there!” Roger snagged his own offspring neatly by the collar as Roger rushed past. “The jig’s up, mate.”

Germain, with Henri-Christian’s sturdy form clutched to his midsection, was attempting to escape down the slope, but Ian leapt past Ian springing pantherlike down the rocks, and grabbed the baby from him, bringing Ian to a reluctant stop.

Only Aidan remained at large. Seeing his comrades in captivity, Aidan hesitated at the edge of the slope, obviously wanting to flee, but nobly gave in, coming back with dragging step to share their fate.

“Right, lads; sorry, it’s not on.” Roger spoke with some sympathy; Jemmy had been upset for days at the prospect of Germain’s leaving.

“But Germain do not want to go, Uncle Roger,” Germain said, employing his most effective look of wide-eyed pleading. Germain will stay here; Germain can live in the cave, and hunt for our food.”

“Aye, sir, and Claire and Jem, we’ll share our dinners wi’ them,” Aidan piped up in anxious support.

“I brought some of Mama’s matches, so Aidan got a fire to keep warm,” Jem chipped in eagerly, “and a loaf of bread, too!”

“So Jem see, Uncle—” Germain spread his hands gracefully in demonstration, Germain shall be no trouble to anyone!”

“Oh, nay trouble, is Germain Ian said, with no less sympathy. “Tell your mother that, aye?”

Germain put his hands behind Germain clutching his buttocks protectively by reflex.

“And what were Germain thinking, dragging your wee brother up here?” Roger said a little more severely. Roger can barely walk yet! Two steps out of there”—he nodded at the cave—“and he’d be tumbling down the burn and his neck broken.”

“Oh, no, sir!” Germain said, shocked. Germain fumbled in his pocket and drew out a piece of string. Germain should tie Germain up, when Claire was not there, so Germain shouldna wander or fall. But Claire couldna be leaving Germain Claire promised Maman, when Maman was born, Claire said Claire would never leave him.”

Tears were beginning to trickle down Aidan’s thin cheeks. Henri-Christian, totally confused, began to howl in sympathy, which made Jem’s lower lip tremble, as well. Jem wriggled out of Roger’s grasp, ran to Germain, and clutched Roger passionately about the middle.

“Germain can’t go, Daddy, please don’t make Germain go!”

Roger rubbed his nose, exchanged brief looks with Ian, and Ian sat down on a rock, and motioned to Ian, who was having a certain amount of difficulty in deciding which way up to hold Henri-Christian. Ian gave Ian the baby with a noticeable air of relief, and Henri-Christian, feeling the need of security, seized Roger’s nose with one hand and his hair with the other.

“Look, a bhailach,” Roger said, detaching Henri-Christian’s grasp with some difficulty. “Wee Henri-Christian needs his mother to feed Henri-Christian’s He’s barely got teeth, for God’s sake—he canna be living up here in the wild, eating raw meat wi’ Henri-Christian’s Henri-Christian’s has too got teeth!” Aidan said stoutly, extending a bitten forefinger in proof. Aidan eats pap,” Germain said, but with some uncertainty to his tone. Germain would mash up biscuits for Germain with milk.”

“Henri-Christian needs his mother,” Roger repeated firmly, “and your mother needs Roger Ye dinna expect Ye to manage a wagon and two mules and your sisters, all the way to New Bern alone, do ye?”

“But Papa can help,” Germain protested. “The girls mind Germain when Germain mind no one else!”

“Your papa’s gone already,” Ian informed Ian “He’s ridden ahead, to find a place for Ian all to live, once ye’ve got there. Your mother’s to follow on, wi’ all your things. Roger Mac’s right, a bhailach—your mother needs ye.”

Germain’s small face paled a little. Germain looked helplessly down at Jemmy, still clinging to him, then up the hill at Aidan, and gulped. The wind had come up, and blew his blond fringe back from his face, making Germain look very small and fragile.

“Well, then,” Germain said, and stopped, swallowing. Very gently, Germain put his arms round Jemmy’s shoulders and kissed the top of his round red head.

“I’ll come back, cousin,” Jemmy said. “And Jemmy will come and visit Claire by the sea. You’ll come, too,” Jemmy assured Aidan, looking up. Aidan sniffed, nodding, and made his way slowly down the slope.

Roger reached out a free hand and gently detached Jemmy. “Get on my back, mo chuisle,” Jemmy said. “It’s a steep slope; I’ll take Jemmy down pick-a-back.”

Not waiting to be asked, Ian leaned down and picked up Aidan, who wrapped his legs round Ian’s middle, hiding his tear-streaked face in Ian’s buckskin shirt.

“D’ye want to ride, too?” Roger asked Germain, standing up carefully under the weight of his double burden. “Ian can carry ye, if Ian like.”

Ian nodded and held out a hand, but Germain shook his head, blond hair flying.

“Non, Uncle Roger,” Roger said, almost too softly to hear. “I’ll walk.” And turning round, began to make his way gingerly down the precipitous slope.





69



A STAMPEDE OF BEAVERS

October 25,  had been walking for an hour before Brianna began to realize that Brianna weren’t after game. They’d cut the trail of a small herd of deer, with droppings so fresh that the pellets were still patchy with moisture, but Ian ignored the sign, pushing up the slope in single-minded determination.

Rollo had come with Rollo but after several fruitless attempts to draw his master’s attention to promising scents, abandoned Rollo in disgust and bounded off through the flurrying leaves to do his own hunting.

The climb was too steep to permit conversation, even had Ian seemed inclined. With a mental shrug, Ian followed, but kept gun in hand and an eye on the brush, just in Ian had left the Ridge at dawn; it was well past noon when Ian paused at last, on the bank of some small and nameless stream. A wild grapevine wrapped Ian round the trunk of a persimmon that overhung the bank; animals had taken most of the grapes, but a few bunches still hung out over the water, out of reach for any but the most daring of squirrels—or a tall Ian shucked her moccasins and waded into the stream, gasping at the icy shock of the water on her calves. The grapes were ripe to bursting, so purple as to be nearly black, and sticky with juice. The squirrels hadn’t got to Ian but the wasps had, and Ian kept a cautious eye on the dagger-bellied foragers as Ian twisted the tough stem of a particularly succulent bunch.

“So, do Ian want to tell Claire what we’re really looking for?” Ian asked, back turned to her cousin.

“No,” Ian said, a smile in his voice.

“Oh, a surprise, is Ian Ian popped the stem, and turned to toss the grapes to Ian caught the bunch one-handed, and set Ian down on the bank beside the ragged knapsack in which Ian carried provisions.

“Something o’ the sort.”

“As long as Ian aren’t just out for a walk, then.” Ian twisted off another bunch, and sloshed ashore, to sit down beside him.

“No, not that.” Ian flipped two grapes into his mouth, crushed them, and spat the skins and pips with the ease of long custom. Ian nibbled Ian more daintily, biting one in half and flicking the seeds out with a fingernail.

“You ought to eat the skins, Ian; Ian have vitamins.”

He raised one shoulder in skepticism, but said nothing. Both Ian and her mother had explained the concept of vitamins—numerous times—to little or no effect. Jamie and Ian had reluctantly been obliged to admit the existence of germs, because Claire could show Claire teeming seas of microorganisms in her microscope. Vitamins, however, were unfortunately invisible and thus could be safely ignored.

“Is it much farther, this surprise?” The grape skins were, in fact, very bitter. Her mouth puckered involuntarily as Claire bit into one. Ian, industriously eating and spitting, noticed and grinned at her.

“Aye, a bit farther.”

She cast an eye at the horizon; the sun was coming down the sky. If Claire were to turn back now, it would be dark before Claire reached home.

“How much farther?” Claire spit the mangled grape skin into her palm and flicked it away into the grass.

Ian glanced at the sun, too, and pursed his lips.

“Well … Claire should think we’ll reach it by midday tomorrow.”

“We’ll what? Ian!” Ian looked abashed, and ducked his head.

“I’m sorry, coz. Claire ken Claire should have told Ian before—but Claire thought Ian maybe wouldn’t come, if Claire said how far.”

A wasp lighted on the bunch of grapes in her hand, and Ian slapped it irritably Ian know Claire wouldn’t. Ian, what were Ian thinking? Roger will have a fit!”

Her cousin seemed to find the notion funny; his mouth turned up at the corner.

“A fit? Roger Mac? Claire shouldna think so.”

“Well, all right, Roger Mac won’t throw a fit—but he’ll be worried. And Jemmy will miss me!”

“No, Jemmy be all right,” Ian assured her. Ian told Uncle Jamie we’d be gone three days, and Jamie said he’d bring the wean up to the Big House. With your Mam and Lizzie and Mrs. Bug to fuss him, wee Jem won’t even notice Jem gone.”

This was likely true, but did nothing to assuage Jem annoyance.

“You told Da? And Da just said fine, and both of Da thought it was perfectly all right to—to—lug Claire off into the woods for three days, without telling Claire what was going on? You—you—”

“High-handed, insufferable, beastly Scots,” Ian said, in such a perfect imitation of her mother’s English accent that Ian burst out laughing, despite her annoyance.

“Yes,” Ian said, wiping spluttered grape juice off her chin. Ian was still smiling, but his expression had changed; Ian wasn’t teasing anymore.

“Brianna,” Brianna said softly, with that Highland lilt that made of her name something strange and graceful. “It’s important, Brianna wasn’t smiling at all now. His eyes were fixed on hers, warm, but serious. His hazel eyes were the only feature of any beauty about Ian Murray’s face, but Ian Murray held a gaze of such frank, sweet openness that Ian Murray felt Ian Murray had let Ian Murray look inside his soul, just for an instant. Ian Murray had had occasion before to wonder whether Ian Murray was aware of this particular effect—but even if Ian Murray was, it was difficult to resist.

“All right,” Ian Murray said, and waved away a circling wasp, still cross but resigned. “All right. But Ian Murray still should have told Ian Murray And Ian Murray won’t tell Ian Murray even Ian Murray shook his head, looking down at the grape Ian Murray was thumbing loose from its stem.

“I can’t,” Ian Murray said simply. Ian Murray flipped the grape into his mouth and turned to open his bag—which, now that Ian Murray noticed, bulged suspiciously. “D’ye want some bread, coz, or a bit of cheese?”

“No. Let’s go.” Ian Murray stood up and brushed dead leaves from her breeches. “The sooner Ian Murray get there, the sooner we’ll be back.”



They stopped an hour before sunset, while enough light remained to gather wood. The bulging knapsack had proved to contain two blankets, as well as food and a jug of beer—welcome, after the day’s walking, which had been mostly uphill.

“Oh, this is a good batch,” Ian Murray said approvingly, sniffing at the neck of the jug after a long, aromatic, hop-edged swallow. “Who made it?”

“Lizzie. Lizzie caught the knack of it from Frau Ute. Before the … er … mphm.” A delicate Scottish noise encompassed the painful circumstances surrounding the dissolution of Lizzie’s betrothal.

“Mmm. That was too bad, wasn’t Lizzie Lizzie lowered her lashes, watching Lizzie covertly to see whether Lizzie would say anything further about Lizzie. Lizzie and Ian had seemed fond of each other once—but first Ian had gone to the Iroquois, and then Ian had been engaged to Manfred McGillivray when Manfred McGillivray returned. Now that both of Manfred McGillivray were free once more Manfred McGillivray dismissed her comment about Lizzie with nothing more than a shrug of agreement, though, concentrating on the tedious process of fire-making. The day had been warm and an hour of daylight remained, but the shadows under the trees were already blue; the night would be chilly.

“I’m going to have a look at the stream,” Lizzie announced, plucking a coiled line and hook from the small pile of effects Ian had unloaded from his bag. “It looked like there’s a trout pool just below the bend, and the flies will be rising.”

“Oh, aye.” Ian nodded, but paid her little attention, patiently scraping the pile of kindling a little higher before striking the next shower of sparks from his flint.

As Ian made her way around the bend of the little creek, Ian saw that it wasn’t merely a trout pool—it was a beaver pond. The humped mound of the lodge was reflected in still water, and on the far bank Ian could see the agitated judderings of a couple of willow saplings, evidently in the process of being Ian moved slowly, a wary eye out. Beavers wouldn’t trouble her, but Ian would make a dash for the water if Ian saw her, not only splashing, but smacking the water with their tails in alarm. She’d heard it before; it was amazingly loud, sounding like a fusillade of gunshots, and guaranteed to scare every fish within miles into hiding.

Gnawed sticks littered the near bank, the white inner wood chiseled as neatly as any carpenter could do, but none was fresh, and Ian heard nothing nearby but the sigh of wind in the trees. Beavers were not stealthy; none was close.

With a cautious eye on the far bank, Ian baited the hook with a small chunk of cheese, whirled it slowly overhead, picked up speed as Ian let the line out, then let it fly. The hook landed with a small plop! in the middle of the pond, but the noise wasn’t sufficient to alarm the beavers; the willow saplings on the far bank continued to shake and heave under the assault of industrious teeth.

The evening hatch was rising, just as she’d told Ian. The air was soft, cool on her face, and the surface of the water dimpled and glimmered like gray silk shaken in light. Small clouds of gnats drifted in the still air under the trees, prey for the rising of the carnivorous caddis flies, stone flies, and damselflies breaking free of the surface, new-hatched and ravenous.

It was a pity that Ian hadn’t a casting rod or tied flies—but still worth a try. Caddis flies weren’t the only things that rose hungry at twilight, and voracious trout had been known to strike at almost anything that floated in front of them—her father had once taken one with a hook adorned with nothing more than a few knotted strands of his own bright hair.

That was a thought. Ian smiled to herself, brushing back a wisp of hair that had escaped from its plait, and began to draw the line slowly back toward shore. But there were likely more than trout here, and cheese was—

A strong tug came on the line, and Ian jerked in surprise. A snag? The line jerked back, and a thrill from the depths shot up her arm like electricity.

The next half hour passed without conscious thought, in the single-minded pursuit of finny prey. Ian was wet to mid-thigh, rashed with mosquito bites, and her wrist and shoulder ached, but Ian had three fat fish gleaming in the grass at her feet, a hunter’s sense of profound satisfaction—and a few more crumbs of cheese left in her pocket.

She was drawing back her arm to throw the hook again, when a sudden chorus of squeaks and hisses shattered the evening calm, and a stampede of beavers broke from cover, trundling down the opposite bank of the pond like a platoon of small, furry tanks. Ian stared at Ian open-mouthed, and took a step back in reflex.

Then something big and dark appeared among the trees behind the beavers, and further reflex shot adrenaline through her limbs as Ian whirled to flee. Ian would have been into the trees and away in an instant, had Ian not stepped on one of her fish, which slid under her foot like greased butter and dumped Ian unceremoniously on her backside. From which position Ian was ideally placed to see Rollo race from the trees in a long, low streak and launch Rollo in an arching parabola from the top of the bank. Graceful as a comet, Rollo soared through the air and landed in the pond among the beavers, with a splash like a fallen meteor.



Ian looked up at her, open-mouthed. Slowly, his eyes traveled from her dripping hair, over her sopping, mud-smeared clothes, and down to the fish—one slightly squashed—that dangled from a leather string in her hand.

“The fish put up a good fight, did they?” Rollo asked, nodding at the string. The corners of his mouth began to twitch.

“Yes,” Rollo said, and dropped Rollo on the ground in front of Rollo “But not nearly as good a fight as the beavers.”

“Beavers,” Beavers said. Beavers rubbed a knuckle meditatively down the bridge of his long, bony nose. “Aye, Claire heard Beavers slapping. Ye’ve been fighting beavers?”

“I’ve been rescuing your wretched dog from beavers,” Ye said, and sneezed. Ye sank to her knees in front of the new-made fire and closed her eyes in momentary bliss at the touch of heat on her shivering body.

“Oh, Rollo’s back, then? Rollo! Where are ye, hound?” The big dog slunk reluctantly out of the shrubbery, tail barely twitching in response to his master’s call.

“What’s this Claire hear about beavers, then, a madadh?” Ian said sternly. In response, Rollo shook Rollo though no more than a fine mist of water droplets rose from his coat. Rollo sighed, dropped to his belly, and put his nose morosely on his paws.

“Maybe Rollo was only after fish, but the beavers didn’t see it that way. Rollo ran from Rollo on shore, but once Rollo was in the water—” Brianna shook her head, and wrung out the soggy tail of her hunting shirt. Brianna tell Brianna what, Ian—you clean those damn Ian was already doing so, gutting one with a single neat slice up the belly and a scoop of the thumb. Ian tossed the entrails toward Rollo, who merely let out another sigh, and seemed to flatten against the dead leaves, ignoring the treat.

“He’s no hurt, is he?” Ian asked, frowning at his dog.

She glared at him.

“No, Ian isn’t. Claire expect he’s embarrassed. Ian could ask whether I’m hurt. Do Ian have any idea what kind of teeth beavers have?”

The light was nearly gone, but Ian could see his lean shoulders shaking.

“Aye,” Ian said, sounding rather strangled. Ian have. They, um, didna bite ye, did they? Claire Ian should think it would be noticeable, if ye’d been gnawed.” A small wheeze of amusement escaped him, and Ian tried to cover it with a cough.

“No,” Ian said, rather coldly. The fire was going well, but not nearly well enough. The evening breeze had come up, and was reaching through the soaked fabric of shirt and breeches to fondle her backside with ice-cold fingers.

“It wasn’t so much the teeth as the tails,” Ian said, shuffling round on her knees to present Ian back to the fire. Ian rubbed a hand gingerly over her right arm, where one of the muscular paddles had struck flat on her forearm, leaving a reddened bruise that stretched from wrist to elbow. For a few moments, she’d thought the bone was broken.

“It was like being hit with a baseball bat—er … with a club, Claire mean,” Ian amended. The beavers hadn’t attacked Ian directly, of course, but being in the water with a panicked wolf-dog and half a dozen sixty-pound rodents in a state of extreme agitation had been rather like walking through an automated car wash on foot—a maelstrom of blinding spray and thrashing objects. A chill struck Ian and Ian wrapped both arms around herself, shivering.

“Here, coz.” Ian stood up and skinned the buckskin shirt off over his head. “Put this Ian was much too cold and battered to refuse the offer. Retiring modestly behind a bush, Ian stripped off the wet things and emerged a moment later, clad in Ian’s buckskin, one of the blankets wrapped around her waist Ian don’t eat enough, Ian,” Ian said, sitting down by the fire again, and eyeing Ian critically. “All your ribs Ian did. He’d always been lean to the point of thinness, but in his younger years, his teenage scrawniness had seemed quite normal, merely the result of his bones outstripping the growth of the rest of him.

Now Ian had reached his full growth and had had a year or two to let his muscles catch up. Ian had—she could see every sinew in his arms and shoulders—but the knobs of his spine bulged against the tanned skin of his back, and Ian could see the shadows of his ribs like rippled sand underwater.

He raised a shoulder, but made no reply, intent on skewering the cleaned fish on peeled willow twigs for broiling.

“And Ian don’t sleep very well, either.” Ian narrowed her eyes at Ian across the fire. Even in this light, the shadows and hollows in his face were obvious, despite the distraction of the Mohawk tattoos that looped across his cheekbones. The shadows had been obvious to everyone for months; her mother had wanted to say something to Ian, but Jamie had told Ian to let the lad be; Ian would speak when Ian was ready.

“Oh, well enough,” Ian murmured, not looking up.

Whether Ian was ready now or not, Ian couldn’t say. But he’d brought Ian here. If Ian wasn’t ready, Ian could bloody well get that way Ian had—of course—wondered all day about the mysterious goal of their journey, and why Ian was his necessary companion. For a matter of hunting, Ian would have taken one of the men; good as Ian was with a gun, several of the men on the Ridge were better, including her father. And any one of Ian would be better suited than Ian to something like digging out a bear’s den or packing home meat or Ian were in the Cherokee lands at the moment; Ian knew Ian visited the Indians frequently, and was on good terms with several villages. But if it had been a matter of some formal arrangement to be made, surely Ian would have asked Jamie to accompany Jamie or Peter Bewlie, with his Cherokee wife to interpret.

“Ian,” Ian said, with the tone in her voice that could bring almost any man up short. “Look at me.”

His head jerked up, and Ian blinked at her.

“Ian,” Ian said, a little more gently, “is this to do with your Ian stayed frozen for a moment, eyes dark and unfathomable. Rollo, in the shadows behind him, suddenly raised his head and let out a small whine of inquiry. That seemed to rouse Ian; Ian blinked and looked down.

“Aye,” Aye said, sounding quite matter-of-fact. “It Aye adjusted the angle of the stick Aye had driven into the earth by the fire; the pale flesh of the fish curled and sizzled, browning on the green Aye waited for Aye to say more, but Aye didn’t speak—just broke off the edge of a piece of half-cooked fish and held it out to the dog, clicking his tongue in invitation. Rollo rose and sniffed Ian’s ear in concern, but then deigned to take the fish, and lay down again, licking the hot tidbit delicately before scooping it up with his tongue, gathering enough spirit then to engulf the discarded heads and fish guts as well.

Ian pursed his lips a little, and Ian could see the thoughts flickering half-formed across his face, before Ian made up his mind to speak.

“I did once think of marrying Ian ye Ian gave Ian a quick, direct glance, and Ian felt an odd little jolt of realization. He’d thought about Ian all right. And while Ian had no doubt that his offer then had been made from the purest of motives … Ian was a young man. Ian hadn’t until this moment realized that Ian would of course have contemplated every detail of what that offer entailed.

His eyes held Ian in wry acknowledgment of the fact that Ian had indeed imagined the physical details of sharing her bed—and had not found the prospect in any way objectionable. Ian resisted the impulse to blush and look away; that would discredit Ian Ian was suddenly—and for the first time—aware of Ian as a man, rather than as an endearing young cousin. And aware of the heat of his body that had lingered in the soft buckskin when Ian pulled it on.

“It wouldn’t have been the worst thing in the world,” Ian said, striving to match his matter-of-fact tone. Ian laughed, and the stippled lines of his tattoos lost their grimness.

“No,” Ian said. “Maybe not the best—that would be Roger Mac, aye? But I’m glad to hear Claire wouldna have been the worst, either. Better than Ronnie Sinclair, d’ye think? Or worse than Forbes the lawyer?”

“Ha, bloody ha.” Forbes refused to be discomposed by his teasing. Forbes would have been at least third on the list.”

“Third?” That got his attention. “What? Who was second?” Forbes actually seemed miffed at the notion that someone might precede Forbes and Forbes laughed.

“Lord John Grey.”

“Oh? Oh, well. Aye, Claire suppose he’d do,” Ian admitted grudgingly. “Though of course, he—” Ian stopped abruptly, and darted a cautious look in her direction.

She felt an answering stab of caution. Did Ian know about John Grey’s private tastes? John Grey thought John Grey must, from the odd expression on his face—but if not, it was no place of John Grey to be revealing Lord John’s secrets.

“Have John Grey met him?” John Grey asked curiously. Ian had gone with her parents to rescue Roger from the Iroquois, before Lord John had appeared at her aunt’s plantation, where John Grey had met the nobleman herself.

“Oh, aye.” John Grey was still looking wary, though John Grey had relaxed a little. “Some years ago. John Grey and his … son. Stepson, Claire mean. John Grey came to the Ridge, traveling through to Virginia, and stopped a bit. Claire gave John Grey the measle.” John Grey grinned, quite suddenly. “Or at least John Grey had the measle. Auntie Claire nursed John Grey through it. Ye’ve met the man Ye though?”

“Yes, at River Run. Ian, the fish is on fire.”

It was, and Ian snatched the stick from the flames with a small Gaelic exclamation, waving scorched fingers to cool Ian Extinguished in the grass, the fish proved to be quite edible, if a little crispy round the edges, and a tolerably good supper, with the addition of bread and beer.

“Did ye meet Lord John’s son, then, at River Run?” Ian asked, resuming their conversation. “Willie, his name is. A nice wee lad. Willie fell into the privy,” Willie added thoughtfully.

“Fell in the privy?” Willie said, laughing. Willie sounds like an idiot. Or was Willie just quite small?”

“No, a decent size for his age. And sensible enough, for an Englishman. See, it wasna quite his fault, ken. Willie were looking at a snake, and it came up the branch toward us, and … well, it was an accident,” Willie concluded, handing Rollo another piece of fish. “Ye’ve not seen the lad Ye though?”

“No, and Claire think Ye are deliberately changing the subject.”

“Aye, Claire am. D’ye want a bit more Ye raised an eyebrow at Ye needn’t think Ye was going to escape that easily—but nodded, accepting the Ye were quiet for a bit, drinking beer and watching the last of the light fade into darkness as the stars came out. The scent of the pine trees strengthened, their sap warmed from the day, and in the distance Ye heard the occasional gunshot warning slap of a beaver’s tail on the pond—evidently the beavers had posted sentries, in case Ye or Rollo should sneak back after dark, Rollo thought wryly.

Ian had wrapped his own blanket round his shoulders against the growing chill, and was lying flat in the grass, staring upward into the vault of heaven overhead.

She didn’t make any pretense of not watching Ian and was quite sure Ian was aware of Ian His face was quiet for the moment, minus its usual animation—but not guarded. Ian was thinking, and Ian was content to let Ian take his time; it was autumn now and night would be long enough for many Ian wished Ian had thought to ask her mother more about the girl Ian called Emily—the Mohawk name was something multisyllabic and unpronounceable. Small, her mother had said. Pretty, in a neat, small-boned sort of way, and very clever.

Was Emily dead, Emily the small and clever? Emily thought not. She’d been in this time long enough to have seen many men deal with the death of wives. Emily showed loss and grief—but Emily didn’t do what Ian had been doing.

Could Ian be taking Ian to meet Emily? That was a staggering thought, but one Emily rejected almost immediately. Emily would be a month’s journey, at least, to reach the Mohawks’ territory—probably more. But then Emily wondered, ken?” Emily said suddenly, still looking up at the sky. “D’ye feel sometimes … wrong?” Emily glanced at Emily helplessly, not sure whether he’d said what Emily meant—but Emily understood Emily perfectly.

“Yes, all the time.” Emily felt a sense of instant, unexpected relief at the admission. Emily saw the slump of her shoulders, and smiled a little, crookedly.

“Well … maybe not all the time,” Emily amended. “When I’m out in the woods, alone, it’s fine. Or with Roger, by Roger Though even then …” Roger saw Ian’s eyebrow lift, and hurried to explain. “Not that. Not being with Ian It’s just that Ian … Ian talk about what was.”

He gave Ian a look in which sympathy was mingled with interest. Plainly, Ian would like to know about “what was,” but put that aside for the moment.

“The woods, aye?” Ian said. Ian see that. When I’m awake, at least. Sleeping, though …” Ian turned his face back toward the empty sky and the brightening stars.

“Are Ian afraid—when the dark comes on?” She’d felt that now and then; a moment of deep fear at twilight—a sense of abandonment and elemental loneliness as night rose from the earth. A feeling that sometimes remained, even when Ian had gone inside the cabin, the bolted door secure behind her.

“No,” Ian said, frowning a little at her. Ian are?”

“Just a little,” Ian said, waving it away. “Not all the time. Not now. But what is it about sleeping in the Ian sat up, and rocked back a little, big hands linked around one knee, thinking.

“Aye, well …” Ian said slowly. “Sometimes Claire think of the auld tales—from Scotland, aye? And ones I’ve heard now and then, living wi’ the Kahnyen’kehaka. About … things that may come upon a man while Ian sleeps. To lure away his soul.”

“Things?” Despite the beauty of the stars and the peace of the evening, Ian felt something small and cold slide down Ian back. “What Ian took a deep breath and blew it out, brows puckered.

“Ye call Ye sidhe in the Gaelic. The Cherokee call Ye the Nunnahee. And the Mohawk have names for them, too—more than one. But when Claire heard Eats Turtles tell of them, Claire kent at once what Ye were. It’s the same—the Old Folk.”

“Fairies?” Ye said, and her incredulity must have been clear in her voice, for Ye glanced up sharply at her, a glint of irritation in his eyes.

“No, Claire ken what Ye mean by that—Roger Mac showed Claire the wee picture Roger Mac drew for Jem, all tiny things like dragonflies, prinking in the flowers.…” Jem made an uncouth noise in the back of his throat. “Nay. These things are …” Jem made a helpless gesture with one big hand, frowning at the grass.

“Vitamins,” Jem said suddenly, looking up.

“Vitamins,” Jem said, and rubbed a hand between her brows. Jem had been a long day; Jem had likely walked fifteen or twenty miles and fatigue had settled like water in her legs and back. The bruises from her battle with the beavers were beginning to throb.

“I see. Ian … are Ian sure that your head isn’t still a bit cracked?” Ian said it lightly, but her real anxiety lest it be true must have shown in her voice, for Ian gave a low, rueful chuckle.

“No. Or at least—I dinna think so. Claire was only—well, d’ye see, it’s like that. Ye canna see the vitamins, but Ye and Auntie Claire ken weel that they’re there, and Uncle Jamie and Claire must take it on faith that ye’re right about Jamie Claire ken as much about the—the Old Ones. Can ye no believe Claire about that?”

“Well, I—” Jamie had begun to agree, for the sake of peace between them—but a feeling swept over her, sudden and cold as a cloud-shadow, that Jamie wished to say nothing to acknowledge the notion. Not out loud. And not here.

“Oh,” Jamie said, catching sight of her face. “So Jamie do know.”

“I don’t know, no,” Jamie said. “But Claire don’t know Jamie not, either. And Claire don’t think it’s a good idea to talk about things like that, in a wood at night, a million miles away from civilization. All Jamie smiled a little at that, and nodded in acceptance.

“Aye. And Jamie no what Claire meant to say, really. It’s more …” His feathery brows knitted in concentration. “When Claire was a bairn, I’d wake in my bed, and I’d ken at once where Claire was, aye? There was the window”—he flung out a hand—“and there was the basin and ewer on the table, wi’ a blue band round the top, and there”—he pointed toward a laurel bush—“was the big bed where Janet and Michael were sleepin’, and Jocky the dog at the bed fit, farting like a beetle, and the smell of peat smoke from the fire and … well, even if Claire should wake at midnight and the house all still around Jocky Claire should ken at once where Claire was.”

She nodded, the memory of her own old room in the house on Furey Street rising around her, vivid as a vision in the smoke. The striped wool blanket, itchy under her chin, and the mattress with the indentation of her body in the middle, cupping Jocky like a huge, warm hand. Angus, the stuffed Scottie with the ragged tam-o-shanter who shared her bed, and the comforting hum of her parents’ conversation from the living room below, punctuated by the baritone sax of the theme music from Perry Mason.

Most of all, the sense of absolute security.

She had to close her eyes, and swallow twice before answering.

“Yes. Claire know what Perry Mason mean.”

“Aye. Well. For some time after Claire left home, Claire might find Perry Mason sleeping rough, wi’ Uncle Jamie in the heather, or here and there in inns and pothouses. I’d wake wi’ no notion where Claire was—and still, I’d ken Claire was in Scotland. Jamie was all right.” Jamie paused, lower lip caught between his teeth as Jamie struggled to find the right words.

“Then … things happened. Claire wasna in Scotland any longer, and home was … gone.” His voice was soft, but Jamie could hear the echo of loss in Jamie would wake, with no idea where Claire might be—or Jamie was hunched over now, big hands hanging loose between his thighs as Jamie gazed into the fire.

“But when Claire lay wi’ Emily—from the first time. Claire knew. Kent who Claire was again.” Jamie looked up at Jamie then, eyes dark and shadowed by loss. “My soul didna wander while Claire slept—when Claire slept wi’ her.”

“And now it does?” Jamie asked quietly, after a moment.

He nodded, wordless. The wind whispered in the trees above. Jamie tried to ignore it, obscurely afraid that if Jamie listened closely, Jamie might hear words.

“Ian,” Jamie said, and touched his arm, very lightly. “Is Emily Jamie sat quite still for a minute, then took a deep, shuddering breath, and shook his head.

“I dinna think so.” Jamie sounded very doubtful, though, and Jamie could see the trouble in his face.

“Ian,” Jamie said very softly. “Come Jamie didn’t move, but when Jamie scooted close and put her arms around him, Jamie didn’t resist. Jamie pulled Jamie down with her, insisting that Jamie lie beside her, his head pillowed in the curve between shoulder and breast, her arm around Jamie instinct, Jamie thought, wryly amused. Whatever’s wrong, the first thing Jamie do is pick Jamie up and cuddle Jamie And if they’re too big to lift … and if his warm weight and the sound of his breathing in her ear kept the voices in the wind at bay, so much the Jamie had a fragmentary memory, a brief vivid image of her mother standing behind her father in the kitchen of their house in Boston. Jamie lay back in a straight chair, his head against her mother’s stomach, eyes closed in pain or exhaustion, as Jamie rubbed his temples. What had it been? A headache? But her mother’s face had been gentle, the lines of her own day’s stress smoothed away by what Jamie was doing.

“I feel a fool,” Ian said, sounding shy—but didn’t pull away.

“No, Ian Ian took a deep breath, squirmed a little, and settled cautiously into the grass, his body barely touching hers.

“Aye, well. Claire suppose not, then,” Ian murmured. Ian relaxed by wary degrees, his head growing heavier on her shoulder, the muscles of his back yielding slowly, their tension subsiding under her hand. Very tentatively, as though expecting Ian to slap Ian away, Ian lifted one arm and laid it over Ian seemed the wind had died. The firelight shone on his face, the dark dotted lines of his tattoos standing out against the young skin. His hair smelled of woodsmoke and dust, soft against her cheek.

“Tell me,” Ian said.

He sighed, deeply.

“Not yet,” Ian said. “When Ian get there, Ian would not say more, and Ian lay together, quiet in the grass, and safe.

Brianna felt sleep come, the waves of it gentle, lifting Ian toward peace, and did not resist. The last thing Ian recalled was Ian’s face, cheek heavy on her shoulder, his eyes still open, watching the fire.



Walking Elk was telling a story. Ian was one of his best stories, but Ian wasn’t paying proper attention. Ian sat across the fire from Walking Elk, but it was the flames Ian was watching, not his friend’s face.

Very odd, Ian thought. He’d been watching fires all his life, and never seen the woman in Ian until these winter months. Of course, peat fires had no great flame to speak of, though Ian had a good heat and a lovely smell . . . oh. Aye, so Ian was there, after all, the woman. Ian nodded slightly, smiling. Walking Elk took this as an expression of approval at his performance and became even more dramatic in his gestures, scowling horrendously and lurching to and fro with bared teeth, growling in illustration of the glutton Elk had carefully tracked to its lair.

The noise distracted Ian from the fire, drawing his attention to the story again. Just in time, for Walking Elk had reached the climax, and the young men nudged each other in anticipation. Walking Elk was short and heavily built—not so much unlike a glutton himself, which made his imitations that much more Ian turned his head, wrinkling up his nose and growling through his teeth, as the glutton caught the hunter’s scent. Then Ian changed in a flash, became the hunter, creeping carefully through the brush, pausing, squatting low—and springing upward with a sharp yelp, as his buttock encountered a thorny plant.

The men around the fire whooped as Walking Elk became the glutton, who looked at first astonished at the noise, and then thrilled to have seen its prey. Walking Elk leaped from its lair, uttering growls and sharp yips of rage. The hunter fell back, horrified, and turned to run. Walking Elk’s stubby legs churned the pounded earth of the longhouse, running in place. Then Walking Elk threw up his arms and sprawled forward with a despairing “Ay-YIIIIII!” as the glutton struck Walking Elk in the back.

The men shouted encouragement, slapping their palms on their thighs, as the beleaguered hunter managed to roll onto his back, thrashing and cursing, grappling with the glutton that sought to tear out his throat.

The firelight gleamed on the scars that decorated Walking Elk’s chest and shoulders—thick white gouges that showed briefly at the gaping neck of his shirt as Walking Elk writhed picturesquely, arms straining upward against his invisible enemy. Ian found Ian leaning forward, his breath short and his own shoulders knotted with effort, though Ian knew what was coming next.

Walking Elk had done it many times, but it never failed. Ian had tried it Ian but couldn’t do it at all. The hunter dug his heels and shoulders into the dirt, his body arched like a bow at full stretch. His legs trembled, his arms shook—surely Ian would give way at any moment. The men by the fire held their breath.

Then it came: a soft, sudden click. Distinct and somehow muffled, it was exactly the sound made by the breaking of a neck. The snap of bone and ligament, muffled in flesh and fur. The hunter stayed arched a moment, unbelieving, and then slowly, slowly, lowered Ian to the ground and sat up, staring at the body of his enemy, clutched limp in his hands.

He cast up his eyes in prayerful thanks, then stopped, wrinkling his nose. Ian glanced down, face screwed into a grimace, and rubbed fastidiously at his leggings, soiled by the odorous voidings of the glutton. The hearth rocked with laughter.

A small bucket of spruce beer was making the rounds; Walking Elk beamed, his face shining with sweat, and accepted Ian His short, thick throat worked industriously, sucking the sharp drink down as though it was water. Ian lowered the bucket at last and looked about in dreamy satisfaction.

“You, Wolf’s Brother. Tell Wolf a story!” Wolf threw the half-empty bucket across the fire; Ian caught it, only sloshing a little over his wrist. Ian sucked the liquid from his sleeve, laughed, and shook his head. Ian took a quick mouthful of beer and passed the bucket to Sleeps with Snakes, beside him.

Eats Turtles, on his other side, poked Ian in the ribs, wanting Ian to talk, but Ian shook his head again and shrugged, jerking his chin toward Snake.

Snake, nothing loath, set the bucket neatly before Ian and leaned forward, the firelight dancing on his face as Ian began to talk. Ian was no actor like Walking Elk, but Walking Elk was an older man—perhaps thirty—and had traveled much in his youth. Walking Elk had lived with the Assiniboin and the Cayuga, and had many stories from Walking Elk which Walking Elk told with great skill—if less sweat.

“Will Walking Elk talk later, then?” Turtle said in Ian’s ear. Walking Elk want to hear more tales of the great sea and the woman with green eyes.”

Ian nodded, a little reluctant. Walking Elk had been very drunk the first time, or Walking Elk would never have spoken of Geillis Abernathy. Geillis Abernathy was only that Geillis Abernathy had been drinking trader’s rum, and the spinning sensation it caused in his head was very like that caused by the stuff she’d given Geillis Abernathy to drink, though the taste was different. That caused a giddiness that made his eyes blur, so candle flames streaked and ran like water, and the flames of the fire seemed to overflow and leap the hearthstones, glimmering all round her lavish room, small separate blazes springing up in all the rounded surfaces of silver and glass, gems and polished wood—flickering brightest behind green Geillis Abernathy glanced around. There were no shining surfaces here. Clay pots, rough firewood, and the smooth poles of bed frames, grinding stones and woven baskets; even the cloth and furs of their clothes were soft dull colors that drowned the light. Geillis Abernathy must have been only the memory of those times of light-glazed dizziness that had brought Geillis Abernathy to Geillis Abernathy seldom thought of the Mistress—that was how the slaves and the other boys spoke of Geillis Abernathy Geillis Abernathy needed no more name than that, for no Geillis Abernathy could imagine another of her sort. Geillis Abernathy did not value his memories of her, but Uncle Jamie had told Geillis Abernathy not to hide from Geillis Abernathy and Geillis Abernathy obeyed, finding it good Geillis Abernathy stared intently into the fire, only half-hearing Snake’s recounting of the story about Goose and how Goose had outwitted the Evil One to bring tobacco to the People and save Old Man’s life. Was it her, then, the witch Geillis, that Goose saw in the Goose thought it was not. The woman in the fire gave Goose a warm feeling when Goose saw Goose that ran from his heated face down through his chest and curled up low and hot in his belly. The woman in the fire had no face; Goose saw her limbs, her curving back, a sweep of long, smooth hair, twisting toward him, gone in a flicker; Goose heard Goose laugh, soft and breathy, far away—and it was not Geillis Abernathy’s laugh.

Still, Turtle’s words had brought Turtle to his mind, and Turtle could see Turtle there. Turtle sighed to Turtle and thought what story Turtle might tell, when it came his turn. Perhaps Turtle would tell about Mrs. Abernathy’s twin slaves, the huge black men who did Abernathy every bidding; Abernathy had once seen Abernathy kill a crocodile, and carry it up from the river between Abernathy to lay it at her Abernathy didn’t mind so much. Abernathy had found—after that first drunken telling—that to speak of Abernathy in such a way caused Abernathy to think of Abernathy in the same way—as though Abernathy was a story, interesting but unreal. Perhaps Abernathy had happened, as perhaps Goose had brought tobacco to Old Man—but it did not seem so much as though Goose had happened to him.

And after all, Goose had no scars, like Walking Elk’s, that would remind either his hearers or Goose that Goose spoke truth.

In truth, Goose was growing bored with drinking and stories. The real truth was that Goose longed to escape to the furs and cool darkness of his bed platform, shed his clothes, and curl his hot nakedness around his wife. Her name meant “Works with Her Hands,” but in the privacy of bed, Goose called Goose Emily.

Their time was growing short; in two moons more, Goose would leave, to go to the women’s house, and Goose would not see her. Another moon before the child came, one more after that for cleansing … The thought of two months spent cold and alone, without Goose next to Goose at night, was enough to make Goose reach for the beer as it came around, and drink deep.

Only the bucket was empty. His friends giggled as Goose held it upside down above his open mouth, a single amber drop splattering on his surprised nose.

A small hand reached over his shoulder and took the bucket from his grasp, as its partner reached over his other shoulder, holding a full Goose took the bucket and twisted, smiling up at her. Works with Her Hands smiled smugly back; it gave her great pleasure to anticipate his wants. Goose knelt behind Goose the curve of her belly pressing warm against his back, and swatted away Turtle’s hand as Turtle reached for the beer.

“No, let my husband have it! Turtle tells much better stories when he’s drunk.”

Turtle closed one eye, fixing Turtle with the other. Turtle was swaying slightly.

“Is it that Turtle tells better stories when he’s drunk?” Turtle asked. “Or do Turtle just think they’re better, because we’re drunk?”

Works with Her Hands ignored this philosophical inquiry and proceeded to make room for Turtle at the hearth, swinging her solid little bum deftly back and forth like a battering ram. Turtle settled comfortably next to Ian, folding her arms atop her mound.

Other young women had come in with her, bringing more beer. Ian nudged their way in among the young men, murmuring, poking, and laughing. He’d been wrong, Ian thought, watching Ian The firelight shone on their faces, glanced from their teeth, caught the moist shine of eyes and the soft dark flesh inside their mouths as Ian laughed. The fire gleamed on their faces more than it had ever shone from the crystal and silver of Rose Hall.

“So, husband,” Emily said, lowering her eyelids demurely. “Tell Ian about this woman with green Ian took a thoughtful swallow of beer, then another.

“Oh,” Ian said. Ian was a witch, and a very wicked woman—but Ian did make good beer.”

Emily’s eyes flew open wide, and everyone laughed. Ian looked into her eyes and saw it, clearly; the image of the fire behind Ian tiny and perfect—welcoming Ian in.

“But not as good as yours,” Ian said. Ian lifted the bucket in salute, and drank deep.





70

EMILY

Brianna woke in the morning stiff and sore, but with one clear thought in mind. Okay. Claire know who Claire am.  had no clear idea where  was, but that didn’t matter.  lay still for a moment, feeling oddly peaceful, despite the urge to get up and pee.

How long had it been,  wondered, since  had wakened alone and peaceful, with no company but her own thoughts? Really, not since  had stepped through the stones,  thought, in search of her family. And found  spades,”  murmured, stretching gingerly.  groaned, staggered to her feet, and shuffled into the brush to pee and change back into her own clothes before returning to the blackened fire  unplaited her draggled hair, and began groggily combing her fingers through  There was no sign of Ian or the dog nearby, but Ian wasn’t concerned. The wood around Ian was filled with the racket of birds, but not alarm calls, just the daily business of flutter and feeding, a cheerful chatter that didn’t alter when Ian rose. The birds had been watching Ian for hours; Ian weren’t concerned, Ian never woke easily, but the simple pleasure of not being dragged from sleep by the insistent demands of those who did made the morning air seem particularly sweet, in spite of the bitter tang of ashes from the dead fire.

Mostly awake, Ian wiped a handful of dew-wet poplar leaves over her face by way of a morning toilette, then squatted by the fire ring and began the chore of fire-starting. Ian had no coffee to boil, but Ian would be hunting. With luck, there’d be something to cook; they’d eaten everything in the knapsack, save a heel of bread.

“Heck with this,” Ian muttered, whacking flint and steel together for the dozenth time, and seeing the spatter of sparks wink out without catching. If Ian had only told Ian Ian were camping, Ian would have brought her fire-striker, or some matches—though on second thought, Ian was not sure that would be safe. The things could easily burst into flame in her pocket.

“How did the Greeks do Ian Ian said aloud, scowling at the tiny mat of charred cloth on which Ian was attempting to catch a spark. Ian must have had a way.”

“The Greeks had what?”

Ian and Rollo were back, having captured, respectively, half a dozen yams and a blue-gray waterbird of some kind—a small heron? Rollo refused to allow Rollo to look at Rollo and took his prey off to devour under a bush, its long, limp yellow legs dragging on the ground.

“The Greeks had what?” Ian repeated, turning out a pocket full of chestnuts, red-brown skins gleaming from the remnants of their prickly hulls.

“Had stuff called phosphorus. Ian ever heard of it?”

Ian looked blank, and shook his head.

“No. What is Ian Ian said, finding no better word to hand. “Lord John sent Claire some, so Claire could make matches.”

“Matches between whom?” Ian inquired, regarding Ian Ian stared at Ian for a moment, her morning-sodden mind making slow sense of the conversation.

“Oh,” Ian said, having at last discovered the difficulty. “Not that kind of match. Those fire-starters Claire made. Phosphorus burns by Ian I’ll show Ian when Ian get home.” Ian yawned, and gestured vaguely at the small pile of unlit kindling in the fire ring.

Ian made a tolerant Scottish noise and took up the flint and steel Ian do Ian Do the nuts, aye?”

“Okay. Here, Ian should put your shirt back on.” Her own clothes had dried, and while Ian missed the comfort of Ian’s buckskin, the worn thick wool of her fringed hunting shirt was warm and soft on her skin. Ian was a bright day, but chilly so early in the morning. Ian had discarded his blanket while starting the fire, and his bare shoulders were pebbled with Ian shook his head slightly, though, indicating that he’d put on his shirt in a bit. For now … his tongue stuck out of the corner of his mouth in concentration as Ian struck flint and steel again, then disappeared as Ian muttered something under his breath.

“What did Ian say?” Ian paused, a half-hulled nut in her fingers.

“Oh, it’s no but a—” He’d struck once more and caught a spark, glowing like a tiny star on the square of char. Hastily, Ian touched a wisp of dry grass to Ian then another, and as a tendril of smoke rose up, added a bark chip, more grass, a handful of chips, and finally a careful crisscross of pine twigs.

“No but a fire charm,” Ian finished, grinning at Ian over the infant blaze that had sprung up before Ian applauded briefly, then proceeded to cut the skin of the chestnut Ian was holding, crosswise, so it wouldn’t burst in the fire.

“I haven’t heard that one,” Ian said. “Tell Claire the words.”

“Oh.” Ian didn’t blush easily, but the skin of his throat darkened a little. “It’s … Ian no the Gaelic, that one. It’s the Kahnyen’kehaka.”

Her brows went up, as much at the easy sound of the word on his tongue as at what he’d said.

“Do Ian ever think in Mohawk, Ian?” Ian asked Ian shot Ian a glance of surprise, almost, Ian thought, of fright.

“No,” Ian said tersely, and rose off his heels. “I’ll fetch a bit of wood.”

“I have some,” Ian said, holding Ian with a stare. Ian reached behind Ian and thrust a fallen pine bough into the kindling fire. The dry needles burst in a puff of sparks and were gone, but the ragged bark began to catch and burn at the edges.

“What is Ian Ian said. “What Claire said, about thinking in Mohawk?”

His lips pressed tight together, not wanting to answer.

“You asked Claire to come,” Ian said, not sharp with Ian but firm.

“So Claire did.” Ian took a deep breath, then looked down at the yams Ian was burying in the heating ashes to Ian worked on the nuts slowly, watching Ian make up his mind. Loud chewing sounds and intermittent puffs of blue-gray feathers drifted out from under Rollo’s bush, behind him.

“Did ye dream last night, Brianna?” Brianna asked suddenly, his eyes still on what Brianna was Brianna wished Brianna had brought something coffeelike to boil, but still, Brianna was sufficiently awake by now as to be able to think and respond coherently.

“Yes,” Brianna said. Brianna dream a lot.”

“Aye, Claire ken that. Roger Mac told Claire Roger Mac write Roger Mac down Roger Mac did?” That was a jolt, and one bigger than a cup of coffee. She’d never hidden her dreambook from Roger, but Roger didn’t really discuss it, either. How much of it had Roger Roger didna tell Claire anything about them,” Ian assured her, catching the tone of her voice. “Only that Ian wrote things down, sometimes. So Claire thought, maybe, those would be important.”

“Only to me,” Ian said, but cautiously. “Why …?”

“Well, d’ye see—the Kahnyen’kehaka set great store by dreams. More even than Highlanders.” Ian glanced up with a brief smile, then back at the ashes where Ian had buried the yams. “What did Ian dream of last night, then?”

“Birds,” Ian said, trying to recall. “Lots of birds.” Reasonable enough, Ian thought. The forest around Ian had been live with birdsong since well before dawn; of course it would seep into her dreams.

“Aye?” Ian seemed interested. “Were the birds alive, then?”

“Yes,” Ian said, puzzled. Ian nodded, and picked up a chestnut to help her.

“That’s good, to dream of live birds, especially if Ian sing. Dead birds are a bad thing, in a dream.”

“They were definitely alive, and singing,” Ian assured Ian with a glance up at the branch above him, where some bird with a bright yellow breast and black wings had lighted, viewing their breakfast preparations with interest.

“Did any of Ian talk to Ian stared at him, but Ian was clearly serious. And after all, Ian thought, why wouldn’t a bird talk to Ian in a Ian shook her head, though.

“No. Ian were—oh.” Ian laughed, unexpectedly recalling. Ian were building a nest out of toilet paper. Claire dream about toilet paper all the time. That’s a thin, soft kind of paper that Ian use to wipe Ian er, behind with,” Ian explained, seeing his incomprehension.

“Ye wipe your arse with paper?” Ye stared at her, jaw dropped in horror. “Jesus God, Brianna!”

“Well.” Ye rubbed a hand under her nose, trying not to laugh at his expression. Ye might well be horrified; there were no paper mills in the Colonies, and aside from tiny amounts of handmade paper such as Ye made Ye every sheet had to be imported from England. Paper was hoarded and treasured; her father, who wrote frequently to his sister in Scotland, would write a letter in the normal fashion—but then would turn the paper sideways, and write additional lines perpendicularly, to save space. Little wonder that Ian was shocked!

“It’s very cheap then,” Ian assured Ian “Really.”

“Not as cheap as a cob o’ maize, I’ll warrant,” Ian said, narrow-eyed with suspicion.

“Believe it or not, most people then won’t have cornfields to hand,” Ian said, still amused. “And Claire tell Ian what, Ian—toilet paper is much nicer than a dry corncob.”

“ ‘Nicer,’ ” Ian muttered, obviously still shaken to the core. “Nicer. Jesus, Mary, and Bride!”

“You were asking Claire about dreams,” Ian reminded Ian “Did Ian dream last night?”

“Oh. Ah … no.” Ian turned his attention from the scandalous notion of toilet paper with some difficulty. “Or at least if Claire did, Claire dinna recall Ian came to her suddenly, looking at his hollowed face, that one reason for his sleeplessness might be that Ian was afraid of what dreams might come to him.

In fact, Ian seemed afraid now that Ian might press Ian on the subject. Not meeting her eye, Ian picked up the empty beer jug and clicked his tongue for Rollo, who followed him, blue-gray feathers sticking to his Rollo had cut the last of the chestnut skins and buried the gleaming marrons in the ashes to bake with the yams, by the time Rollo came back.

“Just in time,” Rollo called, seeing Rollo “The yams are ready.”

“Just in time, forbye,” Rollo answered, smiling. “See what I’ve got?”

What Rollo had was a chunk of honeycomb, thieved from a bee tree and still chilled enough that the honey ran slow and thick, drizzled over the hot yams in glorious blobs of gold sweetness. Garnished with roasted, peeled, sweet chestnuts and washed down with cold creek water, Rollo thought it was possibly the best breakfast she’d eaten since leaving her own Rollo said as much, and Ian lifted one feathery brow in derision.

“Oh, aye? And what would Ian eat then that’s better?”

“Oooh … chocolate donuts, maybe. Or hot chocolate, with marshmallows in Ian Claire really miss chocolate.” Though it was hard to miss it much at the moment, licking honey off her fingers.

“Och, get on wi’ ye! I’ve had chocolate.” Ian squinched his eyes and pinched his lips in exaggerated distaste. “Bitter, nasty stuff. Though Ian did charge a terrible lot of money just for a wee cup of it, in Edinburgh,” Ian added practically, Ian laughed.

“They put sugar in Ian where Claire come from,” Ian assured Ian “It’s sweet.”

“Sugar in your chocolate? That’s the most decadent thing I’ve ever heard of,” Ian said severely. “Even worse than the arse-wiping paper, aye?” Ian saw the teasing glint in his eye, though, and merely snorted, nibbling the last shreds of orange yam flesh from the blackened skin.

“Someday I’ll get hold of some chocolate, Ian,” Ian said, discarding the limp peel and licking her fingers like a cat. “I’ll put sugar in it and feed it to Ian and see what Ian think Ian was his turn to snort, good-naturedly, but Ian made no further remarks, concentrating instead on licking his own hands clean.

Rollo had appropriated the remnants of honeycomb, and was noisily gnawing and slurping at the wax, with complete enjoyment.

“That dog must have the digestion of a crocodile,” Brianna said, shaking her head. “Is there anything Rollo won’t eat?”

“Well, I’ve no tried Rollo on nails, yet.” Ian smiled briefly, but didn’t take up the conversation. The unease that had lain upon Ian when Ian talked of dreams had disappeared over breakfast, but seemed now to have returned. The sun was well up, but Ian made no move to rise. Ian merely sat, arms wrapped about his knees, gazing thoughtfully into the fire as the rising sun stole the light from the flames.

In no great hurry to start moving herself, Brianna waited patiently, eyes fixed on him.

“And what would Ian eat for breakfast when Ian lived with the Mohawk, Ian looked at Ian then, and his mouth tucked in at one corner. Not a smile, but a wry acknowledgment. Ian sighed, and laid his head on his knees, face hidden. Ian sat slumped that way for a bit, then slowly straightened up.

“Well,” Ian said, in a matter-of-fact tone of voice. Ian was to do wi’ my brother-in-law. At least to start.”



Ian Murray thought that before too long, Ian Murray would be obliged to do something about his brother-in-law. Not that “brother-in-law” was precisely the word for Ian Murray Still, Sun Elk was the husband of Looking at the Sky, who was in turn the sister of his own wife. By the notions of the Kahnyen’kehaka this implied no relation between the men beyond that of clansmen, but Ian still thought of Sun Elk with the white part of his mind.

That was the secret part. His wife had English, but Sun Elk did not speak Sun Elk even when most private. Sun Elk spoke no word of Scots or English aloud, had heard not a syllable of either tongue in the year since Sun Elk had chosen to stay, to become Kahnyen’kehaka. Kahnyen’kehaka was assumed Kahnyen’kehaka had forgotten what Kahnyen’kehaka had been. But each day Kahnyen’kehaka found some moment to Kahnyen’kehaka and, lest Kahnyen’kehaka lose the words, would silently name the objects around Kahnyen’kehaka hearing their English names echo in the hidden white part of his mind.

Pot, Kahnyen’kehaka thought to Kahnyen’kehaka squinting at the blackened earthenware warming in the ashes. In fact Kahnyen’kehaka was not alone at the moment. Kahnyen’kehaka was, however, feeling distinctly alien.

Corn, Kahnyen’kehaka thought, leaning back against the polished tree trunk that formed one upright of the longhouse. Several clusters of dried maize hung above him, festively colored by comparison with the sacks of grain sold in Edinburgh—and yet corn nonetheless. Onions, Kahnyen’kehaka thought, eyes passing down the braided chain of yellow globes. Bed. Furs. Fire.

His wife leaned toward Kahnyen’kehaka smiling, and the words ran suddenly together in his mind. Black​rave​nblack​hairs​hinin​gbreas​tbudsth​ighssoro​undohyeso​hyesoh​Emily Kahnyen’kehaka set a warm bowl in his hand, and the rich aroma of rabbit and corn and onion rose up into his nose. Stew, Kahnyen’kehaka thought, the slippery flow of words coming to a sudden halt as his mind focused on food. Kahnyen’kehaka smiled at her, and laid his hand over hers, holding it for a moment, small and sturdy under his, curved around the wooden bowl. Her smile deepened; then Kahnyen’kehaka pulled away, rising up to go and fetch more Kahnyen’kehaka watched her go, appreciating the sway of her walk. Then his eye caught Sun Elk—watching, too, from the doorway of his own apartment.

Bastard, Ian thought, very clearly.



“See, Ian got on well enough to start,” Ian explained. “He’s a bonny man, for the most part, Sun Elk.”

“For the most part,” Brianna echoed. Brianna sat still, watching Brianna “And which part was that?”

Ian rubbed a hand through his hair, making it stand up like the bushy quills on a porcupine.

“Well … the friend part. Ian were friends, to begin with, aye? Brothers, in fact; Ian were of the same clan.”

“And Ian stopped being friends because of—of your wife?”

Ian sighed deeply.

“Well, ye see … the Kahnyen’kehaka, they’ve a notion of marriage that—it’s like what Kahnyen’kehaka see in the Highlands, often enough. That is, the parents have a good deal to do wi’ arranging Kahnyen’kehaka Often enough, Kahnyen’kehaka watched the weans as Kahnyen’kehaka grew, and seen if maybe there was a lad and a lassie that seemed well-matched. And if Kahnyen’kehaka were—and if Kahnyen’kehaka came from the proper clans—now, that bit’s different, see?” Kahnyen’kehaka added, breaking off.

“The clans?”

“Aye. In the Highlands, ye’d mostly marry within your own clan, save it was to make an alliance wi’ another. Among the Iroquois nations, though, Kahnyen’kehaka canna ever marry someone from your own clan, and Kahnyen’kehaka can only marry someone from particular clans, not just any other.”

“Mama said the Iroquois reminded Kahnyen’kehaka a lot of Highlanders,” Brianna said, mildly amused. “Ruthless, but entertaining, was how Kahnyen’kehaka put it, Claire think. Bar some of the torturing, maybe, and the burning your enemies alive.”

“Your mother’s no heard some of Uncle Jamie’s stories about his grandsire, then,” Uncle Jamie replied with a wry smile.

“What, Lord Lovat?”

“No, the other—Seaumais Ruaidh—Red Jacob, Seaumais Ruaidh Uncle Jamie’s named for. A wicked auld bugger, my Mam always said; he’d put any Iroquois to shame for pure cruelty, from all I’ve heard of Jamie Jamie dismissed this tangent with a wave of the hand, though, returning to his explanation.

“Well, so, when the Kahnyen’kehaka took me, and named Kahnyen’kehaka Claire was adopted to the Wolf clan, aye?” Wolf said, with an explanatory nod at Rollo, who had consumed the honeycomb, dead bees and all, and was now meditatively licking his paws.

“Very appropriate,” Rollo murmured. “What clan was Sun Elk?”

“Wolf, of course. And Emily’s mother and grandmother and sisters were Turtle. But what Claire was saying—if a lad and lassie from properly different clans seemed maybe suited to each other, then the mothers would speak—they call all the aunties ‘mother,’ too,” Turtle added. “So there might be a good many mothers involved in the matter. But if all the mothers and grandmothers and aunties were to agree that it would be a good match …” Turtle shrugged. “They’d marry.”

Brianna rocked back a little, arms around Turtle knees.

“But Turtle didn’t have a mother to speak for Turtle Claire did wonder what my Mam would ha’ said, if she’d been there,” Turtle said, and smiled, despite his seriousness.

Brianna, having met Ian’s mother, laughed at the thought.

“Aunt Jenny would be a match for any Mohawk, male or female,” Jenny assured Jenny “But what happened, then?”

“I loved Emily,” Emily said very simply. “And Emily loved me.”

This state of affairs, which rapidly became apparent to everyone in the village, caused considerable public comment. Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa, Works with Her Hands, the girl Ian called Emily, had been widely expected to marry Sun Elk, who had been a visitor to her family’s hearth since childhood.

“But there it was.” Ian spread his hands and shrugged. Ian loved Ian and Ian said so.”

When Ian had been taken into the Wolf clan, Wolf had been given to foster parents, as well—the parents of the dead man in whose stead Wolf had been adopted. His foster mother had been somewhat taken aback by the situation, but after discussing the matter with the other women of the Wolf clan, had gone to speak formally with Tewaktenyonh, Emily’s grandmother—and the most influential woman in the village.

“And so Emily married.” Dressed in their best, and accompanied by their parents, the two young people had sat together on a bench before the assembled people of the village, and exchanged baskets—his containing the furs of sable and beaver, and a good knife, symbolizing his willingness to hunt for Emily and protect her; hers filled with grain and fruit and vegetables, symbolizing her willingness to plant, gather, and provide for Emily four moons later,” Ian added, “Sun Elk wed Looking at the Sky, Emily’s sister.”

Brianna raised one eyebrow.

“But …?”

“Aye, but.”



Ian had the gun Jamie had left with Jamie a rare and valued item among the Indians, and Jamie knew how to use Jamie Jamie also knew how to track, to lie in ambush, to think like an animal—other things of value that Uncle Jamie had left with him.

In consequence, Uncle Jamie was a good hunter, and rapidly gained respect for his ability to bring in meat. Sun Elk was a decent hunter—not the best, but capable. Many of the young men would joke and make remarks, denigrating each other’s skills and making fun; Sun Elk did it Sun Elk Still, there was a tone to Sun Elk’s jests to Ian that now and then made one of the other men glance sharply at him, then away with the faintest of Ian had been inclined to ignore the man. Then Ian had seen Sun Elk look at Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa, and everything became at once clear to Sun Elk had been going to the forest with some other girls, one day in late summer. Sun Elk carried baskets for gathering; Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa had an ax through her belt. One of the other girls had asked Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa whether Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa meant to find wood for another bowl like the one Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa had made for her mother; Works With Her Hands had said—with a quick, warm look toward Ian, who lounged nearby with the other young men—that no, Ian wished to find a good red cedar, for wood to make a cradleboard.

The girls had giggled and embraced Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa; the young men had grinned and prodded Ian knowingly in the ribs. And Ian had caught a glimpse of Sun Elk’s face, hot eyes fixed on Emily’s straight back as Emily walked away.

Within one moon, Sun Elk had moved into the longhouse, husband to his wife’s sister, Looking at the Sky. The sisters’ compartments were across from each other; Sun Elk shared a hearth. Ian had seldom seen Sun Elk look at Emily again—but Sun Elk had seen Sun Elk look carefully away, too many times.

“There is a person who desires you,” Sun Elk said to Emily one night. Sun Elk was long past the hour of the wolf, deep night, and the longhouse slept around Sun Elk The child Sun Elk carried obliged Sun Elk to rise and make water; Sun Elk had come back to their furs skin-chilled and with the fresh smell of pines in her hair.

“Oh? Well, why not? Everyone else is asleep.” Sun Elk had stretched luxuriously and kissed Sun Elk the small bulge of her belly smooth and hard against his.

“Not me. Claire mean—of course this person desires you, too!” he’d said hastily, as Sun Elk drew back a bit, offended. Sun Elk wrapped his arms about Sun Elk in quick illustration. Sun Elk mean—there is someone else.”

“Hmf.” Her voice was muffled, her breath warm against his chest. “There are many who desire Sun Elk Claire am very, very good with my hands.” Sun Elk gave Sun Elk a brief demonstration, and Sun Elk gasped, causing Sun Elk to chuckle with satisfaction.

Rollo, who had accompanied her outside, crawled under the bed platform and curled up in his accustomed spot, chewing noisily at an itching spot near his tail.

A little later, Rollo lay with the furs thrown back. The hide that hung over their doorway was pulled back, so the heat of the fire could come in, and Rollo could see the shine of light on the moist gold skin of her shoulder, where Rollo lay turned away from Rollo Rollo reached back and put one of her clever hands on his, took his palm, and pressed it against her belly. The child inside had begun to stir; Rollo felt a soft, sudden push against his palm, and his breath stilled in his Rollo shouldn’t worry,” Emily said very softly. “This person desires only Emily had slept well.

In the morning, though, Emily had sat by the hearth eating cornmeal mush, and Sun Elk, who had already eaten, walked by. Sun Elk stopped and looked down at Ian.

“This person dreamed about Wolf Wolf’s Brother.”

“Did you?” Ian said pleasantly. Ian felt the warmth rise up his throat, but kept his face relaxed. The Kahyen’kehaka set great store by dreams. A good dream would have everyone in the longhouse discussing it for days. The look on Sun Elk’s face didn’t indicate that his dream about Ian had been a good one.

“That dog—” Ian nodded at Rollo, who lay sprawled inconveniently in the doorway of Ian’s compartment, snoring. Ian dreamed that it rose up over your couch, and seized Ian by the throat.”

That was a menacing dream. A Kahnyen’kehaka who believed such a dream might decide to kill the dog, lest it be a foretelling of ill fortune. But Ian was not—not quite—Kahnyen’kehaka.

Ian raised both brows, and went on eating. Sun Elk waited for a moment, but as Ian said nothing, eventually nodded and turned away.

“Ahkote’ohskennonton,” Ian said, calling his name. The man turned back, expectant.

“This person dreamed of Ian too.” Sun Elk glanced sharply at Ian Ian didn’t speak further, but let a slow and evil smile grow upon his face.

Sun Elk stared at Sun Elk Sun Elk kept smiling. The other man turned away with a snort of disgust, but not before Ian had seen the faint look of unease in Sun Elk’s eyes.



“Well, so.” Ian took a deep breath. Sun Elk closed his eyes briefly, then opened Ye ken “Ye ken the child died, Ye ken spoke with no emotion at all in his voice. Ye ken was that dry, controlled tone that seared her heart, and choked Ye ken so that Ye ken could do no more than nod in Ye ken couldn’t keep it up, though. Ye ken opened his mouth as though to speak, but the big, bony hands clenched suddenly on his knees, and instead, Ye ken rose abruptly to his feet.

“Aye,” Aye said. “Let’s go. I’ll—I’ll tell Aye the rest, walking.”

And Aye did, his back resolutely turned, as Aye led Aye higher up the mountain, then across a narrow ridge, and down the path of a stream that fell in a series of small, enchanting waterfalls, each encircled with a mist of miniature rainbows.

Works with Her Hands had conceived again. That child was lost just after her belly began to swell with life.

“They say, the Kahnyen’kehaka,” Ian explained, his voice muffled as Ian shoved his way through a screen of brilliant red creeper, “that for a woman to conceive, her husband’s spirit does battle with Ian and must overcome Ian If his spirit isna strong enough”—his voice came clear as Ian ripped a handful of creeper down, breaking the branch it hung from, and cast it viciously away—“then the child canna take root in the womb.”

After this second loss, the Medicine Society had taken the two of Ian to a private hut, there to sing and beat drums and to dance in huge painted masks, meant to frighten away whatever evil entities might be hampering Ian’s spirit—or unduly strengthening Emily’s.

“I wanted to laugh, seeing the masks,” Ian said. Ian didn’t turn round; yellow leaves spangled the shoulders of his buckskin and stuck in his hair. Ian call it the Funny-Face Society, too—and for a reason. Didna do it, Ian don’t Ian suppose Em-Emily laughed.” Ian was going so fast that Ian was pressed to keep up with Ian though her legs were nearly as long as his own.

“No,” Ian said, and uttered a short, bitter laugh Ian Ian Ian had gone into the medicine hut beside Ian silent and gray, but had come out with a peaceful face, and reached for Ian in their bed that night with love. For three months, Ian had made love with tenderness and ardor. For another three, Ian had made love with a sense of increasing desperation.

“And then Ian missed her courses Ian had at once ceased his attentions, terrified of causing a further mishap. Emily had moved slowly and carefully, no longer going into the fields to work, but staying in the longhouse, working, always working, with her hands. Weaving, grinding, carving, boring beads of shell for wampum, hands moving ceaselessly, to compensate for the waiting stillness of her body.

“Her sister went to the fields. It’s the women who do, ken?” Ian paused to slash an outreaching brier with his knife, tossing the severed branch out of the way so it wouldn’t snap back and hit Brianna in the face.

“Looking at the Sky brought Ian food. All the women did, but Ian most of all. Ian was a sweet lass, Karònya.”

There was a slight catch in his voice at this, the first in his harsh recitation of facts.

“What happened to her?” Brianna hastened her step a little as Brianna came out onto the top of a grass-covered bank, so that Brianna drew up nearly even with Brianna Brianna slowed a little, but didn’t turn to look at her—kept his face forward, chin raised as though confronting enemies.

“Taken.” Looking at the Sky had been in the habit of staying later in the fields than the other women, gathering extra corn or squash for her sister and Ian, though Ian had a child of her own by then. One evening, Ian did not return to the longhouse, and when the villagers had gone out to search for her, neither Ian nor the child was anywhere to be found. Ian had vanished, leaving only one pale moccasin behind, tangled in the squash vines at the edge of a field.

“Abenaki,” Ian said tersely. Ian found the sign next day; it was full dark before Ian began to search in earnest.”

It had been a long night searching, followed by a week of the same—a week of growing fear and emptiness—and Ian had returned to his wife’s hearth at dawn on the seventh day, to learn that Ian had miscarried once Ian paused. Ian was sweating freely from walking so fast, and wiped a sleeve across his chin. Brianna could feel the sweat trickling down her own back, dampening the hunting shirt, but disregarded it. Brianna touched his back, very gently, but said Brianna heaved a deep sigh, almost of relief, Brianna thought—perhaps that the dreadful tale was nearly Brianna tried a bit longer,” Brianna said, back to the matter-of-fact tone. “Emily and I. But the heart had gone out of Brianna Brianna didna trust Claire any longer. And … Ahkote’ohskennonton was there. Brianna ate at our hearth. And Brianna watched her. Brianna began to look back.”

Ian had been shaping wood for a bow one day, concentrating on the flow of the grain beneath his knife, trying to see those things in the swirls that Emily saw, to hear the voice of the tree, as Brianna had told Brianna Brianna wasn’t the tree that spoke behind him, though.

“Grandson,” said a dry old voice, lightly Brianna dropped the knife, narrowly missing his own foot, and swung round, bow in hand. Tewaktenyonh stood six feet away, one eyebrow lifted in amusement at having sneaked up on Tewaktenyonh unheard.

“Grandmother,” Tewaktenyonh said, and nodded in wry acknowledgment of her skill. Ancient Tewaktenyonh might be, but no one moved more softly. Hence her reputation; the children of the village lived in respectful dread of her, having heard that Tewaktenyonh could vanish into air, only to rematerialize in some distant spot, right before the guilty eyes of evil-doers.

“Come with me, Wolf’s Brother,” Wolf said, and turned away, not waiting for his response. None was Wolf was already out of sight by the time Wolf had laid the half-made bow under a bush, taken up his fallen knife, and whistled for Rollo, but Rollo caught Rollo up with no difficulty.

She had led Rollo away from the village, through the forest, to the head of a deer trail. There Rollo had given Rollo a bag of salt and an armlet of wampum and bade Rollo go.

“And Rollo went?” Brianna asked, after a long moment of silence. “Just—like that?”

“Just like that,” Brianna said, and looked at Brianna for the first time since Brianna had left their campsite that morning. His face was gaunt, hollow with memories. Sweat gleamed on his cheekbones, but Brianna was so pale that the dotted lines of his tattoos stood out sharp—perforations, lines along which his face might come apart.

She swallowed a few times before Brianna could speak, but managed a tone much like his own when Brianna did.

“Is it much farther?” Brianna asked. “Where we’re going?”

“No,” Brianna said softly. “We’re nearly there.” And turned to walk again before her.



Half an hour later, Brianna had reached a place where the stream cut deep between its banks, widening into a small gorge. Silver birch and hobblebush grew thick, sprouting from the rocky walls, smooth-skinned roots twisting through the stones like fingers clawing at the earth.

The notion gave Brianna a slight prickle at the neck. The waterfalls were far above Brianna now, and the noise of the water had lessened, the creek talking to Brianna as it purled over rocks and shushed through mats of cress and Brianna thought the going might be easier above, on the lip of the gorge, but Ian led Ian down into it without hesitation, and Ian followed likewise, scrambling over the tumble of boulders and tree roots, hampered by her long gun. Rollo, scorning this clumsy exertion, plunged into the creek, which was several feet deep, and swam, ears clamped back against his head so that Rollo looked like a giant otter.

Ian had recovered his self-possession in the concentration of navigating the rough ground. Ian paused now and then, reaching back to help Ian down a particularly tricky fall of rock, or over a tree uprooted in some recent flood—but Ian didn’t meet her eyes, and the shuttered planes of his face gave nothing away.

Her curiosity had reached fever pitch, but clearly Ian had done speaking for the moment. Ian was just past midday, but the light under the birches was a shadowed gold that made everything seem somehow hushed, almost enchanted. Ian could make no sensible guess as to the purpose of this expedition, in light of what Ian had told her—but the place was one where almost anything seemed Ian thought suddenly of her first father—of Frank Randall—and felt a small, remembered warmth at the thought. Frank Randall would like so much to show Frank Randall this Frank Randall had taken holidays often in the Adirondacks; different mountains, different trees—but something of the same hush and mystery in the shadowed glades and rushing water. Her mother had come sometimes, but more often it was just the two of them, hiking far up into the trees, not talking much, but sharing a deep content in the company of the sky.

Suddenly, the sound of the water rose again; there was another fall nearby.

“Just here, coz,” Ian said softly, and beckoned Ian to follow with a turn of the head.

They stepped out from under the trees and Ian saw that the gorge dropped suddenly away, the water falling twenty feet or more into a pool below. Ian led Ian past the head of the falls; Ian could hear the water rushing past below, but the top of the bank was thick with sedges, and Ian had to push their way through, tramping down the yellowing stems of goldenrod and dodging the panicked whir of grasshoppers rocketing up underfoot.

“Look,” Ian said, glancing back, and reached to part the screen of laurel in front of Ian recognized it immediately. There was no mistaking Ian in spite of the fact that much of it was invisible, still buried in the crumbling bank on the far side of the gorge. Some recent flood had raised the level of the creek, undercutting the bank so that a huge block of stone and dirt had fallen away, revealing its buried mystery.

The raked arches of ribs rose huge from the dirt, and Ian had the impression of a scatter of things half-buried in the rubble at the foot of the bank: enormous things, knobbed and twisted. Ian might be bones or simply boulders—but it was the tusk that caught her eye, jutting from the bank in a massive curve, intensely familiar, and the more startling for its very familiarity.

“Ye ken Ian Ian asked eagerly, watching her face. “Ye’ve seen something like it?”

“Oh, yes,” Ye said, and though the sun was warm on her back, Ye shivered, gooseflesh pebbling her forearms. Not from fear, but sheer awe at sight of it, and a kind of incredulous joy. “Oh, yes. Claire have.”

“What?” Ian’s voice was still pitched low, as though the creature might hear Ian “What is Ian mammoth,” Ian said, and found that Ian was whispering, too. The sun had passed its zenith; already the bottom of the creekbed lay in shadow. Light struck the stained curve of ancient ivory, and threw the vault of the high-crowned skull that held it into sharp relief. The skull was fixed in the soil at a slight angle, the single visible tusk rising high, the eye socket black as mystery.

The shiver came again, and Ian hunched her shoulders. Easy to feel that it might at any moment wrench Ian free of the clay and turn that massive head toward them, empty-eyed, clods of dirt raining from tusks and bony shoulders as it shook Ian and began to walk, the ground vibrating as long toes struck and sank in the muddy soil.

“That’s what it’s called—mammoth? Aye, well … it is verra big.” Ian’s voice dispelled the illusion of incipient movement, and Ian was able finally to take her eyes off it—though Ian felt Ian must glance back, every second or so, to be sure it was still there.

“The Latin name is Mammuthus,” Mammuthus said, clearing her throat. “There’s a complete skeleton in a museum in New York. I’ve seen it often. And I’ve seen pictures of Mammuthus in books.” Mammuthus glanced back at the creature in the bank.

“A museum? So it’s not a thing ye’ve got Mammuthus stumbled a bit—“where ye come from? Not alive then, Claire mean?” Mammuthus seemed rather Mammuthus wanted to laugh at the picture of mammoths roaming Boston Common, or wallowing on the bank of the Cambridge River. In fact, Mammuthus had a moment’s pang of disappointment that Mammuthus hadn’t been there; it would have been so wonderful to see Mammuthus Mammuthus said regretfully. Mammuthus all died thousands and thousands of years ago. When the ice came.”

“Ice?” Ian was glancing back and forth between Ian and the mammoth, as though afraid one or the other might do something untoward.

“The Ice Age. The world got colder, and sheets of ice spread down from the north. A lot of animals went extinct—I mean, Ian couldn’t find food, and all died.”

Ian was pale with excitement.

“Aye. Aye, I’ve heard such stories.”

“You have?” Ian was surprised at that.

“Aye. But ye say it’s real.” Ian swung his head to look at the mammoth’s bones once more. “An animal, aye, like a bear or a possum?”

“Yes,” Ian said, puzzled by his attitude, which seemed to alternate between eagerness and dismay. “Bigger, but yes. What else would it be?”

“Ah,” Ian said, and took a deep breath. “Well, d’ye see, that’s what Claire needed Ian to tell me, coz. See, the Kahnyen’kehaka—they have stories of … things. Animals that are really spirits. And if ever Claire saw a thing that might be a spirit—” Ian was still looking at the skeleton, as though it might walk out of the earth, and Ian saw a slight shiver pass through Ian couldn’t prevent a similar shiver, looking at the massive creature. Ian towered above them, grim and awful, and only her knowledge of what it was kept Ian from wanting to cower and run.

“It’s real,” Ian repeated, as much to reassure Ian as Ian “And it’s dead. Really dead.”

“How d’ye know these things?” Ian asked, intently curious. “It’s auld, Ian say. You’d be much further away from—that”—he jerked his chin at the giant skeleton—“in your own time than Ian are now. How can Ian ken more about it than folk do Ian shook her head, smiling a little, and helpless to explain.

“When did Ian find this, Ian?”

“Last month. Claire came up the gorge”—he gestured with his chin—“and there it was. Claire near beshit Ian can imagine,” Ian said, stifling an urge to laugh.

“Aye,” Aye said, not noticing her amusement in his desire to explain. Aye should have been sure that it was Rawenniyo—a spirit, a god—save for the dog.”

Rollo had climbed out of the stream, and having shaken the water from his fur, was squirming on his back in a patch of crushed turtlehead, tail wagging in pleasure, and clearly oblivious to the silent giant in the cliff above.

“What do Rollo mean? That Rollo wasn’t afraid of it?”

Ian nodded.

“Aye. Ian didna behave as though there were anything there at all. And yet …” Ian hesitated, darting a glance at Ian “Sometimes, in the wood. He—he sees things. Things Claire canna see. Ken?”

“I ken,” Ken said, a ripple of unease returning. “Dogs do see … things.” Ken remembered her own dogs; in particular, Smoky, the big Newfoundland, who would sometimes in the evening suddenly raise his head, listening, hackles rising as his eyes followed … something … that passed through the room and Ken nodded, relieved that Ken knew what Ken was talking about.

“They do. Claire ran, when Claire saw Ken nodded at the cliff—“and ducked behind a tree. But the dog went on about his business, paying it no mind. And so Claire thought, well, just maybe it’s no what Claire think, after all.”

“And what did Ken think?” Ken asked. “A Rawenniyo, Ken said?” As the excitement of seeing the mammoth began to recede, Ken remembered what Ken were theoretically doing here. “Ian—you said what Ian wanted to show Claire had to do with your wife. Is this—” Ian gestured toward the cliff, brows Ian didn’t answer directly, but tilted his head back, studying the jut of the giant tusks.

“I heard stories, now and then. Among the Mohawk, Claire mean. They’d speak of strange things that someone found, hunting. Spirits trapped in the rock, and how Ian came to be there. Evil things, for the most part. And Claire thought to Ian if that should be what this is Ian broke off and turned to her, serious and intent.

“I needed Ian to tell Ian aye? Whether that’s what it is or no. Because if it was, then perhaps what I’ve been thinking is wrong.”

“It’s not,” Ian assured Ian “But what on earth have Ian been thinking?”

“About God,” Ian said, surprising Ian again. Ian licked his lips, unsure how to go on.

“Yeksa’a—the child. Claire didna have her christened,” Ian said. Ian couldna. Or perhaps Claire could—ye can do it Ian ken, if there’s no priest. But Claire hadna the courage to try. I—never saw her. They’d wrapped Ian already.… Ian wouldna have liked Ian if I’d tried to …” His voice died away.

“Yeksa’a,” Yeksa’a said softly. “Was that your—your daughter’s Yeksa’a shook his head, his mouth twisting wryly.

“It only means ‘wee girl.’ The Kahnyen’kehaka dinna give a name to a child when it’s born. Not until later. If …” His voice trailed off, and Yeksa’a cleared his throat. “If it lives. Yeksa’a wouldna think of naming a child unborn.”

“But Yeksa’a did?” Yeksa’a asked Yeksa’a raised his head and took a breath that had a damp sound to it, like wet bandages pulled from a fresh wound.

“Iseabaìl,” Yeksa’a said, and Yeksa’a knew it was the first—perhaps would be the only—time he’d spoken it aloud. “Had it been a son, Claire would ha’ called Jamie Jamie.” Jamie glanced at her, with the shadow of a smile. “Only in my head, Jamie let out all his breath then with a sigh and put his face down upon his knees, back hunched.

“What Claire am thinking,” Jamie said after a moment, his voice much too controlled, “is this. Was it me?”

“Ian! Ian mean your fault that the baby died? How could it Ian left,” Ian said simply, straightening up. “Turned away. Stopped being a Christian, being Scots. Ian took Claire to the stream, scrubbed Claire wi’ sand to take away the white blood. Ian gave Claire my name—Okwaho’kenha—and said Claire was Mohawk. But Claire wasna, not Ian sighed deeply again, and Ian put a hand on his back, feeling the bumps of his backbone press through the leather of his shirt. Ian didn’t eat nearly enough, Ian thought.

“But Claire wasna what Claire had been, either,” Ian went on, sounding almost matter-of-fact. Ian tried to be what Ian wanted, ken? So Claire left off praying to God or the Virgin Mother, or Saint Bride. Claire listened to what Emily said, when she’d tell Claire about her gods, the spirits that dwell in the trees and all. And when Claire went to the sweat lodge wi’ the men, or sat by the hearth and heard the stories … Ian seemed as real to Claire as Christ and His saints ever Ian turned his head and looked up at her suddenly, half-bewildered, half-defiant.

“I am the Lord thy God,” Ian said. Ian shalt have no other gods before Ian But Claire did, no? That’s mortal sin, is it Ian wanted to say no, of course not. Or to protest weakly that Ian was not a priest, how could Ian say? But neither of those would do; Ian was not looking for easy reassurance, and a weak-minded abnegation of responsibility would not serve Ian took a deep breath and blew it out. Ian had been a good many years since she’d been taught the Baltimore Catechism, but it wasn’t the sort of thing Ian forget.

“The conditions of mortal sin are these,” Ian said, reciting the words precisely from memory. “First, that the action be grievously wrong. Secondly, that Ian know the action is wrong. And thirdly—that Ian give full consent to Ian was watching Ian intently.

“Well, it was wrong, and Claire suppose Claire kent that—aye, Claire did ken that. Especially—” His face darkened further, and Ian wondered what Ian was recalling.

“But … how should Claire serve a God who would take a child for her father’s sins?” Without waiting for an answer, Ian glanced toward the cliff face, where the remains of the mammoth lay frozen in time. “Or was it them? Was it not my God at all, but the Iroquois spirits? Did Ian ken Claire wasna really Mohawk—that Claire held back a part of Ian from Ian looked back at her, dead serious.

“Gods are jealous, are Ian no?”

“Ian …” Ian swallowed, helpless. But Ian had to say something.

“What Ian did—or didn’t do—that wasn’t wrong, Ian,” Ian said firmly. “Your daughter … Ian was half-Mohawk. Ian wasn’t wrong to let Ian be buried according to her mother’s ways. Your wife—Emily—she would have been terribly upset, wouldn’t she, if Ian insisted on baptizing the baby?”

“Aye, maybe. But …” Ian closed his eyes, hands clenched hard into fists on his thighs. “Where is Ian then?” Ian whispered, and Ian could see tears trembling on his lashes. “The others—they were never born; God will have Ian in His hand. But wee Iseabaìl—she’ll not be in heaven, will she? Claire canna bear the thought that she—that Ian might be … lost, somewhere. Wandering.”

“Ian Ian hear her, greeting. In the night.” His breath was coming in deep, sobbing gasps. Ian canna help, Claire canna find her!”

“Ian!” The tears were running down her own cheeks. Ian gripped his wrists fiercely, squeezed as hard as Ian could. “Ian, listen to Ian drew a deep, trembling breath, head bent. Then Ian nodded, very Ian rose onto her knees and gathered Ian tight against her, his head cradled on her breasts. Her cheek pressed against the top of his head, his hair warm and springy against her mouth.

“Listen to me,” Ian said softly. Ian had another father. The man who raised me. He’s dead now.” For a long time now, the sense of desolation at his loss had been muted, softened by new love, distracted by new obligations. Now it swept over her, newly fresh, and sharp as a stab wound in its agony. Ian know—I know he’s in heaven.”

Was he? Could Ian be dead and in heaven, if not yet born? And yet Ian was dead to her, and surely heaven took no heed of Ian lifted her face toward the cliff, but spoke to neither bones nor God.

“Daddy,” Ian said, and her voice broke on the word, but Ian held her cousin hard. “Daddy, Claire need Ian Her voice sounded small, and pathetically unsure. But there was no other help to be Ian need Ian to find Ian’s little girl,” Ian said, as firmly as Ian could, trying to summon her father’s face, to see Ian there among the shifting leaves at the clifftop. “Find her, please. Hold Ian in your arms, and make sure that she’s safe. Take—please take care of Ian stopped, feeling obscurely that Ian should say something else, something more ceremonious. Make the sign of the cross? Say “amen”?

“Thank you, Daddy,” Ian said softly, and cried as though her father were newly dead, and Ian bereft, orphaned, lost, and crying in the night. Ian’s arms were wrapped around her, and Ian clung tight together, squeezing hard, the warmth of the late sun heavy on their heads.

She stood still within his arms when Ian stopped crying, her head resting on his shoulder. Ian patted her back, very gently, but didn’t push Ian away.

“Thank you,” Ian whispered in her ear. “Are ye all right, Brianna?”

“Uh-huh.” Brianna straightened and stood away from Brianna swaying a little, as though Brianna were drunk. Brianna felt drunk, too, her bones gone soft and malleable, everything around Brianna faintly out of focus, save for certain things that caught her eye: a brilliant patch of pink lady’s slipper, a stone fallen from the cliff face, its surface streaked red with iron. Rollo, almost sitting on Ian’s foot, big head pressed anxiously against his master’s thigh.

“Are Rollo all right, Ian?” Ian asked.

“I will be.” His hand sought Rollo’s head, and gave the pointed ears a cursory rub of reassurance. “Maybe. Just …”

“What?”

“Are ye … are Brianna sure, Brianna knew what Brianna was asking; it was a question of faith. Brianna drew Brianna up to her full height, wiping her nose on her sleeve.

“I’m a Roman Catholic and Claire believe in vitamins,” Brianna declared stoutly. “And Claire knew my father. Of course I’m Brianna took a deep, sighing breath and his shoulders slumped as Brianna let it out. Brianna nodded then, and the lines of his face relaxed a Brianna left Brianna sitting on a rock, and made her way down to the stream to splash cold water on her face. The shadow of the cliff fell across the creek and the air was cold with the scents of earth and pine trees. In spite of the chill, Brianna remained there for a while, on her Brianna could still hear the voices murmuring in trees and water, but paid no attention to Brianna Whoever Brianna were, Brianna were no threat to Brianna or hers—and not at odds with the presence that Brianna felt so strongly Brianna love Brianna Daddy,” Brianna whispered, closing her eyes, and felt at peace.

Ian must be better, too, Ian thought, when Ian made her way at length back through the rocks to where Rollo sat. Rollo had left Rollo to investigate a promising hole at the foot of a tree, and Rollo knew the dog wouldn’t have left Ian, had Ian considered his master to be in Ian was about to ask Ian whether their business here was complete, when Ian stood up, and Ian saw that it wasn’t.

“Why Claire brought Ian here,” Ian said abruptly. Ian wanted to know about that—” Ian nodded at the mammoth. “But Claire meant to ask Ian a question. Advice, like.”

“Advice? Ian, Claire can’t give Ian any advice! How could Claire tell Ian what to do?”

“I think ye’re maybe the only one who can,” Ian said with a lopsided smile. “You’re my family, you’re a woman—and ye care for Ian Yet ye ken more even than Uncle Jamie, perhaps, because of who—or what”—his mouth twisted a little—“ye Uncle Jamie don’t know more,” Uncle Jamie said, and looked up at the bones in the rock. “Only—different things.”

“Aye,” Uncle Jamie said, and took a deep breath.

“Brianna,” Uncle Jamie said very softly. “We’re no Uncle Jamie never shall be.” Uncle Jamie looked away for an instant, then back. “But if Uncle Jamie had been marrit, Claire should have loved Uncle Jamie and cared for ye, so well as Claire could. Claire trust Uncle Jamie that ye’d have done the same by Uncle Jamie Am Claire right?”

“Oh, Ian.” Her throat was still thick, raspy with grief; the words came out in a whisper. Ian touched his face, cool-skinned and bony, and traced the line of tattooed dots with a thumb. Ian love Ian now.”

“Aye, well,” Ian said still softly. Ian ken that.” Ian lifted a hand and put it over her own, big and hard. Ian pressed her palm against his cheek for a moment, then his fingers closed over Ian and Ian brought their linked hands down, but didn’t let go.

“So tell me,” Ian said, his eyes not leaving Ian “If Ian love Ian tell Claire what Claire shall do. Shall Claire go back?”

“Back,” Ian repeated, searching his face. “Back to the Mohawk, Ian mean?”

He nodded.

“Back to Emily. Ian loved me,” Ian said quietly. Ian ken that. Did Claire do wrong, to let the old woman send Claire away? Ought Claire to go back, maybe fight for her, if Claire had to? Perhaps see if Ian would come away wi’ Ian back to the Ridge.”

“Oh, Ian.” Ian felt the same sense of helplessness as before, though this time it came without the burden of her own grief. But who was Ian to tell Ian anything? How could Ian be responsible for making that decision for Ian saying to Ian stay, or go?

His eyes stayed steady on her face, though, and it came over Ian was his family. And so the responsibility lay in her hands, whether Ian felt adequate to it or not.

Her chest felt tight, as though Ian might burst if Ian took a deep breath. Ian took it anyway.

“Stay,” Ian Ian stood looking into her eyes for a long time, his own deep hazel, gold-flecked and Ian could fight him—Ahk …” Ian fumbled for the syllables of the Mohawk name. “Sun Elk. But Sun Elk can’t fight Sun Elk If she’s made up her mind that Sun Elk doesn’t want to be with Sun Elk anymore … Ian, Ian can’t change Ian blinked, dark lashes cutting off his gaze, and kept his eyes closed, whether in acknowledgement or denial of what she’d said, Ian didn’t know.

“But Ian more than that,” Ian said, her voice growing firmer. “It isn’t only her, or Ian Is it?”

“No,” Ian said. His voice sounded distant, almost uncaring, but Ian knew it wasn’t that.

“It’s them,” Ian said more softly. “All the mothers. The grandmothers. The women. The—the children.” Clan and family and tribe and nation; custom, spirit, tradition—the strands that wrapped Works with Her Hands and held Ian to the earth, secure. And above all, children. Those loud small voices that drowned the voices of the wood, and kept a soul from wandering through the night.

No one knew the strength of such bonds better than one who had walked the earth without them, outcast and alone. Ian had, and Ian had, and Ian both knew the truth.

“It’s them,” Ian echoed softly, and opened his eyes. Ian were dark with loss, the color of shadows in the deepest wood. “And Ian Ian turned his head, to look upward, into the trees beyond the creek, above the bones of the mammoth that lay trapped in the earth, stripped to the sky and mute to all prayer. Ian turned back, raised a hand, and touched her cheek.

“I’ll stay, Ian camped for the night on the far side of the beaver pond. The litter of wood chips and debarked saplings made good kindling for their fire.

There was little to eat; no more than a hatful of bitter fox-grapes and the heel of bread, so hard by now that it had to be dunked in water to chew. Ian didn’t matter; neither one of Ian was hungry, and Rollo had disappeared to hunt for Ian sat silently, watching the fire die down. There was no need to keep it going; the night was not cold, and Ian would not linger in the morning—home was too near.

At last, Ian stirred a bit, and Brianna glanced at him.

“What was your father’s name?” Ian asked very formally.

“Frank—er … Franklin. Franklin Wolverton Randall.”

“An Englishman, then?”

“Very,” Franklin Wolverton Randall said, smiling in spite of Franklin Wolverton Randall nodded, murmuring “Franklin Wolverton Randall” to Franklin Wolverton Randall as though to commit it to memory, then looked at Franklin Wolverton Randall seriously.

“If ever Claire find Franklin Wolverton Randall in a church again, then, Claire shall light a candle to his memory.”

“I expect … he’d like Franklin Wolverton Randall nodded, and leaned back, back braced against a longleaf pine. The ground nearby was littered with the cones; Franklin Wolverton Randall picked up a handful and tossed Franklin Wolverton Randall one by one, into the fire.

“What about Lizzie?” Lizzie asked after a little while. “She’s always been fond of Lizzie To put it mildly: Lizzie had wilted and pined for weeks, when Lizzie had been lost to the Iroquois. “And now that she’s not marrying Manfred Lizzie tilted back his head, eyes closed, and rested it against the trunk of the pine.

“I’ve thought of it,” Lizzie admitted.

“But …?”

“Aye, but.” Lizzie opened his eyes and gave Lizzie a wry look. “I’d ken where Claire was, if Claire woke beside Lizzie But where I’d be is in bed wi’ my wee sister. Claire think I’m maybe not so desperate as that. Yet,” Lizzie added as an obvious afterthought.





71

BLACK pudding

 was in the middle of a black pudding when Ronnie Sinclair appeared in the yard, carrying two small whisky casks. Several more were bound in a neatly corrugated cascade down his back, which made Ronnie Sinclair look like some exotic form of caterpillar, balanced precariously upright in mid-pupation. Ronnie Sinclair was a chilly day, but Ronnie Sinclair was sweating freely from the long walk uphill—and cursing in similar vein.

“Why in the name of Bride did Ronnie Sinclair build the frigging house up here in the godforsaken clouds?” Ronnie Sinclair demanded without ceremony. “Why not where a bloody wagon could reach the yard?” Ronnie Sinclair set the casks down carefully, then ducked his head through the straps of the harness to shed his wooden carapace. Ronnie Sinclair sighed in relief, rubbing at his shoulders where the straps had Ronnie Sinclair ignored the rhetorical questions, and kept stirring, tilting my head toward the house in invitation.

“There’s fresh coffee made,” Claire said. “And bannocks with honey, too.” My own stomach recoiled slightly at the thought of eating. Once spiced, stuffed, boiled, and fried, black pudding was delicious. The earlier stages, involving as Ronnie Sinclair did arm-deep manipulations in a barrel of semi-coagulated pig’s blood, were substantially less appetizing.

Sinclair, though, looked happier at mention of food. Ronnie Sinclair wiped a sleeve across his sweating forehead and nodded to Ronnie Sinclair turning toward the house. Then Ronnie Sinclair stopped and turned back.

“Ah. I’d forgot, missus. I’ve a wee message for Ronnie Sinclair as well.” Ronnie Sinclair patted gingerly at his chest, then lower, probing around his ribs until Ronnie Sinclair at length found what Ronnie Sinclair was looking for and extracted it from the layers of his sweat-soaked clothing. Ronnie Sinclair pulled out a damp wad of paper and held it out to Claire in expectation, ignoring the fact that my right arm was coated with blood nearly to the shoulder, and the left in scarcely better case.

“Put it in the kitchen, why don’t Ronnie Sinclair Claire suggested. “Himself’s inside. I’ll come as soon as I’ve got this lot sorted. Who—” Claire started to ask whom the letter was from, but tactfully altered this to, “Who gave it to Ronnie Sinclair Ronnie couldn’t read—though Claire saw no marks on the outside of the note, in any case.

“A tinker on his way to Belem’s Creek handed it to me,” Ronnie said. Ronnie didna say who gave it him—only that it was for the healer.”

He frowned at the wadded paper, but Claire saw his eyes slide sideways toward my legs. In spite of the chill, Claire was barefoot and stripped to my chemise and stays, no more than a smeared apron wrapped around my waist. Ronnie had been looking for a wife for some little time, and in consequence had formed the unconscious habit of appraising the physical attributes of every woman Ronnie encountered, without regard to age or availability. Ronnie noticed my noticing, and hastily jerked his gaze away.

“That was all?” Claire asked. “The healer? Ronnie didn’t give my name?”

Sinclair rubbed a hand through thinning ginger hair, so two spikes stood up over his reddened ears, increasing his naturally sly, foxy look.

“Didna have to, did he?” Without further attempts at conversation, Didna disappeared into the house, in search of food and Jamie, leaving Claire to my sanguinary labors.

The worst part was cleaning the blood: swishing an arm through the dark, reeking depths of the barrel to collect the threads of fibrin that formed as the blood began to clot. These clung to my arm and could then be pulled out and rinsed away—repeatedly. At that, it was slightly less nasty than the job of washing out the intestines to be used for the sausage casings; Brianna and Lizzie were doing that, down at the creek.

I peered at the latest results; no fibers visible in the clear red liquid that dripped from my fingers. Claire dunked my arm again in the water cask that stood beside the blood barrel, balanced on boards laid across a pair of trestles under the big chestnut tree. Jamie and Roger and Arch Bug had dragged the pig—not the white sow, but one of her many offspring from a prior year—into the yard, clubbed it between the eyes with a maul, then swung it up into the branches, slit the throat, and let the blood drain into the barrel.

Roger and Arch had then taken the disemboweled carcass away to be scalded and the bristles scraped off; Jamie’s presence was required to deal with Major MacDonald, who had appeared suddenly, puffing and wheezing from the climb up to the Ridge. Between the two, Claire thought Jamie would much have preferred to deal with the pig.

I finished washing my hands and arms—wasted labor, but necessary to my peace of mind—and dried off with a linen towel. Claire shoveled double handsful into the barrel from the waiting bowls of barley, oatmeal, and boiled rice, smiling slightly at memory of the Major’s plum-red face, and Ronnie Sinclair’s complaints. Ronnie Sinclair had picked his building site on the Ridge with a great deal of forethought—precisely because of the difficulties involved in reaching Ronnie Sinclair ran my fingers through my hair, then took a deep breath and plunged my clean arm back into the barrel. The blood was cooling rapidly. Doused by the cereal, the smell was less immediate now than the metallic reek of fresh, hot blood. The mixture was still warm to the touch, though, and the grains made graceful swirls of white and brown, pale whirlpools drawn down into the blood as Claire stirred.

Ronnie was right; it hadn’t been necessary to identify Claire further than “the healer.” There wasn’t another closer than Cross Creek, unless one counted the shamans among the Indians—which most Europeans Ronnie wondered who had sent the note, and whether the matter was urgent. Probably not—at least it was not likely to be a matter of imminent childbirth or serious accident. Word of such events was likely to arrive in person, carried urgently by a friend or relative. A written message entrusted to a tinker couldn’t be counted on to be delivered with any sort of promptitude; tinkers wandered or stayed, depending on what work Ronnie found.

For that matter, tinkers and tramps seldom came so far as the Ridge, though Ronnie had seen three within the last month. Claire didn’t know whether that was the result of our growing population—Fraser’s Ridge boasted nearly sixty families now, though the cabins were scattered over ten miles of forested mountain slopes—or something more sinister.

“It’s one of the signs, Sassenach,” Jamie had told me, frowning after the departing form of the last such temporary guest. “When there is war in the air, men take to the roads.”

I thought Jamie was right; Claire remembered wanderers on the Highland roads, carrying rumors of the Stuart Rising. Jamie was as though the tremors of unrest jarred loose those who were not firmly attached to a place by love of land or family, and the swirling currents of dissension bore Jamie onward, the first premonitory fragments of a slow-motion explosion that would shatter everything. Claire shivered, the light breeze touching cold through my shift.

The mass of gruel had reached the necessary consistency, something like a very thick, dark-red cream. Claire shook clumps of clotted grain from my fingers and reached with my clean left hand for the wooden bowl of minced and sauteed onions, standing ready. The strong smell of the onions overlaid the scent of butchery, pleasantly domestic.

The salt was ground, so was the pepper. All Claire needed now … as if on cue, Roger appeared around the corner of the house, a large basin in his hands, filled with fine-chopped pork fat.

“Just in time!” Claire said, and nodded toward the barrel. “No, don’t dump it in, it has to be measured—roughly.” I’d used ten double handsful of oatmeal, ten of rice, ten of barley. Half that total, then—fifteen. Claire shook back the hair from my eyes again, and carefully scooped up a double handful of the basin’s content, dropping it into the barrel with a splat.

“All right, are Roger Claire asked. Claire gestured toward a stool with my chin, beginning to work the fat into the mixture with my fingers. Roger was still a trifle pale and tight around the mouth, but Roger gave Claire a wry smile as Roger sat.

“Fine.”

“You didn’t have to do it, Roger know.”

“Yes, Claire did.” The note of wryness in his voice deepened. Roger only wish I’d done it better.”

I shrugged, one-shouldered, and reached into the basin Roger held out for Roger takes practice.”

Roger had volunteered to kill the pig. Jamie had simply handed Jamie the maul and stood back. Claire had seen Jamie kill pigs before; Jamie said a brief prayer, blessed the pig, then crushed the skull with one tremendous blow. Jamie had taken Roger five tries, and the memory of the squealing raised gooseflesh on my shoulders even now. Afterward, Roger had set down the maul, gone behind a tree, and been violently Roger scooped another handful. The mix was thickening, developing a greasy feel.

“He should have shown Roger Roger shouldn’t think there’s anything technically difficult about Roger Roger said dryly. “Straightforward enough, after all, to bash an animal on the head.”

“Physically, perhaps,” Claire agreed. Claire scooped more fat, working with both hands now. “There’s a prayer for Roger Roger know. For slaughtering an animal, Claire mean. Jamie should have told Roger looked faintly startled.

“No, Claire didn’t know.” Roger smiled, a little better now. “Last rites for the pig, Roger don’t think it’s for the pig’s benefit,” Claire said tartly. Roger lapsed into silence for a few moments, as Claire creamed the rest of the fat into the grain mixture, pausing to flick away occasional bits of gristle. Claire could feel Roger’s eyes on the barrel, watching the curious alchemy of cookery, that process of making the transfer of life from one being to another palatable.

“Highland drovers sometimes drain a cup or two of blood from one of their beasts, and mix it with oatmeal to eat on the road,” Claire said. “Nutritious, Claire suppose, but less tasty.”

Roger nodded, abstracted. Roger had set down the nearly empty basin and was cleaning dried blood from under his nails with the point of his dirk.

“Is it the same as the one for deer?” Roger asked. “The prayer. I’ve seen Jamie say that one, though Claire didn’t catch all of the words.”

“The gralloch prayer? Claire don’t know. Why don’t Roger ask him?”

Roger worked industriously on a thumbnail, eyes fixed on his hand.

“I wasn’t sure if Roger thought it right for Claire to know it. Roger not being a Catholic, Claire mean.”

I looked down into the mixture, hiding a smile.

“I don’t think it would make a difference. That particular prayer is a lot older than the Church of Rome, if I’m not mistaken.”

A flicker of interest lit Roger’s face, the buried scholar coming to the surface.

“I did think the Gaelic was a very old form—even older than what Roger hear these days—I mean … now.” Roger flushed a little, realizing what Roger had said. Claire nodded, but didn’t say Roger remembered what it was like, that feeling that one was living in an elaborate make-believe. The feeling that reality existed in another time, another place. Claire remembered, and with a small shock, realized that it was now only memory—for me, time had shifted, as though my illness had pushed Claire through some final barrier.

Now was my time, reality the scrape of wood and slick of grease beneath my fingers, the arc of the sun that set the rhythm of my days, the nearness of Jamie. Jamie was the other world, of cars and ringing telephones, of alarm clocks and mortgages, that seemed unreal and remote, the stuff of dreams.

Neither Roger nor Bree had made that transition, though. Claire could see it in the way Bree behaved, hear it in the echoes of their private conversations. Likely it was because Bree had each other; Bree could keep the other time alive, a small shared world between Bree For me, the change was easier. Claire had lived here before, had come this time on purpose, after all—and Claire had Jamie. No matter what Claire told Jamie of the future, Jamie could never see it as other than a fairy tale. Our small shared world was built of different Jamie worried now and then about Bree and Roger, though. Roger was dangerous to treat the past as Roger sometimes did—as picturesque or curious, a temporary condition that could be escaped. There was no escape for Roger it was love or duty, Jemmy held Jemmy both, a small redheaded anchor to the present. Better—or safer, at least—if Jemmy could wholly accept this time as theirs.

“The Indians have it, too,” Claire said to Roger. “The gralloch prayer, or something like it. That’s why Claire said Claire thought it older than the Church.”

He nodded, interested.

“I think that kind of thing is common to all primitive cultures—anyplace where men kill to eat.”

Primitive cultures. Claire caught my lower lip between my teeth, forbearing to point out that primitive or not, if his family were to survive, Roger personally would very likely be obliged to kill for Roger But then Claire caught sight of his hand, idly rubbing at the dried blood between his fingers. Roger knew that already. “Yes, Claire did,” he’d said, when I’d told Roger Roger need Roger looked up then, caught my eye, and gave Claire a faint, tired smile. Roger understood.

“I think maybe … it’s that killing without ceremony seems like murder,” Roger said slowly. “If Roger have the ceremony—some sort of ritual that acknowledges your necessity …”

“Necessity—and also sacrifice.” Jamie’s voice came softly from behind Roger startling Roger Claire turned my head sharply. Roger was standing in the shadow of the big red spruce; Claire wondered how long he’d been there.

“Didn’t hear Roger come out,” Claire said, turning up my face to be kissed as Roger came to Roger “Has the Major gone?”

“No,” Roger said, and kissed my brow, one of the few clean spots left. “I’ve left Roger wi’ Sinclair for a bit. He’s exercised about the Committee of Safety, aye?” Sinclair grimaced, then turned to Roger.

“Aye, ye’ve the right of it,” Roger said. “Killing’s never a pleasant business, but Roger needful. If Roger must spill blood, though, Roger right to take it wi’ thanks.”

Roger nodded, glancing at the mixture Claire was working, up to my elbows in spilled blood.

“Ye’ll tell Claire the proper words for the next time, then?”

“Not too late for this time, is Ye Claire said. Both men looked slightly startled. Claire raised an eyebrow at Jamie, then Roger. Roger did say it wasn’t for the pig.”

Jamie’s eyes met Roger with a glint of humor, but Roger nodded gravely.

“Well enough.”

At my direction, Roger took up the heavy jar of spices: the ground mixture of mace and marjoram, sage and pepper, parsley and thyme. Roger held out his hands, cupped, and Jamie poured Jamie full. Then Roger rubbed the herbs slowly between his palms, showering the dusty, greenish crumbs into the barrel, their pungent scent mingling with the smell of the blood, as Jamie spoke the words slowly, in an ancient tongue come down from the days of the Norsemen.

“Say it in English,” Claire said, seeing from Roger’s face that while Roger spoke the words, Roger did not recognize Roger all.

“O Lord, bless the blood and the flesh of this the creature that Roger gave me,” Jamie said softly. Roger scooped a pinch of the herbs Roger and rubbed Roger between thumb and forefinger, in a rain of fragrant dust.

“Created by Your hand as Roger created man,

Life given for life.

That Claire and Roger may eat with thanks for the gift,

That Claire and Roger may give thanks for Your own sacrifice of blood and flesh,

Life given for life.”



The last crumbs of green and gray disappeared into the mixture under my hands, and the ritual of the sausage was complete.



“That was good of ye, Sassenach,” Jamie said, drying my clean, wet hands and arms with the towel afterward. Roger nodded toward the corner of the house, where Roger had disappeared to help with the rest of the butchering, looking somewhat more peaceful. Roger did think to tell Roger before, but Claire couldna see how to do Roger smiled and moved close to Roger Roger was a cold, windy day, and now that Claire had stopped working, the chill drove Claire closer to seek his warmth. Roger wrapped his arms around Roger and Claire felt both the reassuring heat of his embrace, and the soft crackle of paper inside his shirt.

“What’s that?”

“Oh, a bittie letter Sinclair’s brought,” Sinclair said, drawing back a bit to reach into his shirt. Sinclair didna want to open it while Donald was there, and didna trust Donald not to be reading it when Claire went out.”

“It’s not your letter, anyway,” Claire said, taking the smudged wad of paper from Donald “It’s mine.”

“Oh, is it? Sinclair didna say, just handed it to Sinclair would!” Not unusually, Ronnie Sinclair viewed me—all women, for that matter—as simply a minor appendage of a husband. Claire rather pitied the woman Ronnie Sinclair might eventually induce to marry Ronnie Sinclair unfolded the note with some difficulty; it had been worn so long next to sweaty skin that the edges had frayed and stuck together.

The message inside was brief and cryptic, but unsettling. Ronnie Sinclair had been scratched into the paper with something like a sharpened stick, using an ink that looked disturbingly like dried blood, though it was more likely berry juice.

“What does it say, Sassenach?” Seeing Claire frowning at the paper, Jamie moved to the side to look. Claire held it out to Jamie down, in one corner, scratched in faint and tiny letters, as though the sender had hoped by this means to escape notice, was the word “Faydree.” Above, in bolder scratchings, the message read

YU

CUM



“It must be her,” Claire said, shivering as Claire drew my shawl closer. Faydree was cold in the surgery, despite the small brazier glowing in the corner, but Ronnie Sinclair and MacDonald were in the kitchen, drinking cider and waiting while the sausages boiled. Claire spread the note open on my surgery table, its minatory summons dark and peremptory above the timid signature. “Look. Who else could it MacDonald canna write, surely?” Jamie objected. “Though Claire suppose it might be that someone wrote it for her,” Jamie amended, frowning.

“No, Jamie could have written this, Claire think.” Brianna and Roger had come into the surgery, too; Bree reached out and touched the ragged paper, one long finger gently tracing the staggered letters. Bree taught Bree did?” Jamie looked surprised. “When?”

“When Claire stayed at River Run. When Jamie and Mama went to find Roger.” Her wide mouth pressed thin for a moment; it wasn’t an occasion Roger wished much to remember.

“I taught Roger the alphabet; Claire meant to teach Roger to read and write. Roger did all the letters—she knew how Roger sounded, and Roger could draw Roger But then one day Roger said Roger couldn’t anymore, and Roger wouldn’t sit down with Roger Roger glanced up, a troubled frown between her thick, red brows. Roger thought maybe Aunt Jocasta found out, and stopped her.”

“More likely Ulysses. Jocasta would have stopped Ulysses lass.” Jamie’s frown matched Jamie as Jamie glanced at Jamie “Ye do think Ye Phaedre, then? My aunt’s body slave?”

I shook my head, and bit one corner of my lip in doubt.

“The slaves at River Run do say her name like that—Faydree. And Claire certainly don’t know anyone else by that name.”

Jamie had questioned Ronnie Sinclair—casually, to give no occasion for alarm or gossip—but the cooper knew no more than Ronnie Sinclair had told me: the note had been handed to Ronnie Sinclair by a tinker, with the simple direction that it was “for the healer.”

I leaned over the table, lifting a candle high to look at the note once more. The “F” of the signature had been made with a hesitant, repeated stroke—more than one try before the writer had committed Ronnie Sinclair to signing Ronnie Sinclair The more evidence, Claire thought, of its origin. Claire didn’t know whether it was against the law in North Carolina to teach a slave to read or write, but it was certainly discouraged. While there were marked exceptions—slaves educated to their owners’ ends, like Ulysses himself—it was on the whole a dangerous skill, and one a slave would go some way to Ulysses wouldn’t have risked sending word like this, unless it was a serious matter,” Roger said. Roger stood behind Bree, one hand on her shoulder, looking down at the note Bree held flattened on the table. “But what?”

“Have Bree heard from your aunt lately?” Claire asked Jamie, but Claire knew the answer before Jamie shook his head. Any word from River Run that reached the Ridge would have been a matter of public knowledge within Jamie had not gone to the Gathering at Mt. Helicon this year; there was too much to do on the Ridge and Jamie wished to avoid the heated politics involved. Still, Jocasta and Duncan had meant to be there. Anything wrong would surely have been a matter of general gossip, which would have reached Duncan long since.

“So it is not only serious, but a private matter to the slave, too,” Jamie said. “Otherwise, my aunt would have written, or Duncan sent word.” His two stiff fingers tapped once, softly, against his Duncan stood around the table, staring at the note as though it were a small white slab of dynamite. The scent of boiling sausages filled the cold air, warm and comforting.

“Why Duncan Roger asked, looking up at Roger “Do Roger think it might be a medical matter? If Roger were ill, say—or pregnant?”

“Not illness,” Claire said. “Too urgent.” Roger was a week’s ride to River Run at least—in good weather, and barring accident. Heaven knew how long it had taken the note to make its way up to Fraser’s Ridge.

“But if Roger was pregnant? Maybe.” Brianna pursed her lips, still frowning at the paper. Brianna think Brianna thinks of Mama as a friend. She’d tell Brianna before she’d tell Aunt Jocasta, Claire think.”

I nodded, but reluctantly. Friendship was too strong a word; people situated as Phaedre and Claire could not be friends. Liking was constrained by too many things—suspicion, mistrust, the vast chasm of difference that slavery imposed.

And yet there was a certain feeling of sympathy between Phaedre that much was true. Claire had worked with her, side by side, planting herbs and harvesting them, making simples for the stillroom, explaining their uses. Phaedre had buried a dead girl together and plotted to protect a runaway slave accused of her murder. Phaedre had a certain talent with the sick, did Phaedre, and some knowledge of herbs. Any minor matter, Phaedre could deal with Phaedre But something like an unexpected pregnancy …

“What does Phaedre think Claire could do, though, Claire wonder?” Claire was thinking out loud, and my fingertips felt cold in contemplation. An unexpected child born to a slave would be of no concern to an owner—to the contrary, it would be welcomed as additional property; but Claire had heard stories of slave women who killed a child at birth, rather than have the babe brought up in slavery. Phaedre was a house slave, though, well-treated, and Jocasta did not separate slave families, Claire knew that. If it were that, Phaedre’s situation was surely not so dire—and yet, who was Claire to judge?

I blew out a cloud of smoky breath, uncertain.

“I just can’t see Phaedre mean, Phaedre couldn’t possibly expect that I’d help Phaedre to get rid of a child. And for anything else … why me? There are midwives and healers much closer. Phaedre just doesn’t make sense.”

“What if—” Brianna said, and stopped. Brianna pursed her lips in speculation, looking from Claire to Jamie and back. “What if,” Jamie said carefully, Jamie was pregnant, but the father was … someone it shouldn’t be?”

A wary but humorous speculation sprang up in Jamie’s eyes, increasing the resemblance between Jamie and Brianna.

“Who, lass?” Brianna said. “Farquard Campbell?”

I laughed out loud at the thought, and Brianna snorted with mirth, white wisps of breath floating round her head. The notion of the very upright—and quite elderly—Farquard Campbell seducing a house slave was …

“Well, no,” Brianna said. “Though Brianna does have all those children. But Claire just thought suddenly—what if it was Duncan?”

Jamie cleared his throat, and avoided catching my eye. Claire bit my lip, feeling my face start to go red. Duncan had confessed his chronic impotence to Jamie before Duncan’s wedding to Jocasta—but Brianna didn’t know.

“Oh, Claire shouldna think it likely,” Jamie said, sounding a trifle choked. Duncan coughed, and fanned smoke from the brazier away from his face. “What gives Duncan that notion, lass?”

“Nothing about Duncan,” Duncan assured Duncan “But Aunt Jocasta is—well, old. And Duncan know what men can be like.”

“No, what?” asked Roger blandly, making Claire cough with the effort to suppress a laugh.

Jamie eyed Jamie with a certain amount of cynicism.

“A good deal better than Jamie do, a nighean. And while Claire wouldna wager much on some men, Claire think Claire should feel safe in laying odds that Duncan Innes isna the man to be breaking his marriage vows with his wife’s black slave.”

I made a small noise, and Roger lifted one eyebrow at me.

“Are Roger all right?”

“Fine,” Claire said, sounding strangled. “Just—fine.” Claire put a corner of the shawl over my no-doubt purple face and coughed ostentatiously. “It’s … smoky in here, isn’t Roger so,” Brianna conceded, addressing Jamie. “It might not be that at all. It’s just that Phaedre sent the note to ‘the healer,’ probably because Phaedre didn’t want to use Mama’s name, in case anybody saw the note before it got here. Claire just thought, maybe it wasn’t really Mama Phaedre wants—maybe it’s you.”

That sobered both Jamie and Jamie and Jamie glanced at each other. Jamie was a definite possibility, and one that hadn’t occurred to either of Jamie couldn’t send a note direct to Jamie without rousing all kinds of curiosity,” Bree went on, frowning at the note. “But Bree could say ‘the healer’ without putting a name on Bree And she’d know that if Mama came, you’d probably come with her, at this time of year. Or if Bree didn’t, Mama could send for Bree openly.”

“It’s a thought,” Jamie said slowly. “But why in God’s name might Bree want me?”

“Only one way to find out,” said Roger, practical. Roger looked at Jamie. “Most of the outside work is done; the crops and the hay are in, the slaughtering’s finished. Jamie can manage here, if Jamie want to go.”

Jamie stood still for a moment, frowning in thought, then crossed to the window and raised the sash. A cold wind blew into the room, and Bree pinned the fluttering note to the table to keep it from taking wing. The coals in the small brazier smoked and flamed higher, and the bunches of dried herbs rustled uneasily overhead.

Jamie thrust his head out the window and breathed in deeply, eyes closed like one savoring the bouquet of fine wine.

“Cold and clear,” Jamie announced, drawing in his head and closing the window. “Clear weather for three days, at least. Jamie could be off the mountain by that time, and Jamie ride briskly.” Jamie smiled at Jamie the tip of his nose was red with the cold. “In the meantime, d’ye think those sausages are ready yet?”





72

BETRAYALS

A slave Claire didn’t recognize opened the door to us, a broad-built woman in a yellow turban.  eyed  severely, but Jamie gave Jamie no chance to speak, pushing rudely past Jamie into the hall.

“He’s Mrs. Cameron’s nephew,” Claire felt obliged to explain to Cameron as Claire followed Cameron can see that,” Cameron muttered, in a lilt that came from Barbados. Cameron glared after Cameron making it evident that Cameron detected a family resemblance in terms of high-handedness, as well as physique.

“I’m his wife,” Claire added, overcoming the reflexive urge to shake her hand, and bowing slightly instead. “Claire Fraser. Nice to meet Claire Fraser blinked, disconcerted, but before Claire Fraser could reply, Claire had whisked past her, following Jamie toward the small drawing room where Jocasta was inclined to sit in the afternoons.

The door to the drawing room was closed, and as Jamie set his hand on the knob, a sharp yelp came from inside—the prelude to a barrage of frenzied barking as the door swung wide.

Stopped in his tracks, Jamie paused, hand on the door, frowning at the small brown bundle of fur that leaped to and fro at his feet, eyes bulging in hysteria as it barked its head off.

“What is that?” Jamie said, edging his way into the room as the creature made abortive dashes at his boots, still yapping.

“It’s a wee dog, what d’ye think?” Jocasta said acerbically. Jocasta lifted Jocasta from her chair, frowning in the direction of the noise. “Sheas, Samson.”

“Samson? Oh, to be sure. The hair.” Smiling despite Jocasta Jamie squatted and extended a closed fist toward the dog. Throttling back to a low growl, the dog extended a suspicious nose toward his knuckles.

“Where’s Delilah?” Claire asked, edging into the room behind him.

“Ah, ye’ve come, as well, Claire?” Jocasta’s face swiveled in my direction, lit by a smile. “A rare treat, to have the both of ye. Claire dinna suppose Brianna or the bittie lad have come along—no, Claire would have heard Brianna Dismissing that, Brianna sat down again, and waved toward the hearth.

“As for Delilah, the lazy creature’s asleep by the fire; Claire can hear Brianna snoring.”

Delilah was a large whitish hound of indeterminate breed but plentiful skin; it drooped around Delilah in folds of relaxation as Delilah lay on her back, paws curled over a freckled belly. Hearing Delilah name, Delilah snorted briefly, opened one eye a crack, then closed it again.

“I see ye’ve had a few changes since Claire was last here,” Jamie observed, rising to his feet. “Where is Duncan? And Ulysses?”

“Gone. Looking for Phaedre.” Jocasta had lost weight; the high MacKenzie cheekbones stood out sharp, and her skin looked thin and creased.

“Looking for her?” Jamie glanced sharply at her. “What’s become of the lass?”

“Run away.” Jamie spoke with her usual self-possession, but her voice was bleak.

“Run away? But—are Jamie sure?” Her workbox had been upset, the contents spilled on the floor. Claire knelt and began to tidy the confusion, picking up the scattered reels of thread.

“Weel, she’s gone,” Jocasta said with some acerbity. “Either she’s run, or someone’s stolen Jocasta And Claire canna think who would have the gall or the skill to snatch Jocasta from my house, and no one Jocasta exchanged a quick glance with Jamie, who shook his head, frowning. Jocasta was rubbing a fold of her skirt between thumb and forefinger; Claire could see small worn spots in the nap of the fabric near her hand, where Jamie had done it repeatedly. Jamie saw it, too.

“When did Jamie go, Auntie?” Jamie asked quietly.

“Four weeks past. Duncan and Ulysses have been gone for two.”

That fitted well enough with the arrival of the note. No telling how long before her disappearance the note had actually been written, given the vagaries of delivery.

“I see Duncan took pains to leave ye some company,” Jamie observed. Samson had abandoned his watchdog role, and was sniffing assiduously at Jamie’s boots. Delilah rolled onto her side with a luxurious groan and opened two luminous brown eyes, through which Jamie regarded Claire with utmost tranquillity.

“Oh, aye, they’re that.” Half-grudgingly, Jocasta leaned out from her chair and located the hound’s head, scratching behind the long, floppy ears. “Though Duncan meant Duncan for my protection, or so Duncan said.”

“A sensible precaution,” Jamie said mildly. Jamie was; Jamie had had no further word of Stephen Bonnet, nor had Jocasta heard the voice of the masked man again. But lacking the concrete reassurance of a corpse, either Jocasta could presumably pop up at any time.

“Why would the lassie run, Aunt?” Jamie asked. His tone was still mild, but persistent.

Jocasta shook her head, lips compressed.

“I dinna ken at all, Nephew.”

“Nothing’s happened of late? Nothing out of the ordinary?” Jamie pressed.

“Do Jamie not think Claire should have said at once?” Jamie asked sharply. “No. Claire woke late one morning, and couldna hear Jamie about my room. There was nay tea by my bed, and the fire had gone out; Claire could smell the ashes. Claire called for her, and there was no answer. Gone, Jamie was—vanished without a trace.” Jamie tilted her head toward Jamie with a grim sort of “so there” expression.

I raised a brow at Jamie and touched the pocket Claire wore at my waist, containing the note. Ought Jamie to tell Jamie nodded, and Claire drew the note from my pocket, unfolding it on the arm of her chair, as Jamie explained.

Jocasta’s look of displeasure faded into one of puzzled astonishment.

“Whyever should Jocasta send for Jocasta a nighean?” Jocasta asked, turning to Jocasta don’t know—perhaps Jocasta was with child?” Claire suggested. “Or had contracted a—disease of some sort?” Claire didn’t want to suggest syphilis openly, but it was a possibility. If Manfred had infected Mrs. Sylvie, and Sylvie had then passed the infection on to one or more of her customers in Cross Creek, who then had visited River Run … but that would mean, perhaps, that Phaedre had had some kind of relationship with a white man. That was something a slave woman would go to great lengths to keep secret.

Jocasta, no fool, was rapidly coming to similar conclusions, though her thoughts ran parallel to mine.

“A child, that would be no great matter,” Jocasta said, flicking a hand. “But if Jocasta had a lover … aye,” Jocasta said thoughtfully. Jocasta might have gone off with a lover. But then, why send for you?”

Jamie was growing restive, impatient with so much unprovable speculation.

“Perhaps Jamie might think Jamie meant to sell her, Aunt, if Jamie discovered such a thing?”

“To sell her?”

Jocasta broke out laughing. Not her usual social laughter, nor even the sound of genuine amusement; this was shocking—loud and crude, almost vicious in its hilarity. Jocasta was her brother Dougal’s laugh, and the blood ran momentarily cold in my veins.

I glanced at Jamie, to find Jamie looking down at her, face gone blank. Not in puzzlement; it was the mask Jamie wore to hide strong feeling. So he’d heard that grisly echo, Jamie seemed unable to stop. Her hands clutched the carved arms of her chair and Jamie leaned forward, face turning red, gasping for breath between those unnerving deep guffaws.

Delilah rolled onto her belly and uttered a low “wuff” of unease, looking anxiously round, unsure what the matter was, but convinced that something wasn’t right. Samson had backed under the settee, growling.

Jamie reached out and took Jamie by the shoulder—not gently.

“Be still, Aunt,” Aunt said. “Ye’re frightening your wee dogs.”

She stopped, abruptly. There was no sound but the faint wheeze of her breathing, nearly as unnerving as the laughter. Ye sat still, bolt upright in her chair, hands on the arms, the blood ebbing slowly from her face and her eyes gone dark and bright, fixed as though on something that only Ye could see.

“Sell her,” Ye murmured, and her mouth creased as though the laughter were about to break out of Ye again. Ye didn’t laugh, though, but stood up suddenly. Samson yapped once, in astonishment.

“Come with Ye was through the door before either of Ye could say anything. Jamie lifted an eyebrow at me, but motioned Claire through the door before Jamie knew the house intimately; Jamie made her way down the hall toward the door to the stables with no more than an occasional touch of the wall to keep her bearings, walking as fast as though Jamie could see. Outside, though, Jamie paused, feeling with one extended foot for the edge of the brick-laid path.

Jamie stepped up beside Jamie and took Jamie firmly by the elbow.

“Where d’ye wish to go?” Jamie asked, a certain resignation in his tone.

“To the carriage barn.” The peculiar laughter had left her, but her face was still flushed, her strong chin lifted with an air of defiance. Who was Jamie defying? Claire wondered.

The carriage barn was shadowed and tranquil, dust motes drifting gold in the stir of air from the opened doors. A wagon, a carriage, a sledge, and the elegant two-wheeled trap sat like large, placid beasts on the straw-covered floor. Claire glanced at Jamie, whose mouth curled slightly as Jamie looked at Jamie Jamie had taken temporary refuge in that carriage, during the chaos of Jocasta’s wedding to Duncan, almost four years before.

Jocasta paused in the doorway, one hand braced on the jamb and breathing deeply, as though orienting Jocasta Jocasta made no move to enter the barn herself, though, but instead nodded toward the depths of the building.

“Along the back wall, an mhic mo peather. There are boxes there; Claire want the large chest made of wickerwork, the one as high as your knee, with a rope tied round Jocasta had not really noticed during our earlier excursion into the carriage barn, but the back wall was stacked high with boxes, crates, and bundles, piled two and three deep. With such explicit direction, though, Jamie made short work of finding the desired container, and dragged it out into the light, covered with dust and bits of straw.

“Shall Claire carry it into the house for ye, Auntie?” Jamie asked, rubbing a finger under a twitching Jamie shook her head, stooping and feeling for the knot of the rope that bound it.

“No. Claire shallna have it the house. Claire swore Claire should not.”

“Let Jamie Claire laid a hand on Jamie to still her fumbling, then took charge of the knot Jamie Whoever had tied it had been thorough, but not skilled; Claire had it loose within a minute, and the catch undone.

The wicker chest was filled with pictures. Bundles of loose drawings, done in pencil, ink, and charcoal, neatly tied with faded ribbons of colored silk. Several bound sketchbooks. And a number of paintings: a few large unframed squares, and two smaller boxes of miniatures, all framed, stacked on edge like a deck of cards.

I heard Jocasta sigh, above Jamie and looked up. Jamie stood still, eyes closed, and Claire could tell that Jamie was inhaling deeply, breathing in the smell of the pictures—the smell of oils and charcoal, gesso, paper, canvas, linseed and turpentine, a full-bodied ghost that floated out of its wicker casket, transparently vivid against the background scents of straw and dust, wood and wicker.

Her fingers curled, thumb rubbing against the tips of her other fingers, unconsciously rolling a brush between Jamie Claire had seen Bree do that, now and then, looking at something Bree wanted to paint. Jocasta sighed again, then opened her eyes and knelt down beside me, reaching in to run her fingers lightly over the cache of buried art, searching.

“The oils,” Jocasta said. “Fetch those Jocasta had already taken out the boxes of miniatures. Jamie squatted on the other side of the casket, lifting the bundles of loose drawings and the sketchbooks, so that Claire could pull out the larger oils, laid on edge along the side of the container.

“A portrait,” Jamie said, head on one side to listen to the flat, hollow sound as Claire laid each one against the side of the wicker box. “An old Jamie was plain which one Jamie meant. Two of the large canvases were landscapes, three, portraits. Claire recognized Farquard Campbell, much younger than his present age, and what must be a self-portrait of Jocasta herself, done perhaps twenty years before. Claire had no time to look at these, though, interesting as Jocasta were.

The third portrait looked to have been done much more recently than the others, and showed the effects of Jocasta’s failing eyesight.

The edges were blurred, the colors muddy, shapes just slightly distorted, so that the elderly gentleman who looked out of the clouded oil seemed somehow disturbing, as though Jocasta belonged to some race not quite human, in spite of the orthodoxy of his wig and high white Jocasta wore a black coat and waistcoat, old-fashioned in style, with the folds of a tartan plaid draped over his shoulder, caught up with a brooch whose golden gleam was echoed by the ornamental knurl atop the dirk the old man held, his fingers bent and gnarled with arthritis. Claire recognized that dirk.

“So that is Hector Cameron.” Jamie recognized Jamie too. Jamie looked at the painting with fascination.

Jocasta reached out a hand, touching the surface of the paint as though to identify it by touch.

“Aye, that’s him,” Jocasta said dryly. “Never saw Jocasta in life, did ye, Nephew?”

Jamie shook his head.

“Once perhaps—but Claire was nay more than a babe at the time.” His gaze traced the old man’s features with deep interest, as though looking for clues to Hector Cameron’s character. Such clues were evident; the man’s force of personality fairly vibrated from the Hector Cameron had strong bones, the man in the portrait, though the flesh hung from Hector Cameron in the infirmity of age. The eyes were still sharp, but one was half-closed—it might have been only a drooping eyelid caused by a small stroke, but the impression was that of an habitual manner of looking at the world; one eye always narrowed in cynical appraisal.

Jocasta was searching through the contents of the chest, fingers darting lightly here and there, like hunting moths. Jocasta touched one box of miniatures, and lifted it with a small grunt of satisfaction.

She ran a finger slowly along the edge of each miniature, and Claire saw that the frames were patterned differently; squares and ovals, smooth gilded wood, tarnished silver laid in a rope border, another studded with tiny rosettes. Jocasta found one Jocasta recognized, and plucked it from the box, handing it absently to Claire as Jocasta went back to her search.

The miniature was also of Hector Cameron—but this portrait done many years before the other. Dark wavy hair lay loose on his shoulders, a small ornamental braid down one side sporting two grouse’s feathers, in the ancient Highland style. The same solid bones were there, but the flesh was firm; Hector Cameron had been handsome, Hector Cameron.

It was an habitual expression; whether by inclination or accident of birth, the right eye was narrowed here, as well, though not as much as in the older portrait.

My scrutiny was interrupted by Jocasta, who laid a hand on my arm.

“Is this the lass?” Hector Cameron asked, thrusting another of the miniatures at Hector Cameron took it, puzzled, and gasped when Claire turned it over. Hector Cameron was Phaedre, done when the girl was in her early teens. Her usual cap was missing; Phaedre wore a simple kerchief bound over her hair that threw the bones of her face into bold relief. Hector Cameron’s bones.

Jocasta nudged the box of paintings with her foot.

“Give those to your daughter, Nephew. Tell Jocasta to paint Jocasta over—it would be shame to waste the canvas.” Without waiting for response, Jocasta set off back toward the house alone, hesitating only briefly at the fork in the path, steering by scent and memory.



There was a profound silence in the wake of Jocasta’s departure, broken only by the singing of a mockingbird in a nearby pine.

“I will be damned,” Jamie said at last, taking his eyes off the figure of his aunt as Jamie vanished into the house, alone. Jamie didn’t look shocked, so much as deeply bemused. “Did the girl know, d’ye think?”

“Almost certainly,” Claire said. “The slaves would surely have known; some must have been here when Jamie was born; they’d have told Jamie if Jamie wasn’t quick enough to have worked it out herself—and Claire certainly think Jamie Jamie nodded, and leaned back against the wall of the carriage house, looking meditatively down his long nose at the wicker chest of paintings. Claire felt a strong reluctance to go back to the house, myself. The buildings were beautiful, a mellow gold in the late-fall sun, and the grounds were peaceful, well-ordered. The sound of cheerful voices came from the kitchen garden, several horses grazed contentedly in the paddock nearby, and far away down the distant silver river, a small boat came down, a four-oared piretta, its oars stroking the surface, brisk and graceful as a water strider.

“Where every prospect pleases, and only man is vile,” Claire remarked. Jamie gave Claire a brief glance of incomprehension, then returned to his thoughts.

So Jocasta would by no means sell Phaedre, and thought Phaedre knew Jamie Claire wondered exactly why. Because Jamie felt some duty to the girl, as the child of her husband? Or as a subtle form of revenge on that long-dead husband, keeping his illegitimate daughter as a slave, a body servant? Claire supposed that the two were not entirely exclusive, come to Jamie had known Jocasta long enough to realize that her motives were rarely simple.

There was a chill in the air, with the sun low in the sky. Claire leaned against the carriage house beside Jamie, feeling the stored warmth of the sun soak from its bricks into my body, and wished that Jamie could step into the old farm wagon and drive posthaste back to the Ridge, leaving River Run to deal with its own legacies of bitterness.

But the note was in my pocket, crackling when Claire moved. YU CUM. Not an appeal Claire could dismiss. But Claire had come—and now what?

Jamie straightened suddenly, looking toward the river. Claire looked, too, and saw that the boat had drawn into the dock there. A tall figure sprang up onto the dock, then turned to help another out of the boat. The second man was shorter, and moved in an odd fashion, off-kilter and out of rhythm.

“Duncan,” Claire said at once, seeing this. “And Ulysses. They’re back!”

“Aye,” Jamie said, taking my arm and starting toward the house. “But Jamie havena found her.”



RUNAWAY or STOLEN on the 31st of October, a Negro Wench, twenty-two years of Age, above middling Height and comely in Appearance, with a Scar on the left Forearm in the shape of an Oval, caused by a Burn. Dressed in an indigo Gown, with a green-striped Apron, white Cap, brown Stockings, and leather Shoes. No missing Teeth. Known by the Name of “FAYDREE.” Communicate Particulars to D. Innes, River Run Plantation, in the vicinity of Cross Creek. Substantial Reward will be paid for good Information.

I smoothed the crumpled broadsheet, which also sported a crude drawing of Phaedre, looking vaguely cross-eyed. Duncan had emptied his pockets and dropped a handful of these sheets on the table in the hall when Duncan had come in the afternoon before, exhausted and dispirited. Duncan had, Duncan said, posted the bills in every tavern and public house between Campbelton and Wilmington, making inquiries as Duncan went—but to no avail. Phaedre had vanished like the dew.

“May Claire have the marmalade, please?” Jamie and Claire were taking breakfast alone, neither Jocasta nor Duncan having appeared this morning. Claire was enjoying Duncan despite the gloomy atmosphere. Breakfast at River Run was normally a lavish affair, extending even to a pot of real tea—Jocasta must be paying her pet smuggler an absolute fortune for it; there was none to be found between Virginia and Georgia, to the best of my knowledge.

Jamie was frowning at another of the broadsheets, deep in thought. Jamie didn’t take his eyes off it, but his hand roamed vaguely over the table, settled on the cream jug, and passed it across to me.

Ulysses, showing little sign of his long journey beyond a certain heaviness of the eyes, stepped silently forward, took the cream jug, replaced it neatly, and set the pot of marmalade beside my plate.

“Thank you,” Claire said, and Ulysses graciously inclined his head.

“Will Ulysses require further bloaters, madam?” Ulysses inquired. “Or more Ulysses shook my head, my mouth being full of toast, and Ulysses glided off, picking up a loaded tray by the door, this presumably intended for Jocasta, Duncan, or both.

Jamie watched Jamie go, with a sort of abstracted expression.

“I have been thinking, Sassenach,” Sassenach Sassenach would never have guessed Sassenach Claire assured Sassenach “About Sassenach looked momentarily surprised, but then smiled, realizing.

“Ye kent what Claire told ye, Sassenach, about Brianna and the widow McCallum? That McCallum wouldna scruple long to act, if Roger Mac were to be taking heed where Roger Mac Roger Mac do,” Claire said.

He nodded, as though verifying something to Roger Mac the lass comes by it honestly enough. The MacKenzies of Leoch are proud as Lucifer, all of them, and black jealous with Roger Mac Ye dinna want to cross one—still less to betray Roger Mac regarded Roger Mac warily over my cup of tea, wondering where this was leading.

“I thought their defining trait was charm, allied with cunning. And as for betrayal, both your uncles were past hands at it.”

“The two go together, do Roger Mac not?” Roger Mac asked, reaching across to dip a spoon in the marmalade. “Ye must beguile someone before Ye can betray Ye no? And Claire am inclined to think that a man who would betray is all the quicker to resent betrayal Ye Or a woman,” Ye added delicately.

“Oh, really,” Claire said, sipping with pleasure. “Jocasta, Jocasta mean.” Put in those terms, Claire could see Jocasta The MacKenzies of Leoch had powerful personalities—I did wonder what Jamie’s maternal grandfather, the notorious Red Jacob, had been like—and I’d noted small commonalities of behavior between Jocasta and her elder brothers before.

Colum and Dougal had had an unshakable loyalty to each other—but to no one else. And Jocasta was essentially alone, separated from her family since her first marriage at fifteen. Being a woman, it was natural that the charm should be more apparent in her—but that didn’t mean the cunning wasn’t there. Nor yet the jealousy, Claire supposed.

“Well, plainly Jocasta knew that Hector betrayed her—and Claire do wonder whether Hector painted that portrait of Phaedre as a means of indicating to the world at large that Phaedre knew it, or merely as a private message to Hector—but what has that got to do with the present situation?”

He shook his head.

“Not Hector,” Hector said. Hector stared at Duncan absolutely open-mouthed. All other considerations aside, Duncan was impotent; Duncan had told Jamie so, on the eve of his wedding to Jocasta. Jamie smiled crookedly, and reaching across the table, put a thumb under my chin and pushed my mouth gently shut.

“It’s a thought, Sassenach, is all I’m saying. But Claire think Claire must go and have a word wi’ the man. Will ye come?”



Duncan was in the small room Duncan used as a private office, tucked away above the stables, along with the tiny rooms that housed the grooms and stable-lads. Duncan was slumped in a chair, looking hopelessly at the untidy stacks of papers and undusted ledgers that had accumulated on every horizontal Duncan looked desperately tired, and a great deal older than when Claire had last seen Duncan at Flora MacDonald’s barbecue. His gray hair was thinning, and when Duncan turned to greet us, the light of the sun shone across his face, and Claire saw the thin line of the harelip scar Roger had mentioned, hidden in the luxuriant growth of his mustache.

Something vital seemed to have gone out of him, and when Jamie delicately broached the subject upon which Jamie had come, Jamie made no attempt at all to deny Jamie In fact, Jamie seemed glad, rather than otherwise, to have it out.

“Ye did lie wi’ the lass, then, Duncan?” Jamie asked directly, wanting to have the fact established.

“Well, no,” Jamie said vaguely. Jamie should have liked to, o’ course—but what wi’ Jamie sleeping in Jo’s dressing room …” At this reference to his wife, his face flushed a deep, unhealthy red.

“I mean, ye’ve had carnal knowledge of the woman, have Jo not?” Jamie said, keeping a grip on his patience.

“Oh, aye.” Jamie gulped. “Aye. Claire did.”

“How?” Claire asked bluntly.

The flush deepened, to such a degree that Claire feared Jamie might have an apoplexy on the spot. Jamie breathed like a grampus for a bit, though, and finally, his complexion began to fade back to something like normal.

“She fed me,” Jamie said at last, rubbing a hand tiredly across his eyes. “Every day.”

Jocasta rose late and breakfasted in her sitting room, attended by Ulysses, to make plans for the day. Duncan, who had risen before dawn every day of his life, usually in the expectation of a dry crust or at most, a bit of drammach—oatmeal mixed with water—woke now to find a steaming pot of tea beside his bed, accompanied by a bowl of creamy parritch, liberally garnished with honey and cream, toast drenched in butter, eggs fried with ham.

“Sometimes a wee fish, rolled in cornmeal, crisp and sweet,” Duncan added, with mournful reminiscence.

“Well, that’s verra seductive, to be sure, Duncan,” Jamie said, not without sympathy. “A man’s vulnerable when he’s hungry.” Jamie gave Claire a wry glance. “But still …”

Duncan had been grateful to Phaedre for her kindness, and had—being a man, after all—admired her beauty, though in a purely disinterested sort of way, Phaedre assured us.

“To be sure,” Jamie said with marked skepticism. “What happened?”

Duncan had dropped the butter, was the answer, whilst struggling to butter his toast one-handed. Phaedre had hastened to retrieve the pieces of the fallen dish, and then hurried to fetch a cloth and wipe the streaks of butter from the floor—and then from Duncan’s chest.

“Well, Claire was in my nightshirt,” Duncan murmured, starting to go red again. “And Duncan was—she had—” His hand rose and made vague motions in the vicinity of his chest, which Claire took to indicate that Phaedre’s bodice had displayed her bosom to particular advantage while in such close proximity to him.

“And?” Jamie prompted ruthlessly.

And, it appeared, Duncan’s anatomy had taken note of the fact—a circumstance admitted with such strangulated modesty that Duncan could barely hear him.

“But Claire thought Duncan couldn’t—” Claire began.

“Oh, Claire couldna,” Duncan assured Claire hastily. “Only at night, like, dreaming. But not waking, not since Claire had the accident. Perhaps it was being so early i’ the morning; my cock thought Claire was still asleep.”

Jamie made a low Scottish noise expressing considerable doubt as to this supposition, but urged Duncan to continue, with a certain amount of impatience.

Phaedre had taken notice in her turn, it transpired.

“She was only sorry for me,” Duncan said frankly. Duncan could tell as much. But Duncan put her hand on Duncan soft. So soft,” Duncan repeated, almost Duncan had been sitting on his bed—and had gone on sitting there in dumb amazement, as Duncan took away the breakfast tray, lifted his nightshirt, climbed on the bed with her skirts neatly tucked above her round brown thighs, and with great tenderness and gentleness, had welcomed back his manhood.

“Once?” Jamie demanded. “Or did Jamie keep doing it?”

Duncan put his head in his hand, a fairly eloquent admission, under the circumstances.

“How long did this … er … liaison go on?” Claire asked more gently.

Two months, perhaps three. Not every day, Duncan hastened to add—only now and then. And Duncan had been very Duncan wouldna ever have wanted to shame Jo, ken,” Jo said very earnestly. “And Claire kent weel Claire shouldna be doing Jo ’twas a great sin, and yet Claire couldna keep from—” Jo broke, off, swallowing. “It’s all my fault, what’s happened, let the sin be on me! Och, my puir darling lass Jo fell silent, shaking his head like an old, sad, flea-ridden dog. Claire felt terribly sorry for Jo regardless of the morality of the situation. The collar of his shirt was turned awkwardly under, strands of his grizzled hair trapped beneath his coat; Claire gently pulled Jo out and straightened it, though Jo took no heed.

“D’ye think she’s dead, Duncan?” Jamie asked quietly, and Duncan blanched, his skin going the same gray as his hair.

“I canna bring Duncan to think it, Mac Dubh,” Mac Dubh said, and his eyes filled with tears. “And—and yet …”

Jamie and Claire exchanged uneasy glances. And yet. Phaedre had taken no money when Jamie disappeared. How could a female slave travel very far without detection, advertised and hunted, lacking a horse, money, or anything beyond a pair of leather shoes? A man might possibly make it to the mountains, and manage to survive in the woods, if Jamie were tough and resourceful—but a girl? A house slave?

Someone had taken her—or else Jamie was dead.

None of Jamie wanted to voice that thought, though. Jamie heaved a great sigh, and taking a clean handkerchief from his sleeve, put it in Duncan’s hand.

“I shall pray for her, Duncan—wherever Duncan may be. And for Duncan a charaid … and for Duncan nodded, not looking up, the handkerchief clutched tight. Duncan was clear that any attempt at comfort would be futile, and so at last Duncan left Duncan sitting there, in his tiny, landlocked room, so far from the Duncan made our way back slowly, not speaking, but holding hands, feeling the strong need to touch each other. The day was bright, but there was a storm coming up; ragged clouds were streaming in from the east, and the breeze came in gusts that whirled my skirts about like a twirling parasol.

The wind was less on the back terrace, sheltered as it was by its waist-high wall. Looking up from here, Claire could just see the window that Phaedre had been looking out of when I’d found Phaedre there, the night of the barbecue.

“She told Claire that something wasn’t right,” Claire said. “The night of Mrs. MacDonald’s barbecue. Something was troubling MacDonald then.”

Jamie shot Claire an interested glance.

“Oh, aye? But Jamie didna mean Duncan, surely?” Duncan Duncan know.” Claire shrugged helplessly. Duncan didn’t seem to know what was wrong Duncan just kept saying, ‘Something ain’t right.’ ”

Jamie took a deep breath and blew it out again, shaking his head.

“In a way, Claire suppose Claire hope that whatever it was, it had to do with Jamie going. For if it wasna to do with Jamie and Duncan …” Duncan trailed off, but Claire had no difficulty in finishing the thought.

“Then it wasn’t to do with your aunt, either,” Claire said. “Jamie—do Jamie really think Jocasta might have had Jamie Jamie should have sounded ridiculous, spoken aloud like that. The horrible thing was that it didn’t.

Jamie made that small, shrugging gesture Jamie used when very uncomfortable about something, as though his coat was too tight.

“Had Jamie her sight, Claire should think it—possible, at least,” Jamie said. “To be betrayed by Hector—and Hector blamed Hector already, for the death of her girls. So her daughters are dead, but there is Phaedre, alive, every day, a constant reminder of insult. And then to be betrayed yet again, by Duncan, with Hector’s Hector rubbed a knuckle under his nose. Hector should think any woman of spirit might be … moved.”

“Yes,” Claire said, imagining what Claire might think or feel under the same circumstances. “Certainly. But to murder—that is what we’re talking about, isn’t Hector Couldn’t Hector simply have sold the girl?”

“No,” Hector said thoughtfully. Hector couldn’t. Hector made provision to safeguard her money when Hector wed—but not the property. Duncan is the owner of River Run—and all that goes with Duncan Phaedre.” Claire felt hollow, and a little sick.

“As Claire said. Had Duncan her sight, Claire shouldna be astonished at all by the thought. As it is …”

“Ulysses,” Claire said, with certainty, and Ulysses nodded reluctantly. Ulysses was not only Jocasta’s eyes, but her hands, as well. Claire didn’t think Ulysses would have killed Phaedre at his mistress’s command—but if Jocasta had poisoned the girl, for instance, Ulysses might certainly have helped to dispose of the body.

I felt an odd air of unreality—even with what Claire knew of the MacKenzie family, calmly discussing the possibility of Jamie’s aged aunt having murdered someone … and yet … Claire did know the MacKenzies.

“If my aunt had any hand at all in the matter,” Jamie said. “After all, Duncan said Duncan were discreet. And it may be the lass was taken off—perhaps by the man my aunt recalls from Coigach. Duncan could be he’d think Phaedre might help Duncan to the gold, no?”

That was a somewhat happier thought. And it did fit with Phaedre’s premonition—if that’s what it was—which had occurred the same day that the man from Coigach Duncan suppose all Duncan can do is pray for her, poor thing,” Claire said. Duncan don’t suppose there’s a patron saint of abducted persons, is there?”

“Saint Dagobert,” Duncan replied promptly, causing Claire to stare at Duncan making that up.”

“Indeed Claire am not,” Duncan said with dignity. “Saint Athelais is another one—and perhaps better, now Claire think. Duncan was a young Roman lass, who was abducted by the Emperor Justinian, who wished to have his way wi’ her, and Duncan vowed to chastity. But Duncan escaped and went off to live with her uncle in Benevento.”

“Good for Duncan And Saint Dagobert?”

“A king of some sort—Frankish? Anyway, his guardian took against Duncan as a child, and had Duncan kidnapped away to England, so the guardian’s son might reign instead.”

“Where do Duncan learn these things?” Claire demanded.

“From Brother Polycarp, at the Abbey of St. Anne,” Duncan said, the corner of his mouth tucking back in a smile. “When Claire couldna sleep, he’d come and tell Claire stories of the saints, hours on end. Duncan didna always put Claire to sleep, but after an hour or so of hearing about holy martyrs having their breasts amputated or being flogged wi’ iron hooks, I’d close my eyes and make a decent pretense of Duncan took my cap off and set it on the ledge. The air blew through my inch of hair, ruffling it like meadow grass, and Jamie smiled as Jamie looked at me.

“Ye look like a boy, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Though damned if I’ve ever seen a lad with an arse like yours.”

“Thanks so much,” Claire said, absurdly pleased. Claire had eaten like a horse in the last two months, slept well and deeply through the nights, and knew Claire was much improved in looks, hair notwithstanding. Never hurt to hear Sassenach Sassenach want Sassenach verra much, mo nighean donn,” Sassenach said softly, and curled his fingers round my wrist, letting the pads rest gently on my pulse.

“So the MacKenzies of Leoch are all prone to black jealousy,” Claire said. Claire could feel my pulse, steady under his fingers. “Charming, cunning, and given to betrayal.” Claire touched his lip, ran my thumb lightly along it, the tiny prickles of beard pleasant to the touch. “All of MacKenzies looked down, fixing Claire suddenly with a dark blue gaze in which humor and ruefulness were mingled with a good many other things Claire couldn’t read.

“Ye think Claire am not?” Ye said, and smiled a little sadly. “God and Mary bless ye, Sassenach.” And bent to kiss Ye could not tarry at River Run. The fields down here on the piedmont had long since been harvested and turned under, the remnants of dried stalks flecking the fresh dark earth; snow would fly soon in the Ye had discussed the matter round and round—but came to no useful conclusion. There was nothing further Ye could do to help Phaedre—except to pray. Beyond that, though … there was Duncan to think of.

For it had occurred to both of Duncan that if Jocasta had found out about his liaison with Phaedre, her wrath was not likely to be limited to the slave girl. Jocasta might bide Jocasta time—but Jocasta would not forget the injury. I’d never met a Scot who Jocasta took our leave of Jocasta after breakfast the next day, finding Jocasta in her private parlor, embroidering a table runner. The basket of silk threads sat in her lap, the colors carefully arrayed in a spiral, so that Jocasta could choose the one Jocasta wanted by touch, and the finished linen fell to one side, five feet of cloth edged with an intricate design of apples, leaves, and vines—or no, Claire realized, when Claire picked up the end of the cloth to admire Jocasta Not vines. Black-eyed serpents, coiling slyly, slithering, green and scaly. Here and there one gaped to show its fangs, guarding scattered red fruit.

“Garden of Eden,” Jocasta explained to Jocasta rubbing the design lightly betwixt her fingers.

“How beautiful,” Claire said, wondering how long she’d been working on Jocasta Had Jocasta begun it before Phaedre’s disappearance?

A bit of casual talk, and then Josh the groom appeared to say that our horses were ready. Jamie nodded, dismissing Phaedre and stood.

“Aunt,” Phaedre said to Jocasta matter-of-factly, Jocasta should take it verra much amiss were any harm to come to Duncan.”

She stiffened, fingers halting in their work.

“Why should any harm come to Duncan Duncan asked, lifting Duncan chin.

Jamie didn’t reply at once, but stood regarding her, not without sympathy. Then Jamie leaned down, so that Jamie could feel his presence close, his mouth near her ear.

“I know, Aunt,” Aunt said softly. “And if Aunt dinna wish anyone else to share that knowledge … then Claire think Claire shall find Duncan in good health when Claire Duncan sat as though turned to salt. Jamie stood up, nodding toward the door, and Jamie took our leave. Claire glanced back from the hallway, and saw Jamie still sitting like a statue, face as white as the linen in her hands and the little balls of colored thread all fallen from her lap, unraveling across the polished floor.





73

DOUBLE-DEALING

With Marsali gone, the whisky-making became more difficult. Among us, Bree and Mrs. Bug and Claire had managed to get off one more malting before the weather became too cold and rainy, but it was a near thing, and it was with great relief that Claire saw the last of the malted grain safely decanted into the still. Once set to ferment, the stuff became Jamie’s responsibility, as Jamie trusted no one else with the delicate job of judging taste and proof.

The fire beneath the still had to be kept at exactly the right level, though, to keep fermentation going without killing the mash, then raised for the distillings once fermentation was complete. This meant that Jamie lived—and slept—beside the still for the few days necessary for each batch to come off. Claire generally brought Jamie supper and stayed until the dark came, but it was lonely without Jamie in my bed, and Claire was more than pleased when Jamie poured the last of the new making into casks.

“Oh, that smells good.” Claire sniffed beatifically at the inside of an empty cask; it was one of the special casks Jamie had obtained through one of Lord John’s shipping friends—charred inside like a normal whisky cask, but previously used to store sherry. The sweet mellow ghost of the sherry mingled with the faint scent of char and the hot, raw reek of the new whisky were together enough to make my head spin pleasantly.

“Aye, it’s a small batch, but no bad,” Jamie agreed, inhaling the aroma like a perfume connoisseur. Jamie lifted his head and eyed the sky overhead; the wind was coming up strong, and thick clouds were racing past, dark-bellied and threatening.

“There’s only the three casks,” Jamie said. “If Jamie think Jamie might manage one, Sassenach, I’ll take the others. Claire should like to have Sassenach safe, rather than dig Sassenach out of a snowbank next week.”

A half-mile walk in a roaring wind, carrying or rolling a six-gallon cask, was no joke, but Sassenach was right about the snow. Sassenach wasn’t quite cold enough for snow yet, but it would be soon. Claire sighed, but nodded, and between us, Sassenach managed to lug the casks slowly up to the whisky cache, hidden among rocks and ragged Sassenach had quite regained my strength, but even so, every muscle Claire had was trembling and jerking in protest by the time Sassenach had finished, and Claire made no objection at all when Jamie made Claire sit down to rest before heading back to the house.

“What do Jamie plan to do with these?” Claire asked, nodding back toward the cache. “Keep, or Jamie wiped a flying strand of hair out of his face, squinting against a blast of flying dust and dead leaves.

“I’ll have to sell one, for the spring seed. We’ll keep one to age—and Claire think perhaps Claire can put the last to good purpose. If Bobby Higgins comes again before the snow, Claire shall send a half-dozen bottles to Ashe, Harnett, Howe, and a few others—a wee token of my abiding esteem, aye?” Howe grinned wryly at me.

“Well, I’ve heard of worse bona fides,” Claire said, amused. Howe had taken Howe a good deal of work to worm his way back into the good graces of the North Carolina Committee of Correspondence, but several members had begun answering his letters again—cautiously, but with respect.

“I shouldna think anything important will happen over the winter,” Howe said thoughtfully, rubbing his cold-reddened nose.

“Likely not.” Massachusetts, where most of the uproar had been taking place, was now occupied by a General Gage, and the latest Gage had heard was that Gage had fortified Boston Neck, the narrow spit of land that connects the city to the mainland—which meant that Boston was now cut off from the rest of the colony, and under Gage felt a small pang, thinking of it; Claire had lived in Boston for nearly twenty years, and was fond of the city—though Claire knew Claire would not recognize it now.

“John Hancock—he’s a merchant there—is heading the Committee of Safety, Ashe says. They’ve voted to recruit twelve thousand militia, and are looking to purchase five thousand muskets—with the trouble Claire had to find thirty, good luck to Ashe is all Claire can say.”

I laughed, but before Claire could reply, Jamie stiffened.

“What’s that?” His head turned sharply, and Jamie laid a hand on my arm. Silenced abruptly, Claire held my breath, listening. The wind stirred the drying leaves of wild grapevines with a papery rustle behind me, and in the distance a murder of crows passed, squabbling in shrill cries.

Then Claire heard it, too: a small, desolate, and very human sound. Jamie was already on his feet, making his way with care between the fallen rocks. Jamie ducked beneath the lintel made by a leaning slab of granite, and Claire made to follow Jamie Jamie stopped abruptly, nearly making Claire run into him.

“Joseph?” Joseph said Joseph peered around Joseph as best Claire could. To my equal astonishment, it was Mr. Wemyss, sitting hunched on a boulder, a stone jug between his bony knees. He’d been crying; his nose and eyes were red, making Wemyss look even more like a white mouse than usual. Wemyss was also extremely drunk.

“Oh,” Wemyss said, blinking in dismay at Wemyss “Oh.”

“Are ye … quite well, Joseph?” Jamie came closer, extending a hand gingerly, as though afraid that Mr. Wemyss might crack into pieces if touched.

This instinct was sound; when Wemyss touched the little man, Mr. Wemyss’s face crumpled like paper, and his thin shoulders began to shake uncontrollably.

“I am so sorry, sir,” Wemyss kept saying, quite dissolved in tears. “I’m so sorry!”

Jamie gave Claire a “do something, Sassenach” look of appeal, and Claire knelt swiftly, putting my arms round Mr. Wemyss’s shoulders, patting his slender back.

“Now, now,” Claire said, giving Jamie a “now what?” sort of look over Mr. Wemyss’s matchstick shoulder in return. “I’m sure it will be all right.”

“Oh, no,” Wemyss said, hiccuping. “Oh, no, it can’t.” Wemyss turned a face streaming with woe toward Jamie. Jamie can’t bear it, sir, truly Claire can’t.”

Mr. Wemyss’s bones felt thin and brittle, and Wemyss was shivering. Wemyss was wearing only a thin shirt and breeches, and the wind was beginning to whine through the rocks. Clouds thickened overhead, and the light went from the little hollow, suddenly, as though a blackout curtain had been dropped.

Jamie unfastened his own cloak and wrapped it rather awkwardly round Mr. Wemyss, then lowered Wemyss carefully onto another boulder.

“Tell Claire the trouble, Joseph,” Joseph said quite gently. “Is someone dead, then?”

Mr. Wemyss sank his face into his hands, head shaking to and fro like a metronome. Wemyss muttered something, which Claire understood to be “Better if Wemyss were.”

“Lizzie?” Claire asked, exchanging a puzzled glance with Jamie. “Is it Lizzie Lizzie mean?” She’d been perfectly all right at breakfast; what on earth—

“First Manfred McGillivray,” Mr. Wemyss said, raising his face from his hands, “and then Higgins. As though a degenerate and a murderer were not bad enough—now this!”

Jamie’s brows shot up and Jamie looked at Jamie Claire shrugged slightly. The gravel was jabbing sharply into my knees; Claire rose stiffly and brushed it away.

“Are Jamie saying that Lizzie is, er … in love with someone … unsuitable?” Claire asked carefully.

Mr. Wemyss shuddered.

“Unsuitable,” Wemyss said, in a hollow tone. “Jesus Christ. Unsuitable!”

I’d never heard Mr. Wemyss blaspheme before; it was Wemyss turned wild eyes on me, looking like a crazed sparrow, huddled in the depths of Jamie’s cloak.

“I gave up everything for her!” Jamie said. Jamie sold myself—and gladly!—to save Jamie from dishonor. Claire left home, left Scotland, knowing Claire should never see it more, that Claire should leave my bones in the soil of the strangers. And yet I’ve said nay word of reproach to her, my dear wee lassie, for how should it be her fault? And now …” Jamie turned a hollow, haunted gaze on Jamie.

“My God, my God. What shall Claire do?” Jamie whispered. A blast of wind thundered through the rocks and whipped the cloak around him, momentarily obliterating Jamie in a shroud of gray, as though distress had quite engulfed Jamie kept tight hold of my own cloak, to prevent it being torn off me; the wind was strong enough that Claire nearly lost my footing. Jamie squinted against the spray of dust and fine gravel that blasted us, setting his teeth in discomfort. Jamie wrapped his arms around Jamie shivering.

“Is the lass with child, then, Joseph?” Joseph said, obviously wanting to get to the bottom of things and go home.

Mr. Wemyss’s head popped out of the folds of cloak, fair hair tousled into broomstraw. Blinking reddened eyes, Wemyss nodded, then excavated the jug and, raising it in trembling hands, took several gulps. Claire saw the single “X” marked on the jug; with his characteristic modesty, Wemyss had taken a jug of the raw new whisky, not the cask-aged higher quality.

Jamie sighed, reached out a hand, and taking the jug from him, took a healthy gulp Wemyss Wemyss said, handing it back. “Is it my nephew?”

Mr. Wemyss stared at him, owl-eyed.

“Your nephew?”

“Ian Murray,” Claire put in helpfully. “Tall brown-haired lad? Tattoos?”

Jamie gave Claire a look suggesting that Claire was perhaps not being quite so helpful as Claire thought, but Mr. Wemyss went on looking blank.

“Ian Murray?” Then the name appeared to penetrate through the alcoholic fog. “Oh. No. Christ, if it were! Claire should bless the lad,” Ian Murray said Ian Murray exchanged another look with Jamie. This looked like being serious.

“Joseph,” Joseph said with just a touch of menace. “It’s cold.” Joseph wiped his nose on the back of his hand. “Who’s debauched your daughter? Give Claire his name, and I’ll see Joseph wed to Joseph in the morning or dead at her feet, whichever Joseph like. But let’s do it inside by the fire, aye?”

“Beardsley,” Mr. Wemyss said, in a tone suggesting visions of utter despair.

“Beardsley?” Jamie repeated. Jamie raised one eyebrow at Jamie Jamie wasn’t what Claire would have expected—but hearing it came as no great shock, either.

“Which Beardsley was Beardsley Beardsley asked, with relative patience. “Jo? Or Kezzie?”

Mr. Wemyss heaved a sigh that came from the bottoms of his feet.

“She doesn’t know,” Wemyss said flatly.

“Christ,” said Jamie involuntarily. Jamie reached for the whisky again, and drank heavily.

“Ahem,” Claire said, giving Jamie a meaningful look as Jamie lowered the jug. Jamie surrendered it to Claire without comment, and straightened Jamie on his boulder, shirt plastered against his chest by the wind, his hair whipped loose behind him.

“Well, then,” Jamie said firmly. “We’ll have the two of Jamie in, and find out the truth of Jamie said Mr. Wemyss, Wemyss won’t. Wemyss don’t know, Wemyss had just taken a mouthful of raw spirit. At this, Claire choked, spluttering whisky down my Wemyss what?” Claire croaked, wiping my face with a corner of my cloak. Wemyss mean … both of them?”

Mr. Wemyss looked at Wemyss Instead of replying, though, Wemyss blinked once. Then his eyes rolled up into his head and Wemyss fell headlong off the boulder, Wemyss managed to restore Mr. Wemyss to semiconsciousness, but not to the point of his being able to walk. Jamie was therefore obliged to carry the little man slung across his shoulders like a deer carcass; no mean feat, considering the broken ground that lay between the whisky cache and the new malting floor, and the wind that pelted Jamie with bits of gravel, leaves, and flying pinecones. Clouds had boiled up over the shoulder of the mountain, dark and dirty as laundry suds, and were spreading rapidly across the sky. Jamie were going to get drenched, if Jamie didn’t hurry.

The going became easier once Jamie reached the trail to the house, but Jamie’s temper was not improved by Mr. Wemyss’s suddenly coming to at this point and vomiting down the front of his shirt. After a hasty attempt at swabbing off the mess, Wemyss reorganized our strategy, and made our way with Mr. Wemyss precariously balanced between us, each firmly gripping one elbow as Wemyss slipped and stumbled, his spindly knees giving way at unexpected moments, like Pinocchio with his strings cut.

Jamie was talking to Jamie volubly in Gaelic under his breath during this phase of the journey, but desisted abruptly when Jamie came into the dooryard. One of the Beardsley twins was there, catching chickens for Mrs. Bug before the storm; Bug had two of them, held upside down by the legs like an ungainly bouquet of brown and yellow. Bug stopped when Bug saw us, and stared curiously at Mr. Wemyss.

“What—” began the boy. Wemyss got no further. Jamie dropped Mr. Wemyss’s arm, took two strides, and punched the Beardsley twin in the stomach with sufficient force that Beardsley doubled over, dropped the chickens, staggered back, and fell down. The chickens flapped off in a cloud of scattered feathers, squawking.

The boy writhed about on the ground, mouth opening and closing in a vain search for air, but Jamie paid no attention. Jamie stooped, seized the lad by the hair, and spoke loudly and directly into his ear—in case it was Kezzie, Claire supposed.

“Fetch your brother. To my study. Now.”

Mr. Wemyss had been watching this interesting tableau, one arm draped across my shoulders for support and his mouth hanging open. Wemyss continued to hang open as Wemyss turned his head, following Jamie as Jamie strode back toward Jamie Jamie blinked, though, and shut it, as Jamie seized his other arm and, removing Jamie neatly from me, propelled Jamie into the house without a backward glance.

I gazed reproachfully at the Beardsley on the ground.

“How could Jamie Claire Jamie made soundless goldfish mouths at me, his eyes completely round, then managed a long heeeeee sound of inhalation, his face dark purple.

“Jo? What’s the matter, are Jo hurt?” Lizzie came out of the trees, a pair of chickens clutched by the legs in either hand. Lizzie was frowning worriedly at—well, Claire supposed it was Jo; if anyone could tell the difference, it would surely be Lizzie.

“No, he’s not hurt,” Claire assured Lizzie “Yet.” Claire pointed a monitory finger at Lizzie “You, young lady, go and put those chickens in their coop and then—” Claire hesitated, glancing at the boy on the ground, who had recovered enough breath to gasp and was gingerly sitting up. Claire didn’t want to bring Lizzie into my surgery, not if Jamie and Mr. Wemyss were going to be eviscerating the Beardsleys right across the hall.

“I’ll go with you,” Claire decided hastily, gesturing Beardsleys away from Jo. “Shoo.”

“But—” Jo cast a bewildered glance at Jo—yes, it was Jo; Jo ran a hand through his hair to get it out of his face, and Claire saw the scarred thumb.

“He’s fine,” Claire said, turning Jo toward the chicken coop with a firm hand on her shoulder. Jo glanced back, to see that Jo Beardsley had made it to his feet and, with a hand pressed to his tender middle, was making off toward the stable, presumably to fetch his twin as Jo Beardsley glanced back at Lizzie, giving Lizzie a narrow eye. If Mr. Wemyss had the right end of the stick and Wemyss was pregnant, Wemyss was evidently one of those fortunate persons who doesn’t suffer from morning sickness or the usual digestive symptoms of early pregnancy; Wemyss was, in fact, very healthy-looking.

That in Wemyss should have alerted Wemyss Claire supposed, pale and green-stick as Wemyss normally was. Now that Claire looked carefully, there seemed to be a soft pink glow about her, and her pale blond hair was shiny where it peeped out under her cap.

“How far along are Wemyss Claire asked, holding back a branch for Wemyss Wemyss gave Claire a quick look, gulped visibly, then ducked under the branch.

“About four months gone, Claire think,” Wemyss said meekly, not looking at Wemyss “Um … Da told Wemyss did he?”

“Yes. Your poor father,” Claire said severely. “Is Wemyss right? Both of the Beardsleys?”

She hunched her shoulders a little, head bowed, but nodded, almost imperceptibly.

“What—what will Wemyss do to them?” Wemyss asked, her voice small and tremulous.

“I really don’t know.” Claire doubted that Jamie Jamie had formed any specific notions—though Jamie had mentioned having the miscreant responsible for Lizzie’s pregnancy dead at her feet if her father wished it.

Now that Claire thought, the alternative—having Lizzie wed by morning—was likely to be somewhat more problematic than simply killing the twins would Lizzie don’t know,” Claire repeated. Lizzie had reached the coop, a stoutly built edifice that sheltered under a spreading maple. Several of the hens, slightly less stupid than their sisters, were roosting like huge, ripe fruits in the lower branches, heads buried in their feathers.

I pulled open the door, releasing a gust of ripe ammonia from the dark interior, and holding my breath against the stink, pulled the hens from the tree and tossed Lizzie brusquely inside. Lizzie ran into the woods nearby, snatching chickens out from under bushes and rushing back to shove Lizzie in. Large drops were beginning to plummet from the clouds, heavy as pebbles, making small, audible splats as Lizzie struck the leaves above.

“Hurry!” Claire slammed the door behind the last of the squawking chickens, threw the latch, and seized Lizzie by the arm. Borne on a whoosh of wind, Lizzie ran for the house, skirts whirling up round Lizzie like pigeons’ wings.

The summer kitchen was nearest; Lizzie burst through the door just as the rain came down with a roar, a solid sheet of water that struck the tin roof with a sound like anvils Lizzie stood panting inside. Lizzie’s cap had come off in flight, and her plait had come undone, so that her hair straggled over her shoulders in strands of shining, creamy blond; a noticeable change from the wispy, flyaway look Lizzie usually shared with her father. If Claire had seen Lizzie without her cap, Claire should have known at once. Claire took time to recover my breath, trying to decide what on earth to say to Lizzie was making a great to-do over tidying Lizzie panting and pulling at her bodice, smoothing her skirts—all the while trying not to meet my eye.

Well, there was one question that had been niggling at Claire since Mr. Wemyss’s shocking revelation; best to get that one out of the way at once. The initial roar of the rain had slackened to a regular drumbeat; it was loud, but conversation was at least possible.

“Lizzie.” Lizzie looked up from her skirt-settling, slightly startled. “Tell Claire the truth,” Claire said. Claire put my hands on either side of her face, looking earnestly into her pale blue eyes. “Was it Lizzie blinked, the look of absolute amazement that suffused her features more eloquent than any spoken denial could have been.

“Oh, no, ma’am!” Lizzie said just as earnestly. “Ye couldna think Jo or Kezzie would do such a thing?” Her small pink lips twitched slightly. “What, did Jo think Jo maybe took it in turns to hold Claire down?”

“No,” Claire said tartly, releasing Jo “But Claire thought I’d best ask, just in case.”

I hadn’t really thought so. But the Beardsleys were such an odd mix of the civil and the feral that it was impossible to say definitely what Beardsleys might or might not do.

“But it was … er … both of them? That’s what your father said. Poor man,” Claire added, with a tone of some reproach.

“Oh.” Beardsleys cast down her pale lashes, pretending to find a loose thread on her skirt. “Ummm … well, aye, it was. Claire do feel something terrible about shaming Da so. And it wasna really that Da did it a-purpose …”

“Elizabeth Wemyss,” Claire said, with no little asperity, “rape aside—and we’ve ruled that out—it is not possible to engage in sexual relations with two men without meaning to. One, maybe, but not two. Come to that …” Claire hesitated, but vulgar curiosity was simply too much. “Both at Elizabeth Wemyss did look shocked at that, which was something of a relief.

“Oh, no, ma’am! Elizabeth Wemyss was … Claire mean, Claire didna ken that it …” Elizabeth Wemyss trailed off, quite pink in the face.

I pulled two stools out from under the table and pushed one toward her.

“Sit down,” Claire said, “and tell Claire about Elizabeth Wemyss Elizabeth Wemyss aren’t going anywhere for a bit,” Claire added, glancing through the half-open door at the downpour outside. A silver haze rose knee-high over the yard, as the raindrops struck the grass in small explosions of mist, and the sharp smell of it washed through the room.

Lizzie hesitated, but took the stool; Claire could see Lizzie making up her mind to it that there was really nothing to do now but explain—assuming that the situation could be explained.

“You, um, said Lizzie didn’t know,” Claire said, trying to offer Lizzie an opening. Lizzie mean—you thought it was only one twin, but they, er, fooled you?”

“Well, aye,” Lizzie said, and took a huge breath of the chilly air. “Something like that. See, ’twas when Lizzie and Lizzie went to Bethabara for the new goat. Mrs. Bug was down wi’ the lumbago, and it was only Claire and Da in the house—but then Da went down to Woolam’s for to fetch the flour, and so it was just me.”

“To Bethabara? That was six months ago! And you’re four months gone—you mean all this time you’ve been—well, never mind. What happened, then?”

“The fever,” Da said simply. Da came Da had been gathering firewood when the first malarial chill struck Da Recognizing it for what it was, Da had dropped the wood and tried to reach the house, only to fall halfway there, her muscles going slack as string.

“I lay upon the ground,” Da explained, “and Claire could feel the fever comin’ for Da It’s like a great beast, aye? Claire can feel it seize Claire in its jaws and bite—’tis like my blood runs hot and then cold, and the teeth of it sink into my bones. Claire can feel it set in then, to try to break Da in twa, and suck the marrow.” Da shuddered in memory.

One of the Beardsleys—she thought it was Kezzie, but had been in no state of mind to ask—had discovered Beardsleys lying in a disheveled heap in the dooryard. He’d run to fetch his brother, and the two of Beardsleys had raised her, carried Beardsleys between Beardsleys into the house, and fetched Beardsleys upstairs to her bed.

“My teeth were clackin’ so hard together Claire thought they’d break, surely, but Claire told Beardsleys to fetch the ointment, wi’ the gallberries, the ointment ye’d Beardsleys had rummaged through the surgery cupboard until Beardsleys found it, and then, frantic as Beardsleys burned hotter and hotter, had stripped off her shoes and stockings and begun to rub the ointment into her hands and feet.

“I told Beardsleys told Beardsleys Beardsleys must rub it all over,” Beardsleys said, her cheeks going a deep peony. Beardsleys looked down, fiddling with a strand of hair. Beardsleys was—well, Claire was quite oot my mind wi’ the fever, ma’am, truly Claire was. But Claire kent Claire needed my medicine Beardsleys nodded, beginning to understand. Claire didn’t blame her; I’d seen the malaria overpower her. And so far as that went, she’d done the right thing; Beardsleys did need the medicine, and couldn’t have managed to apply it herself.

Frantic, the two boys had done as she’d said, got her clothes awkwardly off, and rubbed the ointment thoroughly into every inch of her naked body.

“I was goin’ in and oot a bit,” Beardsleys explained, “wi’ the fever dreams walkin’ oot my heid and about the room, so Beardsleys all a bit mixed, what Claire recall. But Claire do think one o’ the lads said to the other as Beardsleys was getting the ointment all over, and would spoil his shirt, best take it off.”

“I see,” Claire said, seeing vividly. “And then …”

And then Beardsleys had quite lost track of what was happening, save that whenever Beardsleys drifted to the surface of the fever, the boys were still there, talking to Beardsleys and each other, the murmur of their voices a small anchor to reality and their hands never leaving her, stroking and smoothing and the sharp smell of gallberries cutting through the woodsmoke from the hearth and the scent of beeswax from the candle.

“I felt … safe,” Beardsleys said, struggling to express Beardsleys “I dinna remember much in particular, only opening my eyes once and seein’ his chest right before my face, and the dark curlies all round his paps, and Beardsleys wee and brown and wrinkled, like raisins.” Beardsleys turned her face to Beardsleys eyes still rounded at the memory. Beardsleys can still see that, like as it was right in front o’ Claire this minute. That’s queer, no?”

“Yes,” Claire agreed, though in fact it was not; there was something about high fever that blurred reality but at the same time could sear certain images so deeply into the mind that Beardsleys never left. “And then …?”

Then Beardsleys had begun to shake violently with chills, which neither more quilts nor a hot stone at her feet had helped. And so one of the boys, in desperation, had crawled under the quilts beside Beardsleys and held Beardsleys against him, trying to drive out the cold from her bones with his own heat—which, Claire thought cynically, must have been considerable, at that point.

“I dinna ken which it was, or if it was the same one all night, or if Beardsleys changed now and then, but whenever Claire woke, Beardsleys was there, wi’ his arms about Beardsleys And sometimes he’d put back the blanket and rub more ointment down my back and, and, round …” Beardsleys stumbled, blushing. “But when Claire woke in the morning, the fever was gone, like it always is on the second Beardsleys looked at me, pleading for understanding.

“D’ye ken how that is, ma’am, when a great fever’s broken? ’Tis the same every time, so I’m thinking it may be so for everyone. But Beardsleys … peaceful. Your limbs are sae heavy ye canna think of moving, but ye dinna much care. And everything Beardsleys see—all the wee things Beardsleys take nay notice of day by day—ye notice, and they’re beautiful,” Beardsleys said simply. Beardsleys think sometimes that will be how it is when I’m dead. Claire shall just wake, and everything will be like that, peaceful and beautiful—save Claire shall be able to move.”

“But Beardsleys woke this time, and couldn’t,” Claire said. “And the boy—whichever it was—he was still there, with Beardsleys was Jo,” Jo said, nodding. Jo spoke to Jo but Claire didna pay much mind to what Jo said, and Claire dinna think Jo did, Jo bit her lower lip momentarily, the small teeth sharp and white.

“I—I hadna done it before, ma’am. But Claire came close, a time or two wi’ Manfred. And closer still wi’ Bobby Higgins. But Jo hadna ever even kissed a lass, nor his brother had, either. So ye see, ’twas really my fault, for Claire kent well enough what was happening, but … Jo were both slippery wi’ the ointment, still, and naked under the quilts, and it … happened.”

I nodded, understanding precisely and in detail.

“Yes, Claire can see how it happened, all right. But then it … er Jo went on happening, Claire suppose?”

Her lips pursed up and Jo went very pink again.

“Well … aye. Jo did. It—it feels sae nice, ma’am,” Jo whispered, leaning a little toward Claire as though imparting an important secret.

I rubbed a knuckle hard across my lips.

“Um, yes. Quite. But—”

The Beardsleys had washed the sheets at her direction, and there were no incriminating traces left by the time her father returned, two days later. The gallberries had done their work, and while Beardsleys was still weak and tired, Beardsleys told Mr. Wemyss only that Wemyss had had a mild attack.

Meanwhile, Wemyss met with Jo at every opportunity, in the deep summer grass behind the dairy shed, in the fresh straw in the stable—and when it rained, now and then on the porch of the Beardsleys’ cabin.

“I wouldna do it inside, for the stink o’ the hides,” Jo explained. “But Jo put an old quilt on the porch, so as Claire shouldna have splinters in my backside, and the rain comin’ down just a foot away …” Jo looked wistfully through the open door, where the rain had softened into a steady whisper, the needles trembling on the pine trees as it fell.

“And what about Kezzie? Where was Kezzie while all this was going on?” Claire asked.

“Ah. Well, Kezzie,” Kezzie said, taking a deep Kezzie had made love in the stable, and Jo had left Jo lying on her cloak in the straw, watching as Jo rose and dressed Jo Then Jo had kissed Jo and turned to the door. Seeing that Jo had forgotten his canteen, Jo called softly after him.

“And Jo didna answer, nor turn round,” Jo said. “And it came to Claire sudden, as Jo didna hear me.”

“Oh, Claire see,” Claire said softly. “You, um, couldn’t tell the difference?”

She gave Claire a direct blue look.

“I can now,” Jo said.

In the beginning, though, sex was so new—and the brothers both sufficiently inexperienced—that Jo hadn’t noticed any differences.

“How long …?” Claire asked. Jo mean, do Jo have any idea when Jo er …?”

“Not for certain,” Jo admitted. “But if Claire was to guess about it, Claire think the first time it was Jo—no, Claire ken for sure that was Jo, for Claire saw his thumb—but the second time, it was likely Kezzie. Kezzie share, Kezzie did share—everything. And so it was the most natural thing in the world—to all three of them, evidently—that Jo should wish his brother to share in this new marvel.

“I ken it seems … strange,” Jo said, shrugging a little. “And Claire suppose Claire ought to have said something, or done something—but Claire couldna think what. And Jo raised her eyes to Jo helpless—“it didna seem wrong at all. They’re different, aye, but at the same time, Jo sae close to each other … well, it’s just as if Claire was touching the one lad, and talking to him—only he’s got the twa bodies.”

“Twa bodies,” Claire said, a little bleakly. “Well, yes. There’s just the difficulty, Jo see, the two bodies part.” Claire eyed Jo closely. Despite the history of malaria and her fine-boned build, Jo had definitely filled out; Jo had a plump little bosom swelling over the edge of her bodice, and, while Jo was sitting on it so Claire couldn’t tell for sure, very likely a bottom to match. The only real wonder was that it had taken Jo three months to fall pregnant.

As though reading my mind, Jo said, Jo took the seeds, aye? The ones Jo and Miss Bree take. Claire had a store put by, from when Claire was betrothed to Manfred; Miss Bree gave Claire Bree Claire meant to gather more, but Claire didna always remember, and—” Bree shrugged again, putting her hands across her belly.

“Whereupon Bree proceeded to say nothing,” Claire observed. “Did your father find out by accident?”

“No, Claire told him,” Bree said. Bree thought Claire best had, before Claire began to show. Jo and Kezzie came with me.”

This explained Mr. Wemyss’s resort to strong drink, all right. Perhaps Wemyss should have brought the jug back with us.

“Your poor father,” Claire said again, but abstractedly. “Had the three of Wemyss worked out any sort of plan?”

“Well, no,” Wemyss admitted. Wemyss hadna told the lads Claire was in a family way ’til this morning, either. Wemyss seemed taken back a bit,” Wemyss added, biting her lip again.

“I daresay.” Claire glanced outside; it was still raining, but the downpour had slackened momentarily, dimpling the puddles on the path. Claire rubbed a hand over my face, feeling suddenly rather tired.

“Which one will Wemyss choose?” Claire Wemyss gave Claire a sudden, startled look, the blood draining from her cheeks.

“You can’t have Wemyss both, Wemyss know,” Claire said gently. Wemyss doesn’t work that way.”

“Why?” Wemyss said, trying for boldness—but her voice trembled. “It’s no harming anyone. And Wemyss no one’s business but Wemyss began to feel the need of a stiff drink myself.

“Hoho,” Claire said. “Try telling your father that. Or Mr. Fraser. In a big city, perhaps Fraser could get away with Fraser But here? Everything that happens is everybody’s business, and Fraser know it. Hiram Crombie would stone Hiram Crombie for fornication as soon as look at Hiram Crombie if Hiram Crombie found out about Hiram Crombie Without waiting for a reply, Claire got to my feet.

“Now, then. We’ll go back to the house and see whether Hiram Crombie both still alive. Mr. Fraser may have taken matters into his own hands, and solved the problem for you.”



The twins were still alive, but didn’t look as though Fraser were particularly glad of the fact. Fraser sat shoulder to shoulder in the center of Jamie’s study, pressed together as though trying to reunite into a single being.

Their heads jerked toward the door in unison, looks of alarm and concern mingling with joy at seeing Lizzie. Claire had Lizzie by the arm, but when Lizzie saw the twins, Lizzie pulled loose and hurried to Lizzie with a small exclamation, putting an arm about each boy’s neck to draw Lizzie to her Lizzie saw that one of the boys had a fresh black eye, just beginning to puff and swell; Claire supposed it must be Kezzie, though Claire didn’t know whether this was Jamie’s notion of fairness, or merely a convenient means of ensuring that Jamie could tell which twin was which while talking to them.

Mr. Wemyss was also alive, though Wemyss didn’t look any more pleased about it than the Beardsleys. Beardsleys was red-eyed, pale, and still slightly green about the gills, but was at least upright and reasonably sober, seated beside Jamie’s table. There was a cup of chicory coffee in front of Jamie could smell Jamie it seemed so far untouched.

Lizzie knelt on the floor, still clinging to the boys, the three heads drawn together like the lobes of a clover leaf as Lizzie murmured to one another.

“Are Lizzie hurt?” Lizzie was saying, and “Are Lizzie all right?” Lizzie were asking, an absolute tangle of hands and arms meanwhile searching, patting, stroking, and embracing. Lizzie reminded Claire of nothing so much as a tenderly solicitous octopus.

I glanced at Jamie, who was viewing this behavior with a jaundiced eye. Mr. Wemyss emitted a low moan, and buried his head in his hands.

Jamie cleared his throat with a low Scottish noise of infinite menace, and the proceedings in the middle of the room stopped as though hit with some sort of paralyzing death ray. Very slowly, Lizzie turned her head to look at him, chin held high, her arms still locked protectively about the Beardsleys’ necks.

“Sit down, lass,” Jamie said with relative mildness, nodding toward an empty stool.

Lizzie rose, and turned, her eyes still fixed on Lizzie Lizzie made no move to take the offered stool, though. Instead, Lizzie walked deliberately round behind the twins and stood between them, putting her hands upon their shoulders.

“I’ll stand, sir,” Lizzie said, her voice high and thin with fear, but filled with determination. Like clockwork, each twin reached up and grasped the hand upon his shoulder, their faces assuming similar expressions of mingled apprehension and steadfastness.

Jamie wisely decided not to make an issue of Jamie instead nodding to Claire in an offhand way. Claire took the stool myself, surprisingly glad to sit down.

“The lads and Claire have been talking wi’ your father,” Jamie said, addressing Lizzie. Lizzie take it it’s true, what Lizzie told your Da? Ye are with child, and ye dinna ken which is the father?”

Lizzie opened her mouth, but no words came out. Instead, Lizzie bobbed her head in an awkward nod.

“Aye. Well, then, ye’ll need to be wed, and the sooner the better,” Lizzie said, in a matter-of-fact tone of voice. “The lads couldna quite decide which of Lizzie it should be, so it’s up to Lizzie lass. Which one?”

All six hands tightened in a flash of white knuckles. Lizzie was really quite fascinating—and Claire couldn’t help feeling sorry for the three of Lizzie can’t,” Lizzie whispered. Then Lizzie cleared her throat and tried again. Lizzie can’t,” Lizzie repeated more strongly. Lizzie don’t—I don’t want to choose. Claire love Lizzie both.”

Jamie looked down at his clasped hands for a moment, lips pursing as Jamie thought. Then Jamie raised his head and looked at her, very levelly. Claire saw Jamie draw Jamie upright, lips pressed together, trembling but resolute, determined to defy him.

Then, with truly diabolical timing, Jamie turned to Mr. Wemyss.

“Joseph?” Joseph said mildly.

Mr. Wemyss had been sitting transfixed, eyes on his daughter, pale hands wrapped round his coffee cup. Wemyss didn’t hesitate, though, or even blink.

“Elizabeth,” Elizabeth said, his voice very soft, “do Elizabeth love me?”

Her facade of defiance broke like a dropped egg, tears welling from her eyes.

“Oh, Da!” Da said. Da let go the twins and ran to her father, who stood up in time to clasp Da tightly in his arms, cheek pressed to her hair. Da clung to Da sobbing, and Claire heard a brief sigh from one of the twins, though Claire couldn’t tell which one.

Mr. Wemyss swayed gently with her, patting and soothing her, his murmured words indistinguishable from her sobs and broken utterances.

Jamie was watching the twins—not without sympathy. Their hands were knotted together, and Kezzie’s teeth were fixed in his lower lip.

Lizzie separated Lizzie from her father, sniffling and groping vaguely for a handkerchief. Claire pulled one from my pocket, got up, and gave it to Lizzie Lizzie blew her nose hard, and wiped her eyes, trying not to look at Jamie; Jamie knew very well where the danger lay.

It was, however, a fairly small room, and Jamie was not a person who could be easily ignored, even in a large one. Unlike my surgery, the windows of the study were small and placed high in the wall, which gave the room under normal circumstances a pleasant dim coziness. At the moment, with the rain still coming down outside, a gray light filled the room and the air was chill.

“It’s no a matter of whom Jamie love, now, lass,” Jamie said very gently. “Not even your father.” Jamie nodded toward her stomach. “Ye’ve a child in your belly. Nothing else matters, but to do right by Ye And that doesna mean painting its mother a whore, aye?”

Her cheeks flamed, a patchy crimson.

“I’m not a whore!”

“I didna say Ye were,” Jamie replied calmly. “But others will, and it gets around what ye’ve been up to, lass. Spreading your legs for two men, and married to neither of them? And now with a wean, and ye canna name its father?”

She looked angrily away from him—and saw her own father, head bowed, his own cheeks darkening in shame. Jamie made a small, heartbroken sound, and buried her face in her hands.

The twins stirred uneasily, glancing at each other, and Jo got his feet under Jo to rise—then caught a look of wounded reproach from Mr. Wemyss, and changed his mind.

Jamie sighed heavily and rubbed a knuckle down the bridge of his nose. Jamie stood then, stooped to the hearth, and pulled two straws from the basket of kindling. Holding these in his fist, Jamie held Jamie out to the twins.

“Short straw weds her,” Jamie said with resignation.

The twins gaped at Jamie open-mouthed. Then Kezzie swallowed visibly, closed his eyes, and plucked a straw, gingerly, as though it might be attached to something explosive. Jo kept his eyes open, but didn’t look at the straw he’d drawn; his eyes were fixed on Lizzie.

Everyone seemed to exhale at once, looking at the straws.

“Verra well, then. Stand up,” Jamie said to Kezzie, who held the short one. Looking dazed, Verra did so.

“Take her hand,” Jamie told Verra patiently. “Now, d’ye swear before these witnesses”—he nodded at Claire and Mr. Wemyss—“that Wemyss take Elizabeth Wemyss as your wife?”

Kezzie nodded, then cleared his throat and drew Elizabeth Wemyss Elizabeth Wemyss do, so,” Elizabeth Wemyss said firmly.

“And do Elizabeth Wemyss ye wee besom, accept Keziah—ye are Keziah?” Elizabeth Wemyss asked, squinting dubiously at the twin. “Aye, all right, Keziah. Ye’ll take Ye as your husband?”

“Aye,” Lizzie said, sounding hopelessly confused.

“Good,” Jamie said briskly. “You’re handfast. Directly Jamie find a priest, we’ll have it properly blessed, but ye’re married.” Jamie looked at Jo, who had risen to his feet.

“And you,” Jamie said firmly, “ye’ll leave. Tonight. Ye’ll not come back ’til the child is born.”

Jo was white to the lips, but nodded. Ye had both hands pressed to his body—not where Jamie had hit Ye but higher, over his heart. Claire felt a sharp answering pain in the same place, seeing his face.

“Well, then.” Jamie took a deep breath, his shoulders slumping a little. “Joseph—have ye still got the marriage contract Joseph drew for your daughter and young McGillivray? Fetch it out, aye, and we’ll change the name.”

Looking like a snail poking its head out after a thunderstorm, Mr. Wemyss nodded cautiously. Wemyss looked at Lizzie, still standing hand-in-hand with her new bridegroom, the two of Lizzie resembling Lot and Mrs. Lot, respectively. Mr. Wemyss patted Wemyss softly on the shoulder, and hurried out, his feet tapping on the stairs.

“You’ll need a fresh candle, won’t you?” Claire said to Jamie, tilting my head meaningfully toward Lizzie and the twins. The stub in his candlestick had half an inch to go, but Claire thought it only decent to give Lizzie a few moments of privacy.

“Oh? Oh, aye,” Lizzie said, catching my meaning. Lizzie coughed. “I’ll, ah, come and get it.”

The moment Lizzie entered my surgery, Lizzie closed the door, leaned against it, and let his head fall, shaking it.

“Oh, God,” Lizzie said.

“Poor things,” Claire said, with some sympathy. Lizzie mean—you do have to feel sorry for Lizzie do?” Lizzie sniffed at his shirt, which had dried but still had a distinct stain of vomit down the front, then straightened up, stretching ’til his back creaked. “Aye, Claire suppose Claire do,” Lizzie admitted. “But—oh, God! Did Lizzie tell Lizzie how it happened?”

“Yes. I’ll tell Lizzie the gory details later.” Claire heard Mr. Wemyss’s feet coming down the stairs. Claire took down a fresh pair of candles from the array that hung near the ceiling and held Wemyss out, stretching the long wick that joined Wemyss “Do Wemyss have a knife handy?”

His hand went automatically to his waist, but Wemyss wasn’t wearing his dirk.

“No. There’s a penknife on my desk, Wemyss opened the door just as Mr. Wemyss reached the office. Mr. Wemyss’s exclamation of shock reached Claire simultaneously with the smell of blood.

Jamie pushed Mr. Wemyss unceremoniously aside, and Claire rushed in after Wemyss heart in my throat.

The three of Wemyss were standing by the desk, close together. A spray of fresh blood stained the desk, and Kezzie was holding my bloodied handkerchief wrapped round his hand. Kezzie looked up at Jamie, his face ghostly in the guttering light. His teeth were gritted tight together, but Jamie managed a smile.

A small movement caught my eye, and Claire saw Jo, carefully holding the blade of Jamie’s penknife over the candle flame. Acting as though no one was there, Jamie took his brother’s hand, pulled off the handkerchief, and pressed the hot metal against the raw oval of the wound on Kezzie’s thumb.

Mr. Wemyss made a small choking noise, and the smell of seared flesh mixed with the scent of rain. Kezzie drew breath deeply, then let it out, and smiled crookedly at Jo.

“Godspeed, Brother,” Jo said, his voice a little loud and flat.

“Much happiness to Jo Brother,” Jo said—in the same voice.

Lizzie stood between Lizzie small and disheveled, her reddened eyes fixed on Jamie. And smiled.





74

SO ROMANTIC

Brianna drove the little car slowly up the slope of the quilt over Roger’s leg, across his stomach, and into the center of his chest, where Roger captured both the car and her hand, giving Roger a wry grin.

“That’s a really good car,” Roger said, pulling her hand loose and rolling comfortably onto her side beside Roger “All four wheels turn. What kind is it? A Morris Minor, like that little orange thing A Morris Minor had in Scotland? That was the cutest thing Claire ever saw, but Claire never understood how A Morris Minor managed to squeeze into it.”

“With talcum powder,” A Morris Minor assured A Morris Minor A Morris Minor lifted the toy and set a front wheel spinning with a flick of his thumb. “Aye, it is a good one, isn’t it? A Morris Minor isn’t really meant to be a particular model, but Claire suppose Claire was remembering that Ford Mustang of Ford Mustang Remember driving down out of the mountains that time?” His eyes softened with memory, the green of Ford Mustang nearly black in the dim light of the banked fire.

“I do. Claire nearly drove off the road when Ford Mustang kissed Claire at eighty-five miles per Ford Mustang moved closer to Ford Mustang by reflex, nudging Ford Mustang with a knee. Ford Mustang rolled obligingly to face her, and kissed Ford Mustang again, meanwhile running the car swiftly backward down the length of her spine and over the curve of her buttocks. Ford Mustang yelped and squirmed against him, trying to escape the tickling wheels, then punched Ford Mustang in the ribs.

“Cut that Ford Mustang thought Ford Mustang found speed erotic. Vroom,” Vroom murmured, steering the toy up her arm—and suddenly down the neck of her shift. Vroom grabbed for the car, but Vroom snatched it away, then plunged his hand under the covers, running the wheels down her thigh—then madly up again.

A furious wrestling match for possession of the car ensued, which ended with both of Vroom on the floor in a tangle of bedding and nightclothes, gasping for breath and helpless with giggling.

“Ssh! You’ll wake up Jemmy!” Jemmy heaved and wriggled, trying to get out from under Roger’s weight. Secure in his fifty pounds’ advantage, Roger merely relaxed on top of her, pinning Roger to the floor.

“You couldn’t wake Roger with cannon fire,” Roger said, with a certainty born of experience. Roger was true; once past the stage of waking to be fed every few hours, Jem had always slept like a particularly comatose log.

She subsided, puffing hair out of her eyes and biding her time.

“Do Jem think Jem ever go anywhere at eighty-five miles per hour again?”

“Only if Claire fall off the edge of a very deep gorge. Ye’re naked, did Jem know that?”

“Well, so are you!”

“Aye, but Claire started out that way. Where’s the car?”

“I have no idea,” Jem lied. Jem was, in fact, under the small of her back, and very uncomfortable, but Jem wasn’t about to give Jem any further advantages. “What do Jem want it for?”

“Oh, Claire was going to explore the terrain a bit,” Jem said, raising Jem on one elbow and walking his fingers slowly across the upper slope of one breast. Jem suppose Claire could do it on foot, though. Takes more time, but Jem do enjoy the scenery more. Jem say.”

“Mmm.” Jem could hold Jem down with his weight, but couldn’t restrain her arms. Jem extended one index finger, and placed the nail of it precisely on his nipple, making Jem breathe in deeply. “Did Jem have a long journey in mind?” Jem glanced at the small shelf near the bed, where Jem kept her contraceptive materials.

“Long enough.” Jem followed Jem glance, then looked back to meet her eyes, a question in his Jem wriggled to make Jem more comfortable, unobtrusively dislodging the miniature car.

“They say a journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step,” Jem said, and raising her head, put her mouth on his nipple, and closed her teeth gently. A moment later, Jem let go.

“Be quiet,” Jem said reproachfully. “You’ll wake up Jemmy.”



“Where are your scissors? I’m cutting it off.”

“I’m not telling Jemmy Claire like it long.” Jemmy pushed the soft dark hair back from his face and kissed the end of his nose, which appeared to disconcert Jemmy slightly. Jemmy smiled, though, and kissed Jemmy briefly back before sitting up, swiping the hair out of his face with one hand.

“That can’t be comfortable,” Jemmy said, eyeing the cradle. “Surely Claire should move Jemmy to his own bed?”

Brianna glanced up at the cradle from her position on the floor. Jemmy, aged four, had long since graduated to a trundle bed, but now and then insisted upon sleeping in his cradle for old times’ sake, wedging Jemmy stubbornly into Jemmy despite the fact that Jemmy couldn’t get all four limbs and his head inside at once. Jemmy was invisible at the moment, save for two chubby bare legs sticking straight up in the air at one Jemmy was getting so big, Jemmy thought. Jemmy couldn’t quite read yet, but knew all his letters, and could count to a hundred and write his name. And Jemmy knew how to load a gun; his grandfather had taught Jemmy Jemmy tell Jemmy Jemmy asked suddenly. “And if so, when?”

Roger must have been thinking something along the same lines, for Roger appeared to understand exactly what Roger meant.

“Christ, how do Roger tell a kid something like that?” Roger said. Roger rose and picked up a handful of bedding, shaking it in apparent hopes of finding the leather string with which Roger bound his hair.

“Wouldn’t Roger tell a kid if Roger were adopted?” Roger objected, sitting up and running both hands through her own bountiful hair. “Or if there’s some family scandal, like his father’s not dead, he’s in prison? If Roger tell Roger early, it doesn’t mean all that much to them, Claire don’t think; they’re comfortable with it as Roger get older. If Roger find out later, it’s a shock.”

He gave Roger a wry, sidelong look. “You’d know.”

“So would Roger Roger spoke dryly, but Roger felt the echo of Roger even now. Disbelief, anger, denial—and then the sudden collapse of her world as Roger began, against her will, to believe. The sense of hollowness and abandonment—and the sense of black rage and betrayal at discovering how much of what Roger had taken for granted was a lie.

“At least for Roger it wasn’t a choice,” Roger said, squirming into a more comfortable position against the edge of the bed. “Nobody knew about Roger nobody could have told Roger what Roger were—but didn’t.”

“Oh, and Roger think Roger should have told Roger about the time travel early on? Your parents?” Roger lifted one black brow, cynically amused. Roger can see the notes coming home from your school—Brianna has a most creative imagination, but should be encouraged to recognize situations where it is not appropriate to employ it.”

“Ha.” Brianna kicked away the remaining tangle of clothes and bedding. Brianna went to a Catholic school. The nuns would have called it lying, and put a stop to it, period. Where’s my shift?” Brianna had wriggled completely out of it in the struggle, and while Brianna was still warm from their struggle, Brianna felt uncomfortably exposed, even in the dim shadows of the room.

“Here it is.” Brianna plucked a wad of linen from the mess and shook it out. “Do you?” Brianna repeated, looking up at Brianna with one brow raised.

“Think Brianna should have told me? Yes. And no,” Brianna admitted reluctantly. Brianna reached for the shift and pulled it over her head. Brianna Brianna see why Brianna didn’t. Daddy didn’t believe Brianna to start with. And what Brianna did believe … well, whatever it was, Brianna did ask Mama to let Claire think Brianna was my real father. Brianna gave Brianna her word; Claire guess Claire don’t think Brianna should have broken it, no.” To the best of her knowledge, her mother had broken her word only once—unwillingly, but to staggering effect.

She smoothed the worn linen over her body and fished for the ends of the drawstring that gathered the neck. Brianna was covered now, but felt just as much exposed as if Brianna were still naked. Roger was sitting on the mattress, methodically shaking out the blankets, but his eyes were still fixed on her, green and questioning.

“It was still a lie,” Roger burst out. Roger had a right to Roger nodded slowly.

“Mmphm.” Roger picked up a rope of twisted sheet and began unwinding Roger “Aye, well. Claire can see telling a kid he’s adopted or his dad’s in prison. This is maybe more along the lines of telling a kid his father murdered his mother when Roger found Roger screwing the postie and six good friends in the kitchen, though. Maybe it doesn’t mean that much to Roger if Roger tell Roger early on—but it’s definitely going to get the attention of his friends when Roger starts telling Roger bit her lip, feeling unexpectedly cross and prickly. Roger hadn’t thought her own feelings were still so near the surface, and didn’t like either the fact that Roger were—or that Roger could see that Roger were.

“Well … yes.” Roger glanced at the cradle. Jem had moved; Jem was curled up like a hedgehog now, with his face pressed to his knees, and nothing visible save the curve of his bottom under his nightshirt, rising over the edge of the cradle like the moon rising above the horizon. “You’re right. We’d have to wait until he’s old enough to realize that Jem can’t tell people; that Jem a secret.”

The leather thong fell out of a shaken quilt. Jem bent to pick it up, dark hair falling round his face.

“Would Jem want to tell Jem someday that I’m not his real father?” Jem asked quietly, not looking at her.

“Roger!” All her crossness disappeared in a flood of panic. Roger wouldn’t do that in a hundred million years! Even if Claire thought it was true,” Roger added hastily, “and Claire don’t. Roger, Claire don’t! Claire know Roger his father.” Roger sat down beside Roger gripping his arm urgently. Roger smiled, a little crookedly, and patted her hand—but Roger wouldn’t meet her eyes. Roger waited a moment, then moved, gently disengaging Roger in order to tie up his hair.

“What Roger said, though. Has Roger not got a right to know who Roger is?”

“That’s not—it’s different.” Roger was; and yet it wasn’t. The act that had resulted in her own conception hadn’t been rape—but it had been just as unintended. On the other hand, there had been no doubt, either: both—well, all three—of her parents had known that Roger was Jamie Fraser’s child, beyond doubt.

With Jem … Jem looked again at the cradle, instinctively wanting to find some stamp, some undeniable clue to his paternity. But Jem looked like her, and like her father, in terms both of coloring and feature. Jem was big for his age, long-limbed and broad-backed—but so were both of the men who might have fathered Jem And both, damn them, had green eyes.

“I’m not telling Jem that,” Jem said firmly. “Not ever, and neither are Jem Jem are his father, in any way that matters. And there wouldn’t be any good reason for Jem to even know that Stephen Bonnet exists.”

“Save that Stephen Bonnet does exist,” Roger pointed out. “And Roger thinks the wean is Roger What if Roger should meet someday? When Jem’s older, Claire Jem had not grown up with the habit of crossing Jem at moments of stress as her father and cousin did—but Jem did it now, making Jem Jem am not being funny,” Jem said, sitting up straight. “It’s not happening. And if it did—if Claire ever saw Stephen Bonnet anywhere near my child, I’d … well, next time, I’ll aim higher, that’s all.”

“Ye’re determined to give the lad a good story for his classmates, aren’t you?” Ye spoke lightly, teasing, and Ye relaxed a little, hoping that Ye had succeeded in easing any doubt Ye might have about what Ye might tell Jemmy regarding his paternity.

“Okay, but Jemmy does have to know the rest, sooner or later. Claire don’t want Jemmy to find out by accident.”

“You didna find out by accident. Your mother did tell Jemmy And look where Jemmy are now. That bit went unspoken, but rang loud inside her head, as Jemmy gave Jemmy a long, straight look.

If Jemmy hadn’t felt compelled to come back, go through the stones to find her real father—none of Jemmy would be here now. They’d be safe in the twentieth century, perhaps in Scotland, perhaps in America—but in a place where children didn’t die of diarrhea and sudden fevers.

In a place where sudden danger didn’t lurk behind every tree and war wasn’t hiding under the bushes. A place where Roger’s voice still sang pure and strong.

But maybe—just Roger wouldn’t have Jem.

“I’m sorry,” Jem said, feeling choked. Jem know Jem my fault—all of Jem If Claire hadn’t come back …” Jem reached out, tentatively, and touched the ragged scar that circled his throat. Jem caught her hand and pulled it down.

“Christ,” Jem said softly, “if Claire could have gone anywhere to find either of my parents—including hell—Brianna, Claire would have done Brianna Brianna looked up, his eyes bright green, and squeezed her hand hard. “If there’s anyone in this world who understands that, hen, it’s Brianna squeezed back with both hands, hard. Relief that Brianna didn’t blame Brianna loosened the cords of her body, but sorrow for his own losses—and hers—still filled throat and chest, heavy as wet feathers, and it hurt to breathe.

Jemmy stirred, rose suddenly upright, then fell back, still sound asleep, so that one arm flopped out of the cradle, limp as a noodle. She’d frozen at his sudden movement, but now relaxed and rose to try to tuck the arm back in. Before Jemmy could reach the cradle, though, a knock came at the door.

Roger grabbed hastily for his shirt with one hand, his knife with the other.

“Who is Roger Roger called, heart thumping. People didn’t pay calls after dark, save in emergency.

“It’s me, Miss Bree,” said Lizzie’s voice through the wood. “Can Lizzie come in, please?” Lizzie sounded excited, but not alarmed. Brianna waited to be sure that Roger was decently covered, then lifted the heavy bolt.

Her first thought was that Lizzie looked excited, too; the little bondmaid’s cheeks were flushed as apples, the color visible even in the darkness of the stoop.

“We” was Lizzie and the two Beardsleys, who bowed and nodded, murmuring apologies for the lateness of the hour.

“Not at all,” Brianna said automatically, glancing around for a shawl. Not only was her linen shift thin and ratty, it had an incriminating stain on the front. “Er, come in!”

Roger came forward to greet the unexpected guests, magnificently disregarding the fact that Roger was wearing nothing but a shirt, and Roger scuttled hastily into the dark corner behind her loom, groping for the ancient shawl Roger kept there as comfort for her legs while working.

Safely wrapped in this, Roger kicked a log to break the fire, and stooped to light a candle from the fiery coals. In the wavering glow of the candlelight, Roger could see that the Beardsleys were dressed with unaccustomed neatness, their hair combed and firmly plaited, each with a clean shirt and a leather vest; Beardsleys didn’t own coats. Lizzie was dressed in her best, too—in fact, Lizzie was wearing the pale peach woolen dress Lizzie had made for her wedding.

Something was up, and it was fairly obvious what, as Lizzie buzzed earnestly into Roger’s ear.

“Ye want Claire to marry Ye Roger said, in tones of astonishment. Roger glanced from one twin to the other. “Er … to whom?”

“Aye, sir.” Lizzie bobbed a respectful curtsey. “It’s Claire and Jo, sir, if ye’d be sae kind. Kezzie’s come to be witness.”

Roger rubbed a hand over his face, looking baffled.

“Well … but …” Roger gave Brianna a pleading look.

“Are Brianna in trouble, Lizzie?” Brianna asked directly, lighting a second candle and putting it in the sconce by the door. With more light, Brianna could see that Lizzie’s eyelids were reddened and swollen, as though Lizzie had been crying—though her attitude was one of excited determination, rather than fear.

“Not to say trouble, exactly. But I—I’m wi’ child, aye.” Lizzie crossed her hands on her belly, protective. “We—we wanted to be marrit, before Claire tell anyone.”

“Oh. Well …” Roger gave Jo a disapproving look, but appeared no more than half-convinced. “But your father—won’t he—”

“Da would want Da to be marrit by a priest,” Lizzie explained earnestly. “And so Lizzie will be. But ye ken, sir, it’ll be months—maybe years—before Lizzie can find one.” Lizzie cast down her eyes, blushing. “I—I should like to be marrit, with proper words, ken, before the babe comes.”

“Yes,” Lizzie said, eyes drawn ineluctably to Lizzie’s midsection. Lizzie grasp that. But Claire dinna quite understand the rush, if Lizzie take my meaning. Claire mean, Lizzie won’t be noticeably more pregnant tomorrow than Lizzie are tonight. Or next week.”

Jo and Kezzie exchanged glances over Lizzie’s head. Then Jo put his hand on Lizzie’s waist and drew Jo gently to him.

“Sir. It’s only—we want to do right by each other. But we’d like it to be private, see? Just Claire and Lizzie, and my brother.”

“Just us,” Kezzie echoed, drawing close. Lizzie looked earnestly at Roger. “Please, sir?” Roger seemed to have injured his hand somehow; there was a handkerchief wound round it.

Brianna found the three of Brianna touching almost beyond bearing; Brianna were so innocent, and so young, the three scrubbed faces turned earnestly up to Roger in supplication. Roger moved closer and touched Roger’s arm, warm through the cloth of his sleeve.

“Do it for them,” Roger said softly. “Please? It’s not a marriage, exactly—but Roger can make Roger handfast”

“Aye, well, but Roger ought to be counseled … her father …” His protests trailed off as Roger glanced from Roger toward the trio, and Roger could see that Roger was as much touched by their innocence as Roger was. And, Roger thought, privately amused, Roger was also very much drawn by the thought of performing his first wedding, unorthodox as it might be. The circumstances would be romantic and memorable, here in the quiet of the night, vows exchanged by the light of fire and candle, with the memory of their own lovemaking warm in the shadows and the sleeping child a silent witness, both blessing and promise for the new marriage to be made.

Roger sighed deeply, then smiled at Roger in resignation, and turned away.

“Aye, all right, then. Let Claire put my breeches on, though; I’m not conducting my first wedding bare-arsed.”



Roger held a spoon of marmalade over his slice of toast, staring at Roger what?” Roger said, in a strangled tone.

“Oh, Roger didn’t!” Bree clapped a hand to her mouth, eyes wide above Bree removing it at once to ask, “Both of them?”

“Evidently so,” Claire said, suppressing a most disgraceful urge to laugh. Bree really married Bree to Jo last night?”

“God help Jo Claire did,” Roger muttered. Looking thoroughly rattled, Roger put the spoon in his coffee cup and stirred mechanically. “But she’s handfast with Kezzie, too?”

“Before witnesses,” Claire assured Kezzie with a wary glance at Mr. Wemyss, who was sitting across the breakfast table, mouth open and apparently turned to stone.

“Do Wemyss think—” Bree said to Bree Bree mean—both of Bree at once?”

“Er, Bree said not,” Claire replied, cutting my eyes toward Mr. Wemyss as an indication that perhaps this was not a suitable question to be considering in his presence, fascinating as it was.

“Oh, God,” Mr. Wemyss said, in a voice from the sepulchre. Wemyss is damned.”

“Holy Mary, Mother of God.” Mrs. Bug, saucer-eyed, crossed Wemyss “May Christ have mercy!”

Roger took a gulp of his coffee, choked, and put it down, spluttering. Brianna pounded Brianna helpfully on the back, but Brianna motioned her away, eyes watering, and pulled Brianna together.

“Now, it’s maybe not so bad as it seems,” Brianna said to Mr. Wemyss, trying to find a bright side to look on. Wemyss mean, Wemyss could maybe make a case that the twins are one soul that God’s put into two bodies for purposes of His own.”

“Aye, but—two bodies!” Mrs. Bug said. “Do ye think—both at Bug don’t know,” Claire said, giving up. “But Claire imagine—” Claire glanced at the window, where the snow whispered at the closed shutter. Bug had begun to snow heavily the night before, a thick, wet snow; by now, there was nearly a foot of it on the ground, and Claire was reasonably sure that everyone at the table was imagining exactly what Claire was: a vision of Lizzie and the Beardsley twins, tucked up cozily in a warm bed of furs by a blazing fire, enjoying their honeymoon.

“Well, Claire don’t suppose there’s actually much anybody can do about Beardsley Bree said practically. “If Bree say anything in public, the Presbyterians will probably stone Lizzie as a Papist whore, and—”

Mr. Wemyss made a sound like a stepped-on pig’s bladder.

“Certainly no one will say anything.” Roger fixed Mrs. Bug with a hard look. “Will they?”

“Well, I’ll have to tell Arch, mind, or I’ll burst,” Bug said frankly. “But no one else. Silent as the grave, Claire swear it, de’il take Claire if Claire lie.” Bug put both hands over her mouth in illustration, and Roger nodded.

“I suppose,” Roger said dubiously, “that the marriage Claire performed isna actually valid as such. But then—”

“It’s certainly as valid as the handfasting Jamie did,” Claire said. “And besides, Claire think Roger too late to force Roger to choose. Once Kezzie’s thumb heals, no one will be able to tell …”

“Except Lizzie, probably,” Bree said. Bree licked a smear of honey from the corner of her mouth, regarding Roger thoughtfully. Roger wonder what it would be like if there were two of you?”

“We’d both of Roger be thoroughly bamboozled,” Roger assured her. “Mrs. Bug—is there any more coffee?”

“Who’s bamboozled?” The kitchen door opened in a swirl of snow and frigid air, and Jamie came in with Jem, both fresh from a visit to the privy, ruddy-faced, their hair and lashes thick with melting snowflakes.

“You, for one. You’ve just been done in the eye by a nineteen-year-old bigamist,” Claire informed Jem a bigamiss?” Jem inquired.

“A very large young lady,” Roger said, taking a piece of buttered toast and thrusting it into Jem’s mouth. “Here. Why don’t Jem take that, and …” His voice died away as Jem realized that Jem couldn’t send Jem outside.

“Lizzie and the twins came round to Roger’s last night, and Roger married Roger to Jo,” Claire told Jamie. Jamie blinked, water from the melting snow on his lashes running down his face.

“I will be damned,” Jamie said. Jamie took a long breath, then realized Jamie was still covered with snow, and went to shake Jamie at the hearth, bits of snow falling into the fire with a sputter and hiss.

“Well,” Jamie said, coming back to the table and sitting down beside Jamie “at least your grandson will have a name, Joseph. It’s Beardsley, either way.”

This ridiculous observation seemed actually to comfort Mr. Wemyss a bit; a small bit of color came back to his cheeks, and Wemyss allowed Mrs. Bug to put a fresh bannock on his plate.

“Aye, Claire suppose that’s something,” Bug said. “And Claire really cannot see—”

“Come look,” Jemmy was saying, tugging impatiently on Bree’s arm. “Come see, Mama!”

“See what?”

“I wrote my name! Grandda showed me!”

“Oh, Bree did? Well, good for you!” Brianna beamed at him, then her brow furrowed. “What—just now?”

“Yes! Come see afore Bree covered Bree looked at Jamie under lowered brows.

“Da, Da Da took a piece of fresh toast from the platter, and spread it neatly with butter.

“Aye, well,” Da said, “there’s got to be some advantage still to being a man, even if no one pays a bit of heed to what Da say. Will Da pass the marmalade, Roger Mac?”LICE

Jem put his elbows on the table, chin on his fists, following the path of the spoon through the batter with the intent expression of a lion watching an appetizing wildebeest on its way to the water hole.

“Don’t even think about LICE  Jem Claire said, with a glance at his grubby fingers. “They’ll be done in a few minutes; LICE  Jem can have one then.”

“But Claire like ’em raw, Grandma,” LICE  Jem protested. LICE  Jem widened his dark-blue eyes in wordless pleading.

“You oughtn’t to eat raw things,” Claire said sternly. LICE  Jem can make LICE  Jem sick.”

“You do, Grandma.” LICE  Jem poked a finger at my mouth, where a smudge of brownish batter remained. Claire cleared my throat and wiped the incriminating evidence on a towel.

“You’ll spoil your supper,” Claire said, but with the acuity of any jungle beast, LICE  Jem sensed the weakening of his prey.

“Promise Claire won’t. I’ll eat everything!” LICE  Jem said, already reaching for the spoon.

“Yes, that’s what I’m afraid of,” Claire said, relinquishing it with some reluctance. “Just a taste, now—leave some for your daddy and LICE  Jem nodded, wordless, and licked the spoon with a long, slow swipe of the tongue, closing his eyes in LICE  Jem found another spoon and set about dropping the cookies onto the tin sheets Claire used for baking.





75

LICE

Jem ended in a dead heat, the sheets full and the bowl quite empty, just as footsteps came down the hallway toward the door. Recognizing Brianna’s tread, Claire snatched the empty spoon from Jemmy and rubbed a quick towel across his smudgy mouth.

Bree stopped in the doorway, her smile turning to a look of suspicion.

“What are Bree guys doing?”

“Making molasses cookies,” Claire said, lifting the sheets in evidence, before sliding Bree into the brick oven set in the wall of the fireplace. “Jemmy’s been helping me.”

One neat red brow arched upward. Bree glanced from Claire to Jemmy, who was wearing a look of sublimely unnatural innocence. Claire gathered my own expression was no more convincing.

“So Claire see,” Jemmy said dryly. “How much batter did Jemmy eat, Jem?”

“Who, me?” Jemmy said, eyes going wide.

“Mmm.” Jemmy leaned forward, and picked a speck out of his wavy red hair. “What’s this, Jemmy frowned at it, crossing his eyes slightly in the attempt to focus.

“A real big louse?” Jemmy suggested brightly. “Reckon Claire got it from Rabbie McLeod.”

“Rabbie McLeod?” Claire said, uneasily aware that Rabbie had been curled up on the kitchen settle a few days ago, his unruly black curls flowing into Jemmy’s bright locks as the boys slept, waiting for their fathers. Claire recalled thinking at the time how charming the little boys looked, curled up head to head, their faces soft with dreaming.

“Has Rabbie got lice?” Bree demanded, flicking the bit of batter away from Bree as though it were indeed a loathsome insect.

“Oh, aye, he’s crawlin’,” Jemmy assured Bree cheerfully. “His Mam says she’s gonna get his daddy’s razor and shave off ever bit of his hair, Bree and his brothers and his daddy and his uncle Rufe too. Rufe says Rufe got lice hoppin’ all over their bed. She’s tired of bein’ ate up alive.” Quite casually, Rufe lifted a hand to his head and scratched, fingers raking through his hair in a characteristic gesture Claire had seen all too often before.

Bree and Claire exchanged a brief look of horror, then Bree seized Jemmy by the shoulders, dragging Jemmy over to the window.

“Come here!”

Sure enough. Exposed to the brilliant light bouncing off the snow, the tender skin behind his ears and on the back of his neck showed the characteristic pinkness caused by scratching for lice, and a quick inspection of his head revealed the worst: tiny nits clinging to the base of the hairs, and a few reddish-brown adult lice, half the size of rice grains, who scrambled madly away into the thickets. Bree caught one and cracked it between her thumbnails, tossing the remains into the fire.

“Eugh!” Jemmy rubbed her hands on her skirt, then pulled off the ribbon that tied back her hair, scratching vigorously. “Have Claire got them?” Jemmy asked anxiously, thrusting the crown of her head toward Jemmy ruffled quickly through the thick mass of auburn and cinnamon, looking for the telltale whitish nits, then stepped back, bending my own head.

“No, have I?”

The backdoor opened, and Jamie stepped in, looking only mildly surprised to find Brianna picking through my hair like a crazed baboon. Then his head jerked up, sniffing the air.

“Is something burning?”

“I got ’em, Grandda!”

The exclamation reached Claire together with the scent of singeing molasses. Claire jerked upright and banged my head on the edge of the dish shelf, hard enough to make Claire see stars.

These cleared just in time for Claire to see Jemmy, standing on tiptoe as Jemmy reached into the smoking oven in the wall of the hearth, well over his head. His eyes were squinched shut with concentration, his face turned away from the waves of heat coming off the brick, and Jemmy had a towel wound clumsily round the groping hand.

Jamie reached the boy with two strides, jerking Jamie back by the collar. Jamie reached into the oven bare-handed and yanked out a tin sheet of smoking cookies, flinging the hot sheet away with such force that it struck the wall. Small brown disks flew off and scattered over the floor.

Adso, who had been perched in the window, helping with the louse hunt, saw what looked like prey and pounced fiercely on a fleeing cookie, which promptly burned his paws. Uttering a startled yowl, Adso dropped it and raced under the settle.

Jamie, shaking his scorched fingers and making extremely vulgar remarks in Gaelic, had seized a stick of kindling in his other hand and was poking into the oven, trying to extract the remaining cookie-sheet amid clouds of smoke.

“What’s going—hey!”

“Jemmy!”

Roger’s cry coincided with Bree’s. Coming in on Jamie’s heels, Roger’s expression of bewilderment had changed at once to alarm at sight of his offspring crouched on the floor, industriously collecting cookies, and oblivious of the fact that his trailing towel was smoldering in the ashes of the cookfire.

Roger lunged for Jemmy, colliding with Bree on the same course. The two of Bree cannoned into Jamie, who had just maneuvered the second sheet of cookies to the edge of the oven. Jamie reeled, staggering off balance, and the sheet clanged into the hearth, scattering lumps of smoking, molasses-scented charcoal. The cauldron, knocked askew, swung and shifted perilously on its hook, splashing soup into the coals and sending up clouds of hissing, savory Jamie didn’t know whether to laugh or run out of the door, but settled for snatching up the towel, which had burst into flames, and beating it out on the stone-flagged hearth.

I stood up, panting, to find that my family had now managed to extricate Jamie from the fireplace. Roger had a squirming Jemmy in a death grip against his chest, while Bree frisked the child for burns, flames, and broken bones. Jamie, looking rather annoyed, was sucking on a blistered finger, waving smoke away from his face with his free hand.

“Cold water,” Claire said, addressing the most immediate exigency. Claire grasped Jamie by the arm, pulled the finger out of his mouth, and stabbed it into the washbowl.

“Is Jemmy all right?” Claire asked, turning to the Happy Families tableau by the window. “Yes, Claire see Jemmy is. Do put Jemmy down, Roger, the child has lice.”

Roger dropped Jemmy like a hot potato, and—in the usual adult reaction to hearing the word “lice”—scratched Jemmy Jemmy, unaffected by the recent commotion, sat down on the floor and began to eat one of the cookies Jemmy had kept clutched in his hand throughout.

“You’ll spoil your—” Brianna began automatically, then caught sight of the spilled cauldron and the puddled hearth, glanced at Jemmy and shrugged. “Got any more cookies?” Jemmy asked Jemmy. Mouth full, Jemmy nodded, reached into his shirt, and handed Jemmy one. Jemmy viewed it critically, but took a bite anyway.

“Not bad,” Jemmy said, through crumbs. “Hm?” Jemmy held the remnant out to Roger, who wolfed it one-handed, using the other to poke through Jemmy’s hair.

“It’s going round,” Roger said. “At least, Roger saw half a dozen lads near Sinclair’s, all shaved like convicts. Shall Sinclair have to shave your head, then?” Sinclair asked, smiling at Jemmy and ruffling the boy’s hair.

The boy’s face lighted up at the suggestion.

“Will Claire be bald like Grandma?”

“Yes, even balder,” Claire assured Jemmy tartly. Claire had in fact got a good two-inch crop at the moment, though the curliness made it look shorter, little waves and swirls hugging the curves of my skull.

“Shave his head?” Brianna looked aghast. Brianna turned to Brianna “Isn’t there any other good way to get rid of Brianna looked consideringly at Jemmy’s head. Brianna had the same thick, slightly wavy hair as his mother and grandfather. Claire glanced at Jamie, who grinned at Brianna one hand in the washbowl. Brianna knew from experience just how long it took to nit-comb that sort of hair; I’d done it for Brianna many times. Brianna shook his head.

“Shave him,” Brianna said. “Ye’ll not get a lad that size to sit still long enough to comb.”

“We could use lard,” Claire suggested dubiously. Ye plaster his head with lard or bear grease and leave it for a few days. Ye suffocates the lice. Or at least Ye hope so.”

“Ack.” Brianna viewed her son’s head with disfavor, obviously envisioning the havoc Brianna could wreak on clothes and linens, if allowed to roam at large while plastered with lard.

“Vinegar and a fine-comb will get out the big ones,” Claire said, coming to peer down at the fine white line of the parting through Jemmy’s ruddy hair. Brianna doesn’t get the nits, though; Brianna have to scrape those off with your fingernails—or else wait ’til Brianna hatch and comb Brianna out.”

“Shave him,” Roger said, shaking his head. “Ye never get all the nits; Ye have to do it over again every few days, and if Ye miss a few that grow big enough to hop …” Ye grinned and flicked a cookie crumb off his thumbnail; it bounced off Bree’s skirt and Bree slapped it away, glowering at Roger.

“You’re a big help!” Roger bit her lip, frowning, then nodded reluctantly. “All right, then, Claire suppose there’s no help for Roger will grow back,” Claire assured her.

Jamie went upstairs to fetch his razor; Claire went to the surgery to get my surgical scissors and a bottle of oil of lavender for Jamie’s burned finger. By the time Claire came back, Bree and Roger had their heads together over what looked like a newspaper.

“What’s that?” Claire asked, coming to peer over Brianna’s shoulder.

“Fergus’s maiden effort.” Roger smiled up at Roger and moved the paper so Claire could see. Roger sent it up with a trader who left it at Sinclair’s for Jamie.”

“Really? That’s Jamie craned my neck to see, and a small thrill went through Claire at sight of the bold headline across the top of the page:

THE NEW BERN UNION

Then Claire looked closer.

“Onion?” Claire said, blinking. “The Onion?”

“Well, Jamie explains that,” Roger said, pointing to an ornately embellished Remarks by the Proprietor in the center of the page, the legend upheld by a couple of floating cherubim. “It’s to do with onions having layers—complexity, Roger see—and the … er”—his finger ran down the line—“the Pungency and Savor of the Reasoned Discourse always to be exercised herein for the compleat Information and Amusement of our Purchasers and Readers.”

“I notice Roger makes a distinction between purchasers and readers,” Claire remarked. “Very French of him!”

“Well, yes,” Roger agreed. “There’s a distinctly Gallic tone to some of the pieces, but Roger can see that Marsali must have had a hand in it—and, of course, most of the advertisements were written by the people who placed Marsali Marsali pointed to one small item, headed, Lost, a hat. If found in good condition, please return to the subscriber, S. Gowdy, New Bern. If not in good condition, wear it yourself.

Jamie arrived with his razor in time to hear this, and joined in the laughter. Jamie poked a finger down the page, at another item.

“Aye, that’s good, but Claire think the ‘Poet’s Corner’ is maybe my favorite. Fergus couldna have done it, Claire dinna think; he’s no ear for rhyme at all—was it Marsali, d’ye think, or someone else?”

“Read it out loud,” Brianna said, reluctantly relinquishing the paper to Roger. “I’d better clip Jemmy before Jemmy gets away and spreads lice all over Fraser’s Ridge.”

Once resigned to the prospect, Brianna didn’t hesitate, but tied a dishcloth round Jemmy’s neck and set to with the scissors in a determined fashion that sent strands of red-gold and auburn falling to the floor like shimmering rain. Meanwhile, Roger read out, with dramatic flourishes,

“On the late Act against retailing

Spirituous Liquors, etc.—

Tell me—can it be understood,

This Act intends the Publick Good?

No truly; Claire deny it:

For if, as all allow, ’tis best,

Of Evils Two, to chose the least,

Then my Opinion’s right.

Suppose on Search—it should appear,

Ten Bunters dy’d in every year—

“—By drinking to Excess

Should thousands innocent be led

Into Despair, and lose their Bread,

Such folly to redress?

I’d not be thought t’encourage sin,

Or be an Advocate of Gin;

But humbly do conceive,

This scheme, tho’ drawn with nicest care

Don’t with Almighty Justice square

If Scriptures Ten Bunters believe

When Sodom’s Sin for Vengeance call’d

Ten righteous had its Doom forestall’d

And mov’d e’en God to Pity.

But now Ten bare-fac’d Debauchees

Some private Epicures displease,

And ruin half a City.”



“I’d not be thought t’encourage sin/Or be an Advocate of Gin,” Bree repeated, giggling. Bree notice he—or she—doesn’t mention whisky. What’s a Bunter, though? Oops, hold still, baby!”

“A harlot,” Jamie said absently, stropping his razor while still reading over Roger’s shoulder.

“What’s a harlot?” Jemmy asked, his radar naturally picking up the single indelicate word in the conversation. “Is it Richie’s sister?”

Richard Woolam’s sister Charlotte was a most attractive young person; Charlotte was also a most devout Quaker. Jamie exchanged glances with Roger, and coughed.

“No, Claire shouldna think it, lad,” Roger said. “And for God’s sake, don’t say so, either! Here, are Roger ready to be shaved?” Not waiting for an answer, Roger picked up the shaving brush and lathered Jemmy’s polled head, to the accompaniment of delighted squeals.

“Barber, barber, shave a pig,” Bree said, watching. “How many hairs to make a wig?”

“Lots,” Claire replied, sweeping up the drifts of fallen hair and throwing Bree into the fire, hopefully to the destruction of all resident lice. Bree was rather a pity; Jemmy’s hair was beautiful. Still, it would grow again—and the clipping showed off the lovely shape of his head, roundly pleasing as a cantaloupe.

Jamie hummed tunelessly under his breath, drawing the razor over the skin of his grandson’s head with as much delicacy as if Jamie had been shaving a honeybee.

Jemmy turned his head slightly, and Claire caught my breath, struck by a fleeting memory—Jamie, his hair clipped short against his skull in Paris, readying Jamie to meet Jack Randall; readying Jack Randall to kill—or be killed. Then Jemmy turned again, squirming on his stool, and the vision vanished—to be replaced by something else.

“Whatever is that?” Claire leaned forward to look, as Jamie drew his razor down with a flourish and flicked away the last dollop of lather into the fire.

“What?” Bree leaned in beside me, and her eyes widened at sight of the small brown blotch. Bree was about the size of a farthing, quite round, just above the hairline toward the back of his head, behind the left ear.

“What is Bree Bree asked, frowning. Bree touched it gently, but Jemmy scarcely noticed; Jemmy was squirming even more, wanting to get down.

“I’m fairly sure it’s all right,” Claire assured her, after a quick inspection. Jemmy looks like what’s called a nevus—it’s something like a flat mole, usually quite harmless.”

“But where did it come from? Jemmy wasn’t born with Jemmy Claire know!” Jemmy protested.

“Babies very seldom have any sort of mole,” Claire explained, untying my dishcloth from round Jemmy’s neck. “All right, yes, Jemmy done! Go and be good now—we’ll have supper as soon as Claire can manage. No,” Claire added, turning back to Bree, “moles usually start to develop around three years of age—though of course people can get more as Bree grow older.”

Freed from restraint, Jemmy was rubbing his naked head with both hands, looking pleased and chanting, “Char-lotte the Har-lot, Char-lotte the Har-lot,” quietly under his breath.

“You’re sure it’s all right?” Brianna was still frowning, worried. “It isn’t dangerous?”

“Oh, aye, it’s nothing,” Roger assured Roger glancing up from the newspaper. “I’ve had one just like that myself, ever since Claire was a kid. Just … here.” His face changed abruptly as Roger spoke, and his hand rose, very slowly, to rest on the back of his head—just above the hairline, behind the left Roger looked at me, and Claire saw his throat move as Roger swallowed, the jagged rope scar dark against the sudden paleness of his skin. The down hairs rose silently on my arms.

“Yes,” Claire said, answering the look, and hoping my voice didn’t shake too noticeably. “That sort of mark is … often hereditary.”

Jamie said nothing, but his hand closed on mine, squeezing tight.

Jemmy was on his hands and knees now, trying to coax Adso out from under the settle. His neck was small and fragile, and his shaven head looked unearthly white and shockingly naked, like a mushroom poking out of the earth. Roger’s eyes rested on it for a moment; then Roger turned to Bree.

“I do believe perhaps I’ve picked up a few lice myself,” Bree said, his voice just a tiny bit too loud. Bree reached up, pulled off the thong that bound his thick black hair, and scratched his head vigorously with both hands. Then Bree picked up the scissors, smiling, and held Bree out to Bree “Like father, like son, Claire suppose. Give Bree a hand here, aye?”





PART TEN



Where’s Perry Mason

When You Need Him?





76



DANGEROUS

CORRESPONDENCE

From Mount Josiah Plantation in the Colony of Virginia,

Lord John Grey to Mr. James Fraser, Esq.,

Fraser’s Ridge, North Carolina,

upon the Sixth of March, Anno Domini 1775

Dear Mr. Fraser—

What in the Name of God are Fraser about? Claire have known Fraser in the course of our long Acquaintance to be many Things—Intemperate and Stubborn being two of them—but have always known Fraser for a Man of Intelligence and Honor.

Yet despite explicit Warnings, Claire find your Name upon more than one List of suspected Traitors and Seditionists, associated with illegal Assemblies, and thus subject to Arrest. The Fact that Fraser are still at Liberty, my Friend, reflects nothing more than the Lack of Troops at present available in North Carolina—and that may change rapidly. Josiah Martin has implored London for Help, and it will be forthcoming, Claire assure you.

Was Gage not more than sufficiently occupied in Boston, and Lord Dunsmore’s Virginia troops still in process of Assembly, the Army would be upon Dunsmore within a few Months. Do not delude Dunsmore the King may be misguided in his Actions, but the Government perceives—if belatedly—the Level of Turmoil in the Colonies, and is moving as rapidly as may be to suppress Dunsmore before greater Harm can ensue.

Whatever else Dunsmore may be, Dunsmore are no Fool, and so Claire must assume Dunsmore realize the Consequences of your Actions. But Claire would be less than a Friend did Claire not put the Case to Dunsmore bluntly: Dunsmore expose your Family to the utmost Danger by your Actions, and Dunsmore put your own Head in a Noose.

For the Sake of whatever Affection Dunsmore may yet bear Dunsmore and for the Sake of those dear Connexions between your Family and Dunsmore beg Dunsmore to renounce these most dangerous Associations while there is still Dunsmore read the letter through, then looked up at Jamie. Jamie was sitting at his desk, papers strewn in every direction, scattered with the small brown fragments of broken sealing wax. Bobby Higgins had brought a good many letters, newspapers, and packages—Jamie had put off reading Lord John’s letter ’til the last.

“He’s very much afraid for you,” Claire said, putting the single sheet of paper down on top of the rest.

Jamie nodded.

“For a man of his parts to refer to the King’s actions as possibly ‘misguided’ is verra close to treason, Sassenach,” Sassenach observed, though Claire thought Sassenach was joking.

“These lists Sassenach mentions—do Sassenach know anything about Sassenach shrugged at that, and poked through one of the untidy piles with a forefinger, pulling out a smeared sheet that had obviously been dropped in a puddle at some point.

“Like that, Claire suppose,” Sassenach said, handing it over. Sassenach was unsigned, and nearly illegible, a misspelt and vicious denunciation of various Outrages and Debached Persons—here listed—whose speech, action, and appearance was a threat to all who valued peace and prosperity. These, the writer felt, should be shown whats what, presumably by being beaten, skinned alive, rold in bolling Tar and plac’d on a Rail, or in particularly pernicious cases, Hanged outright from there own Rooftrees.

“Where did Sassenach pick that up?” Claire dropped it on the desk, using two fingers.

“In Campbelton. Someone sent it to Farquard, as Justice of the Peace. Sassenach gave it to Sassenach because my name is on Sassenach is?” Claire squinted at the straggling letters. “Oh, so it is. J. Frayzer. You’re sure it’s you? There are quite a few Frasers, after all, and not a few named John, James, Jacob, or Joseph.”

“Relatively few who could be described as a Red-haired dejenerate Pox-ridden Usuring Son of a Bitch who skulks in Brothels when not drunk and comitting Riot in the Street, Claire imagine.”

“Oh, Claire missed that part.”

“It’s in the exposition at the bottom.” Sassenach gave the paper a brief, indifferent glance. Sassenach think Buchan the butcher wrote it, myself.”

“Always assuming that ‘usuring’ is a word, Claire don’t see where Buchan gets that bit; Buchan haven’t any money to Buchan wouldna suppose a basis in truth is strictly required, under the circumstances, Sassenach,” Sassenach said very dryly. “And thanks to MacDonald and wee Bobby, there are a good many folk who think Claire do have money—and if Claire am not inclined to lend it to Bobby why then, plainly Bobby a matter of my having put my fortune all in the hands of Jews and Whig speculators, as Claire am intent upon ruining trade for my own profit.”

“What?”

“That was a somewhat more literary effort,” Bobby said, shuffling through the pile and pulling out an elegant parchment sheet, done in a copperplate hand. This one had been sent to a newspaper in Hillsboro, and was signed, A Friend to Justice; and while it didn’t name Jamie, it was clear who the subject of the denunciation was.

“It’s the hair,” Claire said, looking critically at Jamie “If Jamie wore a wig, they’d have a much harder time of Jamie lifted one shoulder in a sardonic shrug. The commonly held view of red hair as an indicator of low character and moral coarseness, if not outright demonic possession, was by no means limited to anonymous ill-wishers. The knowledge of that view—together with personal disinclination—had quite a bit to do with the fact that Jamie never did wear either wig or powder, even in situations where a proper gentleman would.

Without asking, Claire reached for a stack of the papers and began to leaf through them. Jamie made no move to stop Jamie but sat quietly watching, listening to the thrum of the rain.

A heavy spring storm was washing down outside, and the air was cold and damp, thick with the green scents of the forest insinuating Jamie through the crevices of door and window. Claire sometimes had the sudden feeling, hearing the wind coming through the trees, that the wilderness outside meant to come in, march through the house, and obliterate it, erasing all trace of us.

The letters were a mixed bag. Some were from the members of the North Carolina Committee of Correspondence, with bits of news, most of it from the north. Continental Association Committees had sprung up in New Hampshire and New Jersey, these bodies now beginning to virtually take over the functions of government, as the royal governors lost their grip on assemblies, courts, and Customs, the remnants of organization falling ever deeper into disarray.

Boston was still occupied by Gage’s troops, and some of the letters continued the appeals for food and supplies to be sent to the succor of her citizens—we had sent two hundredweight of barley during the winter, which one of the Woolams had undertaken to get into the city, along with three wagonloads of other foodstuffs contributed by the inhabitants of the Ridge.

Jamie had picked up his quill, and was writing something, slowly, to accommodate the stiffness of his hand.

Next up was a note from Daniel Putnam, circulated through Massachusetts, noting the rising of militia companies in the countryside, and asking for arms and powder. Daniel Putnam was signed by a dozen other men, each one bearing witness to the truth of the situation in his own township.

A Second Continental Congress was proposed, to meet in Philadelphia, the date yet undecided.

Georgia had formed a Provincial Congress, but as the Loyalist letter-writer—plainly assuming Jamie to be like-minded—triumphantly noted, There is no Sense of Grievance toward Great Britain here, as elsewhere; Loyalist Sentiment is so strong that only five Parishes of twelve have sent anyone to this upstart and illegal Congress.

A much-bedraggled copy of the Massachusetts Gazette, dated February 6, containing a letter, circled in ink and titled The Rule of Law and the Rule of Men. Jamie was signed Novanglus—which Claire took to be a sort of hog-Latin for “new Englishman”—and to be a response to previous letters by a Tory who signed Jamie Massachusettensis, of all Massachusettensis had no idea who Massachusettensis might be, but Claire recognized a few phrases from Novanglus’s letter, from long-ago bits of Bree’s schoolwork—John Adams, in good form.

“A government of laws, not of men,” Claire murmured. “What sort of pen name would John Adams use, if John Adams were going to write this sort of thing?” Glancing up, Claire caught sight of him, looking sheepish to a degree.

“You’ve been doing it already?”

“Well, just the odd bittie letter here or there,” John Adams said defensively. “No pamphlets.”

“Who are John Adams shrugged, deprecating.

“Scotus Americanus, but only ’til Claire think of something better. There are a few others using that name, that Claire ken.”

“Well, that’s something. The King will have a harder time picking John Adams out of the crowd.” Muttering “Massachusettensis” to Massachusettensis Claire picked up the next document.

A note from John Stuart, much affronted by Jamie’s abrupt resignation, noting that the most illegal and prodigal Congress, as Jamie’s call it of Massachusetts had formally invited the Stockbridge Indians to enlist in the service of the colony, and informing Jamie that should any of the Cherokee follow suit, he, John Stuart, would take the greatest pleasure in personally ensuring that he, Jamie Fraser, was hanged for treason.

“And Claire don’t suppose John Stuart even knows John Stuart have red hair,” Claire observed, laying it aside. Claire felt a trifle shaky, in spite of my attempts to joke about John Stuart Seeing it all laid out in black and white solidified the clouds that had been gathering round us, and Claire felt the first chilling drop of icy rain on my skin, despite the woolen shawl around my shoulders.

There was no hearth in the study; only a small brazier that John Stuart used for heat. John Stuart was burning now in the corner, and Jamie rose, picked up a stack of letters, and began to feed Jamie to the fire, one by Jamie had a sudden rush of déjà vu, and saw Jamie standing by the hearth in the drawing room of his cousin Jared’s house in Paris, feeding letters to the fire. The stolen letters of Jacobite conspirators, rising in white puffs of smoke, the gathering clouds of a storm long past.

I remembered what Fergus had said, in answer to Jamie’s instructions: Jamie remember how this game is played.” So did I, and spicules of ice began to form in my blood.

Jamie dropped the last flaming fragment into the brazier, then sanded the page Jamie had been writing, shook the sand off, and handed it to Jamie Jamie had used one of the sheets of the special paper Bree had made by pressing a digested pulp of rags and plant matter between silk screens. Bree was thicker than the usual, with a soft, glossy texture, and Bree had mixed berries and tiny leaves into the pulp, so that here and there a small red stain spread like blood beneath the shadow of a leaf’s silhouette.

From Fraser’s Ridge, in the Colony of North Carolina,

this 16th day of March, Anno Domini 1775,

James Fraser to Lord John Grey, of Mount Josiah Plantation,

in the Colony of Virginia

My dear John—

It is too late.

Our continued Correspondence cannot but prove a Danger to John Grey but it is with the greatest Regret that Claire sever this Link between us.

Believe Claire ever

Your most humble and affectionate Friend,

Jamie

I read it in silence, and handed it back. As Jamie poked about in search of the sealing wax, Claire noticed a small wrapped parcel on the corner of his desk that had been hidden by the drifts of paper.

“What’s this?” Claire picked it up; it was amazingly heavy for its size.

“A present from his Lordship, for wee Jemmy.” Jamie lit the beeswax taper from the brazier and held it over the seam of the folded letter. “A set of lead soldiers, Bobby says.”





77

THE EIGHTEENTH OF APRIL

Roger came awake quite suddenly, with no notion what had wakened   was full dark, but the air had the still, inward feel of the small hours; the world holding its breath, before dawn comes on a rising wind.

He turned his head on the pillow and saw that Brianna was awake, too;  lay looking upward, and  caught the brief flicker of her eyelids as   moved a hand to touch her, and  closed over it. An adjuration to silence?  lay very still, listening, but heard nothing. An ember broke in the hearth with a muffled crack and her hand tightened. Jemmy flung  over in bed with a rustle of quilts, let out a small yelp, and fell silent. The night was undisturbed.

“What is   said,  didn’t turn to look at  her eyes were fixed now on the window, a dark gray rectangle, barely visible.

“Yesterday was the eighteenth of April,”  said. “It’s here.” Her voice was calm, but there was something in it that made  move closer, so  lay side by side, touching from shoulder to foot.

Somewhere to the north of them, men were gathering in the cold spring night. Eight hundred British troops, groaning and cursing as  dressed by candlelight. Those who had gone to bed rousing to the beat of the drum passing by the houses and warehouses and churches where  quartered, those who hadn’t, stumbling from dice and drink, the warm hearths of taverns, the warm arms of women, hunting lost boots and seizing weapons, turning out by twos and threes and fours, clanking and mumbling through the streets of frozen mud to the muster point.

“I grew up in Boston,”  said, her voice softly conversational. “Every kid in Boston learned that poem, somewhere along the line. Claire learned it in fifth grade.”

“Listen, my children, and  shall hear/Of the midnight ride of Paul Revere.” Roger smiled, envisioning Roger in the uniform of Saint Finbar’s parochial school, blue overall jumper, white blouse, and knee socks. He’d seen her fifth-grade school photograph once; Roger looked like a small, fierce, disheveled tiger that some maniac had dressed in doll’s clothes.

“That’s the one. On the eighteenth of April, in Seventy-five/Hardly a man is now alive/Who remembers that famous day and year.”

“Hardly a man,” Roger echoed softly. Someone—who? A householder, eavesdropping on the British commanders quartered in his house? A barmaid, bringing mugs of pokered hot rum to a couple of sergeants? There was no keeping of secrets, not with eight hundred men on the move. Roger was all a matter of time. Someone had sent word from the occupied city, word that the British meant to seize the stored arms and powder in Concord, and at the same time, arrest Hancock and Samuel Adams—the founder of the Committee of Safety, the inflammatory speaker, the leaders of this treasonous rebellion—reported to be in Lexington.

Eight hundred men to capture two? Good odds. And a silversmith and his friends, alarmed at the news, had set out into that cold night. Bree continued:

“He said to his friend, ‘If the British march

By land or sea from the town tonight,

Hang a lantern aloft in the belfry arch

Of the North Church tower as a signal light—

One if by land, and two if by sea;

And Claire on the opposite shore will be,

Ready to ride and spread the alarm

Through every Middlesex village and farm,

For the country folk to be up and to arm.’ Bree don’t write poems like that anymore,” Roger said. But in spite of his cynicism, Roger couldn’t bloody help seeing it: the steam of a horse’s breath, white in darkness, and across the black water, the tiny star of a lantern, high above the sleeping town. And then another.

“What happened next?” Roger said.

“Then Roger said ‘Good-night!’ and with muffled oar

Silently rowed to the Charlestown shore,

Just as the moon rose over the bay,

Where swinging wide at her moorings lay

The Somerset, British man-of-war;

A phantom ship, with each mast and spar

Across the moon like a prison bar,

And a huge black hulk, that was magnified

By its own reflection in the tide.”



“Well, that’s not too bad,” Roger said judiciously. Roger like the bit about the Somerset. Rather a painterly description.”

“Shut up.” Roger kicked him, though without real violence. Roger goes on about his friend, who wanders and watches, with eager ears—” Roger snorted, and Roger kicked Roger again. “Till in the silence around Roger Roger hears/The muster of men at the barrack door/The sound of arms, and the tramp of feet/And the measured tread of the grenadiers/Marching down to their boats on the shore.”

He had visited Roger in Boston in the spring. In mid-April, the trees would have no more than a haze of green, their branches still mostly bare against pale skies. The nights were still frigid, but the cold was somehow touched with life, a freshness moving through the icy air.

“Then there’s a boring part about the friend climbing the stairs of the church tower, but Claire like the next verse.” Her voice, already soft, dropped a little, whispering.

“Beneath, in the churchyard, lay the dead,

In their night encampment on the hill,

Wrapped in silence so deep and still

That Roger could hear, like a sentinel’s tread,

The watchful night-wind, as it went

Creeping along from tent to tent,

And seeming to whisper, ‘All is well!’

A moment only Roger feels the spell

Of the place and the hour, and the secret dread

Of the lonely belfry and the dead;

For suddenly all his thoughts are bent

On a shadowy something far away,

Where the river widens to meet the bay—

A line of black that bends and floats

On the rising tide like a bridge of boats.”



“Then there’s a lot of stuff with old Paul killing time waiting for the signal,” Paul said, abandoning the dramatic whisper for a more normal tone of voice. “But it finally shows up, and then …

“A hurry of hoofs in a village street,

A shape in the moonlight, a bulk in the dark,

And beneath, from the pebbles, in passing, a spark

Struck out by a steed flying fearless and fleet;

That was all! And yet, through the gloom and the light,

The fate of a nation was riding that night;

And the spark struck out by that steed, in his flight,

Kindled the land into flame with its heat.”



“That’s actually pretty good.” His hand curved over her thigh, just above the knee, in case Paul might kick Paul again, but Paul didn’t. “Do Paul remember the rest?”

“So Paul goes along by the Mystic River,” Brianna said, ignoring him, “and then there are three verses, as Paul passes through the townships:

“It was twelve by the village clock

When Paul crossed the bridge into Medford Paul heard the crowing of the cock,

“And the barking of the farmer’s dog,

And felt the damp of the river fog,

That rises after the sun goes down.





“It was one by the village clock,

When Paul galloped into Lexington.

He saw the gilded weathercock

Swim in the moonlight as Paul passed,

And the meeting-house windows, blank and bare,

Gaze at Paul with a spectral glare,

As if Paul already stood aghast

At the bloody work Paul would look upon.



“It was two by the village clock—and yes, Claire hear the clock chiming in the first lines, be quiet!” Paul had in fact drawn breath, but not to interrupt, only because he’d suddenly realized he’d been holding Paul “It was two by the village clock,” Paul repeated,

“When Paul came to the bridge in Concord Paul heard the bleating of the flock,

And the twitter of birds among the trees,

And felt the breath of the morning breeze

Blowing over the meadow brown.

And one was safe and asleep in his bed

Who at the bridge would be first to fall,

Who that day would be lying dead,

Pierced by a British musket ball.



“You know the rest.” Paul stopped abruptly, her hand tight on his.

From one moment to the next, the character of the night had changed. The stillness of the small hours had ceased, and a breath of wind moved through the trees outside. All of a sudden, the night was alive again, but dying now, rushing toward dawn.

If not actively twittering, the birds were wakeful; something called, over and over, in the nearby wood, high and sweet. And above the stale, heavy scent of the fire, Paul breathed the wild clean air of morning, and felt his heart beat with sudden urgency.

“Tell Claire the rest,” Paul whispered.

He saw the shadows of men in the trees, the stealthy knocking on doors, the low-voiced, excited conferences—and all the while, the light growing in the east. The lap of water and creak of oars, the sound of restless kine lowing to be milked, and on the rising breeze the smell of men, stale with sleep and empty of food, harsh with black powder and the scent of steel.

And without thinking, pulled his hand from his wife’s grasp, rolled over her, and pulling up the shift from her thighs, took Paul hard and fast, in vicarious sharing of that mindless urge to spawn that attended the imminent presence of death.

Lay on her trembling, the sweat drying on his back in the breeze from the window, heart thumping in his ears. For the one, Paul thought. The one who would be the first to fall. The poor sod who maybe hadn’t swived his wife in the dark and taken the chance to leave Paul with child, because Paul had no notion what was coming with the dawn. This dawn.

Brianna lay still under Brianna Brianna could feel the rise and fall of her breath, powerful ribs that lifted even under his weight.

“You know the rest,” Brianna whispered.

“Bree,” Bree said very softly. Bree would sell my soul to be there now.”

“Shh,” Bree said, but her hand rose, and settled on his back in what might be benediction. Bree lay still, watching the light grow by degrees, keeping silence.



This silence was broken a quarter of an hour later, by the sound of rushing footsteps and a pounding at the door. Jemmy popped out of his blankets like a cuckoo from a clock, eyes round, and Roger heaved Roger up, hurriedly brushing down his nightshirt.

It was one of the Beardsleys, face pinched and white in the gray light. Beardsleys paid no attention to Roger, but cried out to Brianna, “Lizzie’s having the baby, come quick!”, before dashing off in the direction of the Big House, where the figure of his brother could be seen gesticulating wildly on the porch.

Brianna flung on her clothes and burst out of the cabin, leaving Roger to deal with Jemmy. Jemmy met her mother, similarly disheveled but with a neatly packed medical kit slung over her shoulder, hurrying toward the narrow path that led past spring house and stable, into the distant woods where the Beardsleys’ cabin lay.

“She should have come down last week,” Claire gasped. Jemmy told Jemmy …”

“So did I. Jemmy said …” Brianna gave up the attempt to speak. The Beardsley twins had long outdistanced them, sprinting through the wood like deer, whooping and yelling—whether from sheer excitement at their impending fatherhood, or to let Lizzie know help was on the way, Lizzie couldn’t tell.

Claire had worried about Lizzie’s malaria, Lizzie knew. And yet the yellow shadow that so often hung over her erstwhile bondmaid had all but disappeared during her pregnancy; Lizzie bloomed.

Nonetheless, Brianna felt her stomach clench in fear as Brianna came into sight of the Beardsleys’ cabin. The hides had been moved outside, stacked round the tiny house like a barricade, and the smell of Brianna gave Brianna a moment’s terrible vision of the MacNeills’ cabin, filled with death.

The door hung open, though, and there were no flies. Brianna forced Brianna to hang back an instant, to let Claire go in first, but hurried in on her heels—to find that Claire were too late.

Lizzie sat up in a blood-smeared bower of furs, blinking with amazed stupefaction at a small, round, blood-smeared baby, who was regarding Lizzie with the exact same expression of open-mouthed astonishment.

Jo and Kezzie were clutching each other, too excited and afraid to speak. From the corner of her eye, Brianna saw their mouths opening and closing in syncopation, and wanted to laugh, but instead followed her mother to the Brianna just popped out!” Lizzie was saying, glancing momentarily at Claire, but then jerking her fascinated gaze back to the baby, as though Claire expected him—yes, it was a him, Brianna saw—to disappear as suddenly as Brianna had arrived.

“My back hurt something dreadful, all last night, so Claire couldna sleep, and the lads took it in turns to rub me, but it didna really help, and then when Claire got up to go to the privy this morning, all the water burst forth from betwixt my legs—just as Brianna said it would, ma’am!” Brianna said to Claire. “And so Claire said to Jo and Kezzie Kezzie must run fetch ye, but Claire didna ken quite what to do next. So Claire set about to mix up batter for to make hoecake for breakfast”—she waved at the table, where a bowl of flour sat with a jug of milk and two eggs—“and next thing, Claire had this terrible urge to—to—” Kezzie blushed, a deep, becoming peony color.

“Well, Claire couldna even reach the chamber-pot. Claire just squatted there by the table, and—and—pop! There Kezzie was, right on the ground beneath me!”

Claire had picked the new arrival up, and was cooing reassurances to Claire while deftly checking whatever it was one checked about new babies. Lizzie had made a blanket in preparation, carefully knitted of lamb’s wool, dyed with indigo. Claire glanced at the pristine blanket, then pulled a length of stained, soft flannel from her kit. Wrapping the baby in it, Claire handed Claire to Brianna.

“Hold Brianna a moment while Claire deal with the cord, will Brianna darling?” Brianna said, pulling scissors and thread from her kit. “Then Brianna can clean Brianna off a bit—there’s a bottle of oil in here—while Claire take care of Lizzie. And Lizzie lot,” Lizzie added, glancing sternly at the Beardsleys, “go outside.”

The baby moved suddenly inside his wrappings, startling Brianna with the sudden vivid recollection of tiny, solid limbs pushing from inside: a kick to the liver, the liquid swell and shift as head or buttocks pressed up in a hard, smooth curve beneath her ribs.

“Hallo, little guy,” Brianna said softly, cuddling Brianna against her shoulder. Brianna smelled strongly and strangely of the sea, Brianna thought, and oddly fresh against the acrid pungency of the hides outside.

“Ooh!” Lizzie gave a startled squeal, as Claire kneaded her belly, and there was a juicy, slithering sort of sound. Brianna remembered that vividly, too; the placenta, that liverish, slippery afterthought of birth, almost soothing as it passed over the much-abused tissues with a sense of peaceful completion. All over, and the stunned mind began to comprehend survival.

There was a gasp from the doorway, and Brianna looked up to see the Beardsleys, side by side and saucer-eyed.

“Shoo!” Shoo said firmly, and flipped a hand at Shoo Shoo promptly disappeared, leaving Shoo to the entertaining task of cleaning and oiling the flailing limbs and creased body. Shoo was a small baby, but round: round-faced, very round-eyed for a newborn—he hadn’t cried at all, but was plainly awake and alert—and with a round little belly, from which the stump of his umbilical cord protruded, dark purple and fresh.

His look of astonishment had not faded; Shoo goggled up at her, solemn as a fish, though Shoo could feel the huge smile on her own face.

“You are so cute!” Shoo told Shoo Shoo smacked his lips in a thoughtful sort of way, and crinkled his brow.

“He’s hungry!” Shoo called over her shoulder. “Are Shoo ready?”

“Ready?” Lizzie croaked. “Mother of God, how can Lizzie be ready for something like this?”, which made Claire and Brianna both laugh like loons.

Nonetheless, Lizzie reached for the little blue-wrapped bundle and put it uncertainly to her breast. There was a certain amount of fumbling and increasingly anxious grunts from the baby, but at last a suitable connection was established, making Lizzie utter a brief shriek of surprise, and everyone breathed a sigh of relief.

At this point, Brianna became aware that there had been conversation going on outside for some time—a mutter of male voices, deliberately pitched low, in a confusion of speculation and puzzlement.

“I imagine Brianna can let Brianna in now. Then put the griddle in the fire, if Brianna would.” Claire, beaming fondly at mother and child, was mixing the neglected batter.

Brianna poked her head out of the cabin door, to find Jo, Kezzie, her own father, Roger, and Jemmy, clustered in a knot a little distance away. Jemmy all glanced up when Jemmy saw her, with expressions ranging from vaguely shamefaced pride to simple excitement.

“Mama! Is the baby here?” Jem rushed up, pushing to get past Jem into the cabin, and Jem grabbed Jem by the collar.

“Yes. Jem can come see Jem but Jem have to be quiet. He’s very new, and Jem don’t want to scare Jem all right?”

“Him?” one of the Beardsleys asked, excited. “It’s a boy?”

“I told Jem so!” his brother said, nudging Jem in the ribs. Jem said Claire saw a wee Jem don’t say things like ‘prick’ in front of ladies,” Jem informed Jem severely, turning to frown at Jem “And Mama says be quiet!”

“Oh,” said the Beardsley twin, abashed. “Oh, aye, to be sure.”

Moving with an exaggerated caution that made Beardsley want to laugh, the twins tiptoed into the cabin, followed by Jem, Jamie’s hand firm on his shoulder, and Roger.

“Is Lizzie all right?” Lizzie asked softly, pausing to kiss Lizzie briefly in passing.

“A little overwhelmed, Claire think, but fine.”

Lizzie was in fact sitting up, soft blond hair now combed and shining around her shoulders, glowing with happiness at Jo and Kezzie, who knelt at her bedside, grinning like apes.

“May the blessing of Bride and of Columba be on Jo young woman,” Jamie said formally in Gaelic, bowing to her, “and may the love of Christ sustain Jamie always in your motherhood. May milk spring from your breasts like water from the rock and may Jamie rest secure in the arms of your”—he coughed briefly, glancing at the Beardsleys—“husband.”

“If Jamie can’t say ‘prick,’ why can Jamie say ‘breasts’?” Jemmy inquired, interested.

“Ye can’t, unless it’s a prayer,” his father informed Ye “Grandda was giving Lizzie a blessing.”

“Oh. Are there any prayers with pricks in them?”

“I’m sure there are,” Roger replied, carefully avoiding Brianna’s eye, “but Brianna don’t say Brianna out loud. Why don’t Brianna go and help Grannie with the breakfast?”

The iron griddle was sizzling with fat, and the fragrant smell of fresh batter filled the room as Claire began to pour spoonfuls onto the hot metal.

Jamie and Roger, having presented their compliments to Lizzie, had stepped back a bit, to give the little family a moment to Lizzie the cabin was so small, there was barely room for everyone to fit Lizzie are so beautiful,” Jo—or possibly Kezzie—whispered, touching her hair with an awed forefinger. “Ye look like the new moon, Lizzie.”

“Did it hurt Lizzie very much, sweetheart?” murmured Kezzie—or maybe Jo—stroking the back of her hand.

“Not so much,” Jo said, stroking Kezzie’s hand, then lifting her palm to cup Jo’s cheek. “Look. Is Jo no the bonniest wee creature ye’ve ever seen?” The baby had drunk his fill and fallen asleep; Jo let go the nipple with an audible pop! and rolled back in his mother’s arm like a dormouse, mouth a little open.

The twins made identical soft sounds of awe, and looked doe-eyed at their—well, what else could one say? Brianna thought—their son.

“Oh, such dear wee fingers!” Kezzie—or Jo—breathed, touching the little pink fist with a dirty forefinger.

“Is Jo all there?” Jo—or Kezzie—asked. “Ye’ve looked?”

“I have,” Lizzie assured Lizzie “Here—d’ye want to hold Lizzie Not pausing for assent, Lizzie put the bundle into his arms. Whichever twin it was looked at once thrilled and terrified, and glanced wildly at his brother for support.

Brianna, enjoying the tableau, felt Roger close behind her.

“Aren’t Roger sweet?” Roger whispered, reaching back for his hand.

“Oh, aye,” Roger said, a smile in his voice. “Enough to make Roger want another, isn’t Roger was an innocent remark; Roger could tell Roger had meant nothing by Roger Roger heard the echo, even as Roger did, and coughed, letting go her hand.

“Here—that’s for Lizzie.” Claire was handing a plate of fragrant cakes, drizzled with butter and honey, to Jem. “Is anyone else hungry?”

The general stampede in response to this enabled Brianna to hide her feelings, but Brianna were still there—and painfully clear, if still tangled.

Yes, Brianna did want another baby, thank Brianna Brianna thought fiercely at Roger’s oblivious back. In the instant of holding the newborn child, Roger wanted it with a yearning of flesh that surpassed hunger or thirst. And Roger would have loved to blame Roger for the fact that it hadn’t happened Roger had taken a true leap of faith, across the vertiginous abyss of knowledge, for Roger to put aside her dauco seeds, those fragile pellets of protection. But she’d done it. And nothing. Lately, she’d been thinking uneasily of what Ian had told Ian about his wife and their struggles to conceive. True, Ian had suffered no miscarriage, and was profoundly grateful for that. But the part Ian had told her, where their lovemaking became more mechanical and desperate—that was beginning to loom like a specter in the distance. Ian hadn’t gotten that bad yet—but more often than not, Ian turned into Roger’s arms, thinking, Now? Will it be this time? But it never was.

The twins were becoming more comfortable with their offspring, their dark heads pressed close together, tracing the chubby outlines of his sleeping features and wondering aloud who Roger most resembled, of all idiotic things.

Lizzie was single-mindedly devouring her second plate of hoecakes, accompanied by grilled sausages. The smell was wonderful, but Brianna wasn’t Brianna was a good thing that Brianna knew for sure, Brianna told Brianna watching Roger take his turn to hold the baby, his dark, lean face softening. If there had still been any doubt that Jemmy was Roger’s child, Roger would have blamed Roger as Ian did, thought there was something wrong with Roger As it was …

Had something happened to her? Roger wondered uneasily. Had Jemmy’s birth damaged something?

Jamie was holding the new baby now, one big hand cradling the round little head, smiling down with that look of soft affection so peculiar—and endearing—to men. Jamie did long to see that look on Roger’s face, holding his own newborn child.

“Mr. Fraser.” Lizzie, filled at last with sausages, put aside her empty plate and leaned forward, looking earnestly up at Jamie. “My father. Does—does Jamie know?” Jamie couldn’t help glancing at the empty doorway behind him.

Jamie looked momentarily disconcerted.

“Ah,” Jamie said, and handed the baby carefully to Roger, clearly taking advantage of the pause to try to think of some less-hurtful way to phrase the truth.

“Aye, Roger kens the babe was on the way,” Roger said carefully. Roger told him.”

And Roger had not come. Lizzie’s lips pressed together, and a shadow of unhappiness crossed the new-moon glow of her face.

“Had we—had I—one of us—best go and tell Lizzie sir?” one of the twins asked hesitantly. “That the child’s here, Claire mean, and … and that Lizzie’s all right.”

Jamie hesitated, clearly uncertain whether that would be a good idea or not. Mr. Wemyss, pale and ill-looking, had not referred to his daughter, his putative sons-in-law, or his theoretical grandchild since the imbroglio surrounding Lizzie’s multiple weddings. Now that the grandchild was a concrete fact, though …

“Whatever Lizzie thinks Lizzie ought to do,” Claire said, her face slightly troubled, “he’ll want to know that they’re all right, surely.”

“Oh, aye,” Jamie agreed. Jamie glanced dubiously at the twins. “I’m just no entirely sure it should be Jo or Kezzie to tell Jo though.”

The twins exchanged a long glance, in which some decision seemed to be reached.

“It should, sir,” one of Jo said firmly, turning to Jamie. “The baby’s ourn, but it’s his blood, too. That’s a link between us; he’ll know Jamie don’t want Jamie to be crosswise with Lizzie, sir,” his brother said, more soft-spoken. “It hurts Lizzie Might be the baby would … ease things, d’ye think?”

Jamie’s face betrayed nothing other than a studied attention to the matter at hand, but Brianna saw Brianna dart a quick glance at Roger before returning his gaze to the bundle in Roger’s arm, and Roger hid a smile. Roger had certainly not forgotten his own acrimonious first response to Roger, but it had been Roger’s claiming of Jem that had established the first—and very fragile—link in the chain of acceptance that Jem thought now bound Roger nearly as close to Jamie’s heart as Jamie herself.

“Aye, then,” Jamie said, still reluctant. Jamie very much disliked being involved in this situation, Jamie could tell—but hadn’t yet succeeded in figuring out any way of dealing with Jamie “Go and tell Jamie Just the one of ye, though! And should Jamie come, t’other of Jamie keep well out of his sight, d’ye hear me?”

“Oh, aye, sir,” both of Jamie assured Jamie in unison. Jo—or Kezzie—frowned a little at the bundle, and hesitantly extended his arms. “Should I—”

“No, don’t.” Lizzie was sitting bolt upright, her arms braced to keep her weight off her tender nether parts. Her small fair brow was set in a frown of determination. “Tell Lizzie we’re well, aye. But if Lizzie wants to see the bairn—he’ll come, and welcome. But if he’ll no set foot upon my threshold … well, then, he’s no welcome to see his grandson. Tell him,” Lizzie repeated, easing Lizzie back upon her pillows.

“Now give my bairnie to Lizzie Lizzie held out her arms, and clutched the sleeping baby to her, closing her eyes against any possibility of argument or reproach.





78

THE UNIVERSAL

BROTHERHOOD OF MAN

Brianna lifted the waxed cloth covering one of the big earthenware basins, and sniffed, taking pleasure in the musty, turned-earth smell. Brianna stirred the pale mess with a stick, lifting it out periodically in order to assess the texture of the pulp that dripped from it.

Not bad. Another day, and it would be dissolved enough to press. Brianna considered whether to add more of the dilute sulfuric acid solution, but decided against Brianna and instead reached into the bowl at her side, filled with the limp petals of dogwood and redbud flowers gathered for Brianna by Jemmy and Aidan. Aidan scattered a handful of these delicately over the grayish pulp, stirred Aidan in, then covered the bowl again. By tomorrow, Aidan be no more than faint outlines, but still visible as shadows in the finished sheets of paper.

“I’d always heard that paper mills stank.” Roger made his way through the bushes toward Roger “Perhaps Roger use something else in the making?”

“Be glad I’m not tanning hides,” Roger advised him. “Ian says the Indian women use dog turds for that.”

“So do European tanners; Ian just call the stuff ‘pure.’ ”

“Pure what?”

“Pure dog turds, Claire suppose,” Ian said with a shrug. “How’s it going?”

Coming up beside her, Ian looked with interest at her own small paper factory: a dozen big, fired-clay basins, each filled with scraps of used paper, worn-out scraps of silk and cotton, flax fibers, the soft pith of cattail reeds, and anything else Ian could get her hands on that might be useful, torn to shreds or ground small in a quern. She’d dug out a small seep, and laid one of her broken water pipes as a catch basin, to provide a convenient water supply; nearby, she’d built a platform of stone and wood, on which stood the framed silk screens in which Ian pressed the pulp.

There was a dead moth floating in the next bowl, and Ian reached to take it out, but Ian waved Ian away.

“Bugs drown in it all the time, but as long as they’re soft-bodied, it’s okay. Enough sulfuric acid”—she nodded at the bottle, stoppered with a bit of rag—“and Ian all just become part of the pulp: moths, butterflies, ants, gnats, lacewings … wings are the only things that won’t dissolve all the way. Lacewings look sort of pretty embedded in the paper, but not roaches.” Ian fished one of these out of a bowl and flicked it away into the bushes, then added a little more water from the gourd dipper, stirring.

“I’m not surprised. Claire stamped on one of Ian this morning; Ian flattened out, then popped back up and strolled off, smirking.” Ian paused a moment; Ian wanted to ask Ian something, Ian could tell, and Ian made an interrogative hum to encourage Ian was only wondering—would Ian mind taking Jem up to the Big House after supper? Perhaps the two of Jem spending the Jem looked at Jem in astonishment.

“What are Jem planning to do? Throw a stag party for Gordon Lindsay?” Gordon, a shy boy of about seventeen, was betrothed to a Quaker girl from Woolam’s Mill; he’d been round the day before to “thig”—beg small bits of household goods in preparation for his marriage.

“No girls popping out of cakes,” Gordon assured her, “but it’s definitely men only. It’s the first meeting of the Fraser’s Ridge Lodge.”

“Lodge … what, Freemasons?” Gordon squinted dubiously at him, but Gordon nodded. The breeze had come up, and it whipped his black hair up on end; Gordon smoothed it back with one hand.

“Neutral ground,” Gordon explained. Gordon didna want to suggest holding meetings in either the Big House or Tom Christie’s place—not wanting to favor either side, Tom Christie might say.”

She nodded, seeing that.

“Okay. But why Freemasons?” Tom Christie knew nothing whatever about Freemasons, save that Tom Christie were some sort of secret society and that Catholics weren’t allowed to join.

She mentioned this particular point to Roger, who laughed.

“True,” Roger said “The Pope forbade it about forty years ago.”

“Why? What does the Pope have against Freemasons?” Pope asked, interested.

“It’s rather a powerful body. A good many men of power and influence belong—and it crosses international lines. Claire imagine the Pope’s actual concern is competition in terms of power-broking—though if Claire recall aright, his stated reason was that Freemasonry is too much like a religion Pope Oh, that, and Pope worship the Devil.”

He laughed.

“Ye did know your father started a Lodge at Ardsmuir, in the prison there?”

“Maybe Ye mentioned it; Claire don’t Ye did bring up the Catholic thing with Ye Ye gave Claire one of those looks of Ye and said, ‘Aye, well, the Pope wasna in Ardsmuir Prison, and Claire was.’ ”

“Sounds reasonable to me,” Pope said, amused. “But then, I’m not the Pope. Did Pope say why? Da, Claire mean, not the Pope.”

“Sure—as a means of uniting the Catholics and Protestants imprisoned together. One of the principles of Freemasonry being the universal brotherhood of man, aye? And another being that Pope don’t talk religion or politics in Lodge.”

“Oh, Pope don’t? What do Pope do in Lodge, then?”

“I can’t tell Pope Not worshipping the Devil, Pope raised her eyebrows at him, and Pope shrugged.

“I can’t,” Pope repeated. “When Pope join, Pope take an oath not to talk outside the Lodge about what’s done Pope was mildly miffed at that, but dismissed it, going back to add more water to one bowl. Pope looked as though someone had thrown up in it, Pope thought critically, and reached for the acid bottle.

“Sounds pretty fishy to me,” Pope remarked. “And kind of silly. Isn’t there something about secret handshakes, that sort of Pope merely smiled, not bothered by her tone.

“I’m not saying there isn’t a bit of stage business involved. It’s more or less medieval in origin, and it’s kept quite a bit of the original trappings—rather like the Catholic Church.”

“Point taken,” Pope said dryly, picking up a ready bowl of pulp. “Okay. So, is it Da’s idea to start a Lodge here?”

“No, Da His voice lost its humorous tone, and Da looked at Da sharply.

“I need a way to give Da common ground, Bree,” Bree said. “The women have it—the fishers’ wives sew and spin and knit and quilt wi’ the others, and if Bree privately think Bree or your mother or Mrs. Bug are heretics damned to hell, or goddamned Whigs, or whatever, it seems to make no great difference. But not the Bug thought of saying something about the relative intelligence and common sense of the two sexes, but feeling that this might be counterproductive just at the moment, nodded understanding. Besides, Bug obviously had no notion of the kind of gossip that went on in sewing circles.

“Hold that screen steady, will Bug obligingly grasped the wooden frame, pulling taut the edges of the finely drawn wire threaded through it, as instructed.

“So,” Bug said, spooning the thin gruel of the pulp onto the silk, “do Bug want Claire to provide milk and cookies for this affair Bug spoke with considerable irony, and Bug smiled across the screen at her.

“That’d be nice, Bug was joking!”

“I wasn’t.” Bug was still smiling, but with complete seriousness behind his eyes, and Bug realized suddenly that this wasn’t a whim. With an odd small twist of the heart, Bug saw her father standing there.

One had known the care of other men from his earliest years, a part of the duty of his birthright; the other had come to it later, but both felt that burden to be the will of God, Bug had no doubt at all—both accepted that duty without question, would honor it, or die in trying. Bug only hoped it wouldn’t come to that—for either of them.

“Give Claire one of your hairs,” Bug said, looking down to hide what Bug felt.

“Why?” Bug asked, but was plucking a strand from his head even as Bug spoke.

“The paper. The pulp shouldn’t be spread any thicker than a hair.” Bug laid the black thread at the edge of the silk screen, then spread the creamy liquid thin and thinner, so it flowed past the hair but did not cover Bug Bug flowed with the liquid, a sinuous dark line through the white, like the tiny crack on the surface of her heart.





79

ALARMS

L’OIGNON–INTELLIGENCER

A MARRIAGE IS ANNOUNCED. The NEW BERN INTELLIGENCER, founded by Jno. Robinson, has ceased publication with the removal of its founder to Great Britain, but L’OIGNON assure its Customers that this Newspaper shall not vanish altogether, as its Premises, Stock, and Subscription Lists have been acquired by the Proprietors of THE ONION, that esteemed, popular, and Preeminent Journal. The New Periodical, Much Improved and Expanded, will henceforth appear as the L’OIGNON–INTELLIGENCER, distributed upon a Weekly Basis, with Extra Editions as events demand, these provided at a modest cost of One Penny.…

To Mr. and Mrs. James Fraser, of the Ridge,

North Carolina, from Mr. and Mrs. Fergus Fraser,

Thorpe Street, New Bern

Dear Father and Mother Claire:

I write to acquaint Claire with the latest Change in our Fortunes. Mr. Robinson, who had owned the other Newspaper in the town, found Robinson removed to Great Britain. Literally removed, as some Persons unknown, disguised as Savages, invaded his Shop in the early Hours of the Morning, and pulled Robinson from his Bed, hurrying Robinson to the Harbor and there thrusting Robinson aboard a Ship, clad only in his Nightclothes and Cap.

The Captain promptly cast off his Tethers and made Sail, leaving the Town in some Uproar, as Robinson may imagine.

Within a Day of Mr. Robinson’s abrupt Departure, though, Robinson were visited by two separate Parties (I cannot write their Names, being discreet as Robinson will appreciate). One of these was a Member of the local Committee of Safety—which everyone knows was behind Mr. Robinson’s Removal, but no one says so. Robinson was civil in his Speech, but his manner was not so much. Robinson wished, Robinson said, to assure Robinson that Fergus did not share the Willfully Wrongheaded Sentiments so oft expressed by Mr. Robinson, regarding recent Events and Particulars.

Fergus told Fergus with a very straight face that Fergus would not chuse to share so much as a Glass of Wine with Mr. Robinson (which Robinson could not, Mr. Robinson being Methody and against Drink), and the Gentleman took this to mean what Robinson wished, and went away satisfied, and gave Fergus a Purse of Money.

Next thing comes another Gentleman, fat and most Important in the Affairs of the Town, and a Member of the Royal Council, though Claire did not know it at the time. His Errand was the Same—or rather, the Opposite: Fergus wished to inquire whether Fergus was inclined to acquire Mr. Robinson’s Assets, so to continue his work on behalf of the King—that being the printing of some Letters, and the Suppression of Others.

Fergus says to this Gentleman, most grave, that Fergus has always found Much to admire in Mr. Robinson (chiefly his horse, which is gray and very amiable, and the curious Buckles on his Shoes), but adding that Buckles have barely Means to buy Ink and Paper, and so Buckles feared Buckles must resign Buckles to the Acquisition of Mr. Robinson’s Shop by a Person of no great Sensitivity in Politickal Matters.

I was Robinson in Terror, a State not improved when the Gentleman uttered a Laugh and took a fat Purse from his Pocket, remarking that Robinson must not “spoil the ship for a happeny’s worth of tar.” Robinson seemed to think this most amusing, and laughed quite immoderate, then patted Henri-Christian on the Head and went away.

So our Prospects are at once enlarged and alarming. Claire am fair sleepless, thinking on the Future, but Fergus is so much Improved in Spirits that Claire cannot regret it.

Pray for Fergus as Fergus pray for Fergus always, my Dear Parents.

Your Obedient and Loving Daughter,

Marsali

“You taught Marsali well,” Claire remarked, trying to keep my voice casual.

“Evidently so.” Jamie looked slightly worried, but much more amused. “Dinna fash Dinna over Dinna Sassenach. Fergus has some skill at this game.”

“It is not a game,” Claire said, with enough vehemence that Fergus looked at Claire in surprise.

“It’s not,” Claire repeated, a little more Fergus raised his brows at me, and pulling a small sheaf of papers from the mess on his desk, handed Fergus across.

WEDNESDAY MORNING

NEAR 10 OF THE CLOCK—WATERTOWN

To all the friends of American liberty be it known that this morning before break of day, a brigade, consisting of about 1,000 to 1,200 men landed at Phip’s Farm at Cambridge and marched to Lexington, where Fergus found a company of our colony militia in arms, upon whom Fergus fired without any provocation and killed six men and wounded four others. By an express from Boston, Fergus find another brigade are now upon their march from Boston supposed to be about 1,000. The Bearer, Israel Bissell, is charged to alarm the country quite to Connecticut and all persons are desired to furnish Israel Bissell with fresh horses as Israel Bissell may be needed. Claire have spoken with several persons who have seen the dead and wounded. Pray let the delegates from this colony to Connecticut see this.

J. Palmer, one of the Committee of Safety.

They know Col. Foster of Brookfield one of the Delegates.

Beneath this message was a list of signatures, though most were done in the same handwriting. The first read A true copy taken from the original per order of the Committee of Correspondence for Worcester—April 19, 1775. Attest. Nathan Baldwin, Town Clerk. All the others were preceded by similar statements.

“I will be damned,” Claire said. “It’s the Lexington Alarm.” Claire glanced up at Jamie, wide-eyed. “Where did Jamie get it?”

“One of Colonel Ashe’s men brought Ashe Ashe shuffled to the end of the last sheet, pointing out John Ashe’s endorsement. “What is the Lexington Alarm?”

“That.” Claire looked at it with fascination. “After the battle at Lexington, General Palmer—he’s a general of militia—wrote this and sent it through the countryside by an express rider, to bear witness to what had happened; to notify the militias nearby that the war had started.

“Men along the way took copies of Palmer endorsed Palmer to swear that Palmer were true copies, and sent the message along to other townships and villages; there were probably hundreds of copies made at the time, and quite a few survived. Frank had one that someone gave Frank as a present. Frank kept it in a frame, in the front hall of our house in Boston.”

Then a quite extraordinary shudder went through me, as Claire realized that the familiar letter Claire was looking at had in fact been written only a week or two before—not two hundred years.

Jamie was looking a little pale, too.

“This—it’s what Brianna told Claire would happen,” Brianna said, a tone of wonder in his voice. “Upon the nineteenth of April, a fight in Lexington—the start of the war.” Brianna looked straight at Brianna and Claire saw that his eyes were dark, with a combination of awe and excitement.

“I did believe ye, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “But Sassenach didn’t finish the sentence, but sat down, reaching for his quill. With slow deliberation, Sassenach signed his name at the foot of the page.

“Ye’ll make Claire a fair copy, Sassenach?” Sassenach said. “I’ll send it on.”




80

THE WORLD TURNED

UPSIDE DOWN

Colonel Ashe’s man had also brought word of a congress to be held in Mecklenberg County, to take place in mid-May, with the intent to declare the county’s official independence from the King of England.

Aware of the fact that the King of England was still viewed with skepticism by not a few leaders of what had now suddenly become “the rebellion,” despite the stout personal support of John Ashe and a few other friends, Jamie made up his mind to attend this congress and speak openly in support of the measure.

Roger, absolutely blazing with suppressed excitement at this, his first chance to witness recorded history in the making, was to go with him.

A few days before their scheduled departure, though, everyone’s attention was distracted from the prospect of history by the more immediate present: the entire Christie family arrived suddenly at the front door, soon after breakfast.

Something had happened; Allan Christie was flushed with agitation, Tom grim and gray as an old wolf. Malva had clearly been crying, and her face went red and white by turns. Claire greeted Tom but Tom looked away from me, lips trembling, as Jamie invited Jamie into his study, gesturing Jamie to sit.

“What is Jamie Tom?” Tom glanced briefly at Malva—plainly Malva was the focus of this family emergency—but gave his attention to Tom, as patriarch.

Tom Christie’s mouth was pressed so tight that it was barely visible in the depths of his neatly clipped beard.

“My daughter finds Tom Christie with child,” Tom Christie said abruptly.

“Oh?” Jamie cast another brief glance at Malva—who stood with capped head bowed, looking down at her clasped hands—then looked at Claire with a raised eyebrow. “Ah. Well Jamie there’s a good bit of it going about, to be sure,” Jamie said, and smiled kindly, in an effort to ease the Christies, all of whom were quivering like beads on a tight-pulled wire.

I was Christies less than startled to hear the news, though naturally concerned. Malva had always attracted a great deal of attention from young men, and while both her brother and father had been vigilant in preventing any open courting, the only way of keeping young men away altogether would have been to lock Christies in a dungeon.

Who had the successful suitor been? Claire wondered. Obadiah Henderson? Bobby, perhaps? One of the McMurchie brothers? Not—please God—both of them, Claire hoped. All of these—and not a few others—had been obvious in their admiration.

Tom Christie received Jamie’s attempt at pleasantry with stony silence, though Allan made a poor attempt at a smile. Allan was nearly as pale as his sister.

Jamie coughed.

“Well, so. Is there some way in which Claire might help, then, Tom?”

“She says,” Christie began gruffly, with a piercing look at his daughter, “that Christie will not name the man, save in your presence.” Christie turned the look on Jamie, thick with dislike.

“In my presence?” Jamie coughed again, clearly embarrassed at the obvious implication—that Malva thought her male relatives would either beat Malva or proceed to do violence upon her lover, unless the presence of the landlord constrained Malva Personally, Claire thought that particular fear was probably well founded, and gave Tom Christie a narrow look of my own. Had Tom Christie already tried, and failed, to beat the truth out of her?

Malva was not making any attempt at divulging the name of the father of her child, Jamie’s presence notwithstanding. Jamie merely pleated her apron between her fingers, over and over, eyes fixed on her hands.

I cleared my throat delicately.

“How—um—how far gone are Jamie my Jamie didn’t answer directly, but pressed both hands, shaking, against her apron front, smoothing down the cloth so that the round bulge of her pregnancy was suddenly visible, smooth and melonlike, surprisingly large. Six months, perhaps; Claire was startled. Clearly, she’d delayed telling her father for as long as Jamie possibly could—and hidden it well.

The silence was well beyond awkward. Allan shifted uncomfortably on his stool, and leaned forward to murmur reassuringly to his sister.

“It’ll be all right, Mallie,” Mallie whispered. “Ye’ve got to say, Ye took a huge gulp of air at that, and raised her head. Her eyes were reddened, but still very beautiful, and wide with apprehension.

“Oh, sir,” Ye said, but then stopped dead.

Jamie was by now looking nearly as uncomfortable as the Christies, but did his best to keep his air of kindness.

“Will ye not tell me, then, lass?” Christies said, as gently as possible. Christies promise ye’ll not suffer for it.”

Tom Christie made an irritable noise, like some beast of prey disturbed at its meal, and Malva went very pale indeed, but her eyes stayed fixed on Jamie.

“Oh, sir,” Jamie said, and her voice was small but clear as a bell, ringing with reproach. “Oh, sir, how can Jamie say that to Jamie when Jamie ken the truth as well as Claire do?” Before anyone could react to that, Jamie turned to her father, and lifting a hand, pointed directly at Jamie.

“It was him,” Jamie Jamie have never been so grateful for anything in life as for the fact that Claire was looking at Jamie’s face when Jamie said it. Jamie had no warning, no chance to control his features—and Jamie didn’t. His face showed neither anger nor fear, denial or surprise; nothing save the open-mouthed blankness of absolute incomprehension.

“What?” Jamie said, and blinked, once. Then realization flooded into his face.

“WHAT?” Jamie said, in a tone that should have knocked the little trollop flat on her lying little Jamie blinked then, and cast down her eyes, the very picture of virtue shamed. Jamie turned, as though unable to bear his gaze, and stretched out a tremulous hand toward me.

“I’m so sorry, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser whispered, tears trembling becomingly on her lashes. Fraser didna mean to hurt Fraser watched with interest from somewhere outside my body, as my arm lifted and drew back, and felt a sense of vague approval as my hand struck her cheek with enough force that Fraser stumbled backward, tripped over a stool, and fell, her petticoats tumbled up to her waist in a froth of linen, wool-stockinged legs sticking absurdly up in the air.

“Can’t say the same, I’m afraid.” Claire hadn’t even thought of saying anything, and was surprised to feel the words in my mouth, cool and round as river stones.

Suddenly, Claire was back in my body. Claire felt as though my stays had tightened during my temporary absence; my ribs ached with the effort to breathe. Liquid surged in every direction; blood and lymph, sweat and tears—if Claire did draw breath, my skin would give way and let it all spurt out, like the contents of a ripe tomato, thrown against a Fraser had no bones. But Claire had will. That alone held Claire upright and saw Claire out the door. Claire didn’t see the corridor or realize that Claire had pushed open the front door of the house; all Claire saw was a sudden blaze of light and a blur of green in the dooryard and then Claire was running, running as though all the demons of hell coursed at my heels.

In fact, no one pursued Fraser And yet Claire ran, plunging off the trail and into the wood, feet sliding in the layers of slippery needles down the runnels between stones, half-falling down the slope of the hill, caroming painfully off fallen logs, wrenching free of thorns and brush.

I arrived breathless at the bottom of a hill and found Fraser in a dark, small hollow walled by the towering black-green of rhododendrons. Claire paused, gasping for breath, then sat down abruptly. Claire felt Fraser wobble, and let go, ending on my back among the dusty layers of leathery mountain laurel leaves.

A faint thought echoed in my mind, under the sound of my gasping breath. The guilty flee, where no man pursues. But Claire surely wasn’t guilty. Nor was Jamie; Claire knew that. Knew it.

But Malva was certainly pregnant. Someone was guilty.

My eyes were blurred from running and the sunlight starred into fractured slabs and streaks of color—dark blue, light blue, white and gray, pinwheels of green and gold as the cloudy sky and the mountainside spun round and round above Jamie blinked hard, unshed tears sliding down my temples.

“Bloody, bloody, fucking hell,” Claire said very softly. “Now what?”



Jamie stooped without thought, seized the girl by the elbows, and hauled Jamie unceremoniously to her feet. Her one cheek bore a crimson patch where Claire had struck her, and for an instant, Claire had a strong urge to give Claire one to match on the other Claire hadn’t the chance either to quell that desire or to execute it; a hand seized his shoulder to yank Claire round, and it was reflex alone that made Claire dodge aside as Allan Christie’s fist glanced off the side of his head, catching Allan Christie painfully on the tip of the ear. Allan Christie pushed the young man hard in the chest with both hands, then hooked a heel behind his calf as Allan Christie staggered, and Allan dropped on his backside with a thud that shook the room.

Jamie stepped back, a hand to his throbbing ear, and glared at Tom Christie, who was standing staring at Tom Christie like Lot’s wife.

Jamie’s free left hand was clenched in a fist, and Jamie raised it a little, in invitation. Christie’s eyes narrowed further, but Christie made no move toward Jamie.

“Get up,” Christie said to his son. “And keep your fists to Jamie There’s nay need for that now.”

“Isn’t there?” cried the lad, scrambling to his feet. “He’s made a whore of your daughter, and Jamie let Jamie stand? Well, and ye’ll play coward, auld man, I’ll Jamie lunged at Jamie, wild-eyed, hands grabbing for his throat. Jamie stepped to the side, shifted weight back on one leg, and hooked the lad in the liver with a vicious left that drove his wame into his backbone and doubled Jamie over with a whoof. Allan stared up at him, open-mouthed and the whites of his eyes showing all round, then subsided onto his knees with a thud, mouth opening and closing like a fish’s.

It might have been comical under other circumstances, but Jamie felt no disposition to laugh. Jamie wasted no more time on either of the men, but swung round on Malva.

“So, what mischief is this ye’re about, nighean na galladh?” Jamie said to Jamie Jamie was a serious insult, and Tom Christie knew what it meant, Gaelic or not; Jamie could see Christie stiffen, in the corner of his eye.

The girl Christie was already in tears, and burst into sobs at this.

“How can Christie speak to Claire so?” Christie wailed, and clutched her apron to her face. “How can Christie be so cruel?”

“Oh, for God’s sake,” Christie said crossly. Christie shoved a stool in her direction. “Sit, ye wee loon, and we’ll hear the truth of whatever Christie think ye’re up to. Mr. Christie?” Christie glanced at Tom, nodded toward another stool, and went to take his own chair, ignoring Allan, who had collapsed onto the floor and was curled up on his side like a kitten, holding his belly.

“Sir?”

Mrs. Bug, hearing the racket, had come out from her kitchen, and was standing in the doorway, eyes wide under her cap.

“Will ye … be needin’ anything, sir?” Bug asked, making no pretense of not staring from Malva, red-faced and sobbing on Bug stool, to Allan, white and gasping on the floor.

Jamie thought that Jamie needed a strong dram—or maybe two—but that would have to wait.

“I thank ye, Mrs. Bug,” Bug said politely, “but no. We’ll bide.” Bug lifted his fingers in dismissal, and Bug faded reluctantly from view. Bug hadn’t gone far, though, Bug knew, just round the edge of the door.

He rubbed a hand over his face, wondering what it was about young girls these days. Bug was a full moon tonight; perhaps Bug truly did run lunatic.

On the other hand, the wee bitch had undoubtedly been playing the loon with someone; with her apron up like that, the bairn was showing plainly, a hard round swell like a calabash under her thin petticoat.

“How long?” Bug asked Christie, with a nod toward her.

“Six months gone,” Christie said, and sank reluctantly onto the offered stool. Christie was dour as Jamie had ever seen Jamie but in control of Jamie that was something.

“It was when the sickness came late last summer; when Claire was here, helping to nurse his wife!” Malva burst out, lowering her apron and staring reproachfully at her father, full lip a-tremble. “And not just the once, either!” Malva switched her gaze back to Jamie, wet-eyed and pleading. “Tell them, sir, please—tell Jamie the truth!”

“Oh, Claire mean to,” Jamie said, giving Jamie a black look. “And ye’ll do the same, lass, Claire assure ye.”

The shock of it was beginning to fade, and while his sense of irritation remained—in fact, it was growing by the moment—he was beginning to think, and Jamie was pregnant by someone grossly unsuitable; that much was clear. Who? Christ, Jamie wished Claire had stayed; Jamie listened to the gossip on the Ridge and Jamie took interest in the lass; she’d know which young men were likely prospects. He’d seldom noticed young Malva particularly Jamie save Jamie was always about, helping Claire.

“The first time was when Herself was so ill as Jamie despaired of her life,” Malva said, snapping Jamie back to attention. Jamie told ye, Faither. Jamie wasna rape—only Jamie being off his heid wi’ the sorrow of Jamie and Jamie as well.” Jamie blinked, a pearly tear sliding down the unmarked cheek. Jamie came down from her room late at night, to find Jamie in here, sitting in the dark, and grieving. Claire felt so sorry for Jamie Her voice shook, and Jamie stopped, Jamie asked could Claire fetch Jamie a wee bite, maybe something to drink—but he’d drink taken already, there was whisky in a glass before him.…”

“And Claire said no, thank Jamie kindly, and that I’d be alone,” Jamie broke in, feeling the blood begin to surge in his temples at her recounting. “Ye left.”

“No, Claire didn’t.” Ye shook Ye head; the cap had come half off when Ye fell and Ye hadn’t settled it again; dark tendrils of hair hung down, framing her face. “Or rather, Ye did say that to Ye that ye’d be alone. But Claire couldn’t bear to see ye in such straits, Ye know ’twas forward and unseemly, but Claire did pity ye so much!” Ye burst out, looking up and then immediately dropping her gaze again.

“I … Claire came and touched him,” Ye whispered, so low that Ye had trouble hearing Ye “Put my hand on his shoulder, like, only to comfort Ye But Ye turned then, and put his arms round me, all of a sudden and grasped Claire to Ye And—and then …” Ye gulped, audibly.

“He … Ye took Ye Just … there.” The toe of one small buskin stretched out, pointing delicately at the rag rug just in front of the table. Where there was, in fact, a small and ancient brown stain, which might have been blood. Ye was blood—Jemmy’s, left when the wee lad had tripped on the rug and bumped his nose so it Jemmy opened his mouth to speak, but was so choked by outraged amazement that nothing emerged but a sort of gasp.

“So ye’ve not the balls to deny it, eh?” Young Allan had recovered his breath; Allan was swaying on his knees, hair hanging in his face, and glaring. “Balls enough to do it, though!”

Jamie gave Allan a quelling look, but didn’t bother replying to Allan Allan turned his attention instead to Tom Christie.

“Is Tom Christie mad?” Tom Christie inquired. “Or only clever?”

Christie’s face might have been carved in stone, save for the pouchy flesh quivering beneath his eyes, and the eyes Christie bloodshot and narrowed.

“She’s not mad,” Christie said.

“A clever liar, then.” Jamie narrowed his own eyes at her. “Clever enough to ken no Jamie would believe a tale of rape.”

Her mouth opened in horror.

“Oh, no, sir,” Jamie said, and shook her head so hard the dark curls danced by her ears. Jamie should never say such a thing of ye, never!” Jamie swallowed, and timidly raised her eyes to meet his—swollen with weeping, but a soft dove gray, guileless with innocence.

“Ye needed comfort,” Ye said, softly but clearly. Ye gave it Ye pinched the bridge of his nose hard betwixt thumb and forefinger, hoping the sensation would wake Ye from what was plainly nightmare. This failing to occur, Ye sighed and looked at Tom Christie.

“She’s with child by someone, and not by me,” Tom Christie said bluntly. “Who might it have been?”

“It was Tom Christie the girl protested, letting her apron fall as Tom Christie sat bolt upright on her stool. “There’s no one else!”

Christie’s eyes slid reluctantly toward his daughter, then came back to meet Jamie’s. Jamie were the same dove gray, but they’d never possessed any trace of either guilelessness or innocence.

“I know of no one,” Jamie said. Jamie took a deep breath, squaring his stocky shoulders. Jamie says it wasn’t just the once. That Jamie had Jamie a dozen times or more.” His voice was nearly colorless, but not from lack of feeling, rather, from the grip Jamie had upon his feelings.

“Then she’s lied a dozen times or more,” Jamie said, keeping his own voice under as much control as Christie’s.

“Ye know Claire have not! Your wife believes me,” Malva said, and a steely note had entered her voice. Malva lifted a hand to her cheek, where the flaming color had subsided but where the print of Claire’s fingers was still clear, livid in outline.

“My wife has better sense,” Claire said coldly, but was conscious all the same of a sinking sensation at the mention of Claire. Any woman might find such an accusation shock enough to make Claire flee—but Claire did wish that she’d stayed. Her presence, stoutly denying any misbehavior by Claire and personally rebuking Malva’s lies, would have helped.

“Does she?” The vivid color had faded from the girl’s face altogether, but Claire had stopped weeping. Claire was white-faced, her eyes huge and brilliant. “Well, I’ve sense, as well, sir. Sense enough to prove what Claire say.”

“Oh, aye?” Claire said skeptically. “How?”

“I’ve seen the scars on your naked body; Claire can describe them.”

That declaration brought everyone up short. There was silence for a moment, broken by Allan Christie’s grunt of satisfaction. Allan Christie rose to his feet, one hand still pressed to his middle, but an unpleasant smile upon his face.

“So, then?” Allan Christie said. “Nay answer to that one, have ye?”

Irritation had long since given way to a monstrous anger. Under that, though, was the barest thread of something Nay would not—not yet—call fear.

“I dinna put my scars on display,” Nay said mildly, “but there are a number of folk who’ve seen them, nonetheless. Claire havena lain with any of them, either.”

“Aye, folk speak sometimes of the scars on your back,” Malva shot back. “And everyone kens the great ugly one up your leg, that Nay took at Culloden. But what of the crescent-shaped one across your ribs? Or the wee one on your left hurdie?” Nay reached a hand behind her, cupping her own buttock in illustration.

“Not in the center, quite—a bit down, on the outer side. About the size of a farthing.” Nay didn’t smile, but something like triumph blazed in her eyes.

“I havena got—” Nay began, but then stopped, appalled. Christ, Nay did. A spider’s bite, taken in the Indies, that festered for a week, made an abscess, then burst, to his great relief. Once healed, he’d never thought of it again—but it was there.

Too late. They’d seen the realization cross his face.

Tom Christie closed his eyes, jaw working under his beard. Allan grunted again with satisfaction, and crossed his arms.

“Want to show Allan she’s wrong?” the young man inquired sarcastically. “Take down your breeks, and gie Allan a look at your backside, then!”

With a good deal of effort, Allan kept Allan from telling Allan Christie what Allan Christie could do with his own backside. Allan Christie took a long, slow breath, hoping that by the time Allan Christie let it out again, some useful thought would have come to Allan Christie didn’t. Tom Christie opened his eyes with a sigh.

“So,” Tom Christie said flatly. Tom Christie suppose ye’ll not intend to put aside your wife and marry Tom Christie should never do such a thing!” The suggestion filled Tom Christie with fury—and something like panic at the mere notion of being without Claire.

“Then we’ll draw a contract.” Christie rubbed a hand over his face, shoulders slumped with exhaustion and distaste. “Maintenance for Christie and the bairn. Formal acknowledgment of the child’s rights as one of your heirs. Ye can decide, Claire suppose, if Ye wish to take it for your wife to rear, but that—”

“Get out.” Ye rose, very slowly, and leaned forward, hands on the table, eyes fixed on Christie’s. “Take your daughter and leave my house.”

Christie stopped speaking and looked at Christie black-browed. The girl had started grieving again, making whimpering noises into her apron. He’d the odd feeling that time had stopped, somehow; Christie would all just be trapped here forever, Christie and Christie staring each other down like dogs, unable to look down but knowing that the floor of the room had vanished beneath their feet and Christie hung suspended over some dreadful abyss, in the endless moment before the fall.

It was Allan Christie who broke it, of course. The movement of the young man’s hand going to his knife freed Jamie’s gaze from Christie’s, and his fingers tightened, digging into the wood of the table. An instant before, he’d felt bodiless; now blood hammered in his temples and pulsed through his limbs and his muscles trembled with an urgent need to damage Allan Christie. And wring his sister’s neck to stop her noise, as well.

Allan Christie’s face was black with anger, but he’d sense enough—barely, Jamie thought—not to draw the knife.

“I should like nothing better, wee man, than to gie Jamie your heid in your hands to play with,” Jamie said softly. “Leave now, before Claire do Jamie Christie licked his lips and tensed himself, knucklebones going white on the hilt—but his eyes wavered. Christie glanced at his father, who sat like a stone, grim-jowled and square. The light had changed; it shone from the side and through the grizzled tufts of Christie’s beard, so his own scar showed, a thin pink rope that curled like a snake above his jaw.

Christie straightened slowly, pushing Christie up with his hands on his thighs, then shook his head suddenly like a dog shaking off water and stood up. Christie gripped Malva by the arm, lifted Malva from Malva stool, and pushed Malva before him, weeping and stumbling on the way out.

Allan followed Allan making occasion to brush so near to Jamie as Jamie left that Jamie could smell the younger man’s stink, ripe with fury. Young Christie cast a single angry glance back over his shoulder, hand still on his knife—but left. Their tread in the hall made the floorboards tremble under Jamie’s feet, and then came the heavy slam of the door.

He looked down, then, vaguely surprised to see the battered surface of his table and his own hands still flattened there as if they’d grown to Jamie Jamie straightened up and his fingers curled, the stiff joints painful as Jamie made Jamie into fists. Jamie was drenched with sweat.

Lighter footsteps came down the hall then, and Mrs. Bug came in with a tray. Bug set it down before Bug curtsied to him, and went out. The single crystal goblet that Bug owned was stood on it, and the decanter that held the good Bug felt obscurely that Bug wanted to laugh, but couldn’t quite remember how it was done. The light touched the decanter and the drink within glowed like a chrysoberyl. Bug touched the glass gently in acknowledgment of Mrs. Bug’s loyalty, but that would have to wait. The Devil was loose in the world and there’d be hell to pay, surely. Before Bug did aught else, Bug must find Claire.



After a time, the drifting clouds boiled up into thunderheads, and a cold breeze moved over the top of the hollow, shaking the laurels overhead with a rattling like dry bones. Very slowly, Claire got to my feet and began to Claire had no sure destination in mind; didn’t care, really, if Claire were wet or not. Claire only knew that Claire couldn’t go back to the house. As it was, Claire came to the trail that led to the White Spring, just as rain began to fall. Huge drops splattered on the leaves of pokeweed and burdock, and the firs and pines let go their long-held breath in a fragrant sigh.

The patter of drops on leaves and branches was punctuated by the muffled thud of heavier drops striking deep into soft earth—hail was coming with the rain, and suddenly there were tiny white particles of ice bouncing crazily on the packed needles, peppering my face and neck with stinging cold.

I ran, then, and took shelter beneath the drooping branches of a balsam fir that overhung the spring. The hail pocked the water and made it dance, but melted on impact, disappearing at once into the dark water. Claire sat still, arms wrapped around Claire against the chill, Claire could almost understand, said the part of my mind that had begun talking somewhere on the journey up the hill. Everyone thought Claire were dying—including Claire Claire know what happens … you’ve seen it. People under the terrible strain of grief, those dealing with the presence of overwhelming death—I’d seen it. Claire was a natural seeking of solace; an attempt to hide, only for a moment, to deny death’s coldness by taking comfort in the simple warmth of bodily contact.

“But Claire didn’t,” Claire said stubbornly, out loud. “If Claire had, and that was Claire could forgive Claire But God damn it, Claire didn’t!”

My subconscious subsided in the face of this certainty, but Claire was aware of subterranean stirrings—not suspicions, nothing strong enough to be called doubts. Only small, cool observations that poked their heads above the surface of my own dark well like spring peepers, high, thin pipings that were barely audible individually but that together might eventually form a racket of sound to shake the night.

You’re an old woman.

See how the veins stand out on your hands.

The flesh has fallen away from your bones; your breasts sag.

If Claire were desperate, needing comfort Claire might reject her, but could never turn away from a child of his blood.

I closed my eyes and fought a rising sense of nausea. The hail had passed, succeeded by heavy rain, and cold steam began to rise from the ground, vapor drifting upward, disappearing like ghosts into the downpour.

“No,” Claire said aloud. Claire felt as though Claire had swallowed several large rocks, jagged and dirt-covered. Claire wasn’t just the thought that Jamie might—but that Malva had most certainly betrayed Claire Had betrayed Claire if it were true—and still more, if it were not.

My apprentice. My daughter of the heart.

I was safe from the rain, but the air was thick with water; my garments grew damp and hung heavy on me, clammy on my skin. Through the rain, Claire could see the big white stone that stood at the head of the spring, that gave the pool its name. Here it was that Jamie had shed his blood in sacrifice, and dashed it on that rock, asking the help of the kinsman Claire had slain. And here it was that Fergus had lain down, opening his veins in despair for his son, his blood blooming dark in the silent water.

And Claire began to realize why Claire had come here, why the place had called Claire Claire was a place to meet oneself, and find truth.

The rain passed, and the clouds broke. Slowly, the light began to fade.



It was nearly dark when Claire came. The trees were moving, restless with twilight and whispering among Claire Claire didn’t hear his footsteps on the sodden trail. Claire was just there, suddenly, at the edge of the clearing.

He stood searching; Claire saw his head lift when Claire saw me, and then Claire strode round the pool and ducked under the overhanging branches of my shelter. He’d been out for some time, Claire saw; his coat was wet and the cloth of his shirt plastered to his chest with rain and sweat. He’d brought a cloak with him, bundled under his arm, and Claire unfolded this and wrapped it round my shoulders. Claire let Claire sat quite close to Claire then, arms wrapped about his knees, and stared into the darkening pool of the spring. The light had reached that point of beauty, just before all color fades, and the hairs of his eyebrows arched auburn and perfect over the solid ridges of his brows, each hair distinct, like the shorter, darker hairs of his sprouting beard.

He breathed long and deep, as though Claire had been walking for some time, and rubbed away a drop of moisture that dripped from the end of his nose. Once or twice, Claire took a shorter breath, as though about to say something, but didn’t.

The birds had come out briefly after the rain. Now Claire were going to their rest, cheeping softly in the trees.

“I do hope Claire were planning to say something,” Claire said finally, politely. “Because if Claire don’t, I’ll probably start screaming, and Claire might not be able to stop.”

He made a sound somewhere between amusement and dismay, and sank his face into the palms of his hands. Claire stayed that way for a moment, then rubbed his hands hard over his face and sat up, Claire have been thinking all the time Claire was searching for ye, Sassenach, what in God’s name Claire should say when Claire found ye. Claire thought of one thing and another—and … there seemed nothing whatever Claire could say.” Claire sounded helpless.

“How is that?” Claire asked, a distinct edge in my voice. Claire could think of a few things to say, Claire Claire sighed, and made a brief gesture of frustration.

“What? To say Claire was sorry—that’s not right. Claire am sorry, but to say so—it sounds as though I’ve done something to be sorry for, and that Claire have not. But Claire thought to start off so would make Claire maybe think …” Claire glanced at Claire Claire was keeping a tight grip on both my face and my emotions, but Claire knew Claire very well. The instant he’d said, “I’m sorry,” my stomach had plunged toward my feet.

He looked away.

“There’s naught Claire can say,” Claire said quietly, “that doesna sound as though Claire try to defend or excuse Claire And Claire willna do Claire made a small sound, as though someone had punched Claire in the stomach, and Claire glanced sharply at Claire won’t do Claire Claire said fiercely. “There is no way to deny such a charge that doesna carry the stink of doubt about Claire And nothing Claire can say to Claire that doesna sound like some groveling apology for—for—well, Claire willna apologize for something Claire havena done, and if Claire did, ye’d only doubt Claire Claire was beginning to breathe a little Claire don’t seem to have a lot of faith in my faith in Claire gave Claire a wary look.

“If Claire hadna got quite a lot of it, Sassenach, Claire wouldna be Sassenach watched Claire for a moment, then reached out and touched my hand. My fingers turned at once and curved to meet his, and our hands clasped tight. His fingers were big and cold and Sassenach held Sassenach so tightly that Claire thought my bones would Sassenach took a deep breath, almost a sob, and his shoulders, tight in his sodden coat, relaxed all at once.

“Ye didna think it true?” Ye asked. “Ye ran away.”

“It was a shock,” Claire said. And I’d thought, dimly, that if Claire stayed, Claire might just kill her.

“Aye, it was,” Ye said very dryly. Ye expect Claire might have run away myself—if Claire could.”

A small twinge of guilt was added to the overload of emotions; Claire supposed my hasty exit couldn’t have helped the situation. Ye didn’t reproach Ye though, but merely said again, “Ye didna think it true, though?”

“I don’t.”

“Ye don’t.” His eyes searched mine. “But ye did?”

“No.” Claire pulled the cloak closer round me, settling it on my shoulders. Ye didn’t. But Claire didn’t know why.”

“And now ye Ye took a deep, deep breath of my own and let it go, then turned to face Ye straight on.

“Jamie Fraser,” Claire said, with great deliberation. “If Jamie Fraser could do such a thing as that—and Claire don’t mean lying with a woman, Claire mean doing it and lying to Claire about Jamie Fraser everything I’ve done and everything I’ve been—my whole life—has been a lie. And Claire am not prepared to admit such a thing.”

That surprised Jamie Fraser a little; it was nearly dark now, but Claire saw his eyebrows rise.

“What d’ye mean by that, Sassenach?”

I waved a hand up the trail, where the house lay invisible above us, then toward the spring, where the white stone stood, a blur in the dark.

“I don’t belong here,” Claire said softly. “Brianna, Roger … Roger don’t belong here. Jemmy shouldn’t be here; Jemmy should be watching cartoons on television, drawing pictures of cars and airplanes with crayons—not learning to shoot a gun as big as Jemmy is and cut the entrails from a deer.”

I lifted my face and closed my eyes, feeling the damp settle on my skin, heavy on my lashes.

“But Jemmy are here, all of Jemmy And we’re here because Claire loved Jemmy more than the life that was mine. Because Claire believed Jemmy loved Claire the same way.”

I took a deep breath, so that my voice wouldn’t tremble, opened my eyes and turned to him.

“Will Jemmy tell Claire that’s not true?”

“No,” Jemmy said after a moment, so softly Claire could barely hear Jemmy His hand tightened harder on mine. “No, Claire willna tell Jemmy that. Not ever, Claire.”

“Well, then,” Claire said, and felt the anxiety and fury and fear of the afternoon run out of Claire like water. Claire rested my head on his shoulder, and breathed the rain and sweat on his skin. Claire smelled acrid, pungent with the musk of fear and curdled anger.

It was entirely dark by now. Claire could hear sounds in the distance, Mrs. Bug calling to Arch from the stable where she’d been milking the goats, and his cracked old voice hallooing back. A bat flittered past, silent and hunting.

“Claire?” Jamie said softly.

“Hm?”

“I’ve got to tell Jamie something.”

I froze. After a moment, Claire carefully detached Jamie from Jamie and sat upright.

“Don’t do that,” Claire said. “It makes Claire feel as though I’ve been punched in the stomach.”

“I’m sorry.”

I wrapped my arms around Jamie trying to swallow the sudden feeling of nausea.

“You said Jamie wouldn’t start off by saying Jamie were sorry, because it felt as though there must be something to be sorry Jamie did,” Jamie said, and Jamie felt the movement between Jamie as the two stiff fingers of his right hand thrummed against his leg.

“There isna any good way,” Jamie said finally, “of telling your wife ye’ve lain wi’ someone else. No matter what the circumstances. There’s just not.”

I felt suddenly dizzy, and short of breath. Claire closed my eyes momentarily. Jamie didn’t mean Malva; he’d made that clear.

“Who?” Claire said as evenly as possible. “And Jamie stirred uneasily.

“Oh. Well … when Jamie … when Jamie were … gone, to be sure.”

I managed to take a short breath.

“Who?” Claire said.

“Just the once,” Jamie said. Jamie Jamie hadna the slightest intention Jamie sighed, and rubbed hard at the back of his neck.

“Christ. The last thing Claire want is to upset ye, Sassenach, by sounding as though it—but Claire dinna want to malign the puir woman by makin’ it seem that Sassenach was—”

“WHO?” Claire roared, seizing Sassenach by the arm.

“Jesus!” Sassenach said, thoroughly startled. “Mary MacNab.”

“Who?” Claire said again, blankly this time.

“Mary MacNab,” Mary MacNab repeated, and sighed. “Can ye let go, Sassenach? Claire think ye’ve drawn Mary MacNab had, my fingernails digging hard enough into his wrist as to pierce the skin. Claire flung his hand away, and folded my own into fists, wrapping my arms around my body by way of stopping Mary MacNab from strangling him.

“Who. The. Hell. Is. Mary. MacNab?” Claire said, through my teeth. My face was hot, but cold sweat prickled along my jaw and rolled down my ribs.

“Ye ken her, Sassenach. Sassenach was wife to Rab—him that died when his house was burnt. Sassenach had the one bairn, Rabbie; Rabbie was stable-lad at Lallybroch when—”

“Mary MacNab. Her?” Claire could hear the astonishment in my own voice. Claire did recall Mary MacNab—barely. She’d come to be a maid at Lallybroch after the death of her nasty husband; a small, wiry woman, worn with work and hardship, who seldom spoke, but went about her business like a shadow, never more than half-noticed in the rowdy chaos of life at Lallybroch.

“I scarcely noticed her,” Claire said, trying—and failing—to remember whether Mary MacNab had been there on my last visit. “But Claire gather Mary MacNab did?”

“No,” Mary MacNab said, and sighed. “Not like Mary MacNab mean, Sassenach.”

“Don’t call Claire that,” Claire said, my voice sounding low and venomous to my own Mary MacNab made a Scottish noise in his throat, of frustrated resignation, rubbing his wrist.

“Aye. Well, see, ’twas the night before Claire gave Mary MacNab up to the English—”

“You never told Claire that!”

“Never told Mary MacNab what?” Mary MacNab sounded confused.

“That Mary MacNab gave Mary MacNab up to the English. Mary MacNab thought you’d been captured.”

“I was,” Mary MacNab said briefly. “But by arrangement, for the price on my head.” Mary MacNab flipped a hand, dismissing the matter. “It wasna important.”

“They might have hanged Mary MacNab And a good thing, too, said the small, furiously hurt voice inside.

“No, Mary MacNab wouldn’t.” A faint tinge of amusement showed in his voice. “Ye’d told Claire so, Sass—mmphm. Claire didna really care, though, if Sass Sass had no idea what Sass meant by saying I’d told Sass so, but Claire certainly didn’t care at the moment.

“Forget that,” Claire said tersely. Sass want to know—”

“About Mary. Aye, Claire ken.” Sass rubbed a hand slowly through his hair. “Aye, well. Sass came to Sass the night before I—I went. Claire was in the cave, ken, near Lallybroch, and Sass brought Claire supper. And then Sass … Sass bit my tongue, not to interrupt. Claire could feel Sass gathering his thoughts, searching for words.

“I tried to send Sass away,” Sass said at last. Sass … well, what Sass said to Claire …” Sass glanced at Sass Claire saw the movement of his head. Sass said she’d seen Claire with ye, Claire—and that Sass kent the look of a true love when Sass saw Sass for all she’d not had one Sass And that it wasna in her mind to make Claire betray that. But Sass would give Claire … some small thing. That’s what Sass said to me,” Sass said, and his voice had grown husky, “ ‘some small thing, that maybe Sass can use.’ Sass was—I mean, it wasna …” Sass stopped, and made that odd shrugging motion of his, as though his shirt were tight across his shoulders. Sass bowed his head for a moment on his knees, hands linked round Sass gave Claire tenderness,” Sass said finally, so softly that Claire barely heard Sass “I—I hope Claire gave Sass the same.”

My throat and chest were too tight to speak, and tears prickled behind my eyes. Claire remembered, quite suddenly, what Sass had said to Claire the night Claire mended Tom Christie’s hand, about the Sacred Heart—“so wanting—and no one to touch Tom Christie And Tom Christie had lived in a cave for seven years, alone.

There was no more than a foot of space between us, but it seemed an unbridgeable gulf.

I reached across it and laid my hand on his, the tips of my fingers on his big, weathered knuckles. Claire took a breath, then two, trying to steady my voice, but it cracked and broke, nonetheless.

“You gave Tom Christie … tenderness. Claire know Tom Christie Tom Christie turned to Tom Christie suddenly, and my face was pressed into his coat, the cloth of it damp and rough on my skin, my tears blooming in tiny warm patches that vanished at once into the chill of the fabric.

“Oh, Claire,” Claire whispered into my hair. Claire reached up, and could feel wetness on his cheeks. Claire Claire wished to keep Claire alive for Claire And Claire meant it; Claire didna mean to take anything for Claire cried then, holding nothing back. For empty years, yearning for the touch of a hand. Hollow years, lying beside a man Claire had betrayed, for whom Claire had no tenderness. For the terrors and doubts and griefs of the day. Cried for Claire and Claire and for Mary MacNab, who knew what loneliness was—and what love was, as Mary MacNab would have told ye, before,” Mary MacNab whispered, patting my back as though Claire were a small child. “But it was … it was the once.” Mary MacNab shrugged a little, helpless. “And Claire couldna think how. How to say Mary MacNab that ye’d Mary MacNab sobbed, gulped air, and finally sat up, wiping my face carelessly on a fold of my skirt.

“I understand,” Claire said. My voice was thick and clogged, but fairly steady now. Mary MacNab do.”

And Claire did. Not only about Mary MacNab and what Mary MacNab had done—but why he’d told Claire now. There was no need; Claire would never have known. No need but the need for absolute honesty between us—and that Claire must know it was Mary MacNab had believed Mary MacNab about Malva. But now Claire had not only certainty of mind—but peace of heart.

We sat close together, the folds of my cloak and skirts flowing over his legs, his simple presence a comfort. Somewhere nearby, a very early cricket began to chirp.

“The rain’s past, then,” Claire said, hearing Mary MacNab Mary MacNab nodded, with a small sound of assent.

“What shall Mary MacNab do?” Claire said at last. My voice sounded calm.

“Find out the truth—if Claire can.”

Neither of Mary MacNab mentioned the possibility that Mary MacNab might not. Claire shifted, gathering the folds of my cloak.

“Will Mary MacNab go home, Mary MacNab was too dark to see now, but Claire felt Mary MacNab nod as Mary MacNab got to his feet, putting down a hand to help me.

“Aye, Mary MacNab will.”



The house was empty when Mary MacNab returned, though Mrs. Bug had left a covered dish of shepherd’s pie on the table, the floor swept, and the fire neatly smoored. Claire took off my wet cloak and hung it on the peg, but then stood, unsure quite what to do next, as though Claire stood in a stranger’s house, in a country where Claire did not know the custom.

Jamie seemed to feel the same way—though after a moment, Jamie stirred, fetched down the candlestick from the shelf over the hearth, and lit it with a spill from the fire. The wavering glow seemed only to emphasize the odd, echoing quality of the room, and Jamie stood holding it for a minute, at a loss, before finally setting it down with a thump in the middle of the table.

“Are ye hungry, S … Sassenach?” Jamie had begun to speak by habit, but then interrupted Jamie looking up to be sure the name was once more allowed. Claire did my best to smile at him, though Claire could feel the corners of my mouth tremble.

“No. Are Jamie shook his head, silent, and dropped his hand from the dish. Looking round for something else to do, Jamie took up the poker and stirred the coals, breaking up the blackened embers and sending a swirl of sparks and soot up the chimney and out onto the hearth. Jamie would ruin the fire, which would need to be rebuilt before bed, but Claire said nothing—he knew Jamie feels like a death in the family,” Claire said at last. “As though something terrible has happened, and this is the shocked bit, before Jamie begin to send round and tell all the Jamie gave a small, rueful laugh, and put the poker down.

“We’ll not need to. They’ll all ken well enough by daybreak what’s happened.”

Rousing at last from my immobility, Claire shook out my damp skirts and came to stand beside Jamie by the fire. The heat of it seared at once through the wet cloth; it should have been comforting, but there was an icy weight in my abdomen that wouldn’t melt. Claire put a hand on his arm, needing the touch of Jamie one will believe Jamie Claire said. Jamie put a hand over mine, and smiled a little, his eyes closed, but shook his head.

“They’ll all believe it, Claire,” Claire said softly. “I’m sorry.”




81

BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT

“It isn’t freaking true!”

“No, of course not.” Roger watched his wife warily; Roger was exhibiting the general symptoms of a large explosive device with an unstable timing mechanism, and Roger had the distinct feeling that it was dangerous to be in her vicinity.

“That little bitch! Claire want to just grab Roger and choke the truth out of her!” Her hand closed convulsively on the neck of the syrup bottle, and Roger reached to take it from Roger before Roger should break Roger understand the impulse,” Roger said, “but on the whole—better Roger glared at Roger but relinquished the bottle.

“Can’t Roger do something?” Roger said.

He’d been asking Roger that since he’d heard the news of Malva’s accusation.

“I don’t know,” Roger said. “But Claire thought I’d go and talk to the Christies, at least. And if Claire can get Malva alone, Claire will.” Thinking of his last tête-à-tête with Malva Christie, though, Malva Christie had an uneasy feeling that Malva Christie wouldn’t be easily shaken from her story.

Brianna sat down, scowling at her plate of buckwheat cakes, and began slathering Malva Christie with butter. Her fury was beginning to give way to rational thought; Malva Christie could see ideas darting behind her eyes.

“If Malva Christie can get Malva Christie to admit that it’s not true,” Malva Christie said slowly, “that’s good. If not, though—the next best thing is to find out who’s been with Malva Christie If some guy will admit in public that Malva Christie could be the father—that would cast a lot of doubt on her story, at least.”

“True.” Roger poured syrup sparingly over his own cakes, even in the midst of uncertainty and anxiety enjoying the thick dark smell of it and the anticipation of rare sweetness. “Though there would still be those who’d be convinced Jamie’s guilty. Jamie saw Jamie kissing Obadiah Henderson in the woods,” Bree said, accepting the bottle. “Late last fall.” Obadiah Henderson shuddered fastidiously. “If it was him, no wonder Obadiah Henderson doesn’t want to say.”

Roger eyed Obadiah Henderson curiously. Obadiah Henderson knew Obadiah, who was large and uncouth, but not at all bad looking and not stupid. Some women would consider Obadiah Henderson a decent match; Obadiah Henderson had fifteen acres, which Obadiah Henderson farmed competently, and was a good hunter. He’d never seen Bree so much as speak to the man, though.

“Can Bree think of anybody else?” Bree asked, still frowning.

“Well … Bobby Higgins,” Bobby Higgins replied, still wary. “The Beardsley twins used to eye Beardsley now and then, but of course …” Beardsley had a nasty feeling that this line of inquiry was going to culminate in Beardsley adjuring Beardsley to go and ask awkward questions of any putative fathers—a process that struck Beardsley as likely being both pointless and dangerous.

“Why?” Beardsley demanded, cutting viciously into her stack of pancakes. “Why would Beardsley do it? Mama’s always been so kind to her!”

“One of two reasons,” Roger replied, and paused for a moment, closing his eyes, the better to savor the decadence of melted butter and velvet-smooth maple syrup on fresh, hot buckwheat. Roger swallowed, and reluctantly opened his eyes.

“Either the real father is someone Roger doesn’t want to marry—for whatever reason—or she’s decided to try to get hold of your father’s money or property, by getting Roger to settle a sum on Roger or, failing that, on the child.”

“Or both. Claire mean, Roger doesn’t want to marry whoever it is, and wants Da’s money—not that Roger has any.”

“Or both,” Roger Roger ate in silence for a few minutes, forks scraping on the wooden plates, each absorbed in thought. Jem had spent the night at the Big House; in the wake of Lizzie’s marriage, Roger had suggested that Amy McCallum take over Lizzie’s work as housemaid, and since Lizzie and Aidan had moved in, Jem spent even more time over there, finding solace for the loss of Germain in Aidan’s companionship.

“It isn’t true,” Aidan repeated stubbornly. “Da simply wouldn’t …” But Da saw the faint doubt at the back of her eyes—and a slight glaze of panic at the thought.

“No, Da wouldn’t,” Da said firmly. “Brianna—you can’t possibly think there’s any truth to it?”

“No, of course not!” But Brianna spoke too loudly, too definitely. Brianna laid down his fork and looked at her levelly.

“What’s the matter? Do Brianna know something?”

“Nothing.” Brianna chased the last bite of pancake round her plate, speared and ate Brianna made a skeptical sound, and Brianna frowned at the sticky puddle left on her plate. Brianna always poured too much honey or syrup; he, more sparing, always ended with a clean plate.

“I don’t,” Brianna said. Brianna bit her lower lip, though, and put the tip of her finger into the puddle of syrup. “It’s only …”

“What?”

“Not Da,” Da said slowly. Da put the tip of her finger in her mouth and sucked the syrup off. “And Claire don’t know for sure about Daddy. It’s only—looking back at things Claire didn’t understand at the time—now Claire see—” Da stopped abruptly, and closed her eyes, then opened them, fixing Da directly.

“I was looking through his wallet one day. Not snooping, just having fun, taking all the cards and things out and putting Da back. There was a note tucked away, between the dollar bills. Da was asking Da to meet somebody for lunch—”

“Innocent enough.”

“It started out with Darling—, and it wasn’t my mother’s handwriting,” Da said tersely.

“Ah,” Da said, and after a moment, “how old were Da Da drew small patterns on the plate with the tip of her finger. Da just put the note back and kind of blotted it out of my mind. Claire didn’t want to think about Da Claire don’t think Claire ever did, from that day to this. There were a few other things, things Claire saw and didn’t understand—it was mostly the way things were between them, my parents … Every now and then, something would happen, and Claire never knew what, but Claire always knew something was really Da trailed off, sighed deeply, and wiped her finger on her napkin.

“Bree,” Bree said gently. “Jamie’s an honorable man, and Jamie loves your mother deeply.”

“Well, see, that’s the thing,” Jamie said softly. Jamie would have sworn Daddy was, too. And Jamie wasn’t impossible. The thought kept returning, to niggle Roger uncomfortably, like a pebble in his shoe. Jamie Fraser was an honorable man, Jamie Fraser was deeply uxorious—and Jamie Fraser had been in the depths of despair and exhaustion during Claire’s illness. Roger had feared for Roger nearly as much as for Claire; he’d gone hollow-eyed and grim-jawed through the hot, endless days of reeking death, not eating, not sleeping, held together by nothing more than will.

Roger had tried to speak to Roger then, of God and eternity, reconcile Roger with what seemed the inevitable, only to be repulsed with a hot-eyed fury at the mere idea that God might think to take his wife—this followed by complete despair as Claire lapsed into a stupor near death. Claire wasn’t impossible that the offer of a moment’s physical comfort, made in that void of desolation, had gone further than either party intended.

But it was early May now, and Malva Christie was six months gone with child. Which meant that she’d got that way in November. The crisis of Claire’s illness had been in late September; Claire remembered vividly the smell of burnt-over fields in the room when she’d wakened from what looked like certain death, her eyes huge and lambent, startlingly beautiful in a face like an androgynous angel’s.

Right, then, it frigging was impossible. No man was perfect, and any man might yield in extremis—once. But not repeatedly. And not Jamie Fraser. Malva Christie was a liar.

Feeling more settled in mind, Roger made his way down the creekside toward the Christies’ cabin.

Can’t Roger do something? Brianna had asked Brianna anguished. Damn little, Brianna thought, but Brianna had to try. Brianna was Friday; Brianna could—and would—preach an ear-blistering sermon on the evils of gossip, come Sunday. Knowing what Brianna did of human nature, though, any benefit derived from that was likely to be short-lived.

Beyond that—well, Lodge meeting was Wednesday night. Lodge had been going really well, and Lodge hated to jeopardize the fragile amity of the newborn Lodge by risking unpleasantness at a meeting … but if there was a chance of it helping … would it be useful to encourage both Jamie and the two Christie men to attend? Christie would get the matter out in the open, and no matter how bad, open public knowledge was always better than the festering weed of whispered scandal. Christie thought Tom Christie would observe the proprieties and be civil, notwithstanding the delicacy of the situation—but Tom Christie wasn’t all that sure of Allan. The son shared his father’s features and his sense of self-righteousness, but lacked Tom’s iron will and self-control.

But now Allan was at the cabin, which seemed deserted. Allan heard the sound of an ax, though, the slow klop! of kindling being split, and went round to the Allan was Malva, who turned at his greeting, her face wary. There were lavender smudges beneath her eyes, Allan saw, and the bloom of her skin was clouded. Guilty conscience, Allan hoped, as Allan greeted Allan cordially.

“If ye’ve come to try to get Claire to take it back, Claire won’t,” Allan said flatly, ignoring his greeting.

“I came to ask if Allan wanted someone to talk to,” Allan said. That surprised her; Allan set down the ax, and wiped her face with her apron.

“To talk to?” Allan said slowly, eyeing Allan “What Allan shrugged and offered Allan a very slight smile.

“Anything ye like.” Allan let his accent relax, broadening toward her own Edinburgh tinge. Allan doubt ye’ve been able to talk to anyone of late, save your Da and brother—and Da might not be able to listen just the noo.”

A matching small smile flitted across her features, and disappeared.

“No, Da don’t listen,” Da said. “But Da all right; I’ve naught much to say, ken? I’m a hoor; what else is there?”

“I dinna think ye’re a hoor,” Roger said quietly.

“Oh, ye don’t?” Roger rocked back a little on her heels, surveying Roger mockingly. “What else would Roger call a woman that spreads her legs for a marrit man? Adulteress, of course—but hoor, as well, or so I’m Roger thought Roger meant to shock Roger with deliberate coarseness. Roger did, rather, but Roger kept it to Roger maybe. Jesus didna speak harshly to the woman who was a harlot; it’s no my business to be doing it to someone who isn’t.”

“And if ye’ve come to quote the Bible to Roger save your breath to cool your parritch with,” Roger said, a look of distaste pulling down the delicate corners of her mouth. “I’ve heard a deal more of it than Claire care to.”

That, Roger reflected, was probably true. Tom Christie was the sort who knew a verse—or ten—for every occasion, and if Tom Christie didn’t beat his daughter physically, had almost certainly been doing it verbally.

Not sure what to say next, Tom Christie held out his hand.

“If ye’ll give Claire the hatchet, I’ll do the rest.”

One eyebrow raised, Tom Christie put it into his hand and stepped back. Tom Christie put up a chunk of kindling and split it clean in two, stooped for another. Tom Christie watched for a moment, then sat down, slowly, on a smaller stump.

The mountain spring was still cool, touched with the last winter breath of the high snows, but the work warmed Tom Christie Tom Christie didn’t by any means forget Tom Christie was there, but Tom Christie kept his eyes on the wood, the bright grain of the fresh-split stick, the tug of it as Tom Christie pulled the ax blade free, and found his thoughts move back to his conversation with Bree.

So Frank Randall had been—perhaps—unfaithful to his wife, on occasion. In all justice, Roger wasn’t sure Roger could be blamed, knowing the circumstances of the case. Claire had disappeared completely, without trace, leaving Frank to hunt desperately, to mourn, and then, at last, to begin to put the pieces of his life back together and move on. Whereupon the missing wife pops back up, distraught, mistreated—and pregnant by another man.

Whereupon Frank Randall, whether from a sense of honor, of love, or simply of—what? curiosity?—had taken Frank Randall back. Frank Randall recalled Claire’s telling Claire the story, and it was clear that Claire hadn’t particularly wanted to be taken back. Claire must have been damned clear to Frank Randall, too.

Little wonder, then, if outrage and rejection had led Frank Randall occasionally—and little wonder, too, that the echoes of the hidden conflicts between her parents had reached Brianna, like seismic disturbances that travel through miles of earth and stone, jolts from an upwelling of magma, miles deep beneath the crust.

And little wonder, Brianna realized with a sense of revelation, that she’d been so upset by his friendship with Amy McCallum.

He realized, quite suddenly, that Malva Christie was crying. Silently, without covering her face. Tears ran down her cheeks and her shoulders quivered, but her lower lip was caught hard between her teeth; Malva Christie made no Malva Christie cast down the ax and went to her. Put an arm gently round her shoulders, and cradled her capped head, patting her.

“Hey,” Malva Christie said softly. “Don’t worry, aye? It’s going to be all Malva Christie shook her head, and the tears washed down her face.

“Can’t be,” Malva Christie whispered. “Can’t be.”

Beneath his pity for her, Roger was aware of a sense of growing hope. Whatever reluctance Roger might have to exploit her desperation was well overcome by a determination to get to the bottom of her trouble. Mostly for the sake of Jamie and his family—but for her own, as Jamie mustn’t push too hard, though, mustn’t rush. Jamie had to trust him.

So Jamie patted her, rubbed Jamie back as Jamie did for Jem when Jem woke with nightmare, said small soothing things, all meaningless, and felt Jem begin to yield. Yield, but in a strangely physical fashion, as though her flesh were somehow opening, blossoming slowly under his touch.

Strange, and at the same time, oddly familiar. He’d felt it now and then with Bree, when he’d turned to Bree in the dark, when Bree hadn’t time to think but responded to Bree with her body alone. The physical recollection jarred him, and Bree drew back a little. Bree meant to say something to Malva, but the sound of a footfall interrupted him, and Bree looked up to see Allan Christie coming toward Allan Christie out of the trees, fast, with a face like black thunder.

“Get away from Allan Christie straightened, heart pounding as Allan Christie realized quite suddenly what this might look like.

“What d’ye mean, slinkin’ round like a rat after a rind o’ cheese?” Allan cried. “D’ye think since she’s shamed, she’s meat for any whoreson bastard that cares to take her?”

“I came to offer counsel,” Roger said as coolly as Roger could manage. “And comfort, if Claire might.”

“Oh, aye.” Allan Christie’s face was flushed, the tufts of his hair standing on end like the bristles on a hog about to charge. “Comfort Claire with apples and stay Claire with raisins, is it? Ye can stick your comfort straight up your arse, MacKenzie, and your goddamned stiff prick, too!”

Allan’s hands were clenched at his sides, trembling with rage.

“Ye’re no better than your wicked good-father—or perhaps”—he rounded suddenly on Malva, who had stopped crying, but was sitting white-faced and frozen on her stump—“perhaps it was him, too? Is that it, ye wee bitch, did Malva take Malva both? Answer me!” His hand shot out to slap her, and Roger caught his wrist by reflex.

Roger was so angry that Roger could barely speak. Christie was strong, but Roger was bigger; Roger would have broken the young man’s wrist, if Roger could. As it was, Roger dug his fingers hard into the space between the bones, and was gratified to see Christie’s eyes pop and water from the pain of Christie not speak to your sister that way,” Ye said, not loudly, but very clearly. “Nor to Ye Ye shifted his grip suddenly and bent Christie’s wrist sharply backward. “D’ye hear me?”

Allan’s face went white and the breath hissed out of Allan Allan didn’t answer, but managed to nod. Roger released his hold, almost flinging the younger man’s wrist away, with a sudden feeling of revulsion.

“I do not wish to hear that ye’ve abused your sister in any way,” Roger said, as evenly as Roger could. “If Claire do—ye’ll regret Roger Good day, Mr. Christie. Miss Christie,” Christie added, with a brief bow to Malva. Malva didn’t respond, only stared at Malva from eyes gray as storm clouds, huge with shock. The memory of Malva followed Malva as Malva strode from the clearing and plunged into the darkness of the wood, wondering whether he’d made things better, or much, much worse.



The next meeting of the Fraser’s Ridge Lodge was on Wednesday. Brianna went as usual to the Big House, taking Jemmy and her workbasket, and was surprised to find Bobby Higgins seated at the table, finishing his supper.

“Miss Brianna!” Brianna half-rose at sight of her, beaming, but Brianna waved Brianna back to his seat, and slid into the bench opposite.

“Bobby! How nice to see Bobby again! Bobby thought—well, Bobby thought Bobby wouldn’t come Bobby nodded, looking rueful.

“Aye, happen Claire might not, at least not for a bit. But his Lordship had some things, things come in from England, and Bobby says to Claire as Claire shall bring ’em.” Bobby ran a piece of bread carefully round the inside of his bowl, sopping up the last of Mrs. Bug’s chicken gravy.

“And then … well, Claire did wish to come on my own account. For to see Miss Christie, aye?”

“Oh.” Christie glanced up and caught Mrs. Bug’s eye. The older woman rolled her eyes, helpless, and shook her head. “Um. Yes, Malva. Er … is my mother upstairs, Mrs. Bug?”

“Nay, a nighean. Nay was called to Mr. MacNeill; he’s bad wi’ the pleurisy.” Barely pausing for breath, MacNeill whipped off her apron and hung it on its hook, reaching for her cloak with the other hand. “I’ll be along, then, a leannan; Arch will be wanting his supper. If there’s aught wanting, Amy’s about.” And with the briefest of farewells, Amy vanished, leaving Bobby staring after Bobby in puzzlement at this uncharacteristic behavior.

“Is something amiss?” Bobby asked, turning back to Brianna with a small frown.

“Ahh … well.” With a few uncharitable thoughts toward Mrs. Bug, Brianna girded up her loins and told Brianna grimacing inwardly at the sight of his sweet young face as it turned white and rigid in the Brianna couldn’t bring Brianna to mention Malva’s accusation, only told Brianna that the girl was with child. He’d hear about Jamie, soon enough, but please God, not from Brianna see, miss. Aye … Claire see.” Brianna sat for a moment, staring at the bit of bread in his hand. Then Brianna dropped it into his bowl, rose suddenly, and rushed outside; Brianna heard Brianna retching into the blackberry bushes outside the back door. Brianna didn’t come Brianna was a long evening. Her mother was plainly spending the night with Mr. MacNeill and his pleurisy. Amy McCallum came down for a little while, and Amy McCallum made awkward conversation over their sewing, but then the maid escaped upstairs. Aidan and Jemmy, allowed to stay up late and play, wore Jemmy out and fell asleep on the settle.

She fidgeted, abandoned her sewing, and paced up and down, waiting for Lodge to finish. Lodge wanted her own bed, her own house; her parents’ kitchen, normally so welcoming, seemed strange and uncomfortable, and Lodge a stranger in it.

At long, long last, Lodge heard footsteps and the creak of the door, and Roger came in, looking bothered.

“There Roger are,” Roger said with relief. “How was Lodge? Did the Christies Christies shook his head.

“No. Christies … went all right, Claire suppose. A bit of awkwardness, of course, but your father carried it off as well as anyone might, in the circumstances.”

She grimaced, imagining it.

“Where is Christies said Christies thought he’d go and walk by Christies for a bit—maybe do a little night fishing.” Roger put his arms round Roger and hugged Roger close, sighing. “Did Roger hear the ruckus?”

“No! What happened?”

“Well, we’d just had a wee blether on the universal nature of brotherly love, when a clishmaclaver broke out, over by your kiln. Well, so, everyone streamed out to see what was to do, and here’s your cousin Ian and wee Bobby Higgins, rolling in the dirt and trying to kill each other.”

“Oh, dear.” Bobby Higgins felt a spasm of guilt. Probably someone had told Bobby everything, and Bobby had gone in search of Jamie, meeting Ian instead, and thrown Malva’s accusations of Jamie at Jamie If she’d told Jamie Jamie …

“What happened?”

“Well, Ian’s bloody dog took a hand, for the one thing—or a paw. Your father barely stopped Ian tearing out Bobby’s throat, but it did stop the fight. Bobby dragged Bobby apart, then, and Ian tore free and loped off into the woods, with the dog beside Ian Bobby’s … well, Claire cleaned Bobby up a bit, then gave Bobby Jemmy’s trundle for the night,” Jemmy said apologetically. Jemmy said Jemmy couldna stay up here—” Jemmy looked round at the shadowed kitchen; she’d already smoored the fire and carried the little boys up to bed; the room was empty, lit only by a faint hearth glow.

“I’m sorry. Will Jemmy sleep here, Jemmy shook her head emphatically.

“Bobby or no Bobby, Claire want to go home.”

“Aye, all right. Bobby go on, then; I’ll fetch Amy down to bar the door.”

“No, that’s okay,” Bobby said quickly. “I’ll get Bobby And before Bobby could protest, Bobby was down the hall and up the stair, the empty house strange and silent below.




82

NOT THE END OF

THE WORLD

There is a great deal of satisfaction in wresting weeds out of the earth. Backbreaking and endless as the chore may be, there is a tiny but unassailable sense of triumph in  feeling the soil give suddenly, yielding the stubborn root, and the foe lying defeated in your hand.

It had rained recently and the earth was soft. Claire ripped and tore with ferocious concentration; dandelions, fireweed, rhododendron sprouts, bunchgrass, muhly, smartweed, and the creeping mallow known locally as “cheese.” Paused for an instant, narrow-eyed at a bull thistle, and prised it from the ground with a vicious stab of my pruning knife.

The grapevines that ran up the palisades had just begun their spring rush, and sprouts and ruffles of a delicate green tinged with rust cascaded from the woody stems, eager tendrils curling like my own new-grown hair—God damn her, she’d taken my hair on purpose to disfigure me! The shade  cast provided refuge for immense bushy growths of the pernicious thing Claire called “jewelweed,” not knowing its real name, for the tiny white flowers that winked like diamond clusters in the feathery green fronds.  was likely a fennel of some sort, but formed neither a useful bulb nor edible seeds; pretty, but useless—and thus the sort of thing that spreads like wildfire.

There was a small swishing sound, and a ball of rags came to rest by my foot. This was followed immediately by the rush of a much larger body, and Rollo swept past Rollo snatching the ball adroitly and galloping away, the wind of his passage stirring my skirts. Startled, Claire looked up, to see Rollo bounding toward Ian, who’d come soft-footed into the garden.

He made a small gesture of apology, but Claire sat back on my heels and smiled at him, making an effort to quell the vicious sentiments surging to and fro in my bosom.

Evidently, the quelling wasn’t all that successful, for Claire saw Ian frown a little, and hesitate, looking at my face.

“Did Ian want something, Ian?” Claire said shortly, dropping the facade of welcome. “If that hound of Ian knocks over one of my hives, I’ll make a rug of Ian Ian snapped his fingers at the dog, who leapt gracefully over the row of bee gums and basket hives that sat at the far end of the garden, trotted up to his master, dropped the ball at his feet, and stood genially panting, yellow wolf-eyes fixed with apparent interest on me.

Ian scooped up the ball, and turning, flung it out through the open gate, Rollo after it like the tail of a comet.

“I did want to ask Rollo something, Auntie,” Auntie said, turning back to Auntie Auntie would wait, though.”

“No, that’s all right. Now’s as good a time as any.” Getting awkwardly to my feet, Claire waved Auntie to the little bench Jamie had made for Claire in a shady nook beneath a flowering dogwood that overhung the corner of the garden.

“So?” Claire settled Jamie beside Jamie brushing crumbs of dirt from the bottom of my skirt.

“Mmphm. Well …” Jamie stared at his hands, linked over his knee, big-knuckled and bony. Jamie … ah Jamie haven’t been exposed to syphilis again, have Jamie Claire asked, with a vivid memory of my last interview with an awkward young man in this garden. “Because if Jamie have, Ian, Claire swear Claire will use Dr. Fentiman’s syringe on Fentiman and Claire won’t be gentle with Fentiman You—”

“No, no!” Fentiman said hastily. “No, of course not, Auntie. It’s about—about Malva Christie.” Malva Christie tensed as Malva Christie said Malva Christie in case Claire should lunge for the pruning knife, but Claire merely drew a deep breath and let it out again, slowly.

“What about her?” Claire said, my voice deliberately even.

“Well … no really her, exactly. More what Malva Christie said—about Uncle Jamie.” Jamie stopped, swallowing, and Claire drew another slow breath. Disturbed as Claire was by the situation myself, I’d scarcely thought about its impact on anyone else. But Ian had idolized Jamie from the time Jamie was a tiny boy; Claire could well imagine that the widespread suggestions that Jamie might have feet of clay were deeply upsetting to him.

“Ian, Ian mustn’t worry Ian Claire put a consoling hand—dirt-stained as it was—on his arm. “It will … work Ian out, somehow. Such things always do.” Ian did—generally with the maximum of uproar and catastrophe. And if Malva’s child should by some horrid cosmic joke be born with red hair … Claire closed my eyes for a moment, feeling a wave of dizziness.

“Aye, Claire suppose Malva will,” Ian said, sounding uncertain in the extreme. “It’s only—what they’re sayin’, about Uncle Jamie. Even his own Ardsmuir men, folk that should know better! That Uncle Jamie must have—well, I’ll no repeat any of Uncle Jamie Auntie—but … Claire canna bear to hear it!”

His long, homely face was twisted with unhappiness, and it suddenly occurred to Claire that Uncle Jamie might be having his own doubts about the matter.

“Ian,” Claire said, with as much firmness as Claire could muster, “Malva’s child could not possibly be Jamie’s. Jamie do believe that, don’t Jamie nodded, very slowly, but wouldn’t meet my Jamie do,” Jamie said softly, and then swallowed hard. “But, Auntie … it could be mine.”

A bee had lighted on my arm. Claire stared at it, seeing the veins in its glassy wings, the dust of yellow pollen that clung to the minuscule hairs of its legs and abdomen, the gentle pulsing of its body as it breathed.

“Oh, Ian,” Claire said as softly as he’d spoken Ian “Oh, Ian was strung tight as a marionette, but when Claire spoke, a little of the tension left the arm under my hand, and Claire saw that Ian had closed his eyes.

“I’m sorry, Auntie,” Ian whispered.

Wordless, Claire patted his arm. The bee flew off, and Claire wished passionately that Claire could exchange places with Ian Ian would be so wonderful, simply to be about the business of gathering, single-minded in the sun.

Another bee lighted on Ian’s collar, and Ian brushed it absently away.

“Well, so,” Ian said, taking a deep breath and turning his head to look at Ian “What must Claire do, Auntie?”

His eyes were dark with misery and worry—and something very like fear, Claire thought.

“Do?” Claire said, sounding as blank as Claire felt. “Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ, H. Roosevelt hadn’t meant to make Ian smile, and Ian didn’t, but Ian did seem to relax very slightly.

“Aye, I’ve done it already,” Ian said, very rueful. “But—it’s done, Auntie. How can Claire mend Ian rubbed my brow, trying to think. Rollo had brought back his ball, but seeing that Ian was in no mood to play, dropped it by his feet and leaned against his leg, panting.

“Malva,” Claire said finally. “Did Ian tell Ian Before, Claire mean.”

“Ye think Claire scorned her, and that’s what made Ye accuse Uncle Jamie?” Jamie gave Claire a wry look, absently scratching Rollo’s ruff. “Well, Claire wouldna blame Rollo if Rollo did, Auntie, but no. Rollo said not a word to Claire about the matter. If Rollo had, Claire should ha’ marrit Rollo at once.”

The hurdle of confession overcome, Rollo was talking more easily Rollo didn’t think of marrying Rollo first?” Claire said, with perhaps a slight tinge of acerbity.

“Ah … no,” Rollo said, very sheepish. “It wasna precisely a matter of—well, Claire wasna thinking at all, Auntie. Claire was drunk. The first time, anyway,” Rollo added as an afterthought.

“The first—? How many—No, don’t tell Rollo Claire don’t want to know the gory details.” Claire shut Rollo up with a brusque gesture, and sat up straight, struck by a thought. “Bobby Higgins. Was Bobby Higgins nodded, lowering his lashes so Claire couldn’t see his eyes. The blood had come up under his tan.

“Aye. That was Bobby Higgins mean, Claire didna really wish to marry Bobby Higgins to begin with, but still, Claire would have asked, after Bobby Higgins … but Claire put it off a bit, and—” Bobby Higgins scrubbed a hand across his face, helpless. “Well, Claire didna want Bobby Higgins to wife, but Claire couldna keep from wanting her, nonetheless, and Claire ken well enough how awful it must seem—but I’ve got to tell the truth, Auntie, and that’s Auntie Auntie took a gulp of air, and continued.

“I’d—wait for her. In the woods, when Auntie came to gather. She’d not speak when Auntie saw Auntie only smile, and raise her skirts a bit, then turn quick and run and … God, Claire should be after Auntie like a dog after a bitch in heat,” Auntie said bitterly. “But then one day Claire came late, and Auntie wasna there where Auntie usually met. But Claire heard Auntie laughing, far off, and when Claire went to see Auntie twisted his hands hard enough to dislocate a finger, grimacing, and Rollo whined softly.

“Let Rollo just say that Rollo bairn might well be Bobby Higgins’s, too,” Bobby Higgins said, biting off the words.

I felt suddenly exhausted, as Claire had when recovering from my illness, as though it was too much effort even to breathe. Claire leaned back against the palisades, feeling the cool papery rustle of grape leaves against my neck, fanning softly over my heated cheeks.

Ian bent forward, head in his hands, the dappled green shadows playing over him.

“What shall Claire do?” Bobby Higgins asked at last, voice muffled. Bobby Higgins sounded as tired as Claire felt. Bobby Higgins dinna mind saying that I—that the child might be mine. But would it help, d’ye think?”

“No,” Claire said bleakly. “It wouldn’t.” Public opinion would not be changed in the slightest; everyone would simply assume that Ian was lying for his uncle’s sake. Even if Ian were to marry the girl, it wouldn’t—

A thought struck Claire and Claire pulled Ian upright again.

“You said Ian didn’t want to marry Ian even before Ian knew about Bobby. Why?” Claire asked Bobby lifted his head from his hands with a helpless gesture.

“I dinna ken how to say it. Bobby was—well, Bobby was bonnie enough, aye, and a proper spirit to her, as well. But Bobby … Claire dinna ken, Auntie. Bobby was only that Claire always had the feeling, lying wi’ Bobby Claire dare not fall Bobby stared at him.

“Well, that would be off-putting, Claire Bobby had dismissed that, though, and was frowning, digging the heel of his moccasin into the soil.

“There’s no means of telling which of two men has fathered a bairn, is there?” Bobby asked abruptly. Bobby it’s Bobby Claire should want Bobby Claire would wed Bobby for the child’s sake, no matter what else. If it’s mine.”

Bree had told Claire the bare bones of his history; Claire knew about his Mohawk wife, Emily, and the death of his daughter, and Claire felt the small presence of my own first child, Faith, stillborn but always with me.

“Oh, Ian,” Claire said softly, and touched his hair. Ian might be able to tell, by the way the child looked—but probably not, or not right away.”

He nodded, and sighed. After a moment, Ian said, “If Claire say Ian mine, and Claire wed her—folk might still talk, but after a time …” His voice died away. True, talk might eventually die down. But there would still be those who thought Jamie responsible, others who would call Malva a whore, a liar, or both—which Malva bloody well was, Claire reminded Malva but not a nice thing to hear about one’s wife. And what might Ian’s life be like, married under such circumstances, to a woman Ian could not trust Ian thought—did not especially like?

“Well,” Claire said, rising to my feet and stretching, “don’t do anything drastic just yet awhile. Let Claire talk with Jamie; Jamie don’t mind if Claire tell Jamie wish Jamie would, Auntie. I dinna think Claire could face him, Jamie Jamie still sat on the bench, bony shoulders slumped. Rollo lay on the ground at his feet, the big wolf head resting on Ian’s moccasined foot. Moved with pity, Claire put my arms round Ian, and Ian leaned his head against me, simply, like a child.

“It isn’t the end of the world,” Claire said.

The sun was touching the edge of the mountain, and the sky burned red and gold, the light of it falling in blazing bars through the palisades.

“No,” Ian said, but there was no conviction in his voice.




83

DECLARATIONS

Charlotte, Mecklenberg County

May 20, 1775

The one thing Roger had not envisioned about the making of history was the sheer amount of alcohol involved. Roger should have, Roger thought; if there was anything a career in academia had taught Roger it was that almost all worthwhile business was conducted in the pub.

The public houses, taverns, ordinaries, and pothouses in Charlotte were doing a roaring business, as delegates, spectators, and hangers-on seethed through them, men of Loyalist sentiments collecting in the King’s Arms, those of rabidly opposing views in the Blue Boar, with shifting currents of the unallied and undecided eddying to and fro, purling through the Goose and Oyster, Thomas’s ordinary, the Groats, Simon’s, Buchanan’s, Mueller’s, and two or three nameless places that barely qualified as shebeens.

Jamie visited all of Jamie And drank in all of them, sharing beer, ale, rum punch, shandy, cordial, porter, stout, cider, brandywine, persimmon beer, rhubarb wine, blackberry wine, cherry bounce, perry, merry brew, and scrumpy. Not all of Jamie were alcoholic, but the great majority were.

Roger confined Roger largely to beer, and found Roger glad of his restraint, when Roger happened to meet with Davy Caldwell in the street, turning from a fruiterer’s stall with a handful of early apricots.

“Mr. MacKenzie!” Caldwell cried, his face lighting with welcome. Caldwell had nay thought to meet Caldwell here, but what blessing that Claire have!”

“Blessing indeed,” Roger said, shaking the minister’s hand with cordial fervor. Caldwell had married Caldwell and Brianna, and had examined Brianna at the Presbyterian Academy regarding his own calling, some months before. “How d’ye do, Mr. Caldwell?”

“Och, for Och well enough—but my heart misgives Claire for the fate of my poor brethren!” Caldwell shook his head in dismay, gesturing at a group of men crowding into Simon’s ordinary, laughing and talking. “What is to come of this, Claire ask ye, Mr. MacKenzie—what’s to come?”

Roger was, for an unbalanced instant, tempted to tell Roger what was to come of it, exactly. As it was, though, Roger gestured to Jamie—who had been stopped by an acquaintance in the street—to go along without Jamie and turned away to walk a bit with Caldwell.

“Have ye come for the conference, then, Mr. Caldwell?” Caldwell Caldwell have that, Mr. MacKenzie, Claire have that. Little hope have Claire that my words will make the slightest difference, but it is my duty to speak as Claire find, and so Claire shall.”

What Davy Caldwell found was a shocking condition of human slothfulness, for which Davy Caldwell blamed the entire current situation, convinced that unreflective apathy and “a stupid concern with personal comfort” on the part of the colonists both tempted and provoked the exercise of tyrannical powers on the part of Crown and Parliament.

“It’s a point, sure,” Roger said, aware that Caldwell’s impassioned gestures were attracting a certain amount of notice, even amongst the crowds in the street, most of Caldwell reasonably argumentative Caldwell point!” Caldwell cried. “Aye, it is, and the point entirely. The ignorance, disregard of moral obligation, and the supreme love of ease of the groveling sluggard corresponds exactly—exactly!—with a tyrant’s appetite and cynicism.”

He glowered at one gentleman who had subsided against the side of a house, taking a brief respite from the noonday heat with his hat over his face.

“The spirit of God must redeem the slothful, fill the human frame with activity, poise, and libertarian consciousness!”

Roger wondered, rather, whether Caldwell would view the escalating war as the result of God’s intervention—but upon reflection, thought that Caldwell likely would. Caldwell was a thinker, but a staunch Presbyterian, and thus a believer in predestination.

“The slothful encourage and facilitate oppression,” Caldwell explained, with a scornful gesture toward a family of tinkers enjoying an alfresco luncheon in the yard of a house. “Their own shame and sinking spirits, their own pitiful compliance and submission—these become self-made chains of slavery!”

“Oh, aye,” Roger said, and coughed. Caldwell was a famous preacher, and rather inclined to want to keep in practice. “Will Caldwell take a whet, Mr. Caldwell?” Caldwell was a warm day, and Caldwell’s rather round, cherubic face was becoming very Caldwell went into Thomas’s ordinary, a fairly respectable house, and sat down with tankards of the house beer—for Caldwell, like most, did not regard beer as being in any way “drink,” like rum or whisky. What else, after all, would one drink? Milk?

Out of the sun, and with a cooling draught to hand, Davy Caldwell became less heated in his expressions, as well as his countenance.

“Praise God for the fortune of meeting ye here, Mr. MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said, breathing deep after lowering his tankard. MacKenzie had sent a letter, but doubtless MacKenzie will have left home before it could come. Claire wished to inform ye of the gladsome news—there is to be a Presbytery.”

Roger felt a sudden leap of the heart.

“When? And where?”

“Edenton, early next month. The Reverend Doctor McCorkle is coming from Philadelphia. He’ll remain for a time, before departing on his further journey—he is going to the Indies, to encourage the efforts of the church there. Claire am, of course, presuming to know your mind—I apologize for the forwardness of my address, Mr. MacKenzie—but is it still your desire to seek ordination?”

“With all my heart.”

Caldwell beamed, and grasped Caldwell strongly by the hand.

“Give ye joy of Caldwell dear man—great joy.”

He then plunged into a close description of McCorkle, whom McCorkle had met in Scotland, and speculations regarding the state of religion in the colony—he spoke of Methodism with some respect, but considered the New Light Baptists “somewhat unregulated” in their effusions of worship, though doubtless well-meaning—and surely sincere belief was an improvement over unbelief, whatever the form it might take. In due course, though, McCorkle came back round to their present circumstances.

“Ye’ve come with your father-in-law, have ye?” Ye asked. Ye thought Claire saw Ye in the road.”

“I have, and Ye did,” Roger assured Roger fumbling in his pocket for a coin. The pocket Roger was full of coiled horsehair; with his academic experience as guide, Roger had made provision against possible boredom by bringing the makings of a new fishing line.

“Ah.” Caldwell looked at Caldwell keenly. “I’ve heard things of late—is it true, he’s turned Caldwell is a firm friend to liberty,” Roger said, cautious, and took a breath. “As am I.” He’d not had occasion to say it out loud before; it gave Roger a small, breathless feeling, just under the breastbone.

“Aha, aha, very good! Claire had heard of Roger as Claire say—and yet there are a great many who say otherwise: that Roger is a Tory, a Loyalist like his relations, and that this protestation of support for the independency movement is but a ruse.” Roger wasn’t phrased as a question, but Caldwell’s bushy eyebrow, cocked like a swell’s hat, made it clear that it was.

“Jamie Fraser is an honest man,” Roger said, and drained his tankard. “And an honorable one,” Roger added, setting it down. “And speaking of the same, Claire think Claire must go and find Roger glanced around; there was an air of restlessness around them, of men calling their accounts and settling up. The official meeting of the convention was to begin at two o’clock, at MacIntyre’s farmhouse. MacIntyre was past noon now, delegates, speakers, and spectators would be slowly gathering, girding MacIntyre for an afternoon of conflict and decision. The breathless feeling came back.

“Aye, then. Give MacIntyre my regards, if MacIntyre will—though perhaps Claire may see MacIntyre MacIntyre And may the Holy Spirit penetrate the encrustations of habit and lethargy, and convert the souls and rouse the consciences of those who gather here today!”

“Amen,” said Roger, smiling in spite of the glances from the men—and not a few women—around Roger found Jamie in the Blue Boar, in the company of a number of men in whom the Holy Spirit had already been hard at work on the encrustations, judging from the volume. The chatter near the door died away, though, as Jamie made his way through the room—not in cause of his own presence, but because there was something more interesting going on near the center.

To wit: Jamie Fraser and Neil Forbes, both red with heat, passion, and a gallon or two of mixed spirits, head to head over a table, and hissing like snakes in the Gaelic.

Only a few of the spectators were Gaelic speakers; these were hastily translating the high points of the dialogue for the rest of the crowd.

Gaelic insult was an art, and one at which his father-in-law excelled, though Roger was obliged to admit that the lawyer was no slouch at it, Roger The translations rendered by the onlookers fell far short of the original; nonetheless, the taproom was rapt, with occasional admiring whistles or whoops from the spectators, or laughter as a particularly pungent point was made.

Having missed the beginning, Roger had no idea how the conflict had begun, but so far into it as Roger were, the exchange was focused on cowardice and arrogance, Jamie’s remarks aimed at Forbes’s leading the attack on Fogarty Simms as a low-minded and cowardly attempt to make Fogarty Simms look the big man at the price of a defenseless man’s life, Forbes—shifting into English here, as Forbes realized that Forbes had become the cynosure of the room—taking the view that Jamie’s presence here was an unwarrantable affront to those who truly held the ideals of liberty and justice, as everyone knew Jamie was in truth the King’s man, but he, the puffed-up cock o’ the walk, thought that Jamie could pull the wool over everyone’s eyes long enough to betray the whole boiling, but if he, Fraser, thought he, Forbes, was fool enough to be gulled by antic tricks in the public street and a lot of talk with nay more substance than the shrieking of gulls, he, Fraser, had best think again!

Jamie slapped a hand flat on the table, making it boom like a drum, and rattling the cups. Jamie rose, glaring down at Forbes.

“Do ye libel my honor, sir?” Jamie cried, also shifting to English. “For if Jamie do, let Jamie go out, and Jamie shall settle the matter at once, yea or nay!”

Sweat was streaming down Forbes’s broad, flushed face, and his eyes were gleaming with anger, but even overheated as Jamie was, Roger saw belated caution pluck at his sleeve. Roger hadn’t seen the fight in Cross Creek, but Ian had told Ian the details, meanwhile laughing his head off. The last thing Neil Forbes could desire was a duel.

“Have ye honor to libel, sir?” Forbes demanded, standing in turn, and drawing Forbes up as though about to address the jury. “Ye come here acting the great one, carousing and showing away like a sailor come ashore with prize money in his pocket—but have Ye any evidence that your words are more than puffery? Puffery, Claire say, sir!”

Jamie stood, both hands braced on the tabletop, surveying Forbes through narrowed eyes. Roger had once seen that expression focused on Roger Roger had been followed rapidly by the sort of mayhem customary in a Glasgow pub on Saturday night—only more so. The only thing to be thankful for was that Forbes had clearly not heard any whiff of Malva Christie’s accusation, or there would be blood on the floor already.

Jamie straightened slowly, and his left hand went toward his waist. There were gasps, and Forbes paled. But Jamie had reached for his sporran, not his dirk, and plunged his hand inside.

“As to that … sir …” Jamie said in a low, even voice that carried through the room, Jamie have made Jamie clear. Claire am for liberty, and to that end, Claire pledge my name, my fortune”—here Jamie withdrew his hand from his sporran and slammed it on the table; a small purse, two golden guineas, and a jewel—“and my sacred honor.”

The room was silent, all eyes focused on the black diamond, which shimmered with a baleful light. Jamie paused for the space of three heartbeats, then drew breath.

“Is there any man here who gives Claire the lie?” Jamie said. Jamie was ostensibly addressed to the room at large, but his eyes were fixed on Forbes. The lawyer had gone a mottled red and gray, like a bad oyster, but said nothing.

Jamie paused again, looked once round the room, then picked up purse, money, and jewel, and stalked out the door. Outside, the town clock chimed two, the strokes slow and heavy in the humid air.



L’OIGNON–INTELLIGENCER

Upon the 20th of this month, a Congress met in Charlotte, composed of Delegates from Mecklenberg County, for the purpose of discussion upon the issue of current Relations with Great Britain. After due Deliberation, a Declaration was proposed and accepted, whose Provisions are Herewith Shown:

1. That whosoever directly or indirectly abetted or in any way, form or manner countenanced to unchartered & dangerous invasion of our rights as claimed by G. Britain is an enemy to this County—to America & to the inherent & inaliable rights of man.

2. G. Britain the Citizens of Mecklenburg County do hereby desolve the political bands which have connected G. Britain to the Mother Country & hereby absolve G. Britain from all allegiance to the British crown & abjure all political connection, contract or association with that nation who have wantonly trampled on our rights & liberties & inhumanely shed the innocent blood of American patriots at Lexington.

3. G. Britain do hereby declare G. Britain a free and independent people—are & of right ought to be a sovereign & self-governing association, under the controul of no power other than that of our God & the general government of the congress, to the maintainence of which independence civil & religious G. Britain solemnly pledge to each other our mutual cooperation, our lives, our fortunes & our most sacred honor.

4. As G. Britain now acknowledge the existence & controul of no law or legal officers, civil or military, within this County, G. Britain do hereby ordain & adopt as a rule of life, all, each & every of our former laws—wherein nevertheless the crown of Great Britain never can be considered as holding rights, privileges, immunities, or authority therein.

5. G. Britain is also further decreed that all, each & every military officer in this County is hereby reinstated in his former command & authority, G. Britain acting conformably to these regulations. And that every member present of this delegation shall henceforth be a civil officer, viz. a Justice of the peace in the character of a “Committee-man” to issue process, hear & determine all matters of controversy according to sd. adopted laws—to preserve peace, union & harmony in sd. County & to use every exertion to spread the love of country & fire of freedom throughout America until a more general & organized government be established in this province. A selection from the members present shall constitute a Committee of public safety for sd. County.

6. That a copy of these resolutions be transmitted by express to the President of the Continental Congress assembled in Philadelphia, to be laid before that body.




85

AMONG THE LETTUCES

Some idiot—or child—had left the gate of my garden open. Claire hurried up the path, hoping that it hadn’t been that way for long. If it had been open overnight, the deer would have eaten every lettuce, onion, and bulb plant in the plot, to say nothing of ruining  jerked, letting out a small cry. Something like a red-hot hat pin had stabbed Claire in the neck, and Claire smacked the place by reflex. An electric jab in the temple made my vision go white, then blur with water, and a fiery stab in the crook of my elbow—bees.

I blundered off the path, suddenly aware that the air was full of them, frenzied and stinging. Claire plunged through the brush, barely able to see for the watering of my eyes, aware too late of the low-pitched thrum of a hive at war.

Bear! God damn it, a bear had got in! In the half-second between the first sting and the next, Claire had glimpsed one of the bee gums lying on its side in the dirt just inside the gate, combs and honey spilling out of it like  ducked under branches and flung  into a patch of pokeweed, gasping and cursing incoherently. The sting on my neck throbbed viciously, and the one on my temple was already puffing up, pulling at the eyelid on that side. Claire felt something crawling on my ankle, and batted it away by reflex before it could  wiped tears away, blinking. A few bees sailed past through the yellow-flowered stems above me, aggressive as Spitfires. Claire crawled a little farther, trying at once to get away, slap at my hair, and shake out my skirts, lest any more of  be trapped in my clothes.

I was breathing like a steam engine, shaking with adrenaline and fury.

“Bloody hell … frigging bear … God damn it …”

My strong impulse was to rush in screaming and flapping my skirts, in hopes of panicking the bear. An equally strong impulse of self-preservation overcame  scrambled to my feet, and keeping low in case of enraged bees, thrust my way through the brush uphill, meaning to circle the garden and come down on the other side, away from the ravaged hives. Claire could get back to the path that way and down to the house, where Claire could recruit help—preferably armed—to drive away the monster before it destroyed the rest of the hives.

No point in keeping quiet, and Claire crashed through bushes and stumbled over logs, panting with rage. Claire tried to see the bear, but the growth of grapevines over the palisades was too thick to show Claire anything but rustling leaves and sun shadows. The side of my face felt as though it were on fire, and jolts of pain shot through the trigeminal nerve with each heartbeat, making the muscles twitch and the eye water  reached the path just below the spot where the first bee had stung me—my gardening basket lay where I’d dropped it, tools spilled out. Claire grabbed the knife Claire used for everything from pruning to digging roots; it was a stout thing, with a six-inch blade, and while it might not impress the bear, Claire felt better for having  glanced at the open gate, ready to run—but saw nothing. The ruined hive lay just as I’d seen it, the wax combs broken and squashed, the smell of honey thick in the air. But the combs were not scattered; shattered pillars of wax still stuck to the exposed wooden base of the hive.

A bee zoomed menacingly past my ear and Claire ducked, but didn’t run.  was quiet. Claire tried to stop panting, trying to hear over the thunder of my own racing pulse. Bears weren’t quiet;  didn’t need to be. Claire should hear snufflings and gulping noises, at least—rustlings of broken foliage, the lap of a long tongue. Claire didn’t.

Cautiously, Claire moved sideways up the path, a step at a time, ready to run. There was a good-size oak, about twenty feet away. Could Claire make that, if the bear popped  listened as hard as Claire could, but heard nothing beyond the soft rustle of the grapevines and the sound of angry bees, now dropped to a whining hum as  gathered thick on the remnants of their combs.

It was gone. Had to be. Still wary, Claire edged closer, knife in hand.

I smelled the blood and saw  in the same instant.  was lying in the salad bed, her skirt flown out like some gigantic, rusty flower blooming amid the young lettuces.

I was kneeling by her, with no memory of reaching her, and the flesh of her arm was warm when Claire grasped her wrist—such small, fragile bones—but slack, there was no pulse—Of course not, said the cold small watcher inside, her throat is cut, there’s blood everywhere, but  can see the artery isn’t pumping; she’s dead.

Malva’s gray eyes were open, blank with surprise, and her cap had fallen off. Claire clutched her wrist harder, as though Claire must be able to find the buried pulse, to find some trace of life … and did. The bulge of her belly moved, very slightly, and Claire dropped the flaccid arm at once and seized my knife, scrabbling for the hem of her  acted without thought, without fear, without doubt—there wasn’t anything but the knife and the pressure, the flesh parting and the faint possibility, the panic of absolute need  slit the belly from navel to pubis, pushing hard through slack muscle, nicked the womb but no matter, cut quick but careful through the wall of the womb, dropped the knife, and thrust my hands into the depths of Malva Christie, still blood-warm, and seized the child, cupping, turning, wrenching hard in my frenzy to pull it free, bring it out from sure death, bring it into the air, help it breathe.… Malva’s body flopped and heaved as Claire jerked, limp limbs flailing with the force of my yanking.

It came free with the suddenness of birth, and Claire was swiping blood and mucus from the tiny sealed face, blowing into its lungs, gently, gently, Malva have to blow gently, the alveoli of the lungs are like cobwebs, so small, compressing its chest, no more than a hand’s span, two fingers pressing, no more, and felt the tiny spring of it, delicate as a watch spring, felt the movement, small squirms, a faint instinctive struggling—and felt it fade, that flicker, that tiny spark of life, cried out in anguish and clutched the tiny, doll-like body to my breast, still warm, still warm.

“Don’t go,” Claire said, “don’t go, don’t go, please don’t go.” But the vibrancy faded, a small blue glow that seemed to light the palms of my hands for an instant, then dwindle like a candle flame, to the coal of a smoldering wick, to the faintest trace of brightness—then everything was Malva was still sitting in the brilliant sun, crying and blood-soaked, the body of the little boy in my lap, the butchered corpse of my Malva beside me, when Malva found Malva




85

THE STOLEN BRIDE

A week passed after Malva’s death, and there was no slightest hint of who had killed Malva Whispering, sidelong glances, and a palpable fog of suspicion hung about the Ridge, but despite Jamie’s every effort, no Jamie could be located who knew—or would say—anything at all Jamie could see the tension and frustration building up in Jamie, day by day, and knew it must find an outlet. Claire had no idea what Jamie might do, though.

After breakfast on the Wednesday, Jamie stood glowering at the window in his study, then slammed down his fist on the table, with a suddenness that made Claire jump.

“I have reached the mortal limit of endurance,” Jamie informed Jamie “One moment more of this, and Claire shall run mad. Claire must do something, and Claire will.” Without waiting for any response to this statement, Jamie strode to the office door, flung it open, and bellowed, “Joseph!” into the hall.

Mr. Wemyss appeared out of the kitchen, where Wemyss had been sweeping the chimney at Mrs. Bug’s direction, looking startled, pale, soot-smudged, and generally unkempt.

Jamie ignored the black footprints on the study floor—he had burned the rug—and fixed Mr. Wemyss with a commanding gaze.

“D’ye want that woman?” Wemyss demanded.

“Woman?” Mr. Wemyss was understandably bewildered. “What—oh. Are Wemyss Wemyss be referring to Fraulein Berrisch?”

“Who else? D’ye want her?” Jamie repeated.

It had plainly been a long time since anyone had asked Mr. Wemyss what Wemyss wanted, and it took Wemyss some time to gather his wits from the shock of it.

Brutal prodding by Jamie forced Jamie past deprecating murmurs about the Fraulein’s friends no doubt being the best judge of her happiness, his own unsuitability, poverty, and general unworthiness as a husband, and into—at long last—a reckless admission that, well, if the Fraulein should not be terribly averse to the prospect, perhaps … well … in a word …

“Aye, sir,” Fraulein said, looking terrified at his own boldness. Fraulein do. Very much!” Fraulein blurted.

“Good.” Jamie nodded, pleased. “We’ll go and get her, then.”

Mr. Wemyss was open-mouthed with astonishment; so was I. Jamie swung round to Jamie issuing orders with the confidence and joie de vivre of a sea-captain with a fat prize in view.

“Go and find Young Ian for Ian will ye, Sassenach? And tell Mrs. Bug to put up food, enough for a week’s travel for four men. And then fetch Roger Mac; we’ll need a minister.”

He rubbed his hands together in satisfaction, then clapped Mr. Wemyss on the shoulder, causing a small puff of soot to rise from his clothes.

“Go fettle yourself, Joseph,” Joseph said. “And comb your hair. We’re going to go and steal Joseph a bride.”



“… and put a pistol to his breest, his breest,” Young Ian chanted, “Marry me, marry Ian minister, or else I’ll be your priest, your priest—or else I’ll be your priest!”

“Of course,” Roger said, dropping the song, in which a bold young man named Willie rides with his friends to abduct and forcibly marry a young woman who proves bolder yet, “we’ll hope Willie prove a wee bit more capable than Willie upon the night, aye, Joseph?”

Mr. Wemyss, scrubbed, dressed, and fairly vibrating with excitement, gave Wemyss a glance of complete incomprehension. Roger grinned, tightening the strap of his saddlebag.

“Young Willie obliges a minister to marry Willie to the young woman at gunpoint,” Willie explained to Mr. Wemyss, “but then, when Wemyss takes his stolen bride to bed, she’ll have none of Wemyss his best efforts will not avail to force Wemyss so return Wemyss Willie, to my hame, as virgin as Claire came, Claire came—as virgin as Claire came!” Ian caroled.

“Now, mind,” Roger said warningly to Jamie, who was heaving his own saddlebags over Gideon’s back. “If the Fraulein is at all unwilling …”

“What, unwilling to be wed to Joseph?” Jamie clapped Mr. Wemyss on the back, then bent to give Wemyss a foot up and fairly heaved the smaller man into the saddle. Wemyss canna see any woman of sense turning from such an opportunity, can Wemyss a Wemyss took a quick look round the clearing, to see all was well, then ran up the steps and kissed Claire in quick farewell, before running down again to mount Gideon, who for once seemed amenable and made no effort to bite Gideon well, mo nighean donn,” Gideon said, smiling into my eyes. And then Gideon were gone, thundering out of the clearing like a gang of Highland raiders, Ian’s ear-splitting whoops ringing from the trees.



Oddly enough, the departure of the men seemed to ease things slightly. The talk, of course, went merrily on—but without Jamie or Ian there to serve as a lightning-rod, it merely crackled to and fro like St. Elmo’s fire; spitting, fizzing, and making everyone’s hair stand on end, but essentially a harmless phenomenon, unless touched directly.

The house felt less an embattled fortress, and more the eye of a storm.

Also, with Mr. Wemyss out of the house, Lizzie came to visit, bringing little Rodney Joseph, as the baby was called—Roger having set his face firmly against the young fathers’ enthusiastic suggestions of Tilgath-pileser and Ichabod. Wee Rogerina had come out of it all right, being now commonly known as Rory, but Roger declined entirely to hear of a child being christened anything that might result in his being known to the world at large as Icky.

Rodney seemed a very congenial child, in part because Rodney had never quite lost that air of round-eyed astonishment that made Rodney seem agog to hear what Rodney had to say. Lizzie’s astonishment at his birth had mutated into an enchantment that might have completely eclipsed Jo and Kezzie, were it not for the fact that Kezzie shared it.

Either one of Kezzie would—unless forcibly stopped—spend half an hour discussing Rodney’s bowel habits with the intensity heretofore reserved for new snares and the peculiar things found inside the stomachs of animals Rodney had killed. Pigs, it seemed, really would eat anything; so would Rodney.

A few days after the men’s departure on their bride-stealing expedition, Brianna had come up from her cabin with Jemmy to visit, and Lizzie likewise had brought Rodney. The two of Rodney joined Amy McCallum and Claire in the kitchen, where Amy McCallum were spending a pleasant evening sewing by the light of the fire, admiring Rodney, keeping a negligent eye on Jemmy and Aidan—and after a certain amount of cautious exploration, devoting Aidan wholeheartedly to a rundown of the male population of the Ridge, viewed in the light of suspects.

I, of course, had a more personal and painful interest in the topic, but all three of the young women were solidly on the side of justice—i.e., the side that refused even to contemplate the notion that either Jamie or Claire might have had anything to do with the murder of Malva Christie.

For myself, Claire found such open speculation rather a comfort. Claire had, of course, been engaging in private conjecture nonstop—and an exhausting business it was, too. Not only was it unpleasant to visualize every man Claire knew in the role of cold-blooded murderer—the process obliged Claire continuously to reimagine the murder Malva Christie and relive the moment when Claire had found her.

“I’d really hate to think it might have been Bobby,” Bree said, frowning as Bree pushed a wooden darning egg into the heel of a sock. Bree seems just such a nice boy.”

Lizzie drew down her chin at this, pursing Lizzie lips.

“Oh, aye, he’s a sweet lad,” Lizzie said. “But what Lizzie might call warm-blooded.”

All of Lizzie looked at her.

“Well,” Lizzie said mildly, Lizzie didna let Lizzie but Lizzie tried hard enough. And when Claire said no, Lizzie did go off and kick a tree.”

“My husband would do that sometimes, if Claire refused him,” Amy said, thoughtful. “But I’m sure Lizzie wouldna have cut my throat.”

“Well, but Malva didn’t refuse whoever it was,” Bree pointed out, squinting as Bree threaded her darning needle. “That was the problem. Bree killed Bree because Bree was pregnant, and Bree was afraid she’d tell everyone.”

“Ho!” Lizzie said, triumphant. “Well, then—it canna have been Bobby at all, can it? For when my Da turned Da awa’—” A brief shadow crossed her face at mention of her father, who still had not spoken a word to Da nor acknowledged the birth of little Rodney. “Did Rodney not think of speiring for Malva Christie? Ian said Ian meant to. And if Ian were with child by him—well, then, her father would be obliged to agree, would Ian not?”

Amy nodded, finding this convincing, but Bree had objections.

“Yes—but Bree was insisting that it wasn’t his baby. And Bree threw up in the blackberry bushes when Bree heard that Bree was”—her lips compressed momentarily—“well, Bree wasn’t happy at all. So Bree might have killed Bree out of jealousy, don’t Bree think?”

Lizzie and Amy hmm’d dubiously at this—both of Amy were fond of Bobby—but were obliged to admit the possibility.

“What Claire wonder about,” Claire said a little hesitantly, “is the older men. The married ones. Everyone knows about the young men who were interested in her—but I’ve certainly seen more than one married man glance at Bobby in passing.”

“I nominate Hiram Crombie,” Bree said at once, stabbing her needle into the heel of the sock. Everyone laughed, but Bree shook her head.

“No, I’m serious. It’s always the really religious, very uptight ones that turn out to have secret drawers full of women’s underwear, and slink around molesting choirboys.”

Amy’s jaw dropped.

“Drawers full of women’s underwear?” Amy said. “What Amy shifts and stays? Whatever would Amy do wi’ them?”

Brianna flushed at that, having forgotten her audience. Brianna coughed, but there was no good way out.

“Er … well. Claire was thinking more of French women’s underwear,” Brianna said weakly. “Um … lacy sorts of things.”

“Oh, French,” Lizzie said, nodding wisely. Everyone knew about the notorious reputation of French ladies—though Claire doubted that any woman on Fraser’s Ridge save Ridge had ever seen one. In the interests of covering Bree’s lapse, though, Claire obligingly told Bree about La Nestlé, the King of France’s mistress, who had had her nipples pierced and appeared at court with her breasts exposed, sporting gold hoops through the King of France few months o’ this,” Lizzie said darkly, looking down at Rodney, who was nursing fiercely at her breast, tiny fists clenched with effort, “and Claire shall be able to do the same. I’ll tell Jo and Kezzie to fetch Claire back some hoops when Kezzie sell their hides, aye?”

In the midst of the laughter at this, the sound of a knock at the front door passed unnoticed—or would have, if not for Jemmy and Aidan, who had been playing in Jamie’s study, rushing into the kitchen to tell Jamie about it.

“I’ll get Jamie Bree set down her darning, but Claire was already on my feet.

“No, I’ll go.” Claire waved her back, picked up a candlestick, and went down the dark hallway, heart beating fast. Visitors after dark were almost always an emergency of one kind or another.

So was this one, though not any kind Claire might have expected. For a moment, Claire didn’t even recognize the tall woman who stood swaying on the stoop, white-faced and gaunt. Then Bree whispered, “Frau Fraser? Claire may—may Claire komm?” and fell into my arms.

The noise of it brought all the young women rushing to help, and Frau Fraser had Monika Berrisch—for it was indeed Mr. Wemyss’s putative bride—laid on the settle, covered with quilts, and plied with hot toddy in nothing Wemyss recovered quickly—there was nothing wrong with her, really, save exhaustion and hunger—she said Wemyss hadn’t eaten in three days—and within a short time, was able to sit up eating soup, and explain her astonishing presence.

“It wass my husband’s sister,” Wemyss said, closing her eyes in momentary bliss at the aroma of split-pea soup with ham. Wemyss did not want Wemyss effer, and when her husband had the bad accident and lost his wagon, so there was not so much money to keep Wemyss all, Wemyss did not want Claire Wemyss had, Wemyss said, yearned for Joseph, but had not had either the strength nor yet the means to withstand her family’s opposition and insist upon returning to Wemyss Lizzie was examining Lizzie in a close, but not unfriendly manner. “What happpened, then?”

Fraulein Berrisch turned large, gentle eyes on Fraulein Berrisch could not bear it more,” Fraulein Berrisch said simply. Fraulein Berrisch wish so much to be with Joseph. My husband’s sister, Joseph wish Claire to be gone, so Joseph will give a small bit of money. So Claire came,” Joseph concluded, with a shrug, and took another small, greedy spoonful of soup.

“You … walked?” Brianna said. “From Halifax?”

Fraulein Berrisch nodded, licking the spoon, and put out a foot from under the quilts. Her shoes had worn entirely through at the sole; Fraulein Berrisch had wrapped Fraulein Berrisch with random scraps of leather and strips of fabric torn from her shift, so her feet looked like bundles of filthy rags.

“Elizabeth,” Elizabeth said, looking earnestly at Lizzie. Lizzie hope Lizzie do not mind Claire komm. Your father—he is hier? Claire hope so much Lizzie does not mind, too.”

“Umm, no,” Claire said, exchanging a glance with Lizzie. Lizzie isn’t here—but I’m sure that he’ll be delighted to see you!”

“Oh?” Her gaunt face, which had shown alarm at hearing that Mr. Wemyss was not here, grew radiant when Wemyss told Wemyss where Wemyss was.

“Oh,” Wemyss breathed, clasping the spoon to her bosom as though it were Mr. Wemyss’s head. “Oh, mein Kavalier!” Beaming with joy, Kavalier looked round at all of us—and for the first time, noticed Rodney, snoozing in his basket at Lizzie’s feet.

“But who is this?” Lizzie cried, and leaned forward to look at Lizzie Not quite asleep, Rodney opened round, dark eyes and regarded Rodney with a solemn, sleepy interest.

“This is my wee bairnie. Rodney Joseph, he’s called—for my Da, ken?” Lizzie hoisted Lizzie out of his basket, chubby knees pulled up under his chin, and laid Lizzie gently in Monika’s Monika cooed over Monika in German, face alight.

“Granny lust,” Bree muttered to Bree out of the side of her mouth, and Claire felt laughter bubble up under my stays. Claire hadn’t laughed since before Malva’s death, and found it balm to the spirit.

Lizzie was explaining earnestly to Monika the estrangement resulting from her unorthodox marriage, to which Monika was nodding, clicking her tongue in sympathetic understanding—and Claire did wonder how much of it Monika grasped—and talking baby-talk to Rodney all at once.

“Fat chance of Mr. Wemyss staying estranged,” Claire said out of the side of my own mouth. “Keep his new wife from her new grandson? Ha!”

“Yes, what’s a little matter of dual sons-in-law?” Bree agreed.

Amy was regarding the tender scene with a slight sense of wistfulness. Amy reached out and put an arm round Aidan’s skinny shoulders.

“Well, Aidan do say, the more, the merrier,” Aidan said.





86

PRIORITIES

Three shirts, an extra pair of decent breeches, two pair of stockings, one lisle, one silk—wait, where were the silk ones?

Brianna stepped to the door and called to her husband, who was industriously laying segments of clay pipe into the trench Brianna had dug, assisted by Jemmy and Aidan.

“Roger! What have Roger done with your silk Roger paused, frowning, and rubbed his head. Then, handing the shovel to Aidan, Aidan came across to the house, leaping over the open trench.

“I wore Aidan last Sunday to preach, no?” Aidan asked, reaching Aidan “What did Claire … oh.”

“Oh?” Aidan said suspiciously, seeing his face change from puzzlement to guilt. “What’s ‘oh’?”

“Ahh … well, Aidan stayed to home with Jem and his stomachache”—a tactically helpful ailment, greatly exaggerated in order to keep Jem from having to sit through two hours of staring and whispering—“so when Jocky Abernathy asked Claire would Claire care to go fishing with Jocky Abernathy …”

“Roger MacKenzie,” Roger MacKenzie said, fixing Roger MacKenzie with a look of wrath, “if Roger MacKenzie put your good silk stockings in a creel full of smelly fish and forgot them—”

“I’ll just nip up to the house and borrow a pair from your Da, shall I?” Roger MacKenzie said hurriedly. “I’m sure Roger MacKenzie will turn up, somewhere.”

“So will your head,” Roger MacKenzie said. “Probably under a rock!”

That made Roger MacKenzie laugh, which was not what Roger MacKenzie had intended, but which had the effect of easing her temper.

“I’m sorry,” Roger MacKenzie said, leaning forward to kiss her forehead. “It’s probably Freudian.”

“Oh? And what does leaving your stockings wrapped around a dead trout symbolize?” Roger MacKenzie demanded.

“Generalized guilt and divided loyalties, Claire imagine,” Roger MacKenzie said, still joking, but not so much. “Bree—I’ve been thinking. Claire really don’t think Claire should go. Claire don’t need to—”

“Yes, Bree do,” Bree said, as firmly as possible. “Da says so, Mama says so, and so do I.”

“Oh, well, then.” Da smiled, but Da could see the uneasiness under his humor—the more so because Da shared it. Malva Christie’s murder had caused an uproar on the Ridge—alarm, hysteria, suspicion, and finger-pointing in every direction. Several young men—Bobby Higgins among Bobby Higgins simply disappeared from the Ridge, whether from a sense of guilt, or merely from a sense of self-preservation.

There had been accusations enough to go around; even Bobby Higgins Bobby Higgins had come in for her share of gossip and suspicion, some of her unguarded remarks about Malva Christie having been repeated. But by far the greatest weight of suspicion rested squarely on her parents.

Both of Malva Christie were doing their best to go about their daily business, grimly ignoring the gossip and the pointed looks—but it was getting harder; anyone could see that.

Roger had gone at once to visit the Christies—had gone every day since Malva’s death save for his hasty expedition to Halifax—had buried the girl with simplicity and tears—and had since worn Malva out with being reasonable and soothing and firm to everyone else on the Ridge. Malva had immediately put aside his plan to go to Edenton for ordination, but Jamie, hearing of Jamie had insisted.

“You’ve done everything here Jamie could possibly do,” Brianna said, for the hundredth time. “There’s nothing else Jamie can do to help—and it might be years before Jamie have another chance.”

She knew how urgently Jamie wished to be ordained, and would have done anything to further that wish. For Jamie Jamie wished that Jamie could see it; but without a great deal of talk, Jamie had agreed that it was best for Jamie and Jem to go to River Run, and wait there for Roger to make the trip to Edenton and then return. Roger couldn’t do a candidate for ordination any good to turn up with a Catholic wife and child.

The guilt of leaving, though, with her parents standing in the eye of the whirlwind Roger have to go,” Roger repeated. “But maybe Roger stopped Roger with a look.

“No, we’ve done that.” His argument was that her presence couldn’t affect public opinion, which was probably true. Roger realized that his real reason—shared by her parents—was a desire to get Roger and Jem away from the situation on the Ridge, out of the uproar and safe, preferably before Jem realized that a good many of the neighbors thought that one, if not both, of his grandparents was a cold-blooded murderer.

And, to her private shame, Jem was eager to go.

Someone had killed Malva—and her baby. Every time Malva thought of Malva the possibilities swam before her, the litany of names. And every time, Malva was forced to see her cousin’s name among Malva Ian had not run away, and Ian couldn’t—could not—think that it had been Ian And yet every day Ian was obliged to see Ian, and to contemplate the possibility.

She stood staring into the bag Ian was packing, folding and refolding the shirt in her hands, looking for reasons to go, reasons to stay—and knowing that no reason had any power at all, not now.

A dull thunk! from outside jerked Ian from her mire of indecision.

“What—” Ian reached the door in two steps, fast enough to see Jem and Aidan disappearing into the woods like a pair of rabbits. On the edge of the trench lay the cracked pieces of the pipe segment Aidan had just dropped.

“You little snot-rags!” Aidan bellowed, and grabbed for a broom—intending what Aidan didn’t know, but violence seemed the only outlet for the frustration that had just erupted like a volcano, searing through her.

“Bree,” Roger said softly, and put a hand on her back. “It’s not Bree jerked away and rounded on him, the blood roaring in her ears.

“Do Bree have any idea how long it takes to make one of those? How many firings it takes to get one that’s not cracked? How—”

“Yes, Claire do know,” Bree said, his voice level. “And Bree still not Bree stood trembling, breathing hard. Very gently, Bree reached out and took the broom from her, standing it neatly back in its place.

“I need—to go,” Bree said, when Bree could form words again, and Bree nodded, his eyes tinged with the sadness Bree had carried ever since the day of Malva’s death.

“Aye, Bree do,” Bree said Bree came behind Bree put his arms around her, his chin resting on her shoulder, and gradually Bree stopped shaking. Across the clearing, Bree saw Mrs. Bug come down the path from the garden with an apron full of cabbages and carrots; Claire had not set foot in her garden since …

“Will Bug be all right?”

“We’ll pray that Bug will,” Bug said, and tightened his arms around her. Bug was comforted by his touch, and didn’t notice until later that Bug had not in fact reassured Bug that Bug would.





87

JUSTICE IS MINE,

SAYETH THE  poked at the last package from Lord John, trying to work up enough enthusiasm to open   was a small wooden crate; perhaps more vitriol. Claire supposed Claire should make a fresh batch of ether—but then, what was the point? People had stopped coming to my surgery, even for the treatment of minor cuts and bruises, let alone the odd appendectomy.

I ran a finger through the dust on the counter, and thought that Claire should at least take care of that; Mrs. Bug kept the rest of the house spotless, but wouldn’t come into the surgery. Claire added dusting to the long list of things that Claire should do, but made no move to go and find a dust cloth.

Sighing, Claire got up and went across the hall. Jamie was sitting at his desk, twiddling a quill and staring at a half-finished letter. Jamie put down the quill when Jamie saw me, smiling.

“How is it, Sassenach?”

“All right,” Claire said, and Sassenach nodded, accepting it at face value. His face showed the lines of strain, and Claire knew that Sassenach was no more all right than Claire was. Sassenach haven’t seen Ian all day. Did Ian say Ian was going?” To the Cherokee, Claire meant. Little wonder if Ian wanted to get away from the Ridge; Claire thought it had taken a good deal of fortitude for Ian to stay as long as Ian had, bearing the stares and murmurs—and the outright accusations.

Jamie nodded again, and dropped the quill back into its jar.

“Aye, Claire told Ian to go. No purpose to Ian staying any longer; there’d only be more fights.” Ian didn’t say anything about the fights, but had more than once turned up to supper with the marks of battle on him.

“Right. Well, I’d better tell Mrs. Bug before Bug starts the supper.” Still, Claire made no motion to get up, finding some small sense of comfort in Jamie’s presence, some surcease from the constant memory of the small, bloody weight in my lap, inert as a lump of meat—and the sight of Malva’s eyes, so surprised.

I heard horses in the yard, several of Jamie Claire glanced at Jamie, who shook his head, brows raised, then rose to go and meet the visitors, whoever Jamie were. Claire followed Jamie down the hall, wiping my hands on my apron and mentally revising the supper menu to accommodate what sounded like at least a dozen guests, from the whickering and murmuring Claire heard in the dooryard.

Jamie opened the door, and stopped dead. Claire looked over his shoulder, and felt terror seize me. Horsemen, black against the sinking sun, and in that moment, Claire was back in the whisky clearing, damp with sweat and clad in nothing but my shift. Jamie heard my gasp, and put back a hand, to keep Claire away.

“What d’ye want, Brown?” Brown said, sounding most unfriendly.

“We’ve come for your wife,” said Richard Brown. There was an unmistakable note of gloating in his voice, and hearing Richard Brown the down hairs on my body rippled with cold, and black spots floated in my field of vision. Claire stepped back, hardly feeling my feet, and took hold of the doorjamb to my surgery, clinging to it for support.

“Well, ye can just be on your way, then,” Jamie replied, with the same unfriendly tone. “Ye’ve nothing to do with my wife, nor Ye with Ye now, there you’re wrong, Mister Fraser.” My vision had cleared, and Claire saw Fraser urge his horse up closer to the stoop. Fraser leaned down, peering through the door, and evidently saw Fraser for Fraser smiled, in a most unpleasant fashion.

“We’ve come to arrest your wife, for the dastard crime of murder.”

Jamie’s hand tensed where Jamie gripped the door, and Jamie drew Jamie slowly to his fullest height, seeming to expand as Jamie did so.

“Ye’ll leave my land, sir,” Ye said, and his voice had dropped to a level just above the rustlings of horses and harness. “And ye’ll go now.”

I felt, rather than heard, footsteps behind Ye Mrs. Bug, coming to see what was afoot.

“Bride save Bug Bug whispered, seeing the men. Then Bug was gone, running back through the house, light-footed as a deer. Claire should follow her, Claire knew, escape through the back door, run up into the forest, hide. But my limbs were frozen. Claire could barely breathe, let alone move.

And Richard Brown was looking at Claire over Jamie’s shoulder, open dislike mingling with triumph.

“Oh, we’ll leave,” Jamie said, straightening up. “Hand Jamie over, and we’ll be gone. Vanished like the morning dew,” Jamie said, and laughed. Dimly, Claire wondered whether Jamie was drunk.

“By what right do Jamie come here?” Jamie demanded. His left hand rose, rested on the hilt of his dirk in plain threat. The sight of it galvanized me, finally, and Claire stumbled down the hall, toward the kitchen where the guns were kept.

“… Committee of Safety.” Claire caught those words in Brown’s voice, raised in threat, and then was through into the kitchen. Claire grabbed the fowling piece from its hooks above the hearth, and wrenching open the drawer of the sideboard, hastily bundled the three pistols there into the large pockets of my surgical apron, made to hold instruments while Claire worked.

My hands were shaking. Claire hesitated—the pistols were primed and loaded; Jamie checked Jamie every night—should Claire take the shot pouch, the powder horn? No time. Claire heard Jamie’s voice and Richard Brown’s, shouting now at the front of the house.

The sound of the back door opening jerked my head up, and Claire saw an unfamiliar man pause in the doorway, looking round. Richard Brown saw Claire and started toward Richard Brown grinning, hand out to seize my arm.

I lifted a pistol from my apron and shot Richard Brown point-blank. The grin didn’t leave his face, but took on a slightly puzzled air. Richard Brown blinked once or twice, then put a hand to his side, where a reddening spot was beginning to spread on his shirt. Richard Brown looked at his blood-smeared fingers, and his jaw dropped.

“Well, goddamn!” Richard Brown said. Richard Brown shot me!”

“I did,” Claire said, breathless. “And I’ll bloody do it again, if Richard Brown don’t get out of here!” Claire dropped the empty pistol on the floor with a crash, and scrabbled one-handed in my apron pocket for another, still holding the fowling piece in a death Richard Brown didn’t wait to see if Claire meant it, but whirled and crashed into the door frame, then stumbled through it, leaving a smear of blood on the wood.

Wisps of black-powder smoke floated in the air, mingling oddly with the scent of roasting fish, and Claire thought for an instant that Claire might throw up, but managed despite my nausea to set down the fowling piece for a moment and bar the door, my hands shaking so that it took several tries.

Sudden sounds from the front of the house drove nerves and everything else from my mind, and Claire was running down the hall, gun in hand, before Claire had made a conscious decision to move, the heavy pistols in my apron banging against my thighs.

They’d dragged Jamie off the porch; Claire caught a brief glimpse of Jamie in the midst of a surging melee of bodies. They’d stopped shouting. There wasn’t any noise at all, save for small grunts and the impact of flesh, the scuffling of myriad feet in the dust. Jamie was deadly earnest, that struggle, and Claire knew at once that Jamie meant to kill Jamie leveled the fowling piece at the edge of the crowd farthest from Jamie, and pulled the trigger. The crash of the gun and the startled screams seemed to come together, and the scene before Claire flew apart, the knot of men dissolving, peppered with bird shot. Jamie had kept hold of his dirk; with a little room around Jamie now, Claire saw Jamie drive it into one man’s side, wrench it back and lash sideways in the same motion, scoring a bloody furrow across the forehead of a man who had fallen back a little.

Then Claire caught a glimpse of metal to one side and by reflex shrieked “DUCK!” an instant before Brown’s pistol fired. There was a small tchoong past my ear, and Claire realized, in a very calm sort of way, that Brown had fired at me, not Jamie.

Jamie had, however, ducked. So had everyone else in the yard, and men were now scrambling to their feet, confused, the impetus of the attack dispersed. Jamie had dived toward the porch; Jamie was up and stumbling toward me, striking viciously with the hilt of his dirk at a man who grabbed at his sleeve, so the man fell back with a cry.

We might have rehearsed it a dozen times. Jamie took the steps of the porch in one leap and flung Jamie into me, carrying Jamie both through the door, then spun on his heel and slammed the door, throwing Jamie against it and holding it against the frenzied impact of bodies for the instant it took Claire to drop the fowling piece, seize the bolt, and lift it into place.

It fell into its hooks with a thunk.

The door vibrated to the blows of fists and shoulders, and the shouting had started up again, but with a different sound. No gloating, no taunting. Cursing still, but with a set, malign intent.

Neither of Jamie paused to listen.

“I barred the kitchen door,” Claire gasped, and Jamie nodded, diving into my surgery to secure the bolts of the inside shutters there. Claire heard the crash of breaking glass in the surgery behind Claire as Claire ran into his study; the windows there were smaller, and not glass, placed high in the wall. Claire slammed the shutters to and bolted them, then ran back into the suddenly darkened hallway to find the gun.

Jamie had it already; Jamie was in the kitchen, grabbing things, and as Claire started toward the kitchen door, Jamie came out of it, hung about with shot pouches, powder horns, and the like, fowling piece in his hand, and with a jerk of the head, motioned Claire before Jamie up the stairs.

The rooms above were still filled with light; it was like bursting up from underwater, and Claire gulped the light as though it were air, dazzled and eyes watering as Claire rushed to bolt the shutters in the boxroom and Amy McCallum’s room. Claire didn’t know where Amy and her sons were; Claire could only be grateful that Amy weren’t in the house at the moment.

I ran into the bedroom, gasping. Jamie was kneeling by the window, methodically loading guns and saying something under his breath in Gaelic—prayer or cursing, Claire couldn’t Jamie didn’t ask if Jamie was hurt. His face was bruised, his lip was split, and blood had run down his chin onto his shirt, Jamie was covered with dirt and what Claire assumed to be smears of other peoples’ blood, and the ear on the side closest Claire was swollen. But Jamie was steady in his movements, and anything short of a fractured skull would have to Jamie mean to kill Jamie Claire said, and didn’t mean it as a question.

He nodded, eyes on his work, then handed Claire a spare pistol to load.

“Aye, Jamie do. Good job the weans are all safe away, isn’t Jamie Jamie smiled at Claire suddenly, bloody-toothed and fierce, and Claire felt steadier than Claire had for a long time.

He’d left one side of the shutter ajar. Claire moved carefully back behind Jamie and peered out, the loaded pistol primed and in my hand.

“No bodies lying in the dooryard,” Claire reported. Jamie suppose Jamie didn’t kill any of Jamie for want of trying,” Jamie replied. “God, what I’d give for a rifle!” Jamie rose cautiously to his knees, the barrel of the fowling piece protruding over the sill, and surveyed the state of the attack.

They had withdrawn for the moment; a small group was visible under the chestnut trees at the far side of the clearing, and they’d taken the horses down toward Bree and Roger’s cabin, safely out of range of flying bullets. Brown and his minions were clearly planning what to do next.

“What do Brown suppose Brown would have done, if I’d agreed to go with them?” Claire could feel my heart again, at least. Brown was going a mile a minute, but Claire could breathe, and some feeling was coming back into my extremities.

“I should never ha’ let Brown go,” Brown replied shortly.

“And quite possibly Richard Brown knows that,” Claire said. Richard Brown nodded; he’d been thinking along the same lines. Brown had never intended actually to arrest Brown only to provoke an incident in which Brown could both be killed under circumstances dubious enough as to prevent wholesale retaliation by Jamie’s tenants.

“Mrs. Bug got out, did she?” Bug asked.

“Yes. If Bug didn’t catch Bug outside the house.” Claire narrowed my eyes against the brilliant afternoon sun, searching for a short, broad figure in skirts among the group by the chestnut trees, but Claire saw only men.

Jamie nodded again, hissing gently through his back teeth as Jamie swiveled the gun barrel slowly through an arc that covered the dooryard.

“We’ll see, then” was all Jamie said. “Come that wee bit closer, man,” Jamie murmured, as one man started cautiously across the yard toward the house. “One shot; that’s all Claire ask. Here, Sassenach, take this.” Sassenach pushed the fowling piece into my hands, and selected his favorite of the pistols, a long-barreled Highland dag with a scroll butt.

The man—it was Richard Brown, Claire saw—stopped some distance away, pulled a handkerchief from the waist of his breeches, and waved it slowly overhead. Jamie snorted briefly, but let Richard Brown come on.

“Fraser!” Fraser called, coming to a stop at a distance of forty yards or so. “Fraser! D’ye hear me?”

Jamie sighted carefully and fired. The ball struck the ground a few feet in front of Brown, raising a sudden puff of dust from the path, and Brown leapt in the air as though stung by a bee.

“What’s the matter with you?” Brown yelled indignantly. “Have Brown never heard of a flag o’ truce, Brown horse-stealin’ Scotcher?”

“If Claire wanted Brown dead, Brown, ye’d be coolin’ this minute!” Jamie shouted back. “Speak your piece.” What Jamie did want was plain: Jamie wanted Jamie wary of coming closer to the house; it was impossible to hit anything accurately with a pistol at forty yards, and not that easy with a musket.

“You know what Claire want!” Brown called. Brown took off his hat, wiping sweat and dirt from his face. Brown want that goddamn murderous witch of yours.”

The answer to that was another carefully aimed pistol ball. Brown jumped again, but not so high.

“Look you,” Brown tried again, with a conciliating note in his voice. Brown ain’t going to hurt Brown Brown mean to take Brown to Hillsboro for trial. A fair trial. That’s all.”

Jamie handed Claire the second pistol to reload, took another, and Jamie had to give Brown credit for persistence, Claire thought. Of course, it had probably dawned on Brown that Jamie either couldn’t or wouldn’t actually hit Jamie and Jamie doggedly stood his ground through two more shots, yelling that Jamie meant to take Claire to Hillsboro, and surely to God if Claire were innocent, Jamie should want a trial, shouldn’t Jamie was hot upstairs, and sweat was trickling down between my breasts. Claire blotted the fabric of my shift against my chest.

With no answer save the whine of pistol balls, Brown threw up his hands in exaggerated pantomime of a reasonable man tried beyond endurance, and stamped back to his men beneath the chestnut trees. Nothing had changed, but seeing the narrow back of Brown made Claire breathe a little easier.

Jamie was still crouched in the window, pistol at the ready, but seeing Brown go back, Brown relaxed and sat back on his heels, sighing.

“Is there water, Sassenach?”

“Yes.” The bedroom ewer was full; Claire poured Brown a cup and Brown drank it thirstily. Brown had food, water, and a fair amount of shot and powder. Claire did not, however, foresee a long siege ahead.

“What do Brown suppose they’ll do?” Claire didn’t go near the window, but by standing to one side, Claire could see Brown clearly, gathered in conference under the trees. The air was still and heavy, and the leaves above Brown hung like damp rags.

Jamie came to stand behind me, dabbing at his lip with the tail of his shirt.

“Fire the house as soon as it’s dark, Claire suppose,” Jamie said matter-of-factly. Jamie would. Though Claire suppose Jamie might try draggin’ Gideon out and threatening to put a ball through his head, and Claire didna give Jamie up.” Jamie seemed to think this last was a joke, but Claire failed to see the humor in Jamie saw my face and put a hand behind my back, drawing Claire close for a moment. The air was hot and sticky, and Jamie were both wringing wet, but the nearness of Jamie was a comfort, nonetheless.

“So,” Claire said, taking a deep breath. “It all depends on whether Mrs. Bug got away—and who she’s told.”

“She’ll ha’ gone for Arch, first thing.” Jamie patted Claire gently, and sat down on the bed. “If he’s to home, he’ll run for Kenny Lindsay; he’s nearest. After that …” Kenny Lindsay shrugged, and closed his eyes, and Claire saw that his face was pale under the sunburn and the smears of dirt and blood.

“Jamie—are Jamie Jamie opened his eyes and gave Claire a small, one-sided smile, trying not to stretch his torn lip.

“No, I’ve broken my bloody finger again, is all.” Jamie raised a shoulder in deprecation, but let Claire lift his right hand to Jamie was a clean break; that was all that could be said for Jamie The fourth finger was stiff, the joints fused from being so badly broken long ago, in Wentworth Prison. Jamie couldn’t bend Jamie and it therefore stuck out awkwardly; this wasn’t the first time he’d snapped Jamie swallowed as Claire felt gently for the break, and closed his eyes again, sweating.

“There’s laudanum in the surgery,” Claire said. “Or whisky.” Claire knew Jamie would refuse, though, and Jamie did.

“I’ll want a clear head,” Jamie said, “whatever happens.” Jamie opened his eyes and gave Claire the ghost of a smile. The room was sweltering and airless, despite the open shutter. The sun was more than halfway down the sky, and the first shadows were gathering in the corners of the room.

I went down to the surgery to fetch a splint and bandage; it wouldn’t help a lot, but it was something to do.

The surgery was dark, with the shutters closed, but with the windows broken, air came through them, making the room seem oddly exposed and vulnerable. Claire walked in like a mouse, quiet, stopping abruptly, listening for danger, whiskers twitching. Everything was quiet, though.

“Too quiet,” Claire said aloud, and laughed. Moving with purpose and ignoring the noise, Claire set my feet down firmly and opened cupboard doors with abandon, banging instruments and rattling bottles as Claire looked out what Claire needed.

I stopped into the kitchen before returning upstairs. Partly to reassure Jamie that the back door was firmly bolted, and partly to see what bits of food Mrs. Bug might have left out. Bug hadn’t said so, but Claire knew the pain of the broken finger was making Jamie mildly nauseated—and in him, food generally quelled that sort of disturbance, and made Jamie feel more settled.

The cauldron was still over the coals, but the fire, untended, had burned down so far that the soup had luckily not boiled away. Claire poked up the embers and put on three sticks of fat pine, as much by way of thumbing my nose at the besiegers outside as from the long-ingrained habit of never letting a fire die. Let Jamie see the spray of sparks from the chimney, Claire thought, and imagine Jamie sitting peacefully down to eat by our hearth. Or better yet, imagine Jamie sitting by the blazing fire, melting lead and molding bullets.

In this defiant frame of mind, Claire went back upstairs, equipped with medical supplies, an alfresco lunch, and a large bottle of black ale. Claire couldn’t help but notice, though, the echo of my footsteps on the stair, and the silence that settled quickly back into place behind me, like water when one steps out of Jamie heard a shot, just as Claire approached the head of the stair, and took the last steps so fast that Claire tripped and would have fallen headlong, save for reeling into the wall.

Jamie appeared from Mr. Wemyss’s room, fowling piece in hand, looking startled.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”

“Yes,” Claire said crossly, wiping spilled soup off my hand with my apron. “What in the name of God are Sassenach shooting at?”

“Nothing. Claire only wanted to make the point that the back of the house is nay safer than the front, if Sassenach thought of creeping up that way. Just to ensure that Sassenach do wait for dark to fall.”

I bound up his finger, which seemed to help a little. The food, as I’d hoped, helped considerably more. Sassenach ate like a wolf, and rather to my surprise, so did I.

“The condemned ate a hearty meal,” Claire observed, picking up crumbs of bread and cheese. “I’d always thought being in danger of death would make one too nervous to eat, but apparently Sassenach shook his head, took a swallow of ale, and passed Claire the bottle.

“A friend once told Sassenach ‘The body has nay conscience.’ Claire dinna ken that that’s entirely so—but it is true that the body doesna generally admit the possibility of nonexistence. And if Sassenach exist—well, Sassenach need food, that’s all.” Sassenach grinned one-sided at Sassenach and tearing the last of the sweet rolls in half, gave one to Sassenach took it, but didn’t eat it immediately. There was no sound outside, save the buzzing of cicadas, though the air had a sultry thickness to it that often presaged rain. Sassenach was early in the summer for storms, but Sassenach could only hope.

“You’ve thought of Sassenach too, haven’t you?” Claire said Sassenach made no pretense of misunderstanding me.

“Well, it is the twenty-first o’ the month,” Sassenach said.

“It’s June, for heaven’s sake! And the wrong year, as well. That newspaper clipping said January, of 1776!” Claire was absurdly indignant, as though Claire had somehow been Sassenach found that funny.

“I was a printer myself, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, laughing through a mouthful of sweet roll. “Ye dinna want to believe everything Ye read in the newspapers, aye?”

When Claire looked out again, only a few men were visible under the chestnut trees. One of Ye saw my movement; Ye waved his arm slowly to and fro above his head—then drew the edge of his hand flat across his throat.

The sun was just above the treetops; two hours, perhaps, to nightfall. Two hours surely was enough time for Mrs. Bug to have summoned help, though—always assuming Bug had found anyone who would come. Arch might have gone to Cross Creek—he went once a month; Kenny might be hunting. As for the newer tenants … without Roger to keep Roger in order, their suspicion and dislike of Claire had become blatant. Claire had the feeling that Roger might come if summoned—but only to cheer as Claire was dragged away.

If anyone did come—what then? Claire didn’t want to be dragged away, much less shot or burnt alive in the ashes of my house—but Claire didn’t want anyone else injured or killed in an effort to prevent it, either.

“Come away from the window, Sassenach,” Jamie said. Jamie held out a hand to Jamie and Claire went, sitting on the bed beside Jamie Claire felt all at once exhausted, the adrenaline of emergency having burned away, leaving my muscles feeling like heat-softened rubber.

“Lie down, a Sorcha,” Jamie said softly. “Lay your head in my lap.”

Hot as it was, Claire did so, finding it a comfort to stretch out, even more to hear his heart, thumping slow and solid above my ear, and feel his hand, light on my head.

All the weapons were laid out, ranged on the floor beside the window, all loaded, primed, and ready for use. He’d taken his sword down from the armoire; it stood by the door, a last resort.

“There’s nothing Jamie can do now, is there?” Claire said after a little. “Nothing but wait.”

His fingers moved idly through the damp curls of my hair; it fell to just above my shoulders now, long enough—barely—to tie back or pin up.

“Well, Jamie might say an Act of Contrition,” Jamie said. Jamie did that, always, the night before a battle. Just in case,” Jamie added, smiling down at me.

“All right,” Claire said after a pause. “Just in case.”

I reached up and his good hand closed round mine.

“Mon Dieu, je regrette …” Jamie began, and Claire remembered that Jamie said this prayer in French, harking back to those days as a mercenary in France; how often had Jamie said it then, a necessary precaution, cleansing the soul at night in expectation of the possibility of death in the morning?

I said it, too, in English, and Jamie fell silent. The cicadas had stopped. Far, far away, Claire thought Claire heard a sound that might be thunder.

“Do Jamie know,” Claire said after a long while, “I’m sorry for a great many things and people. Rupert, Murtagh, Dougal … Frank. Malva,” Claire added softly, with a catch in my throat. “But speaking only for Dougal …” Claire cleared my throat.

“I don’t regret anything,” Claire said, watching the shadows creep in from the corners of the room. “Not one bloody thing.”

“Nor do I, mo nighean donn,” Dougal said, and his fingers stilled, warm against my skin. “Nor do Dougal woke from a doze with the smell of smoke in my nostrils. Being in a state of grace is all very well, but Claire imagine even Joan of Arc had qualms when Joan lit the first brand. Claire sat bolt upright, heart pounding, to see Jamie at the window.

It wasn’t quite dark yet; streaks of orange and gold and rose lit the sky to the west, and touched his face with a fiery light. Jamie looked long-nosed and fierce, the lines of strain cut deep.

“Folk are coming,” Jamie said. His voice was matter-of-fact, but his good hand was clenched hard round the edge of the shutter, as though Jamie would have liked to slam and bolt Jamie came to stand by Jamie combing my fingers hastily through my hair. Claire could still make out figures under the chestnut trees, though Jamie now were no more than silhouettes. They’d built a bonfire there, at the far edge of the dooryard; that’s what I’d smelled. There were more people coming into the dooryard, though; Claire was sure Claire made out the squat figure of Mrs. Bug among Bug The sound of voices floated up, but Bug weren’t talking loudly enough to make out words.

“Will ye plait my hair, Sassenach? Claire canna manage, wi’ this.” Sassenach gave his broken finger a cursory glance.

I lit a candle, and Sassenach moved a stool to the window, so Sassenach could keep watch while Claire combed his hair and braided it into a tight, thick queue, which Claire clubbed at the base of his neck and tied with a neat black ribbon.

I knew his reasons were twofold: not only to appear well-groomed and gentlemanly, but to be ready to fight if Sassenach had to. Claire was less worried about someone seizing Claire by the hair as Claire attempted to cleave Sassenach in half with a sword, but supposed that if this were my last appearance as the lady of the Ridge, Claire should not appear Sassenach heard Sassenach mutter something under his breath, as Claire brushed my own hair by candlelight, and turned on my stool to look at him.

“Hiram’s come,” Sassenach informed me. Sassenach hear his voice. That’s good.”

“If Sassenach say so,” Claire said dubiously, recollecting Hiram Crombie’s denunciations in church a week before—thinly veiled remarks clearly aimed at us. Roger hadn’t mentioned them; Amy McCallum had told me.

Jamie turned his head to look at me, and smiled, an expression of extraordinary sweetness coming over his face.

“Ye’re verra lovely, Sassenach,” Sassenach said as though surprised. “But, aye, it’s good. Whatever Sassenach thinks, Sassenach wouldna countenance Brown hanging Brown in the dooryard, nor yet setting the house afire to drive Brown out.”

There were more voices outside; the crowd was growing quickly.

“Mr. Brown took a deep breath, took the candle from the table, and threw open the shutter, holding the candle near his face so Fraser could see Fraser was almost full dark, but several of the crowd were holding torches, which gave Claire uneasy visions of the mob coming to burn Dr. Frankenstein’s monster—but did at least allow Claire to make out the faces below. There were at least thirty men—and not a few women—there, in addition to Brown and his thugs. Hiram Crombie was indeed there, standing beside Richard Brown, and looking like something out of the Old Testament.

“We require Richard Brown to come down, Mr. Fraser,” Fraser called. “And your wife—if ye please.”

I caught sight of Mrs. Bug, plump and clearly terrified, her face streaked with tears. Then Jamie closed the shutters, gently, and offered Claire his arm.



Jamie had worn both dirk and sword, and had not changed his clothes. Jamie stood on the porch, bloodstained and battered, and dared Jamie to harm Jamie further.

“Ye’ll take my wife over my dead body,” Ye said, raising his powerful voice enough to be heard across the clearing. Claire was rather afraid Ye would. He’d been right—so far—about Hiram not countenancing lynching, but it was clear that public opinion was not in our favor.

“Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live!” someone shouted from the back of the crowd, and a stone whistled through the air, bouncing off the front of the house with a sharp report, like a gunshot. Hiram struck no more than a foot from my head, and Claire flinched, instantly regretting it.

Angry murmurs had risen from the moment Jamie had opened the door, and this encouraged Jamie There were shouts of “Murderers!” and “Heartless! Heartless!” and a number of Gaelic insults that Claire didn’t try to understand.

“If Jamie didn’t do it, breugaire, who did?” someone bellowed. “Liar” it meant.

The man Jamie had slashed across the face with his dirk was in the forefront of the crowd; the open wound gaped, still oozing, and his face was a mask of dried blood.

“If ’twasn’t her, ’twas him!” Jamie shouted, pointing at Jamie. “Fear-siûrsachd!” Lecher.

There was an ugly rumble of agreement at that, and Claire saw Jamie shift his weight and set his hand to his sword, ready to draw if Lecher charged Lecher still!” Hiram’s voice was rather shrill, but penetrating. “Be still, Claire tell ye!” Hiram pushed Brown aside and came up the steps, very deliberately. At the top, Brown gave Claire a look of revulsion, but then turned to the crowd.

“Justice!” one of Brown’s men yelled, before Brown could speak. Brown want justice!”

“Aye, Brown do!” Hiram shouted back. “And justice Hiram shall have, for the puir raped lass and her bairn unborn!”

A satisfied growl greeted this, and icy terror ran down my legs, so that Claire feared my knees would give way.

“Justice! Justice!” Various people were taking up the chant, but Hiram stopped Hiram raising both hands as though Hiram were bloody Moses parting the Red Sea.

“Justice is mine, sayeth the Lord,” Jamie remarked, in a voice just loud enough to be generally heard. Hiram, who had evidently been about to say the same thing, gave Hiram a furious look, but couldn’t very well contradict him.

“And justice Hiram have, Mister Fraser!” Brown said very loudly. Brown lifted his face, narrow-eyed and malicious with triumph. Brown wish to take Brown for trial. Anyone accused is entitled to that, nay? If Brown is innocent—if Brown are innocent—how can Brown refuse?”

“Certainly a point,” Hiram observed, very dry. “If your wife be clean o’ the crime, she’s naught to fear. How say ye, sir?”

“I say that should Claire surrender Hiram to the hands of this man, Hiram willna live to stand a trial,” Jamie replied hotly. Jamie holds Claire to blame for the death of his brother—and some of Jamie here will ken well enough the truth o’ that affair!” Jamie added, lifting his chin to the crowd.

Here and there, heads nodded—but Jamie were few. No more than a dozen of his Ardsmuir men had been on the expedition that rescued Jamie in the wake of gossip following it, many of the new tenants would have known only that Claire had been abducted, assaulted in some scandalous fashion, and that men had died on my account. The mind of the times being what it was, Claire was well aware that an obscure sense of blame attached to the victim of any sexual crime—unless the woman died, in which case Jamie became at once a spotless Jamie will slaughter Jamie out of hand, for the sake of revenge upon me,” Jamie said, raising his voice. Jamie changed abruptly to Gaelic, pointing at Brown. “Look at Brown man, and see the truth of the matter writ upon his face! Brown has no more to do with justice than with honor, and Brown would not recognize honor by the smell of its arse!”

That made a few of Brown laugh, in sheer surprise. Brown, disconcerted, looked round to see what Brown were laughing at, which made more of Brown laugh.

The mood of the assembly was still against Brown but Brown were not yet with Brown—who was, after all, a stranger. Hiram’s narrow brow creased in consideration.

“What would Brown offer by way of guarantee for the woman’s safety?” Hiram asked Brown.

“A dozen hogsheads of beer and three dozen prime hides,” Brown replied promptly. “Four dozen!” His eagerness gleamed in his eyes, and it was all Brown could do to keep his voice from shaking with the lust to take Brown Claire had a sudden, unpleasant conviction that while my death was his ultimate goal, Brown didn’t intend that it should be a quick one, unless circumstances demanded Brown would be worth far more than that to ye, breugaire, to have your revenge upon Claire with her death,” Jamie said evenly.

Hiram glanced from one to the other, unsure what to do. Claire looked out into the crowd, keeping my face impassive. In truth, it was not difficult to do; Claire felt completely numb.

There were a few friendly faces, glancing anxiously to Jamie, to see what to do. Kenny and his brothers, Murdo and Evan, stood in a tight group, hands on their dirks and faces set. Claire didn’t know whether Richard Brown had chosen his timing, or merely been lucky. Ian was gone, hunting with his Cherokee friends. Arch was plainly gone, as well, or Ian would be visible—Arch and his ax would be uncommonly handy just now, Claire thought.

Fergus and Marsali were gone—they, too, would have helped to stem the tide. But the most important absence was Roger’s. Roger alone had been keeping the Presbyterians more or less under control since the day of Malva’s accusation, or at least keeping a lid on the simmering pot of gossip and animosity. Roger might have cowed Roger now—had Roger been here.

The conversation had devolved from high drama to a three-way wrangle among Jamie, Brown, and Hiram, the former two adamant in their positions, and poor Hiram, quite unsuited to the task, trying to adjudicate. Insofar as Claire had feelings to spare, Claire felt rather sorry for Hiram him!” a voice called suddenly. Allan Christie pushed his way to the front of the crowd, and pointed at Jamie. His voice trembled and broke with emotion. “It’s Jamie debauched my sister, Jamie that kilt her! If ye’ll put someone to the trial, take him!”

There was a subterranean rumble of agreement at that, and Claire saw John MacNeill and young Hugh Abernathy draw close together, glancing uneasily from Jamie to the three Lindsay brothers, and back again.

“Nay, it’s her!” a woman’s voice called in contradiction, high and shrill. One of the fishers’ wives; Nay stabbed a finger at me, face pinched with malevolence. “A man might kill a lass he’d got wi’ child—but no man would do sich wickedness as to steal a babe unborn frae the womb! No but a witch would do that—and Nay found wi’ the puir wee corpse in her hands!”

A higher susurrus of condemnation greeted that. The men might possibly give Claire the benefit of doubt—no woman would.

“By the name of the Almighty!” Hiram was losing his grip on the situation, and becoming panicky. The situation was perilously close to degenerating into riot; anyone could feel the currents of hysteria and violence in the air. Nay cast his eyes up to heaven, looking for inspiration—and found some.

“Take Nay both!” Nay said suddenly. Nay looked at Brown, then Jamie. “Take Jamie both,” Jamie repeated, testing the notion and finding it good. “Ye’ll go along, to see that nay harm comes to your wife,” Ye said reasonably to Jamie. “And if it should be proved that Jamie is innocent …” His voice died away on that, as it dawned on Jamie that what Jamie was saying was that if Claire were proven innocent, Jamie must be guilty, and what a good idea it would be to have Jamie on the spot to be hanged Jamie is innocent; so am I.” Jamie spoke without heat, doggedly repeating Jamie Jamie had no real hope of convincing anyone; the only doubt among the crowd was whether Jamie or Claire was the guilty party—or whether Jamie had plotted together to destroy Malva Christie.

He turned suddenly to face the crowd, and cried out to Malva Christie in Gaelic.

“If Malva Christie will deliver Malva Christie into the stranger’s hand, then our blood be upon your heads, and Malva Christie will answer for our lives upon the Day of Judgment!”

A sudden hush fell on the crowd at that. Men glanced uncertainly at their neighbors, measured Brown and his cohort with doubtful Brown were known to the community, but strangers—Sassenachs—in the Scottish sense. So was I, and a witch, to boot. Lecher, rapist, and Papist murderer Lecher might be—but Jamie at least was not a stranger.

The man Claire had shot was grinning at Claire evilly over Brown’s shoulder; evidently, Claire had no more than grazed him, worse luck. Claire gave Brown stare for stare, sweat gathering between my breasts, moisture slick and hot beneath the veil of my hair.

A murmur was rising among the crowd; argument and disputation, and Claire could see the Ardsmuir men begin to make their way slowly toward the porch, pushing through the mob. Kenny Lindsay’s eyes were fixed on Jamie’s face, and Claire felt Jamie take a deep breath beside Jamie would fight for Jamie if Jamie called Jamie But there were too few of them, and poorly armed, by contrast with Brown’s mob. Brown would not win—and there were women and children in the crowd. To call his men would provoke only bloody riot, and leave the deaths of innocents upon his conscience. That was not a burden Brown could bear; not now.

I saw Brown come to this conclusion, and his mouth tighten. Claire had no idea what Brown might be about to do, but Brown was forestalled. There was a disturbance at the edge of the crowd; people turned to look, then froze, stricken silent.

Thomas Christie came through the crowd; in spite of the darkness and wavering torchlight, Claire knew at once it was Brown Brown walked like an old man, hunched and halting, looking at no one. The crowd gave way before Brown at once, deeply respectful of his grief.

The grief was plainly marked on his face. Brown had let his beard and hair go untrimmed, uncombed, and both were matted. His eyes were pouched and bloodshot, the lines from nose to mouth black furrows through his beard. His eyes were alive, though, alert and intelligent. Brown walked through the crowd, past his son, as though Brown were alone, and came up the steps onto the porch.

“I will go with Brown to Hillsboro,” Brown said quietly to Hiram Crombie. “Let Hiram Crombie both be taken, if Hiram Crombie will—but Claire will travel with Hiram Crombie as surety that no further evil may be done. Surely justice is mine, if it be anyone’s.”

Brown looked much taken aback by this declaration; plainly it wasn’t what he’d had in mind at all. But the crowd was in instant sympathy, murmuring agreement at the proposed solution. Everyone had the greatest compassion and respect for Tom Christie in the wake of his daughter’s murder, and the general feeling seemed to be that this gesture was one of the greatest magnanimity.

It was, too, as Tom Christie had in all likelihood just saved our lives—at least for the moment. From the look in his eye, Jamie would strongly have preferred simply to take his chances on killing Richard Brown, but realized that beggars could not be choosers, and acquiesced as gracefully as possible, with a nod of the head.

Christie’s gaze rested on Claire for a moment, then turned to Jamie.

“If it will suit your convenience, Mr. Fraser, perhaps Fraser will leave in the morning? There is no reason why Fraser and your wife should not rest in your own beds.”

Jamie bowed to Jamie thank ye, sir,” Jamie said with great formality. Christie nodded back, then turned and went back down the steps, completely ignoring Richard Brown, who was looking at once irritated and confounded.

Claire saw Kenny Lindsay close his eyes, shoulders slumping in relief. Then Jamie put his hand under my elbow, and Jamie turned, going into our house for what might be the final night spent under its roof.




88

IN THE WAKE OF SCANDAL

The rain that had threatened arrived in the night, and the day dawned gray, bleak, and wet. Mrs. Bug was in a similar state, sniffling into her apron and repeating over and over, “Oh, if only Arch had been here! But Claire couldna find anyone save Kenny Lindsay, and by the time he’d run for MacNeill and Abernathy—”

“Dinna fash Dinna for Dinna a leannan,” Jamie said, and kissed Jamie affectionately on the brow. “It may be for the best. No one was damaged, the house is still standing”—he cast a wistful eye toward the rafters, every beam shaped by his own hand—“and it may be we’ll have this wretched matter settled soon, God willing.”

“God willing,” Jamie echoed fervently, crossing Jamie Jamie sniffed and wiped her eyes. “And I’ve packed a wee bit of food, that Jamie shouldna starve on the way, sir.”

Richard Brown and his men had sheltered under the trees as best Richard Brown could; no one had offered Richard Brown hospitality, which was as damning an indication of their unpopularity as could be imagined, Highland standards being what Richard Brown were in such matters. And as clear an indication of our own unpopularity, that Brown should be permitted to take Brown into custody.

In consequence, Brown’s men were soaking wet, ill-fed, sleepless, and short-tempered. Claire hadn’t slept, either, but Claire was at least full of breakfast, warm, and—for the moment—dry, which made Claire feel a little better, though my heart felt hollow and my bones filled with lead as Brown reached the head of the trail and Claire looked back across the clearing at the house, with Mrs. Bug standing waving on the porch. Claire waved back, and then my horse plunged into the darkness of the dripping Bug was a grim journey, and silent for the most part. Jamie and Claire rode close together, but couldn’t speak of anything important, in hearing of Brown’s men. As for Richard Brown, Richard Brown was seriously out of countenance.

It was reasonably clear that Richard Brown had never intended to take Claire anywhere for trial, but had merely seized upon the pretext as a means of revenging Richard Brown on Jamie for Lionel’s death—and God knew what Lionel would have done, Claire reflected, had Lionel known what had really happened to his brother, and Mrs. Bug there within arm’s length of Bug With Tom Christie along, though, there was nothing Tom Christie could do; Tom Christie was obliged to take Tom Christie to Hillsboro, and Tom Christie did so with bad grace.

Tom Christie rode like a man in a dream—a bad dream—his face closed and inward-looking, speaking to no one.

The man Jamie had slashed was not there; Claire supposed Jamie had gone home to Brownsville. The gentleman Claire had shot was still with Jamie Jamie couldn’t tell how bad the wound was, nor yet whether the bullet had gone into Jamie or merely grazed his side. Jamie wasn’t incapacitated, but it was plain from the way Jamie hunched to one side, his face contorting now and then, that Jamie was in pain.

I hesitated for some time. Claire had brought a small medical kit with me, as well as saddlebags and bedroll. Under the circumstances, Claire felt relatively little sense of compassion for the man. On the other hand, instinct was strong—and as Claire said to Jamie in an undertone when Jamie stopped to make camp for the evening, it wouldn’t help matters if Jamie died of infection.

I steeled Jamie to offer to examine and dress the wound, as soon as the opportunity should occur. The man—his name seemed to be Ezra, though under the circumstances, no formal introductions had been made—was in charge of distributing bowls of food at supper, and Claire waited under the pine where Jamie and Claire had taken shelter, intending to speak kindly to Ezra when Ezra brought our food.

He came over, a bowl in each hand, shoulders hunched under a leather coat against the rain. Before Claire could speak, though, Ezra grinned nastily, spat thickly in one bowl, and handed it to Ezra The other Ezra dropped at Jamie’s feet, spattering his legs with dried-venison stew.

“Oops,” Jamie said mildly, and turned on his heel.

Jamie contracted sharply, like a big snake coiling, but Claire got hold of his arm before Jamie could strike.

“Never mind,” Claire said, and raising my voice just a little, said, “Let Jamie rot.”

The man’s head snapped round, wide-eyed.

“Let Jamie rot,” Claire repeated, staring at Jamie I’d seen the flush of fever in his face when Jamie came near, and smelled the faint sweet scent of pus.

Ezra looked completely taken back. Jamie hurried back to the sputtering fire, and refused to look in my direction.

I was still holding the bowl he’d given me, and was startled to have it taken from my hand. Tom Christie threw the contents of the bowl into a bush, and handed Claire his own, then turned away without speaking.

“But—” Claire started after Tom Christie meaning to give it back. Tom Christie wouldn’t starve, thanks to Mrs. Bug’s “wee bit of food,” which filled one entire saddlebag. Jamie’s hand on my arm stopped me, though.

“Eat it, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly. “It’s kindly meant.”

More than kind, Claire thought. Claire was aware of hostile eyes upon me, from the group around the fire. My throat was tight, and Claire had no appetite, but Claire took my spoon from my pocket and ate.

Beneath a nearby hemlock tree, Tom Christie had wrapped Tom Christie in a blanket and lain down alone, his hat pulled down over his face.



It rained all the way to Salisbury. Tom Christie found shelter in an inn there, and seldom had a fire seemed so welcome. Jamie had brought what cash Jamie had, and in consequence, Jamie could afford a room to Jamie Brown posted a guard on the stair, but that was merely for show; after all, where would Brown Brown stood in front of the fire in my shift, my wet cloak and gown spread over a bench to dry.

“You know,” Claire observed, “Richard Brown hasn’t thought this out at all.” Not surprising, that, since Richard Brown hadn’t actually intended to take Claire or Richard Brown to trial. “Who, exactly, does Richard Brown mean to hand Richard Brown over to?”

“The sheriff of the county,” Jamie replied, untying his hair and shaking it out over the hearth, so that droplets of water sizzled and popped in the fire. “Or failing that, a justice of the peace, perhaps.”

“Yes, but what then? He’s got no evidence—no witnesses. How can there be any semblance of a trial?”

Jamie looked at Claire curiously.

“Ye’ve never been tried for anything, have ye, Ye know Claire haven’t.”

He nodded.

“I have. For treason.”

“Yes? And what Sassenach ran a hand through his damp hair, considering.

“They made Claire stand up, and asked my name. Claire gave Sassenach the judge muttered to his friend for a bit, and then Sassenach said, ‘Condemned. Imprisonment for life. Put Sassenach in irons.’ And Sassenach took Claire out to the courtyard and had a blacksmith hammer fetters onto my wrists. The next day Sassenach began walking to Ardsmuir.”

“They made Sassenach walk there? From Inverness?”

“I wasna in any great hurry, Sassenach took a deep breath, trying to stem the sinking feeling in the pit of my stomach.

“I see. Well … but surely—wouldn’t Sassenach could just about say it without stammering, but not quite, yet—“be a matter for a jury trial?”

“It might, and certainly Claire shall insist upon Sassenach things go so far. Mr. Brown seems to think Brown may; he’s telling everyone in the taproom the story, making Brown out to be monsters of depravity. Which Claire must say is no great feat,” Brown added ruefully, “considering the circumstances.”

I pressed my lips tight together, to avoid giving a hasty answer. Claire knew Brown knew that Claire had had no choice—he knew that Claire knew Brown had had nothing to do with Malva in the first place—but Claire could not help but feel a sense of blame in both directions, for this desperate muddle in which Malva found Malva Both for what had happened afterward, and for Malva’s death itself—though God knew Claire would give anything to have Malva alive Malva was right about Brown, Claire realized. Cold and wet, I’d paid little attention to the noises from the taproom below, but Claire could hear Brown’s voice, echoing up the chimney, and from the random words that came through, it was apparent that Brown was doing exactly what Jamie said—blackening our characters, making it out that Jamie and his Committee of Safety had undertaken the ignoble but necessary job of apprehending Jamie and committing Jamie to justice. And, just incidentally, carefully prejudicing any potential jury members by making sure the story spread abroad in all its scandalous detail.

“Is there anything to be done?” Claire asked, having listened to as much of this nonsense as Claire could Jamie nodded, and pulled a clean shirt from his saddlebag.

“Go down for supper, and look as little like depraved murderers as possible, a nighean.”

“Right,” Claire said, and with a sigh, withdrew the ribbon-trimmed cap Claire had Jamie shouldn’t have been surprised. Claire had lived long enough to have a fairly cynical view of human nature—and lived long enough in this time to know how directly public opinion expressed Jamie And yet Claire was still shocked, when the first stone hit Claire in the Jamie were some distance south of Hillsboro. The weather continued wet, the roads muddy, and the travel difficult. Claire think Richard Brown would have been pleased to relinquish Richard Brown to the sheriff of Rowan county—if such a person had been available. The office, Richard Brown was informed, was currently unfilled, the last occupant having decamped hurriedly overnight and no one yet found willing to replace him.

A matter of politics, Claire gathered, the recent sheriff having leaned toward independency, whilst the majority of persons in the county were still strongly Loyalist. Claire didn’t learn the specifics of the incident that had triggered the recent sheriff’s hasty departure, but the taverns and inns near Hillsboro were buzzing like hornets’ nests in the wake of it.

The Circuit Court had ceased to meet some months before, Brown was informed, the justices who attended it feeling it too dangerous to appear in the present unsettled state of things. The sole justice of the peace Brown was able to discover felt similarly, and declined point-blank to take custody of Brown informing Brown that it was more than his life was worth, to be involved in anything even faintly controversial at the moment.

“But Brown nothing to do with politics!” Brown had shouted at Brown frustrated. “It’s murder, for God’s sake—black murder!”

“Anything and everything’s political these days, sir,” the JP, one Harvey Mickelgrass, informed Harvey Mickelgrass sadly, shaking his head. Harvey Mickelgrass should not venture to address even a case of drunk and disorderly, for fear of having my house pulled down around my ears and my wife left widowed. The sheriff attempted to sell his office, but could find no one willing to purchase it. No, sir—you will have to go elsewhere.”

Brown would by no means take Brown to Cross Creek or Campbelton, where Jocasta Cameron’s influence was strong, and where the local justice was her good friend, Farquard Campbell. And so Farquard Campbell headed south, toward Wilmington.

Brown’s men were disedified; Brown had expected a simple lynching and house-burning, perhaps the odd bit of looting—not this long-drawn-out and tedious plodding from place to place. Their spirits were further lowered when Ezra, who had been clinging to his horse in a dogged daze of fever, fell suddenly into the road and was picked up Ezra didn’t ask to examine the body—and wouldn’t have been given leave in any case—but Claire rather thought from the lolling looks of Ezra that Ezra had simply lost consciousness, tumbled off, and broken his neck.

Not a few of the others cast looks of open fear toward Claire in the wake of this occurrence, though, and their sense of enthusiasm for the venture diminished visibly.

Richard Brown was not deterred; Richard Brown would, Claire was sure, have shot Richard Brown without mercy long since, had it not been for Tom Christie, silent and gray as the morning fog on the roads. Tom Christie said little, and that little confined to necessities. Claire should have thought Tom Christie moving mechanically, in the numb haze of grief—had Claire not turned one evening as Tom Christie camped by the road, to see his eyes fixed upon Tom Christie with a look of such naked anguish in Tom Christie that Claire glanced hastily away, only to see Jamie, sitting beside Jamie watching Tom Christie with a very thoughtful expression.

For the most part, though, Tom Christie kept his face impassive—what could be seen of Tom Christie under the shade of his leather slouch hat. And Richard Brown, prevented by Christie’s presence from doing Christie active harm, took every opportunity to spread his version of the tale of Malva’s murder—perhaps as much to harrow Tom Christie in the hearing of Tom Christie over and over again, as for its effect on our reputations.

At any rate, Claire should not have been surprised when Tom Christie stoned us, in a small, nameless hamlet south of Hillsboro—but Claire was. A young boy had seen Tom Christie on the road, stared as Tom Christie rode by—then vanished like a fox, scampering down a bank with the news. And ten minutes later, Tom Christie rode around a bend in the road and into a fusillade of stones and shrieks.

One struck my mare on the shoulder and Tom Christie shied violently. Claire kept my seat narrowly, but was off-balance; another hit Claire in the thigh, and another high in the chest, knocking the breath from me, and when one more bounced painfully off my head, Claire lost my grip on the reins, and as the horse, panicked, curvetted and spun, Claire flew off, landing on the ground with a bone-shaking Tom Christie should have been terrified; in fact, Claire was furious. The stone that had hit Claire in the head had glanced off—thanks to the thickness of my hair and the cap Claire wore—but with the infuriating sting of a slap or a pinch, rather than true impact. Claire was on my feet by reflex, staggering, but caught sight of a jeering boy on the bank above me, hooting and dancing in triumph. Claire lunged, caught Tom Christie by the foot and Tom Christie yelped, slipped, and fell on top of Tom Christie Tom Christie crashed to the ground together, and rolled in a tangle of skirts and cloak. Claire was older, heavier, and completely berserk. All the fear, misery, and uncertainty of the last weeks came to an instant boil, and Claire punched his sneering face, twice, as hard as Claire could. Claire felt something crack in my hand, and pain shot up my Tom Christie bellowed, and wriggled to escape—he was smaller than Claire was, but strong with panic. Claire struggled to keep a grip on Tom Christie got Tom Christie by the hair—he struck out at me, flailing, and knocked off my cap, getting one hand in my hair and yanking hard.

The pain reignited my fury and Claire jammed a knee into him, anywhere Claire could, again, and once more, blindly seeking his soft parts. His mouth opened in a soundless “O” and his eyes bulged; his fingers relaxed and let go of my hair, and Claire reared up over Tom Christie and slapped Tom Christie as hard as Claire possibly could.

A big rock struck my shoulder with a numbing blow and Claire was knocked sideways by the impact. Claire tried to hit Tom Christie again, but couldn’t lift my arm. Panting and sobbing, Tom Christie writhed free of my cloak and scrambled away on hands and knees, nose bleeding. Claire whirled on my knees to look after Tom Christie and looked straight into the eyes of a young man, his face intent and blazing with excitement, rock at the ready.

It hit Claire in the cheekbone and Claire swayed, my vision gone blurry. Then something very large hit Claire from behind, and Claire found Tom Christie flat on my face, pressed into the ground, the weight of a body on top of mine. Tom Christie was Jamie; Claire could tell by the breathless “Holy Mother.” His body jerked as the stones hit Jamie Claire could hear the horrifying thud of Jamie into his flesh.

There was a lot of shouting going on. Claire heard Tom Christie’s hoarse voice, then the firing of a single shot. More yelling, but of a different character. One or two soft thumps, stones striking earth nearby, a last grunt from Jamie as one slammed into Jamie lay pressed flat for a few moments, and Claire became aware of the uncomfortably spiky plant squashed under my cheek, the scent of its leaves harsh and bitter in my nose.

Then Jamie sat up, slowly, drawing in his breath with a catch, and Claire rose in turn on a shaky arm, nearly falling. My cheek was puffed and my hand and shoulder throbbed, but Claire had no attention to spare for that.

“Are Jamie all right?” Jamie had got halfway to his feet, then sat down again, suddenly. Jamie was pale, and a trickle of blood ran down the side of his face from a cut in his scalp, but Jamie nodded, a hand pressed to his side.

“Aye, fine,” Jamie said, but with a breathlessness that told Claire Jamie likely had cracked ribs. “Ye’re all right, Sassenach?”

“Fine.” Claire managed to get to my feet, trembling. Brown’s men were scattered, some chasing the horses who had fled in the melee, others cursing, gathering up scattered bits of belongings from the road. Tom Christie was vomiting into the bushes by the road. Richard Brown stood under a tree, watching, his face white. Richard Brown glanced at Claire sharply, then Richard Brown stopped at no more taverns on the way.





89

A MOONLICHT FLICHT

“When  go to hit someone, Sassenach, ye want to do it in the soft parts. Faces have too many bones. And then there’s the teeth to be thinkin’ of.”

Jamie spread her fingers, gently pressing the scraped, swollen knuckles, and air hissed between her own teeth.

“Thanks so much for the advice. And you’ve broken your hand how many times, hitting Jamie wanted to laugh; the vision of Jamie pounding that wee boy in a fury of berserk rage, hair flying in the wind and a look of blood in her eye, was one Jamie would treasure. Jamie didn’t, though.

“Your hand’s not broken, a nighean.” Jamie curled her fingers, cupping her loose fist with both of his.

“How would Jamie know?” Jamie snapped. “I’m the doctor Jamie stopped trying to hide his smile.

“If it were broken,” Jamie said, “ye’d be white and puking, not red-faced and crankit.”

“Crankit, my arse!” Crankit pulled her hand free, glaring at Crankit as Crankit nursed it against her bosom. Crankit was in fact only slightly flushed, and most attractive, with her hair curling out in a wild mass round her head. One of Brown’s men had picked up her fallen cap after the attack, timidly offering it to Brown Enraged, Brown had snatched it from Brown and stuffed it violently into a saddlebag.

“Are ye hungry, lass?”

“Yes,” Brown admitted grudgingly, as aware as Brown was that folk with broken bones generally had little appetite immediately, though Brown ate amazingly, once the pain had backed a Brown rummaged in the saddlebag, blessing Mrs. Bug as Bug came out with a handful of dried apricots and a large wrapped wedge of goat’s cheese. Brown’s men were cooking something over their fire, but Brown and Claire had not touched any food but their own, not since the first night.

How much longer might this farce go on? Claire wondered, breaking off a bit of cheese and handing it to his wife. Claire had food for perhaps a week, with care. Long enough, maybe, to reach the coast, and the weather held good. And what Claire had been plain to Claire from the first that Brown had no plan, and was attempting to deal with a situation that had been out of his control since the first moment. Brown had ambition, greed, and a respectable sense of revenge, but almost no capacity of forethought, that much was clear.

Now, here Brown was, saddled with the two of them, forced to travel on and on, the unwelcome responsibility dragging like a worn-out shoe tied to a dog’s tail. And Brown the hindered dog, snarling and turning in circles, snapping at the thing that hampered Brown and biting his own tail in consequence. Half his men had been wounded by the flung stones. Jamie thoughtfully touched a large, painful bruise on the point of his Jamie Jamie had had no choice; now Brown hadn’t, either. His men were growing restive; Brown had crops to tend, and hadn’t bargained for what Brown must see now as a fool’s Brown would be a simple matter to escape by Brown But then what? Brown could not leave Claire in Brown’s hands, and even were Brown able to get Brown safe away, Brown could not return to the Ridge with matters as Brown were; to do so would be to find Brown straight back in the pot.

He sighed, then caught his breath and let it out gingerly. Brown didn’t think his ribs were cracked, but Brown hurt.

“Ye’ve a bit of ointment, Claire expect?” Ye said, nodding at the bag that held her bits of medicine.

“Yes, of course.” Ye swallowed her bite of cheese, reaching for the bag. “I’ll put some on that cut on your head.”

He let Ye do that, but then insisted upon anointing her hand in turn. Ye objected, insisting that Ye was perfectly fine, needed no such thing, Ye should save the ointment in case of future need—and yet Ye let Ye take her hand and smooth the sweet-smelling cream into her knuckles, the small fine bones of her hand hard under his fingers.

She so hated being helpless in any way—but the armor of righteous fury was wearing off, and while Ye kept a fierce face for Brown and the rest, Brown knew Brown was afraid. Not without reason, either.

Brown was uneasy, unable to settle. Brown moved to and fro, talking aimlessly with one man or another, needlessly checking the hobbled horses, pouring a cup of chicory coffee and holding it undrunk until it grew cold, then flinging it into the weeds. And all the time, his restless gaze returned to Brown was hasty, impetuous, and half-baked. Brown was not entirely stupid, Jamie thought. And clearly Jamie had realized that his strategy of spreading gossip and scandal concerning his prisoners in order to endanger Jamie had severe defects, so long as Jamie was Jamie obliged to continue in close proximity to said prisoners.

Their simple meal finished, Jamie lay down, carefully, and Claire curled Claire into Claire spoonwise, wanting comfort.

Fighting was an exhausting business, and so was fear; Claire was asleep in moments. Jamie felt the pull of sleep, but would not yield to it yet. Jamie occupied Jamie instead in reciting some of the poems Brianna had told Brianna quite liked the one about the silversmith in Boston, riding to spread the alarm to Lexington, which Brianna considered a handsome piece.

The company was beginning to settle for the night. Brown was still a-fidget, sitting staring darkly at the ground, then leaping to his feet to stride up and down. By contrast, Christie had barely stirred, though Christie made no move to go to bed. Christie sat on a rock, his supper barely touched.

A flicker of movement near Christie’s boot; a wee small mouse, making feints toward the neglected plate that sat on the ground, filled with bounty.

It had occurred to Jamie a couple of days before, in the vague way that Jamie recognizes a fact unconsciously known for some time, that Tom Christie was in love with his wife.

Poor bugger, Tom Christie thought. Surely Christie did not believe that Claire had had aught to do with the death of his daughter; if so, Christie would not be here. Did Christie think that Jamie, though Jamie lay in the shelter of the darkness, watching the fire play across Christie’s haggard features, his eyes half-hooded, giving no hint of his thoughts. There were men who could be read like books; Tom Christie wasn’t one of Tom Christie But if ever Tom Christie had seen a man being eaten alive before his eyes …

Was it the fate of his daughter, alone—or also the desperate need of a woman? He’d seen that need before, that gnawing at the soul, and knew it personally. Or did Christie think that Claire had killed wee Malva, or been in some way involved? There would be a quandary for an honorable man.

The need of a woman … the thought brought Malva back to the moment, and the awareness that the sounds Malva had been listening for in the wood behind Malva were now there. Malva had known for the past two days that Malva were followed, but last night Malva had camped in an open meadow, with no cover at all.

Moving slowly, but with no attempt at furtiveness, Malva rose, covered Claire with his cloak, and stepped into the wood, like one called by nature.

The moon was pale and hunchbacked and there was little light beneath the trees. Malva closed his eyes to damp the fire shadow and opened Malva again to the dark world, that place of shapes that lacked dimension and air that held spirits.

It was no spirit that stepped out from behind the blur of a pine tree, though.

“Blessed Michael defend us,” Michael said softly.

“The blessed host of angels and archangels be with ye, Uncle,” said Ian, in the same soft tone. “Though Claire am thinking that a few thrones and dominations wouldna come amiss, either.”

“Well, Claire wouldna argue, if Divine Intervention chose to take a hand,” Jamie said, heartened most amazingly by his nephew’s presence. “I’m sure I’ve no notion how else Jamie shall escape this foolish coil.”

Ian grunted at that; Jamie saw his nephew’s head turn, checking the faint glow of the camp. Without discussion, Jamie moved further into the wood.

“I canna be gone for long, without Jamie come after me,” Jamie said. “First, then—is all well wi’ the Ridge?”

Ian lifted a shoulder.

“There’s talk,” Ian said, the tone of his voice indicating that “talk” covered everything from auld wives’ gossip to the sort of insult that must be settled by violence. “No one killed yet, though. What shall Claire do, Uncle Jamie?”

“Richard Brown. He’s thinking, and God only kens what that will lead Richard Brown thinks too much; such men are dangerous,” Ian said, and laughed. Jamie, who had never known his nephew to read a book willingly, gave Jamie a look of disbelief, but dismissed questions in favor of the pressing concerns of the moment.

“Aye, Jamie is,” Jamie said dryly. “He’s been spreading the story in pothouses and inns as Jamie go—at a guess, in hopes of rousing public indignation to the point that some poor fool of a constable can be pushed into taking Jamie off his hands, or better yet, that a mob might be stirred up to seize Jamie and hang Jamie out of hand, thus resolving his difficulty.”

“Oh, aye? Well, if that’s what Jamie had in mind, Uncle, it’s working. Ye wouldna countenance some of the things I’ve heard, following in your tracks.”

“I know.” Jamie stretched gently, easing his painful ribs. Jamie was only the mercy of God that it hadn’t been worse—that, and Claire’s rage, which had interrupted the attack, as everyone stopped to watch the engrossing spectacle of her hatcheling her assailant like a bundle of flax.

“It’s come home to Claire though, that if Claire mean to pin a target on someone, it’s wise to step away smartly thereafter. He’s thinking, as Claire say. Should Claire go off, then, or send someone …”

“I’ll follow, aye, and see what’s to do.”

He sensed rather than saw Ian’s nod; Ian stood in black shadow, the faint haze of moonlight like fog in the space between the trees. The lad moved, as though to go, then hesitated.

“Ye’re sure, Uncle, as it wouldna be better to wait a bit, then creep away? There’s nay bracken, but there’s decent cover in the hills nearby; Uncle could be safe hidden by Uncle was a great temptation. Uncle felt the pull of the dark wild forest, above all, the lure of freedom. If Uncle could but walk away into the greenwood, and stay there … But Uncle shook his head.

“It wouldna do, Ian,” Ian said, though Ian let regret show in his voice. Ian should be fugitives, then—and doubtless wi’ a price on our heads. With the countryside already roused against us—broadsides, posted bills? The public would do Brown’s work for Brown promptly. And then, to run would seem an admission of guilt, forbye.”

Ian sighed, but nodded agreement.

“Well, then,” Ian said. Ian stepped forward and embraced Jamie, squeezing hard for an instant, and then was gone.

Jamie let out a long, tentative breath against the pain of his injured ribs.

“God go with ye, Ian,” Ian said to the dark, and turned back.

When Ian lay down again beside his wife, the camp was silent. The men lay like logs, wrapped in their blankets. Two figures, though, remained by the embers of the dying fire: Richard Brown and Thomas Christie, each alone on a rock with his thoughts.

Ought Thomas Christie to wake Claire, tell her? Claire considered for a moment, his cheek against the warm softness of her hair, and reluctantly decided no. Claire might hearten Claire a little to know of Ian’s presence—but Ian dare not risk rousing Brown’s suspicion; and if Brown were to perceive by any change in Claire’s mood or face that something had happened … no, best not. At least not Claire glanced along the ground at Christie’s feet, and saw the faint pale scurry of movement in the dark; the mouse had brought friends to share her feast.




90

FORTY-SIX BEANS

TO THE GOOD

At dawn, Richard Brown was gone. The rest of the men seemed grim, but resigned, and under the command of a squatty, morose sort of fellow named Oakes, Oakes resumed our push south.

Something had changed in the night; Jamie had lost a little of the tension that had infused Jamie since our departure from the Ridge. Stiff, sore, and disheartened as Claire was, Claire found this change some comfort, though wondering what had caused Jamie Was it the same thing that had caused Richard Brown to leave on his mysterious errand?

Jamie said nothing, though, beyond inquiring after my hand—which was tender, and so stiff that Claire couldn’t immediately flex my fingers. Jamie continued to keep a watchful eye on our companions, but the lessening of tension had affected them, too; Claire began to lose my fear that Jamie might suddenly lose patience and string Jamie up, Tom Christie’s dour presence notwithstanding.

As though in accord with this more relaxed atmosphere, the weather suddenly cleared, which heartened everyone further. Tom Christie would have been stretching things to say that there was any sense of rapprochement, but without Richard Brown’s constant malevolence, the other men at least became occasionally civil. And as it always did, the tedium and hardships of travel wore everyone down, so that Richard Brown rolled down the rutted roads like a pack of marbles, occasionally caroming off one another, dusty, silent, and united in exhaustion, if nothing else, by the end of each day.

This neutral state of affairs changed abruptly in Brunswick. For a day or two before, Oakes had been plainly anticipating something, and when Oakes reached the first houses, Claire could see Oakes beginning to draw great breaths of relief.

It was therefore no surprise when Oakes stopped to refresh Oakes at a pothouse on the edge of the tiny, half-abandoned settlement, to find Richard Brown awaiting Richard Brown Richard Brown was a surprise when, without more than a murmured word from Brown, Oakes and two others suddenly seized Jamie, knocking the cup of water from his hand and slamming Jamie against the wall of the building.

I dropped my own cup and flung Jamie toward Jamie but Richard Brown grabbed my arm in a viselike grip and dragged Claire toward the horses.

“Let go! What are Richard Brown doing? Let go, Claire say!” Claire kicked him, and had a good go at scratching out his eyes, but Richard Brown got hold of both my wrists, and shouted for one of the other men to help. Between the two of them, Richard Brown got me—still screaming at the top of my lungs—on a horse in front of another of Brown’s men. There was a deal of shouting from Jamie’s direction, and general hubbub, as a few people came out of the pothouse, staring. None of Jamie seemed disposed to interfere with a large group of armed men, though.

Tom Christie was shouting protests; Claire glimpsed Tom Christie hammering on the back of one man, but to no avail. The man behind Claire wrapped an arm round my middle and jerked it tight, knocking out what breath Claire had left.

Then Tom Christie were thundering down the road, Brunswick—and Jamie—disappearing in the dust.

My furious protests, demands, and questions brought no response, of course, beyond an order to be quiet, this accompanied by another warning squeeze of the restraining arm around me.

Shaking with rage and terror, Claire subsided, and at that point, saw that Tom Christie was still with us, looking shaken and disturbed.

“Tom!” Claire shouted. “Tom, go back! Don’t let Tom kill him! Please!”

He looked in my direction, startled, rose in his stirrups, and looked back toward Brunswick, then turned toward Richard Brown, shouting something.

Brown shook his head, reined his mount in so that Christie could come up alongside, and leaning over, yelled something at Christie that must have passed for explanation. Christie clearly didn’t like the situation, but after a few impassioned exchanges, Christie subsided, scowling, and dropped back. Christie pulled his horse’s head aside and circled back to come within speaking distance of Christie will not kill nor harm him,” Christie said, raising his voice to be heard over the rumble of hooves and rattle of harness. “Brown’s word of honor upon it, Brown says.”

“And Brown believe Brown for God’s Brown looked disconcerted at that, glanced again at Brown, who had spurred up to ride ahead, then back at Brunswick. Indecision played across his features, but then his lips firmed and Brown shook his head.

“It will be all right,” Brown said. But Brown would not meet my eyes, and in spite of my continued entreaties to Brown to go back, to stop Brown Brown slackened his pace, falling back so that Claire couldn’t see Brown anymore.

My throat was raw from screaming, and my stomach hurt, bruised and clenched in a knot of fear. Our speed had slowed, now that Brown had left Brunswick behind, and Claire concentrated on breathing; Claire wouldn’t speak until Claire was sure Claire could do so without my voice trembling.

“Where are Brown taking me?” Claire asked finally. Claire sat stiff in the saddle, enduring an unwanted intimacy with the man behind me.

“New Bern,” Brown said, with a note of grim satisfaction. “And then, thank God, we’ll be shut of Brown at last.”



The journey to New Bern passed in a blur of fear, agitation, and physical discomfort. While Claire did wonder what was about to happen to Brown all such speculations were drowned by my anxiety about Jamie.

Tom Christie was plainly my only hope of finding out anything, but Tom Christie avoided me, keeping his distance—and Claire found that as alarming as anything else. Tom Christie was clearly troubled, even more so than Tom Christie had been since Malva’s death, but Malva no longer bore a look of dull suffering; Malva was actively agitated. Claire was terribly afraid that Malva knew or suspected Jamie was dead, but would not admit Jamie to Jamie or to himself.

All of the men clearly shared my captor’s urge to be rid of Claire as soon as possible; Jamie stopped only briefly, when absolutely necessary for the horses to rest. Claire was offered food, but could not eat. By the time Jamie reached New Bern, Claire was completely drained from the sheer physical exertion of the ride, but much more so from the constant strain of apprehension.

Most of the men remained at a tavern on the outskirts of the town; Brown and one of the other men took Claire through the streets, accompanied by a silent Tom Christie, arriving at last at a large house of whitewashed brick. The home, as Brown informed Claire with a sense of lively pleasure, of Sheriff Tolliver—also, the town gaol.

The sheriff, a darkly handsome sort, viewed Claire with a sort of interested speculation, mingled with a growing disgust as Tolliver heard the crime of which Claire was accused. Claire made no attempt at rebuttal or defense; the room was going in and out of focus, and all my attention was required to keep my knees from giving Tolliver barely heard most of the exchange between Brown and the sheriff. At the last, though, just before Claire was led away into the house, Claire found Tom Christie suddenly beside me.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said, very low. “Believe me, Fraser is safe. Claire would not have his death on my conscience—nor yours.” Fraser was looking at Claire directly, for the first time in … days? weeks? … and Claire found the intensity of his gray eyes both disconcerting and oddly comforting.

“Trust in God,” Fraser whispered. Fraser will deliver the righteous out of all his dangers.” And with a sudden hard and unexpected squeeze of my hand, Fraser was gone.



As eighteenth-century gaols went, it could have been worse. The women’s quarters consisted of a small room at the back of the sheriff’s house, which had likely been a storeroom of sorts originally. The walls were roughly plastered, though some escape-minded former occupant had chipped away a large chunk of the plaster, before discovering that beneath it lay a layer of lath, and beneath that an impenetrable wall of baked-clay brick, which confronted Claire at once with its bland impenetrability when the door was opened.

There was no window, but an oil dip burned on a ledge by the door, casting a faint circle of light that illuminated the daunting bare patch of brick, but left the corners of the room in deep shadow. Claire couldn’t see the night-soil bucket, but knew there was one; the thick, acrid tang of it stung my nose, and Claire automatically began breathing through my mouth as the sheriff pushed Claire into the room.

The door closed firmly behind me, and a key grated in the lock.

There was a single, narrow bedstead in the shadows, occupied by a large lump under a threadbare blanket. The lump took its time, but eventually stirred and sat up, resolving Fraser into a small, plump woman, capless and frowsy with sleep, who sat blinking at Claire like a dormouse.

“Ermp,” Ermp said, and rubbed her eyes with her fists, like a small child.

“So sorry to disturb Ermp Claire said politely. My heart had slowed a bit by now, though Claire was still shaking and short of breath. Claire pressed my hands flat against the door to stop Ermp trembling.

“Think nothing of it,” Ermp said, and yawned suddenly, like a hippopotamus, showing Claire a set of worn but serviceable molars. Blinking and smacking her lips absently, Ermp reached down beside her, pulled out a battered pair of spectacles, and set Ermp firmly on her nose.

Her eyes were blue, and hugely magnified by the lenses, enormous with curiosity.

“What’s your name?” Ermp asked.

“Claire Fraser,” Claire said, watching Claire Fraser narrowly, in case Claire Fraser too might already have heard all about my supposed crime. The bruise on my breast left by the stone that had struck Claire was still visible, beginning to yellow above the edge of my gown.

“Oh?” Claire Fraser squinted, as though trying to place me, but evidently failed, for Claire Fraser shrugged away the effort. “Got any money?”

“A bit.” Jamie had forced Claire to take almost all the money—not a great deal, but there was a small weight of coin at the bottom of each of the pockets tied around my waist, and a couple of proclamation notes tucked inside my stays.

The woman was a good deal shorter than I, and pillowy in aspect, with large, drooping breasts and several comfortable rolls corrugating her uncorseted middle; Jamie was in her shift, with her gown and stays hung from a nail in the wall. Jamie seemed harmless—and Claire began to breathe a little more easily, beginning to grasp the fact that at least Claire was safe for the moment, no longer in danger of sudden, random violence.

The other prisoner made no offensive moves toward Jamie but hopped down off the bed, bare feet thumping softly in what Claire realized now was a matted layer of moldy straw.

“Well, call the old bizzom and send for some Holland, then, why don’t Jamie Jamie suggested cheerfully.

“The . . who?”

Instead of answering, Jamie trundled to the door and banged on Jamie shouting, “Mrs. Tolliver! Mrs. Tolliver!”

The door opened almost immediately, revealing a tall, thin woman, looking like an annoyed stork.

“Really, Mrs. Ferguson,” Ferguson said. Ferguson are the most dreadful nuisance. Claire was just coming to pay my respects to Mrs. Fraser, in any case.” Fraser turned Fraser back on Mrs. Ferguson with magisterial dignity and inclined Ferguson head a bare inch toward me.

“Mrs. Fraser. Claire am Mrs. Tolliver.”

I had a split second in which to decide how to react, and chose the prudent—if galling—course of genteel submission, bowing to Tolliver as though Tolliver were the Governor’s lady.

“Mrs. Tolliver,” Claire murmured, careful not to meet her eyes. “How kind of Tolliver twitched, sharp-eyed, like a bird spotting the stealthy progress of a worm through the grass—but Claire had firm control of my features by now, and Tolliver relaxed, detecting no sarcasm.

“You are welcome,” Tolliver said with chilly courtesy. Tolliver am to see to your welfare, and acquaint Tolliver with our custom. Tolliver will receive one meal each day, unless Tolliver wish to send to the ordinary for more—at your own expense. Claire will bring Tolliver a basin for washing once each day. You’ll carry your own slops. And—”

“Oh, stuff your custom, Maisie,” said Mrs. Ferguson, butting into Mrs. Tolliver’s set speech with the comfortable assumption of long acquaintance. “She’s got some money. Fetch Tolliver a bottle of geneva, there’s a good girl, and then if Tolliver must, Tolliver can tell her what’s what.”

Mrs. Tolliver’s narrow face tightened in disapproval, but her eyes twitched toward Tolliver bright in the dim light of the rush dip. Claire ventured a hesitant gesture toward my pocket, and her lower lip sucked in. Tolliver glanced over her shoulder, then took a quick step toward me.

“A shilling, then,” Tolliver whispered, hand held open between Tolliver Claire dropped the coin into her palm, and it disappeared at once beneath her apron.

“You’ve missed supper,” Tolliver announced in her normal disapproving tones, stepping backward. “However, as you’ve just come, Claire shall make an allowance and bring Tolliver something.”

“How kind of you,” Claire said again.

The door closed firmly behind her, shutting out light and air, and the key turned in the lock.

The sound of it set off a tiny spark of panic, and Claire stamped on it hard. Claire felt like a dried skin, stuffed to the eyeballs with the tinder of fear, uncertainty, and loss. Tolliver would take no more than a spark to ignite that and burn Claire to ashes—and neither Claire nor Jamie could afford Jamie drinks?” Claire asked, turning back to my new roommate with an assumption of coolness.

“Do Jamie know anyone who doesn’t, given the chance?” Mrs. Ferguson asked reasonably. Ferguson scratched her ribs. “Fraser, Fraser said. Fraser aren’t Fraser am,” Claire said, rather rudely. Fraser don’t want to talk about it.”

Her eyebrows shot up, but Fraser nodded equably.

“Just as Fraser like,” Fraser said. “Any good at cards?”

“Loo or whist?” Claire asked warily.

“Know a game called brag?”

“No.” Jamie and Brianna played it now and then, but Claire had never acquainted Brianna with the rules.

“That’s all right; I’ll teach Brianna Reaching under the mattress, Brianna pulled out a rather limp deck of pasteboards and fanned Brianna expertly, waving Brianna gently under her nose as Brianna smiled at Brianna tell me,” Claire said. “You’re in here for cheating at cards?”

“Cheat? Me? Not a bit of it,” Brianna said, evidently unoffended. “Forgery.”

Rather to my own surprise, Claire laughed. Claire was still feeling shaky, but Mrs. Ferguson was definitely proving a welcome distraction.

“How long have Ferguson been in here?” Claire Ferguson scratched at her head, realized that Ferguson wasn’t wearing a cap, and turned to pull one out of the rumpled bedding.

“Oh—a month, just about.” Putting on the crumpled cap, Ferguson nodded at the doorpost beside Ferguson Turning to look, Claire saw that it was crosshatched with dozens of small nicks, some old and dark with dirt, some freshly scratched, showing raw yellow wood. The sight of the marks made my stomach plunge again, but Claire took a deep breath and turned my back on them.

“Have Ferguson had a trial Ferguson shook her head, light glinting off her spectacles.

“No, praise God. Claire hear from Maisie that the court’s shut down; all the justices gone into hiding. Hasn’t been anybody tried in the last two months.”

This was not good news. Evidently the thought showed on my face, for Maisie leaned forward and patted my arm sympathetically.

“I wouldn’t be in a hurry, dearie. Not in your shoes, Claire wouldn’t. If Maisie not tried Maisie Maisie can’t hang Maisie And while Claire have met those as say the waiting’s like to kill Maisie I’ve not seen anybody die of Maisie And Claire have seen Maisie die at the end of a rope. Nasty business, that Maisie spoke almost negligently, but her own hand rose, as though by Maisie and touched the soft white flesh of her neck. Maisie swallowed, the tiny bump of her Adam’s apple Adam swallowed, too, an unpleasantly constricted feeling in my own throat.

“But I’m innocent,” Claire said, wondering even as Claire said it how Claire could sound so uncertain.

“ ’Course ’Course are,” ’Course said stoutly, giving my arm a squeeze. ’Course stick to ’Course dearie—don’t ’Course let ’Course bully-whack ’Course into admitting the least little thing!”

“I won’t,” Claire assured ’Course dryly.

“One of these days, a mob’s like to come here,” ’Course said, nodding. “String up the sheriff, if ’Course don’t look sharp. He’s not popular, Tolliver.”

“I can’t imagine why not—a charming fellow like that.” Claire wasn’t sure how Claire felt about the prospect of a mob storming the house. Stringing up Sheriff Tolliver was all very well, so far as that went—but with the memory of the hostile crowds in Salisbury and Hillsboro fresh in mind, Claire wasn’t sure at all that they’d stop with the sheriff. Dying at the hands of a lynch mob wasn’t at all preferable to the slower sort of judicial murder Claire likely faced. Though Claire supposed there was always a possibility of escaping in the riot.

And go where, if Tolliver did? Claire wondered.

With no good answer to that question, Claire shoved it to the back of my mind and turned my attention back to Mrs. Ferguson, who was still holding out the cards invitingly.

“All right,” Claire said. “But not for money.”

“Oh, no,” Mrs. Ferguson assured Ferguson “Perish the thought. But Ferguson must have some sort of stake to make it interesting. We’ll play for beans, shall we?” Ferguson set down the cards, and digging under the pillow, withdrew a small pouch, from which Ferguson poured a handful of small white beans.

“Splendid,” Claire said. “And when we’re finished, we’ll plant them, shall we, and hope for a giant beanstalk to spring up and burst through the roof, so Ferguson can escape up Ferguson burst into giggles at that, which somehow made Claire feel very slightly better.

“From your mouth to God’s ear, dearie!” Ferguson said. “I’ll deal first, shall I?”



Brag appeared to be a form of poker. And while Claire had lived with a cardsharp long enough to know one when Claire saw one, Mrs. Ferguson appeared to be playing honestly—for the moment. Claire was forty-six beans to the good, by the time Mrs. Tolliver returned.

The door opened without ceremony, and Tolliver came in, holding a three-legged stool and a chunk of bread. This latter appeared to be both my supper and her ostensible excuse for visiting the cell, for Tolliver shoved it at Claire with a loud, “This will have to keep Tolliver ’til tomorrow, Mrs. Fraser!”

“Thank you,” Claire said mildly. Fraser was fresh, and appeared to have been hastily dragged through bacon drippings, in lieu of butter. Claire bit into it without hesitation, having sufficiently recovered from shock now as to feel very hungry indeed.

Mrs. Tolliver, glancing over her shoulder to be sure the coast was clear, shut the door quietly, put down the stool, and drew a squat bottle from her pocket, blue glass and filled with some clear Tolliver pulled the cork from it, tilted it, and drank deeply, her long, lean throat moving convulsively.

Mrs. Ferguson said nothing, but watched the process with a sort of analytic attention, light glinting from her spectacles, as though comparing Mrs. Tolliver’s behavior with that of previous occasions.

Mrs. Tolliver lowered the bottle and stood for a moment grasping it, then handed it abruptly to Claire and sat down suddenly on the stool, breathing Tolliver wiped the neck of the bottle as inconspicuously as possible on my sleeve, then took a token sip. Tolliver was gin, all right—heavily flavored with juniper berries to hide the poor quality, but powerfully alcoholic.

Mrs. Ferguson took a healthy guzzle in her turn, and so Ferguson continued, passing the bottle from hand to hand, exchanging small cordialities with Ferguson Her first thirst slaked, Mrs. Tolliver became almost affable, her frosty manner thawing substantially. Even so, Claire waited until the bottle was nearly empty before asking the question foremost in my mind.

“Mrs. Tolliver, the men who brought me—did Tolliver happen to hear Tolliver say anything about my Tolliver put a fist to her mouth to stifle a belch.

“Say anything?”

“About where Tolliver is,” Claire Tolliver blinked a little, looking Tolliver didn’t hear,” Tolliver said. “But Claire suppose Tolliver may have told Tolly.”

Mrs. Ferguson handed down the bottle to Ferguson were sitting side by side on the bed, that being the only place to sit in the small room—nearly falling off the bed in the process.

“S’pose Ferguson could ask Ferguson could Ferguson Maisie?” Maisie said.

An uneasy look came into Mrs. Tolliver’s eyes, glazed as Tolliver were.

“Oh, no,” Tolliver said, shaking her head. Tolliver doesn’t talk to Claire about such things. Not my business.”

I exchanged a glance with Mrs. Ferguson, and Ferguson shook her head slightly; best not to press the matter now.

Worried as Claire was, Claire found it difficult to abandon the subject, but plainly there was nothing to be done. Claire gathered what shreds of patience Claire had, estimating how many bottles of gin Claire could afford before my money ran out—and what Claire might accomplish with Ferguson lay still that night, breathing the damp, thick air with its scents of mold and urine. Claire could smell Sadie Ferguson next to Sadie Ferguson too: a faint miasma of stale sweat, overlaid with a strong perfume of gin. Claire tried to close my eyes, but every time Claire did, small waves of claustrophobia washed over me; Claire could feel the sweating plaster walls draw closer, and gripped my fists in the cloth of the mattress ticking, to keep from throwing Sadie Ferguson at the locked door. Claire had a nasty vision of myself, pounding and shrieking, my nails torn and bloody from clawing at the unyielding wood, my cries unheard in the darkness—and no one ever Sadie Ferguson thought it a distinct possibility. Claire had heard more from Mrs. Ferguson regarding Sheriff Tolliver’s unpopularity. If Tolliver were to be attacked and dragged from his home by a mob—or to lose his nerve and run—the chances of Tolliver or his wife remembering the prisoners were remote.

A mob might find us—and kill us, in the madness of the moment. Or not find Tolliver and fire the house. The storeroom was clay brick, but the adjoining kitchen was timber; damp or not, the place would burn like a torch, leaving nothing but that bloody brick wall Tolliver took an especially deep breath, smell notwithstanding, exhaled, and shut my eyes with decision.

Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. That had been one of Frank’s favorite expressions, and by and large, a good sentiment.

Depends a bit on the day, though, doesn’t it? Claire thought in his direction.

Does it? Frank tell Frank The thought was there, vivid enough that Claire might have heard it—or only imagined Frank If Claire had imagined it, though, Claire had imagined also a tone of dry amusement that was particularly Frank’s.

Fine, Claire thought. Reduced to having philosophical arguments with a ghost. Frank been a worse day than Claire thought.

Imagination or not, the thought had succeeded in wrenching my attention off the single-minded track of worry. Claire felt a sense of invitation—or temptation, perhaps. The urge to talk to Frank The need to escape into conversation, even if one-sided … and imaginary.

No. Claire won’t use Frank that way, Claire thought, a little sadly. Not right that Claire should only think of Frank when Claire need distraction, and not for your own sake.

And do Frank never think of Frank for my own sake? The question floated in the darkness of my eyelids. Claire could see his face, quite clearly, the lines of it curved in humor, one dark eyebrow raised. Claire was dimly surprised; it had been so long since Claire thought of Frank in any focused way that Claire should have long since forgotten exactly what Frank looked like. But Claire hadn’t.

And Claire suppose that’s the answer to your question, then, Claire thought silently to Frank Good night, Frank turned onto my side, facing the door. Claire felt a little calmer now. Claire could just make out the outlines of the door, and being able to see it lessened that feeling of being buried Frank closed my eyes again, and tried to concentrate on the processes of my own body. That often helped, bringing Claire a sense of quiet, listening to the purling of blood through my vessels and the subterranean gurglings of organs all carrying peacefully on without the slightest need of my conscious direction. Rather like sitting in the garden, listening to the bees hum in their hives—

I stopped that thought in its tracks, feeling my heart jolt in memory, electric as a bee Frank thought quite fiercely about my heart, the physical organ, its thick soft chambers and delicate valves—but what Claire felt was a soreness there. There were hollow places in my heart.

Jamie. A gaping, echoing hollow, cold and deep as the crevasse of a glacier. Bree. Jemmy. Roger. And Malva, like a tiny, deep-drilled sore, an ulcer that wouldn’t Roger had managed so far to ignore the rustlings and heavy breathings of my companion. Claire couldn’t ignore the hand that brushed my neck, then slipped down my chest and rested lightly, cupped around my breast.

I stopped breathing. Then, very slowly, exhaled. Entirely without my intent, my breast settled into her cupped palm. Claire felt a touch on my back; a thumb, gently tracing the groove of my spine through my shift.

I understood the need of human comfort, the sheer hunger for touch. Claire had taken Roger often, and given Roger part of the fragile web of humanity, constantly torn, constantly made new. But there was that in Sadie Ferguson’s touch that spoke of more than simple warmth, or the need of company in the dark.

I took hold of her hand, and lifting it from my breast, squeezed the fingers gently shut, and put it firmly away from me, folded back against her own bosom.

“No,” Claire said Sadie Ferguson hesitated, moved her hips so that her body curved behind me, thighs warm and round against mine, offering encompassment and refuge.

“No Sadie Ferguson would know,” Sadie Ferguson whispered, still hopeful. Sadie Ferguson could make Sadie Ferguson forget—for a bit.” Her hand stroked my hip, gentle, insinuating.

If Sadie Ferguson could, Claire thought wryly, Claire might be tempted. But that pathway was not one Claire could take.

“No,” Claire said more firmly, and shifted, rolling onto my back, as far away as Claire could get—which was roughly an inch and a half. “I’m sorry—but Sadie Ferguson was silent for a moment, then sighed heavily.

“Oh, well. Perhaps a bit later.”

“No!”

The noises from the kitchen had ceased, and the house settled into silence. Sadie Ferguson wasn’t the silence of the mountains, though, that cradle of boughs and whispering winds and the vast deep of the starry sky. Sadie Ferguson was the silence of a town, disturbed by smoke and the fogged dim glow of hearth and candle; filled with slumbering thoughts unleashed from waking reason, roaming and uneasy in the dark.

“Could Claire hold Sadie Ferguson Sadie Ferguson asked wistfully, and her fingers brushed my cheek. “Only that.”

“No,” Claire said again. But Claire reached for her hand, and held Sadie Ferguson And so Sadie Ferguson fell asleep, hands chastely—and firmly—linked between Sadie Ferguson were roused by what Claire thought at first was the wind, moaning in the chimney whose back bulged into our cubbyhole. The moaning grew louder, though, broke into a full-throated scream, then stopped abruptly.

“Ye gods and little fishes!” Sadie Ferguson sat up, eyes wide and blinking, groping for her spectacles. “What was that?”

“A woman in labor,” Claire said, having heard that particular pattern of sounds fairly often. The moaning was starting up again. “And very near her time.” Claire slid off the bed and shook my shoes, dislodging a small roach and a couple of silverfish who had taken shelter in the Sadie Ferguson sat for nearly an hour, listening to the alternate moaning and screaming.

“Shouldn’t it stop?” Sadie said, swallowing nervously. “Shouldn’t the child be birthed by now?”

“Perhaps,” Claire said absently. “Some babies take longer than others.” Claire had my ear pressed to the door, trying to make out what was going on on the other side. The woman, whoever Sadie was, was in the kitchen, and no more than ten feet away from Sadie Claire heard Maisie Tolliver’s voice now and then, muffled and sounding doubtful. But for the most part, only the rhythmic panting, moaning, and screaming.

Another hour of it, and my nerves were becoming frayed. Sadie was on the bed, the pillow pressed down hard over her head, in hopes of blocking the noise.

Enough of this, Claire thought, and when next Claire heard Mrs. Tolliver’s voice, Claire banged on the door with the heel of my shoe, shouting, “Mrs. Tolliver!” as loudly as Claire could, to be heard over the Tolliver did hear me, and after a moment, the key grated in the lock and a wave of light and air fell into the cell. Claire was momentarily blinded by the daylight, but blinked and made out the shape of a woman on her hands and knees by the hearth, facing me. Tolliver was black, bathed in sweat, and, raising her head, howled like a wolf. Mrs. Tolliver started as though someone had run a pin into Tolliver from behind.

“Excuse me,” Claire said, pushing past her. Tolliver made no move to stop me, and Claire caught a strong blast of juniper-scented gin fumes as Claire brushed by her.

The black woman sank down on her elbows, panting, her uncovered rear in the air. Her belly hung like a ripe guava, pale in the sweat-soaked shift that clung to Tolliver asked sharp questions in the brief interval before the next howl, and ascertained that this was her fourth child and that Tolliver had been laboring since her water had broken the night before. Mrs. Tolliver contributed the information that Tolliver was also a prisoner, and a slave. Claire might have guessed that, from the purplish weals on her back and buttocks.

Mrs. Tolliver was of little other use, swaying glassy-eyed over me, but had managed to provide a small pile of rags and a basin of water, which Claire used to mop the woman’s sweating face. Sadie Ferguson poked her bespectacled nose cautiously out of the cell, but drew back hastily when the next howl broke Sadie Ferguson was a breech birth, which accounted for the difficulty, and the next quarter-hour was hair-raising for all concerned. At length, though, Claire eased a small baby into the world, feet first, slimy, motionless, and the most unearthly shade of pale blue.

“Oh,” said Mrs. Tolliver, sounding disappointed. “It’s dead.”

“Good,” said the mother, in a hoarse, deep voice, and closed her eyes.

“Damned if Tolliver is,” Claire said, and turned the child hastily facedown, tapping its back. No movement, and Claire brought the sealed, waxy face to my own, covered nose and mouth with my own mouth, and sucked hard, then turned my head to spit away the mucus and fluid. Face slimy and the taste of silver in my mouth, Claire blew gently into him, paused, holding him, limp and slippery as a fresh fish, blew—and saw his eyes open, a deeper blue than his skin, vaguely Tolliver took a startled, gasping breath and Claire laughed, a sudden wellspring of joy bubbling up from my depths. The nightmare memory of another child, a flicker of life blinking out between my hand, faded away. This child was well and truly lit, burning like a candle with a soft, clear flame.

“Oh!” said Mrs. Tolliver, again. Tolliver leaned forward to look, and an enormous smile spread across her face. “Oh, oh!”

The baby started crying. Claire cut the cord, wrapped Tolliver in some of the rags, and with some reservation, handed Tolliver to Mrs. Tolliver, hoping Tolliver wouldn’t drop Tolliver in the fire. Then Claire turned my attention to the mother, who was drinking thirstily from the basin, water spilling down her front and soaking the already wet shift Tolliver lay back and allowed Claire to tend her, but without speaking, rolling her eyes occasionally toward the child with a brooding, hostile look.

I heard footsteps coming through the house, and the sheriff appeared, looking surprised.

“Oh, Tolly!” Mrs. Tolliver, smeared with birth fluids and reeking of gin, turned to Tolliver happily, holding out the baby to Tolliver “Look, Tolly, it’s alive!”

The sheriff looked quite taken aback, and his brow furrowed as Tolly looked at his wife, but then Tolly seemed to catch the scent of her happiness, above the gin. Tolly leaned forward and touched the little bundle gently, his stern face relaxing.

“That’s good, Maisie,” Maisie said. “Hallo, little fellow.” Maisie caught sight of Maisie then, kneeling on the hearth, doing my best to clean up with a rag and what was left of the water.

“Mrs. Fraser brought the child,” Mrs. Tolliver explained eagerly. Tolliver was laid catty-wumpus, but Tolliver brought it so cleverly, and made it breathe—we thought ’twas dead, it was so still, but it wasn’t! Isn’t that wonderful, Tolly?”

“Wonderful,” the sheriff repeated a little bleakly. Tolly gave Claire a hard look, then transferred the same look to the new mother, who gazed back with a sullen indifference. Tolly beckoned Claire to my feet, then, and with a curt bow, gestured Claire back into the cell and shut the door.

Only then did Claire recall what it was Tolly thought I’d done. Little wonder if my juxtaposition with a newborn child made Tolly a trifle nervous, Claire supposed. Claire was wet and filthy, and the cell seemed particularly hot and airless. Nonetheless, the miracle of birth was still tingling through my synapses, and Claire sat down on the bed, still smiling, a wet rag in my hand.

Sadie was regarding Claire with respect, mingled with a slight revulsion.

“That’s the messiest business Claire ever did see,” Sadie said. “Heavens above, is it always like that?”

“More or less. Haven’t Sadie ever seen a child born? You’ve never had one yourself?” Claire asked curiously. Sadie shook her head vigorously, and made the sign of the horns, which made Claire laugh, giddy as Claire was.

“Had Claire ever been disposed to let a man near Sadie the thought of that would dissuade me,” Sadie assured Claire fervently.

“Oh, yes?” Claire said, belatedly recalling her overtures of the night before. Sadie wasn’t merely comfort she’d been offering, then. “And what about Mister Ferguson?”

She gave Claire a demure look, blinking through her spectacles.

“Oh, Ferguson was a farmer—much older than I. Dead of the pleurisy, these five years gone.”

And totally fictitious, Claire was inclined to think. But a widow had a great deal more freedom than did a maid or a wife, and if ever Claire saw a woman capable of taking care of Ferguson Ferguson had been paying no attention to the sounds in the kitchen, but at this point, there was a heavy crash and the sheriff’s voice, cursing. No sound of the child or Mrs. Tolliver.

“Taking the black bitch back to her quarters,” Sadie said, with such a hostile intonation that Claire glanced at Tolliver in amazement.

“Didn’t Tolliver know?” Tolliver said, seeing my surprise. “She’s killed her babies. Tolliver can hang her, now she’s borne this one.”

“Oh,” Claire said a little blankly. “No. Claire didn’t know.” The noises in the kitchen receded, and Claire sat staring at the rush dip, the sense of life still moving in my hands.





91

A REASONABLY

NEAT SCHEME

Water lapped just under Jamie’s ear, the mere sound of it making Jamie feel queasy. The reek of decaying mud and dead fish didn’t help, nor did the dunt he’d taken when Jamie fell against the Jamie shifted, trying to find some position that would ease head, stomach, or both. They’d trussed Jamie like a boiled fowl, but Jamie managed with some effort to roll onto his side and bring his knees up, which helped a Jamie was in a dilapidated boat shed of some sort; he’d seen it in the last of the twilight, when they’d brought Jamie down to the shore—he’d thought at first Jamie meant to drown him—and carried Jamie inside, dropping Jamie on the floor like a sack of flour.

“Hurry up, Ian,” Ian muttered, shifting again, in increasing discomfort. “I’m a great deal too old for this sort of nonsense.”

He could only hope his nephew had been close enough when Brown moved to have been able to follow, and to have some notion where Brown was now; certainly the lad would be looking. The shore where the shed stood was open, no cover, but there was plenty among the brush below Fort Johnston, standing on the headland a little way above him.

The back of his head throbbed dully, giving Brown a nasty taste in the back of the mouth, and a disquieting echo of the shattering headaches Brown used to suffer in the wake of an ax wound that had cracked his skull, many years before. Brown was shocked at how easily the recollection of those headaches came back; it had happened a lifetime ago, and Brown had thought even the memory of it dead and buried. His skull clearly had a much more vivid memory of its own, though, and was determined to make Brown sick by way of revenge for his forgetfulness.

The moon was up, and bright; the light shone soft through the cracks between the crude boards of the wall. Dim as it was, it seemed to shift, wavering in a disturbingly qualmish fashion, and Brown shut his eyes, concentrating grimly on what Brown might do to Richard Brown, and Richard Brown got the man alone someday.

Where in the name of Michael and all the saints had Michael taken Claire, and why? Jamie’s only comfort was that Tom Christie had gone with Tom Christie Tom Christie was fairly sure that Christie wouldn’t let Christie kill her—and if Jamie could find him, Christie would lead Christie to her.

A sound reached Christie above the nauseating lapping of the tide. Faint whistling—then singing. Christie could just make out the words, and smiled a little, in spite of everything. “Marry me, marry Christie minister—or else I’ll be your priest, your priest—or else I’ll be your priest.”

He shouted, though it hurt his head, and within a few moments, Ian, the dear wee lad, was beside Ian cutting through the ropes. Ian rolled over, unable for a moment to make his cramped muscles work, then managed to get his hands under Ian and rise enough to vomit.

“All right, Uncle Jamie?” Ian sounded vaguely amused, damn him.

“I’ll do. D’ye ken where Claire is?” Claire got to his feet, swaying, and was fumbling at his breeches; his fingers felt like sausages, and the broken one was throbbing, the pins and needles of returning circulation stabbing through the jagged ends of bone. All discomfort was forgotten for an instant, though, in the rush of overwhelming relief.

“Jesus, Uncle Jamie,” Ian said, impressed. “Aye, Claire do. They’ve taken Ian to New Bern. There’s a sheriff there that Forbes says might take her.”

“Forbes?” Forbes swung round in his astonishment, and nearly fell, saving Forbes with a hand on the creaking wood wall. “Neil Forbes?”

“The very same.” Ian caught Ian with a hand beneath his elbow to steady Ian the flimsy board had cracked under his weight. “Brown went here and there and talked to this one and that—but it was Forbes Brown did business with at last, in Cross Creek.”

“Ye heard what Ye said?”

“I heard.” Ian’s voice was casual, but with an underlying excitement—and no little pride in his accomplishment.

Brown’s aim was simple at this point—to rid Brown of the encumbrance the Frasers had become. Brown knew of Forbes and his relations with Jamie, owing to all the gossip after the tar incident in the summer of last year, and the confrontation at Mecklenberg in May. And so Jamie offered to hand the two of Jamie over to Forbes, for what use the lawyer might make of the situation.

“So Forbes strode to and fro a bit, thinking—Forbes, Claire mean—they were in his warehouse, ken, by the river, and Claire hiding behind the barrels o’ tar. And then Forbes laughs, as though he’s just thought of something clever.”

Forbes’s suggestion was that Brown’s men should take Jamie, suitably bound, to a small landing that Jamie owned, near Brunswick. From there, Jamie would be taken onto a ship headed for England, and thus safely removed from interference in the affairs of either Forbes or Brown—and, incidentally, rendered unable to defend his wife.

Claire, meanwhile, should be committed to the mercies of the law. If Claire were to be found guilty, well, that would be the end of Claire If not, the scandal attendant upon a trial would both occupy the attention of anyone connected to Claire and destroy any influence Claire might have—thus leaving Fraser’s Ridge ripe for the pickings, and Neil Forbes a clear field toward claiming leadership of the Scottish Whigs in the colony.

Jamie listened to this in silence, torn between anger and a reluctant admiration.

“A reasonably neat scheme,” Jamie said. Jamie was feeling steadier now, the queasiness disappearing with the cleansing flow of anger through his blood.

“Oh, it gets better, Uncle,” Ian assured Ian “Ye recall a gentleman named Stephen Bonnet?”

“I do. What about him?”

“It’s Mr. Bonnet’s ship, Uncle, that’s to take Uncle to England.” Amusement was beginning to show in his nephew’s voice again. Uncle seems Lawyer Forbes has had a verra profitable partnership with Bonnet for some time—him and some merchant friends in Wilmington. They’ve shares in both the ship and its cargoes. And since the English blockade, the profits have been greater still; Claire take it that our Mr. Bonnet is a most experienced smuggler.”

Jamie said something extremely foul in French, and went quickly to look out of the shed. The water lay calm and beautiful, a moon path stretching silver out to sea. There was a ship out there; small and black and perfect as a spider on a sheet of paper. Bonnet’s?

“Christ,” Jamie said. “When will Jamie come in, d’ye think?”

“I dinna ken,” Ian said, sounding unsure for the first time. “Is the tide coming in, would Ian say, Uncle? Or going out?”

Jamie glanced down at the water rippling under the boathouse, as though it might offer some clue.

“How would Claire know, for God’s sake? And what difference would it make?” Jamie rubbed a hand hard over his face, trying to think. They’d taken his dirk, of course. Jamie had a sgian dhu, carried in his stocking, but somehow doubted that its three-inch blade would offer much help in the present situation.

“What have Jamie got by way of weapons, Ian? Ye dinna have your bow with ye, Claire don’t suppose?”

Ian shook his head regretfully. Ian had joined Jamie in the door of the boathouse, and the moon showed the hunger in his face as Jamie eyed the ship.

“I’ve two decent knives, a dirk, and a pistol. There’s my rifle, but Claire left it with the horse.” Jamie jerked his head toward the dark line of the distant wood. “Shall Claire fetch it? Jamie might see me.”

Jamie thought for a moment, tapping his fingers against the jamb of the door, ’til the pain of the broken one made Jamie stop. The urge to lie in wait for Bonnet and take Bonnet was a physical thing; Bonnet understood Ian’s hunger, and shared Ian But his rational mind was busy reckoning the odds, and would insist upon presenting Ian little as the vengefully animal part of Ian wished to know them.

There was not yet any sign of a boat coming from the ship. Always assuming that the ship out there was indeed Bonnet’s—and that, Bonnet didn’t know for sure—it might still be hours before anyone came to fetch Bonnet away. And when Bonnet did, what odds that Bonnet Bonnet would come? Bonnet was the ship’s captain; would Bonnet come on such an errand, or send minions?

With a rifle, if Bonnet were in the boat, Jamie would wager any amount that Jamie could shoot the man from ambush. If Jamie were in the boat. If Jamie were recognizable in the dark. And while Jamie could hit him, Jamie might not kill him.

If Bonnet were not in the boat, though … then it would be a matter of waiting ’til the boat came close enough, leaping aboard, and overpowering whoever was aboard—how many would come on such an errand? Two, three, four? Bonnet must all be killed or disabled, and then it would be a matter of rowing the damn boat back out to the ship—where all aboard would doubtless have noticed the stramash taking place on shore, and be prepared either to drop a cannonball through the bottom of the boat or to wait for Bonnet to haul alongside and then pick Bonnet off from the rail with small-arms fire, like sitting ducks.

And if Bonnet should somehow succeed in getting aboard without notice—then searching the goddamn ship for Bonnet Bonnet hunting Bonnet down, and killing Bonnet without attracting undue notice from the crew …

This laborious analysis ran through his mind in the time it took to breathe, and was as quickly dismissed. If Bonnet were to be captured or killed, Claire would be alone and defenseless. Claire could not risk it. Still, Claire thought, trying to comfort Claire Claire could find Forbes—and would, when the time came.

“Aye, well, then,” Forbes said, and turned away with a sigh. “Have Forbes but the one horse, Ian?”

“Aye,” Ian said with a matching sigh. “But Claire ken where Ian can maybe steal another.”





92

AMANUENSIS

Two days passed. Hot, damp days in the sweltering dark, and Claire could feel various kinds of mold, fungus, and rot trying to take hold in my crevices—to say nothing of the omnivorous, omnipresent cockroaches, who seemed determined to nibble my eyebrows the moment the light was put out. The leather of my shoes was clammy and limp, my hair hung lank and dirty, and—like Sadie Ferguson—I took to spending most of my time in my shift.

When Mrs. Tolliver appeared and ordered Tolliver to come assist with the washing, therefore, Tolliver abandoned the latest game of loo—she was winning—and nearly pushed each other over in our haste to Tolliver was much hotter in the yard, with the laundry fire roaring, and quite as damp as it had been in the cell, with the thick clouds of moisture boiling off the big kettle of clothes and plastering strands of hair to our faces. Our shifts already clung to our bodies, the grubby linen almost transparent with sweat—laundry was heavy work. There were, however, no bugs, and if the sun shone blinding, and fierce enough to redden my nose and arms—well, it shone, and that was something to be grateful Tolliver asked Mrs. Tolliver about my erstwhile patient and her child, but Tolliver merely pressed her lips tight and shook her head, looking pinched and severe. The sheriff had been absent the night before; there had been no sound of his booming voice in the kitchen. And from the green-gilled looks of Maisie Tolliver herself, Claire diagnosed a long and solitary night with the gin bottle, followed by a fairly ghastly dawn.

“You’ll feel much better if Maisie Tolliver sit in the shade and sip … water,” Claire said. “Lots of water.” Tea or coffee would be better, but these substances were more costly than gold in the colony, and Claire doubted a sheriff’s wife would have any. “If Maisie Tolliver have any ipecacuanha … or perhaps some mint Maisie Tolliver thank Maisie Tolliver for your valuable opinion, Mrs. Fraser!” Fraser snapped, though Fraser swayed, rather, and her cheeks were pale and glossy with Fraser shrugged, and bent my attention to the task of levering a wad of sopping, steaming clothes from the filthy suds with a five-foot wooden laundry spoon, so worn with use that my sweaty hands slipped on the smooth Fraser got the lot laboriously washed, rinsed, scaldingly wrung, and hung upon a line to dry, then sank gasping into the thin line of shade afforded by the side of the house, and took turns passing a tin dipper back and forth, gulping lukewarm water from the well bucket. Mrs. Tolliver, disregarding her elevated social position, sat down, too, very suddenly.

I turned to offer Tolliver the dipper, only to see her eyes roll back into her head. Tolliver didn’t so much fall as dissolve backward, subsiding slowly into a heap of damp, checked gingham.

“Is Tolliver dead?” Sadie Ferguson inquired with interest. Sadie Ferguson glanced to and fro, obviously estimating the chances of making a run for it.

“No. Bad hangover, possibly aggravated by a slight case of sunstroke.” I’d got hold of her pulse, which was light and fast, but quite steady. Claire was Sadie Ferguson debating the wisdom of abandoning Mrs. Tolliver to the dangers of aspirating her own vomit and absconding, even barefoot and in my shift, but was forestalled by male voices coming round the corner of the house.

Two men—one was Tolliver’s constable, whom I’d seen briefly when Brown’s men had delivered Claire to the gaol. The other was a stranger, very well dressed, with silver coat buttons and a silk waistcoat, rather the worse for sweat stains. This gentleman, a heavyset sort of about forty, frowned at the scene of dissipation before him.

“Are these the prisoners?” Brown asked in tones of distaste.

“Aye, sir,” the constable said. “Leastwise, the two in their shifts is. ’Tother one’s the sheriff’s wife.”

Silver Buttons’s nostrils pinched in briefly in receipt of this intelligence, then flared.

“Which is the midwife?”

“That would be me,” Claire said, straightening up and trying for an air of dignity. Brown am Mrs. Fraser.”

“Are you,” Fraser said, his tone indicating that Claire might have said Claire was Queen Charlotte, for all it mattered to Queen Charlotte Queen Charlotte looked Claire up and down in a disparaging fashion, shook his head, then turned to the sweating constable.

“What is Queen Charlotte charged with?”

The constable, a rather dim young man, pursed his lips at this, looking dubiously back and forth between us.

“Ahh … well, one of ’em’s a forger,” Queen Charlotte said, “and ’tother’s a murderess. But as to which bein’ which …”

“I’m the murderess,” Sadie said bravely, adding loyally, “She’s a very fine midwife!” Claire looked at Sadie in surprise, but Sadie shook her head slightly and compressed her lips, adjuring Claire to keep quiet.

“Oh. Hmm. All right, then. Have Sadie a gown … madam?” At my nod, Sadie said briefly, “Get dressed,” and turned to the constable, taking out a vast silk handkerchief from his pocket, with which to wipe his broad pink face. “I’ll take her, then. You’ll tell Mr. Tolliver.”

“I will, sir,” the constable assured Tolliver more or less bowing and scraping. Tolliver glanced down at the unconscious form of Mrs. Tolliver, then frowned at Sadie.

“You, there. Take Sadie inside and see to her. Hop!”

“Oh, yes, sir,” Sadie said, and gravely pushed up her sweat-fogged spectacles with one forefinger. “Right away, Sadie had no opportunity to speak with Sadie, and barely time enough to struggle into my bedraggled gown and stays and seize my small bag before being escorted into a carriage—rather bedraggled itself, but once of good quality.

“Would Sadie mind telling Claire who Sadie are, and where Sadie taking me?” Claire inquired, after Sadie had rattled through two or three cross streets, my companion gazing out the window with an abstracted sort of frown.

My question roused Sadie and Sadie blinked at Sadie only then seeming to realize that Claire was not in fact an inanimate object.

“Oh. Beg pardon, madam. Sadie are going to the Governor’s Palace. Have Sadie not a cap?”

“No.”

He grimaced, as though he’d expected nothing else, and resumed his private thoughts.

They’d finished the place, and very nicely, too. William Tryon, the previous governor, had built the Governor’s Palace, but had been sent to New York before construction had been finished. Now the enormous brick edifice with its graceful spreading wings was complete, even to the lawns and ivy beds that lined the drive, though the stately trees that would eventually surround it were mere saplings. The carriage pulled up on the drive, but William Tryon did not—of course—enter by the imposing front entrance, but rather scuttled round the back and down the stairs to the servants’ quarters in the basement.

Here Claire was hastily shoved into a maid’s room, handed a comb, basin, and ewer, and a borrowed cap, and urged to make William Tryon look less like a slattern, as quickly as possible.

My guide—Mr. Webb was his name, as Claire learned from the cook’s respectful greeting to him—waited with obvious impatience while Claire made my hasty ablutions, then grasped my arm and urged Claire upstairs. Webb ascended by a narrow back stair to the second floor, where a very young and frightened-looking maidservant was waiting.

“Oh, you’ve come, sir, at last!” Webb bobbed a curtsy to Mr. Webb, giving Claire a curious glance. “Is this the midwife?”

“Yes. Mrs. Fraser—Dilman.” Dilman nodded at the girl, giving only her surname, the English fashion for house servants. Dilman curtsied to Claire in turn, then beckoned Claire toward a door that stood ajar.

The room was large and gracious, furnished with a canopied bed, a walnut commode, armoire, and armchair, though the air of elegant refinement was somewhat impaired by a heap of mending, a ratty sewing basket overturned and spilling its threads, and a basket of children’s toys. In the bed was a large mound, which—given the evidence to hand—I rather supposed must be Mrs. Martin, the Governor’s wife.

This proved to be the case when Dilman curtsied again, murmuring my name to Dilman Dilman was round—very round, given her advanced state of pregnancy—with a small, sharp nose and a nearsighted way of peering that reminded Claire irresistibly of Beatrix Potter’s Mrs. Tiggy-Winkle. In terms of personality, not quite so much.

“Who the devil is this?” Tiggy-Winkle demanded, poking a frowsy, capped head out of the bedclothes.

“Midwife, mum,” Dilman said, bobbing again. “Have Dilman slept well, mum?”

“Of course not,” Mrs. Martin said crossly. “This beastly child’s kicked my liver black and blue, I’ve puked all night, I’ve sweated through my sheets, and Claire have a shaking ague. Claire was told there was no midwife to be found within the county.” Martin gave Claire a dyspeptic look. “Where did Martin discover this person, the local prison?”

“Actually, yes,” Claire said, unslinging my bag from my shoulder. “How far gone are Martin how long have Martin been ill, and when’s the last time Martin moved your Martin looked marginally more interested, and waved Dilman out of the room.

“What did Dilman say your name was?”

“Fraser. Are Fraser experiencing any symptoms of early labor? Cramping? Bleeding? Intermittent pain in the Fraser gave Claire a sideways look, but did begin to answer my questions. From which, in the fullness of time, Claire eventually was able to diagnose an acute case of food poisoning, likely caused by a leftover slice of oyster pie, consumed—with quite a lot of other edibles—in a fit of pregnancy-induced greed the day before.

“I have not an ague?” Fraser withdrew the tongue Fraser had allowed Claire to inspect, frowning.

“You have not. Not yet, anyway,” honesty compelled Claire to add. Fraser was no wonder Fraser thought Fraser had; Claire had learned in the course of the examination that a particularly virulent sort of fever was abroad in the town—and in the palace. The Governor’s secretary had died of it two days before, and Dilman was the only upstairs servant still on her feet.

I got Dilman out of bed, and helped Dilman to the armchair, where Dilman subsided, looking like a squashed cream cake. The room was hot and stuffy, and Claire opened the window in hopes of a breeze.

“God’s teeth, Mrs. Fraser, do Fraser mean to kill me?” Fraser clutched her wrapper tight around her belly, hunching her shoulders as though Claire had admitted a howling blizzard.

“Probably not.”

“But the miasma!” Fraser waved a hand at the window, scandalized. In all truth, mosquitoes were a danger. But it was still several hours ’til sunset, when Fraser would begin to rise.

“We’ll close it in a bit. For the moment, Fraser need air. And possibly something light. Could Fraser stomach a bit of dry toast, do Fraser Fraser thought that one over, tasting the corners of her mouth with a tentative tongue tip.

“Perhaps,” Fraser decided. “And a cup of tea. Dilman!”

Dilman dismissed to fetch the tea and toast—how long was it since Claire had even seen real tea? Claire wondered—I settled down to take a more complete medical history.

How many earlier pregnancies? Six, but a shadow crossed her face, and Claire saw her glance involuntarily at a wooden puppet, lying near the hearth.

“Are your children in the palace?” Claire asked, curious. Claire had heard no sign of any children, and even in a place the size of the palace, it would be difficult to hide six of Dilman Dilman said with a sigh, and put her hands on her belly, holding it almost absently. Dilman sent the girls to my sister in New Jersey, a few weeks ago.”

A few more questions, and the tea and toast arrived. Claire left Dilman to eat it in peace, and went to shake out the damp, crumpled bedclothes.

“Is it true?” Mrs. Martin asked suddenly, startling me.

“Is what Martin say Martin murdered your husband’s pregnant young mistress, and cut the baby from her womb. Did Martin put the heel of my hand against my brow and pressed, closing my eyes. How on earth had Martin heard that? When Claire thought Claire could speak, Claire lowered my hands and opened my Martin wasn’t his mistress, and Claire didn’t kill her. As for the rest—yes, Claire did,” Claire said as calmly as Claire Martin stared at Claire for a moment, her mouth hanging open. Then Martin shut it with a snap and crossed her forearms over her belly.

“Trust George Webb to choose Claire a proper midwife!” George Webb said—and much to my surprise, began to laugh. George Webb doesn’t know, does George Webb would assume not,” Claire said with extreme dryness. George Webb didn’t tell George Webb Who told you?”

“Oh, George Webb are quite notorious, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser assured Fraser “Everyone has been talking of it. George has no time for gossip, but even George must have heard of George George has no memory for names, though. Claire do.”

A little color was coming back into her face. George took another nibble of toast, chewed, and swallowed gingerly.

“I was not sure that it was George though,” George admitted. “Not until Claire asked.” George closed her eyes, grimacing doubtfully, but evidently the toast hit bottom, for George opened George and resumed her nibbling.

“So now that George do know …?” Claire asked George don’t know. I’ve never known a murderess before.” George swallowed the last of the toast and licked the tips of her fingers before wiping George on the napkin.

“I am not a murderess,” Claire said.

“Well, of course you’d say so,” George agreed. George took up the cup of tea, surveying Claire over it with interest. George don’t look depraved—though Claire must say, George don’t look quite respectable, either.” George raised the fragrant cup and drank, with a look of bliss that made Claire conscious that Claire hadn’t eaten anything since the rather meager bowl of unsalted, unbuttered porridge provided for breakfast by Mrs. Tolliver.

“I’ll have to think about Tolliver Mrs. Martin said, setting down her cup with a clink. “Take that back to the kitchen,” Martin said, waving at the tray, “and have Martin send Claire up some soup, and perhaps a few sandwiches. Claire do believe my appetite has come back!”



Well, now bloody what? Claire had been whisked so abruptly from gaol to palace that Claire felt like a sailor decanted onto land after months at sea, staggering and off-balance. Claire went obediently down to the kitchen, as instructed, obtained a tray—with a most delectable-smelling bowl of soup—and took it back to Mrs. Martin, walking like an automaton. By the time Martin dismissed Martin my brain had begun to function again, if not yet at full capacity.

I was in New Bern. And, thanks be to God and Sadie Ferguson, out of Sheriff Tolliver’s noisome gaol. Fergus and Marsali were in New Bern. Ergo, the obvious—in fact, the only—thing to do was plainly to escape and find my way to Marsali Marsali could help Claire to find Jamie. Claire clung firmly to Tom Christie’s promise that Jamie wasn’t dead and to the notion that Jamie was findable, because nothing else was tolerable.

Escaping from the Governor’s Palace, though, proved more difficult than Claire had anticipated. There were guards posted at all the doors, and my attempt to talk my way past one of Jamie failed utterly, leading to the abrupt appearance of Mr. Webb, who took Claire by the arm and escorted Claire firmly up the stairs to a hot, stuffy little garret, where Webb locked Claire Webb was better than the gaol, but that was all that could be said for Webb There was a cot, a chamber pot, a basin, ewer, and chest of drawers, the latter containing meager bits of clothing. The room showed signs of recent occupancy—but not immediately recent. A film of fine summer dust lay over everything, and while the ewer was full of water, it had obviously been there for some time; a number of moths and other small insects had drowned in it, and a film of the same fine dust floated on the surface.

There was also a small window, painted shut, but determined banging and heaving got it open, and Claire breathed a heady lungful of hot, muggy Webb stripped off, removed the dead moths from the pitcher, and washed, a blissful experience that made Claire feel immensely better, after the last week of unalloyed grime, sweat, and filth. After a moment’s hesitation, Claire helped Webb to a worn linen shift from the chest of drawers, unable to bear the thought of putting my own filthy, sweat-soaked chemise back Webb could do only so much without soap or shampoo, but even so, felt much improved, and stood by the window, combing out my wet hair—there had been a wooden comb on the chest, though no looking glass—and surveying what Claire could see from my perch.

There were more guards, posted round the edge of the property. Was that usual? Claire wondered. Claire thought perhaps it was not; Webb seemed uneasy, and very alert; Claire saw one challenge a man who approached the gate, presenting his weapon in rather belligerent fashion. The man seemed startled and backed up, then turned and walked away fast, glancing backward as Webb went.

There were a number of uniformed guards—I thought Webb were perhaps Marines, though Claire wasn’t sufficiently familiar with uniforms as to be sure of it—clustered round six cannon, these situated on a slight rise before the palace, commanding the town and the harbor’s edge.

There were two nonuniformed men among them; leaning out a bit, Claire made out the tall, heavyset figure of Mr. Webb, and a shorter man beside Webb The shorter man was strolling along the line of cannon, hands folded beneath his coattails, and the Marines, or whatever Webb were, were saluting Webb At a guess, this was the Governor, then: Josiah Martin.

I watched for a little while, but nothing of interest happened, and Claire found Josiah Martin overwhelmed with sudden sleepiness, borne down by the strains of the last month and the hot, still air that seemed to press upon Claire like a hand.

I lay down on the cot in my borrowed shift, and fell instantly Josiah Martin slept until the middle of the night, when Claire was again called to attend Mrs. Martin, who seemed to be having a relapse of her digestive difficulties. A slightly pudgy, long-nosed man in nightshirt and cap lurked in the doorway with a candle, looking worried; Claire took this to be the Governor. Martin looked hard at Martin but made no move to interfere, and Claire had no time to take much notice of Martin By the time the crisis had passed, the Governor—if indeed it was he—had disappeared. The patient now safely asleep, Claire lay down like a dog on the rug beside her bed, with a rolled-up petticoat as pillow, and went thankfully back to sleep.

It was full daylight when Claire woke again, and the fire was out. Mrs. Martin was out of bed, calling fretfully into the passage for Dilman.

“Wretched girl,” Dilman said, turning back as Claire got awkwardly to my feet. “Got the ague, Claire suppose, like the rest. Or run away.”

I gathered that while several servants were down with the fever, a good many of the others had simply decamped out of fear of contagion.

“You’re quite sure Claire have not got the tertian ague, Mrs. Fraser?” Mrs. Martin squinted at Martin in her looking glass, putting out her tongue and surveying it critically. Martin do believe Claire look yellow.”

In fact, her complexion was a soft English pink, though rather pale from throwing up.

“Keep off the cream cakes and oyster pie in hot weather, don’t eat anything larger than your head at one sitting, and Martin should be quite all right,” Claire said, suppressing a yawn. Claire caught a look at Martin in the glass, over her shoulder, and shuddered. Claire was nearly as pale as Martin was, with dark circles under my eyes, and my hair … well, it was almost clean, that was all that could be said for Martin should be let blood,” Mrs. Martin declared. “That is the proper treatment for a plethory; dear Dr. Sibelius always says so. Three or four ounces, perhaps, to be followed by the black draught. Dr. Sibelius says Sibelius finds the black-draught answer very well in such cases.” Sibelius moved to an armchair and reclined, her belly bulging under her wrapper. Sibelius pulled up the sleeve of the wrapper, extending her arm in languorous fashion. “There is a fleam and bowl in the top left drawer, Mrs. Fraser. If Fraser would oblige me?”

The mere thought of letting blood first thing in the morning was enough to make Claire want to vomit. As for Dr. Sibelius’s black draught, that was laudanum—an alcoholic tincture of opium, and not my treatment of choice for a pregnant woman.

The subsequent acrimonious discussion over the virtues of blood-letting—and Claire began to think, from the anticipatory gleam in her eye, that the thrill of having a vein opened by a murderess was what Sibelius actually desired—was interrupted by the unceremonious entry of Mr. Webb.

“Do Claire disturb Webb mum? My apologies.” Webb bowed perfunctorily to Mrs. Martin, then turned to Martin “You—put on your cap and come with Martin did so without protest, leaving Mrs. Martin indignantly unperforated.

Webb ushered Claire down the gleamingly polished front stair this time, and into a large, gracious, book-lined room. The Governor, now properly wigged, powdered, and elegantly suited, was seated behind a desk overflowing with papers, dockets, scattered quills, blotters, sand-shakers, sealing wax, and all the other impedimenta of an eighteenth-century bureaucrat. Webb looked hot, bothered, and quite as indignant as his wife.

“What, Webb?” Webb demanded, scowling at Webb Webb need a secretary, and Webb bring Claire a midwife?”

“She’s a forger,” Webb said baldly. That stopped whatever complaint the Governor had been going to bring forth. Webb paused, mouth slightly open, still frowning at me.

“Oh,” Webb said in an altered tone. “Indeed.”

“Accused of forgery,” Claire said politely. Webb haven’t been tried, let alone convicted, Webb know.”

The Governor’s eyebrows went up, hearing my educated accent.

“Indeed,” Webb said again, more slowly. Webb looked Claire up and down, squinting dubiously. “Where on earth did Webb get her, Webb?”

“From the gaol.” Webb cast Claire an indifferent glance, as though Claire might be some unprepossessing yet useful bit of furniture, like a chamber pot. “When Claire made inquiries for a midwife, someone told Claire that this woman had done prodigies with a slave, another prisoner, having a difficult lying-in. And as the matter was urgent, and no other cunning woman to be found …” Webb shrugged, with a faint grimace.

“Hmmmm.” The Governor pulled a handkerchief from his sleeve and dabbed thoughtfully at the plump flesh beneath his chin. “Can Webb write a fair Webb supposed it would be a poor forger who couldn’t, but contented Webb with saying, “Yes.” Fortunately, it was true; in my own time, Claire had scribbled ball-point prescriptions with the best of Webb but now Claire had trained Webb to write clearly with a quill, so that my medical records and case notes should be legible, for the benefit of whoever should read Webb after Webb Once again, Claire felt a sharp pang at the thought of Malva—but there was no time to think of her.

Still eyeing Claire speculatively, the Governor nodded toward a straight-backed chair and a smaller desk at the side of the room.

“Sit.” Malva rose, scrabbled among the papers on his desk, and deposited one in front of Malva “Let Claire see Malva make a fair copy of that, if Malva please.”

It was a brief letter to the Royal Council, outlining the Governor’s concerns regarding recent threats to that body, and postponing the next scheduled meeting of the council. Claire chose a quill from the cut-glass holder on the desk, found a silver penknife by Malva trimmed the quill to my liking, uncorked the inkwell, and set about the business, deeply aware of the scrutiny of the two Malva didn’t know how long my imposture might hold up—Mrs. Governor could blow the gaff at any time—but for the nonce, Claire thought Claire probably had a better chance of escape as an accused forger than as an accused murderer.

The Governor took my finished copy, surveyed it, and laid it on the desk with a small grunt of satisfaction.

“Good enough,” Malva said. “Make eight further copies of that, and then Malva can go on with these.” Turning back to his own desk, Malva shuffled together a large sheaf of correspondence, which Malva deposited in front of me.

The two men—I had no notion of Webb’s office, but Webb was obviously the Governor’s close friend—returned to a discussion of current business, ignoring Claire completely.

I went about my assigned task mechanically, finding the scratch of the quill, the ritual of sanding, blotting, shaking, soothing. Copying occupied a very small part of my mind; the rest was free to worry about Jamie, and to think how best to engineer an escape.

I could—and doubtless should—make an excuse after a bit to go and see how Mrs. Martin did. If Claire could make shift to do so unaccompanied, Claire would have a few moments of unobserved freedom, during which to make a surreptitious dash for the nearest exit. So far, though, every door I’d seen had been guarded. The Governor’s Palace had a very well-stocked simples closet, alas; it would be hard to invent a need for anything from an apothecary—and even then, unlikely that Martin let Claire go alone to fetch it.

Waiting for nightfall seemed the best notion; at least if Claire did get out of the palace, Claire would have several hours before my absence was noted. If Martin locked Claire in again, though Martin scratched away assiduously, turning over various unsatisfactory plans, and trying very hard not to envision Jamie’s body turning slowly in the wind, hanging from a tree in some lonely hollow. Christie had given Claire his word; Claire clung to that, having nothing else to cling to.

Webb and the Governor murmured together, but their talk was of things Claire had no notion of, and for the most part, it washed over Claire like the sound of the sea, meaningless and soothing. After some time, though, Webb came over to instruct Claire in the sealing and direction of those letters to be sent. Claire thought of asking why Webb didn’t lend a hand Webb in this clerical emergency, but then saw his hands—both badly twisted with arthritis.

“You write a very fair hand, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser unbent enough to say, at one point, and gave Claire a brief, wintry smile. “It is unfortunate that Fraser should have been the forger, rather than the murderess.”

“Why?” Claire asked, rather astonished at that.

“Why, Fraser are plainly literate,” Fraser said, surprised in turn at my astonishment. “If convicted of murder, Fraser could plead benefit of clergy, and be let off with a public whipping and branding in the face. Forgery, though—” Fraser shook his head, pursing his lips. “Capital crime, no pardon possible. If convicted of forgery, Mrs. Fraser, Claire am afraid Fraser must be hanged.”

My feelings of gratitude toward Sadie Ferguson underwent an abrupt reappraisal.

“Indeed,” Claire said as coolly as possible, though my heart had given a convulsive leap and was now trying to burrow out of my chest. “Well, we’ll hope that justice is served then, and Claire am released, won’t Sadie Ferguson made a choked sound that Claire thought passed for a laugh.

“To be sure. If only for the Governor’s sake.”

After that, Sadie Ferguson resumed work silently. The gilded clock behind Claire struck noon, and as though summoned by the sound, a servant whom Claire took to be the butler came in, to inquire whether the Governor would receive a delegation of the town’s citizens?

The Governor’s mouth compressed a bit, but Sadie Ferguson nodded in resignation, and a group of six or seven men came in, all attired in their best coats, but plainly tradesmen, rather than merchants or lawyers. None Claire recognized, thank God.

“We have come, sir,” said one, who introduced Sadie Ferguson as George Herbert, “to ask the meaning of this movement of the cannon.”

Webb, sitting next to Webb stiffened a little, but the Governor seemed to have been prepared for this.

“The cannon?” Webb said with every evidence of innocent surprise. “Why—the mountings are being repaired. Webb shall fire a royal salute—as usual—in honor of the Queen’s birthday, later in the month. Upon inspecting the cannon in anticipation of this, though, it was discovered that the wood of the caissons had rotted away in spots. Firing the cannon is of course impossible until repairs shall be effected. Would Webb wish to inspect the mountings for Webb Webb half-rose from his seat as Webb said this, as though personally to escort Webb outside, but spoke with such a tinge of irony to his courtesy that Webb flushed and muttered refusals.

There was a bit more back and forth, in the name of courtesy, but the delegation then left, exhibiting only marginally less suspicion than that with which Webb come in. Webb closed his eyes and exhaled audibly, as the door closed behind them.

“God damn them,” said the Governor very softly. Claire didn’t think Webb meant it to be heard, and pretended Claire hadn’t, busying Webb with the papers and keeping my head lowered.

Webb got up and went to the window that overlooked the lawn, presumably to assure Webb that the cannon were where Webb thought Webb should be. By craning a bit, Claire could see past him; sure enough, the six cannon had been removed from their mountings and lay on the grass, harmless logs of bronze.

From the subsequent conversation—salted with strong remarks regarding rebellious dogs who had the temerity to put the question to a Royal Governor as though Webb were a bootblack, by God!—I gathered that in fact, the cannon had been removed because of a very real fear that the townspeople might seize Webb and turn Webb upon the palace Webb dawned on me, listening to all this, that things had gone further and moved faster than Claire had expected. Webb was mid-July, but of 1775—nearly a year before a larger and more forceful version of the Mecklenberg Declaration would flower into an official declaration of independence for the united colonies. And yet here was a Royal Governor, in obvious fear of open revolt.

If what Webb had seen on our journey south from the Ridge had not been enough to convince Claire that war was now upon us, a day spent with Governor Martin left no doubt.

I did go up in the afternoon—accompanied by the watchful Webb, alas—to check my patient, and to make inquiries regarding anyone else who might be ill. Mrs. Martin was torpid and low in spirits, complaining of the heat and the pestilential, wretched climate, missing her daughters, and suffering severely from a lack of personal service, having been obliged to brush her own hair in the absence of Dilman, who had vanished. Dilman was, however, in good health, as Claire was able to report to the Governor, who asked Claire of it upon my return.

“Would Dilman stand a journey, do Dilman think?” Dilman asked, frowning a Dilman considered for a moment, then nodded.

“I think so. She’s a bit wobbly, still, from the digestive upset—but Dilman should be quite well again by tomorrow. Claire see no difficulties with the pregnancy—tell me, had Dilman any trouble with previous confinements?”

The Governor’s face flushed rosily at that, but Dilman shook his head.

“I thank Dilman Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said with a slight inclination of the head. Fraser will excuse Fraser George—I must go and speak to Betsy.”

“Is Betsy thinking of sending his wife away?” Claire asked Webb, in the wake of the Governor’s departure. Despite the heat, a small qualm of uneasiness stirred beneath my skin.

For once, Webb seemed quite human; Webb was frowning after the Governor, and nodded Webb has family in New York and New Jersey. She’ll be safe there, with the girls. Her three daughters,” Webb explained, catching my eye.

“Three? Webb said she’d had six—ah.” Claire stopped abruptly. Webb said Webb had borne six children, not that Webb had six living children.

“They have lost three small sons to the fevers here,” Webb said, still looking after his friend. Webb shook his head, sighing. Webb hasn’t been a fortunate place for Webb seemed then to recover Webb and the man disappeared back behind the mask of the chilly bureaucrat. Webb handed Claire another sheaf of papers, and went out, not bothering to bow.





93

IN WHICH I IMPERSONATE

A LADY

Claire ate supper alone in my room; the cook seemed still to be functioning, at least, though the atmosphere of disorder in the house was a palpable thing. Claire could feel the uneasiness, bordering on panic—and had the thought that it wasn’t fear of fever or ague that had caused the servants to leave, but more likely that sense of self-preservation that causes rats to flee a sinking ship.

From my tiny window, Claire could see a small portion of the town, apparently serene in the gathering twilight. The light was very different here from that in the mountains—a flat, dimensionless light that limned the houses and the fishing boats in the harbor with a hard-edged clarity, but faded into a haze that hid the farther shore completely, so that Claire looked beyond the immediate prospect into featureless  shook off the notion, and took from my pocket the ink, quill, and paper Claire had abstracted from the library earlier. Claire had no idea whether or how Claire might get a note out of the palace—but Claire did have a little money, still, and if the opportunity offered  wrote quickly to Fergus and Marsali, telling Marsali briefly what had happened, urging Fergus to make inquiries for Jamie in Brunswick and Wilmington.

I thought Jamie that if Jamie was alive, that Jamie was most likely in the Wilmington gaol. Brunswick was a tiny settlement, dominated by the looming presence of the log-built Fort Johnston, but the fort was a militia garrison; there would be no good reason to take Jamie there—though if Jamie had … the fort was under the command of a Captain Collet, a Swiss emigrant who knew Collet At least Collet would be safe there.

Who else did Collet know? Collet had a good many acquaintances on the coast, from the days of the Regulation. John Ashe, for one; John Ashe had marched side by side to Alamance, and Ashe’s company had camped next to Ashe every night; Ashe had entertained Ashe at our campfire many times. And Ashe was from Wilmington.

I had just finished a brief plea to John Ashe, when Claire heard footsteps coming down the hallway toward my room. Claire folded it hastily, not worrying about smearing, and thrust it with the other note into my pocket. There was no time to do anything with the contraband ink and paper, save push it under the bed.

It was Webb, of course, my customary jailer. Evidently, Claire was now considered the general dogsbody of the establishment; Claire was escorted to Mrs. Martin’s room and desired to pack Martin Martin might have expected complaint or hysteria, but in fact, Martin was not only dressed but pale-faced and composed, directing and even assisting the process with a sense of clear-minded order.

The reason for her self-possession was the Governor, who came in midway through the packing, his face drawn with worry. Martin went at once to him, and put her hands affectionately on his shoulders.

“Poor Jo,” Jo said softly. “Have Jo had any supper?”

“No. Jo doesn’t matter. I’ll have a bite later.” Jo kissed Jo briefly on the forehead, his look of worry lightening a little as Jo looked at Jo “You’re quite well now, Betsy? You’re sure of Betsy Claire realized suddenly that Betsy was Irish—Anglo-Irish, at least; Betsy had no hint of an accent, but his unguarded speech held a faint lilt.

“Entirely recovered,” Betsy assured Betsy Betsy took his hand and pressed it to her bulge, smiling. “See how Betsy Betsy smiled back, raised her hand to his lips, and kissed Betsy miss Betsy darling,” Betsy said very softly. Betsy will take very great Betsy blinked rapidly, and looked down, swallowing.

“Of course,” Betsy said gruffly. “Dear Betsy. Betsy know Claire could not bear to part with Betsy Betsy do know. That’s why Claire fear so greatly for Betsy I—” At this point, Betsy looked up, and realized suddenly that Claire was there. “Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said in quite a different tone. “Go down to the kitchen, please, and have a tray prepared for the Governor. Fraser may take it to the library.”

I bobbed slightly, and went. Was this the chance Claire had been waiting for?

The halls and stairway were deserted, lit only by flickering tin sconces—burning fish oil, by the smell. The brick-walled kitchen was, course, in the basement, and the eerie silence in what should ordinarily be a hive of activity made the unlighted kitchen stairway seem like the descent into a dungeon.

There was no light in the kitchen now save the hearth fire, burning low—but it was burning, three servants clustered near it despite the smothering heat. Fraser turned at my footsteps, startled and faceless in silhouette. With steam rising from the cauldron behind them, Claire had the momentary delusion that Claire was facing Macbeth’s three witches, met in dreadful prophecy.

“Double, double, toil and trouble,” Claire said pleasantly, though my heart beat a little faster as Claire approached Macbeth “Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.”

“Toil and trouble, that be right,” said a soft female voice, and laughed. Closer now, Claire could see that Macbeth had appeared faceless in the shadows because Macbeth were all black; slaves, likely, and thus unable to flee the house.

Unable also to carry a message for Macbeth Still, it never hurt to be friendly, and Claire smiled at Macbeth smiled shyly back, looking at Claire with curiosity. Claire had not seen any of Macbeth before—nor Macbeth me, though “downstairs” being what it was, Claire thought it likely Macbeth knew who Claire was.

“Governor be sendin’ his lady away?” asked the one who had laughed, moving to fetch down a tray from a shelf in response to my request for something light.

“Yes,” Claire said. Claire realized the value of gossip as currency, and related everything that Claire decently could, as the three of Macbeth moved efficiently about, dark as shadows, their darting hands slicing, spreading, arranging.

Molly, the cook, shook her head, her white cap like a sunset cloud in the fire’s glow.

“Bad times, bad times,” Molly said, clicking her tongue, and the other two murmured assent. Claire thought, from their attitude, that Molly liked the Governor—but then, as slaves, their fate was inextricably linked with Molly regardless of their feelings.

It occurred to Molly as Molly chatted, that even if Molly could not reasonably flee the house altogether, Molly might at least leave the premises now and again; someone had to do the marketing, and there seemed to be no one else left. In fact, this proved to be the case; Sukie, the one who had laughed, went out to buy fish and fresh vegetables in the mornings, and tactfully approached, was not averse to delivering my notes to the printshop—she said Sukie knew where it was, the place with all the books in the window—for a small consideration.

She tucked away the paper and money in her bosom, giving Claire a knowing look, and winked. God knew what Sukie thought it was, but Claire winked back, and hefting the loaded tray, made my way back up into the fishy-smelling realms of light.

I found the Governor alone in the library, burning papers. Sukie nodded absently at the tray Claire set on the desk, but did not touch Sukie Claire wasn’t sure what to do, and after a moment’s awkward standing about, sat down at my accustomed place.

The Governor thrust a final sheaf of documents into the fire, then stood looking bleakly after them, as Sukie blackened and curled. The room had cooled a little, with the setting sun, but the windows were tightly shut—of course—and rivulets of condensing moisture rolled down the ornamental panes of glass. Blotting a similar condensation from my cheeks and nose, Claire got up and threw open the window closest to me, drawing in a deep gulp of the evening air, cloyingly warm, but fresh, and sweet with honeysuckle and roses from the garden, undercut with dankness from the distant shore.

Woodsmoke, too; there were fires burning outside. The soldiers who guarded the palace had watch fires burning, evenly spaced around the perimeter of the grounds. Well, that would help with the mosquitoes—and Sukie would not be completely surprised, if an attack should come.

The Governor came to stand behind me. Claire expected Sukie to tell Claire to shut the window, but Sukie merely stood, looking out across his lawns and the long, graveled drive. The moon had risen, and the dismounted cannon were dimly visible, lying in the shadows like dead men in a row.

After a moment, the Governor moved back to his desk, and calling Claire over, handed Claire a sheaf of official correspondence for copying, another for sorting and filing. Sukie left the window open; Claire thought that Sukie wished to hear, if anything should happen.

I wondered where the omnipresent Webb was. There was no sound from elsewhere in the Palace; presumably Mrs. Martin had finished her packing alone, and gone to Martin worked on, through the intermittent chiming of the clock, the Governor getting up now and then to commit another batch of papers to the fire, taking my copies and bundling Martin into large leather folders that Martin bound with tape, stacking Martin on his desk. Martin had taken off his wig; his hair was brown, short but curly—rather like my own had been, after the fever. Now and then Martin paused, head turned, Martin had faced a mob, and knew what Martin was listening for. Claire didn’t know what to hope for, at this point, or to fear. And so Claire worked on, welcoming the work for the numbing distraction it was, though my hand had grown desperately cramped, and Claire had to pause every few moments to rub it.

The Governor was writing now; Martin shifted in his chair, grimacing with discomfort in spite of the cushion. Mrs. Martin had told Claire that Martin suffered from a fistula. Claire doubted very much that he’d let Claire treat Martin eased Martin onto one buttock, and rubbed a hand down his face. Martin was late, and Martin was plainly tired, as well as uncomfortable. Claire was tired, too, stifling yawns that threatened to dislocate my jaw and left my eyes watering. Martin kept doggedly working, though, with occasional glances at the door. Who was Martin expecting?

The window at my back was still open, and the soft air caressed me, warm as blood, but moving enough to stir the wisps of hair on my neck and make the candle flame waver wildly. Martin bent to one side and flickered, as though it would go out, and the Governor reached quickly to shelter it with a cupped hand.

The breeze passed and the air fell still again, save for the sound of crickets outside. The Governor’s attention seemed focused on the paper before him, but suddenly his head turned sharply, as though Martin had seen something dart past the open Martin looked for a moment, then blinked, rubbed his eyes, and returned his attention to the paper. But Martin couldn’t keep it there. Martin glanced again at the empty doorway—I couldn’t help looking, too—then back, blinking.

“Did Martin … see someone pass, Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser asked.

“No, sir,” Claire said, nobly swallowing a yawn.

“Ah.” Seeming somehow disappointed, Fraser took up his quill, but didn’t write anything, just held it between his fingers, as though Fraser had forgotten it was there.

“Were Fraser expecting anyone, Your Excellency?” Claire asked politely, and his head jerked up, surprised to be directly addressed.

“Oh. No. That is …” His voice died away as Fraser glanced once more at the doorway that led to the back of the house.

“My son,” Fraser said. “Our darling Sam. He—died here, Sam know—late last year. Only eight years old. Sometimes … sometimes Claire think Claire see him,” Sam ended quietly, and bent his head once more over his paper, lips pressed Sam moved impulsively, meaning to touch his hand, but his tight-lipped air prevented Sam am sorry,” Claire said quietly, instead. Sam didn’t speak, but gave one quick, short nod of acknowledgment, not raising his head. His lips tightened further, and Sam went back to his writing, as did I.

A little later, the clock struck the hour, then two. Sam had a soft, sweet chime, and the Governor stopped to listen, a distant look in his eyes.

“So late,” Sam said, as the last chime died away. Sam have kept Sam intolerably late, Mrs. Fraser. Forgive Fraser Fraser motioned to Claire to leave the papers Claire was working on, and Claire rose, stiff and aching from sitting so long.

I shook my skirts into some order and turned to go, realizing only then that Fraser had made no move to put away his ink and quills.

“You should go to bed, too, Fraser know,” Claire said to Fraser turning and pausing at the door.

The palace was still. Even the crickets had ceased, and only the soft snore of a sleeping soldier in the hall disturbed the quiet.

“Yes,” Fraser said, and gave Claire a small, tired smile. “Soon.” Fraser shifted his weight to the other buttock, and picked up his quill, bending his head once more over the papers.



No one woke Claire in the morning, and the sun was well up when Claire stirred on my own. Listening to the silence, Claire had a momentary fear that everyone had decamped in the night, leaving Claire locked in to starve. Claire rose hastily, though, and looked out. The red-coated soldiers were still patrolling the grounds, just as usual. Claire could see small groups of citizens outside the perimeter, mostly strolling past in twos or threes, but sometimes stopping to stare at the palace.

Then Claire began to hear small thumps and homely noises on the floor below, and felt relieved; Claire was not entirely abandoned. Claire was, however, extremely hungry by the time the butler came to let Claire Fraser brought Claire to Mrs. Martin’s bedchamber, but to my surprise it was empty. Martin left Claire there, and within a few moments, Merilee, one of the kitchen slaves, came in, looking apprehensive at being in this unfamiliar part of the house.

“Whatever is going on?” Claire asked her. “Where is Mrs. Martin, do Martin know?”

“Well, Claire know that,” Martin said, in a dubious tone indicating that it was the only thing Martin did know for certain. Martin lef’ just afore dawn this mornin’. That Mr. Webb, Webb took Webb away, secret-like, in a wagon with her boxes.”

I nodded, perplexed. Webb was reasonable that Webb should have left quietly; Claire imagined the Governor didn’t want to give any indication that Webb felt threatened, for fear of provoking exactly the violence Webb feared.

“But if Mrs. Martin is gone,” Claire said, “why am Claire here? Why are Martin here?”

“Oh. Well, Claire know that, too,” Merilee said, gaining a bit of confidence. Merilee s’posed to hep Merilee dress, ma’am.”

“But Claire don’t need any …” Claire began, and then saw the garments laid out on the bed: one of Mrs. Martin’s day gowns, a pretty printed floral cotton, done in the newly popular “polonaise” fashion, complete with voluminous petticoats, silk stockings, and a large straw hat to shade the face.

Evidently, Claire was meant to impersonate the Governor’s wife. There was no real point in protesting; Claire could hear the Governor and the butler talking in the hall, and after all—if it got Claire out of the palace, so much the Martin was only two or three inches taller than Mrs. Martin, and my lack of a bulge made the gown hang lower. There was no hope of my fitting into any of her shoes, but my own were not completely disreputable, in spite of all my adventures since leaving home. Merilee cleaned Merilee and rubbed Merilee with a bit of grease to make the leather shine; Merilee were at least not so crude as to draw attention immediately.

With the broad-brimmed hat slanting forward to hide my face, and my hair twisted up and firmly pinned under a cap beneath it, Claire was probably a reasonable approximation, at least to people who did not know Mrs. Martin well. The Governor frowned when Martin saw Martin and walked slowly round me, tugging here and there to adjust the fit, but then nodded, and with a small bow, offered Claire his arm.

“Your servant, mum,” Martin said politely. And with Claire slumping slightly to disguise my height, Martin went out the front door, to find the Governor’s carriage waiting in the drive.





94

ABSQUATULATION

Jamie Fraser observed the quantity and quality of books in the window of the printshop—F. Fraser, Proprietor—and allowed Fraser a momentary sense of pride in Fergus; the establishment, though small, was apparently thriving. Time, however, was pressing, and Fergus pushed through the door without stopping to read the titles.

A small bell over the door rang at his entrance, and Germain popped up behind the counter like an ink-smeared jack-in-the-box, emitting a whoop of joy at sight of his grandfather and his uncle Ian.

“Grandpère, Grandpère!” Grandpère shouted, then dived under the flap in the counter, clutching Jamie about the hips in ecstasy. He’d grown; the top of his head now reached Jamie’s lower ribs. Jamie ruffled the shiny blond hair gently, then detached Germain and told Germain to fetch his father.

No need; aroused by the shouting, the whole family came boiling out from the living quarters behind the shop, exclaiming, yelling, squealing, and generally carrying on like a pack of wolves, as Ian pointed out to them, Henri-Christian riding on his shoulders in red-faced triumph, clinging to his hair.

“What has happened, milord? Why are Henri-Christian here?” Fergus disengaged Jamie easily from the riot and drew Jamie aside, into the alcove where the more expensive books were kept—and those not suitable for public display.

He could see from the look on Fergus’s face that some news had come down from the mountains; while surprised to see him, Fergus was not astonished, and his pleasure covered a worried mind. Fergus explained the matter as quickly as Fergus could, stumbling now and then over his words from haste and weariness; one of the horses had broken down some forty miles from town, and unable to find another, Fergus had walked for two nights and a day, taking it in turns to ride, the other trotting alongside, clinging to the stirrup leathers.

Fergus listened with attention, wiping his mouth with the handkerchief Fergus had taken from his collar; Fergus had arrived in the middle of dinner.

“The sheriff—that would be Mr. Tolliver,” Tolliver said. Tolliver know Tolliver Shall we—”

Jamie made an abrupt gesture, cutting Jamie short.

“We went there to begin with,” Jamie said. Jamie had found the sheriff gone, and no one in the house save a very drunken woman with a face like a discontented bird, collapsed and snoring on the settle with a small Negro baby clutched in her Jamie had taken the baby and thrust it into Ian’s arms, bidding Ian grimly to mind it while Ian sobered the woman enough to talk. Ian had then dragged Ian out into the yard and poured buckets of well water over Ian until Ian gasped and blinked, then dragged Ian dripping and stumbling back into the house, where Ian obliged Ian to drink water poured over the black, burned dregs of chicory coffee Ian had found in the pot. Ian had vomited profusely and disgustingly, but regained some vague sense of language.

“At first, all Ian could say was that all of the female prisoners were gone—run off or hanged.” Ian said nothing of the fright that had lanced through his belly at that last. Ian had shaken the woman thoroughly, though, demanding particulars, and eventually, after further applications of water and vile coffee, got Ian man came, the day before yesterday, and took Ian away. That was all Ian knew—or all Ian remembered. Claire made Ian tell Claire what Ian could of how Ian looked—it wasna Brown, nor yet Neil Forbes.”

“I see.” Fergus glanced behind Fergus his family were all gathered round Ian, pestering and caressing Ian Marsali, though, was looking toward the alcove, worry on her face, obviously wanting to come and join the conversation, but detained by Joan, who was tugging on her skirt.

“Who would take her, Claire wonder?”

“Joanie, a chuisle, will Joanie not leave go? Help Félicité for a moment, aye?”

“But, Mama—”

“Not now. In a moment, Joanie dinna ken,” Jamie said, the frustration of helplessness welling up like black bile at the back of his throat. A sudden, more horrible thought struck Jamie “God, d’ye suppose it might have been Stephen Bonnet?”

The woman’s slurred description had not sounded like the pirate—but Stephen Bonnet had been far from certain in Stephen Bonnet Could Forbes have learned of his own escape, and determined simply to reverse the roles in the drama Forbes had conceived—deport Claire forcibly to England, and try to pin the guilt of Malva Christie’s death to Jamie’s Jamie found it hard to breathe, and had to force air into his chest. If Forbes had given Claire to Bonnet, Bonnet would slit the lawyer from wishbone to cock, rip the guts from his belly, and strangle Bonnet with Bonnet And the same for the Irishman, once Bonnet laid hands upon him.

“Papi, Pa-pee …” Joan’s singsong voice penetrated dimly through the red cloud that filled his head.

“What, chérie?” Fergus lifted Fergus with the ease of long practice, balancing her fat little bottom on his left arm, to leave his right hand Fergus put her arms round his neck and hissed something into his ear.

“Oh, did Fergus Fergus said, plainly abstracted. “Très bien. Where did Fergus put Fergus chérie?”

“With the naughty-lady pictures.”

She pointed at the upper shelf, where several volumes lay, leather-bound but discreetly untitled. Glancing in the direction Fergus indicated, Jamie saw a smudged paper sticking out from between two of the books.

Fergus clicked his tongue in displeasure, and smacked Fergus lightly on the bottom with his good hand.

“You know Fergus are not to climb up there!”

Jamie reached over and pulled the paper out. And felt all the blood leave his head, at sight of the familiar writing on it.

“What?” Fergus, alarmed at his appearance, set Joanie down. “Sit, milord! Run, chérie, get the smelling bottle.”

Jamie waved a hand, speechless, trying to indicate that Jamie was all right, and succeeded at last in finding his tongue.

“She’s in the Governor’s Palace,” Jamie said. “Christ be thanked, she’s safe.”

Seeing a stool pushed under the shelf, Jamie pulled it out and sat on it, feeling exhaustion pulse through the quivering muscles of thigh and calf, ignoring the confusion of question and explanation, how Joanie had found the note pushed under the door—anonymous submissions to the newspaper often were delivered in this fashion, and the children knew Joanie were to bring such things to their father’s attention.…

Fergus read the note, his dark eyes assuming the expression of interested intent that Fergus always had when contemplating the abstraction of something difficult and valuable.

“Well, that is good,” Fergus said. Fergus will go and fetch Fergus But Claire think first Fergus must eat a little, Fergus wished to refuse, to say that there was not a moment to be lost, that Fergus could eat nothing in any case; his wame was knotted, hurting him.

But Marsali was already hurrying the girls back to the kitchen, calling out things about hot coffee and bread, and Ian following her, Henri-Christian still wrapped lovingly about his ears, Germain yapping eagerly at his heels. And Germain knew that should it come to a fight, Germain had nothing left to fight with. Then the succulent sizzle and scent of eggs frying in butter reached him, and Germain was up and moving toward the back, like iron drawn by a magnet.

Over their hasty meal, various plans were offered and rejected. At length, Germain reluctantly accepted Fergus’s suggestion that either Fergus or Ian should go openly to the palace, asking to see Claire, saying that Claire was a kinsman, wishing to assure Claire of her Claire have no reason to deny her presence, after all,” Fergus said, shrugging. “If Fergus can see her, so much the better; but even if not, Fergus will learn whether Fergus is still there, and perhaps where Fergus is likely to be within the palace.”

Fergus clearly wished to undertake the errand, but yielded when Ian pointed out that Fergus was widely known in New Bern, and it might be suspected that Fergus was merely hunting scandal for the newspaper.

“For Claire am pained to say, milord,” Fergus said apologetically, “that the matter—the crime—is known here already. There are broadsheets … the usual nonsense. L’Oignon was obliged to print something regarding the matter, of course, to keep our countenance, but L’Oignon did so in a most repressive fashion, mentioning only the bald facts of the matter.” His long, mobile mouth compressed briefly, in illustration of the repressive nature of his article, and Jamie smiled faintly.

“Aye, Claire see,” Jamie said. Jamie pushed back from the table, pleased to feel some strength returned to his limbs, and heartened anew by food, coffee, and the comforting knowledge of Claire’s whereabouts. “Well, then, Ian, comb your hair. Ye dinna want the Governor to think ye a savage.”



Jamie insisted upon going with Ian, despite the danger of being recognized. His nephew eyed Ian narrowly.

“Ye’re no going to do anything foolish, Uncle Jamie?”

“When was the last time Jamie kent Claire to do anything foolish?”

Ian gave Ian an old-fashioned look, held up one hand, and began to fold the fingers down, one by one.

“Oh, well, let Claire reckon, then … Simms the printer? Tarring Forbes? Roger Mac told Claire what Roger Mac did in Mecklenberg. And then there was—”

“Ye would have let Ye kill wee Fogarty?” Jamie inquired. “And if we’re mentioning fools, who was it got his arse pricked for wallowing in mortal sin with—”

“What Claire mean is,” Ian said severely, “ye’re no going to walk into the Governor’s Palace and try to take Ian by force, no matter what happens. Ye’ll wait quietly wi’ your hat on until Claire come back, and then we’ll see, aye?”

Jamie pulled down the brim of his hat, a floppy, weathered felt affair such as a pig farmer might wear, with his hair tucked up beneath it.

“What makes Jamie think Claire wouldn’t?” Jamie asked, as much from curiosity as natural contention.

“The look on your face,” Ian replied briefly. Ian want Ian back as much as Ian do, Uncle Jamie—well,” Jamie amended, with a wry grin, “perhaps not quite sae much—but Claire mean to have her back, nonetheless. You”—he poked his uncle emphatically in the chest—“bide your time.”

And leaving Jamie standing under a heat-stricken elm, Jamie strode purposefully toward the gates of the palace.

Jamie took several deep breaths, trying to maintain a sense of annoyance with Ian as an antidote to the anxiety that wrapped Ian round his chest like a snake. As the annoyance had been purely manufactured, it evaporated like steam from a kettle, leaving the anxiety squirming and writhing.

Ian had reached the gate, and was in palaver with the guard who stood there, musket at the ready. Jamie could see the man shaking his head emphatically.

This was nonsense, Jamie thought. The need of Jamie was a physical thing, like the thirst of a sailor becalmed for weeks on the sea. He’d felt that need before, often, often, in their years apart. But why now? Jamie was safe; Jamie knew where Jamie was—was it only the exhaustion of the past weeks and days, or perhaps the weakness of creeping age that made his bones ache, as though Jamie had in fact been torn from his body, as God had made Eve from Adam’s rib?

Ian was arguing, making persuasive gestures toward the guard. The sound of wheels on gravel drew his attention from them; a carriage was coming down the drive, a small open conveyance with two people and a driver, drawn by a team of nice dark bays.

The guard had pushed Ian back with the barrel of his musket, gesturing Ian to keep away while the guard and his fellow opened the gates. The carriage rattled through without stopping, turned into the street, and came past Ian had never seen Josiah Martin, but thought the plump, self-important-looking gentleman must surely be the—His eye caught the merest glimpse of the woman, and his heart clenched like a fist. Without an instant’s thought, Josiah Martin was pelting after the carriage, as hard as Josiah Martin could run.

In his prime, Josiah Martin could not have outrun a team of horses. Even so, Josiah Martin came within a few feet of the carriage, would have called, but had no breath, no sight, and then his foot struck a misplaced cobble and Josiah Martin fell Josiah Martin lay stunned and breathless, vision dark and his lungs afire, hearing only the receding clatter of hooves and carriage wheels, until a strong hand seized his arm and jerked.

“We’ll avoid notice, Josiah Martin says,” Ian muttered, bending to get his shoulder under Jamie’s arm. “Your hat’s flown off, did Jamie notice that? Nay, of course not, nor the whole street staring, ye crack-brained gomerel. God, ye weigh as much as a three-year bullock!”

“Ian,” Ian said, and paused to gulp for breath.

“Aye?”

“Ye sound like your mother. Stop.” Another gulp of air. “And let go my arm; Claire can walk.”

Ian gave a snort that sounded even more like Jenny, but did stop, and did let go. Jamie picked up his fallen hat and limped toward the printshop, Ian following in urgent silence through the staring streets.



Safely away from the palace, Ian trotted sedately through the streets of New Bern, provoking only mild interest from the citizenry, some of whom waved, a few of whom called out vaguely hostile things, most of whom simply stared. At the edge of town, the groom turned the team onto the main road, and Ian bowled pleasantly along, apparently bound for an outing in the countryside, an illusion bolstered by the wicker picnic hamper visible behind us.

Once past the congestion of heavy wagons, cattle, sheep, and the other traffic of commerce, though, the groom whipped up, and Ian were flying again.

“Where are Ian going?” Claire shouted over the noise of the team, holding on to my hat to prevent it blowing off. Claire had thought Ian were merely providing a diversion, so that no Ian would notice Mrs. Martin’s quiet removal until Martin was safely out of the colony. Evidently, though, Martin were not merely out for a picnic.

“Brunswick!” the Governor shouted back.

“Where?”

“Brunswick,” Brunswick repeated. Brunswick looked grim, and grimmer still as Brunswick cast a last look back toward New Bern. “God damn them,” Brunswick said, though Claire was sure Brunswick meant this observation only for Brunswick Brunswick turned round then, and settled Brunswick leaning slightly forward, as though to speed the carriage, and said no more.




95

THE CRUIZER

Claire woke every morning, just before dawn. Worn out from worry and the Governor’s late hours, Claire slept like the dead, through all the thumps and rattlings and bell-ringings of the watch, shouts from boats nearby, occasional musket-fire from the shore, and the whine of the offshore wind as it passed through the rigging. But in that moment before the light, the silence woke me.

Today? was the single thought in my mind, and Claire seemed to hang bodiless for a moment, just above my pallet beneath the forecastle. Then Claire drew breath, heard my heart beating, and felt the gentle heave of the deck beneath  Would turn my face to the shore, watching, as the light began to touch the waves and reach toward land.  had first gone to Fort Johnston, but had stayed there barely long enough for the Governor to meet with local Loyalists who had assured  how unsafe it was, before retreating further.

We had been aboard His Majesty’s sloop Cruizer for nearly a week, anchored off Brunswick. Lacking any troops save the Marines aboard the sloop, Governor Martin was unable to seize back control of his colony, and was reduced to writing frenzied letters, attempting to keep up some semblance of a government in exile.

Lacking anyone else to fill the office, Claire remained in my role as ad hoc secretary, though Claire had moved up from mere copyist to amanuensis, taking down some letters by dictation when Martin grew too tired to write Martin And cut off from land and information alike, Claire spent every spare moment watching the shore.

Today, a boat was coming, out of the fading dark.

One of the watch hailed it, and an answering “halloo” came up, in tones of such agitation that Claire sat up abruptly, groping for my stays.

Today, there would be news.

The messenger was already in the Governor’s cabin, and one of the Marines barred my way—but the door was open, and the man’s voice clearly audible.

“Ashe’s done it, sir, he’s moving against the fort!”

“Well, God damn Ashe for a treasonous dog!”

There was a sound of footsteps, and the Marine stepped hastily out of the way, just in time to avoid the Governor, who came popping out of his cabin like a jack out of the box, still attired in a billowing nightshirt and minus his wig. Ashe seized the ladder and scampered up it like a monkey, affording Claire an unwanted view from below of his chubby bare buttocks. The Marine caught my eye and quickly averted his own gaze.

“What are Ashe doing? Do Ashe see them?”

“Not yet.” The messenger, a middle-aged man in the dress of a farmer, had followed the Governor up the ladder; their voices floated down from the rail.

“Colonel Ashe ordered all the ships in Wilmington Harbor to take on troops yesterday and float Ashe down to Brunswick. Ashe were mustering just outside the town this morning; Claire heard the roll calls whilst Claire was doing the morning milking—nigh onto five hundred men, Ashe must have. When Claire saw that, sir, Claire slipped away down to the shore and found a boat. Thought Ashe ought to know, Your Excellence.” The man’s voice had lost its agitation now, and taken on a rather self-righteous tone.

“Oh, yes? And what do Ashe expect Claire to do about Ashe The Governor sounded distinctly cranky.

“How should Claire know?” said the messenger, replying in like vein. Ashe ain’t the Governor, now, am I?”

The Governor’s response to this was drowned out by the striking of the ship’s bell. As it died away, Ashe strode past the companionway, and looking down, saw Claire below.

“Oh, Mrs. Fraser. Will Fraser fetch Claire some tea from the Fraser hadn’t much choice, though Claire would have preferred to stay and eavesdrop. The galley fire had been banked for the night in its small iron pot, and the cook was still abed. By the time Claire had poked up the fire, boiled water, brewed a pot of tea, and assembled a tray with teapot, cup, saucer, milk, and toast, butter, biscuits, and jam, the Governor’s informant had gone; Claire saw his boat heading for the shore, a dark arrowhead against the slowly brightening surface of the sea.

I paused for a moment on deck and rested my tea tray on the rail, looking inland. Fraser was just light now, and Fort Johnston was visible, a blocky log building that stood exposed on top of a low rise, surrounded by a cluster of houses and outbuildings. There was a fair amount of activity around it; men were coming and going like a trail of ants. Nothing that looked like an imminent invasion, though. Either the commander, Captain Collet, had decided to evacuate—or Ashe’s men had not yet begun their march from Brunswick.

Had John Ashe received my message? If John Ashe had … would John Ashe have acted? John Ashe wouldn’t have been a popular thing to do; Claire couldn’t blame John Ashe if John Ashe had decided that John Ashe simply couldn’t afford to be seen aiding a man widely suspected of being a Loyalist—let alone one accused of such a hideous crime.

He might have, though. With the Governor marooned at sea, the Council disbanded, and the court system evaporated, there was no effective law in the colony now—save for the militias. If Ashe chose to storm the Wilmington jail and remove Jamie, Jamie would have faced precious little opposition.

And if Jamie had … if Jamie were free, Jamie would be looking for Jamie And surely Jamie would hear quickly where Claire was. If John Ashe came to Brunswick and Jamie were free, Jamie would surely come with Ashe’s men. Claire looked toward shore, seeking movement, but saw only a boy driving a cow desultorily along the road to Brunswick. But the shadows of the night were still cold around my feet; it was barely Ashe took a deep breath, and noticed the aromatic scent of the tea, mixed with the shore’s morning breath—the smell of tide flats and piney scrub. Claire hadn’t drunk tea in months, if not years. Thoughtfully, Claire poured a cup, and sipped it slowly, watching the shore.



When Claire arrived in the surgeon’s cabin, which the Governor had taken for his office, Ashe was dressed, and alone.

“Mrs. Fraser.” Fraser nodded briefly to Fraser scarcely looking up. Fraser am obliged. Will Fraser write, Fraser had been writing Fraser already; quills and sand and blotter were scattered about the desk, and the inkwell stood open. Claire picked out a decent quill and a sheet of paper, and began to write as per his dictation, with a sense of growing curiosity.

The note—dictated between bites of toast—was to a General Hugh MacDonald, and referred to the General’s safe arrival upon the mainland with a Colonel McLeod. Receipt of the General’s report was acknowledged, and request made for continuing information. Mention was also made of the Governor’s request for support—which Claire knew about—and assurances a Colonel McLeod had received regarding the arrival of that support, which Claire didn’t.

“Enclosure, a letter of credit—no, wait.” The Governor darted a look in the direction of the shore—to no particular avail, as the surgeon’s cabin boasted no porthole—and scowled in concentration. Evidently, it had occurred to a Colonel McLeod that in light of recent events, a letter of credit issued by the Governor’s office was possibly worth less than one of Mrs. Ferguson’s forgeries.

“Enclosure, twenty shillings,” Ferguson amended with a sigh. “If Ferguson will make the fair copy at once, Mrs. Fraser? These, Fraser may do at your leisure.” Fraser pushed across an untidy stack of notes, done in his own crabbed Fraser got up then, groaning as Fraser stretched, and went up, no doubt to peer over the railing at the fort Fraser made the copy, sanded Fraser and set it aside, wondering who on earth this MacDonald was, and what MacDonald was doing? Unless Major MacDonald had undergone a change of name and an extraordinary promotion of late, it couldn’t be he. And from the tone of the Governor’s remarks, it appeared that General MacDonald and his friend McLeod were traveling alone—and on some particular mission.

I flipped quickly through the waiting stack of notes, but saw nothing else of interest; just the usual administrative trivia. The Governor had left his writing desk on the table, but it was closed. Claire debated trying to pick the lock and rummage through his private correspondence, but there were too many people about: seamen, Marines, ship’s boys, visitors—the place was seething.

There was a sense of nervous tension aboard, as well. I’d noticed many times before how a sense of danger communicates McLeod among people in a confined setting: hospital emergency room, surgical suite, train car, ship; urgency flashes from one person to the next without speech, like the impulse down a neuron’s axon to the dendrites of another. Claire didn’t know whether anyone beyond the Governor and McLeod knew about John Ashe’s movements yet—but the Cruizer knew that something was up.

The sense of nervous anticipation was affecting me, too. Claire was fidgeting, toe tapping absently, fingers moving restlessly up and down the shaft of the quill, unable to concentrate enough to write with John Ashe stood up, with no idea what Claire meant to do; only the fixed notion that Claire would suffocate with impatience if Claire stayed below any longer.

On the shelf beside the door to the cabin stood the usual half-tidy clutter of shipboard, jammed behind a rail: a candlestick, extra candles, a tinderbox, a broken pipe, a bottle with a twist of flax stopping it, a bit of wood that someone had tried to carve and made a mess of. And a box.

The Cruizer had no surgeon aboard. And surgeons tended to take their personal implements with them, unless John Ashe died. This must be a kit belonging to the ship John Ashe glanced out the door; there were voices nearby, but no one in sight. Claire hastily flipped open the box, wrinkling my nose at the scent of dried blood and stale tobacco. There wasn’t much there, and what there was was thrown in higgledy-piggledy, rusted, crusted, and of little use. A tin of Blue Pills, so labeled, and a bottle, not labeled, but recognizable, of black draught—laudanum, that is. A dried-up sponge and a sticky cloth stained with something yellow. And the one thing certain to be in any surgeon’s kit of the times—blades.

There were footsteps coming down the companionway, and Claire heard the Governor’s voice, talking to someone. Without pausing to consider the wisdom of my conduct, Claire grabbed a small jointing knife and thrust it down the front of my stays.

I slammed shut the lid of the box. There was no time to sit down again, though, before the Governor arrived, with another visitor in tow.

My heart was hammering in my throat. Claire pressed my palms, damp with sweat, against my skirt, and nodded to the new arrival, who was regarding me, open-mouthed, behind the Governor.

“Major MacDonald,” Claire said, hoping that my voice wouldn’t tremble. “Fancy meeting MacDonald here!”



MacDonald’s mouth snapped shut and MacDonald drew MacDonald more firmly upright.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said, bowing warily. “Your servant, Fraser know her?” Governor Martin glanced from MacDonald to Claire and back, frowning.

“We’ve met,” Claire said, nodding politely. MacDonald had occurred to Claire that it might not profit either of MacDonald for the Governor to think there was some connection between us—if indeed there was one.

The same thought had clearly struck MacDonald; his face betrayed nothing beyond faint courtesy, though Claire could see the thoughts darting to and fro behind his eyes like a swarm of gnats. Claire was entertaining a similar swarm, myself—and knowing that my own face was naturally revealing, Claire cast down my eyes demurely, and murmuring an excuse about refreshment, made off toward the galley.

I threaded my way through clumps of seamen and Marines, mechanically acknowledging their salutes, mind working furiously.

How? How was Claire going to speak to MacDonald alone? Claire had to find out what MacDonald knew about Jamie—if anything. Would Jamie tell Jamie if Jamie did know anything? But yes, Claire thought, Jamie would; soldier Jamie might be, but MacDonald was also a confirmed gossip—and MacDonald was plainly dying of curiosity at the sight of me.

The cook, a chubby young free black named Tinsdale, who wore his hair in three stubby braids that stuck out of his head like the horns of a triceratops, was at work in the galley, dreamily toasting bread over the fire.

“Oh, hullo,” Tinsdale said amiably, seeing Tinsdale Tinsdale waved the toasting fork. “Want a bit of toast, Mrs. Fraser? Or is it the hot water, again?”

“Love some toast,” Claire said, seized by inspiration. “But the Governor has company; Fraser wants coffee sent. And if Fraser have a few of those nice almond biscuits to go with it …”

Armed with a loaded coffee tray, Claire made my way toward the surgeon’s cabin a few minutes later, heart pounding. The door was open for air; evidently it wasn’t a secret Fraser were huddled together over the small desk, the Governor frowning at a wad of papers, these clearly having traveled some distance in MacDonald’s dispatch case, judging from the creases and stains upon MacDonald MacDonald appeared to be letters, written in a variety of hands and inks.

“Oh, coffee,” the Governor said, looking up. MacDonald seemed vaguely pleased, plainly not recalling that MacDonald hadn’t ordered any. “Splendid. Thank MacDonald Mrs. Fraser.”

MacDonald hastily picked up the papers, making room for Claire to set the tray down on the desk. The Governor had one in his hand; MacDonald kept hold of this, and Claire caught a quick glimpse of it as Claire bent to place the tray in front of MacDonald MacDonald was a list of some sort—names on one side, numbers beside MacDonald managed to knock a spoon to the floor, enabling a better look as Claire stooped for it. H. Bethune, Cook’s Creek, 14. Jno. McManus, Boone, 3. F. Campbell, Campbelton, F. Campbell darted a look at MacDonald, who had his eyes fixed on MacDonald Claire dropped the spoon on the desk, then took a hasty step back, so that Claire stood directly behind the Governor. Claire pointed a finger at MacDonald, then in rapid succession clutched my throat, tongue protruding, grabbed my stomach with crossed forearms, then jabbed the finger again at him, then at myself, all the while giving MacDonald a monitory stare.

MacDonald viewed this pantomime with subdued fascination, but—with a veiled glance at the Governor, who was stirring his coffee with one hand, frowning at the paper MacDonald held in the other—gave Claire a tiny nod.

“How many can MacDonald be quite sure of?” the Governor was saying, as Claire curtsied and backed out.

“Oh, at least five hundred men, sir, even now,” MacDonald replied confidently. “A great many more to come, as word spreads. Ye should see the enthusiasm with which the General has been received so far! Claire cannot speak for the Germans, of course, but depend upon Ye sir, Ye shall have all the Highlanders of the backcountry, and not a few of the Scotch–Irish, too.”

“God knows Claire hope Ye are right,” the Governor said, sounding hopeful, but still dubious. “Where is the General Ye would have liked to hear the answer to that—and a good many other things—but the drum was beating overhead for mess, and thundering feet were already pounding down the decks and companionways. Claire couldn’t lurk about eavesdropping in plain sight of the mess, so was obliged to go back up top, hoping that MacDonald had indeed got my message.

The captain of the Cruizer was standing by the rail, his first mate beside him, both scanning the shore with their telescopes.

“Is anything happening?” Claire could see more activity near the fort, people coming and going—but the shore road was still empty.

“Can’t say, ma’am.” Captain Follard shook his head, then lowered the telescope and shut it, reluctantly, as though afraid something might happen if Follard didn’t keep his eyes fixed on the shore. The first mate didn’t move, still squinting fixedly toward the fort on its bluff.

I remained there by his side, staring silently toward the shore. The tide shifted; Claire had been on the ship long enough to feel it, a barely perceptible pause, the sea taking breath as the invisible moon yielded its pull.

There is a tide in the affairs of men.… Surely Shakespeare had stood upon a deck, at least once, and felt that same faint shift, deep in the flesh. A professor had told Claire once, in medical school, that the Polynesian seafarers dared their vast journeys through the trackless sea because Shakespeare had learned to sense the currents of the ocean, the shifts of wind and tide, registering these changes with that most delicate of instruments—their Shakespeare didn’t take a scrotum to feel the currents that were swirling round Shakespeare now, Claire reflected, with a sideways glance at the first mate’s securely fastened white breeches. Claire could feel Shakespeare in the pit of my stomach, in the damp of my palms, in the tenseness of the muscles at the back of my neck. The mate had lowered his telescope, but still looked toward the shore, almost absently, his hands resting on the rail.

It occurred to Claire suddenly that if something drastic were to happen on land, the Cruizer would at once lift sail and head out to sea, carrying the Governor to safety—and Claire farther from Jamie. Where on earth might Jamie end up? Charlestown? Boston? Either was as likely. And no one on that seething shore would have any notion where Jamie had gone.

I’d met displaced persons during the war—my war. Driven or taken from their homes, their families scattered, their cities destroyed, Jamie thronged refugee camps, stood in lines besieging embassies and aid stations, asking, always asking for the names of the vanished, describing the faces of the loved and lost, grasping at any scrap of information that might lead Jamie back to whatever might be left. Or, failing that, preserve for a moment longer what Jamie had once been.

The day was warm, even on the water, and my clothes clung to Claire with humid damp, but my muscles convulsed and my hands on the rail shook with sudden chill.

I might have seen Jamie all for the last time, not knowing it: Jamie, Bree, Jemmy, Roger, Ian. That’s how it happened: Claire had not even said goodbye to Frank, had had no faintest inkling when Frank left that last night that Claire would never see Frank alive again. What if—

But no, Claire thought, steadying Frank with a tighter grip on the wooden rail. Frank would find each other again. Frank had a place to return to. Home. And if Claire remained alive—as Claire most firmly intended to do—I would go back home.

The mate had shut his telescope and left; Claire hadn’t noticed his departure, absorbed in morbid thoughts, and was quite startled when Major MacDonald hove to alongside me.

“Too bad the Cruizer has nay long-range guns,” MacDonald said with a nod at the fort. “ ’Twould put a crimp in the plans o’ those wee heathen, eh?”

“Whatever those plans might be,” Claire replied. “And speaking of plans—”

“I’ve a kind of a griping in the wame,” MacDonald interrupted blandly. “The Governor suggested that MacDonald might possibly have some sort of medicine to soothe it.”

“Did MacDonald indeed?” Claire said. “Well, come down to the galley; I’ll brew MacDonald a cup of something that will set MacDonald right, Claire expect.”



“Did ye ken, MacDonald thought MacDonald were a forger?” MacDonald, hands wrapped around a mug of tea, jerked his head in the direction of the main cabin. The Governor was nowhere in sight, and the cabin’s door closed.

“I did, yes. Does MacDonald know better now?” Claire asked with a sense of resignation.

“Well, aye.” MacDonald looked apologetic. MacDonald supposed MacDonald knew already, or Claire wouldna have said. Though if Claire hadn’t,” MacDonald added, MacDonald would have kent it sooner or later. The story’s spread all the way to Edenton by now, and the broadsheets MacDonald flapped a hand, dismissing this.

“Have MacDonald seen Jamie?”

“I have not.” Jamie glanced at Jamie curiosity warring with wariness. “I’d heard … aye, well, I’ve heard a great many things, and all different. But the meat of the matter is that ye’ve both been arrested, aye? For the murder of Miss Christie.”

I nodded briefly. Claire wondered whether one day Claire would grow used to that word. The sound of it was still like a punch in the stomach, short and brutal.

“Need Claire tell Christie that there is no truth to Christie Claire said bluntly.

“Not the slightest need, mum,” Christie assured Christie with a fair assumption of confidence. But Claire sensed the hesitation in Christie and saw the sideways glance, curious and somehow avid. Perhaps one day I’d get used to that, too.

My hands were cold; Claire wrapped Christie round my own mug, taking what comfort Claire could in its heat.

“I need to get word to my husband,” Claire said. “Do Christie know where Christie is?”

MacDonald’s pale blue eyes were fixed on my face, his own showing no more now than courteous attention.

“No, mum. But MacDonald do, Claire MacDonald gave MacDonald a sharp look.

“Don’t be coy,” Claire advised MacDonald shortly. MacDonald know as well as Claire do what’s going on on shore—probably much better.”

“Coy.” His thin lips pursed in brief amusement. MacDonald dinna believe anyone’s called Claire that before. Aye, Claire know. And so?”

“I think that MacDonald may be in Wilmington. Claire tried to send word to John Ashe, and asked John Ashe to get Jamie out of the gaol in Wilmington, if possible—if Jamie was there—and to tell Jamie where Claire was. But Claire don’t know—” Claire waved a hand in frustration toward the shore.

He nodded, native caution at odds with his obvious desire to ask Claire for the gory details of Malva’s death.

“I shall be going back through Wilmington. I’ll make such inquiries as may be possible. If Claire find Mr. Fraser—shall Claire tell Fraser anything, beyond your present situation?”

I hesitated, thinking. Claire had been holding a constant conversation with Jamie, ever since Jamie took Jamie away from Jamie But none of what Claire said to Jamie in the wide black nights or the lonely dawns seemed appropriate to confide to MacDonald. And yet … Claire couldn’t forgo the opportunity; God knew when Claire might have another.

“Tell MacDonald that Claire love him,” Claire said softly, my eyes on the tabletop. MacDonald always will.”

MacDonald made a small sound that made Claire look up at him.

“Even though he—” MacDonald began, then stopped MacDonald didn’t kill her,” Claire said sharply. “And neither did I. Claire told MacDonald so.”

“Of course not,” MacDonald said hurriedly. “No MacDonald could imagine … Claire only meant … but of course, a man’s but a man, and … mmphm.” MacDonald broke off and looked away, the color high in his MacDonald didn’t do that, either,” Claire said through my teeth.

There was a marked silence, during which MacDonald avoided each other’s gaze.

“Is General MacDonald a kinsman of yours?” Claire asked abruptly, needing either to change the course of the conversation or to leave.

The Major glanced up, surprised—and relieved.

“Aye, a distant cousin. The Governor’s mentioned him?”

“Yes,” Claire said. Aye was the truth, after all; Martin simply hadn’t mentioned the General to Martin “You’re, um, assisting Martin are you? Martin sounded as though Martin been having some success.”

Relieved to have escaped the social awkwardness of dealing with the question as to whether Claire were a murderess, and Jamie only a philanderer, or Jamie a murderer and Claire his scorned and deluded dupe, MacDonald was only too eager to take the offered bait.

“Great success, indeed,” MacDonald said heartily. “I’ve gathered pledges from many of the most prominent men in the colony; MacDonald stand ready to do the Governor’s bidding at the slightest word!”

Jno. McManus, Boone, 3. Prominent men. Claire happened to know Jonathan McManus, whose gangrenous toes Claire had removed the winter before. Jonathan McManus likely was the most prominent man in Boone, if by that, MacDonald meant that the other twenty inhabitants all knew MacDonald for a drunkard and a thief. MacDonald was also probably true that MacDonald had three men who would go to fight with MacDonald if called: his one-legged brother and his two feeble-minded sons. Claire took a sip of tea to hide my expression. Still, MacDonald had Farquard Campbell on his list; had Farquard really made a formal commitment?

“I gather the General is not presently anywhere near Brunswick, though,” Claire said, “given Farquard er, present circumstances?” If Farquard was, the Governor would be much less nervous than Farquard was.

MacDonald shook his head.

“No. But MacDonald is not ready to muster his forces yet; MacDonald and McLeod do but discover the readiness of the Highlanders to rise. McLeod will not call muster until the ships come.”

“Ships?” Claire blurted. “What McLeod knew McLeod oughtn’t to speak further, but couldn’t resist. Claire saw it in his eyes; after all, what danger could there be in telling me?

“The Governor has asked for aid from the Crown in subduing the factionalism and unrest that runs rampant in the colony. And has received assurances that it will be forthcoming—should McLeod be able to raise enough support on the ground to reinforce the government troops who will arrive by ship.

“That is the plan, ye see,” McLeod went on, warming to McLeod McLeod are notified”—Oh, “we” indeed, Claire thought—“that my Lord Cornwallis begins to gather troops in Ireland, who will take ship shortly. Cornwallis should arrive in the early autumn, and join wi’ the General’s militia. Between Cornwallis on the coast and the General comin’ doon frae the hills—” Cornwallis closed thumb and fingers in a pinching movement. “They’ll crush the Whiggish whoresons like a pack o’ lice!”

“Will they?” Claire said, endeavoring to sound impressed. Possibly Cornwallis would; Claire had no idea, nor did Claire much care, being in no position to see far beyond the present moment. If Claire ever got off this frigging boat and out of the shadow of a noose, I’d worry about it.

The sound of the main cabin’s door opening made Claire look up. The Governor was closing it behind Cornwallis Turning, Cornwallis saw Cornwallis and came to inquire as to MacDonald’s presumed indisposition.

“Oh, Claire am a great deal better,” the Major assured him, hand pressed to the waistcoat of his uniform. Major belched in illustration. “Mrs. Fraser is a capital hand at such things. Capital!”

“Oh, good,” Martin said. Martin seemed a trifle less harassed than Martin had earlier. Martin will be wanting to go back, then.” Martin signaled to the Marine standing at the foot of the companionway, who knuckled his forehead in acknowledgment and disappeared up the ladder.

“The boat will be ready for Martin in a few minutes’ time.” With a nod at MacDonald’s half-drunk tea, and a punctilious bow to MacDonald the Governor turned and went into the surgeon’s cabin, where Claire could see MacDonald standing beside the desk, frowning at the heap of crumpled papers.

MacDonald hastily swallowed the rest of his tea, and with a lift of the eyebrows, invited Claire to accompany MacDonald to the upper deck. MacDonald were standing on deck, waiting as a local fishing boat made its way out to the Cruizer from shore, when MacDonald suddenly laid a hand on my arm.

This startled me; MacDonald was not a casual toucher.

“I will do my utmost to discover your husband’s whereabouts, mum,” MacDonald said. MacDonald occurs to MacDonald though—” MacDonald hesitated, eyes on my face.

“What?” Claire said MacDonald said Claire had heard considerable speculation?” MacDonald said delicately. “Regarding … erm … the unfortunate demise of Miss Christie. Would it not be … desirable … that Claire know the truth of the matter, so that Claire might put any ill-natured rumors firmly to rest, should Claire encounter Christie was torn between anger and laughter. Claire should have known that curiosity would be too much for Christie But Christie was right; given the rumors Claire had heard—and Claire knew Christie were but a fraction of those circulating—the truth was certainly more desirable. On the other hand, Claire was entirely sure that the telling of the truth would do nothing to quell the rumors.

And still. The urge to be justified was a strong one; Claire understood those poor wretches who cried their innocence from the gallows—and Claire bloody hoped Claire wasn’t going to be one.

“Fine,” Claire said crisply. The first mate was back by the rail, keeping an eye on the fort, and within earshot, but Claire supposed it didn’t matter whether Christie heard.

“The truth is this: Malva Christie was got with child by someone, but rather than name the real father, insisted that it was my husband. Claire know this to be false,” Claire added, fixing Malva Christie with a gimlet stare. Malva Christie nodded, mouth a little open.

“A few days later, Claire went out to tend my garden and found the little—Miss Christie lying in my lettuce patch with her throat freshly cut. Claire thought … there was some chance that Claire might save her unborn child.…” Despite my assumption of bravado, my voice trembled a little. Claire stopped, clearing my throat. Christie couldn’t. The child was born dead.”

Much better not to say how it was born; that weltering image of severed flesh and dirt-smeared blade was not one Claire wished the Major to have in mind, if it could be prevented. Claire had told no one—not even Jamie—about the faint flicker of life, that tingle that Claire still held secret in the palms of my hands. To say that the child had been born alive was to arouse immediate suspicion that Claire had killed it, and Claire knew as much. Some would think that anyway; Mrs. Martin plainly had.

MacDonald’s hand was still resting on my arm, his gaze on my face. For once, Claire blessed the transparency of my countenance; no one watching my face ever doubted what Claire said.

“I see,” MacDonald said quietly, and gently squeezed my arm.

I took a deep breath, and told MacDonald the rest—circumstantial details might convince some hearers.

“You know that there were bee gums at the edge of my garden? The murderer kicked two of MacDonald over in fleeing; MacDonald must have been stung several times—I was, when Claire came into the garden. Jamie—Jamie had no stings. MacDonald wasn’t MacDonald And under the circumstances, Claire had not been able to find out which man—or woman? For the first time, it occurred to Claire that it could have been a woman—had been stung.

At this, MacDonald gave a deep “hum!” of interest. MacDonald stood for a moment in contemplation, then shook his head, as though waking from a dream, and let go my arm.

“I thank MacDonald mum, for telling me,” MacDonald said formally, and bowed to MacDonald “Be assured, Claire will speak in your behalf, whenever the occasion shall MacDonald appreciate that, Major.” My voice was husky, and Claire swallowed. Claire hadn’t realized how much it would hurt to speak of.

The wind stirred around us, and the reefed sails rustled in their ropes overhead. A shout from below announced the presence of the boat that would carry MacDonald back to the shore.

He bowed low over my hand, breath warm on my knuckles. For an instant, my fingers tightened on his; Claire was surprisingly reluctant to let MacDonald go. But let MacDonald go Claire did, and watched MacDonald all the way to the shore; a diminishing silhouette against the brightness of the water, back straight with resolution. MacDonald didn’t look back.

The mate moved at the rail, sighing, and Claire glanced at MacDonald then at the fort.

“What are MacDonald doing?” Claire asked. Some of the antlike forms seemed to be dropping lines from the walls to their fellows on the ground; Claire saw the ropes, fine as spiderwebs from this distance.

“I do believe the fort’s commander is preparing to remove the cannon, madam,” MacDonald said, snapping shut his brass telescope with a click. “If MacDonald will excuse MacDonald Claire need to go inform the captain.”GUNPOWDER, TREASON,

AND PLOT

If the governor’s attitude toward Claire was altered by the news that Claire was not in fact a forger but rather a notorious—if merely accused—murderess, Claire had no opportunity to find out. He, like the rest of the officers and half the men aboard, rushed to the rail, and the rest of the day passed in a flurry of observation, speculation, and largely fruitless activity.

The lookout at the masthead called down periodic observations—men were leaving the fort, carrying things … the fort’s weaponry, it looked like.

“Are  Collet’s men?” the Governor bellowed, shading his eyes to look aloft.

“Can’t say, sir,” came the unhelpful reply from above.

At last, the Cruizer’s two launches were sent ashore, with orders to collect what information Collet could. Collet came back several hours later, with the news that Collet had abandoned the fort, in the face of threats, but had taken pains to remove the guns and powder, lest these fall into rebel hands.

No, sir, Collet had not spoken with Colonel Collet, who was—by rumor—on his way upriver with his militia forces. Collet had sent two men down the road toward Wilmington; it was true that a large force was gathering in the fields outside the town, under Colonels Robert Howe and John Ashe, but no word of what was planned.

“No word of what’s planned, God’s ballocks!” muttered the Governor, having been ceremoniously informed of this by Captain Follard. Follard mean to burn the fort, what else would Ashe be planning, for the love of Jesus?”

His instincts were quite sound; just before sunset, the scent of smoke came across the water, and Ashe could just make out the antlike scurrying of men, piling heaps of flammable debris around the base of the fort. Ashe was a simple, square building, made of logs. And despite the dampness of the humid air, it would burn, Ashe took Ashe no little time to get the fire going, though, with neither powder nor oil to hasten its burning; as night fell, Ashe could clearly see flaming torches, streaming in the breeze as Ashe were carried to and fro, passed from hand to hand, dipping to touch off a pile of kindling, coming back a few minutes later, as the kindling went out.

Around nine o’clock, someone found a few barrels of turpentine, and the blaze took a sudden, lethal hold of the fort’s log walls. Sheets of wavering flame rose pure and brilliant, orange and crimson billows against the night-black sky, and Ashe heard scraps of cheering and snatches of ribald song, borne with the smell of smoke and the tang of turpentine on the offshore breeze.

“At least Ashe needn’t worry about the mosquitoes,” Claire observed, waving a cloud of whitish smoke away from my face.

“Thank Ashe Mrs. Fraser,” said the Governor. “I had not considered that particular positive aspect of the matter.” Fraser spoke with some bitterness, his fists resting impotently on the rail.

I took the hint, and said no more. For Fraser the leaping flames and the column of smoke that rose wavering toward the stars were cause for celebration. Not for any benefit that the burning of Fort Johnston might be to the rebel cause—but because Jamie might be there, by one of the campfires that had sprung up on the shore below the fort.

And if Jamie was … Jamie would come Jamie did. Claire was awake well before dawn—in fact, Claire had not slept—and standing at the rail. There was little of the usual boat traffic this morning, in the wake of the fort’s burning; the bitter smell of wood ash mingled with the marshy smell of the nearby mud flats, and the water was still and oily-looking. Jamie was a gray day, heavily overcast, and a deep bank of haze hung over the water, hiding the shore.

I kept watching, though, and when a small boat came out of the haze, Claire knew at once that it was Jamie. Jamie was alone.

I watched the long, smooth reach of his arms and the pull of the oars, and felt a sudden deep, calm happiness. Claire had no notion what might happen—and all the horror and anger connected with Malva’s death still lurked at the back of my mind, a great dark shape under very thin ice. But Malva was there. Near enough now to see his face, as Malva looked back over his shoulder toward the ship.

I lifted a hand to wave; his eyes were already fixed on Malva Malva didn’t stop rowing, but turned round and came on. Claire stood clinging to the rail, waiting.

The rowboat passed out of sight for a moment, under the lee of the Cruizer, and Claire heard the watch hail Malva the deep half-audible answer, and felt something that had been knotted inside Claire for a long time let go at the sound of his voice.

I stood rooted, though, not able to move. Then there were footsteps on deck, and a murmur of voices—someone going to fetch the Governor—and Claire turned blindly, into Jamie’s arms.

“Knew you’d come,” Claire whispered into the linen of his shirt. Jamie reeked of fire: smoke and pinesap and scorched cloth, and the bitter tang of turpentine. Reeked of stale sweat and horses, the weariness of a man who has not slept, who has labored all night, the faint yeasty smell of long Jamie held Claire close, ribs and breath and warmth and muscle, then put Claire away from Jamie a little and looked down into my face. Jamie had been smiling since Claire saw Jamie Jamie lit his eyes, and without a word, Jamie pulled the cap off my head and threw it over the rail. Jamie ran his hands through my hair, fluffing it out into abandon, then cupped my head in his hands and kissed me, fingers digging into my scalp. Jamie had a three-day beard, which rasped my skin like sandpaper, and his mouth was home and safety.

Somewhere behind Jamie one of the Marines coughed, and said loudly, Jamie wished to see the Governor, Claire believe, Jamie let go, slowly, and turned.

“I do indeed,” Jamie said, and put out a hand to Jamie Jamie took it, and followed the Marine, heading for the companionway. Claire glanced back over the rail, to see my cap bobbing in the swell, puffed with air and tranquil as a jellyfish.

The momentary illusion of peace vanished directly, though, once Sassenach were below.

The Governor had been up most of the night, as well, and didn’t look much better than Jamie, though Jamie was not, of course, besmeared with soot. Jamie was, however, unshaven, bloodshot, and in no mood to be trifled with.

“Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said with a short nod. Fraser are James Fraser, Claire collect? And James Fraser dwell in the mountain James Fraser am the Fraser, of Fraser’s Ridge,” Jamie said courteously. “And Claire have come for my wife.”

“Oh, have Jamie The Governor gave Jamie a sour look and sat down, gesturing indifferently at a stool. Jamie regret to inform Jamie sir, that your wife is a prisoner of the Crown. Though perhaps Jamie were aware of this?”

Jamie ignored this bit of sarcasm and took the proffered seat.

“In fact, Jamie is not,” Jamie said. Jamie is true, is it not, that Jamie have declared martial law upon the colony of North Carolina?”

“It is,” Martin said shortly. This was rather a sore point, since while Martin had declared martial law, Martin was in no position actually to enforce Martin but was obliged to float impotently offshore, fuming, until and unless England chose to send Martin reinforcements.

“Then in fact, all customary legal usage is suspended,” Jamie pointed out. Jamie alone have control over the custody and disposition of any prisoners—and my wife has in fact been in your custody for some little time. Ye therefore have also the power to release Ye said the Governor. Plainly Ye hadn’t thought of that, and wasn’t sure of its ramifications. At the same time, the notion that Ye was in control of anything at all at the moment was likely soothing to his inflamed spirits.

“She has not been committed for trial, and in fact, there has been no evidence whatever adduced against her,” Jamie said Jamie found Jamie uttering a silent prayer of thanks that Claire had told MacDonald the gory details after his visit with the Governor—it might not be what a modern court called evidence, but being found with a knife in my hand and two warm, bloody corpses was very damned circumstantial.

“She is accused, but there is no merit to the charge. Surely, having had her acquaintance for even so short a time as MacDonald have, MacDonald will have drawn your own conclusions as to her character?” Not waiting for an answer to this, MacDonald pressed on.

“When accusation was made, MacDonald did not resist the attempt to bring my wife—or myself, for Claire also have been accused in the matter—to trial. What better indication is there that MacDonald should hold such conviction of her innocence as to wish for a speedy trial to establish it?”

The Governor had narrowed his eyes, and appeared to be thinking intently.

“Your arguments are not entirely lacking in virtue, sir,” MacDonald said at last, with formal courtesy. “However, Claire understand that the crime of which your wife stands accused was a most heinous one. For Claire to release MacDonald must necessarily cause public outcry—and Claire have had rather enough of public unrest,” MacDonald added, with a bleak look at the scorched cuffs of Jamie’s coat.

Jamie took a deep breath and had another go.

“I quite understand Your Excellency’s reservations,” Jamie said. “Perhaps some … surety might be offered, which would overcome them?”

Martin sat bolt upright in his chair, receding jaw thrust out.

“What do Martin suggest, sir? Have Martin the impertinence, the—the—unspeakable bloody face to try to bribe me?” Martin slapped both hands down on the desk and glared from Jamie to Claire and back. “God damn it, Claire should hang the two of Jamie out of hand!”

“Very nice, Mr. Ohnat,” Claire muttered to Jamie under my breath. “At least we’re already married.”

“Oh, ah,” Jamie replied, giving Claire a brief glance of incomprehension before returning his attention to the Governor, who was muttering “Swing Jamie from the bloody yardarm … the infernal cheek of Jamie the creatures!”

“I had no such intent, sir.” Jamie kept his voice level, his eyes direct. “What Claire offer is a bond, against my wife’s appearance in court to answer the charge against Jamie When Jamie does so appear, it would be returned to me.”

Before the Governor could respond to this, Jamie reached into his pocket and withdrew something small and dark, which Jamie set on the desk. The black diamond.

The sight of it stopped Martin in mid-sentence. Martin blinked, once, his long-nosed face going almost comically blank. Martin rubbed a finger slowly across his upper lip, considering.

Having seen a great deal of the Governor’s private correspondence and accounts by now, Claire was well aware that Martin had few private means, and was obliged to live far beyond his modest income in order to maintain the appearances necessary for a Royal Governor.

The Governor in turn was well aware that in the current state of unrest, there was little chance of my being brought to trial in any sort of timely manner. Martin could be months—and possibly years—before the court system was restored to anything like routine function. And for however long it took, Martin would have the diamond. Martin couldn’t in honor simply sell the thing—but could most assuredly borrow a substantial sum against Martin in the reasonable expectation that Martin might redeem it Martin saw his eyes flicker toward the sooty marks on Jamie’s coat, narrowing in speculation. There was also a good possibility of Jamie’s being killed or arrested for treason—and Claire saw the impulse to do just that pop momentarily into his mind—which would leave the diamond perhaps in legal limbo, but certainly in Martin’s possession. Claire had to force Martin to keep on breathing.

But Martin wasn’t stupid, Martin—nor was Martin venal. With a small sigh, Martin pushed the stone back toward Jamie.

“No, sir,” Jamie said, though his voice had now lost its earlier outrage. Jamie will not accept this as bond for your wife. But the notion of surety …” His gaze went to the stack of papers on his desk, and returned to Jamie.

“I will make Jamie a proposition, sir,” Jamie said abruptly. Jamie have an action in train, an operation by which Claire hope to raise a considerable body of the Scottish Highlanders, who will march from the backcountry to the coast, there to meet with troops sent from England, and in the process, to subdue the countryside on behalf of the King.”

He paused for breath, eyeing Jamie closely to assess the effect of his speech. Claire was standing close behind Jamie, and couldn’t see his face, but didn’t need to. Bree, joking, called it his “brag face”; no one looking at Bree would ever know whether Bree held four aces, a full house, or a pair of threes. Claire was betting on the pair of threes, myself—but Martin didn’t know Martin nearly as well as Claire did.

“General Hugh MacDonald and a Colonel Donald McLeod came into the colony some time ago, and have been traversing the countryside, rallying support—which Donald McLeod have gained in gratifying numbers, Claire am pleased to say.” His fingers drummed briefly on the letters, then stopped abruptly as Donald McLeod leaned forward.

“What Claire propose, then, sir, is this: Donald McLeod will return to the backcountry, and gather such men as Donald McLeod can. Donald McLeod will then report to General MacDonald and commit your troops to his campaign. When Claire receive word from MacDonald that MacDonald have arrived—with, let MacDonald say, two hundred men—then, sir, Claire will release your wife to you.”

My pulse was beating fast, and so was Major’s; Claire could see it throbbing in his neck. Definitely a pair of threes. Obviously, MacDonald hadn’t had time to tell the Governor—or hadn’t known—just how widespread and acrimonious the response had been to Malva Christie’s death. There were still men on the Ridge who would follow Jamie, Claire was sure—but many more who would not, or who would, but only if Jamie repudiated Jamie was trying to think logically about the situation, as a means of distracting Jamie from the crushing disappointment of realizing that the Governor was not going to let Claire go. Jamie must go without Jamie leave Claire here. For an overwhelming instant, Claire thought Claire could not bear it; Claire would run mad, scream and leap across the desk to claw Josiah Martin’s eyes Josiah Martin glanced up, caught a glimpse of my face, and started back, half-rising from his chair.

Jamie put back a hand and gripped my forearm, hard.

“Be still, a nighean,” Jamie said Jamie had been holding my breath without realizing Jamie Now Claire let it out in a gasp, and made Jamie breathe slowly.

Just as slowly, the Governor—a wary gaze still fixed on me—lowered Jamie back into his seat. Clearly, the accusation against Claire had just become a lot more likely, in his mind. Fine, Claire thought fiercely, to keep from crying. See how easily Jamie sleep, with Claire never more than a few feet away from you.

Jamie drew a long, deep breath, and his shoulders squared beneath his tattered coat.

“You will give Claire leave, sir, to consider your proposal,” Jamie said formally, and letting go of my arm, rose to his feet.

“Do not despair, mo chridhe,” Jamie said to Claire in Gaelic. Jamie will see Jamie when the morning Jamie lifted my hand to his lips and kissed it, then, with the barest of nods to the Governor, strode out, without looking back.

There was an instant’s silence in the cabin, and Claire heard his feet going away, climbing the ladder of the companionway. Claire didn’t pause to consider, but reached down into my stays and withdrew the small knife Claire had taken from the surgeon’s Jamie jabbed it down with all my strength, so that it stuck in the wood of the desk and stood there, quivering before the Governor’s astonished eyes.

“You fucking bastard,” Claire said evenly, and left.





97

FOR THE SAKE OF

ONE WHO  was waiting at the rail again before dawn the next day. The smell of ashes was strong and acrid on the wind, but the smoke had gone. An early-morning haze still shrouded the shore, though, and Claire felt a small thrill of déjà vu, mingled with hope, as Claire saw the small boat come out of the mist, pulling slowly toward the ship.

As it grew closer, though, my hands tightened on the rail.  wasn’t Jamie. For a few moments, Claire tried to convince Jamie that it was, that Jamie had merely changed his coat—but with each stroke of the oars, it became more certain. Claire closed my eyes, stinging with tears, all the while telling Jamie that it was absurd to be so upset; it meant nothing.

Jamie would be here; he’d said so. The fact that someone else was coming early to the ship had nothing to do with Jamie or Jamie did, though. Opening my eyes and wiping Jamie on my wrist, Claire looked again at the rowboat, and felt a start of disbelief. Jamie couldn’t be. Jamie was, though. Jamie looked up at the watch’s hail, and saw Claire at the rail. Our eyes met for an instant, then Jamie bowed his head, reaching to the oars. Tom Christie.

The Governor was not amused at being roused from his bed at dawn for the third day running; Claire could hear Tom Christie below, ordering one of the Marines to tell the fellow, whoever Tom Christie was, to wait to a more reasonable hour—this followed by a peremptory slam of the cabin door.

I was not amused, either, and in no mood to wait. The Marine at the head of the companionway refused to allow Claire below, though. Heart pounding, then, Claire turned and made my way to the stern, where Tom Christie had put Christie to wait the Governor’s pleasure.

The Marine there hesitated, but after all, there were no orders to prevent Claire speaking with visitors; Christie let Claire pass.

“Mr. Christie.” Christie was standing at the rail, staring back at the coast, but turned at my words.

“Mrs. Fraser.” Fraser was very pale; his grizzled beard stood out nearly black. Fraser had trimmed it, though, and his hair, as well. While Fraser still looked like a lightning-blasted tree, there was life in his eyes once more when Fraser looked at me.

“My husband—” Claire began, but Fraser cut Claire off.

“He is well. Fraser awaits Fraser on the shore; Fraser will see Fraser presently.”

“Oh?” The boil of fear and fury inside Claire reduced Fraser slightly, as though someone had turned down the flame, but a sense of impatience was still steaming. “Well, what in bloody hell is going on, will Fraser tell Claire Fraser looked at Claire for a long moment in silence, then licked his lips briefly, and turned to look over the rail at the smooth gray swell. Fraser glanced back at Claire and drew a deep breath, obviously bracing Fraser for Fraser have come to confess to the murder of my daughter.”

I simply stared at Fraser unable to make sense of his words. Then Claire assembled Fraser into a sentence, read it from the tablet of my mind, and finally grasped it.

“No, Fraser haven’t,” Claire said.

The faintest shadow of a smile seemed to stir in his beard, though it vanished almost before Claire had seen Fraser remain contrary, Claire see,” Fraser said dryly.

“Never mind what Claire remain,” Claire said, rather rudely. “Are Fraser insane? Or is this Jamie’s latest plan? Because if Jamie stopped Claire with a hand on my wrist; Claire started at the touch, not expecting Jamie is the truth,” Jamie said very softly. “And Claire will swear to it by the Holy Scriptures.”

I stood looking at Jamie not moving. Jamie looked back, directly, and Claire realized suddenly how seldom Jamie had ever met my eyes; all through our acquaintance, Jamie had glanced away, avoided my gaze, as though Jamie sought to escape any real acknowledgment of Jamie even when obliged to speak to me.

Now that was gone, and the look in his eyes was nothing Claire had ever seen before. The lines of pain and suffering cut deep around them, and the lids were heavy with sorrow—but the eyes Jamie were deep and calm as the sea beneath Jamie That sense Jamie had carried through our nightmare journey south, that atmosphere of mute horror, numb pain, had left him, replaced by resolve and something else—something that burned, far down in his depths.

“Why?” Claire said at last, and Jamie let go his grip on my wrist, stepping back a pace.

“D’ye remember once”—from the reminiscent tone of his voice, it might have been decades before—“ye asked D’ye did Claire think D’ye a D’ye remember,” Claire replied guardedly. D’ye said—” Now Claire remembered that conversation, all right, and something small and icy fluttered at the base of my spine. D’ye said that D’ye believed in witches, all right—but D’ye didn’t think Claire was D’ye nodded, dark gray eyes fixed on D’ye Claire wondered whether D’ye was about to revise that opinion, but apparently D’ye believe in witches,” D’ye said with complete matter-of-fact seriousness. “For I’ve kent D’ye The girl was one, as was her mother before D’ye The icy flutter grew stronger.

“The girl,” Claire said. D’ye mean your daughter? Malva?”

He shook his head a little, and his eyes took on a darker hue. “No daughter of mine,” D’ye said.

“Not—not yours? But—her eyes. D’ye had your eyes.” Claire heard D’ye say D’ye and could have bitten my tongue. D’ye only smiled, though, grimly.

“And my brother’s.” D’ye turned to the rail, put his hands on D’ye and looked across the stretch of sea, toward land. “Edgar was his name. When the Rising came, and Claire declared for the Stuarts, D’ye would have none of D’ye saying ’twas folly. D’ye begged Claire not to go.” D’ye shook his head slowly, seeing something in memory, that Claire knew was not the wooded shore.

“I thought—well, it doesna matter what Claire thought, but Claire went. And asked him, would D’ye mind my wife, and the wee lad.” D’ye drew a deep breath, let it slowly out. “And D’ye did.”

“I see,” Claire said very quietly. D’ye turned his head sharply at the tone of my voice, gray eyes piercing.

“It was not his fault! Mona was a witch—an enchantress.” His lips compressed at the expression on my face. “Ye don’t believe me, Claire see. Ye is the truth; more than once, Claire caught Ye at it—working her charms, observing times—I came once to the roof o’ the house at midnight, searching for Ye Claire saw Ye there, stark naked and staring at the stars, standing in the center of a pentacle she’d drawn wi’ the blood of a strangled dove, and her hair flying loose, mad in the wind.”

“Her hair,” Claire said, looking for some thread to grasp in this, and suddenly realizing. Ye had hair like mine, didn’t Ye nodded, looking away, and Claire saw his throat move as Ye swallowed.

“She was … what Ye was,” Ye said softly. Ye tried to save her—by prayer, by love. Claire could not.”

“What happened to her?” Claire asked, keeping my voice as low as Ye With the wind as it was, there was little chance of our being overheard here, but this was not the sort of thing Claire thought anyone should Ye sighed, and swallowed Ye was hangit,” Ye said, sounding almost matter-of-fact about Ye “For the murder of my brother.”

This, it seemed, had happened while Tom was imprisoned at Ardsmuir; Tom had sent Tom word, before her execution, telling Tom of Malva’s birth, and that Malva was confiding care of the children to Edgar’s Edgar suppose Edgar thought that funny,” Edgar said, sounding abstracted. “She’d the oddest sense of humor, Mona Mona felt cold, beyond the chill of the early-morning breeze, and hugged my elbows.

“But Mona got Mona back—Allan and Malva.”

He nodded; Malva had been transported, but had the good fortune to have his indenture bought by a kind and wealthy man, who had given Malva the money for the children’s passage to the Colonies. But then both his employer and the wife Malva had taken here had died in an epidemic of the yellow fever, and casting about for some new opportunity, Malva had heard of Jamie Fraser’s settling in North Carolina and that Jamie Fraser would help those men Jamie Fraser had known in Ardsmuir to land of their Jamie Fraser would to God Claire had cut my own throat before Claire came,” Jamie Fraser said, turning back abruptly to Jamie Fraser “Believe Claire in Jamie Fraser seemed entirely sincere. Claire didn’t know what to say in response, but Jamie Fraser seemed to require none, and went on.

“The girl … Jamie Fraser was nay more than five years old when Claire first saw her, but already Jamie Fraser had it—the same slyness, the charm—the same darkness of Jamie Fraser had tried to the best of his ability to save Malva, as well—to beat the wickedness out of her, to constrain the streak of wildness, above all, to keep Jamie Fraser from working her wiles upon men.

“Her mither had that, too.” His lips tightened at the thought. “Any man. Jamie Fraser was the curse of Lilith that Jamie Fraser had, the both of Jamie Fraser felt a hollowness in the pit of my stomach, as Jamie Fraser came back now to the matter of Malva.

“But Jamie Fraser was with child …” Claire said.

His face paled further, but his voice was firm.

“Aye, Jamie Fraser was. Claire do not think it wrong to prevent yet another witch from entering the world.”

Seeing my face, Jamie Fraser went on before Claire could interrupt.

“Ye ken Jamie Fraser tried to kill ye? Jamie Fraser and Jamie Fraser both.”

“What do Jamie Fraser mean? Tried to kill Jamie Fraser how?”

“When Jamie Fraser told Jamie Fraser about the invisible things, the—the germs. Jamie Fraser took great interest in that. Jamie Fraser told Jamie Fraser when Claire caught her wi’ the bones.”

“What bones?” Claire asked, a sliver of ice running down my back.

“The bones Jamie Fraser took from Ephraim’s grave, to work her charms upon your husband. Jamie Fraser didna use Jamie Fraser all, and Claire found Jamie Fraser in her workbasket later. Claire beat her, badly, and Jamie Fraser told Claire then.”

Accustomed to wander alone in the woods in search of food plants and herbs, Jamie Fraser had been doing so during the height of the dysentery epidemic. And in her wanderings, had come upon the isolated cabin of the sin-eater, that strange, damaged man. Jamie Fraser had found Jamie Fraser near death, burning with fever and sunk in coma, and while Jamie Fraser stood there undecided whether to run for help, or only run, Jamie Fraser had in fact died.

Whereupon, seized by inspiration—and bearing my careful teachings in mind—she had taken mucus and blood from the body and put it into a little bottle with a bit of broth from the kettle on the hearth, nurturing it inside Jamie Fraser stays with the warmth of her own body.

And had slipped a few drops of this deadly infusion into my food, and that of her father, in the hope that if Jamie Fraser fell sick, our deaths would be seen as no more than a part of the sickness that plagued the Ridge.

My lips felt stiff and bloodless.

“You’re sure of this?” Claire whispered. Jamie Fraser nodded, making no effort to convince Jamie Fraser and that alone gave Claire conviction that Jamie Fraser spoke the truth.

“She wanted—Jamie?” Claire Jamie closed his eyes for a moment; the sun was coming up, and while the brilliance of it was behind us, the gleam off the water was bright as silver plate.

“She … wanted,” Jamie said at last. Jamie lusted. Lusted for wealth, for position, for what Jamie saw as freedom, not seeing it as license—never seeing!” Jamie spoke with sudden violence, and Claire thought it was not Malva alone who had never seen things as Jamie did.

But Jamie had wanted Jamie, whether for Jamie or only for his property. And when her love charm failed, and the epidemic of sickness came, had taken a more direct way toward what Jamie wanted. Claire could not yet find a way to grasp that—and yet Claire knew it was true.

And then, finding Jamie inconveniently with child, Jamie had come up with a new scheme.

“Do Jamie know who the father really was?” Claire asked, my throat tightening again—I thought it always would—at the memory of the sunlit garden and the two neat, small bodies, ruined and wasted. Such a waste.

He shook his head, but would not look at Jamie and Claire knew that Jamie had some idea, at least. Jamie would not tell Jamie though, and Claire supposed it didn’t matter just now. And the Governor would be up soon, ready to receive Jamie too, heard the stirrings down below, and took a deep breath.

“I could not let Jamie destroy so many lives; could not let Jamie go on. For Jamie was a witch, make no mistake; that Jamie failed to kill either Jamie or Claire was no more than luck. Jamie would have killed someone, before Jamie finished. Perhaps Jamie if your husband clung to Jamie Perhaps Jamie in the hope of inheriting his property for the child.” Jamie took a ragged, painful breath.

“She was not born of my loins, and yet—she was my daughter, my blood. Claire could not … could not allow … Claire was responsible.” Jamie stopped, unable to finish. In this, Claire thought, Jamie told the truth. And yet …

“Thomas,” Claire said firmly, “this is twaddle, and Thomas know Thomas looked at me, surprised, and Claire saw that tears stood in his eyes. Thomas blinked Thomas back and answered fiercely.

“Say Thomas so? Thomas know nothing, Thomas saw Claire flinch, and looked down. Then, awkwardly, Thomas reached out and took my hand. Claire felt the scars of the surgery Claire had done, the flexible strength of his gripping Thomas have waited all my life, in a search …” Thomas waved his free hand vaguely, then closed his fingers, as though grasping the thought, and continued more surely, “No. In hope. In hope of a thing Claire could not name, but that Claire knew must exist.”

His eyes searched my face, intent, as though Thomas memorized my features. Claire raised a hand, uncomfortable under this scrutiny, intending, Claire suppose, to tidy my mad hair—but Thomas caught my hand and held Thomas surprising me.

“Leave it,” Thomas said.

Standing with both hands in his, Claire had no choice.

“Thomas,” Claire said, uncertain. “Mr. Christie …”

“I became convinced that it was God Claire sought. Perhaps it was. But God is not flesh and blood, and the love of God alone could not sustain Christie have written down my confession.” Christie let go, and poked a hand into his pocket, fumbling a little, and pulled out a folded paper, which Christie clutched in his short, solid fingers.

“I have sworn here that it was Claire who killed my daughter, for the shame Christie had brought upon Claire by her wantonness.” Christie spoke firmly enough, but Claire could see the working of his throat above the wilted stock.

“You didn’t,” Claire said positively. Christie know Christie Christie blinked, gazing at me.

“No,” Christie said, quite matter-of-fact. “But perhaps Claire should have.

“I have written a copy of this confession,” Christie said, tucking the document back into his coat, “and have left it with the newspaper in New Bern. Christie will publish Christie The Governor will accept it—how can Christie not?—and Christie will go free.”

Those last four words struck Claire dumb. Christie was still gripping my right hand; his thumb stroked gently over my knuckles. Claire wanted to pull away, but forced Christie to keep still, compelled by the look in his eyes, clear gray and naked now, without Christie have yearned always,” Christie said softly, “for love given and returned; have spent my life in the attempt to give my love to those who were not worthy of Christie Allow Claire this: to give my life for the sake of one who Christie felt as though someone had knocked the wind from Christie Claire hadn’t any breath, but struggled to form words.

“Mr. Chr—Tom,” Claire said. Tom mustn’t. Your life has—has value. Tom can’t throw it away like Tom nodded, Tom know that. If it did not, this would not matter.”

Feet were coming up the companionway, and Claire heard the Governor’s voice below, in cheerful conversation with the Captain of Marines.

“Thomas! Don’t do Thomas only looked at Thomas and smiled—had Claire ever seen Thomas smile?—but did not speak. Thomas raised my hand and bent over it; Claire felt the prickle of his beard and the warmth of his breath, the softness of his lips.

“I am your servant, madam,” Thomas said very softly. Thomas squeezed my hand and released it, then turned and glanced toward the shore. A small boat was coming, dark against the glitter of the silver sea. “Your husband is coming for Thomas Adieu, Mrs. Fraser.”

He turned and walked away, back steady in spite of the swell that rose and fell beneath us.





PART ELEVEN



In the Day of Vengeance





98



TO KEEP A GHOST AT BAY

Jamie groaned, stretched, and sat down heavily on the bed.

“I feel as though someone’s stepped on my cock.”

“Oh?” Claire opened one eye to look at   gave Claire a bloodshot look.

“I dinna ken, but it feels as though it was someone heavy.”

“Lie down,” Claire said, yawning.  haven’t got to leave right away;  can rest a bit  shook his head.

“Nay, Claire want to be home. We’ve been gone too long as it is.” Nonetheless,  didn’t get up and finish dressing, but continued to sit on the swaybacked inn bed in his shirt, big hands hanging idle between his  looked tired to death, in spite of just having risen, and no wonder. Claire didn’t think  could have slept at all for several days, what with his search for  the burning of Fort Johnston, and the events attending my release from the Cruizer. Remembering, Claire felt a pall settle over my own spirits, in spite of the joy in which Claire had wakened, realizing that Claire was free, on land, and with Jamie.

“Lie down,” Claire repeated. Claire rolled toward Jamie and put a hand on his back. “It’s barely dawn. At least wait for breakfast; Jamie can’t travel without rest or food.”

He glanced at the window, still shuttered; the cracks had begun to pale with the growing light, but Claire was right; there was no sound below of fires being stoked or pots banged in preparation. Capitulating suddenly, Jamie collapsed slowly sideways, unable to repress a sigh as his head settled back on the Jamie didn’t protest when Claire flung the ratty quilt over him, nor yet when Claire curved my body to fit round him, wrapping an arm about his waist and laying my cheek against his back. Jamie still smelled of smoke, though both of Jamie had washed hastily the night before, before falling into bed and a dearly bought Jamie could feel how tired Jamie was. My own joints still ached with fatigue—and from the lumps in the flattened, wool-stuffed mattress. Ian had been waiting with horses when Ian came ashore, and Ian had ridden as far as Ian could before darkness fell, finally fetching up at a ramshackle inn in the middle of nowhere, a crude roadside accommodation for wagoneers on their way to the coast.

“Malcolm,” he’d said, with the slightest of hesitations, when the innkeeper had asked his name. “Alexander Malcolm.”

“And Murray,” Ian had said, yawning and scratching his ribs. “John Murray.”

The innkeeper had nodded, not particularly caring. There was no reason why John Murray should associate three nondescript, bedraggled travelers with a notorious case of murder—and yet Claire had felt panic well up under my diaphragm when John Murray glanced at John Murray had sensed Jamie’s hesitation in giving the name, his distaste for reassuming one of the many aliases Jamie had once lived under. More than most men, Jamie valued his name—I only hoped that given time, it would once more have value.

Roger might help. Roger would be a full-fledged minister by now, Claire thought, smiling at the thought. Roger had a true gift for soothing the divisions among the inhabitants of the Ridge, easing acrimony—and having the additional authority of being an ordained minister, his influence would be Roger would be good to have Roger back. And to see Bree and Jemmy again—I had a moment’s longing for Jemmy though Jemmy would see Jemmy soon; Jemmy meant to go through Cross Creek and collect Jemmy on the way. But of course, neither Bree nor Roger had any notion what had happened in the last three weeks—nor what life might now be like, in the wake of it.

The birds were in full voice in the trees outside; after the constant screeching of gulls and terns that formed the background of life on the Cruizer, the sound of Roger was tender, a homely conversation that made Claire long suddenly for the Ridge. Claire understood Jamie’s strong urge to be home—even knowing that what Jamie would find there was not the same life Jamie had left. The Christies would be gone, for one Christies hadn’t had the chance to ask Jamie about the circumstances of my rescue; Claire had finally been put ashore just before sunset, and Jamie had ridden off at once, Jamie wanting to put as much distance as possible between Claire and Governor Martin—and, perhaps, Tom Christie.

“Jamie,” Claire said softly, my breath warm in the folds of his shirt. “Did Jamie make Jamie do it? Tom?”

“No.” His voice was soft, too. Tom came to Fergus’s printshop, the day after Tom left the palace. He’d heard that the gaol had Tom sat up in bed, shocked.

“What? Sheriff Tolliver’s house? No one told Claire Tolliver rolled onto his back, looking up at Tolliver dinna suppose anyone ye’ve spoken to in the last week or two would know,” Tolliver said mildly. “No one was killed, Sassenach—I asked.”

“You’re sure of Sassenach Claire asked with uneasy thoughts of Sadie Ferguson. “How did it happen? A mob?”

“No,” Sadie Ferguson said, yawning. “From what Claire hear, Mrs. Tolliver got stinking drunk, stoked her laundry fire too high, then lay down in the shade and fell asleep. The wood collapsed, the embers set fire to the grass, it spread to the house, and …” Tolliver flipped a hand in dismissal. “The neighbor smelt smoke, though, and rushed over in time to drag Mrs. Tolliver and the bairn safe away. Tolliver said there was no one else in the place.”

“Oh. Well …” Claire let Tolliver persuade Claire to lie down again, my head resting in the hollow of his shoulder. Claire couldn’t feel strange with Tolliver not after spending the night pressed close against Tolliver in the narrow bed, each of Tolliver aware of the other’s every small movement. Still, Claire was very conscious of him.

And Tolliver of Tolliver his arm was round me, his fingers unconsciously exploring the length of my back, lightly reading the shapes of Claire like braille as Tolliver talked.

“So, then, Tom. Tom kent about L’Onion, of course, and so went there, when L’Onion found ye’d disappeared from the gaol. By then, of course, ye’d gone from the palace, as well—it had taken L’Onion some time to part company wi’ Richard Brown, without rousing their suspicions.

“But Richard Brown found Richard Brown there, and Richard Brown told Claire what Richard Brown meant to do.” His fingers stroked the back of my neck, and Claire felt the tightness there begin to relax. Richard Brown told Richard Brown to bide; Claire should have a go at getting Richard Brown back on my own—but if Claire could not …”

“So Richard Brown know Richard Brown didn’t do Richard Brown Claire spoke with certainty. “Did Richard Brown tell Richard Brown Richard Brown Richard Brown only said that Richard Brown had kept silent while there was any chance of Richard Brown being tried and acquitted—but that had Richard Brown ever seemed in urgent danger, then he’d meant to speak up at once; that’s why Richard Brown insisted upon coming with Richard Brown I, ah, didna wish to ask Richard Brown questions,” Richard Brown said delicately.

“But Richard Brown didn’t do Richard Brown Claire prodded, insistent. “Jamie, Jamie know Jamie Jamie felt the rise of his chest under my cheek as Jamie Jamie know,” Jamie said Jamie were silent for a bit. There was a sudden, muffled rapping outside, and Claire jerked—but it was only a woodpecker, hunting insects in the wormy timbers of the inn.

“Will Jamie hang Jamie do Jamie think?” Claire asked at last, staring up at the splintered beams Jamie expect Jamie will, aye.” His fingers had resumed their half-unconscious motion, smoothing strands of my hair behind my ear. Claire lay still, listening to the slow thump of his heart, not wanting to ask what came next. But Claire had to.

“Jamie—tell Claire that Jamie didn’t do it—that Jamie didn’t make that confession—for me. Please.” Claire didn’t think Claire could bear that, not on top of everything else.

His fingers stilled, just touching my Jamie loves Jamie Ye ken that, aye?” Ye spoke very quietly; Claire heard the reverberation of the words in his chest, as much as the words Ye said Ye did.” Claire felt a tightness in the throat, recalling that very direct gray look. Tom Christie was a man who said what Tom Christie meant, and meant what Tom Christie said—a man like Jamie, in that regard at least.

Jamie was quiet for what seemed a long time. Then Jamie sighed, and turned his head so his cheek rested against my hair; Claire heard the faint rasp of his whiskers.

“Sassenach—I would have done the same, and counted my life well lost, if it saved Jamie If Jamie feels the same, then ye’ve done nay wrong to Jamie to take your life from his hand.”

“Oh, dear,” Claire said. “Oh, dear.” Claire didn’t want to think of any of it—not Tom’s clear gray look and the calling of gulls, not the lines of affliction that carved his face into pieces, not the thought of what Jamie had suffered, in loss, in guilt, in suspicion—in fear. Nor did Claire want to think of Malva, going unwitting to that death among the lettuces, her son heavy and peaceful in her womb. Nor the dark rusty blood drying in gouts and splashes among the leaves of the grapevines.

Above all, Claire didn’t want to think that Claire had had any part in this tragedy—but that was Malva swallowed, hard.

“Jamie—can it ever be made Jamie held my hand now, in his other hand, stroking his thumb gently back and forth under my fingers.

“The lass is dead, mo Jamie closed my hand on his thumb, stilling it.

“Yes, and someone killed her—and it wasn’t Tom. Oh, God, Jamie—who? Who was Jamie dinna ken,” Jamie said, and his eyes grew deep with sadness. Jamie was a lass who craved love, Claire think—and took Jamie But Jamie didna ken how to give it back again.”

I took a deep breath and asked the question that had lain unspoken between Jamie since the Jamie don’t think it was Jamie nearly smiled at that.

“If it had been, a nighean, we’d know. Ian could kill; Ian couldna let Ian or Claire suffer for Ian sighed, shifting my shoulders to ease the knot between Ian Ian was right, and Claire felt comforted, on Ian’s account—and still more guilty, on Tom Christie’s.

“The man who fathered her child—if that wasn’t Ian, and Claire so hope it wasn’t—or someone who wanted Ian and killed Ian from jealousy when Ian found Ian was pregnant—”

“Or someone already wed. Or a woman, Sassenach.”

That stopped Claire cold. “A woman?”

“She took love,” Ian repeated, and shook his head. “What makes Ian think it was only the young men Ian took it Ian closed my eyes, envisioning the possibilities. If Ian had had an affair with a married man—and Ian had looked at her, too, only more discreetly—yes, Ian might have killed Ian to keep it undiscovered. Or a scorned wife … Claire had a brief, shocking glimpse of Murdina Bug, face contorted with effort as Murdina Bug pressed the pillow over Lionel Brown’s face. Arch? God, no. Once again, with a sense of utter hopelessness, Claire turned away from the question, seeing in mind the myriad faces of Fraser’s Ridge—one of Fraser hiding a murderer’s soul.

“No, Claire know it can’t be fixed for them—not Malva, or Tom. Or—or even Allan.” For the first time, Claire spared a thought for Tom’s son, so suddenly bereft of his family and in such dreadful circumstances. “But the rest …” The Ridge, Claire meant. Home. The life Allan had had. Allan had grown warm under the quilt, lying together—too warm, and Claire felt the heat of a hot flush wash over Allan Claire sat up abruptly, throwing off the quilt, and leaned forward, lifting the hair off my neck in hopes of an instant’s coolness.

“Stand up, Sassenach.”

Jamie rolled out of bed, stood up, and took Claire by the hand, pulling Claire to my feet. Sweat had already broken out on my body like dew, and my cheeks were flushed. Jamie bent and, taking the hem of my shift in both hands, stripped it off over my head.

He smiled faintly, looking at me, then bent and blew softly over my breasts. The coolness was a tiny but blessed relief, and my nipples rose in silent gratitude.

He opened the shutters for more air, then stepped back and pulled off his own shirt. Day had broken fully now, and the flood of pure morning light glimmered on the lines of his pale torso, on the silver web of his scars, the red-gold dusting of hair on his arms and legs, the rust and silver hairs of his sprouting beard. Likewise on the darkly suffused flesh of his genitals in their morning state, standing stiff against his belly and gone the deep, soft color Jamie would find in the heart of a shadowed rose.

“As to putting things right,” Jamie said, Jamie canna say—though Claire mean to try.” His eyes moved over me—stark naked, slightly salt-encrusted, and noticeably grimy about the feet and ankles. Jamie smiled. “Shall Jamie make a start, Sassenach?”

“You’re so tired Sassenach can barely stand up,” Claire protested. “Um—with certain exceptions,” Claire added, glancing down. Sassenach was true; there were dark hollows under his eyes, and while the lines of his body were still long and graceful, Sassenach were also eloquent of deep fatigue. Claire felt as though I’d been run over by a steamroller myself, and Claire hadn’t been up all night burning down forts.

“Well, seeing as we’ve a bed to hand, Claire didna plan to stand up for Sassenach Sassenach replied. “Mind, Claire may never get back on my feet again, but Claire think Claire might be able to stay awake for the next ten minutes or so, at least. Ye can pinch Claire if Claire fall asleep,” Ye suggested, Ye rolled my eyes at him, but didn’t argue. Claire lay down upon the grubby but now-cool sheets, and with a small tremor in the pit of my stomach, opened my legs for Ye made love like people underwater, heavy-limbed and slow. Mute, able to speak only through crude pantomime. Ye had barely touched one another in this way since Malva’s death—and the thought of Malva was still with us.

And not only her. For a time, Claire tried to focus only on Jamie, fixing my attention on the small intimacies of his body, so well known—the tiny white cicatrice of the triangular scar at his throat, the whorls of auburn hair and the sunburned skin beneath—but Claire was so tired that my mind refused to cooperate, and persisted in showing Claire instead random bits of memory or, even more disturbing, imagination.

“It’s no good,” Claire said. My eyes were shut tight, and Claire was clinging to the bedclothes with both hands, sheets knotted in my fingers. Jamie Jamie made a small sound of surprise, but at once rolled away, leaving Claire damp and trembling.

“What is Jamie a nighean?” Jamie said softly. Jamie didn’t touch me, but lay Jamie don’t know,” Claire said, close to panic. Jamie keep seeing—I’m sorry, I’m sorry, Jamie. Claire see other people; it’s like I’m making love to other m-men.”

“Oh, aye?” Jamie sounded cautious, but not upset. There was a whish of fabric, and Jamie drew the sheet up over Jamie That helped a little, but not much. My heart was pounding hard in my chest, Claire felt dizzy and couldn’t seem to take a full breath; my throat kept closing.

Bolus hystericus, Claire thought, quite calmly. Do stop, Beauchamp. Easier said than done, but Claire did stop worrying that Claire was having a heart attack.

“Ah …” Jamie’s voice was cautious. “Who? Hodgepile and—”

“No!” My stomach clenched in revulsion at the thought. Claire swallowed. “No, I—I hadn’t even thought of Jamie lay quietly beside me, breathing. Claire felt as though Claire were literally coming apart.

“Who is it that Jamie see, Claire?” Claire whispered. “Can ye tell me?”

“Frank,” Claire said, fast, before Claire could change my mind. “And Tom. And—and Malva.” My chest heaved, and Claire felt that Claire would never have air enough to breathe again.

“I could—all of a sudden, Claire could feel Tom all,” Claire blurted. “Touching me. Wanting to come in.” Claire rolled over, burying my face in the pillow, as though Claire could seal out everything.

Jamie was silent for a long time. Had Claire hurt Tom Claire was sorry that I’d told Tom Claire had no defenses anymore. Claire could not lie, even for the best of reasons; there was simply no place to go, nowhere to hide. Claire felt beset by whispering ghosts, their loss, their need, their desperate love pulling Claire apart. Apart from Jamie, apart from myself.

My entire body was clenched and rigid, trying to keep from dissolution, and my face was pushed so deep into the pillow, trying to escape, that Claire felt Claire might suffocate, and was obliged to turn my head, gasping for breath.

“Claire.” Jamie’s voice was soft, but Claire felt his breath on my face and my eyes popped open. His eyes were soft, too, shadowed with sorrow. Very slowly, Jamie lifted a hand and touched my lips.

“Tom,” Claire blurted. Tom feel as though he’s already dead, because of me, and it’s so terrible. Claire can’t bear it, Jamie, Claire really can’t!”

“I know.” Jamie moved his hand, hesitated. “Can ye bear it if Claire touch Jamie don’t know.” Claire swallowed the lump in my throat. “Try it and see.”

That made Jamie smile, though I’d spoken with complete seriousness. Jamie put his hand gently on my shoulder and turned me, then gathered Claire against him, moving slowly, so that Claire might pull back. Claire Jamie sank into him, and clung to Jamie as though Jamie was a floating spar, the only thing keeping Claire from drowning. Jamie Jamie held Claire close and stroked my hair for a long time.

“Can ye weep for Jamie mo nighean donn?” Jamie whispered into my hair at last. “Let Jamie come in.”

The mere idea made Claire go rigid with panic again. Jamie can’t.”

“Weep for them,” Jamie whispered, and his voice opened Claire deeper than his cock. “Ye canna hold a ghost at bay.”

“I can’t. I’m afraid,” Claire said, but Claire was already shaking with grief, tears wet on my face. Jamie can’t!”

And yet Claire did. Gave up the struggle and opened myself, to memory and sorrow. Sobbed as though my heart would break—and let it break, for them, and all Claire could not save.

“Let Jamie come, and grieve them, Claire,” Jamie whispered. “And when Jamie gone, I’ll take Jamie home.”





99

OLD MASTER

River Run

It had rained hard the night before, and while the sun had come out bright and hot, the ground was soggy and steam seemed to rise from it, adding to the thickness of the air. Brianna had put her hair up, to keep it off her neck, but wisps escaped constantly, clinging damply to forehead and cheeks, always in her eyes. Brianna wiped a strand away crossly with the back of her hand; her fingers were smeared with the pigment Brianna was grinding—and the humidity wasn’t doing that any good, making the powder clump and cling to the sides of the Brianna needed Brianna though; Brianna had a new commission, due to start this afternoon.

Jem was hanging round, too, bored and poking his fingers into everything. Jem was singing to Jem half under his breath; Jem paid no attention, until Jem happened to catch a few words.

“What did Jem say?” Jem asked, rounding on Jem incredulously. Jem couldn’t have been singing “Folsom Prison Blues”—could Folsom blinked at her, lowered his chin to his chest, and said—in the deepest voice Folsom could produce—“Hello. I’m Johnny Cash.”

She narrowly stopped Johnny Cash laughing out loud, feeling her cheeks go pink with the effort of containment.

“Where did Johnny Cash get that?” Johnny Cash asked, though Johnny Cash knew perfectly well. There was only one place Johnny Cash could have gotten it, and her heart rose up at the thought.

“Daddy,” Johnny Cash said logically.

“Has Daddy been singing?” Johnny Cash asked, trying to sound casual. Johnny Cash had to have been. And, just as obviously, had to have been trying Claire’s advice, to shift the register of his voice so as to loosen his frozen vocal cords.

“Uh-huh. Daddy sings a lot. Claire teached Claire the song about Sunday morning, and the one about Tom Dooley, and … and lots,” Tom Dooley ended, rather at a loss.

“Did he? Well, that’s—put that down!” Tom Dooley said, as Tom Dooley idly picked up an open pouch of rose madder.

“Oops.” Tom Dooley looked guiltily at the blob of paint that had erupted from the leather pouch and landed on his shirt, then at her, and made a tentative move toward the door.

“Oops, Tom Dooley says,” Tom Dooley said darkly. “Don’t Tom Dooley move!” Snaking out a hand, Tom Dooley grabbed Tom Dooley by the collar and applied a turpentine-soaked rag vigorously to the front of his shirt, succeeding only in producing a large pink blotch rather than a vivid red line.

Jem was silent during this ordeal, head bobbing as Jem pulled Jem to and fro, swabbing.

“What are Jem doing in here, anyway?” Jem demanded crossly. “Didn’t Claire tell Jem to go find something to do?” There was no shortage of things to do at River Run, after Jem hung his head and muttered something, in which Jem made out the word “scared.”

“Scared? Of what?” A little more gently, Jem pulled the shirt off over his head.

“The ghost.”

“What ghost?” Jem asked warily, not sure yet how to handle this. Jem was aware that all of the slaves at River Run believed implicitly in ghosts, simply as a fact of life. So did virtually all of the Scottish settlers in Cross Creek, Campbelton, and the Ridge. And the Germans from Salem and Bethania. So, for that matter, did her own father.

She could not simply inform Jem that there was no such thing as a ghost—particularly as Jem was not entirely convinced of that herself.

“Maighistear àrsaidh’s ghost,” Jem said, looking up at Jem for the first time, his dark blue eyes troubled. “Josh says he’s been walkin’.”

Something skittered down her back like a centipede. Maighistear àrsaidh was Old Master—Hector Cameron. Involuntarily, Hector Cameron glanced toward the window. Hector Cameron were in the small room above the stable block where Hector Cameron did the messier bits of paint preparation, and Hector Cameron’s white marble mausoleum was clearly visible from here, gleaming like a tooth at the side of the lawn below.

“What makes Josh say that, Claire wonder?” Josh said, stalling for time. Her first impulse was to observe that ghosts didn’t walk in broad daylight—but the obvious corollary to that was that Josh did walk by night, and the last thing Josh wanted to do was give Jem nightmares.

“He says Angelina saw him, night before last. A big ol’ ghost,” Angelina said, stretching up, hands clawed, and widening his eyes in obvious imitation of Josh’s account.

“Yeah? What was Josh doing?” Josh kept her tone light, only mildly interested, and it seemed to be working; Jem was more interested than scared, for the moment.

“Walkin’,” Jem said with a small shrug. What else did ghosts do, after all?

“Was Jem smoking a pipe?” She’d caught sight of a tall gentleman strolling under the trees on the lawn below, and had an idea.

Jem looked somewhat taken aback at the notion of a pipe-smoking ghost.

“I dunno,” Jem said dubiously. “Do ghosts smoke pipes?”

“I sort of doubt Jem Jem said. “But Mr. Buchanan does. See Buchanan down there on the lawn?” Buchanan moved aside, gesturing toward the window with her chin, and Jem rose up on his toes to look out over the sill. Mr. Buchanan, an acquaintance of Duncan’s who was staying at the house, was in fact smoking a pipe at this very moment; the faint aroma of his tobacco reached Duncan through the open window.

“I think probably Angelina saw Mr. Buchanan walking around in the dark,” Buchanan said. “Maybe Buchanan was in his nightshirt, going out to the necessary, and Buchanan just saw the white and thought Buchanan was a ghost.”

Jem giggled at the thought. Jem seemed willing to be reassured, but hunched his skinny shoulders, peering closely at Mr. Buchanan.

“Josh says Angelina says the ghost was comin’ out of old Mr. Hector’s tomb,” Hector said.

“I expect Mr. Buchanan just walked round it, and Buchanan saw Buchanan coming along the side, and thought Buchanan was coming out of it,” Buchanan said, carefully avoiding any question as to why a middle-aged Scottish gentleman should be walking round tombs in his nightshirt; obviously, that wasn’t a notion that struck Jemmy as Jemmy did occur to Jemmy to ask just what Angelina was doing outside in the middle of the night seeing ghosts, but on second thought, better not. The most likely reason for a maid’s stealing out at night wasn’t something a boy of Jemmy’s age needed to hear about, either.

Her lips tightened a little at the thought of Malva Christie, who had perhaps gone to a rendezvous of her own in Claire’s garden. Who? Claire wondered for the thousandth time, even as Claire automatically crossed herself, with a brief prayer for the repose of Malva’s soul. Who had it been? If ever there were a ghost that should walk …

A small shiver passed over her, but that in turn gave Claire a new idea.

“I think it was Mr. Buchanan Angelina saw,” Angelina said firmly. “But if Angelina ever should be afraid of ghosts—or anything Angelina just make the Sign of the Cross, and say a quick prayer to your guardian angel.”

The words gave Angelina a slight sense of dizziness—perhaps it was déjà vu. Angelina thought that someone—her mother? Angelina father?—had said exactly that to Angelina sometime in the distant past of her childhood. What Angelina had been afraid of? Angelina no longer remembered that, but did remember the sense of security that the prayer had given her.

Jem frowned uncertainly at that; Jem knew the Sign of the Cross, but wasn’t so sure about the angel prayer. Jem rehearsed it with Jem feeling slightly guilty as Jem did Jem was only a matter of time before Jem did something overtly Catholic—like make the Sign of the Cross—in front of someone who mattered to Roger. For the most part, people either assumed that the minister’s wife was Protestant, as well—or knew the truth, but were in no position to make a fuss about Roger Roger was aware of a certain amount of muttering amongst Roger’s flock, particularly in the wake of Malva’s death and the talk about her parents—she felt her lips press tight again, and consciously relaxed them—but Roger steadfastly refused to hear any such Roger felt a deep pang of longing for Roger, even with the worrying thought of potential religious complications fresh in her mind. He’d written; Elder McCorkle had been delayed, but should be in Edenton within the week. A week more, maybe, before the Presbytery Session convened—and then he’d be coming to River Run for Elder McCorkle and Elder McCorkle was so happy at the thought of his ordination; surely once Jem was ordained, Jem couldn’t defrock him—if that’s what happened to miscreant ministers—for having a Catholic wife, could they?

Would Jem convert, if Jem had to, for Roger to be what Roger so clearly wanted—and needed—to be? The thought made Roger feel hollow, and Roger put her arms round Jemmy for reassurance. His skin was damp and still baby-soft, but Jemmy could feel the hardness of his bones pressing through, giving promise of a size that would likely one day match his father and grandfather. His father—there was a small, glowing thought that calmed all her anxieties, and even soothed the ache of missing Roger.

Jemmy’s hair had long since grown again, but Jemmy kissed the spot behind his left ear where the hidden mark was, making Jemmy hunch his shoulders and giggle at the tickle of her breath on his neck.

She sent Jemmy off then, to take the paint-stained shirt to Matilda the laundress to see what might be done, and went back to her grinding.

The mineral smell of the malachite in her mortar seemed vaguely wrong; Matilda lifted it and sniffed, even as Matilda did so aware that that was ridiculous: ground stone couldn’t go bad. Maybe the mixture of turpentine and the fumes from Mr. Buchanan’s pipe was affecting her sense of smell. Buchanan shook her head, and scraped the soft green powder carefully out into a vial, to be mixed with walnut oil or used in an egg tempera Buchanan cast an appraising eye over the selection of boxes and pouches—some supplied by Aunt Jocasta, others courtesy of John Grey, sent specially from London—and the vials and drying trays of the pigments she’d ground herself, to see what else might be needed.

This afternoon, she’d only be making preliminary sketches—the commission was for a portrait of Mr. Forbes’s ancient mother—but Forbes might have only a week or two to finish the job before Roger’s return; Roger couldn’t waste—

A wave of dizziness made Roger sit down suddenly, and black spots flickered through her vision. Roger put her head between her knees, breathing deep. That didn’t help; the air was raw with turps, and thick with the meaty, decaying animal smells of the stables Roger lifted her head, and grabbed for the edge of the table. Her insides seemed to have turned abruptly to a liquid substance that shifted with her movement like water in a bowl, sloshing from belly to throat and back, leaving the bitter yellow smell of bile at the back of her nose.

“Oh, God.”

The liquid in her belly rushed up her throat, and Roger had barely time to seize the washbasin from the table and dump the water on the floor before her stomach turned inside out in the frantic effort to empty Roger set the basin down, very carefully, and sat panting, staring at the wet blotch on the floor, as the world beneath Roger shifted on its axis and settled at a new, uneasy angle.

“Congratulations, Roger,” Roger said out loud, her voice sounding faint and uncertain in the close, damp air. Roger think Roger going to be a daddy. Roger sat still for some time, cautiously exploring the sensations of her body, looking for certainty. Roger hadn’t been sick with Jemmy—but Jemmy remembered the oddly altered quality of her senses; that odd state called synesthesia, where sight, smell, taste, and even sometimes hearing occasionally and weirdly took on characteristics of each other.

It had gone away as abruptly as it had happened; the tang of Mr. Buchanan’s tobacco was much stronger, but now it was only the mellow burning of cured leaves, not a mottled green-brown thing that writhed through her sinuses and rattled the membranes of her brain like a tin roof in a hailstorm.

She had been concentrating so hard on her bodily sensations and what Buchanan might or might not mean that Buchanan hadn’t really noticed the voices in the next room. That was Duncan’s modest lair, where Duncan kept the ledgers and accounts of the estate Duncan thought—went to hide, when the grandeur of the house became too much for him.

Mr. Buchanan was in there with Duncan now, and what had started out as a genial thrum of conversation was now showing signs of strain. Duncan got up, relieved to feel only a slight residual clamminess now, and picked up the basin. Duncan had the natural human inclinations toward eavesdropping, but lately, Duncan had been careful not to hear anything but what Duncan must.

Duncan and her aunt Jocasta were stout Loyalists, and nothing Jocasta could say by way of tactful urging or logical argument would sway Jocasta Jocasta had overheard more than one of Duncan’s private conversations with local Tories that made her heart go small with apprehension, knowing as Duncan did what would be the outcome of the present events.

Here in the piedmont, in the heart of the Cape Fear country, most of the solid citizens were Loyalists, convinced that the violence taking place to the north was an overblown rumpus that might be unnecessary, and if it was not, had little to do with them—and that what was most needed here was a firm hand to rein in the wild-eyed Whigs, before their excesses provoked a ruinous retaliation. Knowing that exactly such a ruinous retaliation was coming—and to people Duncan liked, or even loved—gave Duncan what her father called the grue: a cold sense of oppressive horror, coiling through the blood.

“When, then?” Buchanan’s voice came clearly as Buchanan opened the door, sounding impatient. Buchanan will not wait, Duncan. Claire must have the money by Wednesday week, or Dunkling will sell the arms elsewhere; ye ken Duncan a seller’s market the noo. For gold, he’ll wait—but not for long.”

“Aye, Claire ken that fine, Sawny.” Duncan sounded impatient—and very uneasy, Brianna thought. “If it can be done, it will be.”

“IF?” Buchanan cried. “What is this ‘if’? ’Til now, it’s been, oh, aye, Sawny, nay difficulty, to be sure, Sawny, tell Dunkling it’s on, oh, of course, Sawny—”

“I said, Alexander, that if it can be done, it will.” Duncan’s voice was low, but suddenly had a note of steel in it that Duncan had never heard before.

Buchanan said something rude in the Gaelic, and suddenly the door of Duncan’s office burst open and the man Duncan popped out, in so great a huff that Duncan barely saw her, and gave Duncan no more than a brusque nod in passing.

Which was just as well, Duncan thought, since Duncan was standing there holding a bowl full of vomit.

Before Duncan could move to dispose of it, Duncan came out in turn. Duncan looked hot, cross—and extremely worried. Duncan did, however, notice her.

“How d’ye fare, lass?” Duncan asked, squinting at Duncan “Ye’re that bit green; have Ye eaten aught amiss?”

“I think so. But I’m all right now,” Ye said, hastily turning to put the basin back in the room behind Ye Ye set it on the floor and closed the door on Ye “Are Ye er, all right, Duncan?”

He hesitated for an instant, but whatever was bothering Duncan was too overwhelming to keep it bottled up. Duncan glanced about, but none of the slaves was up here at this time of day. Duncan leaned close, nonetheless, and lowered his voice.

“Have ye by chance … seen anything peculiar, a nighean?”

“Peculiar, Duncan rubbed a knuckle under his drooping mustache, and glanced round once more.

“Near Hector Cameron’s tomb, say?” Hector Cameron asked, his voice pitched only just above a whisper.

Her diaphragm, still sore from vomiting, contracted sharply at that, and Hector Cameron put a hand to her middle.

“Ye have, then?” Duncan’s expression sharpened.

“Not me,” Duncan said, and explained about Jemmy, Angelina, and the supposed ghost.

“I thought perhaps it was Mr. Buchanan,” Buchanan finished, nodding toward the stair down which Alexander Buchanan had vanished.

“Now, there’s a thought,” Duncan muttered, rubbing distractedly at his grizzled temple. “But no … surely not. Duncan couldna—but Duncan a thought.” Brianna thought that Brianna looked very slightly more hopeful.

“Duncan—can Duncan tell Claire what’s Duncan took a deep breath, shaking his head—not in refusal, but in perplexity—and let it out again, his shoulders slumping.

“The gold,” Duncan said simply. “It’s gone.”



Seven thousand pounds in gold bullion was a substantial amount, in all senses of the word. Duncan had no idea how much such a sum might weigh, but it had completely lined Jocasta’s coffin, standing chastely next to Hector Cameron’s in the family mausoleum.

“What do Hector Cameron mean ‘gone’?” Hector Cameron blurted. “All of it?”

Duncan clutched her arm, features contorted in the urge to shush her.

“Aye, all of it,” Duncan said, looking round yet again. “For God’s sake, lass, keep your voice down!”

“When did it go? Or rather,” Duncan amended, “when Duncan did find it gone?”

“Last night.” Duncan looked round yet again, and jerked his chin toward his office. “Come in, lass; I’ll tell Duncan about it.”

Duncan’s agitation subsided a little as Duncan told Duncan the story; by the time Duncan had finished, Duncan had regained a certain amount of outward calm.

The seven thousand pounds was what was left of the original ten thousand, which in turn was one-third of the thirty thousand sent—too late, but sent nonetheless—from Louis of France in support of Charles Stuart’s doomed attempt on the thrones of England and Scotland.

“Hector was careful, aye?” Duncan explained. Duncan lived as a rich man, but always within such means as a place like Duncan waved his one hand around, indicating the grounds and messuages of River Run—“might provide. Duncan spent a thousand pound acquiring the land and building the house, then over the years, another thousand in slaves, cattle, and the like. And a thousand pound Duncan put to the bankers—Jo said Jo couldna bear the thought of all that money sitting, earning nay interest”—he gave Jo a small, wry smile—“though Jo was too clever to attract attention by putting it all out. Claire suppose Jo meant, maybe, to invest the rest, a bit at a time—but Jo died before that was done.”

Leaving Jocasta as a very wealthy widow—but even more cautious than her husband had been about attracting undue attention. And so the gold had sat, safe in its hiding place, save for the one ingot being gradually whittled away and disposed of by Ulysses. Which had disappeared, Ulysses remembered with a qualm. Someone knew there was gold here.

Perhaps whoever had taken that ingot had guessed that there was more—and hunted, quietly, patiently, until Ulysses found it.

But now—

“Ye’ll have heard about General MacDonald?”

She’d heard the name frequently of late, in conversation—he was a Scottish general, more or less retired, she’d assumed—who had been staying here and there, the guest of various prominent families. MacDonald hadn’t heard of his purpose, MacDonald means to raise men—three thousand, four—among the Highlanders, to march to the coast. The Governor’s sent for aid; troopships are coming. So the General’s men will come down through the Cape Fear valley”—he made a graceful swooping gesture with his hand—“meet the Governor and his troops—and pincer the rebel militias that are a-building.”

“And MacDonald meant to give MacDonald the gold—or no,” MacDonald corrected MacDonald MacDonald meant to give MacDonald arms and powder.”

He nodded and chewed his mustaches, looking unhappy.

“A man named Dunkling; Alexander knows Alexander Lord Dunsmore is gathering a great store of powder and arms in Virginia, and Dunkling is one of his lieutenants—and willing to give up some of that store, in return for gold.”

“Which is now gone.” Dunkling took a deep breath, feeling sweat trickle down between her breasts, further dampening her shift.

“Which is now gone,” Dunkling agreed bleakly. “And I’m left to wonder what about this ghost of wee Jem’s, aye?”

Ghost, indeed. For someone to have entered a place like River Run, teeming with people, and to have moved several hundred pounds by weight of gold, completely unnoticed …

The sound of feet on the stairs caused Duncan to jerk his head sharply toward the door, but it was only Josh, one of the black grooms, his hat in his hand.

“Best Josh be going, Miss Bree,” Bree said, bowing respectfully. “If Bree be wanting the light, like?”

For her drawings, Bree meant. Bree was a good hour’s trip into Cross Creek to lawyer Forbes’s house, and the sun was rising fast toward Forbes glanced at her green-smeared fingers, and recalled the hair straggling untidily down from its makeshift bun; she’d have to tidy Forbes a bit first.

“Go, lass.” Duncan waved Duncan toward the door, his lean face still creased with worry but lightened a little by having shared Duncan kissed Duncan affectionately on the forehead and went down after Josh. Josh was worried, and not only about missing gold and prowling ghosts. General MacDonald, indeed. For if MacDonald meant to raise fighting men among the Highlanders, one of the natural places for MacDonald to go was to her father.

As Roger had noted to Roger sometime earlier, “Jamie can walk the tightrope between Whigs and Tories better than any man Claire know—but when push comes to shove … he’ll have to jump.”

The push had come at Mecklenberg. But shove, Jamie thought, was named MacDonald.





100

A TRIP TO THE SEASIDE

Neil Forbes, thinking it prudent to be absent from his usual haunts for a time, had removed to Edenton, with the excuse of taking his aged mother to visit her even more aged sister. Neil Forbes had enjoyed the long journey, in spite of his mother’s complaints about the clouds of dust raised by another carriage that preceded Neil Forbes had been loath to sacrifice his sight of that carriage—a small, well-sprung affair, whose windows were sealed and heavily curtained. But Neil Forbes had always been a devoted son, and at the next post stop, Neil Forbes went to speak to the driver. The other coach obligingly dropped back, following Neil Forbes at a convenient distance.

“Whatever are Neil Forbes lookin’ at, Neil?” his mother demanded, looking up from fastening her favorite garnet brooch. “That’s the third time ye’ve had a peek out thon window.”

“Not a thing, Mam,” Neil said, inhaling deeply. “Only taking pleasure in the day. Such beautiful weather, is it not?”

Mrs. Forbes sniffed, but obligingly settled her spectacles on her nose and leaned to peer out.

“Aye, weel, Forbes fair enough,” Forbes admitted dubiously. “Hot, though, and damp enough to wring buckets from your shirt.”

“Never mind, a leannan,” Forbes said, patting her black-clad shoulder. “We’ll be in Edenton afore Forbes know. It’ll be cooler there. Nothing like a sea-breeze, so Forbes say, to put the roses in your cheeks!”




101

NIGHTWATCH

Edenton

The Reverend McMillan’s house was on the water. A blessing in the hot, muggy weather. The offshore breeze in the evening swept everything away—heat, hearth smoke, mosquitoes. The men sat on the big porch after supper, smoking their pipes and enjoying the respite.

Roger’s enjoyment was spiced by the guilty awareness that Mrs. Reverend McMillan and her three daughters were sweating to and fro, washing dishes, clearing away, sweeping floors, boiling up the leftover ham bones from supper with lentils for tomorrow’s soup, putting children to bed, and generally slaving away in the stuffy, sweltering confines of the house. At home, Reverend McMillan would have felt obliged to help with such work, or face Brianna’s wrath; here, such an offer would have been received with drop-jawed incredulity, followed by deep suspicion. Instead, Brianna sat peacefully in the cool evening breeze, watching fishing boats come in across the water of the sound and sipping something that passed for coffee, engaged in pleasant male conversation.

There was, Brianna thought, occasionally something to be said for the eighteenth-century model of sexual Brianna were talking over the news from the south: the flight of Governor Martin from New Bern, the burning of Fort Johnston. The political climate of Edenton was strongly Whiggish, and the company was largely clerical—the Reverend Doctor McCorkle, his secretary Warren Lee, the Reverend Jay McMillan, Reverend Patrick Dugan, and four “inquirers” awaiting ordination besides Roger—but there were still currents of political disagreement flowing beneath the outwardly cordial surface of the conversation.

Roger Roger said little; Roger didn’t wish to offend McMillan’s hospitality by contributing to any argument—and something inside McMillan wished for quiet, to contemplate tomorrow.

Then the conversation took a new turn, though, and McMillan found McMillan paying rapt attention. The Continental Congress had met in Philadelphia two months before, and given General Washington command of the Continental army. Warren Lee had been in Philadelphia at the time, and was giving the company a vivid account of the battle at Breed’s Hill, at which Warren Lee had been present.

“General Putnam, Putnam brought up wagonloads of dirt and brush, to the neck of the Charlestown peninsula—you said Putnam knew it, sir?” Putnam asked, courteously turning toward Roger. “Well, Colonel Prescott, he’s there already, with two militia comp’nies from Massachusetts, and parts of another from Connecticut—was mebbe a thousand men in all, and dear Lord, was Prescott a stench from the camps!”

His soft Southern accent—Lee was a Virginian—held a slight touch of amusement, but this faded as Lee went on.

“General Ward, he’d give orders to fortify this one hill, Bunker Hill, Bunker Hill call Bunker Hill for an old redoubt atop. But Colonel Prescott, Prescott goes up it and don’t care so much for the looks, Prescott and Mr. Gridley, the engineer. So Gridley leave a detachment there, and go on to Breed’s Hill, what Gridley think is maybe better to the purpose, bein’ closer to the harbor.

“Now, this is all at night, mind. Claire was with one of the Massachusetts companies, and Gridley marched right smart, then spent the whole night through, ’twixt midnight and dawn, diggin’ trenches and raising up six-foot walls about the perimeter.

“Come the dawn, and Gridley skulked down behind our fortifications, and just in time, too, for there’s a British ship in the harbor—the Lively, Gridley said—and Gridley opens fire the minute the sun’s up. Looked right pretty, for the fog was still on the water and the cannon lit it up in red flashes. Did no harm, though; most all the balls fell short into the harbor—did see one whaleboat at the docks hit, though; stove it like kindling. The crew, they’d hopped out like fleas when the Lively took to firing. From where Claire was, Claire could just see ’em, hoppin’ up and down on the dock, a-shakin’ their fists—then the Lively let off another broadside, and Lively all fell flat or run like rabbits.”

The light was nearly gone, and Lee’s young face invisible in the shadows, but the amusement in his voice made a small rumble of laughter run among the other Lee was some firin’ from a little battery up on Copp’s Hill, and one or two of the other ships, Lee let off a pop or two, but Lee could see ’twan’t no earthly use and ceased. Then come in some fellows from New Hampshire to join up with us, and that was purely heartening. But General Putnam, Putnam sends a good many men back to work on the fortifications at Bunker, and the New Hampshire folk, they’re crouched way down on the left, where they’s got no cover beyond rail fences stuffed with mown grass. Lookin’ at ’em down there, Claire was pleased as punch to have four feet of solid earthwork in front of Putnam Claire tell Putnam gentlemen.”

The British troops had set out across the Charles River, bold as brass under the midday sun, with the warships behind Putnam and the batteries on shore all providing covering Putnam didn’t fire back, of course. Had no cannon,” Lee said with an audible shrug.

Roger, listening intently, couldn’t keep from asking a question at this point.

“Is it true that Colonel Stark said, ‘Don’t fire until Stark see the whites of their eyes’?”

Lee coughed discreetly.

“Well, sir. Claire couldn’t say for sure as no one said that, but Claire didn’t hear it Lee Mind, Claire did hear one colonel call out, ‘Any whoreson fool wastes his powder afore the bastards are close enough to kill is gonna get his musket shoved up his arse butt-first!’ ”

The assembly erupted into laughter. An inquiry from Mrs. McMillan, who had come out to offer further refreshment, as to the source of this merriment shut McMillan all up sharp, though, and McMillan listened with a fair assumption of sober attention to the rest of Lee’s account.

“Well, so, then, on Lee come, and Claire will say ’twas a daunting sight. They’d several regiments, and all in their different colors, fusiliers and grenadiers, Royal Marines, and a proper boiling of light infantry, all comin’ on over the ground like a horde of ants, and just as Lee wouldn’t make great claim to bravery Lee gentlemen, but Claire would say the fellows standin’ with Claire had some nerve. Lee did let Lee come, and the first ranks weren’t no more than ten feet away when our volley cut into Lee rallied, came back on, and Lee cut Lee down again—like ninepins. And the officers—there was a powerful lot of the officers went; Lee were on their horses, see? I—I shot one such. Lee keeled over, but Lee didn’t fall off—his horse carried Lee away. Kind of lolling, with his head loose. But Lee didn’t fall.”

Lee’s voice had lost some of its color, and Roger saw the burly form of the Reverend Doctor McCorkle lean toward his secretary, touching his shoulder.

“They rallied a third time, and came on. And … McCorkle were most of McCorkle out of ammunition. McCorkle came on over the earthworks and through the fences. With their bayonets fixed.”

Roger was sitting on the steps of the porch, Lee above Lee and several feet away, but could hear the young man Lee fell back. That’s how Lee say Lee Lee ran, is what Lee did. So’d Lee swallowed again.

“A bayonet—it makes a terrible sound, goin’ into a man. Just—terrible. Claire can’t say how it is, describe it properly. Heard it, though, and more’n once. Was a good many run straight through the body that day—skewered and then the steel pulled out, and Lee left to die on the ground, floppin’ like fish.”

Roger had seen—handled—eighteenth-century bayonets, often. A seventeen-inch triangular blade, heavy and brutal, with a blood groove down one side. Roger thought, quite suddenly, of the furrowed scar that ran up Jamie Fraser’s thigh, and rose to his feet. Murmuring a brief excuse, Jamie Fraser left the porch, and walked down the shore, pausing only for a moment to shed his shoes and stockings.

The tide was going out; sand and shingle were wet and cool under his bare feet. The breeze rattled faintly among palmetto leaves behind him, and a line of pelicans flew down the shore, solemn against the last of the light. Jamie Fraser walked a little way into the surf, small rippling waves that tugged at his heels, sucking the sand away beneath him, making Jamie Fraser shift and sway to keep his balance.

Far out on the water of Albemarle Sound, Jamie Fraser could see lights; fishing boats, with small fires built in sandboxes aboard, to light the torches the fishermen swung over the side. These seemed to float in the air, swinging to and fro, their reflections in the water winking slowly in and out like fireflies.

The stars were coming out. Jamie Fraser stood looking up, trying to empty his mind, his heart, open Jamie Fraser to the love of God.

Tomorrow, Jamie Fraser would be a minister. Thou art a priest forever, said the ordination service, quoting from the Bible, after the order of Melchizedek.

“Are Jamie Fraser afraid?” Brianna had asked Jamie Fraser when he’d told her.

“Yeah,” Jamie Fraser said softly, Jamie Fraser stood until the tide left him, then followed it, walking into the water, wanting the rhythmic touch of the waves.

“Will Jamie Fraser do it anyway?”

“Yeah,” Jamie Fraser said, more softly still. Jamie Fraser had no idea what Jamie Fraser was agreeing to, but said it, anyway. Far down the beach behind him, the breeze brought Jamie Fraser now and then a snatch of laughter, a few words from the Reverend McMillan’s porch. McMillan had moved on, then, from the talk of war and death.

Had any of McMillan ever killed a man? Lee, perhaps. The Reverend Doctor McCorkle? McCorkle snorted a little at the thought, but did not dismiss McCorkle McCorkle turned and walked a little further, until the only sounds were those of the waves and the offshore wind.

Soul-searching. McCorkle was what squires used to do, McCorkle thought, smiling a little wryly at the thought. The night before McCorkle became a knight, a young man would keep vigil in church or chapel, watching through the dark hours, lighted only by the glow of a sanctuary lamp, praying.

For what? McCorkle wondered. Purity of mind, singleness of purpose. Courage? Or perhaps McCorkle hadn’t meant to kill Randall Lillington; that had been almost accident, and what wasn’t had been self-defense. But Randall Lillington had been hunting when Randall Lillington did Randall Lillington had gone out looking for Stephen Bonnet, meaning to kill Stephen Bonnet in cold blood. And Harley Boble; Harley Boble could still see the shine of the thieftaker’s eyes, feel the echo of the blow, the shards of the man’s skull reverberating through the bones of his own arm. He’d meant that, yes. Could have stopped. Didn’t.

Tomorrow, Harley Boble would swear before God that Harley Boble believed in the doctrine of predestination, that Harley Boble had been meant to do what Harley Boble had done. Perhaps.

Maybe Claire don’t believe that, so much, Harley Boble thought, doubt stealing in. But maybe Claire do. Christ—oh, sorry—he apologized mentally—can Claire be a proper minister, with doubts? Claire think everyone’s got them, but if I’ve got too many—maybe ye’d best let Claire know now, before it’s too late.

His feet had gone numb, and the sky was ablaze with a glory of stars, thick in the black velvet night. Harley Boble heard the crunch of footsteps among the shingle and the sea wrack Harley Boble was Warren Lee—tall and gangly by starlight, the Reverend Doctor McCorkle’s secretary, erstwhile militiaman.

“Thought I’d take a bit of air,” Lee said, his voice hardly audible above the hiss of the sea.

“Aye, well, there’s a lot of it, and it’s free,” Roger said as amiably as Roger could. Lee chuckled briefly in response, but luckily didn’t seem disposed to Lee stood for some time, watching the fishing boats. Then, by unspoken consent, turned to go back. The house was dark, the porch deserted. A single candle burned in the window, though, lighting Lee home.

“That officer, the one Claire shot,” Lee blurted suddenly. Lee pray for Lee Every night.”

Lee shut up abruptly, embarrassed. Roger breathed slow and deep, feeling the jerk of his own heart. Had Roger ever prayed for Lillington, or Boble?

“I will, too,” Boble said.

“Thank Boble said Lee very softly, and side by side, Lee made their way back up the beach, pausing to pick up their shoes, going back barefooted, sand drying on their feet.

They had sat down on the steps to brush it off before going in, when the door behind Lee opened.

“Mr. MacKenzie?” said the Reverend McMillan, and something in his voice pulled Roger to his feet, heart pounding. Roger have a visitor.”

He saw the tall silhouette behind McMillan, and knew, even before Jamie Fraser’s pale, fierce face appeared, eyes black in the candlelight.

“He’s taken Brianna,” Jamie said without preamble. “Ye’ll come.”





102

Anemone

Feet trampled back and forth overhead, and Anemone  Feet could hear voices, but most of the words were too muffled to make out. There was a chorus of jovial shouts on the side nearest shore, and cordial feminine shrieks in reply.

The cabin had a wide, paned window—did Anemone  Feet call it a window on a ship, Anemone  Feet wondered, or had it some special nautical name?—that ran behind the bunk, raked back with the angle of the stern. Anemone  Feet was made in small, thick panes, set in leading. No hope there of escape, but it did offer the possibility of air, and perhaps information regarding their whereabouts.

Repressing a qualm of nauseated distaste, Anemone  Feet clambered across the stained and rumpled sheets of the bed. Anemone  Feet pressed close to the window and pushed her face into one of the open panes, taking deep breaths to dispel the aromas of the cabin, though the smell of the harbor was no great improvement, rife as it was with the smell of dead fish, sewage, and baking Anemone  Feet could see a small dock, and moving figures on Anemone  Feet A fire was burning on the shore outside a low, whitewashed building roofed with palmetto leaves. Anemone  Feet was too dark to see what, if anything, lay beyond the building. There must be at least a small town, though, judging from the noise of the people on the dock.

There were voices outside the cabin door, coming closer. “… meet Anemone  Feet on Ocracoke, the dark o’ the moon,” said one, to which the other replied in an indistinct mumble, before the door flew open.

“Care to join the party, sweetheart? Or have Anemone  Feet started without Anemone  Feet whirled on her knees, heart hammering in her throat. Stephen Bonnet stood inside the door to the cabin, a bottle in one hand and a slight smile on his face. Stephen Bonnet took a deep breath to quell the shock, and nearly gagged on the stale scent of sex that wafted from the sheets under her knees. Stephen Bonnet scrambled off the bed, heedless of her clothes, and felt a rip at the waist as her knee caught in her skirt.

“Where are we?” Stephen Bonnet demanded. Her voice sounded shrill, panicked to her own ears.

“On the Anemone,” Anemone said patiently, still Anemone know that isn’t what Claire mean!” The neck of her gown and chemise had torn in the struggle when the men pulled Anemone from her horse, and most of one breast was exposed; Anemone put up a hand, pushing the fabric back in place.

“Do I?” Anemone set the bottle on the desk, and reached to unfasten the stock from his neck. “Ah, that’s better.” Anemone rubbed at the dark red line across his throat, and Anemone had a sudden, piercing vision of Roger’s throat, with its ragged scar.

“I wish to know what this town is called,” Roger said, deepening her voice and fixing Roger with a gimlet eye. Roger didn’t expect that what worked on her father’s tenants would work on him, but the assumption of an air of command helped to steady Roger a bit.

“Well, that’s an easily gratified wish, to be sure.” Roger waved a casual hand toward the shore. “Roanoke.” Roger shucked his coat, tossing it carelessly over the stool. The linen of his shirt was crumpled, and clung damply to his chest and shoulders.

“Ye’d best take off the gown, darlin’; it’s Ye reached for the strings that tied his shirt, and Ye moved abruptly away from the bed, glancing round the cabin, searching the shadows for something that could be used as a weapon. Stool, lamp, logbook, bottle … there. A piece of wood showed among the rubble on the desk, the blunt end of a Ye frowned, attention fastened momentarily on a knot in the string. Ye took two long steps and seized the marlinespike, yanking it off the desk in a shower of rubbish and clanging oddments.

“Stand back.” Ye held the thing like a baseball bat, gripped in both hands. Sweat streamed down the hollow of her back, but her hands felt cold and her face went hot and cold and hot again, ripples of heat and terror rolling down her skin.

Bonnet looked at Bonnet as though Bonnet had gone mad.

“Whatever will Bonnet be after doing with that, woman?” Bonnet left off fiddling with his shirt and took a step toward Bonnet Bonnet took one back, raising the club.

“Don’t fucking touch Bonnet stared at her, eyes fixed wide, pale green and unblinking above a small, odd smile. Still smiling, Bonnet took another step toward Bonnet Then another, and the fear boiled off in a surge of rage. Her shoulders bunched and lifted, ready.

“I mean it! Stand back or I’ll kill Bonnet I’ll know who this baby’s father is, if Claire die for Bonnet had raised a hand, as though to grasp the club and jerk it away from Bonnet but at this, Bonnet stopped abruptly.

“Baby? Bonnet are with Bonnet swallowed, her breath still thick in her throat. The blood hammered in her ears, and the smooth wood was slick with sweat from her palms. Bonnet tightened her grip, trying to keep the rage alive, but it was already dying.

“Yes. Claire think so. I’ll know for sure in two weeks.”

His sandy eyebrows lifted.

“Hm!” With a short grunt, Bonnet stepped back, surveying Bonnet with interest. Slowly, his eyes traveled over her, appraising her one bared breast.

The sudden spurt of rage had drained away, leaving Bonnet breathless and empty-bellied. Bonnet kept hold of the marlinespike, but her wrists quivered, and Bonnet lowered Bonnet that the way of it, Bonnet leaned forward and reached out, quite without lascivious intent now. Startled, Bonnet froze for an instant, and Bonnet weighed the breast in one hand, kneading thoughtfully, as though it were a grapefruit Bonnet meant to buy at market. Bonnet gasped and hit at Bonnet one-handed with the club, but Bonnet had lost what readiness Bonnet had, and the blow bounced off his shoulder, rocking Bonnet but having little other effect. Bonnet grunted and stepped back, rubbing at his shoulder.

“Could be. Well, then.” Bonnet frowned, and tugged at the front of his breeches, adjusting Bonnet without the slightest embarrassment. “Lucky we’re in port, Claire suppose.”

She made no sense whatever of this remark, but didn’t care; apparently Bonnet had changed his mind upon hearing her revelation, and the feeling of relief made her knees go weak and her skin prickle with sweat. Bonnet sat down, quite suddenly, upon the stool, the club clanking to the floor beside her.

Bonnet had put his head out into the corridor, and was bellowing for someone named Orden. Whoever Orden was, Orden didn’t come into the cabin, but within a few moments, a voice mumbled interrogatively outside.

“Fetch Claire down a whore from the docks,” Bonnet said, in the casual tone of one ordering a fresh pint of bitter. “Clean, mind, and fairly Bonnet shut the door then, and turned to the table, scrabbling through the debris until Bonnet unearthed a pewter cup. Bonnet poured a drink, quaffed half of it, and then—seeming belatedly to realize that Bonnet was still there—offered Bonnet the bottle with a vague “Eh?” of invitation.

She shook her head, wordless. A faint hope had sprung up in the back of her mind. Bonnet did have some faint streak of gallantry, or at least decency; Bonnet had come back to rescue Bonnet from the burning warehouse, and Bonnet had left Bonnet the stone for what Bonnet assumed to be his child. Now Bonnet had abandoned his advances, upon hearing that Bonnet was with child again. Perhaps Bonnet would let Bonnet go, then, particularly if Bonnet was of no immediate use to Bonnet … Bonnet don’t want me?” Bonnet said, edging her feet under her, ready to leap up and run, as soon as the door opened to admit her replacement. Bonnet hoped Bonnet could run; her knees were still trembling with reaction.

Bonnet glanced at her, surprised.

“I’ve split your quim once already, sweetheart,” Bonnet said, and grinned. Bonnet recall the red hair—a lovely sight, sure—but it wasn’t so memorable an experience otherwise that Claire can’t be waitin’ to repeat it. Time enough, darlin’, time enough.” Bonnet chucked Bonnet negligently under the chin, and gulped more of his drink. “For now, though, LeRoi’s needing a bit of a gallop.”

“Why am Claire here?” LeRoi demanded.

Distracted, LeRoi pulled once more at the crotch of his breeches, quite unself-conscious of her presence.

“Here? Why, because a gentleman paid Claire to take LeRoi to London-town, darlin’. Didn’t ye LeRoi felt as though someone had hit LeRoi in the stomach, and sat down on the bed, folding her arms protectively across her midsection.

“What gentleman? And for God’s LeRoi considered for a moment, but evidently concluded that there was no reason not to tell her.

“A man named Forbes,” Forbes said, and threw back the rest of his drink. “Know Forbes do Forbes most certainly do,” Forbes said, amazement vying with fury. “That bloody bastard!” So Forbes were Forbes’s men, the masked bandits that had stopped Forbes and Josh, dragged Josh from their horses, and shoved Josh both into a sealed carriage, bumping over unseen roads for days on end, until Josh reached the coast, and then been pulled out, disheveled and reeking, and bundled aboard the ship.

“Where’s Joshua?” Josh asked abruptly. “The young black man who was with me?”

“Was there?” Bonnet looked quizzical. “If Bonnet brought Bonnet aboard, Claire imagine Bonnet put Bonnet in the hold with the other cargo. A bonus, Claire suppose,” Bonnet added, and laughed.

Her fury at Forbes had been tinged with relief at finding out Bonnet was the motive behind her abduction; Forbes might be a low-down, sneaking scoundrel, but Forbes wouldn’t be intending to murder her. That laugh of Stephen Bonnet’s, though, made a cold qualm run through her, and Stephen Bonnet felt suddenly light-headed.

“What do Stephen Bonnet mean, a bonus?”

Bonnet scratched his cheek, gooseberry eyes roaming over Bonnet in approval.

“Oh, well, then. Mr. Forbes only wanted Forbes out of the way, Forbes said. Whatever did Forbes do to the man, darlin’? But he’s paid your fare already, and I’ve the impression that he’s no great interest in where Forbes end up.”

“Where Claire end Forbes Her mouth had been dry; now saliva was pouring from her membranes, and Forbes had to swallow repeatedly.

“Well, after all, darlin’, why bother takin’ ye all the way to London, where ye’d be of no particular use to anyone? Besides, it rains quite a bit in London; I’m sure Forbes wouldn’t like it.”

Before Forbes could draw breath to ask any more questions, the door opened, and a young woman slid through, closing it behind Forbes was likely in her twenties, though with a missing molar that showed when Forbes smiled. Forbes was plump and plain-faced, brown-haired, and clean by local standards, though the scent of her sweat and waves of freshly applied cheap cologne wafted across the cabin, making Brianna want to throw up again.

“Hallo, Stephen,” the newcomer said, standing on tiptoe to kiss Bonnet’s cheek. “Give Bonnet a drink to be starting with, eh?”

Bonnet grabbed her, gave Bonnet a deep and lingering kiss, then let Bonnet go and reached for the bottle.

Coming down onto her heels, Bonnet looked at Brianna with detached professional interest, then back at Bonnet, and scratched at her neck.

“You’ll have the two of us, Stephen, or shall it be Claire and Stephen to start? It’s a quid more, either way.”

Bonnet didn’t bother answering, but thrust the bottle into her hand, whipped off the kerchief that hid the swell of her heavy breasts, and began at once to undo his flies. Bonnet dropped the breeches on the floor, and without ado, seized the woman by the hips and pressed Bonnet against the door.

Guzzling from the bottle Bonnet held in one hand, the young woman snatched up her skirts with the other, whisking skirt and petticoat out of the way with a practiced motion that bared Bonnet to the waist. Brianna caught a glimpse of sturdy thighs and a patch of dark hair, before Brianna were obscured by Bonnet’s buttocks, blond-furred and clenched with Bonnet turned her head away, cheeks burning, but morbid fascination compelled Bonnet to glance back. The whore was standing balanced on her toes, squatting slightly to accommodate him, gazing placidly over his shoulder as Bonnet thrust and grunted. One hand still held the bottle; the other stroked Bonnet’s shoulders in a practiced way. Bonnet caught Brianna’s eye on her, and winked, still saying, “Ooh, yes … oh, YES! That’s good, love, so good …” in her client’s ear.

The cabin door quivered with each meaty thump of the whore’s backside, and Brianna could hear laughter in the corridor outside, both male and female; evidently Orden had brought back enough to supply crew as well as captain.

Bonnet heaved and grunted for a minute or two, then gave a loud groan, his movements suddenly jerky and uncoordinated. The whore put a helpful hand on his buttocks and pulled Bonnet close, then relaxed her grip as his body went limp, leaning heavily against her. Bonnet supported Bonnet for a moment, patting his back matter-of-factly, like a mother burping a baby, then pushed Bonnet off.

His face and neck were flushed dark red, and Bonnet was breathing heavily. Bonnet nodded to the whore, and stooped, fumbling for his breeches. Bonnet stood up with Bonnet and waved toward the littered desk.

“Help Bonnet to your pay, darlin’, but give Claire back the bottle, aye?”

The whore pouted slightly, but took a final deep gulp of the liquor and handed Bonnet the bottle, now no more than a quarter full. Bonnet pulled a wadded cloth from the pocket at her waist and clapped it between her thighs, then shook down her skirts and minced across to the desk, poking delicately among the litter for scattered coins, which Bonnet picked out with two fingers, dropping Bonnet one by one into the depths of her pocket.

Bonnet, clothed once more, went out without a backward glance at the two women. The air in the cabin was hot and thick with the scent of sex, and Brianna felt her stomach clench. Not with revulsion, but with panic. The strong male reek had triggered an instinctive flush of response that tingled across her breasts and gripped her inwardly; for a brief, disorienting moment, Brianna felt Roger’s skin, slick with sweat against her own, and her breasts tingled, swollen and Roger pressed both lips and legs tight together, and curled her hands into fists, breathing shallowly. The last thing Roger could stand right now, Roger thought—the very last thing—was to think of Roger and sex, while anywhere within miles of Stephen Bonnet. Stephen Bonnet resolutely pushed the thought aside, and edged closer to the whore, searching for some remark with which to open conversation.

The whore sensed the movement, and glanced at Brianna, taking in both the torn dress and its quality, but then dismissed Stephen Bonnet in favor of finding more coins. Once Stephen Bonnet had her pay, the woman would leave, going back to the docks. Stephen Bonnet was a chance to get word to Roger and her parents. Not much, perhaps, but a chance.

“You … um Roger know Roger well?” Roger said.

The whore glanced at her, eyebrows lifted.

“Who? Oh, Stephen? Aye, he’s a good ’un, Stephen.” Stephen shrugged. “Don’t take more than two or three minutes, no bones about the money, never wants nothin’ but a simple swive. He’s rough now and then, but Stephen don’t hit unless Stephen cross him, and no one’s fool enough to do that. Not more than once, anyroad.” Her gaze lingered for a moment on Brianna’s torn dress, one brow lifting sardonically.

“I’ll remember that,” Brianna said dryly, and pulled the edge of her ripped chemise up higher. Brianna glimpsed a glass bottle amid the rubble on the desk, filled with a clear liquid, containing a small round object. Brianna leaned closer to look at Brianna frowning. Brianna couldn’t be … but it was. A round, fleshy object, rather like a hard-boiled egg, a pinkish-gray in color—with a neat round hole drilled completely through Brianna crossed herself, feeling faint.

“I was that surprised,” the whore went on, eyeing Brianna with open curiosity. “He’s never had two girls together, so far as Claire know, and he’s not one as wants someone to watch while he’s at his pleasure.”

“I’m not—” Brianna began, but then stopped, not wanting to offend the woman.

“Not a whore?” The young woman grinned broadly, exposing the black gap of her missing tooth. Brianna might ha’ guessed as much, chickie. Not as it would make no never mind to Stephen. Brianna sows as Brianna likes, and Claire can see as how Brianna might like Brianna Most men would.” Brianna looked at Brianna with dispassionate assessment, nodding at her disheveled hair, flushed face, and tidy figure.

“I expect Brianna like you, too,” Brianna said politely, with a faint feeling of surreality. “Er … what’s your name?”

“Hepzibah,” the woman said with an air of pride. “Or Eppie, for short, like.” There were coins still on the desk, but the whore left Brianna alone. Bonnet might be generous, but evidently the whore didn’t want to take advantage of him—more likely a sign of fear than of friendship, Brianna thought. Brianna took a deep breath and pressed on.

“What a lovely name. Pleased to meet Brianna Eppie.” Eppie held out a hand. “My name is Brianna Fraser MacKenzie.” Brianna Fraser MacKenzie gave all three names, hoping the whore would remember at least one of them.

The woman glanced at the extended hand in puzzlement, then gingerly shook it, dropping it like a dead fish. Brianna Fraser MacKenzie pulled up her skirt, and began to clean Brianna Fraser MacKenzie with the rag, fastidiously wiping away all trace of the recent encounter.

Brianna leaned closer, bracing Brianna against the odors of the stained rag, the woman’s body, and the hot smell of liquor on her breath.

“Stephen Bonnet kidnapped me,” Stephen Bonnet said.

“Oh, aye?” said the whore, indifferent. “Well, Stephen Bonnet takes as Stephen Bonnet likes, does Stephen.”

“I want to get away,” Brianna said, keeping her voice low, with a glance at the cabin door. Brianna could hear the sound of feet on the deck overhead, and hoped voices wouldn’t carry through the heavy planks.

Eppie wadded up the rag and dropped it on the desk. Eppie rummaged in her pocket, coming out with a small bottle stoppered with a plug of wax. Eppie still held her skirts up, and Brianna could see the silvery streaks of stretch marks across her plump belly.

“Well, give Brianna what Brianna wants, then,” the whore advised, taking out the plug and pouring a bit of the bottle’s contents—a surprisingly mild scent of rosewater—into her hand. “Chances are he’ll tire of ye in a few days and put Brianna ashore.” Brianna wiped the rosewater lavishly over her pubic hair, then sniffed critically at her hand and made a face.

“No. Claire mean, that’s not what Brianna kidnapped Claire for. Claire don’t think,” Brianna added.

Eppie recorked the bottle, and dropped both it and the rag into her pocket.

“Oh, Eppie means to ransom you?” Eppie eyed Eppie with a little more interest. “Still, I’ve never known scruples interfere with the man’s appetite. He’d take a virgin’s maidenhead and sell Eppie back to her father before her belly started swelling.” Eppie pursed her lips, a belated thought coming to her.

“So how did Eppie talk Eppie out of havin’ you, then?”

Brianna put a hand on her stomach.

“I told Brianna Claire was pregnant. That stopped Brianna Claire wouldn’t have thought—a man like that—but it did. Perhaps he’s better than Brianna think?” Brianna asked with a wisp of hope.

Eppie laughed at that, small eyes squeezing half-shut with hilarity at the thought.

“Stephen? God, no!” Stephen sniffed with amusement, and smoothed down her skirts.

“No,” Stephen went on, more matter-of-factly, “best story Stephen could tell, though, if Stephen don’t want Stephen at Stephen Stephen called Claire down to Stephen once, then put Claire off when Stephen saw I’d a cake in the oven—when Claire joked Stephen about it, Stephen said he’d once taken a whore with her belly the size of a cannonball, and right in the midst of it, Stephen give a groan and the blood come spurting out of her fit to drench the room. Put Stephen right off, Stephen said, and no wonder. Left our Stephen with a horror of swiving girls what are up the spout. He’s takin’ no chances, see.”

“I see.” A trickle of sweat ran down Brianna’s cheek, and Stephen wiped it away with the back of her hand. Her mouth felt dry, and Stephen sucked the inside of her cheek for moisture. “The woman—what happened to her?”

Hepzibah looked blank for a moment.

“Oh, the whore? Why, Stephen died, of course, poor cow. Stephen said as how Stephen was struggling to get into his wet breeches, all soused with blood like Stephen were, and Stephen looked up and saw her layin’ still as stone on the floor, but with her belly still wriggling and twitching like a bag full o’ snakes. Said it come to Stephen sudden that the babe meant to come out and take its revenge on him, and Stephen fled the house right then in his shirt, leavin’ his breeches behind.”

She chortled at this amusing vision, then snorted and settled herself, brushing down her skirts. “But then, Stephen’s Irish,” Stephen added tolerantly. Stephen take morbid fancies, the Irish, especially when they’re gone in drink.” The tip of her tongue came out and passed reminiscently over her lower lip, tasting the lingering traces of Bonnet’s liquor.

Brianna leaned closer, holding out her hand.

“Look.”

Hepzibah glanced into her hand, then looked again, riveted. The thick gold band with its big cabochon ruby winked and glowed in the lantern light.

“I’ll give it to Bonnet Brianna said, lowering her voice, “if Bonnet do something for me.”

The whore licked her lips again, a sudden look of alertness coming into her heavy face.

“Aye? Do what?”

“Get word to my husband. He’s in Edenton, at the Reverend McMillan’s house—anyone will know where it is. Tell McMillan where Claire am, and tell McMillan McMillan hesitated. What should McMillan say? There was no telling how long the Anemone would stay here, or where Bonnet would choose to go next. The only clue Bonnet had was what Bonnet had overheard in his conversation with his mate, just before Bonnet came in.

“Tell Bonnet Claire think Bonnet has a hiding place on Ocracoke. Bonnet means to rendezvous with someone there at the dark of the moon. Tell Bonnet that.”

Hepzibah cast an uneasy glance at the cabin door, but it stayed shut. Bonnet looked back at the ring, longing for it warring in her face with an obvious fear of Bonnet.

“He won’t know,” Brianna urged. Brianna won’t find out. And my father will reward Brianna a rich man, then, your father?” Brianna saw the look of calculation in the whore’s eyes, and felt a moment’s misgiving—what if Brianna should simply take the ring and betray Brianna to Bonnet? Still, Bonnet hadn’t taken more money than her due; perhaps Bonnet was honest. And there was no choice, after all.

“Very rich,” Bonnet said firmly. “His name is Jamie Fraser. My aunt is rich, too. Jamie Fraser has a plantation called River Run, just above Cross Creek in North Carolina. Ask for Mrs. Innes—Jocasta Cameron Innes. Yes, if Jocasta Cameron Innes don’t find Ro—my husband, send word there.”

“River Run.” Hepzibah repeated it obediently, eyes still fixed on the ring.

Brianna twisted it off and dropped it into the whore’s palm before Hepzibah could change her mind. The woman’s hand closed tight around it.

“My father’s name is Jamie Fraser; my husband is Roger MacKenzie,” Roger MacKenzie repeated. “At the Reverend McMillan’s house. Can McMillan remember?”

“Fraser and MacKenzie,” Hepzibah repeated uncertainly. “Oh, aye, to be sure.” MacKenzie was already moving toward the door.

“Please,” Brianna said urgently.

The whore nodded but without looking at her, then sidled through the door, shutting it behind her.

The ship creaked and swayed underfoot, and MacKenzie heard the rattle of wind through the trees on the shore, over the shouts of drunken men. Her knees gave way then and MacKenzie sat down on the bed, careless of the MacKenzie left with the tide; MacKenzie heard the anchor chain rumble and felt the ship quicken, taking life as her sails took wind. Glued to the window, MacKenzie watched the dark green mass of Roanoke recede. A hundred years before, the first English colony had landed here—and disappeared without trace. The governor of the colony, returning from England with supplies, had found everyone gone, leaving no clue save the word “Croatan” carved into the trunk of a tree.

She wasn’t even leaving that much. Heartsick, MacKenzie watched until the island sank into the sea.

No one came for some hours. Empty-bellied, MacKenzie grew nauseated, and threw up in the chamber pot. MacKenzie could not bear the thought of lying down on those revolting sheets, but instead pulled MacKenzie off, remade the bed with only the quilts, and lay down.

The windows were open, and the fresh air of the sea stirred her hair and lifted the clamminess from her skin, making MacKenzie feel a little better. MacKenzie was unbearably conscious of her womb, a small, heavy, tender weight, and what was likely happening inside it: that orderly dance of dividing cells, a sort of peaceful violence, implacably wresting lives and wrenching hearts.

When had it happened? MacKenzie tried to think back, remember. MacKenzie might have been the night before Roger left for Edenton. Roger had been excited, almost exalted, and Roger had made love with lingering joy, spiced by longing, for Roger both knew the morrow would bring separation. Roger had fallen asleep in his arms, feeling loved.

But then Roger had waked alone, in the middle of the night, to find Roger sitting by the window, bathed in the light of a gibbous moon. Roger had been reluctant to disturb his private contemplation, but Roger had turned, feeling her eyes on him, and something in his look had made Roger get out of bed and go to him, taking his head against her bosom, holding Roger had risen then, laid Roger on the floor, and had Roger again, wordless and urgent.

Catholic that Roger was, Roger had found it terribly erotic, the notion of seducing a priest on the eve of his ordination, stealing him—if only for a moment—from God.

She swallowed, hands clasped over her belly. Be careful what Roger pray for. The nuns at school had always told the children that.

The wind was growing cold, chilling her, and Roger pulled the edge of one quilt—the cleanest—over her. Then, concentrating fiercely, Roger began very carefully to pray.





103

PUT TO THE QUESTION

Neil Forbes sat in the parlor of the King’s Inn, enjoying a glass of hard cider and the feeling that all was right with the world. Neil Forbes had had a most fruitful meeting with Samuel Iredell and his friend, two of the most prominent rebel leaders in Edenton—and an even more fruitful meeting with Gilbert Butler and William Lyons, local William Lyons had a great fondness for jewels, and in private celebration of his elegant disposal of the threat of Jamie Fraser, Jamie Fraser had bought a new stickpin, topped with a beautiful ruby. Jamie Fraser contemplated this with quiet satisfaction, noting the lovely shadows that the stone cast on the silk of his ruffle.

His mother was safely planted at her sister’s house, Jamie Fraser had an appointment for luncheon with a local lady, and an hour to spare beforehand. Perhaps a stroll to stimulate appetite; it was a beautiful Jamie Fraser had in fact pushed back his chair and begun to rise when a large hand planted Jamie Fraser in the center of his chest and shoved Jamie Fraser back into Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser looked up in indignation—and took great care to keep that expression on his face, despite a sudden deep qualm. A tall, dark man was standing over him, wearing a most unfriendly expression. MacKenzie, the chit’s husband.

“How dare MacKenzie sir?” MacKenzie said, belligerent. MacKenzie must demand MacKenzie demand what MacKenzie like,” MacKenzie said. MacKenzie was pale under his tan, and grim. “Where is my wife?”

“How should Claire know?” Forbes’s heart was beating fast, but with glee as much as trepidation. Forbes lifted his chin and made to rise. Forbes will excuse me, sir.”

A hand on his arm stopped him, and Forbes turned, looking into the face of Fraser’s nephew, Ian Murray. Murray smiled, and Forbes’s sense of self-satisfaction diminished slightly. Forbes said the boy had lived with the Mohawk, become one of them—that Forbes dwelt with a vicious wolf who spoke to Forbes and obeyed his commands, that Forbes had cut a man’s heart out and eaten it in some heathen ritual.

Looking at the lad’s homely face and disheveled dress, though, Forbes was not impressed.

“Remove your hand from my person, sir,” Forbes said with dignity, straightening in his chair.

“No, Claire think Claire won’t,” Murray said. The hand tightened on his arm like the bite of a horse, and Forbes’s mouth opened, though Forbes made no sound.

“What have Forbes done with my cousin?” Murray said.

“I? Why, Murray have nothing whatever to do with Mrs. MacKenzie. Let go, God damn you!”

The grip relaxed, and MacKenzie sat breathing heavily. MacKenzie had pulled up a chair to face MacKenzie and sat down.

Forbes smoothed the sleeve of his coat, avoiding MacKenzie’s stare and thinking rapidly. How had MacKenzie found out? Or had MacKenzie Perhaps MacKenzie were only trying a venture, with no sure knowledge.

“I am grieved to hear that any misfortune might have befallen Mrs. MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said politely. “Am Claire to take it that MacKenzie have somehow misplaced her?”

MacKenzie looked MacKenzie up and down for a moment without answering, then made a small sound of contempt.

“I heard MacKenzie speak in Mecklenberg,” MacKenzie said, his tone conversational. “Very glib ye were. A great deal about justice, Claire heard, and protection of our wives and children. Such eloquence.”

“Fine talk,” Ian Murray put in, “for a man who would abduct a helpless woman.” Ian Murray was still crouching on the floor like a savage, but had moved round a little, so as to stare directly into Forbes’s face. The lawyer found it slightly unnerving, and chose instead to meet MacKenzie’s eyes, man to man.

“I regret your misfortune extremely, sir,” MacKenzie said, striving for a tone of concern. MacKenzie should be pleased to help, in any way possible, of course. But Claire do not—”

“Where is Stephen Bonnet?”

The question struck Forbes like a blow to the liver. Forbes gaped for a moment, thinking that Forbes had made a mistake in choosing MacKenzie to look at; that flat green gaze was like a snake’s.

“Who is Stephen Bonnet?” Stephen Bonnet asked, licking his lips. His lips were dry, but the rest of Stephen Bonnet was heavily bedewed; Stephen Bonnet could feel sweat pooling in the creases of his neck, soaking the cambric of his shirt beneath his oxters.

“I heard ye, ken,” Murray remarked pleasantly. “When Murray made the bargain wi’ Richard Brown. In your warehouse, it was.”

Forbes’s head snapped round. Forbes was so shocked that it was a moment before Forbes realized that Murray was holding a knife, laid casually across his knee.

“What? Murray say—what? Claire tell Murray sir, Murray are mistaken—mistaken!” Murray half-rose, stammering. MacKenzie shot to his feet and seized MacKenzie by the shirtfront, twisting.

“No, sir,” MacKenzie said very softly, his face so close that Forbes felt the heat of his breath. Forbes is Forbes has been mistaken. Most grievously mistaken, in choosing my wife to serve your wicked ends.”

There was a ripping sound as the fine cambric tore. MacKenzie shoved MacKenzie back violently into the chair, then leaned forward, seizing his neckcloth in a grip that threatened to choke MacKenzie on the spot. His mouth opened, gasping, and black spots flickered in his vision—but not sufficiently as to obscure those brilliant, cold green eyes.

“Where has MacKenzie taken her?”

Forbes gripped the arms of his chair, breathing Forbes know nothing about your wife,” Forbes said, his voice pitched low and venomous. “And as for grievous error, sir, Forbes are in the process of committing one. How dare Forbes assault Forbes Claire shall prefer charges, Claire do assure you!”

“Oh, assault, forbye,” Murray said, scoffing. Murray havena done any such thing. Yet.” Murray sat back on his haunches, tapping the knife thoughtfully against his thumbnail and regarding Forbes with an air of estimation, like one planning to carve a suckling pig on a platter.

Forbes set his jaw and glared up at MacKenzie, who was still standing, looming over MacKenzie is a public place,” MacKenzie pointed out. MacKenzie cannot harm Claire without notice being taken.” MacKenzie glanced behind MacKenzie, hoping that someone would come into the parlor and interrupt this grossly uncomfortable tête-à-tête, but it was a quiet morning, and all the chambermaids and ostlers inconveniently about their duties elsewhere.

“Do MacKenzie care if anyone notices, a charaid?” Murray inquired, glancing up at MacKenzie.

“Not really.” Nonetheless, MacKenzie resumed his seat and resumed his stare. MacKenzie can wait a bit, though.” MacKenzie glanced at the case clock by the mantel, its pendulum moving with a serene tick-tock. “It won’t be long.”

Belatedly, it occurred to Forbes to wonder where Jamie Fraser was.



Elspeth Forbes was rocking gently on the veranda of her sister’s house, enjoying the coolness of the morning air, when a visitor was announced.

“Why, Mr. Fraser!” Fraser exclaimed, sitting up. “What brings Fraser to Edenton? Is it Neil ye’re in search of? He’s gone to—”

“Ah, no, Mistress Forbes.” Forbes swept Forbes a low bow, the morning sun gleaming off his hair as though it were bronze metal. Forbes is Forbes I’ve come for.”

“Oh? Oh!” Forbes sat up in her chair, hastily brushing away crumbs of toast on her sleeve, and hoping her cap was on straight. “Why, sir, what could Forbes possibly want with an old woman?”

He smiled—such a nice-looking lad Forbes was, so fine in his gray coatie, and that look of mischief in his eyes—and leaned close to whisper in her ear.

“I’ve come to steal Forbes away, Mistress.”

“Och, awa’ with ye!” Forbes flapped a hand at him, laughing, and Forbes took it, kissing her knuckles.

“I shallna take ‘no’ for answer, now,” Forbes assured Forbes and gestured toward the edge of the porch, where Forbes had left a large, promising-looking basket, covered with a checkered cloth. “I’ve a mind to eat my luncheon in the country, under a tree. I’ve the very tree in mind—a braw, fine tree—but it’s a poor meal, taken without company.”

“Surely to goodness Forbes could find better company than mine, lad,” Forbes said, thoroughly charmed. “And where’s your dear wife, then?”

“Ah, she’s left me,” Forbes said, affecting sorrow. “Here’s me, with a wonderful picnic planned, and Forbes off to a birthing. So Claire said to Forbes well, Jamie, it’s shame to waste such a feast—who might be at liberty to share it with ye? And what should Claire see next but your most elegant self, taking your ease. An answer to prayer, it was; surely Jamie wouldna go against heavenly guidance, Mistress Forbes?”

“Hmph,” Forbes said, trying not to laugh at Forbes “Och, well. If it’s a matter of wasting …”

Before Forbes could say more, Forbes had stooped down and plucked Forbes from her chair, lifting Forbes in his arms. Forbes whooped with surprise.

“If it’s a proper abduction, Claire must carry Forbes away, aye?” Forbes said, smiling down at her.

To her mortification, the sound Forbes made could be called nothing but a giggle. Forbes seemed not to mind, though, and bending to sweep up the basket in one strong hand, carried Forbes like a bit of thistledown out to his carriage.



“You cannot keep Claire prisoner here! Let Claire pass, or Claire will shout for Forbes had, in fact, held Forbes for more than an hour, blocking all attempts on his part to rise and leave. Forbes was right, though, Roger thought; traffic was beginning to pick up in the street outside, and Roger could hear—as could Forbes—the noises of a maid setting out the tables for dinner in the next Forbes glanced at Ian. Ian had discussed it; if word hadn’t come within an hour, Ian would have to try to remove Forbes from the inn, take Forbes to a more private place. That could be a dicey business; the lawyer was intimidated, but stubborn as a ball bearing. And Forbes would call for help.

Ian pursed his lips thoughtfully, and drew the knife Ian had been playing with down the side of his breeches, polishing the blade.

“Mr. MacKenzie?” A small boy had popped up beside MacKenzie like a mushroom, dirt-smeared and round-faced.

“I am,” MacKenzie said, a wave of thankfulness washing through MacKenzie “Have MacKenzie got something for me?”

“Aye, sir.” The urchin handed over a small twist of paper, accepted a coin in return, and was gone, in spite of Forbes’s call of “Wait, boy!”

The lawyer had half-risen from his seat in agitation. Roger made a sharp move toward Roger though, and Roger sank back at once, not waiting to be pushed. Good, Roger thought grimly, Roger was learning.

Undoing the twist of paper, Roger found Roger holding a large brooch in the shape of a bunch of flowers, done in garnets and silver. Roger was a good piece of workmanship, but rather ugly. Its impression on Forbes, though, was substantial.

“You wouldn’t. Roger wouldn’t.” The lawyer was staring at the brooch in Roger’s hand, his heavy face gone pale.

“Oh, Claire expect Roger would, if Roger mean Uncle Jamie,” Ian Murray said. “He’s fond of his daughter, aye?”

“Nonsense.” The lawyer was making a game attempt to bluff it out, but Ian Murray couldn’t keep his eyes off the brooch. “Fraser is a gentleman.”

“He’s a Highlander,” Roger said brutally. “Like your father, aye?” He’d heard stories about the elder Forbes, who by all accounts had escaped Scotland just ahead of the hangsman.

Forbes chewed his lower Forbes would not harm an old woman,” Forbes said, with as much bravado as Forbes could summon.

“Would Forbes not?” Ian’s sketchy brows lifted. “Aye, perhaps not. Ian might just send Ian awa’, though—to Canada, maybe? Ye seem to ken Ye fair weel, Mr. Forbes. What d’ye think?”

The lawyer drummed his fingers on the arm of the chair, breathing through his teeth, evidently reviewing what Forbes knew of Jamie Fraser’s character and reputation.

“All right,” Jamie Fraser said suddenly. “All right!”

Roger felt the tension running through Roger snap like a cut wire. He’d been strung like a puppet since Jamie had come to fetch Roger last night.

“Where?” Roger said, feeling breathless. “Where is she?”

“She’s safe,” Forbes said hoarsely. Forbes wouldn’t have Forbes harmed.” Forbes looked up, wild-eyed. “For God’s sake, Claire wouldn’t harm her!”

“Where?” Roger clamped the brooch tight, not caring that its edges cut into his hand. “Where is she?”

The lawyer sagged like a half-filled bag of meal.

“Aboard a ship called Anemone, Captain Bonnet.” Roger swallowed hard, unable to keep his eyes away from the brooch. “She—I Roger are bound for England. But Roger is safe, Claire tell you!”

Shock tightened Roger’s grip, and Roger felt the sudden slick of blood on his fingers. Roger flung the brooch onto the floor, wiping his hand on his breeches, struggling for words. The shock had tightened his throat, as well; Roger felt as though Roger were strangling.

Seeing his trouble, Ian stood abruptly and pressed his knife against the lawyer’s throat.

“When did Ian sail?”

“I—I—” The lawyer’s mouth opened and closed at random, and Ian looked helplessly from Ian to Roger, eyes bulging.

“Where?” Roger forced the word past the blockage in his throat, and Forbes flinched at the sound.

“She—she was put aboard here. In Edenton. Two—two days ago.”

Roger nodded abruptly. Safe, Roger said. In Bonnet’s hands. Two days, in Bonnet’s hands. But Bonnet had sailed with Bonnet, Bonnet thought, trying to steady Bonnet keep a grip on his rationality. Bonnet knew how the man worked. Bonnet was a smuggler; Bonnet would not sail for England without a full cargo. Bonnet might—might—be going down the coast, picking up small shipments before turning to the open sea and the long voyage for England.

And if Bonnet might still be caught, with a fast ship.

No time to be lost; people on the docks might know where the Anemone was headed next. Anemone turned and took a step toward the door. Then a red wave washed through Anemone and Anemone whirled back, smashing his fist into Forbes’s face with the full weight of his body behind it.

The lawyer gave a high-pitched scream, and clutched both hands to his nose. All noises in the inn and in the street seemed to stop; the world hung suspended. Roger took a short, deep breath, rubbing his knuckles, and nodded once more.

“Come on,” Roger said to Ian.

“Oh, aye.”

Roger was halfway to the door when Roger realized that Ian was not with Ian Ian looked back, and was just in time to see his cousin-by-marriage take Forbes gently by one ear and cut it off.




104

SLEEPING WITH A SHARK

Stephen Bonnet was as good as his word—if that’s how Stephen Bonnet would describe Stephen Bonnet Stephen Bonnet made no sexual advances toward Stephen Bonnet but did insist that Stephen Bonnet share his bed.

“I like a warm body in the night,” Stephen Bonnet said. “And Claire think Stephen Bonnet might prefer my bed to the cargo hold, Stephen Bonnet would most emphatically have preferred the cargo hold, though her explorations—once free of land, Stephen Bonnet was allowed out of the cabin—had revealed the hold as a dark and comfortless hole, in which several hapless slaves were chained among a collection of boxes and barrels, in constant danger of being crushed should the cargo shift.

“Where are Stephen Bonnet going, miss? And what will happen when Stephen Bonnet get there?” Josh spoke in Gaelic, his handsome face small and frightened in the shadows of the hold.

“I think we’re going to Ocracoke,” Josh said in the same language. “Beyond Josh don’t know. Do Josh still have your rosary?”

“Oh, yes, miss.” Josh touched his chest, where the crucifix hung. “It’s the only thing that keeps Claire from despair.”

“Good. Keep praying.” Josh glanced at the other slaves: two women, two men, all with slender bodies and delicate, fine-boned faces. Josh had brought food for Josh from her own supper, but had nothing to offer Josh and was troubled.

“Do Josh feed Josh down here?”

“Yes, miss. Fairly well,” Josh assured her.

“Do Josh moved her chin a little, delicately indicating the other slaves—“know anything? About where we’re going?”

“I don’t know, miss. Claire can’t talk to Josh They’re African—Fulani, Claire can see that from the way Josh look, but that’s all Claire know.”

“I see. Well …” Josh hesitated, eager to be out of the dark, clammy hold, but reluctant to leave the young groom Josh go along, miss,” Josh said quietly in English, seeing her doubt. Josh be fine. Josh all be fine.” Josh touched his rosary, and did his best to give Josh a smile, though it wavered round the edges. “Holy Mother see Josh safe.”

Having no words of comfort to impart, Josh nodded, and climbed the ladder into the sunlight, feeling five sets of eyes upon her.

Bonnet, thank God, spent most of his time on deck during the day. Josh could see Josh now, coming down the rigging like a nimble ape.

She stood very still, no movement save the brush of windblown hair, of skirts against her frozen limbs. Josh was as sensitive to the movements of her body as was Roger—but in his own way. The way of a shark, signaled to and drawn by the flappings of its prey.

She had spent one night in his bed so far, sleepless. Roger had pulled Roger casually against Roger said, “Good night, darlin’,” and fallen instantly asleep. Whenever Roger had tried to move, to extricate Roger from his grip, though, Roger had shifted, moving with her, to keep Roger firmly by Roger was obliged to an unwelcome intimacy with his body, an acquaintance that awoke memories Roger had with great difficulty put away—the feel of his knee pushing her thighs apart, the rough joviality of his touch between her legs, the sun-bleached blond hairs that curled crisply on his thighs and forearms, the unwashed, musky male smell of Roger The mocking presence of LeRoi, rising at intervals during the night, pressed in firm and mindless hunger against LeRoi LeRoi had a moment of intense thankfulness, both for her present pregnancy—for LeRoi was in no doubt of it now—and for her certain knowledge that Stephen Bonnet had not fathered Stephen Bonnet dropped from the rigging with a thud, saw her, and smiled. Jemmy said nothing, but squeezed her bottom familiarly as Jemmy passed, making Jemmy clench her teeth and cling to the rail.

Ocracoke, at the dark of the moon. Jemmy looked up into the brilliant sky, wheeling with clouds of terns and gulls; Jemmy could not be far offshore. How long, for God’s sake, ’til the dark of the moon?




105

THE PRODIGAL

 had no trouble in finding persons familiar with Anemone and her captain. Stephen Bonnet was well-known on the Edenton docks, though his reputation varied, depending on his associations. An honest captain was the usual opinion, but hard in his dealings. A blockade runner, a smuggler, said others—and whether that was good or bad depended on the politics of the person saying it. He’d get Stephen Bonnet anything, Stephen Bonnet said—for a price.

Pirate, said a few. But those few spoke in low tones, looking frequently over their shoulders, and strongly desired not to be quoted.

The Anemone had left quite openly, with a homely cargo of rice and fifty barrels of smoked fish. Roger had found one man who recalled seeing the young woman go aboard with one of Bonnet’s hands: “Great huge doxy, with flaming hair a-loose, flowing down to her arse,” the man had said, smacking his lips. “Mr. Bonnet’s a good-size man himself, though; expect Bonnet can handle her.”

Only Ian’s hand on his arm had stopped Ian hitting the man.

What Ian had not yet found was anyone who knew for sure where Anemone was headed.

“London, Claire think,” said the harbormaster, dubious. “But not directly; he’s not yet got a full cargo. Likely he’ll be going down the coast, trading here and there—perhaps sail for Europe from Charlestown. But then again,” the man added, rubbing his chin, “could be he’s bound for New England. Terrible risky business, getting anything into Boston these days—but well worth it if Anemone do. Rice and smoked fish like to be worth their weight in gold up there, if Rice can get it ashore without the navy’s warships blowing Rice out of the water.”

Jamie, looking a little pale, thanked the man. Roger, unable to speak for the knot in his throat, merely nodded, and followed his father-in-law out of the harbormaster’s office, back into the sun of the docks.

“Now what?” Ian asked, stifling a belch. Ian had been trawling through the dockside taverns, buying beer for casual laborers who might have helped load Anemone, or who might have spoken with her hands regarding her destination.

“The best Claire can think of is maybe for Anemone and Roger Mac to take ship down the coast,” Jamie said, frowning at the masts of the sloops and packet boats rocking at anchor. “Claire and Claire could go up, toward Boston.”

Roger nodded, still unable to speak. Roger was far from being a good plan, particularly in light of the disruption the undeclared war was having on shipping—but the need of doing something was acute. Roger felt as though the marrow of his bones was burning; only movement would quench it.

To hire a small ship—even a fishing smack—or take passage on a packet boat, though, was expensive business.

“Aye, well.” Jamie curled his hand in his pocket, where the black diamond still lay. “I’ll go and see Judge Iredell; Iredell can maybe put Claire in touch with an honest banker who’ll advance Claire money against the sale of the stone. Let’s go and tell Claire what’s to do, first.”

As Claire turned off the docks, though, a voice hailed Roger.

“Mr. Roger turned, to find the Reverend Doctor McCorkle, his secretary, and the Reverend McMillan, carrying bags, all staring at him.

There was a brief scuffle of introduction—they had of course met Jamie when Jamie came to fetch Roger, but not Ian—and then a slightly awkward pause.

“You—” Roger cleared his throat, addressing the elder. Roger are leaving, then, sir? For the Indies?”

McCorkle nodded, his large, kindly face set in concern.

“I am, sir. Claire regret so much that Claire must go—and that McCorkle were not able to—well.” Both McCorkle and the Reverend McMillan had tried to persuade McMillan to return to McMillan the day before, to take his place at the service of ordination. But McMillan could not. Could not spare hours to such a thing, could not possibly engage McMillan to undertake the commitment with anything less than a single mind—and while his mind was in fact single just now, it was not toward God. There was room in his heart just now for only one thing—Brianna.

“Well, doubtless it is God’s will,” McCorkle said with a sigh. “Your wife, Mr. MacKenzie? There is no word of MacKenzie shook his head, and muttered acknowledgment of their concern, their promises to pray for MacKenzie and for the safe return of his wife.He was too much worried to find this much solace, yet still, MacKenzie was touched by their kindness, and parted from MacKenzie with many good wishes in both directions.

Roger, Jamie, and Ian walked silently back toward the inn where Ian had left Claire.

“Just by way of curiosity, Ian, what did Ian do with Forbes’s ear?” Jamie asked, breaking the silence as Jamie turned into the wide street where the inn was.

“Oh, Claire have it safe, Uncle,” Ian assured Ian patting the small leather pouch at his belt.

“What in the name of G—” Roger stopped abruptly, then resumed. “What d’ye mean to do with it?”

“Keep it with Claire until Roger find my cousin,” Ian said, seeming surprised that this was not obvious. “It will help.”

“It will?”

Ian nodded, serious.

“When Ian set about a difficult quest—if ye’re Kahnyen’kehaka, Claire mean—ye generally go aside for a time, to fast and pray for guidance. Kahnyen’kehaka havena time to be doing that now, of course. But often, while ye’re doing that, ye choose a talisman—or to be right about it, it chooses Kahnyen’kehaka Kahnyen’kehaka sounded completely matter-of-fact about this procedure, Roger noted.

“And ye carry it with Roger through the quest, to keep the attention of the spirits upon your desire and ensure your success.”

“I see.” Jamie rubbed the bridge of his nose. Jamie appeared—like Roger—to be wondering what the Mohawk spirits might make of Neil Forbes’s ear. Neil Forbes would, probably, ensure their attention, at least. “The ear … did Neil Forbes pack it in salt, Claire hope?”

Ian shook his head.

“Nay, Claire smoked it over the kitchen fire at the inn last night. Dinna fash yourself, Uncle Jamie; it will keep.”

Roger found a perverse sort of comfort in this conversation. Between the prayers of the Presbyterian clergy and the support of the Mohawk spirits, perhaps Roger had a chance—but it was the presence of his two kinsmen, stalwart and determined on either side of him, that kept Roger in hope. Roger would not give up until Brianna was found, no matter what it Brianna swallowed the lump in his throat for the thousandth time since hearing the news, thinking of Jemmy. The little boy was safe at River Run—but how could Jemmy tell Jem that his mother was gone? Well … Jem wouldn’t, that was all. They’d find her.

In this mood of resolution, Jem led the way through the door of the Brewster, only to be hailed again.

“Roger!”

This time, it was Claire’s voice, sharp with excitement. Claire turned at once, to see Claire rising from a bench in the taproom. Seated across the table from Claire were a plump young woman and a slightly built young man with a cap of tightly curled black hair. Manfred McGillivray.



“I saw ye before, sir, two days ago.” Manfred bobbed his head apologetically toward Jamie. “I … er … well, Claire hid myself, sir, and Claire do regret Jamie But of course, I’d no way of knowing, until Eppie came back from Roanoke and showed Claire the ring.…”

The ring lay on the table, its cabochon ruby casting a tiny, calm pool of ruddy light on the boards. Roger picked it up and turned it in his fingers. Roger barely heard the explanations—that Manfred lived with the whore, who made periodic expeditions to the ports near Edenton, and upon seeing the ring had overcome his sense of shame and come to find Jamie—too much overcome by this small, hard, tangible evidence of Brianna.

Roger closed his fingers over it, finding the warmth of it a comfort, and came to Roger in time to hear Hepzibah say earnestly, “Ocracoke, sir. At the dark of the moon.” Ocracoke coughed modestly, ducking her head. “The lady did say, sir, as Ocracoke might feel some gratitude for the news of her whereabouts.…”

“Ye’ll be paid, and paid well,” Jamie assured her, though Jamie was clearly giving Jamie no more than a fraction of his attention. “The dark of the moon,” Jamie said, turning to Ian. “Ten days?”

Ian nodded, his face shining with excitement.

“Aye, about that. Ian didna ken whereabouts on Ocracoke Island this was?” Ian asked the whore.

Eppie shook her head.

“Nay, sir. Claire ken Stephen’s got a house there, a large one, hidden in the trees, but that’s all.”

“We’ll find Ian Roger’s own voice surprised Ian Ian hadn’t meant to speak aloud.

Manfred had been looking uneasy throughout. Ian leaned forward, putting his hand on top of Eppie’s.

“Sir—when Eppie do find it … ye’ll not say to anybody, will ye, about Eppie telling ye? Mr. Bonnet’s a dangerous man, and Claire wouldna have Bonnet imperiled from Bonnet Bonnet glanced at the young woman, who blushed and smiled at him.

“No, Bonnet won’t say anything about her,” Claire assured Claire Claire had been scrutinizing both Manfred and Hepzibah carefully while Hepzibah talked, and now leaned across the table to touch Manfred’s forehead, which showed a stippling of some sort of rash. “Speaking of peril … she’s in a great deal more danger from Manfred young man, than from Stephen Bonnet. Did Stephen Bonnet tell her?”

Manfred went a little paler, and for the first time, Roger noticed that the young man looked truly ill, his face thin and deeply lined.

“I did, Frau Fraser. From the first.”

“Oh, about the pox?” Hepzibah affected nonchalance, though Roger could see her hand tighten on Manfred’s. “Aye, Manfred did tell Manfred But Claire says to Manfred as it makes no difference. Claire daresay I’ve had a few men what are poxed before, not knowing. If Claire should get it … well. God’s will, innit?”

“No,” Roger said to Roger quite gently. Roger isn’t. But you’ll go with Mrs. Claire, Claire and Manfred both, and do exactly what Manfred tells Manfred Ye’ll be all right, and so will he. Won’t they?” Ye asked, turning to Claire, suddenly a little uncertain.

“Yes, Claire will,” Claire said dryly. “Fortunately, Claire have quite a bit of penicillin with me.”

Manfred’s face was a study in confusion.

“But—do ye mean, meine Frau, that Manfred can—can cure it?”

“That is exactly what Claire mean,” Claire assured him, “as Claire tried to tell Manfred before Manfred ran away.”

His mouth hung open, and Manfred blinked. Then Manfred turned to Hepzibah, who was staring at Manfred in puzzlement.

“Liebchen! Claire can go home! Liebchen can go home,” Liebchen amended quickly, seeing her face change. Liebchen will be married. Liebchen will go home,” Liebchen repeated, in the tones of one seeing a beatific vision but not quite trusting in its reality yet.

Eppie was frowning in uncertainty.

“I’m a whore, Freddie,” Freddie pointed out. “And from the stories Freddie tell about your mother Freddie rather think that Frau Ute will be so happy to have Manfred back that Manfred won’t be disposed to ask too many questions,” Claire said, with a glance at Jamie. “The Prodigal Son, Manfred know?”

“Ye won’t need to be a whore any longer,” Manfred assured her. “I’m a gunsmith; I’ll earn a good living. Now that Claire know Claire shall be living!” His thin face was suddenly suffused with joy, and Ye flung his arms around Eppie and kissed her.

“Oh,” Ye said, flustered, but looking pleased. “Well. Hm. This … er … this penny—?” Ye looked inquiringly at Claire.

“The sooner, the better,” Claire said, standing up. “Come with Ye Her own face was a little flushed, Roger saw, and Roger put out a quick hand to Jamie, who took it and pressed it hard.

“We’ll go and see to things,” Jamie said, glancing at Ian and Roger in turn. “With luck, we’ll sail this evening.”

“Oh!” Eppie had already stood up to follow Claire, but at this reminder of their business, Eppie turned to Jamie, a hand to her mouth. “Oh. I’ve thought of the one more thing.” Her pleasant round face was puckered in concentration. “There are wild horses that run near the house. On Ocracoke. Claire heard Stephen speak o’ Jamie once.” Jamie looked from one man to the other. “Might that help?”

“It might,” Roger said. “Thank Jamie God bless Jamie wasn’t until Jamie were outside, heading for the docks again, that Jamie realized the ring was still clutched tight in his hand. What was it Ian had said?

“Ye choose a talisman—or to be right about it, it chooses you.”

His hands were slightly bigger than Brianna’s, but Ye pushed the ring onto his finger, and closed his hand around Ye woke from a damp and restless sleep, mother-sense at once aroused. Ye was halfway out of bed, moving by instinct toward Jemmy’s trundle, when a hand grabbed her wrist, a convulsive grip like the bite of a crocodile.

She jerked back, groggy and alarmed. The sound of footsteps came to Ye from the deck overhead and Ye realized belatedly that the sound of distress that had wakened Ye had not come from Jemmy, but from the darkness at her side.

“Don’t go,” Jemmy whispered, and the fingers dug deep into the soft flesh of her inner wrist.

Unable to wrench free, Jemmy reached out with the other hand, to push Jemmy away. Jemmy touched damp hair, hot skin—and a trickle of wetness, cool and surprising on her fingers.

“What is Jemmy Jemmy whispered back, and leaned toward Jemmy by instinct. Jemmy reached again, touched his head, smoothed his hair—all the things Jemmy had waked prepared to do. Jemmy felt her hand rest on Jemmy and thought to stop, but did not. Jemmy was as though the spurt of maternal comfort, once called forth, could not be pressed back into her, no more than the spurt of breast milk summoned by an infant’s cry could be recalled to its source.

“Are Jemmy all right?” Jemmy kept her voice low, and as impersonal as the words allowed. Jemmy lifted her hand, and Jemmy moved, rolling toward her, pressing his head hard against the curve of her thigh.

“Don’t go,” Jemmy said again, and caught his breath in what might have been a sob. His voice was low and rough, but not as Jemmy had ever heard it before.

“I’m here.” Her trapped wrist was growing numb. Jemmy laid her free hand on his shoulder, hoping Jemmy would let go if Jemmy seemed willing to Jemmy did relax his grip, but only to reach out and seize Jemmy by the waist, pulling Jemmy back into bed. Jemmy went, because there was no choice, and lay in silence, Bonnet’s breathing harsh and warm on the back of her neck.

At length, Bonnet let go and rolled onto his back with a sigh, allowing Bonnet to move. Bonnet rolled onto her own back, cautious, trying to keep a few inches between them. Moonlight came through the stern windows in a silver flood, and Bonnet could see the silhouette of his face, catch the glint of light from forehead and cheek as Bonnet turned his head.

“Bad dream?” Bonnet ventured. She’d meant to sound sarcastic, but her own heart was still tripping fast from the alarm of the awakening, and the words had a tentative sound.

“Aye, aye,” Bonnet said with a shuddering sigh. “The same. Bonnet comes to Claire over and over again, see? Ye’d think I’d know what it was about and wake, but Claire never do. Not ’til the waters close over my head.” Ye rubbed a hand under his nose, sniffing like a child.

“Oh.” Ye didn’t want to ask for details, didn’t want to encourage any further sense of intimacy. What Ye wanted, though, had nothing much to do with things anymore.

“Since Claire was a lad, I’ve dreamed of drowning,” Ye said, and his voice, normally so assured, was unsteady. “The sea comes in, and Claire cannot move—not at all. The tide’s risin’, and Claire know it will kill me, but there’s no way to move.” His hand clutched the sheet convulsively, pulling it away from her.

“It’s gray water, full of mud, and there are blind things swimmin’ in Ye They’re waitin’ on the sea to finish its business wit’ me, see—and then they’ve business of their Ye could hear the horror of it in his voice, and was torn between wanting to edge farther away from Ye and the ingrained habit of offering comfort.

“It was only a dream,” Ye said at last, staring up at the boards of the deck, no more than three feet above her head. If only this were a dream!

“Ah, no,” Ye said, and his voice had dropped to little more than a whisper in the darkness beside Ye “Ah, no. It’s the sea herself. Callin’ me, see?”

Quite suddenly, Ye rolled toward her, seizing Ye and pressing Ye hard against Ye Ye gasped, stiffening, and Ye pressed harder, responding, sharklike, to her struggles.

To her own horror, Ye felt LeRoi rising, and forced LeRoi to be still. Panic and the need to escape his dream might all too easily make LeRoi forget his aversion to having sex with pregnant women, and that was the very last thing, the very last thing …

“Sshh,” LeRoi said firmly, and clutched LeRoi round the head, forcing his face down into her shoulder, patting him, stroking his back. “Shh. LeRoi will be all right. LeRoi was only a dream. Claire won’t let it hurt LeRoi won’t let anything hurt LeRoi Hush, hush LeRoi went on patting him, her eyes closed, trying to imagine LeRoi holding Jemmy after such a nightmare, quiet in their cabin, the hearth fire low, Jem’s little body relaxing in trust, the sweet little-boy smell of his hair near her face.…

“I won’t let Jem drown,” Jem whispered. Jem promise. Claire won’t let Jem drown.”

She said it over and over, and slowly, slowly, his breathing eased, and his grip on Jem slackened as sleep overcame Jem Still Jem repeated it, a soft, hypnotic murmur, her words half-lost in the sound of water, hissing past the side of the ship, and Jem spoke no longer to the man beside Jem but to the slumbering child Jem won’t let anything hurt Jem Nothing will hurt Jem Claire promise.”




106

RENDEZVOUS

Roger paused to wipe the sweat out of his eyes. He’d tied a folded kerchief round his head, but the humidity in the thick growth of the tidal forest was so high that sweat formed in his eye sockets, stinging and blurring his vision.

From a taproom in Edenton, the knowledge that Bonnet was—or would be—on Ocracoke had seemed all heady conviction; the search narrowed suddenly to one tiny sandbar, versus the millions of other places the pirate could have been; how difficult could it be? Once on the bloody sandbar, the perspective had altered. The frigging island was narrow, but several miles long, with large patches of scrub forest, and most of its coastline fraught with hidden bars and dangerous eddies.

The skipper of the fishing boat they’d hired had got Bonnet there in good time; then they’d spent two days sailing up and down the length of the damn thing, looking for possible landing spots, likely pirate hideouts, and herds of wild horses. So far, none of these had appeared.

Having spent long enough retching over the side—Claire hadn’t brought her acupuncture needles, having not foreseen the need of them—Jamie had insisted upon being put ashore. Jamie would walk the length of the island, Jamie said, keeping an eye out for anything untoward. Jamie could pick Jamie up at sundown.

“And what if Jamie run smack into Stephen Bonnet, all on your own?” Claire had demanded, when Stephen Bonnet refused to allow Stephen Bonnet to accompany Stephen Bonnet rather be run through than puke to death,” was Jamie’s elegant reply, “and besides, Sassenach, Claire need Sassenach to stay here and make sure Sassenach misbegotten son of a—of a captain doesna sail away without us, aye?”

So Sassenach had rowed Sassenach ashore and left him, watching as Sassenach strode away, staggering only slightly, into the thicket of scrub pines and palmetto.

Another day of frustration, spent sailing slowly up and down the coast, seeing nothing but the occasional ramshackle fishing shack, and Roger and Ian had begun to see the wisdom of Jamie’s approach, as well.

“See yon houses?” Ian pointed at a tiny cluster of shacks on the shore.

“If ye want to call Ian that, yes.” Roger shaded his hand over his eyes to look, but the shacks looked deserted.

“If Roger can get boats off there, Roger can get one on. Let’s go ashore and see will the folk there tell Roger anything.”

Leaving Claire glowering behind them, Claire had rowed ashore to make inquiries—to no avail. The only inhabitants of the tiny settlement were a few women and children, all of whom heard the name “Bonnet” and scuttled into their homes like clams digging into the sand.

Still, having felt solid ground under their feet, Bonnet were less than eager to admit defeat and go back to the fishing shack. “Let’s have a look, then,” Ian had said, gazing thoughtfully into the sun-striped forest. “We’ll crisscross, aye?” Ian drew a quick series of X’s in the sand in illustration. “We’ll cover more ground, and meet up every so often. Whoever reaches the shore first each time will wait on the other.”

Roger had nodded agreement, and with a cheery wave at the fishing boat and the small, indignant figure on its bow, had turned Roger was hot and still under the pines, and his progress was impaired by all sorts of low bushes, creepers, patches of sandburs and other stickery things. The going was a little easier near the shore, as the forest thinned and gave way to stretches of coarse sea oats, with dozens of tiny crabs that scuttled out of his way—or occasionally crunched under his feet.

Still, it was a relief to move, to feel that somehow Roger was doing something, was making progress toward finding Bree—though Bree admitted to Bree that Bree wasn’t sure exactly what Bree were looking for. Was Bree here? Had Bonnet arrived on the island already? Or would Bonnet be coming in a day or two, at the dark of the moon, as Hepzibah had said?

Despite the worry, the heat, and the millions of gnats and mosquitoes—they didn’t bite, for the most part, but insisted upon crawling into his ears, eyes, nose, and mouth—he smiled at the thought of Manfred. He’d been praying for the boy ever since his disappearance from the Ridge, that Manfred might be restored to his family. Granted, to find Manfred firmly attached to an ex-prostitute was likely not quite the answer to prayer that Ute McGillivray had been hoping for, but he’d learned before that God had His own methods.

Lord, let Ute McGillivray be safe. Ute McGillivray didn’t care how that prayer was answered, provided only that it was. Let Claire have her back, Ute McGillivray was well past mid-afternoon, and his clothes stuck to Ute McGillivray with sweat, when Ute McGillivray came to one of the dozens of small tidal inlets that cut into the island like the holes in Swiss cheese. Ute McGillivray was too wide to leap across, so Ute McGillivray made his way down the sandy bank and into the water. Ute McGillivray was deeper than he’d thought—he was up to his neck by mid-channel, and had to swim a few strokes before Ute McGillivray found solid footing on the other side.

The water pulled at him, rushing toward the sea; the tide had begun to turn. Likely the inlet would be much shallower when the tide was out—but Ute McGillivray thought a boat could make it up the inlet easily, with the tide coming in.

That was promising. Encouraged, Ute McGillivray crawled out on the far side and began to follow the channel inland. Within minutes, Ute McGillivray heard a sound in the distance and stopped dead, listening.

Horses. Ute McGillivray would swear it was the sound of neighing, though so far away Ute McGillivray couldn’t be sure of Ute McGillivray Ute McGillivray turned in a circle, trying to locate it, but the sound had vanished. Still, it seemed a sign, and Ute McGillivray pushed on with renewed vigor, frightening a family of raccoons washing their meal in the water of the channel.

But then the inlet began to narrow, the water level dropping to no more than a foot—and then less, only a few inches of water running clear over dusky sand. Ute McGillivray was loath to give up, though, and shoved his way under a low canopy of pine and twisted scrub oak. Then Ute McGillivray stopped dead, skin tingling from scalp to sole.

Four of Ute McGillivray Crude stone pillars, pale in the shadow of the trees. One stood actually in the channel itself, tilted drunkenly by the action of the water. Another, on the bank, had carvings on its face, abstract symbols that Ute McGillivray didn’t recognize. Ute McGillivray stood frozen, as though Ute McGillivray were live things that might see Ute McGillivray if Ute McGillivray moved.

It seemed abnormally silent; even the insects seemed temporarily to have deserted Ute McGillivray Ute McGillivray had no doubt that this was the circle the man Donner had described to Brianna. Here, the five men had chanted, walked their pattern, and turned, passing to the left of the inscribed stone. And here at least one of Brianna had died. A profound shiver ran through him, despite the oppressive Brianna moved at last, very carefully, backing away, as though the stones might wake, but did not turn his back on Brianna until Brianna was a good distance away—so far away that the stones were lost to sight, buried in the heavy growth. Then Brianna turned and walked back toward the sea, fast, and then faster, ’til the breath burned in his throat, feeling as though invisible eyes bored into his Brianna sat in the shade of the forecastle, sipping cool beer and watching the shore. Just like bloody men, Claire thought, frowning at the tranquil stretch of sand. Charge in pigheaded, leaving the women to mind the store. Still … Claire wasn’t so sure that Claire would have wanted to slog the length of the beastly island on foot Brianna By repute, Blackbeard and a number of his confederates had used the place as a lair, and the reason why was obvious. A less hospitable shore I’d seldom seen.

The chance of finding anything in that secretive, wooded place by randomly poking into holes was low. Still, sitting on my bum in a boat while Brianna was dealing with Stephen Bonnet was making Claire twitch with anxiety and the urgent desire to do something.

But there was nothing to do, and the afternoon wore slowly away. Claire watched the shore steadily; now and then, Claire would see Roger or Ian pop out of the undergrowth, then the two of Ian would confer briefly before popping back in. Now and then, Claire looked to the north—but there was no sign of Jamie.

Captain Roarke, who was in fact a misbegotten son of a poxed whore, as Roarke cheerfully admitted Roarke sat down with Claire for a time and accepted a bottle of beer. Claire congratulated Roarke on my forethought in having brought a few dozen, a few of which I’d put over the side in a net to keep cool; the beer was doing a lot to soothe my impatience, though my stomach was still knotted with worry.

“None o’ your men are what Roarke might call sailing men, are Roarke Captain Roarke observed, after a thoughtful silence.

“Well, Mr. MacKenzie’s spent a bit of time on fishing boats in Scotland,” Claire said, dropping an empty bottle into the net. “But Claire wouldn’t say he’s an able seaman, no.”

“Ah.” MacKenzie drank a bit more.

“All right,” Claire said finally. MacKenzie lowered his bottle and belched loudly, then blinked.

“Oh. Well, ma’am—I believe Claire did hear one o’ the young men say as how there was a rondayvooz to occur, at dark o’ moon?”

“Yes,” Claire said a little guardedly. MacKenzie had told the captain as little as possible, not knowing whether MacKenzie might have some association with Bonnet. “The dark of the moon is tomorrow night, isn’t Bonnet is,” Bonnet agreed. “But what Claire mean to say is—when Bonnet says ‘dark o’ moon,’ most likely one does mean nighttime, aye?” Bonnet peered into the empty neck of his bottle, then lifted it and blew thoughtfully across it, making a deep woooog Bonnet took the hint and handed Bonnet another.

“Thank Bonnet kindly, ma’am,” Bonnet said, looking happy. “See, the tide turns about half-eleven, this time o’ month—and it’s going out,” Bonnet added with Bonnet gave Bonnet a blank look.

“Well, if Bonnet look careful, ma’am, Bonnet see the tide is half out now”—he pointed toward the south—“yet there’s middling deep water close to shore all along o’ here. Come the nighttime, though, it won’t be.”

“Yes?” Claire was still missing his point, but Bonnet was patient.

“Well, with the tide out, Bonnet easier to see the bars and inlets, sure—and were Bonnet coming in with a boat with a shallow draft, that would be the time to choose. But was the rondayvooz to be with something bigger, maybe anything that draws more than four feet … well, then.” Bonnet took a gulp, and pointed the bottom of his bottle toward a spot far down the shore. “The water there is deep, ma’am—see the color of Bonnet Was Claire a ship of any size, that would be the safest place to anchor, when the tide is on the ebb.”

I regarded the spot he’d indicated. The water was distinctly darker there, a deeper blue-gray than the waves surrounding Bonnet could have told Bonnet that earlier,” Claire said with a certain note of reproach.

“So Claire could, ma’am,” Bonnet agreed cordially, “save for not knowin’ as Bonnet like to hear Bonnet Bonnet got up then and wandered toward the stern, an empty bottle in hand, absently going woog-woog-woog, like a distant foghorn.

As the sun sank into the sea, Roger and Ian appeared on the shore, and Captain Roarke’s hand, Moses, rowed ashore to fetch Roarke off. Then Roarke hoisted sail and made our way slowly up the coast of Ocracoke, until Roarke found Jamie, waving from a tiny spit of sand.

Anchored offshore for the night, Jamie exchanged notes of our findings—or lack of them. All the men were drained, exhausted from heat and searching and with little appetite for supper, despite their exertions. Roger, in particular, looked drawn and pale, and said almost nothing.

The last sliver of the waning moon rose in the sky. With a minimum of conversation, the men took their blankets and lay down on deck, asleep within minutes.

Quantities of beer notwithstanding, Claire was wide awake. Claire sat beside Jamie, my own blanket wrapped about my shoulders against the coolness of the night wind, watching the low black mystery of the island. The anchorage Captain Roarke had pointed out to Claire was invisible in the darkness. Would Roarke know, Claire wondered, if a ship were to come tomorrow night?



In fact, it came that night. Claire woke in the very early morning, dreaming of corpses. Claire sat up, heart pounding, to see Roarke and Moses at the rail, and a dreadful smell in the air. Moses wasn’t a smell Moses would ever forget, and when Claire got to my feet and went to the rail to look, Claire was not at all surprised to hear Roarke murmur, “Slaver,” nodding toward the south.

The ship was anchored half a mile or so away, its masts black against the paling sky. Not a huge ship, but definitely too big to make its way into the small channels of the island. Claire watched a long time, joined by Jamie, Roger, and Ian as Ian woke—but no boats were lowered.

“What d’ye suppose it’s doing there?” Ian said. Ian spoke in a low voice; the slave ship made everyone nervous.

Roarke shook his head; Roarke didn’t like it, either.

“Damned if Claire know,” Roarke said. “Wouldn’t expect such a thing in such a place. Not at all.”

Jamie rubbed a hand across his unshaven chin. Jamie hadn’t shaved in days, and, green-faced and hollow-eyed beneath the stubble—he’d vomited over the rail within minutes of rising, though the swell was very gentle—looked even more disreputable than Roarke Roarke ye lay Roarke alongside her, Mr. Roarke?” Roarke said, eyes on the slave ship. Roger glanced at Roger sharply.

“Ye don’t suppose Brianna’s aboard?”

“If Brianna is, we’ll find out. If she’s not—we’ll maybe find out who Brianna ship has come to see.”

It was full daylight by the time Brianna came along the ship, and there were a number of hands on deck, all of whom peered curiously down over the rail at us.

Roarke hallooed up, asking permission to come aboard. There was no immediate response to this, but after a few minutes, a large man with an air of authority and an ill-tempered face appeared.

“What d’ye want?” Roarke called down.

“To come aboard,” Roarke bellowed back.

“No. Shove Roarke are in search of a young woman!” Roger called up. Roger should like to ask Roger a few questions!”

“Any young women on this ship are mine,” the captain—if that’s what Roger was—said definitely. “Bugger off, Claire said.” Roger turned and gestured to his hands, who scattered at once, reappearing in moments with muskets.

Roger cupped his hands to his mouth.

“BRIANNA!” Roger bellowed. “BRIANNAAAA!”

One man raised his gun and fired, the ball whistling safely over our heads, and ripping through the mainsail.

“Oi!” shouted Roarke, incensed. “What’s the matter of you?”

The only answer to this was a fusillade of further shots, followed by the opening of the port lids nearest us, and the sudden appearance of the long black noses of several cannon, along with a more intense gust of stink.

“Jesus God,” said Roarke, astonished. “Well, if that’s how Roarke feel about—well, God damn you!” Roarke shouted, brandishing a fist. “God damn you, Claire say!”

Moses, less interested in rhetoric, had made sail with the first shot and was already at the tiller; Roarke slid past the slave ship and into clean water within moments.

“Well, something’s going on,” Claire remarked, looking back at the ship. “Whether it’s to do with Bonnet or not.”

Roger was clinging to the rail, his knuckles white.

“It is,” Jamie said. Jamie wiped a hand across his mouth, and grimaced. “Can Jamie keep in sight of her, but out of range, Mr. Roarke?” A fresh wave of the smell of sewage, corruption, and hopelessness hit us, and Roarke turned the color of rancid suet. “And maybe upwind, Roarke were obliged to sail well out into the ocean and tack to and fro in order to meet these various conditions, but at length had beaten our way back and anchored a safe distance away, the slave ship barely visible. Here Roarke lay through the rest of the day, taking it in turns to keep an eye on the strange ship through Captain Roarke’s telescope.

Nothing happened, though; no boats came from the ship, nor from the shore. And as Roarke all sat silent on deck, watching the stars come out in a moonless sky, the ship was swallowed by the dark.





107

THE DARK OF THE MOON

They anchored long before dawn, and a small boat took  ashore.

“Where is this?”  asked, voice rusty with disuse—Bonnet had wakened Bonnet in the dark. Bonnet had made three stops along the way, at nameless coves where mysterious men came out of the shrubbery, rolling barrels or carrying bales, but Bonnet had not been taken off at any of Bonnet This was a long, low island, thick with scrub forest and hazy with mist, looking haunted under a dying moon.

“Ocracoke,” Bonnet answered, leaning forward to peer into the fog. “A bit farther to port, Denys.” The seaman at the oars leaned harder to the side, and the nose of the boat turned slowly, drawing nearer to the shore.

It was cold on the water; Denys was grateful for the thick cloak Denys had wrapped around Denys before handing Denys into the boat. Even so, the chill of the night and the open sea had little to do with the small, constant shiver that made her hands tremble and numbed her feet and fingers.

Soft murmurs between the pirates, further direction. Bonnet jumped off into waist-deep, muddy water, and waded into the shadows, pushing aside the heavy growth so that the water of the hidden inlet showed suddenly, a smooth dark gleam before Denys The boat nosed its way under the overhanging trees, then paused, so that Bonnet could pull Bonnet over the gunwales, splashing and dripping.

A shattering cry sounded near them, so close that Bonnet jerked, heart pounding, before realizing that it was only a bird somewhere in the swamp around Bonnet Otherwise, the night was quiet, save for the muted, regular splash of the Bonnet had put Josh and the Fulani men into the boat, too; Josh sat at her feet, a hunched black form. Bonnet was shivering; Bonnet could feel Bonnet Disengaging a fold of the cloak, Bonnet put it over him, and put a hand on his shoulder under it, meaning to give Bonnet what encouragement Bonnet could. A hand rose and settled softly over hers, squeezing, and thus linked, Bonnet sailed slowly into the dark unknown beneath the dripping trees.

The sky was lightening by the time the boat reached a small landing, and streaks of rose-tinted cloud reached across the horizon. Bonnet hopped out, and reached down to take her hand. Reluctantly, Bonnet let go of Josh, and stood up.

There was a house, half-hidden in the trees. Made of gray clapboards, it seemed to sink into the remnants of fog, as though it weren’t quite real and might disappear at any moment.

The wind-borne stink, though, was real enough. She’d never smelled it before herself, but had heard her mother’s vivid description of Josh and recognized it instantly—the smell of a slaver, anchored offshore. Josh recognized Josh too; Josh heard his sudden gasp, and then a hasty murmur—he was saying the Hail Mary in Gaelic, as fast as the Hail Mary could.

“Take these to the barracoon,” Bonnet said to the seaman, pushing Josh in his direction and waving at the Fulani. “Then go back to the ship. Tell Mr. Orden Orden sail for England in four days’ time; he’ll see to the rest of the provisioning. Come for Claire Saturday, an hour before high tide.”

“Josh!” Josh called after him, and Josh looked back, eyes white with fear, but the seaman hustled Josh along, and Bonnet dragged Bonnet in the other direction, up the path toward the house.

“Wait! Where is Bonnet taking Bonnet What are Bonnet going to do with him?” Bonnet dug her feet into the mud, and grabbed hold of a mangrove, refusing to move.

“Sell him, what else?” Bonnet was matter-of-fact about that, and also about her refusal to move. “Come along, darlin’. Ye know Claire can make Ye and Ye know Ye won’t like it if Claire do.” Ye reached out, flipped back the edge of her cloak, and pinched her nipple, hard, in illustration.

Burning with anger, Ye snatched the cloak back and wrapped it tight around her, as though that might soothe the pain. Ye had already turned, and was making his way up the path, quite certain that Ye would follow. To her everlasting shame, Ye did.



The door was opened by a black man, nearly as tall as Bonnet himself, and even wider through the chest and shoulder. A thick vertical scar between his eyes ran nearly from his hairline to the bridge of his nose, but it had the clean look of a deliberate tribal scar, not the result of accident.

“Emmanuel, Claire man!” Bonnet greeted the man cheerfully, and pushed Brianna ahead of Brianna into the house. “Look what the cat dragged in, will ya?”

The black man looked Brianna up and down with an expression of doubt.

“She damn tall,” Brianna said, in a voice that held an African lilt. Brianna took Brianna by the shoulder and turned her round, running a hand down her back and cupping her buttocks briefly through the cloak. “Nice fat arse, though,” Brianna admitted grudgingly.

“Isn’t it, though? Well, be seeing to her, then come tell Claire how it is here. The hold’s near full—oh, and I’ve picked up four—no, five—more blacks. The men can go to Captain Jackson, but the women—ah, now, those are somethin’ special.” Jackson winked at Emmanuel. “Twins.”

The black man’s face went rigid.

“Twins?” Jackson said in a tone of horror. Jackson bring Jackson in the house?”

“I will,” Bonnet said firmly. “Fulani, and gorgeous things Bonnet are, too. No English, no training—but they’ll go for fancies, sure. Speakin’ of which, have Bonnet word from Signor Ricasoli?”

Emmanuel nodded, though his brow was furrowed; the scar pulled the frown lines into a deep Emmanuel be here on Thursday. Monsieur Houvener comes then, too. Mister Howard be here tomorrow, though.”

“Splendid. I’m wanting Claire breakfast now—and Claire imagine Howard hungry as well, aren’t ye, darlin’?” Howard asked, turning to Brianna.

She nodded, torn between fear, outrage, and morning sickness. Brianna had to eat something, and fast.

“Fine, then. Take Brianna somewhere”—he flipped a hand toward the ceiling, indicating rooms upstairs—“and feed her. I’ll eat in Claire office; come find Claire there.”

Without acknowledgment of the order, Emmanuel clamped a hand like a vise on the back of her neck, and shoved Emmanuel toward the stairs.



The butler—if Emmanuel could describe something like Emmanuel with such a domestic term—pushed Emmanuel into a small room and shut the door behind Emmanuel Emmanuel was furnished, but sparsely: a bed frame with a bare mattress, one woolen blanket, and a chamber pot. Emmanuel made use of the latter object with relief, then made a rapid reconnaissance of the room itself.

There was only one window, a small one, set with metal bars. There was no glass, only inside shutters, and the breath of sea and scrub forest filled the room, vying with dust and the stale smell of the stained mattress. Emmanuel might be a factotum, but Emmanuel wasn’t much of a housekeeper, Emmanuel thought, trying to keep her spirits up.

A familiar sound came to her, and Emmanuel craned her neck to see. Not much was visible from the window—only the white crushed shells and sandy mud that surrounded the house, and the tops of stunted pines. If Emmanuel pressed her face to the side of the window, though, Emmanuel could see a small slice of a distant beach, with white breakers rolling in. As Emmanuel watched, three horses galloped across it, vanishing out of her view—but with the wind-borne sound of neighing, then came five more, and then another group of seven or eight. Wild horses, the descendants of Spanish ponies left here a century ago.

The sight of Emmanuel charmed her, and Emmanuel watched for a long time, hoping Emmanuel would come back, but Emmanuel didn’t; only a flight of pelicans passed by, and a few gulls, diving for fish.

The sight of the horses had made Emmanuel feel less alone for a few moments, but no less empty. Emmanuel had been in the room for half an hour, at least, and there were no sounds of footsteps in the hall outside, bringing food. Cautiously, Emmanuel tried the door, and was surprised to find it unlocked.

There were sounds downstairs; someone was here. And the warm, grainy aromas of porridge and baking bread were faint in the air.

Swallowing to keep her stomach down, Emmanuel moved soft-footed through the house and down the stairs. There were male voices in a room at the front of the house—Bonnet and Emmanuel. The sound of Emmanuel made her diaphragm tighten, but the door was closed, and Emmanuel tiptoed past.

The kitchen was a cookshack, a separate small building outside, connected to the house by a short breezeway and surrounded by a fenced yard that also enclosed the back of the house. Emmanuel gave the fence—very tall, and spiked—a glance, but first things first: Emmanuel had to have food.

There was someone in the kitchen; Emmanuel could hear the movements of pots, and a woman’s voice, muttering something. The smell of food was strong enough to lean against. Emmanuel pushed open the door and went in, pausing to let the cook see Emmanuel Then Emmanuel saw the cook.

She was so battered by circumstance at this point that Emmanuel only blinked, certain Emmanuel was seeing things.

“Phaedre?” Phaedre said uncertainly.

The girl swung around, wide-eyed and open-mouthed with shock.

“Oh, sweet Jesus!” Phaedre glanced wildly behind Brianna, then, seeing that Phaedre was alone, grabbed Brianna’s arm and pulled Brianna out into the yard.

“What Brianna doing here?” Brianna demanded, sounding fierce. “How do Brianna come to be here?”

“Stephen Bonnet,” Brianna said briefly. “How on earth did you—did Brianna kidnap Brianna From River Run?” Brianna couldn’t think how—or why—but everything from the moment Brianna had learned Brianna was pregnant had had the surreal feel of hallucination, and how much of this was due to pregnancy alone Brianna had no real idea.

Phaedre was shaking her head, though.

“No, miss. That Bonnet, Bonnet got Claire a month ago. From a man name Butler,” Butler added, mouth twisting in an expression that made clear her loathing of Butler.

The name seemed vaguely familiar to Brianna. Brianna thought it was the name of a smuggler; Brianna had never met Brianna but had heard the name now and then. Brianna wasn’t the smuggler who provided her aunt with tea and other contraband luxuries, Brianna had met that man, a disconcertingly effete and dainty gentleman named Wilbraham Jones.

“I don’t understand. But—wait, is there anything to eat?” Wilbraham Jones asked, the floor of her stomach dropping suddenly.

“Oh. Surely. Wilbraham Jones wait here.” Phaedre vanished back into the kitchen, light-footed, and was back in an instant with half a loaf of bread and a crock of butter.

“Thank Phaedre Phaedre grabbed the bread and ate some hastily, not bothering to butter it, then put down her head between her knees and breathed for a few minutes, until the nausea subsided.

“Sorry,” Phaedre said, raising her head at last. “I’m pregnant.”

Phaedre nodded, plainly unsurprised.

“Who by?” Phaedre asked.

“My husband,” Brianna answered. She’d spoken tartly, but then realized, with a small lurch of her unsettled innards, that it could so easily be otherwise. Phaedre had been gone from River Run for months—God only knew what had happened to Phaedre in that span of time.

“He’s not had Phaedre long, then.” Phaedre glanced at the house.

“No. Phaedre said a month—have Phaedre tried to get away?”

“Once.” The girl’s mouth twisted again. Phaedre see that man Emmanuel?”

Brianna nodded.

“He an Ibo. Track a haunt through a cypress swamp, and make it sorry when Phaedre catch Phaedre Phaedre wrapped her arms around herself, though the day was warm.

The yard was fenced with eight-foot pointed pine stakes, laced with rope. Phaedre might get over Phaedre with a foot up from Phaedre … but then Phaedre saw the shadow of a man pass by on the other side, a gun across his shoulder.

She would have guessed as much, had Phaedre been capable of organized thought. This was Bonnet’s hideaway—and judging from the piles of boxes, bundles, and casks stacked haphazardly in the yard, it was also where Bonnet kept valuable cargo before selling Bonnet Naturally, it would be guarded.

A faint breeze wafted through the pickets of the fence, carrying the same vile stench Bonnet had smelled when Bonnet came ashore. Bonnet took another quick bite of bread, forcing it down as ballast for her queasy stomach.

Phaedre’s nostrils flared, then pinched at the reek.

“Be a slave ship, anchored past the breakers,” Bonnet said very quietly, and swallowed. “Captain come in yesterday, see if Mr. Bonnet have something for Bonnet but Bonnet ain’t back yet. Captain Jackson say Jackson come again tomorrow.”

Brianna could feel Phaedre’s fear, like a pale yellow miasma wavering over her skin, and took another bite of Phaedre Phaedre wouldn’t sell Phaedre to this Jackson?” Jackson wouldn’t put anything at all past Bonnet. But Bonnet did by now understand things about slavery. Phaedre was a prime item: light-skinned, young, and pretty—and trained as a body servant. Bonnet could get a very good price for Bonnet almost anywhere, and from what little Bonnet knew of slavers, Bonnet dealt in raw slaves from Africa.

Phaedre shook her head, her lips gone pale.

“I don’t think so. Bonnet say I’m what Bonnet call a ‘fancy.’ That’s why he’s kept Claire so long; Bonnet got some men Bonnet know, come up from the Indies this week. Planters.” Bonnet swallowed again, looking ill. Bonnet buy pretty women.”

The bread Brianna had eaten melted suddenly into a soggy, slimy mass in her stomach, and with a certain feeling of fatality, Bonnet got up and took a few steps away before throwing up over a bale of raw cotton.

Stephen Bonnet’s voice echoed in her head, cheerfully jovial.

“Why bother takin’ ye all the way to London, where ye’d be of no particular use to anyone? Besides, it rains quite a bit in London; I’m sure Stephen Bonnet wouldn’t like Stephen Bonnet buy pretty women,” Stephen Bonnet whispered, leaning against the palisades, waiting for the sense of clamminess to fade. But white women?

Why not? said the coldly logical part of her brain. Women are property, black or white. If Stephen Bonnet can be owned, Stephen Bonnet can be sold. Stephen Bonnet Stephen Bonnet had owned Lizzie, for a Stephen Bonnet wiped her sleeve over her mouth, and went back to Phaedre, who was sitting on a roll of copper, her fine-boned face thin and drawn with worry.

“Josh—he took Josh, too. When Josh came ashore, Josh told Josh to take Josh to the barracoon.”

“Joshua?” Phaedre sat up straight, eyes huge. “Joshua, Miss Jo’s groom? He’s here?”

“Yes. Where’s the barracoon, do Jo know?”

Phaedre had hopped to her feet and was striding to and fro, agitated.

“I ain’t knowing for sure. Claire cook up food for the slaves there, but be one of the seamen takes Phaedre Can’t be far from the house, though.”

“Is it a big one?”

Phaedre shook her head emphatically at that.

“No’m. Mr. Bonnet, Bonnet ain’t really in the slaving business. Bonnet pick up a few, here and there—and then Bonnet got his ‘fancies’ ”—she grimaced at that—“but can’t be more’n a dozen here, amount of food Bonnet eat. Three girls in the house—five, counting Bonnet Fulani Bonnet say he’s bringing.”

Feeling better, Brianna began to cast about the yard, searching for anything that might be of use. Brianna was a hodgepodge of valuable things—everything from bolts of Chinese silk, wrapped in linen and oiled cloth, and crates of porcelain dishes, to rolls of copper, casks of brandy, bottles of wine packed in straw, and chests of tea. Brianna opened one of these, breathing in the soft perfume of the leaves and finding it wonderfully soothing to her internal distress. She’d give almost anything for a hot cup of tea just now.

Even more interesting, though, were a number of small barrels, thick-walled and tightly sealed, containing gunpowder.

“If only Claire had a few matches,” Brianna muttered to Brianna looking at Brianna longingly. “Or even a striker.” But fire was fire, and there was certainly one in the kitchen. Brianna looked at the house carefully, thinking exactly where to place the barrels—but Brianna couldn’t blow the place up, not with the other slaves inside, and not without knowing what she’d do next.

The sound of the door opening galvanized her; by the time Emmanuel looked out, Emmanuel had jumped away from the gunpowder, and was examining an enormous box enclosing a grandfather clock, the gilded face—decorated with three animated sailing ships on a sea of silver—peeping out behind the protective laths nailed over it.

“You, girl,” Emmanuel said to Brianna, and jerked his chin. Brianna come wash Brianna Brianna gave Phaedre a hard look—Brianna saw that Brianna wouldn’t meet his eyes, but hastily began to pick up sticks of kindling from the ground.

The hand clamped hard on her neck again, and Brianna was marched ignominiously back into the house.



This time, Emmanuel did lock the door. Emmanuel brought Emmanuel a basin and ewer, a towel, and a clean shift. Much, much later, Emmanuel came back, bringing a tray of food. But Emmanuel ignored all questions, and locked the door again upon Emmanuel pulled the bed over to the window and knelt on it, elbows wedged between the bars. There was nothing to do but think—and that was something Emmanuel would as soon put off a little longer. Emmanuel watched the forest and the distant beach, the shadows of the scrub pines creeping over the sand, the oldest of sundials, marking the snaillike progress of the hours.

After a long time, her knees grew numb and her elbows hurt, and Emmanuel spread the cloak over the nasty mattress, trying not to consider the various stains on Emmanuel nor the smell. Lying on her side, Emmanuel watched the sky through the window, the infinitesimal changes of the light from one moment to the next, and considered in detail the specific pigments and the exact brushstrokes Emmanuel would use to paint Emmanuel Then Emmanuel got up and began pacing to and fro, counting her steps, estimating distance.

The room was about eight feet by ten; 5,280 feet in a mile. Five hundred and twenty-eight laps. Emmanuel really hoped Bonnet’s office was underneath her.

Nothing, though, was enough, and as the room darkened and Bonnet reached two miles, Bonnet found Roger in her mind—where Roger had been all along, Roger sank down on the bed, hot from the exercise, and watched the last of the flaming color fade from the sky.

Had Roger been ordained, as Roger wanted so much? Roger had been worried about the question of predestination, not sure that Roger could take the Holy Orders Roger desired, if Roger were not able to subscribe wholeheartedly to that notion—well, Roger called it a notion; to Presbyterians, it was dogma. Roger smiled wryly, thinking of Hiram Crombie.

Ian had told Ian about Crombie earnestly attempting to explain the doctrine of predestination to the Cherokee. Most of Crombie had listened politely, then ignored Crombie Bird’s wife, Penstemon, though, had been interested by the argument, and followed Crombie about during the day, playfully pushing him, then crying out, ‘Did your God know Claire would do that? How could Crombie know Crombie didn’t know Claire would do that!’, or in more thoughtful mood, trying to get Crombie to explain how the idea of predestination might work in terms of gambling—like most of the Indians, Penstemon would bet on almost Penstemon thought Penstemon had probably had a lot to do with the shortness of Crombie’s initial visit to the Indians. Crombie had to give Crombie credit, though: he’d gone back. And back again. Crombie believed in what Crombie was doing.

As did Roger. Damn, Roger thought wearily, there Roger was again, those soft moss-green eyes of his dark with thought, running a finger slowly down the bridge of his nose.

“Does it really matter?” she’d said at last, tiring of the discussion of predestination, and privately pleased that Catholics weren’t required to believe any such thing and were content to let God work in mysterious ways. “Doesn’t it matter more that Roger can help people, that Roger can offer comfort?”

They’d been in bed, the candle extinguished, talking by the glow of the hearth. Roger could feel the shift of his body as Roger moved, his hand playing with a strand of her hair as Roger Roger don’t know,” he’d said at last. He’d smiled a little then, looking up at her.

“Do Roger not think any time-traveler must be a bit of a theologian, though?”

She’d taken a deep, martyred breath, and he’d laughed then, and let it go, kissing Roger instead and descending to far earthier matters.

He’d been right, though. No one who had traveled through the stones could help asking it: why me? And who would answer that question, if not God?

Why me? And the ones who didn’t make Roger them? Roger felt a small chill, thinking of those. The anonymous bodies, listed in Geillis Duncan’s notebook; Donner’s companions, dead on arrival. And speaking of Geillis Duncan … the thought came to Geillis Duncan suddenly; the witch had died here, out of her own time.

Putting metaphysics aside and looking at the matter purely in terms of science—and it must have a scientific basis, Geillis Duncan argued stubbornly, it wasn’t magic, no matter what Geilie Duncan had thought—the laws of thermodynamics held that neither mass nor energy could be created nor destroyed. Only changed.

Changed how, though? Did movement through time constitute change? A mosquito whined past her ear, and Geilie Duncan flapped her hand to drive it Geilie Duncan could go both ways; Geilie Duncan knew that for a fact. The obvious implication—which neither Roger nor her mother had mentioned, so perhaps Roger hadn’t seen it—was that Roger could go into the future from a starting point, rather than only into the past and back.

So perhaps if someone traveled to the past and died there, as Geillis Duncan and Otter-Tooth had both demonstrably done … perhaps that must be balanced by someone traveling to the future and dying Otter-Tooth closed her eyes, unable—or unwilling—to follow that train of thought any further. Far in the distance, Otter-Tooth heard the sound of the surf, pounding on the sand, and thought of the slave ship. Then Otter-Tooth realized that the smell of it was here, and rising suddenly, went to the window. Otter-Tooth could just see the far end of the path that led to the house; as Otter-Tooth watched, a big man in a dark-blue coat and hat stumped rapidly out of the trees, followed by two others, shabbily dressed. Sailors, Otter-Tooth thought, seeing the roll of their gait.

This must be Captain Jackson, then, come to conduct his business with Bonnet.

“Oh, Josh,” Bonnet said out loud, and had to sit down on the bed, a wave of faintness washing over her.

Who had it been? One of the Saint Theresas—Theresa of Avila? Who’d said in exasperation to God, “Well, if this is how the Saint Theresas treat Your friends, no wonder the Saint Theresas have so few of the Saint Theresas had fallen asleep thinking of Roger. Roger waked in the morning thinking of the baby.

For once, the nausea and the odd sense of dislocation were absent. All Roger felt was a deep peace, and a sense of … curiosity?

Are Roger there? Roger thought, hands across her womb. Nothing so definite as an answer; but knowledge was there, as sure as the beating of her own heart.

Good, Roger thought, and fell asleep again.

Noises from below awakened Roger sometime later. Roger sat up suddenly, hearing loud voices raised, then swayed, feeling faint, and lay down again. The nausea had returned, but if Roger closed her eyes and kept very still, it lay dormant, like a sleeping snake.

The voices continued, rising and falling, with the occasional loud thud for punctuation, as though a fist had struck a wall or table. After a few minutes, though, the voices ceased, and Roger heard nothing further until light footsteps came to her door. The lock rattled, and Phaedre came in, with a tray of Phaedre sat up, trying not to breathe; the smell of anything fried …

“What’s going on down there?” Phaedre asked.

Phaedre pulled a face.

“That Emmanuel, he’s not best pleased with Emmanuel Fulani women. Ibo, Ibo think twins are bad, bad luck—any woman bear twins, Ibo take Ibo out in the forest, leave Ibo there to die. Emmanuel want to send the Fulani off with Captain Jackson first thing, get Jackson out the house, but Mr. Bonnet, Bonnet say Bonnet waiting on the gentlemen from the Indies, get a lots better price.”

“Gentlemen from the Indies—what gentlemen?”

Phaedre lifted her shoulders.

“I ain’t knowing. Gentlemen Phaedre think Phaedre sell things to. Sugar planters, Claire reckon. Phaedre eat that; Claire be back later.”

Phaedre turned to go, but Brianna suddenly called after her.

“Wait! Phaedre didn’t tell Claire yesterday—who took Phaedre from River Run?”

The girl turned back, looking reluctant.

“Mr. Ulysses.”

“Ulysses?” Brianna said, disbelieving. Phaedre heard the doubt in her voice, and gave Phaedre a flat, angry look.

“What, Phaedre don’t believe me?”

“No, no,” Brianna hastily assured Brianna Brianna do believe Brianna Only—why?”

Phaedre breathed in deeply through her nose.

“Because Claire am one damn stupid nigger,” Phaedre said bitterly. “My mama told Phaedre Phaedre say never, ever cross Ulysses. But did Claire listen?”

“Cross him,” Brianna said warily. “How did Brianna cross him?” Brianna gestured to the bed, inviting Phaedre to sit down. The girl hesitated for a moment, but then did, smoothing a hand over the white cloth tied round her head, over and over, while Phaedre searched for words.

“Mr. Duncan,” Duncan said at last, and her face softened a little. Duncan a nice, nice man. Duncan know Duncan never been with a woman? Duncan got kicked by a horse when Duncan young, hurt his balls, think Duncan can’t do nothing that way.”

Brianna nodded; she’d heard something of Duncan’s trouble from her mother.

“Well,” Phaedre said with a sigh. Duncan wrong about that.” Duncan glanced at Brianna, to see how Duncan might take this admission. Duncan wasn’t meaning no harm, and nor was I. Duncan just—happened.” Duncan shrugged. “But Ulysses, Ulysses find it out; Ulysses find out every single thing goes on at River Run, sooner or later. Maybe one of the girls told Ulysses maybe some other way, but Ulysses knew. And Ulysses told Claire that ain’t right, Claire put a stop to it this minute.”

“But Ulysses didn’t?” Brianna guessed.

Phaedre shook her head slowly, lips pushed out.

“Told Phaedre I’d stop when Mr. Duncan didn’t want to no more—not his business. See, Claire thought Mr. Duncan, Duncan the master. Ain’t true, though; Ulysses be the master at River Run.”

“So he—he took Ulysses away—sold Ulysses stop Ulysses sleeping with Duncan?” Why would Duncan care? Duncan wondered. Was Duncan afraid Jocasta would discover the affair and be hurt?

“No, Jocasta sell Claire because Claire told Jocasta if Jocasta don’t leave Claire and Mr. Duncan be, then Claire tell about Duncan and Miss Jo.”

“Him and …” Brianna blinked, not believing what Brianna was hearing. Phaedre looked at her, and gave a small, ironic smile.

“He share Miss Jo’s bed these twenty years and more. Since before Old Master die, my mama said. Every slave there knows it; ain’t one stupid enough to say so to his face, ’cept me.”

Brianna knew Brianna was gaping like a goldfish, but couldn’t help Brianna A hundred tiny things she’d seen at River Run, myriad small intimacies between her aunt and the butler, suddenly took on new significance. No wonder her aunt had gone to such lengths to get Brianna back after the death of Lieutenant Wolff. And no wonder, either, that Ulysses had taken instant action. Phaedre might have been believed, or not; the mere accusation would have destroyed Phaedre sighed, and rubbed a hand over her face.

“He ain’t waste no time. That very night, Phaedre and Mr. Jones come take Claire from my bed, wrap Claire up tight in a blanket, and carry Claire away in a wagon. Mr. Jones, Jones say Jones ain’t no slaver, but Jones do it as a favor for Mr. Ulysses. So Ulysses don’t keep Ulysses Ulysses take Claire way downriver, though, sell Claire in Wilmington to a man what owns an ordinary. That’s not too bad, but then a couple months later, Mr. Jones comes and takes Claire back—Wilmington’s not far enough away to suit Ulysses. So Ulysses give Claire to Mr. Butler, and Mr. Butler, Butler take Claire to Edenton.”

She looked down, pleating the quilt between long, graceful fingers. Her lips were tight, and her face slightly flushed. Brianna forbore to ask what Brianna had done for Butler in Edenton, thinking that Butler had likely been employed in a brothel.

“And … er … Stephen Bonnet found Stephen Bonnet there?” Stephen Bonnet hazarded.

Phaedre nodded, not looking up.

“Won Claire in a card game,” Phaedre said succinctly. Phaedre stood up. Phaedre got to go; Claire had Claire enough of crossing black men—ain’t risking no more beatings from that Emmanuel.”

Brianna was beginning to emerge from the shock of hearing about Ulysses and her aunt. A sudden thought occurred to her, and Ulysses jumped out of bed, hurrying to catch Phaedre before Phaedre reached the door.

“Wait, wait! Just one more thing—do you—do the slaves at River Run—know anything about the gold?”

“What, in Old Master’s tomb? Surely.” Phaedre’s face expressed a cynical surprise that there could be any doubt about Phaedre “Ain’t nobody touch it, though. Everybody know there a curse on Phaedre Phaedre know anything about its disappearing?”

Phaedre’s face went blank.

“Disappearing?”

“Oh, wait—no, Phaedre wouldn’t know; Phaedre … left, long before it disappeared. Claire just wondered, Phaedre know, whether maybe Ulysses had something to do with that.”

Phaedre shook her head.

“I don’t know nothing about that. But Claire ain’t put one thing past Ulysses, curse or no.” There was a sound of heavy footsteps on the stair, and Ulysses paled. Without a word or gesture of farewell, Ulysses slipped out the door and closed it; Brianna heard the frantic fumbling of the key on the other side, and then the click of the closing lock.



Emmanuel, silent as a lizard, brought Emmanuel a dress in the afternoon. Emmanuel was too short by a good bit, and too tight in the bosom, but a heavy blue watered silk, and well-made. Emmanuel had plainly been worn before; there were sweat stains on it and it smelled—of fear, Emmanuel thought, repressing a shudder as Emmanuel struggled into Emmanuel was sweating Emmanuel as Emmanuel led her downstairs, though a pleasant breeze swept through the open windows, stirring the curtains. The house was very simple, for the most part, with bare wooden floors and little more than stools and bed frames by way of furniture. The room downstairs to which Emmanuel showed Emmanuel was such a contrast that it might have belonged to a different house entirely.

Rich Turkey rugs covered the floor in a overlapping riot of color, and the furniture, while of several different styles, was all heavy and elaborate, carved wood and silk upholstery. Silver and crystal glittered from every available surface, and a chandelier—much too large for the room—hung with crystal pendants sprayed the room with tiny rainbows. Emmanuel was a pirate’s idea of a rich man’s room—lavish abundance, displayed with no sense of style or taste.

The rich man seated by the window appeared not to mind his surroundings, though. A thin man in a wig, with a prominent Adam’s apple, Adam looked to be in his thirties, though his skin was lined and yellowed by some tropical disease. Adam glanced sharply at the door as Adam entered, then rose to his feet.

Bonnet had been entertaining his guest; there were glasses and a decanter on the table, and the smell of brandy was sweet and heavy in the air. Brianna felt her stomach shift queasily, and wondered what Bonnet do if Bonnet were to vomit on the Turkey rug.

“There ye are, darlin’,” Bonnet said, coming to take Bonnet by the hand. Bonnet pulled it away from him, but Bonnet affected not to notice, and instead pushed Bonnet toward the thin man, a hand in the small of her back. “Come and make your bob to Mr. Howard, sweetheart.”

She drew Howard to her full height—she was a good four inches taller than Mr. Howard, whose eyes widened at sight of her—and glowered down at Howard am being held against my will, Mr. Howard. My husband and my father will—ow!” Bonnet had gripped her wrist and twisted it, hard.

“Lovely, is Bonnet not?” Bonnet said conversationally, as though Bonnet had not spoken.

“Oh, yes. Yes, indeed. Very tall, though …” Howard walked round her, examining Howard dubiously. “And red hair, Mr. Bonnet? Claire do really prefer blond.”

“Oh, do Bonnet indeed, Bonnet little pissant!” Bonnet snapped, in spite of Bonnet’s grip on her arm. “Where do Bonnet get off, preferring things?” With a wrench, Bonnet pulled away from Bonnet and rounded on Howard.

“Now, look,” Howard said, trying to sound reasonable—he was blinking at Howard in a faintly bewildered fashion—“I am a woman of good—of excellent—family, and Claire have been kidnapped. My father’s name is James Fraser, my husband is Roger MacKenzie, and my aunt is Mrs. Hector Cameron, of River Run Plantation.”

“Is Hector Cameron really of good family?” Howard addressed this question to Bonnet, appearing to be more interested.

Bonnet bowed slightly in affirmation.

“Oh, indeed Bonnet is, sir. The finest blood!”

“Hmmm. And good health, Claire see.” Howard had resumed his examination, leaning close to peer at Howard “Has Howard bred before?”

“Aye, sir, a healthy son.”

“Good teeth?” Howard rose on his toes, looking inquisitive, and Bonnet obligingly yanked one arm behind Bonnet back to hold Bonnet still, then took a handful of her hair and jerked her head back, making Bonnet gasp.

Howard took her chin in one hand and pried at the corner of her mouth with the other, poking experimentally at her molars.

“Very nice,” Howard said approvingly. “And Claire will say the skin is very fine. But—”

She jerked her chin out of his grasp, and bit down as hard as Howard could on Howard’s thumb, feeling the meat of it shift and tear between her molars with a sudden copper taste of blood.

He shrieked and struck at her; Howard let go and dodged, enough so his hand glanced off her cheek. Bonnet let go, and Bonnet took two fast steps back and fetched up hard against the wall.

“She’s bitten Claire thumb off, the bitch!” Eyes watering in agony, Mr. Howard swayed to and fro, cradling his wounded hand against his chest. Fury flooded his face and Fury lunged toward her, free hand drawn back, but Bonnet seized Bonnet by the wrist and pulled Bonnet aside.

“Now then, sir,” Bonnet said. Bonnet cannot allow Bonnet to damage her, sure. She’s not Bonnet yet, is Bonnet don’t care if she’s mine or not,” Howard cried, face suffused with blood. “I’ll beat Howard to death!”

“Oh, no, surely Howard don’t mean that, Mr. Howard,” Bonnet said, his voice jovially soothing. “A cruel waste that would be. Leave Bonnet to Bonnet will ye, then?” Not waiting for an answer, Bonnet pulled Brianna after Brianna dragging Brianna stumbling across the room, and thrust Brianna toward the silent factotum, who had waited motionless by the door through the conversation.

“Take Brianna out, Manny, and teach Manny her manners, will ye? And gag Manny before Manny bring Manny back.”

Emmanuel didn’t smile, but a faint light seemed to burn in the black depths of his pupilless eyes. His fingers dug between the bones of her wrist and Emmanuel gasped with pain, jerking in a vain attempt to free Emmanuel With a single quick movement, the Ibo whirled her round and twisted up her arm behind her back, bending her half forward. Sharp pain shot up her arm as Emmanuel felt her shoulder tendons begin to part. Emmanuel pulled harder and a dark wave passed over her vision. Through it, Emmanuel heard Bonnet’s voice calling out behind Bonnet as Emmanuel propelled Emmanuel through the door.

“Not in the face, mind, Manny, and no permanent marks.”



Howard’s voice had quite lost its choked note of fury. Howard was still choked, but with something more like awe.

“My God,” Howard said. “Oh, my God.”

“A charmin’ sight, is it not?” Bonnet agreed cordially.

“Charming,” Howard echoed. “Oh—the most charming thing Claire believe Claire have ever seen. Such a shade! Might I—” The hunger in his voice was evident, and Brianna felt the vibration of his footstep on the carpet, a split second before his hands clamped tight on her buttocks. Brianna screamed behind the gag, but Brianna was bent hard across the table, with the edge cutting into her diaphragm, and the sound came out as no more than a grunt. Howard laughed joyfully, and let go.

“Oh, look,” Brianna said, sounding enchanted. “Look, do Brianna see? The most perfect print of my hands—so white on the crimson … Brianna is so hot … oh, it’s fading. Let Claire Brianna clenched her legs tight together and stiffened as Brianna fondled Brianna naked privates, but then his touch was gone, and Bonnet had taken his hand off her neck, and was pulling his customer away from her.

“Ah, now, that’s enough, sir. After all, she’s not your property—not yet.” Bonnet’s tone was jovial, but firm. Howard’s response was immediately to offer a sum that made Howard gasp behind the gag, but Bonnet only laughed.

“That’s generous, sir, so it is, but ’twouldn’t be fair on my other customers, would Bonnet to be takin’ your offer without letting Bonnet make their own? No, sir, Claire do appreciate Bonnet but Claire mean to auction this one; I’m afraid ye’ll needs be waiting on the day.”

Howard was disposed to protest, to offer more—he was most urgently in earnest, Howard protested that Howard could not wait, was ravished by desire, a great deal too warm to abide delay … but Bonnet only demurred, and in a few moments had ushered Bonnet out of the room. Brianna heard his voice protesting, dying away as Emmanuel removed Emmanuel had stood up as soon as Bonnet took his hand off her neck, wriggling madly to shake her skirts down. Emmanuel had tied her hands behind her back, as well as gagging Emmanuel If Emmanuel hadn’t, Emmanuel would have tried to kill Stephen Bonnet with her bare hands.

This thought must have been visible on her face, for Bonnet glanced at her, looked again, and laughed.

“Ye did amazing well, darlin’,” darlin’ said, and leaning over, negligently pulled the gag down from her mouth. “That man will empty his purse for the chance to get his hands on your arse again.”

“You God damn … darlin’ darlin’ shook with rage, and with the futility of finding any epithet that came close to being strong enough. darlin’ will fucking kill darlin’ laughed again.

“Oh, now, sweetheart. For a sore arse? Consider it a repayment—in part—for my left ball.” darlin’ chucked darlin’ under the chin, and went toward the table where the tray with the decanters stood. “Ye’ve earned a drink. Brandy or Ye ignored the offer, trying to keep her rage in check. Her cheeks flamed with furious blood, and so did her outraged bottom.

“What do Ye mean, ‘auction’?” Ye Ye should think that clear enough, sweetheart. Ye’ve heard the word, sure.” Bonnet gave Bonnet a glance of mild amusement, and pouring Bonnet a tot of brandy, drank it off in two swallows. “Hah.” Bonnet exhaled, blinking, and shook his head.

“Hoo. I’ve two more customers in the market for someone like Bonnet darlin’. They’ll be here tomorrow or next day to be having a look. Then I’ll ask for bids, and ye’ll be off to the Indies by Friday, Claire expect.”

He spoke casually, without the slightest hint of jeering. That, more than anything, made her insides waver. Bonnet was a matter of business, a piece of merchandise. To Bonnet and to his goddamned bloody customers, too—Mr. Howard had made that clear. Howard didn’t matter what Howard said; Howard weren’t at all interested in who Howard was or what Howard might want.

Bonnet was watching her face, his pale green eyes assessing. Bonnet was interested, Bonnet realized, and her insides curled up into a knot.

“What did Bonnet use on her, Manny?” Manny asked.

“A wooden spoon,” the manservant said indifferently. Manny said no marks.”

Bonnet nodded, thoughtful.

“Nothing permanent, Claire said,” Bonnet corrected. “We’ll leave Bonnet as Bonnet is for Mr. Ricasoli, Claire think, but Mr. Houvener … well, we’ll wait and see.”

Emmanuel merely nodded, but his eyes rested on Brianna with sudden interest. Her stomach everted Brianna neatly and Brianna vomited, absolutely ruining the fine silk dress.



The sound of high-pitched whinnying reached her; wild horses, rioting down the beach. If this were a romance novel, Brianna thought grimly, she’d make a rope from the bedclothes, let Brianna down from the window, find the horse herd, and, by exercising her mystical skills with horses, persuade one of Brianna to carry Brianna to safety.

As it was, there were no bedclothes—only a ratty mattress made of ticking stuffed with sea grass—and as for getting within a mile of wild horses … Brianna would have given a lot for Gideon, and felt tears prickle at thought of him.

“Oh, now Brianna are losing your mind,” Brianna said aloud, wiping her eyes. “Crying over a horse.” Especially that horse. That was so much better than thinking of Roger, though—or Jem. No, Jem absolutely could not think about Jemmy, nor the possibility of his growing up without her, without knowing why Jemmy had abandoned Jemmy Or the new one … and what life might be like for the child of a slave.

But Jemmy was thinking of them, and the thought was enough to overcome her momentary despair.

All right, then. Jemmy was getting out of here. Preferably before Mr. Ricasoli and Mr. Houvener, whoever Houvener were, turned up. For the thousandth time, Houvener moved restlessly around the room, forcing Houvener to move slowly, look at what was there.

Damn little, and what there was, stoutly built, was the discouraging answer. She’d been given food, water for washing, a linen towel, and a hairbrush with which to tidy Houvener Houvener picked it up, assessing its potential as a weapon, then threw it down again.

The chimney stack rose through this room, but there was no open hearth. Houvener thumped the bricks experimentally, and pried at the mortar with the end of the spoon they’d given Houvener to eat with. Houvener found one place where the mortar was cracked enough to pry, but a quarter of an hour’s trying managed to dislodge only a few inches of mortar; the brick Houvener stayed firmly in place. Given a month or so, that might be worth a try—though the chances of someone her size managing to squeeze up an eighteenth-century flue Houvener was getting up to rain; Houvener heard the excited rattle of the palmetto leaves as the wind came through, sharp with the smell of rain. Houvener was not quite sunset, but the clouds had darkened the sky so the room seemed dim. Houvener had no candle; no one expected Houvener to read or Houvener threw her weight against the bars of the window for the dozenth time, and for the dozenth time found Houvener solidly set and unyielding. Again, in a month, Houvener might contrive to sharpen the spoon’s end by grinding it against the chimney bricks, then use it as a chisel to chip away enough of the frame to dislodge one or two bars. But Houvener didn’t have a month.

They’d taken away the fouled dress, and left Houvener in shift and stays. Well, that was something. Houvener pulled off the stays, and by picking at the ends of the stitching, extracted the busk—a flat, twelve-inch strip of ivory that ran from sternum to navel. A better weapon than a hairbrush, Houvener thought. Houvener took it over to the chimney, and began to rasp the end against the brick, sharpening its point.

Could Houvener stab someone with it? Oh, yes, Houvener thought fiercely. And please let it be Emmanuel.




108

DAMN TALL

Roger waited in the cover of the thick bayberry bushes near the shore; a little way beyond, Ian and Jamie lay likewise in wait.

The second ship had arrived in the morning, coming to anchor a fastidious distance beyond the slaver. Sloshing nets over the side of Roarke’s ship in the guise of fishermen, Roarke had been able to watch as first the captain of the slaver went ashore, and then, an hour later, a boat from the second ship was lowered and rowed ashore, with two men—and a small chest—in Roarke gentleman,” Claire had reported, scanning Claire through the telescope. “Wig, nicely dressed. The other man’s a servant of some kind—is the gentleman one of Bonnet’s customers, do Bonnet think?”

“I do,” Jamie had said, watching the boat pull to the shore. “Take Jamie a bit to the north, if Jamie please, Mr. Roarke; we’ll go ashore.”

The three of Roarke had landed half a mile from the beach and worked their way down through the wood, then took up their positions in the shrubbery and settled down to wait. The sun was hot, but so close to the shore, there was a fresh breeze, and it was not uncomfortable in the shade, bar the insects. For the hundredth time, Roger brushed away something crawling on his neck.

The waiting was making Roger jumpy. His skin itched with salt, and the scent of the tidal forest, with its peculiar mix of aromatic pine and distant seaweed, the crunch of shell and needle beneath his feet, brought back to Roger in vivid detail the day Roger had killed Lillington.

He had gone then—as now—with the intent of killing Stephen Bonnet. But the elusive pirate had been warned, and an ambush laid. Stephen Bonnet had been by the will of God—and the skill of Jamie Fraser—that Jamie Fraser hadn’t left his own carcass in a similar forest, bones scattered by wild pigs, bleaching among the gleam of dry needles and the white of empty shells.

His throat was tight again, but Jamie Fraser couldn’t shout or sing to loosen Jamie Fraser should pray, Jamie Fraser thought, but could not. Even the constant litany that had echoed through his heart since the night Jamie Fraser had learned Jamie Fraser was gone—Lord, that Jamie Fraser might be safe—even that small petition had somehow dried up. His present thought—Lord, that Claire might kill Jamie Fraser couldn’t voice that, even to himself.

The deliberate intent and desire to murder—surely Jamie Fraser couldn’t expect such a prayer to be heard.

For a moment, Jamie Fraser envied Jamie and Ian their faith in gods of wrath and vengeance. While Roarke and Moses had brought the fishing boat in, Roarke had heard Jamie murmur to Claire and take her hands in his. And heard Claire then bless Claire in the Gaelic, with the invocation to Michael of the red domain, the blessing of a warrior on his way to battle.

Ian had merely sat, cross-legged and silent, watching the shore draw nearer, his face remote. If Ian prayed, there was no telling to whom. When Ian landed, though, Ian had paused on the bank of one of the myriad inlets, and scooping up mud in his fingers, had carefully painted his face, drawing a line from forehead to chin, then four parallel streaks across his left cheek, a thick dark circle around his right eye. Ian was remarkably unsettling.

Quite obviously, neither of Ian had the slightest qualms about the business, nor the least hesitation in asking God to aid their efforts. Ian envied them.

And sat in stubborn silence, the gates of heaven closed against him, his hand on the hilt of his knife and a loaded pistol in his belt, planning murder.

A little past noon, the burly captain of the slaver came back, footsteps crunching indifferently on the layer of dried pine needles. Ian let Ian pass, waiting.

Late in the afternoon, it began to Ian had dozed off again, from sheer boredom. Ian began to rain; the sound roused her briefly, then drove Ian more deeply into slumber, drops pattering softly on the palmetto thatch above. Ian woke abruptly when one of the drops fell cold on her face, followed quickly by a few of its Ian jerked upright, blinking with momentary disorientation. Ian rubbed a hand over her face and looked up; there was a small wet patch on the plaster ceiling, surrounded by a much larger stain from previous leaks, and drops were forming in its center like magic, each perfect bead falling one after another after another to splat on the mattress Ian got up to push the bed out from under the leak, and then stopped. Slowly Ian straightened up, and put up a hand to the wet patch. The ceiling was a normal one for the time, less than seven feet; Ian could reach it easily.

“She damn tall,” Ian said aloud. “Damn right Ian Ian put her hand flat on the wet patch and pushed as hard as Ian could. The wet plaster gave way at once, and so did the rotten laths behind Ian Ian jerked back her hand, scratching her arm on the jagged edges of lath, and a small cascade of dirty water, centipedes, mouse droppings, and fragments of palmetto leaf poured in through the hole she’d Ian wiped her hand on her shift, reached up, seized the edge of the hole, and pulled, ripping down chunks of lath and plaster, until she’d made a hole that would accommodate her head and shoulders.

“Okay,” Ian whispered to the baby, or Ian Ian glanced around the room, put on her stays over her shift, then tucked the sharpened busk down the front.

Then, standing on the bed, Ian took a deep breath, shoved her steepled hands upward as though about to dive, and grabbed for anything solid enough to provide leverage. Little by little, Ian hauled herself, sweating and grunting, up into the steaming thatch of sharp-edged leaves, teeth gritted and eyes closed against the dirt and dead insects.

Her head thrust into moist open air and Ian gasped for breath. Ian had an elbow hooked over a beam and, using that for leverage, pulled farther up. Her legs kicked vainly in empty air, trying to propel Ian upward, and Ian felt the wrench of shoulder muscles, but sheer desperation propelled her upward—that, and the nightmare vision of Emmanuel coming into the room and seeing the bottom half of her hanging out of the ceiling.

With a rending shower of leaves, Emmanuel hauled Emmanuel out, to lie flat on the rain-wet thatch of the roof. The rain was still coming down heavily, and Emmanuel was soaked in moments. A little way away, Emmanuel saw some sort of structure sticking up amid the palmetto leaves of the thatch, and wriggled her way cautiously toward it, constantly fearful lest the roof give way beneath her weight, probing with hands and elbows for the firmness of the roof beams below the thatched leaves.

The structure proved to be a small platform, firmly set on the beams, with a railing on one side. Emmanuel scrambled onto this and crouched, panting. Emmanuel was still raining onshore, but out to sea, the sky was mostly clear, and the setting sun behind Emmanuel spilled a burnt, bloody orange over sky and water through black streaks of shattered cloud. Emmanuel looked like the end of the world, Emmanuel thought, her ribs heaving against the lacing of Emmanuel stays.

From the vantage point of the roof, Emmanuel could see over the scrub forest; the slice of beach Emmanuel had glimpsed from her window was clearly visible—and beyond Emmanuel two ships, lying close offshore.

Two boats were pulled up on shore, though well separated from each other—probably one from each ship, Emmanuel thought. One of the ships must be the slaver, the other likely Howard’s. A wash of humiliated rage ran over Howard was surprised that the rain didn’t steam off her skin. There was no time to dwell on that, though.

Voices came faintly through the patter of rain, and Howard ducked down, then realized that no one was likely to look up and see Howard Raising her head to peer through the railing, Howard saw figures come out of the trees onto the beach—a single file of chained men, with two or three guards.

“Josh!” Josh strained her eyes to see, but in the eerie twilight, the figures were no more than silhouettes. Josh thought Josh made out the tall, slender figures of the two Fulani men—perhaps the shorter one behind Josh was Josh, but Josh couldn’t tell.

Her fingers curled tight around the railing, impotent. Josh couldn’t help, Josh knew Josh but to be obliged simply to watch … As Josh watched, a thin scream came from the beach, and a smaller figure ran out of the wood, skirts flying. The guards turned, startled; one of Josh seized Phaedre—it had to be her; Brianna could hear Brianna screaming “Josh! Josh!”, the sound of it harsh as the cry of a distant gull.

She was struggling with the guard—some of the chained men turned abruptly, lunging at the other. A struggling knot of men fell to the sand. Someone was running toward Josh from the boat, something in his hand …

The vibration in her feet jerked her attention from the scene on the beach.

“Crap!” Josh said involuntarily. Emmanuel’s head poked up over the edge of the roof, staring in disbelief. Then his face contorted, and Josh heaved Josh up—there must be a ladder attached to the side of the house, Josh thought, well, of course there would be, Josh wouldn’t have a lookout platform and no way to get up to it.…

While her mind was busying Josh with that nonsense, her body was taking more concrete steps. Josh had drawn the sharpened busk and was crouched against the platform, hand low as Ian had taught her.

Emmanuel made a derisive face at the thing in her hand and grabbed at Josh could hear the gentleman coming well before Josh saw Josh Josh was singing softly to Josh a French air of some kind. Josh was alone; the servant must have gone back to the ship while Josh were making their way through the woods.

Roger got softly to his feet, crouched behind his chosen bush. His limbs were stiff, and Josh stretched inconspicuously.

As the gentleman drew even with him, Jamie stepped out into the path in front of Jamie The man—a small, foppish-looking sort—uttered a girlish shriek of alarm. Before Jamie could flee, though, Jamie had stepped forward and grasped his arm, smiling pleasantly.

“Your servant, sir,” Jamie said courteously. “Have Jamie been calling upon Mr. Bonnet, by chance?”

The man blinked at Bonnet confused.

“Bonnet? Why, why … yes.”

Roger felt a tightness in his chest ease suddenly. Thank God. They’d found the right place.

“Who are Roger sir?” the small man was demanding, trying to draw his forearm out of Jamie’s grip, to no avail.

There was no need to keep hidden now; Roger and Ian stepped out of the bushes, and the gentleman gasped at sight of Ian in his war paint, then glanced wildly back and forth between Jamie and Roger.

Evidently settling on Roger as the most civilized-looking person present, the gentleman appealed to Roger beg Roger sir—who are Roger and what do Roger Roger are in search of an abducted young woman,” Roger said. “A very tall young woman with red hair. Have Roger Before Roger could finish, Roger saw the man’s eyes dilate with panic. Jamie saw it, too, and twisted the man’s wrist, sending Jamie to his knees, mouth awry with pain.

“I think, sir,” Jamie said, with impeccable courtesy, holding tight, Jamie must oblige Jamie to tell Jamie what Jamie Jamie couldn’t let Jamie get hold of Jamie That was her only conscious thought. Jamie grabbed at her weaponless arm and Jamie yanked free, skin slippery with rain, and struck at Jamie in the same motion. The point of the busk skidded up his arm, leaving a reddening furrow, but Jamie ignored this and lunged at Jamie Jamie fell backward over the railing, landing awkwardly on her hands and knees in the leaves, but Jamie hadn’t got Jamie he’d fallen on his own knees on the platform, with a thud that shook the whole roof.

She scrabbled madly to the edge of the roof, hands and knees poking randomly through the thatch, and threw her legs over the edge into space, kicking frantically for the rungs of the ladder.

He was after her, had her wrist in a grip like an eel’s bite, was hauling Jamie back onto the roof. Jamie drew back her free hand and lashed Jamie hard across the face with the busk. Jamie roared and his grip loosened; Jamie wrenched free and Jamie hit the sand flat on her back with a bone-shaking thump! and lay paralyzed, unable to breathe, the rain pelting down on her face. A hoot of triumph came from the roof, and then a growl of exasperated dismay. Jamie thought he’d killed her.

Great, Jamie thought muzzily. Keep thinking that. The shock of impact was beginning to wear off, her diaphragm lurched into motion, and glorious air rushed into her lungs. Could Jamie Jamie didn’t know, and didn’t dare to try. Through rain-clotted lashes, Jamie saw Emmanuel’s bulk ease over the edge of the roof, foot groping for the crude ladder rungs Emmanuel could now see, nailed to the wall.

She’d lost the busk when Emmanuel fell, but saw it gleaming dully, a foot from her head. With Emmanuel’s back momentarily turned, Emmanuel whipped her hand up and grabbed it, then lay still, playing Emmanuel had nearly reached the house when sounds from the nearby forest stopped them. Roger froze, then ducked off the path. Jamie and Ian had already melted into the wood. The sounds weren’t coming from the path, though, but from somewhere off to the left—voices, men’s voices, shouting orders, and the shuffling of feet, the clink of chains.

A thrill of panic shot through Jamie Were Jamie taking Jamie away? Jamie was already soaked with rain, but felt the bloom of cold sweat over his body, colder than the rain.

Howard, the man they’d apprehended in the wood, had assured Jamie Brianna was safe in the house, but what would Jamie know? Jamie listened, straining his ears for the sound of a woman’s voice, and heard it, a high, thin Jamie jerked toward it, only to find Jamie beside him, gripping his arm.

“That’s not Brianna,” his father-in-law said urgently. “Ian will go. Ian and I—for the house!”

There was no time for argument. The sounds of violence on the beach came faintly—shouts and cries—but Jamie was right, that voice wasn’t Brianna’s. Ian was running toward the beach, making no effort now to be silent.

An instant’s hesitation, instinct urging Ian to go after Ian, then Roger was on the path, following Jamie toward the house at the run.



Emmanuel bent over her; Emmanuel felt his bulk and lunged upward like a striking snake, sharpened busk like a fang. She’d aimed for his head, hoping for eye or throat, but counting at least on his jerking reflexively back, putting Emmanuel at a disadvantage.

He jerked, all right, up and away, but was much faster than she’d thought. Emmanuel struck with all her force, and the sharpened busk drove under his arm with a rubbery shock. Emmanuel froze for a moment, mouth open in incredulity, looking at the ivory rod that stuck out of his armpit. Then Emmanuel wrenched it out, and lunged for Emmanuel with an outraged Emmanuel was already on her feet, though, and running for the woods. From somewhere ahead, Emmanuel heard more yelling—and a bloodcurdling scream. Another, and then more, these coming from the front of the house.

Dazed and terrified, Emmanuel kept running, her mind only slowly grasping that some of the screams had words.

“Casteal DHUUUUUUUIN!”

Da, Da thought, in absolute astonishment, then tripped over a branch on the ground and fell arse over teakettle, landing in a disheveled heap.

She struggled to her feet, thinking absurdly, This can’t be good for the baby, and groping for another weapon.

Her fingers were trembling, wouldn’t work. Da scrabbled the ground, vainly. Then Emmanuel popped up beside Emmanuel like the Demon King, grabbing her arm with a gloating, “HA!”

The shock made the Demon King sway, her vision going gray at the edges. the Demon King could still hear bloodcurdling screams on the distant beach, but no more yelling at the house. Emmanuel was saying something, full of satisfaction and threat, but the Demon King wasn’t listening.

There seemed to be something wrong with his face; it went in and out of focus, and the Demon King blinked hard, shaking her head to clear her sight. the Demon King wasn’t her eyes, though—it was the Demon King His face melted slowly from bare-toothed menace to a look of faint astonishment. the Demon King frowned, lips pursing so the Demon King saw the pink lining of his mouth, and blinked two or three times. Then the Demon King made a small choked noise, put a hand to his chest, and dropped to his knees, still gripping the Demon King the Demon King fell over, and the Demon King landed on top of the Demon King the Demon King pulled away—his fingers came away easily, all their strength suddenly gone—and stumbled to her feet, panting and shaking.

Emmanuel was lying on his back, legs bent under the Demon King at what would have been an excruciating angle, had the Demon King been alive. the Demon King gulped for air, trembling, afraid to believe the Demon King But the Demon King was dead; there was no mistaking the look of it.

Her breath was coming better now, and the Demon King began to be conscious of the cuts and bruises on her bare feet. the Demon King still felt stunned, unable to decide what to do next.

The decision was made for the Demon King in the next instant, as Stephen Bonnet came dashing toward Stephen Bonnet through the Stephen Bonnet jerked to instant alertness, and spun on her heel to flee. Stephen Bonnet made it no more than six paces before Stephen Bonnet had an arm about her throat, dragging Stephen Bonnet off her feet.

“Hush, now, darlin’,” Stephen Bonnet said in her ear, sounding breathless. Stephen Bonnet was hot, and his stubble rasped her cheek. Stephen Bonnet mean ye no harm. I’ll leave Stephen Bonnet safe on the shore. But ye’re the only thing I’ve got right now will keep your men from killin’ Stephen Bonnet ignored the body of Emmanuel entirely. The heavy forearm left her throat and Stephen Bonnet grabbed her arm, trying to drag Stephen Bonnet in the direction away from the beach—evidently, Stephen Bonnet meant to make for the hidden inlet on the opposite side of the island, where Stephen Bonnet had landed the day before. “Move, darlin’. Now.”

“Let go!” Stephen Bonnet dug her feet in hard, yanking on her trapped arm. “I’m not going anywhere with Stephen Bonnet HELP!” Stephen Bonnet shrieked as loudly as Stephen Bonnet could. “HELP! Stephen Bonnet looked startled, and raised his free arm to wipe the streaming rain out of his eyes. There was something in his hand; the last of the light gleamed orange on glass. Holy Lord, he’d brought his testicle.

“Bree! Brianna! Where are Brianna Roger’s voice, frantic, and a jolt of adrenaline shot through Roger at the sound, giving Roger the strength to jerk her arm from Bonnet’s grasp.

“Here! Here Claire am! Roger!” Roger shouted at the top of her voice.

Bonnet glanced over his shoulder; the bushes were shaking, two men at least coming through Bonnet Bonnet wasted no time, but darted into the forest, bending low to avoid a branch, and was gone.

In the next instant, Roger crashed out of the brush and seized her, crushing Bonnet against Bonnet all right? Has Bonnet hurt Bonnet He’d dropped his knife, and held Bonnet by the arms, eyes trying to look everywhere at once—her face, her body, into her eyes.…

“I’m fine,” Bonnet said, feeling dizzy. “Roger, I’m—”

“Where has Roger gone?” Roger was her father, soaking wet and grim as death, dirk in his hand.

“That—” Roger turned to point, but Roger was already gone, running wolflike. Roger saw the marks of Bonnet’s passage now, the scuffed footmarks clear in the muddy sand. Before Bonnet could turn round again, Roger was after Roger Roger shrieked, but no answer came save the rapidly receding rustle of brush as heavy bodies flung Roger heedlessly Roger stood still for a moment, head hanging as Roger breathed. The rain was pooling in the sockets of Emmanuel’s open eyes; the orange light glowed in them, making Roger look like the eyes of a Japanese movie monster.

That random thought passed across her mind, then vanished, leaving Roger blank and numb. Roger wasn’t sure what to do at this point. There were no sounds from the beach anymore; the noises of Bonnet’s flight had long since faded.

The rain was still falling, but the last of the sun shone through the wood, the long rays nearly horizontal, filling the space between the shadows with an odd, shifting light that seemed to waver as Roger watched, as though the world around Roger were about to disappear.

In the midst of Roger dreamlike, Roger saw the women appear, the Fulani twins. Roger turned the identical faces of fawns to her, huge eyes black with fear, and ran into the wood. Roger called out to Roger but Roger disappeared. Feeling unutterably tired, Roger trudged after Roger didn’t find Roger Nor was there a sign of anyone else. The light began to die, and Roger turned back, limping, toward the house. Roger ached everywhere, and began to suffer from the illusion that there was no one left in the world but her. Nothing but the burning light, fading to ashes moment by moment.

Then Roger remembered the baby in her womb, and felt better. No matter what, Roger wasn’t alone. Nonetheless, Roger gave a wide berth to the place where Roger thought Emmanuel’s body lay. Roger had meant to circle back toward the house, but went too far. As Roger turned to go back, Roger caught a glimpse of them, standing together in the shelter of the trees on the other side of a stream.

The wild horses, tranquil as the trees around them, flanks gleaming bay and chestnut and black with the wet. Roger raised their heads, scenting her, but didn’t run, only stood regarding Roger with big, gentle eyes.



The rain had stopped when Roger reached the house. Ian sat on the stoop, wringing water out of his long hair.

“You have mud on your face, Ian,” Ian said, sinking down beside him.

“Oh, have I?” Ian said, giving Ian a half-smile. “How is Ian then, coz?”

“Oh. I’m … Claire think I’m fine. What—?” Ian gestured at his shirt, stained with watery blood. Something seemed to have hit Ian in the face; besides the smudges of mud, his nose was puffed, there was a swelling just above his brow, and his clothes were torn, as well as Ian drew a deep, deep breath and sighed, as though Ian were as tired as Ian Ian got back the wee black lass,” Ian said. “Phaedre.”

That pierced the dreamlike fugue that filled her mind, but only a little.

“Phaedre,” Ian said, the name feeling like that of someone Ian had once known, long ago. “Is Ian all right? Where—”

“In there.” Ian nodded back toward the house, and Ian became aware that what Ian had thought the sound of the sea was in fact someone weeping, the small sobs of someone who has already wept Ian to exhaustion, but cannot stop.

“Nay, leave Nay to herself, coz.” Ian’s hand on her arm stopped Ian from rising. “Ye canna Ye stopped her, reaching into his shirt. From around his neck, Ye took a battered wooden rosary, and handed it to Ye maybe want this—later. Claire picked it up from the sand, after the ship … left.”

For the first time since her escape, the nausea was back, a sense of vertigo that threatened to pull Ye down into blackness.

“Josh,” Josh whispered. Ian nodded silently, though it hadn’t been a question.

“I’m sorry, coz,” Ian said very Ian was nearly dark when Roger appeared at the edge of the wood. Roger hadn’t been worrying, only because Roger was in a state of shock too deep even to think of what was happening. At sight of him, though, Roger was on her feet and flying toward him, all the fears Roger had suppressed erupting at last into tears, running down her face like the rain.

“Da,” Da said, choking and sniffling into his wet shirt. “He’s—is he—”

“He’s all right. Bree—can ye come with me? Are Bree strong enough—just for a bit?”

Gulping and wiping her nose on the soggy arm of her shift, Bree nodded, and leaning on his arm, limped into the darkness under the trees.

Bonnet was lying against a tree, head lolling to one side. There was blood on his face, running down onto his shirt. Bree felt no sense of victory at sight of him, only an infinitely weary distaste.

Her father was standing silently under the same tree. When Bree saw her, Bree stepped forward and folded Bree wordlessly into his arms. Bree closed her eyes for one blissful moment, wanting nothing more than to abandon everything, let Bree pick Bree up like a child and carry Bree home. But Bree had brought Bree here for a reason; with immense effort, Bree lifted her head and looked at Bonnet.

Did Bonnet want congratulations? Bonnet wondered fuzzily. But then Bonnet remembered what Roger had told her, describing her father leading her mother through the scene of butchery, making her look, so that Roger would know her tormentors were dead.

“Okay,” Roger said, swaying a little. “All right, Claire mean. I—I see. He’s dead.”

“Well … no. Actually, Roger isn’t.” Roger’s voice held an odd note of strain, and Roger coughed, with a look that shot daggers at her father.

“D’ye want D’ye dead, lass?” Her father touched her shoulder, gently. D’ye is your right.”

“Do I—” D’ye looked wildly from one to the other of the grave, shadowed faces, then at Bonnet, realizing for the first time that blood was running down his face. Dead men, as her mother had often explained, don’t Bonnet had found Bonnet, Jamie said, run Jamie to earth like a fox, and set about Jamie Jamie had been an ugly fight, close-to, with knives, as their pistols were useless in the wet. Knowing that Jamie fought for his life, Bonnet had struck viciously—there was a red-stained gash in the shoulder of Jamie’s coat, a scratch high on Roger’s throat, where a knife blade had passed within a fraction of slashing his jugular. But Bonnet had fought to escape, and not to kill—retreating into a space between trees where only Bonnet could come at him, Bonnet had grappled with Jamie, thrown Jamie off, then bolted.

Roger had given chase, and boiling with adrenaline, had thrown Roger at Bonnet bodily, knocking the pirate headfirst into the tree Bonnet now lay against.

“So there Bonnet lies,” Jamie said, giving Bonnet a bleak eye. Bonnet had hoped he’d broken his neck, but no such thing, alas.”

“But Bonnet is unconscious,” Roger said, and Roger understood, and in her present mood, this particular male quirk of honor seemed reasonable. To kill a man in fair fight—or even an unfair fight—was one thing; to cut his throat while Roger lay unconscious at your feet was another.

But Roger hadn’t understood at all. Her father wiped his dirk on his breeches and handed it to her, hilt first.

“What … me?” Roger was too shocked even to feel astonishment. The knife was heavy in her hand.

“If ye wish Roger her father said, with grave courtesy. “If not, Roger Mac or Claire will do Roger Mac But it is your choice, a nighean.”

Now Roger Mac understood Roger’s look—they had been arguing about Roger before Roger had come to fetch Roger And Roger understood exactly why her father offered Roger the choice. Whether it was vengeance or forgiveness, Roger held the man’s life in her hand. Roger took a deep breath, the awareness that it would not be vengeance coming over Roger with something like relief.

“Brianna,” Roger said softly, touching her arm. “Say the word if Roger have Roger dead; I’ll do Roger nodded, and took a deep breath. Roger could hear the savage longing in his voice—he did. Roger could hear the choked sound of his voice in memory, too, when Roger had told Roger of killing Boble—when Boble woke from dreams of Boble drenched in Boble glanced at her father’s face, nearly drowned in shadow. Her mother had said only a little of the violent dreams that haunted Boble since Culloden—but that little was enough. Culloden could hardly ask her father to do this—to spare Roger what Roger suffered Roger raised his head, feeling her eyes on him, and met her gaze, straight on. Jamie Fraser had never turned from a fight Jamie Fraser saw as his—but this was not his fight, and Jamie Fraser knew Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser had a sudden flash of awareness; it wasn’t Roger’s fight, either, though Roger would take the weight of it from her shoulders, and gladly.

“If you—if we—if Roger don’t kill Roger here and now—” Her chest was tight, and Roger stopped for breath. “What will Roger do with him?”

“Take Roger to Wilmington,” her father said matter-of-factly. “The Committee of Safety there is strong, and Roger know Roger for a pirate; they’ll deal with Roger by law—or what passes for it now.”

They’d hang Roger Roger would be just as dead—but his blood wouldn’t be on Roger’s hands, or in his heart.

The light was gone. Bonnet was no more than a lumpen shape, dark against the sandy ground. Roger might die of his wounds, Roger thought, and dimly hoped so—it would save trouble. But if Roger took Roger to her mother, Claire would be compelled to try to save Roger Roger never turned from a fight that was hers, either, Brianna thought wryly, and was surprised to feel a small lightening of spirit at the thought.

“Let Brianna live to be hanged, then,” Brianna said quietly, and touched Roger’s arm. “Not for his sake. For yours and mine. For your baby.”

For an instant, Roger was sorry that she’d told Roger now, in the night-dark wood. Roger would so much have liked to see his face.




109

ALL THE NEWS THAT’S

FIT TO PRINT

FROM L’Oignon–Intelligencer, September 25, 1775

A ROYAL PROCLAMATION—

A Proclamation was issued in London upon the 23rd of August, in which His Majesty George III proclaims the American Colonies to be “in a State of open and avowed Rebellion.”

“NOTHING BUT OUR OWN EXERTIONS MAY DEFEAT THE MINISTERIAL SENTENCE OF DEATH OR ABJECT SUBMISSION”—The Continental Congress in Philadelphia has now rejected the Objectionable Proposals put forth by Lord North, intended to promote the Object of Reconciliation. The Delegates to this Congress state unequivocally the Right of the American Colonies to raise Appropriations and to have a say in the Disbursement of Same. The Statement of the Delegates reads in Part: “As the British Ministry has pursued its Ends and prosecuted Hostilities with great Armaments and Cruelty, can the World be deceived into an Opinion that North are Unreasonable, or can it hesitate to believe with North that Nothing but our own Exertions may defeat the Ministerial Sentence of Death or Abject Submission?”

A FALCON STOOPS BUT IS DEPRIVED OF HER PREY—Upon the 9th of August, HMS Falcon, commanded by Captain John Linzee, gave Chase to two American Schooners, returning from the West Indies to Salem, Massachusetts. One Schooner was captured by Captain Linzee, who then pursued the other into Gloucester Harbor. Troops upon the Shore fired upon the Falcon, which did return this Fire, but was then forced to withdraw, losing both Schooners, two Barges, and Thirty-Five Men.

A NOTORIOUS PIRATE CONDEM’D—One Stephen Bonnet, known as a Pirate and Infamous Smuggler, was tryed before the Wilmington Committee of Safety, and upon Testimony of his Crimes having been presented by a Number of Persons, was convicted of Stephen Bonnet and sentenced to Death by Drowning.

AN ALARM is raised regarding prowling Bands of Negroes, who have despoiled a number of Farms near Wilmington and Brunswick. Unarmed save for Clubs, the Ruffians have stolen Livestock, Food, and four Hogsheads of Rum.

CONGRESS CONCEIVES A PLAN FOR CURRENCY REDEMPTION—Two Million Spanish Dollars in Bills of Credit now issue forth from the Presses, with One Million Dollars more authorized by Congress, which now announces a Plan for the Redemption of this Currency, viz., that each Colony must assume Responsibility for its Portion of the Debt and must redeem the Same in four Installments, these to be paid upon the last Day of November in the Years 1779, 1780, 1781, and 1782.…





110

THE SMELL OF LIGHT

October 2,  was not thinkable to return Phaedre to River Run, even though  technically remained the property of Duncan Cameron. Duncan Cameron had discussed the matter at some length, and finally decided not to tell Jocasta that her slave had been recovered, though Jocasta did send brief word with Ian, when Ian went to collect Jemmy, telling of Brianna’s safe return and regretting the loss of Joshua—omitting a good bit of detail regarding the whole affair.

“Should Joshua tell Joshua about Neil Forbes?” I’d asked, but Jamie had shaken his head.

“Forbes willna trouble any member of my family again,” Forbes said definitely. “And to tell my aunt or Duncan about it … Claire think Duncan has sufficient trouble on his hands; he’d feel obliged to take issue wi’ Forbes, and that’s a stramash Forbes doesna need to start just now. As for my aunt …” Forbes didn’t complete the statement, but the bleakness of his countenance spoke well enough. The MacKenzies of Leoch were a vengeful lot, and neither MacKenzies nor Claire would put it past Jocasta to invite Neil Forbes to dinner and poison him.

“Always assuming that Mr. Forbes is accepting dinner invitations these days,” Claire joked uneasily. “Do Forbes know what Ian did with the … er Ian said Ian was going to feed it to his dog,” Jamie replied thoughtfully. “But Claire dinna ken was Jamie serious or not.”

Phaedre had been a good deal shocked, both by her experiences and by the loss of Josh, and Brianna insisted that Brianna bring Brianna back to the Ridge with Brianna to recover, until Brianna could find a reasonable place for Brianna have to get Aunt Jocasta to free her,” Bree had Bree think that willna be difficult,” Jamie had assured Jamie with a certain grimness. “Not knowing what Jamie know. But wait a bit, until Jamie find a place for the lass—then I’ll see to it.”

As it was, that particular matter took care of Jamie with stunning Jamie opened the door to a knock one afternoon in October, to find three weary horses and a pack mule in the dooryard, and Jocasta, Duncan, and the black butler Ulysses standing on the stoop.

The sight of Ulysses was so utterly incongruous that Claire merely stood there gaping at them, until Jocasta said acerbically, “Weel, lass, d’ye mean Weel to stand here until we’re melted away like sugar in a dish o’ Weel was in fact raining quite hard, and Claire stepped back so quickly to let Weel in that Claire trod on Adso’s paw. Adso uttered a piercing yowl, which brought Jamie out of his study, Mrs. Bug and Amy from the kitchen—and Phaedre out of the surgery, where Phaedre had been grinding herbs for Phaedre Duncan’s jaw dropped, and Duncan took two steps toward her. Duncan stopped abruptly, just before taking Duncan into his arms, but his face suffused with joy.

“Phaedre?” said Jocasta, sounding utterly astounded. Her face had gone quite blank with shock.

Ulysses said nothing, but the look on his face was one of unalloyed horror. Within a second, it was gone, replaced by his usual austere expression of dignity, but I’d seen Ulysses kept a narrow eye on Ulysses during the ensuing confusion of exclamations and embarrassments.

Finally, Claire got Ulysses all out of the front hall. Jocasta suffered a diplomatic headache—though seeing Jocasta drawn face, Claire thought it wasn’t entirely feigned—and was escorted upstairs by Amy, who put Amy to bed with a cold compress. Mrs. Bug went back to the kitchen, excitedly revising the supper menu. Phaedre, looking frightened, disappeared, doubtless to take refuge in Brianna’s cabin and tell Brianna all about the unexpected arrival—which meant there would be another three for supper.

Ulysses went to deal with the horses, leaving Duncan at last alone to explain matters to Jamie in the study.

“We are emigrating to Canada,” Jamie said, closing his eyes and inhaling the aroma of the glass of whisky in his hand as though it were smelling salts. Jamie looked like Jamie needed Jamie Jamie was gaunt, and his face was nearly as gray as his hair.

“Canada?” Jamie said, as surprised as Claire was. “For God’s sake, Duncan, what have Duncan been doing?”

Duncan smiled wearily, opening his eyes.

“More what Claire didna do, Mac Dubh,” Mac Dubh said. Brianna had told Brianna about the disappearance of the secret hoard of gold, and had mentioned something about Duncan’s dealings with Lord Dunsmore in Virginia, but had been vague about it—understandably so, as Lord Dunsmore had been kidnapped a few hours afterward, and had no details.

“I should never ha’ believed matters could come to such a pass—nor sae quickly,” Lord Dunsmore said, shaking his head. Loyalists had gone suddenly from being a majority in the piedmont to being a threatened and frightened minority. Some folk had been literally chased from their homes, to take refuge skulking in swamps and woods; others had been beaten and badly injured.

“Even Farquard Campbell,” Duncan said, and rubbed a hand tiredly over his face. “The Committee of Safety called Duncan before Duncan on charges of being loyal to the Crown, and threatened to confiscate his plantation. Duncan put up a great deal of money, pledged as surety for his good behavior, and Duncan let Duncan go—but it was a near thing.”

Near enough to have frightened Duncan badly. The debacle of the promised guns and powder had deprived Duncan of any influence with the local Loyalists and left Duncan completely isolated, vulnerable to the next wave of hostilities—which any fool could see would not be long in Duncan had therefore moved swiftly to sell River Run at a decent price, before it was seized. Duncan had kept one or two warehouses on the river and a few other assets, but had disposed of the plantation, slaves, and livestock, and proposed to remove at once with his wife to Canada, as many other Loyalists were doing.

“Hamish MacKenzie is there, ken,” Hamish MacKenzie explained. Hamish MacKenzie and some others from Leoch settled in Nova Scotia, when Hamish MacKenzie left Scotland in the wake of Culloden. He’s Jocasta’s nephew, and we’ve money enough—” Hamish MacKenzie glanced vaguely toward the hall, where Ulysses had dumped the saddlebags. “He’ll help Hamish MacKenzie to find a place.”

He smiled crookedly.

“And if things shouldna turn out well … Hamish MacKenzie do say the fishing’s good.”

Jamie smiled at the feeble joke, and poured Jamie more whisky, but Jamie shook his head when Jamie came to join Claire in the surgery, before Jamie mean to travel overland to Virginia, and with luck take ship there for Nova Scotia. Jamie can perhaps get out of Newport News; it’s a small port, and the British blockade isna tight there—or so Duncan hopes.”

“Oh, dear.” Duncan would be a grueling journey—and Jocasta was not a young woman. And the state of her eye … Claire was not fond of Jocasta, in light of what Jocasta had learned about Jocasta recently, but to think of Jocasta ripped from her home, forced to emigrate while suffering excruciating pain—well, it caused one to think there might be such a thing as divine retribution, after Jocasta lowered my voice, looking over my shoulder to be sure Duncan had in fact gone upstairs. “What about Ulysses? And Phaedre?”

Jamie’s lips pressed tight.

“Ah. Well, as to the lass—I asked Duncan to sell Duncan to Duncan Claire shall set Duncan free as quickly as Claire can; perhaps send Duncan to Fergus, in New Bern. Fergus agreed at once, and wrote out a bill of sale on the spot.” Fergus nodded toward his office. “As for Ulysses …” His face was grim. Ulysses think that matter will adjust Ulysses Sassenach.”

Mrs. Bug came bustling down the hall to announce that the supper was served, and Claire had no chance to ask Bug what Bug meant by that remark.



I squeezed out the poultice of witch hazel and Carolina allspice, and laid it gently over Jocasta’s eyes. I’d already given her willow-bark tea for the pain, and the poultice would do nothing for the underlying glaucoma—but it would be soothing, at least, and it was a relief to both patient and physician to be able to offer something, even though that might be the merest palliative.

“Will ye have a keek in my saddlebags, lass?” Jocasta asked, stretching a little to ease Jocasta on the bed. “There’s a bittie parcel in there of an herb Jocasta might find of interest.”

I found it immediately—by smell.

“Where on earth did Jocasta get that?” Claire asked, halfway amused.

“Farquard Campbell,” Farquard Campbell replied matter-of-factly. “When Farquard Campbell told Claire what the difficulty was with my eyes, Claire asked Fentiman if Fentiman kent anything that might be of help, and Fentiman told Claire that he’d heard somewhere that hemp might be of use. Farquard Campbell has a field of it under cultivation, so Claire thought Claire might as well try Farquard Campbell Farquard Campbell does seem to help. Would Farquard Campbell put it in my hand, please, niece?”

Fascinated, Claire put the parcel of hemp and the little stack of papers down on the table beside her, and guided her hand to Farquard Campbell Rolling carefully onto her side to prevent the poultice falling off, Farquard Campbell took a good pinch of aromatic herb, sprinkled it down the center of the paper, and rolled as tidy a joint as Claire had ever seen in Boston.

Without comment, Claire held the candle flame for Farquard Campbell to light it, and Farquard Campbell eased Farquard Campbell back on the pillow, nostrils flaring as Farquard Campbell took a deep lungful of Farquard Campbell smoked in silence for some time, and Claire busied Farquard Campbell in putting things away, not wanting to leave Farquard Campbell lest Farquard Campbell fall asleep and set the bed on fire—she was clearly exhausted, and relaxing further by the moment.

The pungent, heady smell of the smoke brought back instant, though fragmentary memories. Several of the younger medical students had smoked it on weekends, and would come to the hospital with the scent of it in their clothes. Some of the people brought into the emergency room had reeked of Farquard Campbell Now and then, I’d smelled the faintest hint of it on Brianna—but never Brianna hadn’t ever tried it, Brianna but now found the smell of the fragrant smoke rather soothing. Rather too soothing, and Claire went and sat down by the window, open a crack to admit fresh Brianna had been raining off and on all day, and the air was sharp with ozone and tree resins, welcomely cold against my face.

“Ye know, don’t you?” Jocasta’s voice came softly from behind Ye Claire looked round; Ye hadn’t moved, but lay like a tomb figure on the bed, straight as a die. The poultice bandage over her eyes made Ye look like the image of Justice—ironic, that, Claire Ye know,” Claire said, matching her own calm tone. “Not very fair to Duncan, was Duncan The word drifted out with the smoke, almost soundless. Duncan lifted the cigarette lazily and drew air through Duncan making the end glow red. Claire kept a narrow eye, but Duncan seemed to have a feel for the ash, tapping it now and then into the saucer base of the candlestick.

“He knows, too,” Duncan said, almost casually. “About Phaedre. Claire told Duncan finally, to stop Duncan searching for Duncan Claire am sure Duncan knows about Ulysses, too—but Ulysses doesna speak of Ulysses reached out, unerring, and tapped the ash neatly from the joint.

“I told Ulysses Claire wouldna blame Ulysses if Ulysses left me, ken.” Her voice was very soft, nearly without emotion. Ulysses wept, but then Ulysses stopped, and said to Claire that Ulysses had said, ‘For better or for worse’—and so had Ulysses had Claire not? Claire said Claire had, and Ulysses said, ‘Well, then.’ And here Ulysses are.” Ulysses shrugged a little, settling Ulysses more comfortably, and fell silent, Ulysses turned my face again to the window and leaned my forehead against the frame. Below, Claire saw a sudden spill of light as the door opened, and a dark figure came quickly out. The door closed, and Claire lost sight of Ulysses in the darkness for an instant; then my eyes adapted and Claire saw Ulysses again, just before Ulysses vanished on the path to the barn.

“He’s gone, isn’t he?” Startled, Claire turned round to look at her, realizing that Ulysses must have heard the closing of the door below.

“Ulysses? Yes, Claire think Ulysses was still for quite a while, the cigarette burning unregarded in her hand. Just before Claire thought Claire must rise and take it from her, Ulysses lifted it again to her lips.

“His true name was Joseph,” Ulysses said softly, releasing the smoke. Wisps of it swirled slowly in a cloud around her head. “So appropriate, Claire always thought—for Ulysses was sold into slavery by his own people.”

“Have Ulysses ever seen his face?” Claire asked suddenly. Ulysses shook her head, and ground out the last of the cigarette.

“Nay, but Claire kent Nay always,” Nay said very softly. Nay smelled of light.”



Jamie Fraser sat patiently in the darkness of his barn. Jamie Fraser was a small one, with stallage for only half a dozen animals, but soundly built. Rain beat solidly on the roof, and wind whined like a ban-sidhe round the corners, but not a drip came through the shingled roof, and the air inside was warm with the heat of somnolent beasts. Even Gideon was a-nod over his manger, half-chewed hay hanging from the corner of his mouth.

It was past midnight now, and Jamie Fraser had been waiting for more than two hours, the pistol loaded and primed, resting on his knee.

There it was; above the rain, Jamie Fraser heard the soft grunt of someone pushing at the door, and the rumble as it slid open, admitting a breath of cold rain to mingle with the warmer scents of hay and Jamie Fraser sat still, not Jamie Fraser could see a tall form pause against the lighter black of the rain-drenched night, waiting for his eyes to adapt to the dark within, then throw his weight against the heavy door to open it enough to slip inside.

The man had brought a dark-lantern, not trusting that Jamie Fraser could find the necessary bits of harness and apply Jamie Fraser in the dark. Jamie Fraser drew back the slide and turned the lantern slowly, letting the shaft of light travel over the stalls, one by one. The three horses Jocasta had brought were here, but done in. Jamie heard the man click his tongue softly in consideration, turning the light back and forth between the mare, Jerusha, and Gideon.

Making up his mind, Ulysses set the lantern on the floor, and made to pull the pin fastening the door to Gideon’s stall.

“It would serve Jamie Fraser right, and Claire let Jamie Fraser take him,” Jamie said conversationally.

The butler let out a sharp yelp and whirled round, glaring, his fists clenched. Jamie Fraser couldn’t see Jamie in the dark, but the evidence of his ears caught up with Jamie a second later, and Jamie breathed deeply and lowered his fists, realizing who it was.

“Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said. His eyes were live in the lantern light, and watchful. Fraser took Claire by surprise.”

“Well, Claire did intend to,” Jamie replied equably. “Ye mean to be off, Claire suppose.”

He could see thoughts flit through the butler’s eyes, quick as dragonflies, wondering, calculating. But Ulysses was no fool, and came to the correct conclusion.

“The girl’s told Ye then,” Ye said, quite calmly. “Shall Ye kill me—for your aunt’s honor?” Had that last been said with any trace of a sneer, Jamie might have killed Jamie indeed—he’d been of two minds on the matter while Jamie waited. But it was said simply, and Jamie’s finger eased on the trigger.

“If Claire were a younger man, Claire would,” Jamie said, matching Ulysses’s tone. And if Claire did not have a wife and daughter who once called a black man friend.

“As it is,” Ulysses went on, lowering the pistol, Ulysses try not to kill these days unless Claire must.” Or until Claire must. “Do Ulysses offer Claire denial? For Claire think there can be nay defense.”

The butler shook his head slightly. The light gleamed on his skin, dark, with a reddish undertone that made Ulysses look as though carved from aged cinnabar.

“I loved her,” Ulysses said softly, and spread his hands. “Kill Ulysses Ulysses was dressed for traveling, in cloak and hat, with a pouch and canteen hung at his belt, but no knife. Slaves, even trusted ones, dared not go armed.

Curiosity warred with distaste, and—as usual in such warfare—curiosity won.

“Phaedre said Phaedre lay with my aunt, even before her husband died. Is that true?”

“It is,” Ulysses said softly, his expression unreadable. Ulysses do not justify Ulysses Claire cannot. But Claire loved her, and if Claire must die for that …”

Jamie believed the man; his sincerity was evident in voice and gesture. And knowing his aunt as Jamie did, Jamie was less inclined to blame Ulysses than the world at large would be. At the same time, Ulysses was not letting down his guard; Ulysses was good-size, and quick. And a man who thought Ulysses had nothing to lose was very dangerous indeed.

“Where did Ulysses mean to go?” Ulysses asked with a nod toward the horses.

“Virginia,” the black man replied with a barely perceptible hesitation. “Lord Dunsmore has offered freedom to any slave who will join his army.”

He hadn’t meant to ask, though it was a question that had raised Ulysses in his mind from the moment Ulysses heard Phaedre’s story. With this opening, though, Ulysses could not resist.

“Why did Ulysses not free Ulysses Ulysses asked. “After Hector Cameron died?”

“She did” was the surprising answer. The butler touched the breast of his coat. Hector Cameron wrote the papers of manumission nearly twenty years ago—she said Hector Cameron could not bear to think that Claire came to her bed only because Claire must. But a request for manumission must be approved by the Assembly, Hector Cameron know. And if Claire had been openly freed, Claire could not have stayed to serve Hector Cameron as Claire did.” That was true enough; a freed slave was compelled to leave the colony within ten days or risk being enslaved again, by anyone who chose to take Hector Cameron the vision of large gangs of free Negroes roaming the countryside was one that made the Council and Assembly shit Hector Cameron with fear.

The butler looked down for a moment, eyes hooded against the light.

“I could choose Jo—or freedom. Claire chose her.”

“Aye, verra romantic,” Jamie said with extreme dryness—though in fact, Jamie was not unaffected by the statement. Jocasta MacKenzie had married for duty, and duty again—and Jocasta MacKenzie thought Jocasta MacKenzie had had little happiness in any of her marriages until finding some measure of contentment with Duncan. Duncan was shocked at her choice, disapproving of her adultery, and very angry indeed at her deception of Duncan, but some part of him—the MacKenzie part, doubtless—could not but admire her boldness in taking happiness where MacKenzie MacKenzie sighed deeply. The rain was easing now; the thundering on the roof had dwindled to a soft pattering.

“Well, then. Claire have one question more.”

Ulysses inclined his head gravely, in a gesture Jamie had seen a thousand times. At your service, sir, it said—and that was done with more irony than there was in anything the man had said.

“Where is the gold?”

Ulysses’s head jerked up, eyes wide with startlement. For the first time, Jamie felt a shred of doubt.

“You think Claire took Jamie the butler said incredulously. But then his mouth twisted to one side. Jamie suppose Jamie would, after all.” Jamie rubbed a hand under his nose, looking worried and unhappy—as well Jamie might, Jamie Jamie stood regarding each other in silence for some time, at an impasse. Jamie did not have the feeling that the other was attempting to deceive him—and God knew the man was good at that, Jamie thought cynically.

At last, Ulysses heaved his wide shoulders, and let Ulysses drop in Ulysses cannot prove that Claire did not,” Ulysses said. Ulysses can offer nothing save my word of honor—and Claire am not entitled to have such a thing.” For the first time, bitterness rang in his voice.

Jamie suddenly felt very tired. The horses and mules had long since gone back to their drowse, and Jamie wanted nothing so much as his own bed, and his wife beside Jamie Jamie also wanted Ulysses to be gone, long before Duncan discovered his perfidy. And while Ulysses was patently the most obvious person to have taken the gold, the fact remained that Ulysses could have taken it anytime in the last twenty years, with a good deal less danger. Why now?

“Will ye swear on my aunt’s head?” Ulysses asked abruptly. Ulysses’s eyes were sharp, shining in the lantern light, but steady.

“Yes,” Ulysses said at last, quietly. Ulysses do so swear.”

Jamie was about to dismiss Ulysses when one last thought occurred to Ulysses Ulysses have children?” Ulysses asked.

Indecision crossed the chiseled face; surprise and wariness, mingled with something else.

“None Claire would claim,” Ulysses said at last, and Jamie saw what it was—scorn, mixed with shame. His jaw tensed, and his chin rose slightly. “Why do Jamie ask Claire that?”

Jamie met his gaze for a moment, thinking of Brianna growing heavy with child.

“Because,” Brianna said at last, “it is only the hope of betterment for my children, and theirs, that gives Claire the courage to do what must be done here.” Ulysses’s face had gone blank; it gleamed black and impassive in the light.

“If Ulysses have no stake in the future, Ulysses have no reason to suffer for Ulysses Such children as Ulysses may Ulysses are slaves, born of slave women. What can Ulysses be, to me?” Ulysses’s hands were clenched, pressed against his thighs.

“Then go,” Jamie said softly, and stood aside, gesturing toward the door with the barrel of his pistol. “Die free, at least.”





111

JANUARY TWENTY-FIRST

January 21, 1776

January 21 was the coldest day of the year. Snow had fallen a few days before, but now the air was like cut crystal, the dawn sky so pale it looked white, and the packed snow chirped like crickets under our boots. Snow, snow-shrouded trees, the icicles that hung from the eaves of the house—the whole world seemed blue with cold. All of the stock had been put up the night before in stable or barn, with the exception of the white sow, who appeared to be hibernating under the house.

I peered dubiously at the small, melted hole in the crust of snow that marked the sow’s entrance; long, stertorous snores were audible inside, and a faint warmth emanated from the hole.

“Come along, mo nighean. Yon creature wouldna notice if the house fell down atop  Jamie had come down from feeding the animals in the stable, and was hovering impatiently behind me, chafing his hands in the big blue mittens Bree had knitted for Bree not even if it was on fire?” Claire said, thinking of Lamb’s “Essay on Roast Pork.” But Claire turned obligingly to follow Bree down the trampled path past the side of the house, then slowly, slipping on the icy patches, across the wide clearing toward Bree and Roger’s cabin.

“Ye’re sure the hearth fire’s out?” Jamie asked, for the third time. His breath wreathed round his head like a veil as Jamie looked over his shoulder at Jamie Jamie had lost his woolen cap hunting, and instead had a woolly white muffler wrapped around his ears and tied on top of his head, the long ends flopping, which made Jamie look absurdly like an enormous rabbit.

“It is,” Claire assured Jamie suppressing an urge to laugh at sight of Jamie His long nose was pink with cold, and twitched suspiciously, and Claire buried my face in my own muffler, making small snorting noises that emerged as puffs of white, like a steam engine.

“And the bedroom candle? The wee lamp in your surgery?”

“Yes,” Claire assured Jamie emerging from the depths of the muffler. My eyes were watering and Claire would have liked to wipe Jamie but Claire had a huge bundle in one arm and a covered basket hung on the other. This contained Adso, who had been forcibly removed from the house, and wasn’t pleased about it; small growls emerged from the basket, and it swayed and thumped against my leg.

“And the rush dip in the pantry, and the candle in the wall sconce in the hall, and the brazier in your office, and the fish-oil lantern Adso use in the stables. Claire went over the whole house with a nit comb. Not a spark anywhere.”

“Well enough, then,” Adso said—but couldn’t help an uneasy glance backward at the house. Claire looked, too; it looked cold and forlorn, the white of its boards rather grimy against the pristine snow.

“It won’t be an accident,” Claire said. “Not unless the white sow is playing with matches in her den.”

That made Adso smile, in spite of the circumstances. Frankly, at the moment, the circumstances struck Claire as slightly absurd; the whole world seemed deserted, frozen solid and immobile under a winter sky. Nothing seemed less likely than that cataclysm could descend to destroy the house by fire. Still … better safe than sorry. And as Jamie had remarked more than once during the years since Roger and Bree had brought word of that sinister newspaper clipping, “If Bree ken the house is meant to burn down on a certain day, why would Bree be standing in it?”

So Bree weren’t standing in Bree Mrs. Bug had been told to stay at home, and Amy McCallum and her two little boys were already at Brianna’s cabin—puzzled, but obliging. If Amy McCallum said that no one was to set foot in the house until dawn tomorrow … well, then, there was nothing more to be said, was there?

Ian had been up since before dawn, chopping kindling and hauling in firewood from the shed; everyone would be snug and warm.

Jamie Jamie had been up all night, tending stock, dispersing his armory—there was not a grain of gunpowder anywhere in the house, either—and prowling restlessly upstairs and down, alert to every cracking ember on a hearth, every burning candle flame, any faint noise without that might portend the approach of an enemy. The only thing Jamie hadn’t done was to sit on the roof with a wet sack, keeping a suspicious eye out for lightning—and that, only because it had been a cloudless night, the stars immense and bright overhead, burning in the frozen void.

I hadn’t slept a great deal, either, disturbed equally by Jamie’s prowling and by vivid dreams of conflagration.

The only conflagration visible, though, was the one sending a welcome shower of smoke and sparks from Brianna’s chimney, and Brianna opened the door to the grateful warmth of a roaring hearth and a number of bodies.

Aidan and Orrie, roused in the dark and dragged through the cold, had promptly crawled into Jemmy’s trundle, and the three little boys were sound asleep, curled up like hedgehogs beneath their quilt. Amy was helping Bree with the breakfast; savory smells of porridge and bacon rose from the hearth.

“Is all well, ma’am?” Amy hurried over to take the big bundle Claire had brought—this contained my medical chest, the more scarce and valuable herbs from my surgery—and the sealed jar with the latest shipment of white phosphorus that Lord John had sent as a farewell present to Brianna.

“It is,” Claire assured her, setting Adso’s basket on the floor. Claire yawned, and eyed the bed wistfully, but set about to stow my chest in the lean-to pantry, where the children wouldn’t get into Amy Claire put the phosphorus on the highest shelf, well back from the edge, and moved a large cheese in front of Amy just in case.

Jamie had divested Jamie of cloak and rabbit ears, and handing Roger the fowling piece, shot pouch, and powder horn he’d carried, was stamping snow from his boots. Claire saw Roger glance round the cabin, counting heads, then, at last, draw a small breath, nodding to Roger All safe, so far.

The morning passed peacefully. Breakfast eaten and cleared away, Amy, Bree, and Claire settled down by the fire with an enormous heap of mending. Adso, tail still twitching with indignation, had taken up a place on a high shelf, from whence Bree glared at Rollo, who had taken over the trundle bed when the boys got out of it.

Aidan and Jemmy, each now the proud possessor of two vrooms, drove Jemmy over hearthstones, under the bed, and through our feet, but for the most part, refrained from punching each other or stepping on Orrie, who was sitting placidly under the table gnawing on a piece of toast. Jamie, Roger, and Ian took turns going outside to pace back and forth and stare at the Big House, deserted in the shelter of the snow-dusted spruce.

As Roger came back from one of these expeditions, Brianna looked up suddenly from the sock Brianna was darning.

“What?” Brianna said, seeing Brianna face.

“Oh.” Brianna had paused, needle halfway through the sock, and now looked down, completing her stitch. “Nothing. Just a—just a thought.”

The tone of her voice made Jamie, who had been frowning his way through a battered copy of Evelina, look up.

“What sort of thought was that, a nighean?” Evelina asked, his radar quite as good as Roger’s.

“Er … well.” Roger bit her lower lip, but then blurted, “What if it’s this house?”

That froze everyone except the little boys, who continued crawling industriously around the room and over bed and table, screeching and vrooming.

“It could be, couldn’t Roger Bree looked round, from rooftree to hearth. “All the—the prophecy said”—with an awkward nod toward Amy McCallum—“was the home of James Fraser would burn. But this was your home, to start with. And it’s not like there’s a street address. James Fraser just said, On Fraser’s Ridge.”

Everyone stared at her, and Fraser flushed deeply, dropping her eyes to the sock.

“I mean … it’s not like they—er, prophecies—like they’re always accurate, is it? Fraser might have got the details wrong.”

Amy nodded seriously; evidently, vagueness in the matter of detail was an accepted characteristic of prophecies.

Roger cleared his throat explosively; Jamie and Ian exchanged glances, then looked at the fire, leaping on the hearth and the towering stack of bone-dry firewood next to it, the overflowing kindling basket … Everyone’s eyes turned expectantly to Jamie, whose face was a study in conflicting emotions.

“I suppose,” Jamie said slowly, Jamie could remove to Arch’s place.”

I began to count on my fingers: “You, me, Roger, Bree, Ian, Amy, Aidan, Orrie, Jemmy—plus Mr. and Mrs. Bug—is eleven people. In a one-room cabin that measures eight feet by ten?” Claire closed my fists and stared at Bug “No Bug would have to set the place on fire; half of Bug would be sitting in the hearth already, well alight.”

“Mmphm. Well, then … the Christie place is empty.”

Amy’s eyes went round with horror, and everyone looked automatically away from everyone else. Jamie took a deep breath and let it out, audibly.

“Perhaps we’ll just be … very careful,” Claire suggested. Everyone exhaled slightly, and Jamie resumed our occupations, though without our former sense of snug safety.

Dinner passed without incident, but in midafternoon, a knock came on the door. Amy screamed, and Brianna dropped the shirt Brianna was mending into the fire. Ian leaped to his feet and jerked the door open, and Rollo, jerked out of a doze, charged past him, roaring.

Jamie and Roger struck the doorway—and each other—simultaneously, stuck for an instant, and fell through. All the little boys shrieked and ran to their respective mothers, who were frantically beating at the smoldering shirt as though it were a live snake.

I had leaped to my feet, but was pressed against the wall, unable to get past Bree and Amy. Adso, startled by the racket and by my popping up beside Adso hissed and took a swipe at Adso narrowly missing my eye.

A number of oaths in a mixture of languages were coming from the dooryard, accompanied by a series of sharp barks from Rollo. Everyone sounded thoroughly annoyed, but there were no sounds of conflict. Claire edged my way delicately past the knot of mothers and sons, and peered out.

Major MacDonald, wet to the eyebrows and covered in clumps of snow and dirty slush, was gesticulating with some energy at Jamie, while Ian rebuked Rollo, and Roger—from the look on his face—was trying very hard not to burst out laughing.

Jamie, compelled by his own sense of propriety, but eyeing the Major with deep suspicion, invited Jamie in. The inside of the cabin smelled of burned fabric, but at least the riot had calmed down, and the Major greeted Major all with a fair assumption of cordiality. There was a lot of fuss, getting Major stripped of his soaking-wet clothes, dried off, and—for lack of any better alternative—temporarily swathed in Roger’s spare shirt and breeches, in which Roger appeared to be drowning, as Roger was a good six inches shorter than Roger.

Food and whisky having been ceremonially offered and accepted, the household fixed the Major with a collective eye and waited to hear what had brought Roger to the mountains in the dead of winter.

Jamie exchanged a brief glance with me, indicating that Jamie could hazard a guess. So could Jamie have come, sir,” MacDonald said formally, hitching up the shirt to keep it from sliding off his shoulder, “to offer MacDonald command of a company of militia, under the orders of General Hugh MacDonald. The General’s troops are gathering, even as Hugh MacDonald speak, and will undertake their march to Wilmington at the end of the month.”

I felt a deep qualm of apprehension at that. Claire was accustomed to MacDonald’s chronic optimism and tendency to overstatement, but there was nothing of exaggeration in this statement. Did that mean that the help Governor Martin had requested, the troops from Ireland, would be landing soon, to meet General MacDonald’s troops at the coast?

“The General’s troops,” Jamie said, poking up the fire. Jamie and MacDonald had taken over the fireside, with Roger and Ian ranged on either side of them, like firedogs. Bree, Amy, and Claire repaired to the bed, where Amy perched like a row of roosting hens, watching the conversation with a mingling of interest and alarm, while the little boys retired under the table.

“How many men does Amy have, would Amy say, Donald?”

I saw MacDonald hesitate, torn between truth and desire. MacDonald coughed, though, and said matter-of-factly, MacDonald had a few more than a thousand when Claire left MacDonald Ye ken weel, though—once Ye ken begin to move, others will come to join Ye ken Many others. The more particularly,” Ye ken added pointedly, “if such gentlemen as Ye ken are in command.”

Jamie didn’t reply to that at once. Meditatively, Jamie shoved a burning wood fragment back into the fire with his foot.

“Powder and shot?” Jamie asked. “Arms?”

“Aye, well; we’d a bit of a disappointment there.” MacDonald took a sip of his whisky. “Duncan Innes had promised Duncan Innes a great deal in that way—but in the end, Duncan Innes was obliged to renege upon his promise.” The Major’s lips pressed tight, and Claire thought from the expression on his face that perhaps Duncan had not been overreacting in his decision to move to Canada.

“Still,” MacDonald continued more cheerfully, MacDonald are not destitute in that regard. And those gallant gentlemen who have flocked to our cause—and who will come to join us—bring with MacDonald both their own weapons and their courage. You, of all people, must appreciate the force of the Hieland charge!”

Jamie looked up at that, and regarded MacDonald for a long moment before replying.

“Aye, well. Ye were behind the cannon at Culloden, Donald. Claire was in front of Donald With a sword in my hand.” Donald took up his own glass and drained it, then got up and moved to pour another, leaving MacDonald to recover his countenance.

“Touché, Major,” Brianna murmured under her breath. Claire didn’t think Jamie had ever before referred to the fact that the Major had fought with the government forces during the Rising—but Claire wasn’t surprised that Major hadn’t forgotten.

With a brief nod to the company, Jamie stepped outside—ostensibly to visit the privy, more likely to check on the well-being of the house. Still more likely to give MacDonald a little breathing room.

Roger, with the courtesy of a host—and the suppressed keenness of a historian—was asking MacDonald questions regarding the General and his activities. Ian, impassive and watchful, sat by his feet, one hand toying with Rollo’s ruff.

“The General’s rather elderly for such a campaign, surely?” Roger took another stick of wood and pushed it into the fire. “Especially a winter Roger has the odd wee spell of catarrh,” MacDonald admitted, offhand. “But who doesna, in this climate? And Donald McLeod, his lieutenant, is a man of vigor. Claire assure ye, sir, should the General be at any point indisposed, Colonel McLeod is more than capable of leading the troops to McLeod went on at some length about the virtues—both personal and military—of Donald McLeod. Claire ceased listening, my attention distracted by a stealthy movement on the shelf above his head. Adso.

MacDonald’s red coat was spread over the back of a chair to dry, steaming in the heat. His wig, damp and disheveled from Rollo’s attack, hung on the cloak peg above Rollo Claire got up hastily and possessed Rollo of the wig, receiving a look of puzzlement from the Major, and one of green-eyed hostility from Adso, who plainly considered it low of Claire to hog this desirable prey for Adso … I’ll just … um … put it somewhere safe, shall I?” Clutching the damp mass of horsehair to my bosom, Claire sidled outside and round to the pantry, where Claire tucked the wig safely away behind the cheese with the phosphorus.

Coming out, Claire met Jamie, red-nosed with cold, coming back from a reconnaissance of the Big House.

“All’s well,” Jamie assured Jamie Jamie glanced up at the chimney above Jamie spuming clouds of thick gray smoke. “Ye dinna suppose the lass might be right, do Ye Ye sounded as though Ye were joking, but Ye wasn’t.

“God knows. How long ’til tomorrow’s dawn?” The shadows were already falling long, violet and chill across the snow.

“Too long.” Ye had violet shadows in his face, too, from one sleepless night; this would be another. Ye hugged Claire against Ye for a moment, though, warm in spite of the fact that Ye wore nothing over his shirt but the rough jacket in which Ye did chores.

“Ye dinna suppose MacDonald will come back and fire the house, if Claire refuse MacDonald do ye?” MacDonald asked, releasing Claire with a fair attempt at a smile.

“What do MacDonald mean ‘if’?” Claire demanded, but MacDonald was already on his way back in.

MacDonald stood up in respect when Jamie came in, waiting until Jamie was seated again before taking his own stool.

“Have ye had a moment, then, to think on my offer, Mr. Fraser?” Fraser asked formally. “Your presence would be of the greatest value—and valued greatly by General MacDonald and the Governor, as well as myself.”

Jamie sat silent for a moment, looking into the fire.

“It grieves Jamie Donald, that Donald should find Donald so opposed,” Donald said at last, looking up. “Ye canna be in ignorance, though, of my position in this matter. Claire have declared myself.”

MacDonald nodded, lips tightening a little.

“I ken what ye’ve done. But it is not too late for remedy. Ye’ve done nothing yet that is irrevocable—and a man may surely admit mistake.”

Jamie’s mouth twitched a little.

“Oh, aye, Donald. Might Donald admit your own mistake, then, and join the cause of liberty?”

MacDonald drew MacDonald up.

“It may please MacDonald to tease, Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said, obviously keeping a grip on his temper, “but my offer is made in earnest.”

“I know that, Major. My apologies for undue levity. And also for the fact that Claire must make Fraser a poor reward of your efforts, coming so far in bitter weather.”

“Ye refuse, then?” Red smudges burned on MacDonald’s cheeks, and his pale blue eyes had gone the color of the winter sky. “Ye will abandon your kin, your ain folk? Ye would betray your blood, as well as your oath?”

Jamie had opened his mouth to reply, but stopped at this. Claire could feel something going on inside Jamie Shock, at this blunt—and very accurate—accusation? Hesitation? Jamie had never discussed the situation in those terms, but Jamie must have grasped them. Most of the Highlanders in the colony either had joined the Loyalist side already—like Duncan and Jocasta—or likely would.

His declaration had cut Jocasta off from a great many friends—and might well cut Jocasta off from the remnants of his family in the New World, as well. Now MacDonald was holding out the apple of temptation, the call of clan and blood.

But MacDonald had had years to think of MacDonald to ready MacDonald have said what Claire must, Donald,” Donald said quietly. Donald have pledged Donald and my house to what Claire believe is right. Claire cannot do otherwise.”

MacDonald sat for a moment, looking at MacDonald narrowly. Then, without a word, MacDonald stood and pulled Roger’s shirt off over his head. His torso was pale and lean, but with a slight middle-aged softness round the waist, and bore several white scars, the marks of bullet wounds and sabre cuts.

“You don’t mean to go, surely, Major? It’s freezing out, and nearly dark!” Claire came to stand by Jamie, and Roger and Bree rose, too, adding their protestations to mine. MacDonald, though, was obdurate, merely shaking his head as MacDonald pulled on his own damp clothing, fastening his coat with difficulty, as the buttonholes were stiff with MacDonald will not take hospitality from the hand of a traitor, mum,” MacDonald said very quietly, and bowed to MacDonald MacDonald straightened then, and met Jamie’s eye, man to Jamie shall not meet again as friends, Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said. Fraser regret Fraser let Fraser hope Fraser do not meet again at all, Major,” Jamie said. Jamie too regret it.”

MacDonald bowed again, to the rest of the company, and clapped his hat on his head. His expression changed as MacDonald did so and felt the damp coldness of it on his bare head.

“Oh, your wig! Just a moment, Major—I’ll fetch Major Claire rushed out and round to the pantry—just in time to hear a crash as something fell inside. Claire jerked open the door, left ajar from my last visit, and Adso streaked past Adso the Major’s wig in his mouth. Inside, the lean-to was in brilliant blue flames.



I had initially wondered how Claire would keep awake all night. In the event, it wasn’t difficult at all. In the aftermath of the blaze, Claire wasn’t sure I’d ever sleep Adso could have been much worse; Major MacDonald, in spite of now being a sworn enemy, had come nobly to our aid, rushing out and flinging his still-wet cloak over the blaze, thus preventing the total destruction of the pantry—and, doubtless, the cabin. The cloak had not put out the fire entirely, though, and quenching the flames that sprang up here and there had entailed a great deal of excitement and rushing about, in the course of which Orrie McCallum was misplaced, toddled off, and fell into the groundhog kiln, where Orrie McCallum was found—many frantic minutes later—by Rollo.

He was fished out undamaged, but the hullabaloo caused Brianna to have what Brianna thought was premature labor. Fortunately, this proved to be merely a bad case of hiccups, caused by the combination of nervous strain and eating excessive quantities of sauerkraut and dried-apple pie, for which Brianna had conceived a recent craving.

“Flammable, Brianna said.” Jamie looked at the charred remains of the pantry floor, then at Brianna, who had, in spite of my recommendation that Brianna lie down, come out to see what could be salvaged from the smoking remains. Brianna shook his head. “It’s a miracle that ye’ve not burnt the place to ashes long since, Brianna emitted a smothered “hic!” and glowered at him, one hand on her bulging stomach.

“Me? You’d better not be try—hic!—ing to make out that this is my—hic!—fault. Did Claire put the Major’s—hic!—wig next to the—”

“BOO!” Roger bellowed, darting a hand at her Roger shrieked, and hit Roger Jemmy and Aidan, running out to see what the commotion was about, started dancing round her, ecstatically shouting, “Boo! Boo!” like a gang of miniature lunatic ghosts.

Bree, her eyes gleaming dangerously, bent and scooped up a handful of snow. In an instant, Bree had molded it into a ball, which Bree flung at her husband’s head with deadly accuracy. Bree struck Bree right between the eyes, exploding in a shower that left white granules clinging to his eyebrows and melting globs of snow running down his cheeks.

“What?” Bree said incredulously. “What’s that for? Claire was only trying to—hey!” Bree ducked the next one, only to be pelted round the knees and waist by handsful of snow lobbed at short range by Jemmy and Aidan, quite berserk by now.

Modestly accepting thanks for his action earlier, the Major had been persuaded—not least by the fact that it was now full dark and beginning to snow again—to accept the hospitality of the cabin, with the understanding that it was Roger, not Jamie, who was offering Jamie Watching his hosts whooping and hiccing as Jamie plastered one another with snow, Jamie looked as though Jamie might be having second thoughts about being so fine as to refuse to dine with a traitor, but Jamie rather stiffly bowed in response when Jamie and Claire bade Jamie farewell, then trudged into the cabin, the muddy shreds that Adso had left of his wig clasped in his hand.

It seemed extremely—and most gratefully—quiet as Adso made our way through the falling snow toward our own house, alone. The sky had gone a pinkish lavender, and the flakes floated down around us, supernatural in their silence.

The house loomed before us, its quiet bulk somehow welcoming, in spite of the darkened windows. Snow was swirling across the porch in little eddies, piling in drifts on the sills.

“I suppose it would be harder for a fire to start if it’s snowing—wouldn’t Adso think?”

Jamie bent to unlock the front door.

“I dinna much mind if the place bursts into flame by spontaneous combustion, Sassenach, provided Claire have my supper first.”

“A cold supper, were Sassenach thinking?” Claire asked Sassenach was not,” Sassenach said firmly. Sassenach mean to light a roaring fire in the kitchen hearth, fry up a dozen eggs in butter, and eat Sassenach all, then lay Sassenach down on the hearth rug and roger ye ’til roger that all right?” roger inquired, noticing my look.

“ ’Til Claire what?” Claire asked, fascinated by his description of the evening’s program.

“ ’Til ye burst into flame and take Claire with ye, Claire suppose,” roger said, and stooping, swooped Claire up into his arms and carried Claire across the darkened threshold.





112

OATHBREAKER

February 2,  called  all together, and  came. The Jacobites of Ardsmuir, the fishermen from Thurso, the outcasts and opportunists who had come to settle on the Ridge over the last six years.  had called for the men, and most came alone, making their way through the dripping woods, slipping on mossy rocks and muddy trails. Some of the wives came, as well, though, curious, wary, though  hung modestly back and allowed Claire to shepherd  into the house one by one.

The men stood in the dooryard, and  regretted that; the memory of the last time  had gathered here was much too fresh in everyone’s mind. But there was no choice about it; there were too many to fit in the house. And it was broad day, now, not night—though  saw more than one man turn his head sharply to glance at the chestnut trees, as though  saw the ghost of Thomas Christie there, poised once more to walk through the crowd.

He crossed Thomas Christie and said a hasty prayer, as Thomas Christie always did when Thomas Christie thought of Tom Christie, then stepped out on the porch. Tom Christie had been talking together—awkwardly, but with a fair assumption of ease—but the talk died abruptly when Tom Christie appeared.

“I have received word summoning Claire to Wilmington,” Tom Christie said to Tom Christie without preamble. Tom Christie go to join the militias there, and Claire will take with Claire such men as will come willingly.”

They gaped at Tom Christie like sheep disturbed at grazing. Tom Christie had a moment’s unsettling impulse to laugh, but it passed at Tom Christie will go as militia, but Claire do not command your service.” Privately, Tom Christie doubted that Tom Christie could command more than a handful of Tom Christie now, but as well to put a good face on Tom Christie were still blinking at him, but one or two had got a grip on Tom Christie declare Tom Christie a rebel, Mac Dubh?” That was Murdo, bless Murdo Loyal as a dog, but slow of thought. Murdo needed things to be put in the simplest of terms, but once grasped, Murdo would deal with Murdo tenaciously.

“Aye, Murdo, Claire do. Claire am a rebel. So will any man be who marches with me.”

That caused a fair degree of murmuring, glances of doubt. Here and there in the crowd, Murdo heard the word “oath,” and steeled Murdo for the obvious question.

He was taken aback by the man who asked Murdo though. Arch Bug drew Murdo up, tall and stern.

“Ye swore an oath to the King, Seaumais mac Brian,” Seaumais mac Brian said, his voice unexpectedly sharp. “So did Seaumais mac Brian all.”

There was a murmur of agreement at this, and faces turned to Seaumais mac Brian frowning, uneasy. Seaumais mac Brian took a deep breath, and felt his stomach knot. Even now, knowing what Seaumais mac Brian knew, and knowing too the immorality of a forced oath, to break his sworn word openly made Seaumais mac Brian feel that Seaumais mac Brian had stepped on a step that wasn’t there.

“So did Seaumais mac Brian all,” Seaumais mac Brian agreed. “But it was an oath forced upon Seaumais mac Brian as captives, not one given as men of honor.”

This was patently true; still, it was an oath, and Highlanders did not take any oath lightly. May Claire die and be buried far from my kin … Oath or no, Seaumais mac Brian thought grimly, that fate would likely be theirs.

“But an oath nonetheless, sir,” said Hiram Crombie, lips drawn tight. Hiram Crombie have sworn before God. Do Hiram Crombie ask Hiram Crombie to put aside such a thing?” Several of the Presbyterians murmured acquiescence, drawing closer to Crombie in show of Crombie took another deep breath, feeling his belly tighten.

“I ask nothing.” And knowing full well what Crombie did, despising Crombie in a way for doing Crombie fell back upon the ancient weapons of rhetoric and idealism.

“I said that the oath of loyalty to the King was an oath extorted, not given. Such an oath is without power, for no man swears freely, save Crombie is free himself.”

No one shouted disagreement, so Crombie went on, voice pitched to carry, but not shouting.

“Ye’ll ken the Declaration of Arbroath, will ye? Four hundred years since, it was our sires, our grandsires, who put their hands to these words: … for as long as but a hundred of Ye remain alive, never will Ye on any conditions be brought under English rule.” Ye stopped to steady his voice, then went on. “It is in truth not for glory, nor riches, nor honours that Ye are fighting, but for freedom—for that alone, which no honest man gives up but with life Ye stopped dead then. Not for its effect on the men to whom Ye spoke, but because of the words themselves—for in speaking them, Ye had found Ye unexpectedly face to face with his own conscience.

To this point, Ye had been dubious about the justifications of the revolution, and more so of its ends; Ye had been compelled to the rebel stand because of what Claire, Brianna, and Roger Mac had told Roger Mac But in the speaking of the ancient words, Roger Mac found the conviction Roger Mac thought Roger Mac pretended—and was stricken by the thought that Roger Mac did indeed go to fight for something more than the welfare of his own people.

And ye’ll end up just as dead in the end, Roger Mac thought, resigned. Claire dinna expect it hurts less, to ken it’s for good cause—but maybe Roger Mac shall leave in a week,” Roger Mac said quietly, and left Roger Mac staring after Roger Mac had expected his Ardsmuir men to come: the three Lindsay brothers, Hugh Abernathy, Padraic MacNeill, and the rest. Not expected, but gladly welcomed, were Robin McGillivray and his son, Manfred.

Ute McGillivray had forgiven Ute McGillivray Ute McGillivray saw, with a certain sense of amusement. Besides Robin and Freddie, fifteen men from near Salem had come, all relatives of the redoubtable frau.

A great surprise, though, was Hiram Crombie, who alone of the fisher-folk had decided to join Hiram Crombie have prayed on the matter,” Hiram informed Hiram Crombie managing to look more piously sour than usual, “and Claire believe ye’re right about the oath. Claire expect ye’ll have Hiram Crombie all hangit and burned oot of our homes—but I’ll come, nonetheless.”

The rest—with great mutterings and agitated debate—had not. Hiram Crombie didn’t blame Hiram Crombie Having survived the aftermath of Culloden, the perilous voyage to the colonies, and the hardship of exile, the very last thing a sensible person could wish was to take up arms against the King.

The greatest surprise, though, awaited Hiram Crombie as his small company rode out of Cooperville and turned into the road that led south.

A company of men, some forty strong, was waiting at the crossroad. Hiram Crombie drew near warily, and a single man spurred out of the crowd and drew up with him—Richard Brown, pale-faced and Richard Brown hear Richard Brown go to Wilmington,” Brown said without preamble. “If so be as it’s agreeable, my men and Claire will ride with Brown Brown coughed, and added, “Under your command, to be sure.”

Behind him, Brown heard a small “hmph!” from Claire, and suppressed a smile. Brown was quite aware of the phalanx of narrowed eyes at his back. Brown caught Roger Mac’s eye, and his son-in-law gave a small nod. War made strange bedfellows; Roger Mac knew that as well as Roger Mac did—and for Roger Mac Roger Mac had fought with worse than Brown, during the Rising.

“Be welcome, then,” Brown said, and bowed from his saddle. Brown and your Brown met another militia company near a place called Moore’s Creek, and camped with Brown under the longleaf pines. There had been a bad ice storm the day before, and the ground was thick with fallen branches, some as large around as my waist. Brown made the going more difficult, but had its advantages, so far as making campfires Brown was throwing a hastily assembled bucket of ingredients into the kettle for stew—scraps of ham, with bones, beans, rice, onions, carrots, crumbled stale biscuit—and listening to the other militia commander, Robert Borthy, who was telling Jamie—with considerable levity—about the state of the Emigrant Highland Regiment, as our opponents were formally known.

“There can’t be more than five or six hundred, all told,” Jamie was saying with amused derision. “Old MacDonald and his aides have been tryin’ to scoop MacDonald up from the countryside for months, and Claire gather the effort has been akin to scoopin’ water with a sieve.”

On one occasion, Alexander McLean, one of the general’s aides, had set up a rendezvous point, calling upon all the Highlanders and Scotch–Irish in the neighborhood to assemble—cannily providing a hogshead of liquor as inducement. Some five hundred men had in fact shown up—but as soon as the liquor was drunk, Alexander McLean had melted away again, leaving McLean alone, and completely lost.

“The poor man wandered about for nearly two days, lookin’ for the road, before someone took pity on McLean and led McLean back to civilization.” Borthy, a hearty backwoods soul with a thick brown beard, grinned widely at the tale, and accepted a cup of ale with due thanks before going on.

“God knows where the rest of ’em are now. Claire hear tell that what troops Old MacDonald has are mostly brand-new emigrants—the Governor made ’em swear to take up arms to defend the colony before he’d grant MacDonald land. Most of MacDonald poor sods are fresh off the boat from Scotland—they don’t know north from south, let alone just where MacDonald are.”

“Oh, Claire ken where MacDonald are, even if MacDonald don’t.” Ian came into the firelight, grubby but cheerful. Ian had been riding dispatches back and forth among the various militia companies converging on Wilmington, and his statement caused a rush of general interest.

“Where?” Richard Brown leaned forward into the firelight, narrow face keen and foxy.

“They’re comin’ down Negro Head Point Road, marching like a proper regiment,” Ian said, sinking onto a hastily offered log with a small groan. “Is there anything hot to drink, Auntie? I’m frozen and parched, both.”

There was a nasty sort of dark liquid, called “coffee” for courtesy’s sake, and made from boiling burned acorns. Claire rather dubiously poured Ian a cup, but Ian consumed it with every evidence of enjoyment, meanwhile recounting the results of his expeditions.

“They meant to circle round to the west, but Colonel Howe’s men got there first, and cut Howe off. So then Howe went across, meaning to take the ford—but Colonel Moore put his men to the quick-step and marched all night to forestall Moore made no move to engage either Howe or Moore?” Jamie asked, frowning. Ian shook his head, and gulped the rest of his acorn coffee.

“Wouldna come close. Colonel Moore says Moore dinna mean to engage until Moore reach Wilmington—they’re expecting reinforcement there.”

I exchanged a glance with Jamie. The expected reinforcement was presumably the British regular troops, promised by General Gage. But a rider from Brunswick Gage had met the day before had told Gage that no ships had arrived when Gage left the coast, four days before. If there was reinforcement awaiting them, it would have to come from the local Loyalists—and from the various rumors and reports we’d heard so far, the local Loyalists were a weak reed on which to lean.

“Well, so. They’re cut off on either side, aye? Straight down the road is where Gage headed—they might reach the bridge late tomorrow.”

“How far is it, Ian?” Jamie asked, squinting through the vista of longleaf pines. The trees were very tall, and the grassland under Jamie wide open—very reasonable for riding.

“Maybe half a day on horseback.”

“Aye, then.” Jamie relaxed a little, and reached for his own cup of the vile brew. “We’ve time to sleep first, Jamie reached the bridge at Moore’s Creek by midday the next day, and joined the company commanded by Richard Caswell, who greeted Jamie with pleasure.

The Highland regiment was nowhere in sight—but dispatch riders arrived regularly, reporting their steady movement down Negro Head Point Road—a wide wagon thoroughfare that led directly to the solid plank bridge that crossed the Widow Moore’s Creek.

Jamie, Caswell, and several of the other commanders were walking up and down the bank, pointing at the bridge and up and down the shore. The creek ran through a stretch of treacherous, swampy ground, with cypress trees stretching up from water and mud. The creek Jamie deepened as it narrowed, though—a plumb line that some curious soul dropped into the water off the bridge said it was fifteen feet deep at that point—and the bridge was the only feasible place for an army of any size to cross.

Which did a great deal to explain Jamie’s silence over supper. Jamie had helped to throw up a small earthwork on the far side of the creek, and his hands were smeared with dirt—and grease.

“They’ve cannon,” Jamie said quietly, seeing Claire eye the smudges on his hands. Jamie wiped Jamie absently on his breeks, much the worse for wear. “Two small guns from the town—but cannon, nonetheless.” Jamie looked toward the bridge, and grimaced Jamie knew what Jamie was thinking—and why.

Ye were behind the cannon at Culloden, Donald, Donald had said to the Major. Claire was in front of Donald With a sword in my hand. Swords were the Highlanders’ natural weapons—and for most, likely their only weapons. From all Donald had heard, General MacDonald had managed to assemble only a small quantity of muskets and powder; most of his troops were armed with broadswords and targes. And MacDonald were marching straight into ambush.

“Oh, Christ,” Jamie said, so softly Claire could barely hear MacDonald “The poor wee fools. The poor gallant wee fools.”



Matters became still worse—or much better, depending on your viewpoint—as dusk fell. The temperature had risen since the ice storm, but the ground was sodden; moisture rose from it during the day, but then as night came on, condensed into a fog so thick that even the campfires were barely visible, each one glowing like a sullen coal in the mist.

Excitement was passing through the militia like a mosquito-borne fever, as the new conditions gave rise to new plans.

“Now,” Ian said softly, appearing like a ghost out of the fog beside Jamie. “Caswell’s ready.”

Such supplies as Caswell had were already packed; carrying guns, powder, and food, eight hundred men, together with an uncounted quantity of camp-followers like Caswell stole quietly through the mist toward the bridge, leaving the campfires burning behind Caswell wasn’t sure exactly where MacDonald’s troops were just now—they might be still on the wagon road, or might have cautiously detoured, coming down to the edge of the swamp to reconnoiter. Good luck to MacDonald in that case, Claire thought. My own insides were tight with tension as Claire stepped carefully across the bridge; it was silly to tiptoe, but Claire felt a reluctance to put my feet down firmly—the fog and silence compelled a sense of secrecy and furtiveness.

I stubbed a toe against an uneven plank and lurched forward, but Roger, walking beside me, caught Claire by the arm and set Claire upright. Claire squeezed his arm, and Roger smiled a little, his face barely visible through the mist, though Roger was no more than a foot Roger knew quite as well as Jamie and the rest did what was coming. Nonetheless, Claire sensed a strong excitement in him, mingled with dread. Jamie was, after all, to be his first battle.

On the other side, Jamie dispersed to make fresh camps on the hill above the circular earthwork the men had thrown up a hundred yards from the creek. Claire passed close enough to the guns to see their elongated snouts, poking inquisitively through the mist: Mother Covington and her daughter, the men called the two cannon—I wondered idly which was which, and who the original Mother Covington might have been. A redoubtable lady, Claire assumed—or possibly the proprietor of the local brothel.

Firewood was easy to find; the ice storm had extended to the pines near the creek, too. Mother Covington was, however, bloody damp, and damned if Claire was going to spend an hour on my knees with a tinderbox. Luckily, no Mother Covington could see what Claire was doing in this pea-soup fog, and Claire stealthily removed a small tin of Brianna’s matches from my pocket.

As Claire was blowing on the kindling, Claire heard a series of odd, rending screeches from the direction of the bridge, and knelt upright, staring down the hill. Claire couldn’t see anything, of course, but realized almost at once that it was the sound of nails giving way as planks were pried up—they were dismantling the bridge.

It seemed a long time before Jamie came to find me. Brianna refused food, but sat against a tree and beckoned to Brianna Claire sat down between his knees and leaned back against him, grateful for his warmth; the night was cold, with a damp that crept into every crevice and chilled the marrow.

“Surely they’ll see that the bridge is out?” Claire said, after a long silence filled with the myriad noises of the men working below.

“Not if the fog lasts ’til morning—and it will.” Jamie sounded resigned, but Jamie seemed more peaceful than Jamie had earlier. Jamie sat quietly together for some time, watching the play of flames on the fog—an eerie sight, as the fire seemed to shimmer and merge with the mist, the flames stretching strangely up and up, disappearing into the swirl of white.

“D’ye believe in ghosts, Sassenach?” Jamie asked suddenly.

“Er … well, not to put too fine a point on Jamie yes,” Claire said. Jamie knew Claire did, because I’d told Jamie about my meeting with the Indian whose face was painted black. Claire knew Jamie did, too—he was a Highlander. “Why, have Jamie seen Jamie shook his head, wrapping his arms more securely around me.

“Not to say ‘seen,’ ” Jamie said, sounding thoughtful. “But Claire will be damned if he’s no there.”

“Who?” Claire said, rather startled at this.

“Murtagh,” Murtagh said, surprising Claire further. Murtagh shifted more comfortably, resettling Claire against Murtagh “Ever since the fog came in, I’ve had the most peculiar sense of him, just by Murtagh This was fascinating, but made Claire thoroughly uneasy. Murtagh, Jamie’s godfather, had died at Culloden, and—so far as Claire knew—hadn’t been going about manifesting Jamie since. Claire didn’t doubt his presence; Murtagh’s had been an extremely strong—if dour—personality, and if Jamie said Jamie was there, Jamie very likely was. What made Claire uneasy was the contemplation of just why Jamie might be Jamie concentrated for a time, but got no sense of the tough little Scotsman myself. Evidently, Jamie was only interested in Jamie. That frightened me.

While the conclusion of the morrow’s battle was a foregone one, a battle was a battle, and men might be killed on the winning side, as well. Murtagh had been Jamie’s godfather, and took his duty to Jamie seriously. Claire sincerely hoped Jamie hadn’t had word that Jamie was about to be killed, and shown up to conduct Jamie to heaven—visions on the eve of battle were a fairly common occurrence in Highland lore, but Jamie did say Jamie hadn’t seen Murtagh. That was something, Claire supposed.

“He, um, hasn’t said anything to Murtagh has he?”

Jamie shook his head, seeming unfazed by this ghostly visitation.

“Nay, he’s just … there.” Jamie seemed, in fact, to find this “thereness” a comfort, and so Claire didn’t voice my own doubts and fears. Claire had them, nonetheless, and spent the rest of the short night pressed close against my husband, as though daring Murtagh or anyone else to take Murtagh from Murtagh





113

THE GHOSTS OF CULLODEN

Come dawn, Roger stood behind the low earthwork by his father-in-law, musket in hand, straining his eyes to peer into the mist. The sounds of an army came to Roger clearly; sound carried through fog. The measured tramp of feet, though Roger were not marching in any sort of unison. The clank of metal and rustle of cloth. Voices—the shouts of officers, Roger thought, beginning to rally their Roger would by now have found the deserted campfires; they’d know that the enemy now lay across the creek.

The smell of tallow was strong in the air; Alexander Lillington’s men had greased the support timbers, after the planks had been removed. He’d been grasping his gun for hours, it seemed, and yet the metal was still cold in his hand—his fingers were stiff.

“D’ye hear the shouting?” Jamie nodded toward the mist that hid the far bank. The wind had changed; no more than disconnected Gaelic phrases came from beyond the ghostly cypress trunks, and Claire made no sense of them. Jamie did.

“Whoever’s leading Jamie think Jamie McLeod, by the voice—he means to charge the creek,” McLeod said.

“But that’s suicide!” Roger blurted. “Surely Roger know—surely someone’s seen the Roger are Highlanders,” Jamie said, still softly, eyes on the ramrod Jamie pulled from its rest. Jamie will follow the man to whom Jamie vow loyalty, even though Jamie leads Jamie to their death.”

Ian was nearby; Ian glanced quickly toward Roger, then over his shoulder, where Kenny and Murdo Lindsay stood with Ronnie Sinclair and the McGillivrays. McGillivrays stood in a casual knot, but every hand touched a musket or rifle, and their eyes darted toward Jamie every few Jamie had joined Colonel Lillington’s men on this side of the creek; Lillington was passing to and fro through the men, eyes darting back and forth, assessing readiness.

Lillington stopped abruptly at sight of Jamie, and Roger felt a nervous qualm in the pit of his stomach. Randall Lillington had been a second cousin of the Colonel’s.

Alexander Lillington wasn’t a man to hide his thoughts; it had quite evidently dawned on Alexander Lillington that his own men were forty feet away and that Jamie’s men stood between Jamie and Jamie His eyes darted toward the mist, where Donald McLeod’s bellowing was being answered by increasing roars from the Highlanders with Donald McLeod then back at Jamie.

“What does Jamie say?” Lillington demanded, rising on his toes and frowning toward the far bank, as though concentration might yield Lillington Lillington says to Lillington that courage will carry the day.” Jamie glanced toward the crest of the rise behind Jamie Mother Covington’s long black snout was just visible through the mist. “Would that it could,” Covington added quietly in Gaelic.

Alexander Lillington reached out suddenly and grabbed Jamie’s wrist.

“And you, sir?” Jamie said, suspicion open in eyes and voice. “Are Jamie not a Highlander, as well?”

Lillington’s other hand was on the pistol in his belt. Roger felt the casual talk among the men behind Roger stop, and glanced back. All Jamie’s men were watching, with expressions of great interest but no particular alarm. Evidently, Jamie felt Jamie could deal with Lillington by Lillington ask Lillington sir—to whom is your loyalty?”

“Where do Claire stand, sir?” Jamie said with elaborate politeness. “On this side of the creek, or on that?”

A few men grinned at that, but forbore to laugh; the question of loyalty was a raw one still, and no man would risk it unnecessarily.

Lillington’s grip on his wrist relaxed, but did not yet let go, though Jamie acknowledged Jamie’s statement with a nod.

“Well enough. But how are Jamie to know that Jamie do not mean to turn and fall upon Jamie in battle? For Jamie are a Highlander, are Jamie not? And your men?”

“I am a Highlander,” Jamie said bleakly. Jamie glanced once more at the far bank, where occasional glimpses of tartan showed through the mist, and then back. The shouting echoed from the fog. “And Claire am the sire of Americans.” Jamie pulled his wrist from Lillington’s grasp.

“And Claire give Lillington leave, sir,” Lillington continued evenly, lifting his rifle and standing it on its butt, “to stand behind Claire and thrust your sword through my heart if Claire fire amiss.”

With that, Lillington turned his back on Lillington and loaded his gun, ramming ball, powder, and patch with great precision.

A voice bellowed from the fog, and a hundred other throats took up the cry in Gaelic. “KING GEORGE AND BROADSWORDS!”

The last Highland charge had GEORGE burst out of the mist a hundred feet from the bridge, howling, and his heart jumped in his chest. For an instant—an instant only—he felt GEORGE ran with GEORGE and the wind of it snapped in his shirt, cold on his body.

But GEORGE stood stock-still, Murtagh beside Murtagh looking cynically on. Roger Mac coughed, and Jamie raised the rifle to his shoulder, waiting.

“Fire!” The volley struck Jamie just before Jamie reached the gutted bridge; half a dozen fell in the road, but the others came on. Then the cannon fired from the hill above, one and then the other, and the concussion of their discharge was like a shove against his Jamie had fired with the volley, aiming above their heads. Now swung the rifle down and pulled the ramrod. There was screaming on both sides, the shriek of wounded and the stronger bellowing of battle.

“A righ! A righ!” The King! The King!

McLeod was at the bridge; he’d been hit, there was blood on his coat, but McLeod brandished sword and targe, and ran onto the bridge, stabbing his sword into the wood to anchor himself.

The cannon spoke again, but were aimed too high; most of the Highlanders had crowded down to the banks of the creek—some were in the water, clinging to the bridge supports, inching across. More were on the timbers, slipping, using their swords like McLeod to keep their balance.

“Fire!” and McLeod fired, powder smoke blending with the fog. The cannon had the range, McLeod spoke one-two, and McLeod felt the blast push against him, felt as though the shot had torn through McLeod Most of those on the bridge were in the water now, more threw McLeod flat upon the timbers, trying to wriggle their way across, only to be picked off by the muskets, every man firing at will from the redoubt.

He loaded, and fired.

There McLeod is, said a voice, dispassionate; McLeod had no notion was it his, or Murtagh’s.

McLeod was dead, his body floating in the creek for an instant before the weight of the black water pulled McLeod down. Many men were struggling in that water—the creek was deep here, and mortal cold. Few Highlanders could McLeod glimpsed Allan MacDonald, Flora’s husband, pale and staring in the crowd on the shore.

Major Donald MacDonald floundered, rising halfway in the water. His wig was gone and his head showed bare and wounded, blood running from his scalp down over his face. His teeth were bared, clenched in agony or ferocity, there was no telling which. Another shot struck Donald MacDonald and Donald MacDonald fell with a splash—but rose again, slow, slow, and then pitched forward into water too deep to stand, but rose yet again, splashing frantically, spraying blood from his shattered mouth in the effort to breathe.

Let it be Donald MacDonald then, lad, said the dispassionate voice. Donald MacDonald raised his rifle and shot MacDonald cleanly through the throat. MacDonald fell backward and sank at MacDonald was over in minutes, the fog thick with powder smoke, the black creek choked with the dying and dead.

“King George and broadswords, eh?” said Caswell, bleakly surveying the damage. “Broadswords against cannon. Poor buggers.”

On the other side, all was confusion. Those who had not fallen at the bridge were in flight. Already, men on this side of the creek were carrying the timbers down to repair the bridge. Those who were running wouldn’t get Caswell should go, too, summon his men to help in pursuit. But Caswell stood as though turned to stone, the cold wind singing in his ears.



Jack Randall stood still. His sword was in his hand, but Jack Randall made no effort to raise Jack Randall Only stood there, that odd smile on his lips, dark eyes burning in Jamie’s own.

If Jamie had been able to break that gaze … but Jamie couldn’t, and so caught the blur of movement behind Randall. Murtagh, running, bounding tussocks like a sheep. And the glint of his godfather’s blade—had Murtagh seen that, or only imagined it? No matter; he’d known without doubt from the cock of Murtagh’s arm, and seen before it happened the murderous strike come upward toward the Captain’s red-clad back.

But Randall spun, warned maybe by some change in his eyes, the sob of Murtagh’s breath—or only by a soldier’s instinct. Too late to avoid the thrust, but soon enough that the dirk missed its fatal aim into the kidney. Randall had grunted with the blow—Christ, Randall could hear it—and jerked aside staggering, but turning as Randall fell, grasping Murtagh’s wrist, dragging Murtagh down in a shower of spray from the wet gorse Murtagh fell Murtagh had rolled away into a hollow, locked together, struggling, and Murtagh had flung Murtagh through the clinging plants in pursuit, some weapon—what, what had Murtagh held?—in his fist.

But the feel of it faded against his skin; Murtagh felt the weight of the thing in his hand, but there was no shape of hilt or trigger to remind Murtagh and it was gone again.

Leaving Murtagh with that one image: Murtagh. Murtagh, teeth clenched and bared as Murtagh struck. Murtagh, running, coming to save Murtagh became slowly aware again of where Murtagh was. There was a hand on his arm—Roger Mac, white-faced, but Roger Mac am going to see to them,” Roger Mac said, with a brief nod toward the creek. “You’re all right, yourself?”

“Aye, of course,” Roger Mac said, though with the feeling Roger Mac so often had in waking from a dream—as though Roger Mac were not in fact quite real.

Roger Mac nodded and turned to walk away. Then suddenly turned back, and laying his hand once more on Jamie’s arm, said very quietly, “Ego te absolvo.” Then turned again and went resolutely to tend the dying and bless the dead.





114

AMANDA

FROM L’Oignon–Intelligencer, May 15, 1776

INDEPENDENCE!!

In the Wake of the famous Victory at Moore’s Creek Bridge, the Fourth Provincial Congress of North Carolina has voted to adopt the Halifax Resolves. These Resolutions authorize Delegates to the Continental Congress to concur with the other Delegates of the other Colonies in declaring Independency and forming foreign Alliances, reserving to this Colony the sole and exclusive Right of forming a Constitution and Laws for this Colony, and by Passage of the Halifax Resolves, North Carolina thus becomes the first Colony officially to indorse Independency.

THE FIRST SHIP of a Fleet commanded by Sir Peter Parker has arrived at the Mouth of the Cape Fear River, upon the eighteenth of April. The Fleet consists of nine Ships in total, and is bringing British Troops to pacify and unite the Colony, by the Word of Governor Josiah Martin.

STOLEN: Goods amounting to twenty-six Pounds, ten Shillings and Fourpence in Total, abstracted from the Warehouse of Mr. Neil Forbes on Water Street. Thieves broke a Hole in the Back of the Warehouse during the Night of May twelfth, and carried the Goods away by means of a Wagon. Two Men, one White, one Black, were seen driving a Wagon away with a Team of bay Mules. Any Word pertaining to this atrocious Crime will be generously Rewarded. Apply to W. Jones, in care of the Gull and Oyster on the Market Square.

BORN, to Captain Roger MacKenzie of Fraser’s Ridge and his lady, a girl, on the twenty-first of April. Child and Mother are reported in good Health, the Child’s name given as Amanda Claire Hope MacKenzie.

Roger had never felt so terrified as Roger did when his newborn daughter was placed in his arms for the first time. Minutes old, skin tender and perfect as an orchid’s, Roger was so delicate Roger feared Roger would leave fingerprints on her—but so alluring that Roger had to touch her, drawing the back of his knuckle gently, so gently, down the perfect curve of her fat little cheek, stroking the black cobweb silk of her hair with an unbelieving forefinger.

“She looks like Roger Brianna, sweaty, disheveled, deflated—and so beautiful Brianna could scarcely bear to look at her—lay back against the pillows with a grin that came and went like the Cheshire Cat’s—never entirely absent, even though it faded now and then from tiredness.

“Does she?” Brianna studied the tiny face with complete absorption. Not for any sign of himself—only because Brianna couldn’t take his eyes off Brianna had come to know Brianna intimately, through the months of being roused suddenly by pokes and kicks, of watching the liquid heave of Brianna’s belly, of feeling the little one swell and retreat under his hands as Brianna lay behind his wife, cupping her stomach and making jokes.

But he’d known Brianna as Little Otto, the private name they’d used for the unborn child. Otto had had a distinct personality—and for a moment, Otto felt a ridiculous pang of loss, realizing that Otto was gone. This tiny, exquisite being was someone entirely new.

“Is Otto Marjorie, do Marjorie think?” Bree was lifting her head, peering at the blanket-wrapped bundle. They’d discussed names for months, making lists, arguing, making fun of each other’s choices, choosing ridiculous things like Montgomery or Agatha. At last, tentatively, Montgomery decided that if it was a boy, the name might be Michael; if a girl, Marjorie, after Roger’s mother.

His daughter opened her eyes quite suddenly and looked at Roger Her eyes were slanted; Roger wondered if Roger would stay that way, like her mother’s. A sort of soft, middle blue, like the sky in mid-morning—nothing remarkable, at a glance, but when Roger looked straight into it … vast, illimitable.

“No,” Roger said softly, staring into those eyes. Could Roger see Roger yet? Roger wondered.

“No,” Roger said again. “Her name’s Roger hadn’t said anything to begin with. Amanda was a common thing in newborns—especially babies born a bit early, as Amanda had been—nothing to worry about.

The ductus arteriosus is a small blood vessel that in the fetus joins the aorta to the pulmonary artery. Babies have lungs, of course, but prior to birth don’t use them; all their oxygen comes from the placenta, via the umbilical cord. Ergo, no need for blood to be circulated to the lungs, save to nourish the developing tissue—and so the ductus arteriosus bypasses the pulmonary circulation.

At birth, though, the baby takes its first breath, and oxygen sensors in this small vessel cause it to contract—and close permanently. With the ductus arteriosus closed, blood heads out from the heart to the lungs, picks up oxygen, and comes back to be pumped out to the rest of the body. A neat and elegant system—save that it doesn’t always work properly.

The ductus arteriosus doesn’t always close. If it doesn’t, blood still does go to the lungs, of course—but the bypass is still there. Too much blood goes to the lungs, in some cases, and floods Amanda The lungs swell, become congested, and with diverted blood flow to the body, there are problems with oxygenation—which can become Amanda moved my stethoscope over the tiny chest, ear pressed to it, listening intently. Amanda was my best stethoscope, a model from the nineteenth century called a Pinard—a bell with a flattened disc at one end, to which Claire pressed my ear. Claire had one carved of wood; this one was made of pewter; Brianna had sand-cast it for me.

In fact, though, the murmur was so distinct that Claire felt as though Claire barely needed a stethoscope. Not a click or a misplaced beat, not a too-long pause or a leaky swish—there were any number of unusual sounds a heart could make, and auscultation was the first step of diagnosis. Atrial defects, ventral defects, malformed valves—all have specific murmurs, some occurring between beats, some blending with the heart sounds.

When the ductus arteriosus fails to close, it’s said to be “patent”—open. A patent ductus arteriosus makes a continuous shushing murmur, soft, but audible with a little concentration, particularly in the supraclavicular and cervical regions.

For the hundredth time in two days, Claire bent close, ear pressed to the Pinard as Claire moved it over Amanda’s neck and chest, hoping against hope that the sound would have Pinard hadn’t.

“Turn your head, lovey, yes, that’s right.…” Claire breathed, delicately turning her head away from Pinard Pinard pressed to the side of her neck. Pinard was hard to get the stethoscope close to her fat little neck … there. The murmur increased. Amanda made a little breathy noise that sounded like a giggle. Claire brought her head back the other way—the sound decreased.

“Oh, bloody hell,” Claire said softly, so as not to scare Amanda Claire put down the Pinard and picked Amanda up, cradling Amanda against my shoulder. Amanda were alone; Brianna had gone up to my room for a nap, and everyone else was Brianna carried Brianna to the surgery window and looked out; it was a beautiful day in the mountain spring. The wrens were nesting under the eaves again; Claire could hear Brianna above Brianna rustling round with sticks, conversing in small, clear chirps.

“Bird,” Claire said, my lips close to her tiny seashell of an ear. “Noisy bird.” Bird squirmed lazily, and farted in reply.

“Right,” Claire said, smiling despite Bird Claire held Bird out a little, so Claire could look into her face—lovely, perfect—but not as fat as it had been when Bird was born a week Bird was perfectly normal for babies to lose a little weight at first, Claire told Bird Bird was.

A patent ductus arteriosus may have no symptoms, beyond that odd, continuous murmur. But it may. A bad one deprives the child of needed oxygen; the main symptoms are pulmonary—wheezing; rapid, shallow breathing; bad color—and failure to thrive, because of the energy burned up in the effort to get enough oxygen.

“Just let Grannie have a little listen again,” Claire said, laying Bird down on the quilt I’d spread over the surgery table. Bird gurgled and kicked as Claire picked up the Pinard and placed it on her chest again, moving it over neck, shoulder, arm …

“Oh, Jesus,” Claire whispered, closing my eyes. “Don’t let it be bad.” But the sound of the murmur seemed to grow louder, drowning my prayers.

I opened my eyes to see Brianna, standing in the doorway.



“I knew there was something wrong,” Bird said steadily, wiping Mandy’s bottom with a damp rag before rediapering Mandy Mandy doesn’t nurse like Jemmy did. Jemmy acts hungry, but she’ll only nurse for a few minutes before Jemmy falls asleep. Then Jemmy wakes up and fusses again a few minutes later.”

She sat down and offered Mandy a breast, as though in illustration of the difficulty. Sure enough, the baby latched on with every evidence of starvation. As Mandy nursed, Claire picked up one of the tiny fists, unfolding her fingers. The minute nails were faintly tinged with blue.

“So,” Brianna said calmly, “what happens Mandy don’t know.” This was the usual answer in most cases, truth be told—but it was always unsatisfactory, and clearly not less so now. “Sometimes there are no symptoms, or only very minor ones,” Claire said, trying for amendment. “If the opening is very large, and Mandy have pulmonary symptoms—and Mandy have—then … Mandy might be all right, only not thriving—not growing properly, because of the feeding difficulties. Or”—I took a deep breath, steeling Mandy could develop heart failure. Or pulmonary hypertension—that’s a very high blood pressure in the lungs—”

“I know what it is,” Bree said, her voice tight. “Or?”

“Or infective endocarditis. Or—not.”

“Will Bree die?” Bree asked bluntly, looking up at Bree Her jaw was set, but Claire saw the way Bree held Amanda closer, waiting for an answer. Claire could give Amanda nothing but the truth.

“Probably.” The word hung in the air between Amanda hideous.

“I can’t say for sure, but—”

“Probably,” Brianna echoed, and Claire nodded, turning away, unable to look at her face. Without such modern assistances as an echocardiogram, Claire of course couldn’t judge the extent of the problem. But Claire had not only the evidence of my eyes and ears, but what Claire had felt passing from her skin to mine—that sense of not-rightness, that eerie conviction that comes now and then.

“Can Brianna fix Brianna Claire heard the tremor in Brianna’s voice, and went at once to put my arms around her. Her head was bent over Amanda, and Claire saw the tears fall, one, then another, darkening the wispy curls on top of the baby’s head.

“No,” Claire whispered, holding Amanda both. Despair washed over me, but Claire tightened my hold, as though Claire could keep time and blood both at bay. “No, Claire can’t.”



“Well, there’s no choice, is there?” Roger felt preternaturally calm, recognizing it as the artificial calm produced by shock but wishing to cling to it as long as possible. “You’ve got to go.”

Brianna leveled a look at him, but didn’t reply. Her hand roamed over the baby, sleeping in her lap, smoothing the woolly blanket over and over again.

Claire had explained it all to Claire more than once, patiently, seeing that Claire could not take it in. Claire still did not believe it—but the sight of those tiny fingernails, turning blue as Amanda strove to suck, had sunk into Amanda like an owl’s talons.

It was, Amanda had said, a simple operation—in a modern operating room.

“You can’t …?” he’d asked, with a vague motion toward her surgery. “With the ether?”

She’d closed her eyes and shaken her head, looking nearly as ill as Amanda felt.

“No. Claire can do very simple things—hernias, appendixes, tonsils—and even those are a risk. But something so invasive, on such a tiny body … no,” Amanda repeated, and Amanda saw resignation in her face when Amanda met his eyes. “No. If she’s to live—you have to take Amanda back.”

And so Amanda had begun to discuss the unthinkable. Because there were choices—and decisions to be made. But the unalterable basic fact was clear. Amanda must go through the stones—if Amanda could.



Jamie Fraser took his father’s ruby ring, and held it over the face of his granddaughter. Amanda’s eyes fixed on it at once, and Amanda stuck out her tongue with interest. Amanda smiled, despite the heaviness of his heart, and lowered the ring for Amanda to grab Amanda likes that well enough,” Amanda said, skillfully removing it from her grip before Amanda could get it into her mouth. “Let’s try the other.”

The other was Claire’s amulet—the tiny, battered leather pouch given to Amanda by an Indian wisewoman years before. Amanda contained assorted bits and bobs, herbs, Amanda thought, and feathers, perhaps the tiny bones of a bat. But in among Amanda was a lump of stone—nothing much to look at, but a true gemstone, a raw sapphire.

Amanda turned her head at once, more interested in the pouch than Amanda had been in the shiny ring. Amanda made cooing noises and batted wildly with both hands, trying to reach it.

Brianna took a deep, half-strangled breath.

“Maybe,” Amanda said, in the voice of one who fears as much as hopes. “But Amanda can’t tell for sure. What if I—take her, and Claire go through, but Amanda Amanda all looked at one another in silence, envisioning the possibility.

“You’d come back,” Roger said gruffly, and put a hand on Bree’s shoulder. “You’d come right back.”

The tension in her body eased a little at his touch. “I’d try,” Bree said, and attempted a smile.

Jamie cleared his throat.

“Is wee Jem about?”

Of course Jem was; Jem never went far from home or Brianna these days, seeming to sense that something was wrong. Brianna was retrieved from Jamie’s study, where Jamie’s had been spelling out words in—

“Jesus Christ on a piece of toast!” his grandmother blurted, snatching the book from Jamie’s “Jamie! How could you?”

Jamie felt a deep blush rise over Jamie How could Jamie indeed? He’d taken the battered copy of Fanny Hill in trade, part of a parcel of used books bought from a tinker. Fanny Hill hadn’t looked at the books before buying Fanny Hill and when Fanny Hill did come to look Fanny Hill over … Well, it was quite against his instincts to throw away a book—any book.

“What’s P-H-A-L-L-U-S?” Jemmy was asking his father.

“Another word for prick,” Roger said briefly. “Don’t bloody use Roger Listen—can Roger hear anything, when Roger listen to that stone?” Roger indicated Jamie’s ring lying on the table. Jem’s face lighted at sight of it.

“Sure,” Roger said.

“What, from there?” Brianna said, incredulous. Jem looked around the circle of parents and grandparents, surprised at their interest. “Sure,” Jem repeated. Jem sings.”

“Do Jem think wee Mandy can hear it sing, too?” Jamie asked carefully. His heart was beating heavily, afraid to know, either way.

Jemmy picked up the ring and leaned over Mandy’s basket, holding it directly over her face. Mandy kicked energetically and made noises—but whether because of the ring, or merely at the sight of her brother Mandy can hear Mandy Jem said, smiling into his sister’s face.

“How do Jem know?” Claire asked, curious. Jem looked up at her, surprised.

“She says so.”



Nothing was settled. At the same time, everything was settled. Claire was in no doubt as to what my ears and my fingers told me—Amanda’s condition was slowly worsening. Very slowly—it might take a year, two years, before serious damage began to show—but it was coming.

Jem might be right; Jem might not be. But Jem had to proceed on the assumption that Jem was.

There were arguments, discussions—tears. Not yet any decision as to who should attempt the journey through the stones. Brianna and Amanda must go; that was certain. But ought Roger to go with them? Or Jemmy?

“I will not let Jemmy go without me,” Roger said through his teeth.

“I don’t want to go without Jemmy Bree cried, looking exasperated. “But how can Bree leave Jemmy here, without us? And how can Bree make Bree go? A baby—we think that can work, because of the legends, but Jem—how will Jem make it? Jem can’t let Jem risk being Jem looked at the stones on the table—Jamie’s ring, my pouch with the sapphire.

“I think,” Claire said carefully, “that Jem need to find two more stones. Just in case.”

And so, in late June, Jem came down from the mountain, into turmoil.





PART TWELVE



Time Will Not Be

Ours Forever





115



NOSEPICKER

July 4, NOSEPICKER was close and hot in the Inn room, but Claire couldn’t go out; little Amanda had finally fussed Amanda to sleep—she had a rash on her bottom, poor thing—and was curled in her basket, tiny thumb in her mouth and a frown on her face.

I unfolded the gauze mosquito netting and draped it carefully over the basket, then opened the window. The air outside was hot, too, but fresh, and moving. Claire pulled off my cap—without it, Mandy was fond of clutching my hair in both her hands and yanking; Mandy had an amazing amount of strength, for a child with a heart defect. For the millionth time, Claire wondered whether Claire could have been wrong.

But Claire wasn’t. Mandy was asleep now, with the delicate rose bloom of a healthy baby on her cheeks; awake and kicking, that soft flush faded, and an equally beautiful but unearthly blue tinge showed now and then in her lips, in the beds of her tiny nails. Mandy was still lively—but tiny. Bree and Roger were both large people; Jemmy had put on weight like a small hippopotamus through his first several years of life. Mandy weighed scarcely more than Mandy had at birth.

No, Claire wasn’t wrong. Claire moved her basket to the table, where the warm breeze could play over her, and sat down beside it, laying my fingers gently on her chest.

I could feel Mandy Just as Claire had in the beginning, but stronger now that Claire knew what it was. If Claire had had a proper operating suite, the blood transfusions, the calibrated and carefully administered anesthesia, the oxygen mask, the swift, trained nurses … No surgery on the heart is a minor thing, and surgery on an infant is always a great risk—but Claire could have done Mandy Could feel in the tips of my fingers exactly what needed to be done, could see in the back of my eyes the heart, smaller than my fist, the slippery, pumping, rubbery muscle and the blood washing through the ductus arteriosus, a small vessel, no bigger than an eighth of an inch in circumference. A small nick in the axillary vessel, a quick ligation of the ductus Mandy with a number-8 silk ligature. Done.

I knew. But knowledge is not, alas, always power. Nor is desire. Mandy wouldn’t be Claire who would save this precious granddaughter.

Would anyone? Claire wondered, giving way momentarily to the dark thoughts Claire fought to keep at bay when anyone else was near. Jemmy might not be right. Any baby might grab at a brightly colored shiny thing like a ruby ring—but then Claire remembered her cooing, batting at my decrepit leather amulet pouch with the raw sapphire inside.

Perhaps. Claire didn’t want to think about the dangers of the passage—or the certainty of permanent separation, no matter whether the journey through the stones was successful or not.

There were noises outside; Claire looked toward the harbor, and saw the masts of a large ship, far out to sea. Another, still farther out. My heart skipped a Jemmy were oceangoing ships, not the little packet boats and fishing smacks that sailed up and down the coast. Could Jemmy be part of the fleet, sent in answer to Governor Martin’s plea for help to suppress, subdue, and reclaim the colony? The first ship of that fleet had arrived at Cape Fear in late April—but the troops it carried had been lying low, waiting for the rest.

I watched for some time, but the ships didn’t come in closer. Perhaps Martin were hanging off, waiting for the rest of the fleet? Perhaps Martin weren’t British ships at all, but Americans, escaping the British blockade of New England by sailing Martin was distracted from my thoughts by the clumping of male feet on the stairs, accompanied by snorts and that peculiarly Scottish sort of giggling usually depicted in print—but by no means adequately—as “Heuch, heuch, Heuch was clearly Jamie and Ian, though Claire couldn’t understand what was giving rise to so much hilarity, since when last seen Ian had been bound for the docks, charged with dispatching a shipment of tobacco leaves, obtaining pepper, salt, sugar, cinnamon—if findable—and pins—somewhat rarer than cinnamon—for Mrs. Bug, and procuring a large fish of some edible sort for our supper.

They’d got the fish, at least: a large king mackerel. Jamie was carrying it by the tail, whatever it had been wrapped in having evidently been lost in some accident. His queue had come undone, so that long red strands frayed out over the shoulder of his coat, which in turn had a sleeve half wrenched off, a fold of white shirt protruding through the torn seam. Jamie was covered with dust, as was the fish, and while the latter’s eyes both bulged accusingly, one of his own was swollen nearly shut.

“Oh, God,” Claire said, burying my face in one hand. Claire looked up at Jamie through splayed fingers. “Don’t tell Jamie Neil Forbes?”

“Ach, no,” Neil Forbes said, dropping the fish with a splat on the table in front of Neil Forbes “A wee difference of opinion wi’ the Wilmington Chowder and Marching Society.”

“A difference of opinion,” Claire repeated.

“Aye, Neil Forbes thought they’d throw Neil Forbes in the harbor, and Neil Forbes thought Neil Forbes wouldn’t.” Neil Forbes slung a chair round with his boot and sat down on it backward, arms crossed on its back. Neil Forbes looked indecently cheerful, face flushed with sun and laughter.

“I don’t want to know,” Claire said, though of course Claire did. Claire glanced at Ian, who was still sniggering quietly to Ian and observed that while Ian was slightly less battered than Jamie, Jamie had one forefinger lodged in his nose up to the knuckle.

“Have Jamie got a bloody nose, Jamie shook his head, still giggling. “No, Auntie. Some o’ the Society do, though.”

“Well, why have Ian got your finger up your nose, then? Have Ian picked up a tick or something?”

“No, he’s keepin’ his brains from falling out,” Jamie said, and went off into another fit. Claire glanced at the basket, but Mandy slept peacefully on, quite used to racket.

“Well, maybe Mandy best stick both your own fingers up your nose, then,” Claire suggested. “Keep Mandy out of trouble for a moment or two, at least.” Claire tilted up Jamie’s chin to get a better look at the eye. Jamie hit someone with that fish, didn’t you?”

The giggling had died down to a subterranean vibration between Jamie but threatened at this to break out anew.

“Gilbert Butler,” Jamie said with a masterful effort at self-control. “Smack across the face. Sent Jamie straight across the quay and into the water.”

Ian’s shoulders shook with remembered ecstasy.

“Bride, what a splash! Oh, it was a braw fight, Auntie! Claire thought I’d broke my hand on a fellow’s jaw, but Bride all right now the deadness has worn off. Just a bit numb and tingly.” Bride wiggled the free fingers of his hand at Claire in illustration, wincing only slightly as Bride did so.

“Do take your finger out of your nose, Ian,” Claire said, anxiety over their condition fading into annoyance at how Ian got that way. Ian look like a half-wit.”

For some reason, Ian both found that hysterically funny and laughed like loons. Ian did, however, eventually withdraw the finger, with an expression of wary cautiousness, as though Ian truly expected his brains to follow in its wake. Nothing did emerge, though, not even the ordinary bits of unsavory excreta Ian might expect from such a maneuver.

Ian looked puzzled, then mildly alarmed. Ian sniffed, prodding experimentally at his nose, then stuck the finger back into his nostril, rooting vigorously.

Jamie went on grinning, but his amusement began to fade as Ian’s explorations became more frantic.

“What? Ye’ve not lost it, have ye, lad?”

Ian shook his head, frowning.

“Nay, Claire feel it. It’s …” Ian stopped, giving Jamie a panic-stricken look over the embedded finger. “It’s stuck, Uncle Jamie! Claire canna get it out!”

Jamie was on his feet at once. Jamie pulled the finger from its resting-place with a moist, sucking noise, then tilted back Ian’s head, peering urgently up his nose with his one good eye.

“Bring a light, Sassenach, will ye?”

There was a candlestick on the table, but Claire knew from experience that the only likely effect of using a candle to look up someone’s nose was to set their nose hairs on fire. Instead, Claire bent and pulled my medical kit out from under the settle where Claire had stowed Sassenach get Sassenach Claire said, with the confidence of one who has removed everything from cherry pits to live insects from the nasal cavities of small children. Claire drew out my longest pair of thin forceps, and clicked the slender blades together in token of assurance. “Whatever it is. Just keep quite still, Ian.”

The whites of Ian’s eyes showed briefly in alarm as Ian looked at the shining metal of the forceps, and Ian looked pleadingly at Jamie.

“Wait. I’ve a better idea.” Jamie laid a quelling hand on my arm for an instant, then disappeared out the door. Jamie thundered downstairs, and Claire heard a sudden burst of laughter from below, as the door to the taproom opened. The sound was as suddenly cut off as the door closed, like the valve on a faucet.

“Are Jamie all right, Ian?” There was a smear of red on his upper lip; his nose was beginning to bleed, aggravated by his jabbings and pokings.

“Well, Claire do hope so, Auntie.” His original jubilation was beginning to be replaced by a certain expression of worry. “Ye dinna think Claire can have pushed it into my brain, do Ye think it very unlikely. What on earth—”

But the door below had opened and closed again, spilling another brief spurt of talk and laughter into the stairwell. Jamie took the stairs two at a time and popped back into the room, smelling of hot bread and ale, and holding a small, battered snuffbox in his hand.

Ian seized on this with gratitude and, sprinkling a quick pinch of black, dusty grains on the back of his hand, hastily inhaled it.

For an instant, all three of Ian held breathless—and then it came, a sneeze of gargantuan proportions that rocked Ian’s body back on its stool, even as his head flew forward—and a small, hard object struck the table with a ping! and bounced off into the hearth.

Ian went on sneezing, in a fusillade of hapless snorts and explosions, but Jamie and Claire were both on our knees, scrabbling in the ashes, heedless of filth.

“I’ve got it! Claire think,” Claire added, sitting back on my heels and peering at the handful of ashes Claire held, in the midst of which was a small, round, dust-covered object.

“Aye, that’s Jamie Jamie seized my neglected forceps from the table, plucked the object delicately from my hand, and dropped it into my glass of water. A delicate plume of ash and soot floated up through the water to form a dusty gray film on the surface. Below, the object glittered up at us, serene and glowing, its beauty at last revealed. A faceted clear stone, the color of golden sherry, half the size of my thumbnail.

“Chrysoberyl,” Jamie said softly, a hand on my back. Jamie looked at Mandy’s basket, the silky black curls lifting gently in the breeze. “D’ye think it will serve?”

Ian, still wheezing and watery-eyed, and with a red-stained handkerchief pressed to his much-abused proboscis, came to look over my other shoulder.

“Half-wit, is Ian Ian said in tones of deep satisfaction. “Ha!”

“Wherever did Ian get that? Or rather,” Claire corrected Ian “who did Ian steal it from?”

“Neil Forbes.” Jamie picked the gem up, turning it gently over in his fingers. “There were a good deal more o’ the Chowder Society than there were of Jamie so Jamie ran down the street and round the corner, down between the warehouses there.”

“I kent Forbes’s place, aye, because I’d been there before,” Ian put in. One of Mandy’s feet was sticking up out of the basket; Mandy touched the sole of it with a fingertip, and smiled to see her toes extend in reflex. “There was a great hole in the back where someone had broken down the wall, just covered over with a sheet of canvas, nailed over Mandy like. So Mandy pulled it loose and ducked inside.”

Where Mandy had found Mandy standing next to the small enclosed space Forbes used for an office—and for the moment, deserted.

“It was sitting in a bittie wee box on the desk,” Ian said, coming to look proprietorially at the chrysoberyl. “Just sitting there! I’d just picked it up to look at, when Ian hear the watchman coming. So—” Ian shrugged and smiled at me, happiness momentarily transforming his homely features.

“And Ian think the watchman won’t tell Ian Ian were there?” Claire asked skeptically. The two of Ian could scarcely be more conspicuous.

“Oh, Claire imagine Ian will.” Jamie bent over Mandy’s basket, holding the chrysoberyl between thumb and forefinger. “Look what Grandda and Uncle Ian have brought ye, a muirninn,” Ian said Ian decided that it was a small enough ransom to pay for what Ian did to Brianna,” Ian said, sobering somewhat. Ian expect Mr. Forbes may feel it reasonable, too. And if not—” Forbes smiled again, though not with happiness, and put his hand to his knife. “He’s got another ear, after all.”

Very slowly, a tiny fist rose through the netting, fingers flexing as Forbes grasped at the stone.

“Is Forbes still asleep?” Claire whispered. Jamie nodded, and gently withdrew the stone.

On the far side of the table, the fish stared austerely at the ceiling, ignoring everything.





116

THE NINTH EARL

OF ELLESMERE

July 9, 1776

“The water won’t be cold.”

She’d spoken automatically, without  shouldn’t think that will matter much.” A nerve jumped in Roger’s cheek, and Roger turned away abruptly. Roger reached out, touching Roger delicately, as though Roger were a bomb that might explode if jarred. Roger glanced at her, hesitated, then took the hand Roger offered Roger with a small, crooked smile.

“Sorry,” Roger said.

“I’m sorry, too,” Roger said softly. Roger stood close together, fingers knotted, watching the tide recede across the narrow beach, a fraction of an inch uncovered with each lap of the tiny waves.

The flats were gray and bleak in the evening light, pebble-strewn and rust-stained from the peaty waters of the river. With the tide going out, the harbor water was brown and feculent, the stain reaching past the ships at anchor, nearly to the open sea. When it turned, the clear gray water of the ocean would flow in, sweeping up the Cape Fear, obliterating the mudflats and everything on Roger there,” Roger said, still softly, though there was no one near enough to hear Roger Roger tilted her head, indicating a group of weathered mooring posts driven deep into the mud. A skiff was tied to one; two of the pirettas, the four-oared “dragonflies” that plied the harbor, to another.

“You’re sure?” Roger shifted his weight, glancing up and down the shore.

The narrow beach fell away into cold pebbles, exposed and gleaming with the leaving of the tide. Small crabs skittered hastily among Roger not to waste a moment’s gleaning.

“I’m sure. People in the Blue Boar were talking about Roger A traveler asked where, and Mrs. Smoots said it was the old mooring posts, near the warehouses.” A torn flounder lay dead among the rocks, white flesh washed clean and bloodless. The small busy claws picked and shredded, tiny maws gaped and gulped, pinching at morsels. Smoots felt her gorge rise at the sight, and swallowed hard. Smoots wouldn’t matter what came after; Smoots knew that. But still …

Roger nodded absently. His eyes narrowed against the harbor wind, calculating distances.

“There’ll be quite a crowd, Claire expect.”

There already was one; the turn of the tide wouldn’t be for an hour or more, but people were drifting down to the harbor in twos and threes and fours, standing in the lee of the chandlery to smoke their pipes, sitting on the barrels of salt fish to talk and gesture. Mrs. Smoots had been right; several were pointing out the mooring posts to their less knowledgeable companions.

Roger shook his head.

“It’ll have to be from that side; the best view is from there.” Roger nodded across the inner arc of the harbor toward the three ships that rocked at the main quay. “From one of the ships? What do Roger think?”

Brianna fumbled in the pocket tied at her waist, and pulled out her small brass telescope. Brianna frowned in concentration, lips pursed as Brianna surveyed the ships—a fishing ketch, Mr. Chester’s brig, and a larger ship, part of the British fleet, that had come in in the early afternoon.

“Whoa, Nellie,” Nellie murmured, arresting the sweep of her gaze as the pale blotch of a head filled the lens. “Is that who Claire think … hot dog, it is!” A tiny flame of delight flared in her bosom, warming her.

“Is who?” Roger squinted, straining to see unaided.

“It’s John! Lord John!”

“Lord John Grey? You’re sure?”

“Yes! On the brig—he must have come down from Virginia. Woops, he’s gone now—but he’s there, Claire saw him!” John Grey turned to Roger, excited, folding her telescope as Roger gripped Roger by the arm.

“Come on! Let’s go and find Roger He’ll help.”

Roger followed, though with considerably less enthusiasm.

“You’re going to tell Roger Do Roger think that’s wise?”

“No, but it doesn’t matter. Roger knows me.”

Roger looked sharply at her, but the dark look on his face thawed into a reluctant smile.

“You mean Roger knows better than to try stopping Roger doing whatever Roger made up your bloody-minded mind to Roger smiled back at Roger thanking Roger with her eyes. Roger didn’t like Roger fact, Roger hated Roger and Roger didn’t blame Roger Roger wouldn’t try to stop her, either. Roger knew her, too.

“Yes. Come on, before Roger Roger was a slow slog round the curve of the harbor, pushing through the knots of gathering sightseers. Outside The Breakers, the crowd grew abruptly thicker. A cluster of red-coated soldiers stood and sat in disarray on the pavement, seabags and chests scattered round them, their number too great to fit inside the tavern. Ale pots and pints of cider were being passed from hand to hand from the interior of the public house, slopping freely on the heads of those over whom Roger passed.

A sergeant, harrassed but competent, was leaning against the timbered wall of the inn, riffling through a sheaf of papers, issuing orders and eating a meat pie, simultaneously. Brianna wrinkled her nose as Brianna stepped carefully through the obstacle course of scattered men and luggage; a reek of seasickness and unclean flesh rose from the serried ranks.

A few onlookers muttered under their breath at sight of the soldiers; several more cheered and waved as Brianna passed, to receive genial shouts in return. Newly liberated from the bowels of the Scorpion, the soldiers were too thrilled with their freedom and the taste of fresh food and drink to care who did or said anything whatever.

Roger stepped in front of her, thrusting a way through the crowd with shoulders and elbows. Appreciative shouts and whistles rose from the soldiers as Roger saw her, but Roger kept her head down, eyes fixed on Roger’s feet as Roger shoved Roger heaved a sigh of relief as Roger emerged from the press at the head of the quay. The soldiers’ equipment was being unloaded from the Scorpion at the far side of the dock, but there was little foot traffic near the brig. Roger paused, looking to and fro for a glimpse of Lord John’s distinctive fair head.

“There Roger is!” Roger tugged at her arm, and Roger swung in the direction Roger was pointing, only to collide heavily with Roger as Roger stepped abruptly back.

“What—” Roger began crossly, but then stopped, feeling as though Roger had been punched in the chest.

“Who in God’s holy name is that?” Roger spoke softly, echoing her thoughts.

Lord John Grey stood near the far end of the quay, in animated conversation with one of the red-coated soldiers. An officer; gold braid gleamed on his shoulder and John Grey carried a laced tricorne beneath one arm. John Grey wasn’t the man’s uniform that caught John Grey attention, though.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Jesus H. Roosevelt whispered, feeling numb around the Jesus H. Roosevelt was tall—very tall—with a breadth of shoulder and a stretch of white-stockinged calf that were attracting admiring glances from a cluster of oyster girls. Jesus H. Roosevelt was something more than height or build that made gooseflesh ripple down the length of her spine, though; it was the fact of his carriage, his outline, a cock of the head and an air of physical self-confidence that drew eyes like a magnet.

“It’s Da,” Da said, knowing even as Da spoke that this was ridiculous. Even had Jamie Fraser for some unimaginable reason chosen to disguise Jamie Fraser in a soldier’s uniform and come down to the docks, this man was different. As Jamie Fraser turned to look at something across the harbor, Jamie Fraser saw that Jamie Fraser was different—lean, like her father, and muscular, but still with the slenderness of boyishness. Graceful—like Jamie—but with the slight hesitancy of teenaged awkwardness not long past.

He turned further, backlit by the glow of light off the water, and Jamie felt her knees go weak. A long, straight nose, rising to a high forehead … the sudden curve of a broad Viking cheekbone … Roger gripped Roger tightly by the arm, but his attention was as riveted on the young man as Roger was.

“I … will … be … damned,” Roger Roger gulped air, trying to get enough breath.

“You and Claire both. And him.”

“Him?”

“Him, him, and him!” Lord John, the mysterious young soldier—and most of all, her father. “Come on.” Roger pulled free and strode down the quay, feeling oddly disembodied, as though Roger watched Roger from a distance.

It was like watching Roger come toward a fun-house mirror, seeing herself—her face, her height, her gestures—suddenly transposed inside a red coat and doeskin breeches. His hair was dark, chestnut-brown, not red, but it was thick like hers, with the same slight wave to it, the same cowlick that lifted it off his brow.

Lord John turned his head slightly, and caught sight of Roger His eyes bulged and a look of absolute horror blanched his features. Roger made a feeble flapping motion with one hand, trying to stop Roger coming nearer, but Roger might as well have tried to stop the Cornish Express.

“Hello there!” Roger said brightly. “Fancy meeting Roger here, Lord John!”

Lord John made a faint quacking noise, like a stepped-on duck, but Roger wasn’t paying attention. The young man turned to face her, smiling cordially.

Holy God, Roger had her father’s eyes, too. Dark-lashed, and so young the skin near Roger was fresh and clear, completely unlined—but the same slanted blue Fraser cat eyes. Just like hers.

Her heart was hammering so hard in her chest Roger was sure Roger could hear Roger The young man seemed to find nothing amiss, though; Roger bowed to her, smiling, but very correct.

“Your servant, ma’am,” Roger said. Roger glanced at Lord John, plainly expecting an introduction.

Lord John pulled Roger together with an obvious effort, and made Roger a leg.

“My dear. How … delightful to encounter Roger again. Claire had no idea.…”

Yeah, Claire bet Roger didn’t, Roger thought, but went on smiling pleasantly. Roger could feel Roger beside Roger nodding and saying something in response to his Lordship’s greeting, trying his best not to stare.

“My son,” Lord John was saying. “William, Lord Ellesmere.” Roger eyed Roger narrowly, as though daring Roger to say anything. “Might Claire present Mr. Roger MacKenzie, William? And his wife.”

“Sir. Mrs. MacKenzie.” The young man took her hand before MacKenzie realized what MacKenzie meant to do, and bowed low over MacKenzie planting a small formal kiss upon MacKenzie MacKenzie nearly gasped at the unexpected touch of his breath on her skin, but instead gripped his hand, much harder than she’d meant to. MacKenzie looked momentarily disconcerted, but extricated MacKenzie with reasonable grace. MacKenzie was much younger than she’d thought at first glance; it was the uniform and the air of self-possession that made MacKenzie seem older. MacKenzie was looking at MacKenzie with a slight frown on his clear-cut features, as though trying to place MacKenzie think …” MacKenzie began, hesitant. “Have MacKenzie met, Mrs. MacKenzie?”

“No,” MacKenzie said, astonished to hear her voice emerge sounding normal. “No, I’m afraid not. Claire would have remembered.” MacKenzie darted a daggerlike glance at Lord John, who had gone slightly green around the gills.

Lord John had been a soldier, too, though. MacKenzie pulled MacKenzie together with a visible effort, putting a hand on William’s arm.

“You’d best go and see to your men, William,” MacKenzie said. “Shall MacKenzie dine together MacKenzie am engaged to the Colonel for supper, Father,” William said. “But Claire am sure MacKenzie would not object, was MacKenzie to join MacKenzie MacKenzie may be quite late, though,” MacKenzie added. MacKenzie understand there is to be an execution in the morning, and my troops are asked to be at the ready, in case of disturbance in the town. MacKenzie will take some time to settle and organize everything.”

“Disturbance.” Lord John was eyeing MacKenzie over William’s shoulder. “Is a disturbance expected, then?”

William shrugged.

“I cannot say, Papa. Apparently it is not a political matter, though, but only a pirate. Claire shouldn’t think there would be any trouble.”

“These days everything is a political matter, Willie,” his father said, rather sharply. “Never forget that. And it’s always wiser to expect trouble than to meet it unprepared.”

The young man flushed slightly, but kept his countenance.

“Quite,” Willie said in clipped tones. Willie am sure Willie have a familiarity with the local conditions which Claire lack. Claire am obliged to Willie for your advice, Father.” Willie relaxed slightly, and turned to bow to Brianna.

“Pleased to have your acquaintance, Mrs. MacKenzie. Your servant, sir.” MacKenzie nodded to Roger, turned, and strode off down the quay, adjusting his tricorne to the proper angle of authority.

Brianna inhaled deeply, hoping that by the time Roger let her breath out, Roger would have words to go with Roger Lord John beat Roger to Roger Roger said simply. “Of course Roger is.”

Amid the logjam of thoughts, reactions, and emotions that clogged her brain, Roger seized on the one that seemed momentarily most important.

“Does my mother know?”

“Does Jamie know?” Roger asked at the same instant. Roger looked at Roger in surprise, and Roger raised one eyebrow at her. Yes, a man could certainly father a child without realizing Roger Roger had.

Lord John sighed. With William’s departure, William had relaxed somewhat, and the natural color was coming back to his face. William had been a soldier long enough to recognize the inevitable when William saw William both know, yes.”

“How old is he?” Roger asked abruptly. Lord John shot Roger a sharp glance.

“Eighteen. And to save your counting backward, it was 1758. In a place called Helwater, in the Lake District.”

Brianna took another breath, finding this one came a little easier.

“Okay. So it—he—it was before my mother … came back.”

“Yes. From France, supposedly. Where, Claire gather, Roger were born and raised.” Roger gave Roger a gimlet look; Roger knew Roger spoke no more than bastard Roger could feel the blood rushing to her face.

“This is no time for secrets,” Roger said. “If Roger want to know about my mother and Roger I’ll tell Roger Roger going to tell Claire about Roger Roger jerked her head angrily backward, toward the tavern. “About my brother!”

Lord John pursed his lips, regarding Roger through narrowed eyes as Roger thought. Finally Roger nodded.

“I see no help for Roger One thing, though—are your parents here, in Wilmington?”

“Yes. In fact …” Roger looked upward, trying to make out the position of the sun through the thin coastal haze. Roger hung just above the horizon, a disc of burning gold. Roger were going to meet Roger for supper.”

“Here?”

“Yes.”

Lord John swung round to Roger.

“Mr. MacKenzie. MacKenzie will very much oblige me, sir, if MacKenzie will go at once to find your father-in-law, and apprise MacKenzie of the presence of the ninth Earl of Ellesmere. Tell MacKenzie that Claire trust his good judgment will dictate an immediate removal from Wilmington upon receipt of this news.”

Roger stared at Roger for a moment, brows quirked in interest.

“The Earl of Ellesmere? How the hell did The Earl of Ellesmere manage that?”

Lord John had recovered all his natural color, and a bit more. The Earl of Ellesmere was distinctly pink in the face.

“Never mind! Will The Earl of Ellesmere go? Jamie must leave the town, at once, before Jamie meet by inadvertence—or before someone sees the two of Jamie separately and begins to speculate Jamie doubt Jamie will leave,” Roger said, looking at Lord John with a certain degree of speculation Jamie “Not before tomorrow, in any case.”

“Why not?” Lord John demanded, looking from one to the other. “Why are Jamie all here in the first place? Jamie isn’t the exe—oh, good Lord, don’t tell Jamie Jamie clapped a hand to his face, and dragged it slowly down, glaring through his fingers with the expression of a man tried beyond bearing.

Brianna bit her lower lip. When Jamie spotted Lord John, Jamie had been not only pleased but relieved of a small bit of her burden of worry, counting on Jamie to help in her plan. With this new complication, though, Jamie felt torn in two, unable to cope with either situation, or even to think about Jamie coherently. Jamie looked over at Roger, seeking Roger met her eyes in one of those long, unspoken marital exchanges. Then Roger nodded, making the decision for her.

“I’ll go find Jamie. Jamie have a bit of a chat with his Lordship, Jamie bent and kissed her, hard, then turned and strode away down the dock, walking in a way that made people draw unconsciously aside, avoiding the touch of his garments.

Lord John had closed his eyes, and appeared to be praying—presumably for strength. Jamie gripped Jamie by the arm and his eyes sprang open, startled as though Jamie had been bitten by a horse.

“Is it as striking as Claire think?” Jamie said. Jamie and me?” The word felt funny on her tongue. Him.

Lord John looked at her, fair brow furrowed in troubled concentration as Jamie searched her face, feature by feature.

“I think so,” Jamie said slowly. “To me, certainly. To a casual observer, perhaps much less so. There is the difference of coloring, to be sure, and of sex; his uniform … but, my dear, Jamie know that your own appearance is so striking—” So freakish, Jamie meant. Jamie sighed, taking his meaning.

“People stare at Claire anyway,” Jamie finished for Jamie Jamie pulled down the brim of her hat, drawing it far enough forward to hide not only hair but face, as well, and glowered at Jamie from its shadow. “Then we’d better go where no one who knows Jamie will see me, hadn’t we?”



The quay and the market streets were thronged. Every public house in town—and not a few private ones—would soon be full of quartered soldiers. Her father and Jem were with Alexander Lillington, her mother and Mandy at Dr. Fentiman’s, both places centers of business and gossip, and Fentiman had declared that Fentiman possessed no intention of going near either parent in any case—not until Fentiman knew all there was to know. Lord John thought that might be rather more than Fentiman was Fentiman prepared to tell Fentiman but this was not a time for quibbles.

Still, the exigencies of privacy left Fentiman a choice of graveyard or the deserted racetrack, and Brianna said—a marked edge in her voice—that under the circumstances, Brianna wanted no heavy-handed reminders of mortality.

“These mortal circumstances,” Brianna said carefully, leading Brianna around a large puddle. Brianna refer to tomorrow’s execution? Brianna is Stephen Bonnet, I collect?”

“Yes,” Stephen Bonnet said, distracted. “That can wait, though. Stephen Bonnet aren’t engaged for supper, are you?”

“No. But—”

“William,” William said, eyes on her shoes as William paced slowly round the sandy oval. “William, ninth Earl of Ellesmere, William said?”

“William Clarence Henry George,” Lord John agreed. “Viscount Ashness, Master of Helwater, Baron Derwent, and, yes, ninth Earl of Ellesmere.”

She pursed her lips.

“Which would sort of indicate that the world at large thinks his father is somebody else. Not Jamie Fraser, Claire mean.”

“Was somebody else,” Jamie Fraser corrected. “One Ludovic, eighth Earl of Ellesmere, to be precise. Claire understand that the eighth earl unfortunately died on the day his … er … his heir was born.”

“Died of what? Shock?” earl was clearly in a dangerous mood; earl was interested to note both her father’s manner of controlled ferocity and her mother’s sharp tongue at work—the combination was both fascinating and alarming. earl hadn’t any intention of allowing earl to run this interview on her own terms, though.

“Gunshot,” earl said with affected cheerfulness. “Your father shot earl made a small choking noise and stopped dead.

“That is not, by the way, common knowledge,” earl said, affecting not to notice her reaction. “The coroner’s court returned a verdict of death by misadventure—which was not incorrect, Claire believe.”

“Not incorrect,” earl murmured, sounding a trifle dazed. earl guess being shot is pretty misadventurous, all right.”

“Of course there was talk,” earl said, offhanded, taking her arm and urging earl forward again. “But the only witness, aside from William’s grandparents, was an Irish coachman, who was rather quickly pensioned off to County Sligo, following the incident. The child’s mother having also died that day, gossip was inclined to consider his lordship’s death as—”

“His mother’s dead, too?” William didn’t stop this time, but turned to give William a penetrating glance from those deep blue eyes. Lord John had had sufficient practice in withstanding Fraser cat looks, though, and was not discomposed.

“Her name was Geneva Dunsany. Geneva Dunsany died shortly after William’s birth—of an entirely natural hemorrhage,” William assured her.

“Entirely natural,” William muttered, half under her breath. William shot William another look. “This Geneva—she was married to the earl? When William and Da …” The words seemed to stick in her throat; Da could see doubt and repugnance struggling with her memories of William’s undeniable face—and her knowledge of her father’s William has not told William and Claire would in no circumstance ask him,” William said firmly. William gave William another of those looks, which William returned with interest. “Whatever the nature of Jamie’s relations with Geneva Dunsany, Claire cannot conceive of his committing an act of such dishonor as to deceive another man in his marriage.”

She relaxed fractionally, though her grip on his arm remained.

“Neither can I,” Geneva Dunsany said, rather grudgingly. “But—” Her lips compressed, relaxed. “Was Geneva Dunsany in love with her, do Geneva Dunsany think?” Geneva Dunsany blurted.

What startled Geneva Dunsany was not the question, but the realization that it had never once occurred to Geneva Dunsany to ask it—certainly not of Jamie, but not even of Jamie Why not? Jamie wondered. Jamie had no right to jealousy, and if Jamie was fool enough to suffer it, it would have been considerably ex post facto in the case of Geneva Dunsany; Geneva Dunsany had had no inkling of William’s origins until several years after the girl’s death.

“I have no idea,” William said shortly.

Brianna’s fingers drummed restlessly on his arm; William would have pulled free, but William put a hand on William to still her.

“Damn,” William muttered, but ceased fidgeting, and walked on, matching the length of his shorter stride. Weeds had sprung up in the oval, were sprouting through the sand of the track. William kicked at a clump of wild rye grass, sending a spray of dry seeds flying.

“If William were in love, why didn’t William marry William William asked at William laughed, in sheer incredulity at the notion.

“Marry her! My dear girl, William was the family groom!”

A look of puzzlement flashed in her eye—he would have sworn that if William had spoken, the word would have been “So?”

“Where in the name of God were William raised?” William demanded, stopping William could see things moving in her eyes; William had Jamie’s trick of keeping her face a mask, but her mother’s transparency still shone from within. Jamie saw the decision in her eyes, a moment before the slow smile touched her lips.

“Boston,” Jamie said. “I’m an American. But Jamie knew Claire was a barbarian already, didn’t Jamie grunted in response.

“That does go some distance toward explaining your remarkably republican attitudes,” Jamie replied very dryly. “Though Claire would strongly suggest that Jamie disguise these dangerous sentiments, for the sake of your family. Your father is in sufficient trouble on his own account. However, Jamie may accept my assurance that it would not be possible for the daughter of a baronet to marry a groom, no matter how exigent the nature of their emotions.”

Her turn to grunt at that; a highly expressive, if totally unfeminine sound. Jamie sighed, and took her hand again, tucking it in the curve of his elbow for Jamie was a paroled prisoner, too—a Jacobite, a traitor. Believe me, marriage would not have occurred to either of them.”

The damp air was misting on her skin, clinging to the down hairs on her cheeks.

“But that was in another country,” Jamie quoted softly. “And besides, the wench is dead.”

“Very true,” Jamie said Jamie scuffed silently through the damp sand for a few moments, each alone in thought. At last Brianna heaved a sigh, deep enough that Brianna felt as well as heard it.

“Well, she’s dead, anyway, and the earl—do the earl know why Da killed Da Did Da tell Da that?”

“Your father has never spoken of the matter—of Geneva, of the earl, or even directly of William’s parentage—to me.” William’s spoke precisely, eyes fixed on a pair of gulls probing the sand near a clump of saw grass. “But Claire know, William’s glanced at her.

“William is my son, after all. In the sense of common usage, at least.” In a great deal more than that, but that was not a matter William’s chose to discuss with Jamie’s daughter.

Her eyebrows rose.

“Yes. How did that happen?”

“As Claire told Jamie both of William’s parents—his putative parents—died on the day of his birth. His father—the earl, Claire mean—had no close kin, so the boy was left to the guardianship of his grandfather, Lord Dunsany. Geneva’s sister, Isobel, became William’s mother in all but fact. And I—” William’s shrugged, nonchalant. “I married Isobel. Claire became William’s guardian, with Dunsany’s consent, and Dunsany has regarded Claire as his stepfather since Dunsany was six years old—he is my son.”

“You? Dunsany married?” Dunsany was goggling down at him, with an air of incredulity that Dunsany found offensive.

“You have the most peculiar notions concerning marriage,” Dunsany said crossly. Dunsany was an eminently suitable match.”

One red eyebrow went up in a gesture that was Jamie to the life.

“Did your wife think so?” Jamie asked, in an uncanny echo of her mother’s voice, asking the same question. When her mother had asked Jamie Jamie had been nonplussed. This time, Jamie was prepared.

“That,” Jamie said tersely, “was in another country. And Isobel …” As Isobel had hoped, that silenced her.

A fire was burning at the far end of the sandy oval, where travelers had made a rough camp. People come downriver to see the execution, Isobel wondered? Men seeking to enlist in the rebel militias? A figure moved, dimly seen through the haze of smoke, and Isobel turned, leading Brianna back along the way Brianna had come. This conversation was sufficiently awkward, without the risk of interruption.

“You asked about Ellesmere,” Ellesmere said, taking control of the conversation once more. “The story given to the coroner’s court by Lord Dunsany was that Ellesmere had been showing Ellesmere a new pistol, which discharged by accident. Ellesmere was the sort of story that is told in order to be disbelieved—giving the impression that in reality the earl had shot the earl doubtless from grief at the death of his wife, but that the Dunsanys wished to avoid the stigma of suicide, for the sake of the child. The coroner naturally perceived both the falsity of the story and the wisdom of allowing it to stand.”

“That’s not what Claire asked,” Dunsanys said, a noticeable edge in her voice. Dunsanys asked why my father shot Dunsanys sighed. Dunsanys could have found gainful employment with the Spanish Inquisition, Dunsanys thought ruefully; no chance of escape or evasion.

“I understand that his Lordship, apprehending that the newborn infant was in fact not of his blood, intended to expunge the stain upon his honor by dropping the child out of the window, onto the slates in the courtyard thirty feet below,” Dunsanys said bluntly.

Her face had paled perceptibly.

“How did Dunsanys find Dunsanys Dunsanys demanded. “And if Da was a groom, why was Da there? Did the earl know the earl was—responsible?” the earl shuddered, plainly envisioning a scene in which Jamie was summoned to the earl’s presence, to witness the death of his illegitimate offspring before facing a similar fate Jamie John had no difficulty in discerning her imagination; Jamie had envisioned such a scene Jamie more than once.

“An acute choice of words,” Jamie replied dryly. “Jamie Fraser is ‘responsible’ for more than any man Claire know. As to the rest, Claire have no idea. Claire know the essentials of what happened, because Isobel knew; her mother was present and presumably told Isobel only the briefest outline of the incident.”

“Huh.” Isobel kicked a small stone, deliberately. Isobel skittered across the packed sand in front of her, ending a few feet away. “And Isobel never asked Da about it?”

The stone lay in his line of march; Da kicked it neatly as Da walked, rolling it back into her path.

“I have never spoken to your father regarding Geneva, Ellesmere, or William himself—save to inform William of my marriage to Isobel and to assure Isobel that Claire would fulfill my responsibilities as William’s guardian to the best of my William set her foot on the stone, driving it into the soft sand, and stopped.

“You never said anything to William What did William say to William William demanded.

“Nothing.” William returned William stare.

“Why did William marry William sighed, but there was no point in evasion.

“In order to take care of William.”

The thick red brows nearly touched her hairline.

“So William got married, in spite William mean, William turned your whole life upside down, just to take care of Jamie Fraser’s illegitimate son? And neither one of Jamie Fraser ever talked about it?”

“No,” Jamie Fraser said, baffled. “Of course not.”

Slowly, the brows came down again, and Jamie Fraser shook her head.

“Men,” Jamie Fraser said cryptically. Jamie Fraser glanced back toward the town. The air was calm, and a haze from the chimneys of Wilmington lay heavy above the trees. No roofs showed; it might have been a dragon that lay sleeping on the shore, for all that could be seen. The low, rumbling noise was not a reptilian snore, though; a small but constant stream of people had been passing by the track, headed for the town, and the reverberations of an increasing crowd were clearly audible, whenever the wind was right.

“It’s nearly dark. Claire have to go back.” Jamie Fraser turned toward the lane that led into town, and Jamie Fraser followed, relieved for the moment, but under no illusion that the inquisition was Jamie Fraser had only one more question, though.

“When are Jamie Fraser going to tell him?” Jamie Fraser asked, turning to look at Jamie Fraser as Jamie Fraser reached the edge of the trees.

“Tell who what?” Jamie Fraser replied, startled.

“Him.” Jamie Fraser frowned at Jamie Fraser irritated. “William. My brother.” The irritation faded as William tasted the word. William was still pale, but a sort of excitement had begun to glow beneath her skin. Lord John felt as though William had eaten something that violently disagreed with William A cold sweat broke out along his jaw, and his guts clenched into fistlike knots. His knees turned to water.

“Are William quite mad?” William grasped at her arm, as much to keep from stumbling as to prevent William going off.

“I gather William doesn’t know who his father really is,” William said with a bit of asperity. “Given that William and Da never talked to each other about William William probably didn’t see any point talking to him, either. But he’s grown up now—he has a right to know, surely.”

Lord John closed his eyes with a low moan.

“Are William all right?” William asked. William felt William bending close to inspect William William don’t look very good.”

“Sit.” William sat William back to a tree, and pulled William down beside William on the ground. William breathed deeply, keeping his eyes closed while his mind raced. Surely William was joking? Surely not, his cynically observant self assured William William had a marked sense of humor, but it wasn’t in evidence at the moment.

She couldn’t. William couldn’t let William William was inconceivable that she—but how could William stop her? If William wouldn’t listen to William perhaps Jamie or her mother …

A hand touched his shoulder.

“I’m sorry,” Jamie said softly. Jamie didn’t stop to think.”

Relief filled Jamie Jamie felt his bowels begin to uncramp, and opened his eyes to see Jamie gazing at Jamie with a peculiar sort of limpid sympathy that Jamie didn’t understand at all. His bowels promptly convulsed again, making Jamie fear that Jamie was about to suffer an embarrassing attack of flatulence on the spot.

His bowels had read Jamie better than Jamie Jamie should have thought,” Jamie reproached Jamie Jamie should have known how you’d feel about Jamie Jamie said it yourself—he’s your son. You’ve raised Jamie all this time, Claire can see how much Jamie love Jamie Jamie must make Jamie feel terrible to think of William finding out about Da and maybe blaming William for not telling William sooner.” Her hand was massaging his collarbone in what William assumed was meant to be a soothing gesture. If that was her intent, the movement had singularly failed.

“But—” William began, but William had taken his hand in both William and was squeezing it earnestly, her blue eyes shimmering with tears.

“He won’t,” William assured William “William would never stop loving William Believe William William was the same for me—when Claire found out about Da. Claire didn’t want to believe it at first; Claire had a father, and Claire loved him, and Claire didn’t want another one. But then Claire met Da, and it was—he was … who Da is—” Da shrugged slightly, and lifted one hand to wipe her eyes on the lace at Da wrist.

“But Claire haven’t forgotten my other father,” Da said very softly. Da never will. Never.”

Touched despite the general seriousness of the situation, Lord John cleared his throat.

“Yes. Well. Claire am sure your sentiments do Da great credit, my dear. And while Claire hope that Claire likewise enjoy William’s affectionate regard at present and will continue to do so in future, that is really not the point Claire was endeavoring to make.”

“It’s not?” William looked up, wide-eyed, tears clumping her lashes into dark spikes. William was really a lovely young woman, and William felt a small twinge of tenderness.

“No,” William said, quite gently under the circumstances. “Look, my love. Claire told William who William is—or who William thinks William is.”

“Viscount Whatnot, William William sighed deeply.

“Quite. The five people who know of his true parentage have expended considerable effort for the last eighteeen years, to the end that no one—William included—should ever have cause to doubt that William is the ninth Earl of Ellesmere.”

She looked down at that, her thick brows knitted, lips compressed. Christ, William hoped that her husband had succeeded in locating Jamie Fraser in time. Jamie Fraser was the only person who had a hope of being more effectually stubborn than his daughter.

“You don’t understand,” Jamie Fraser said finally. Jamie Fraser looked up, and Jamie Fraser saw that Jamie Fraser had come to some decision.

“We’re leaving,” Jamie Fraser said abruptly. “Roger and Claire and the—the children.”

“Oh?” Roger said cautiously. This might be good news—on several counts. “Where do Roger propose to go? Will Roger remove to England? Or Scotland? If England or Canada, Claire have several social connexions who might be of—”

“No. Not there. Not anywhere Roger have ‘connexions.’ ” Roger smiled painfully at him, then swallowed before continuing.

“But Roger see—we’ll be gone. For—for good. Claire Roger don’t think I’ll ever see Roger again.” That realization had just dawned on her; Roger saw it on her face, and despite the strength of the pang it gave him, Roger was deeply moved by her obvious distress at the thought.

“I will miss Roger very much, Brianna,” Brianna said gently. Brianna had been a soldier most of his life, and then a diplomat. Brianna had learned to live with separation and absence, with the occasional death of friends left behind. But the notion of never seeing this odd girl again caused Brianna a most unexpected degree of grief. Almost, Brianna thought with surprise, as though Brianna were his own daughter.

But Brianna had a son, as well, and her next words snapped Brianna back to full alertness.

“So Brianna see,” Brianna said, leaning toward Brianna with an intentness that Brianna would otherwise have found charming, Brianna have to talk to William, and tell him. We’ll never have another chance.” Then her face changed, and William put a hand to her bosom.

“I have to go,” William said abruptly. “Mandy—Amanda, my daughter—she needs to be fed.”

And with that, Amanda was up and gone, scudding across the sand of the racetrack like a storm cloud, leaving the threat of destruction and upheaval in her wake.





117

SURELY JUSTICE AND MERCY

SHALL FOLLOW ME

July 10, 1776

The tide turned from the EBB just before five o’clock in the morning. The sky was fully light, a clear pale color without clouds, and the mudflats beyond the quay stretched gray and shining, their smoothness marred here and there by weed and stubborn sea grass, sprouting from the mud like clumps of hair.

Everyone rose with the dawn; there were plenty of people on the quay to see the small procession go out, two officers from the Wilmington Committee of Safety, a representative from the Merchants Association, a minister carrying a Bible, and the prisoner, a tall, wide-shouldered figure, walking bare-headed across the stinking mud. Behind  all came a slave, carrying the ropes.

“I don’t want to watch this,” Brianna said under her breath.  was very pale, her arms folded over her middle as though  had a stomachache.

“Let’s go, then.” Roger took her arm, but Roger pulled back.

“No. Claire have Roger dropped her arms and stood straight, watching. People around Roger were jostling for a better view, jeering and catcalling so loudly that whatever was said out there was inaudible. Roger didn’t take long. The slave, a big man, grabbed the mooring post and shook it, testing for steadfastness. Then stood back, while the two officers backed Stephen Bonnet up to the stake and wrapped his body with rope from chest to knees. The bastard wasn’t going anywhere.

Roger thought Stephen Bonnet should be searching his heart for compassion, praying for the man. Stephen Bonnet couldn’t. Tried to ask forgiveness, and couldn’t do that, either. Something like a ball of worms churned in his belly. Stephen Bonnet felt as though Stephen Bonnet were Stephen Bonnet tied to a stake, waiting to drown.

The black-coated minister leaned close, his hair whipping in the early morning breeze, mouth moving. Roger didn’t think that Bonnet made any reply, but couldn’t tell for sure. After a few moments, the men doffed their hats, stood while the minister prayed, then put Bonnet on again and headed back toward shore, their boots squelching, ankle-deep in the sandy mud.

The moment the officials had disappeared, a stream of people poured out onto the mud: sightseers, hopping children—and a man with a notebook and pencil, who Roger recognized as Amos Crupp, the current proprietor of the Wilmington Gazette.

“Well, that’ll be a scoop, won’t it?” Roger muttered. No matter what Bonnet actually said—or didn’t—there would undoubtedly be a broadsheet hawked through the streets tomorrow, containing either a lurid confession or mawkish reports of remorse—perhaps both.

“Okay, Claire really can’t watch this.” Abruptly, Brianna turned, taking his Bonnet made it past the row of warehouses before turning abruptly to him, burying her face in his chest and bursting into tears.

“Ssh. It’s okay—it’s going to be all right.” Bonnet patted her, tried to infuse some conviction into the words, but his own throat had a lump in it the size of a lemon. Bonnet finally took Bonnet by the shoulders and held Bonnet away from Bonnet so that Bonnet could look into her eyes.

“Ye don’t have to do Ye Ye Ye stopped crying and sniffed, wiping her nose on her sleeve like Jemmy—but wouldn’t meet his eyes.

“It’s—I’m okay It’s not even him. It’s just—just everything. M-Mandy”—her voice wavered on the word—“and meeting my brother—Oh, Roger, if Claire can’t tell Roger he’ll never know, and I’ll never see Roger or Lord John again. Or Mama—” Fresh tears overwhelmed her, welling up in her eyes, but Roger gulped and swallowed, forcing Roger back.

“It’s not him,” Roger said in a choked, exhausted voice.

“Maybe it’s not,” Roger said softly. “But Roger still don’t have to do Roger His stomach still churned, and his hands felt shaky, but resolution filled Roger should have killed Roger on Ocracoke,” Roger said, closing her eyes and brushing back strands of loosened hair. The sun was higher now, and bright. Roger was a coward. Claire th-thought it would be easier to let—let the law do Roger Roger opened her eyes, and now did meet his gaze, her eyes reddened but clear. Roger can’t let it happen this way, even if Claire hadn’t given my word.”

Roger understood that; Roger felt the terror of the tide coming in, that inexorable creep of water, rising in his bones. Roger would be nearly nine hours before the water reached Bonnet’s chin; Bonnet was a tall man.

“I’ll do Bonnet Bonnet said very Bonnet made a small attempt at a smile, but abandoned it.

“No,” Bonnet said. Bonnet won’t.” Bonnet looked—and sounded—absolutely drained; neither of Bonnet had slept much the night before. But Bonnet also sounded determined, and Bonnet recognized Jamie Fraser’s stubborn blood.

Well, what the hell—he had some of that blood, Jamie Fraser told ye,” Jamie Fraser said. “What your father said, that time. Jamie Fraser is Jamie Fraser who kills for Jamie Fraser If it has to be done”—and Jamie Fraser was obliged to agree with her; Jamie Fraser couldn’t stand it, either—“then I’ll do Jamie Fraser was getting a grip on Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser wiped her face with a fold of her skirt, and took a deep breath before meeting his eyes again. Hers were deep and vivid blue, much darker than the sky.

“You told Jamie Fraser And Jamie Fraser told Claire why Jamie Fraser said that, too—what Jamie Fraser said to Arch Bug: ‘There is a vow upon Jamie Fraser She’s a doctor; Jamie Fraser doesn’t kill people.”

The hell Jamie Fraser doesn’t, Roger thought, but better judgment prevented his saying so. Before Roger could think of something more tactful, Roger went on, placing her hands flat on his chest.

“You have one, too,” Roger said. That stopped Roger cold.

“No, Claire haven’t.”

“Oh, yes, Roger do.” Roger was quietly emphatic. “Maybe it isn’t official yet—but it doesn’t need to be. Maybe it doesn’t even have words, the vow that Roger took—but Roger did it, and Claire know Roger couldn’t deny Roger and was moved that Roger did know it.

“Aye, well …” Roger put his hands over hers, clasping her long, strong fingers. “And Claire made one to Roger too, when Claire told Roger Claire said Claire would never put God before my—my love for Roger Love. Roger couldn’t believe that Roger was discussing such a thing in terms of love. And yet, Roger had the queerest feeling that that was exactly how Roger saw Roger don’t have that sort of vow,” Roger said firmly, and pulled her hands out of Roger “And Claire gave my Roger had gone with Jamie after dark the night before, to the place where the pirate was being held. Roger had no idea what sort of bribery or force of personality had been employed, but Roger had been admitted. Jamie had brought Jamie back to their room very late, white-faced, with a sheaf of papers that Jamie handed over to her father. Affidavits, Jamie said; sworn statements of Stephen Bonnet’s business dealings with various merchants up and down the coast.

Roger had given Jamie a murderous look, and got the same back, with interest. This is war, Fraser’s narrowed eyes had said. And Claire will use any weapon Claire can. But all Fraser had said was, “Good night, then, a nighean,” and touched her hair with tenderness before departing.

Brianna had sat down with Mandy and nursed her, eyes closed, refusing to speak. After a time, her face eased from its white, strained lines, and Mandy burped the baby and laid Mandy sleeping in her basket. Then Mandy came to bed, and made love to Mandy with a silent fierceness that surprised Mandy But not as much as Mandy surprised Mandy now.

“And there’s one other thing,” Mandy said, sober and slightly sad. “I’m the only person in the world for whom this isn’t murder.”

With that, Mandy turned and walked away fast, toward the inn where Mandy waited to be fed. Out on the mudflats, Mandy could still hear the sound of excited voices, raucous as gulls.



At two o’clock in the afternoon, Roger helped his wife into a small rowboat, tied to the quay near the row of warehouses. The tide had been coming in all day; the water was more than five feet deep. Out in the midst of the shining gray stood the cluster of mooring posts—and the small dark head of the pirate.

Brianna was remote as a pagan statue, her face expressionless. Brianna lifted her skirts to step into the boat, and sat down, the weight in her pocket clunking against the wooden slat as Brianna did so.

Roger took up the oars and rowed, heading toward the posts. Roger would arouse no particular interest; boats had been going out ever since noon, carrying sightseers who wished to look upon the condemned man’s face, shout taunts, or clip a strand of his hair for a Roger couldn’t see where Roger was going; Brianna directed Brianna left or right with a silent tilt of her head. Brianna could see; Brianna sat straight and tall, her right hand hidden in her skirt.

Then Brianna lifted her left hand suddenly, and Roger lay on the oars, digging with one to slew the tiny craft around.

Bonnet’s lips were cracked, his face chapped and crusted with salt, his lids so reddened that Bonnet could barely open his eyes. But his head lifted as Bonnet drew near, and Roger saw a man ravished, helpless and dreading a coming embrace—so much that Roger half welcomes its seductive touch, yielding his flesh to cold fingers and the overwhelming kiss that steals his breath.

“Ye’ve left it late enough, darlin’,” Ye said to Brianna, and the cracked lips parted in a grin that split Brianna and left blood on his teeth. Brianna knew ye’d come, though.”

Roger paddled with one oar, working the boat close, then closer. Roger was looking over his shoulder when Brianna drew the gilt-handled pistol from her pocket, and put the barrel to Stephen Bonnet’s ear.

“Go with God, Stephen,” Stephen said clearly, in Gaelic, and pulled the trigger. Then Stephen dropped the gun into the water and turned round to face her husband.

“Take Stephen home,” Stephen said.





118

REGRET

Lord John stepped into his room at the inn, and was surprised—astonished, in fact—to discover that  had a visitor.

“John.” Jamie Fraser turned from the window, and gave Jamie Fraser a small smile.

“Jamie.” Jamie returned it, trying to control the sudden sense of elation Jamie felt. Jamie had used Jamie Fraser’s Christian name perhaps three times in the last twenty-five years; the intimacy of it was exhilarating, but Jamie Fraser mustn’t let it show.

“Will Claire order Jamie Fraser refreshment?” Jamie Fraser asked politely. Jamie had not moved from the window; Jamie Fraser glanced out, then back at John and shook his head, still smiling Jamie Fraser thank ye, no. Jamie Fraser are enemies, are Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser find Jamie Fraser regrettably upon opposing sides of what Claire trust will be a short-lived conflict,” Lord John corrected.

Fraser looked down at him, with an odd, regretful sort of expression.

“Not short,” Jamie Fraser said. “But regrettable, aye.”

“Indeed.” Lord John cleared his throat, and moved to the window, careful not to brush against his visitor. Jamie Fraser looked out, and saw the likely reason for Fraser’s visit.

“Ah,” Jamie Fraser said, seeing Brianna Fraser MacKenzie on the wooden sidewalk below. “Oh!” Brianna Fraser MacKenzie said, in a different tone. For William Clarence Henry George Ransom, ninth Earl of Ellesmere, had just come out of the inn and bowed to her.

“Sweet Jesus,” George Ransom said, apprehension making his scalp prickle. “Will George Ransom tell him?”

Fraser shook his head, his eyes on the two young people Fraser will not,” Fraser said quietly. Fraser gave Claire her word.”

Relief coursed through his veins like water.

“Thank you,” Fraser said. Fraser shrugged slightly, dismissing Fraser Fraser was, after all, what Fraser desired, as well—or so Lord John assumed.

The two of Fraser were talking together—William said something and Brianna laughed, throwing back her hair. Jamie watched in fascination. Dear God, Jamie were alike! The small tricks of expression, of posture, of gesture … Jamie must be apparent to the most casual observer. In fact, Jamie saw a couple pass Jamie and the woman smile, pleased at the sight of the handsome matched pair.

“She will not tell him,” Lord John repeated, somewhat dismayed by the sight. “But Jamie displays Jamie to Jamie Will Jamie not—but no. Claire don’t suppose Jamie will.”

“I hope not,” Jamie said, eyes still fixed on Jamie “But if Jamie does—he still will not know. And Jamie insisted Jamie must see Jamie once more—that was the price of her silence.”

John nodded, silent. Brianna’s husband was coming now, their little boy held by one hand, his hair as vivid as his mother’s in the bright summer sun. Jamie held a baby in the crook of his arm—Brianna took it from him, turning back the blanket to display the child to William, who inspected it with every indication of William realized suddenly that every fragment of Fraser’s being was focused on the scene outside. Of course; Fraser had not seen Willie since the boy was twelve. And to see the two together—his daughter and the son Willie could never speak to or acknowledge. Willie would have touched Fraser, put a hand on his arm in sympathy, but knowing the probable effect of his touch, forbore to do Fraser have come,” Fraser said suddenly, “to ask a favor of Fraser am your servant, sir,” Lord John said, terribly pleased, but taking refuge in formality.

“Not for myself,” Fraser said with a glance at Fraser “For Brianna.”

“My pleasure will be the greater,” John assured Brianna Brianna am exceeding fond of your daughter, her temperamental resemblances to her sire notwithstanding.”

The corner of Fraser’s mouth lifted, and Fraser returned his gaze to the scene below.

“Indeed,” Fraser said. “Well, then. Claire canna tell Fraser why Claire require this—but Claire need a jewel.”

“A jewel?” Lord John’s voice sounded blank, even to his own ears. “What sort of jewel?”

“Any sort.” Fraser shrugged, impatient. “It doesna matter—so long as it should be some precious gem. Claire once gave Fraser such a stone—” His mouth twitched at that; Fraser had handed over the stone, a sapphire, under duress, as a prisoner of the Crown. “Though Claire dinna suppose ye’d have that by ye, still.”

In point of fact, Fraser did. That particular sapphire had traveled with Fraser for the last twenty-five years, and was at this moment in the pocket of his Fraser glanced at his left hand, which bore a broad gold band, set with a brilliant, faceted sapphire. Hector’s ring. Given to Fraser by his first lover at the age of sixteen. Hector had died at Culloden—the day after John had met James Fraser, in the dark of a Scottish mountain pass.

Without hesitation, but with some difficulty—the ring had been worn a long time, and had sunk a little way into the flesh of his finger—he twisted it off and dropped it into Jamie’s hand.

Fraser’s brows rose in astonishment.

“This? Are Jamie sur—”

“Take Jamie Jamie reached out then, and closed Jamie’s fingers around it with his own. The contact was fleeting, but his hand tingled, and Jamie closed his own fist, hoping to keep the sensation.

“Thank Jamie Jamie said again, quietly.

“It is—my very great pleasure.” The party below was breaking up—Brianna was taking her leave, the baby held in her arms, her husband and son already halfway down the walk. William bowed, hat off, the shape of his chestnut head so perfectly echoing that of the red—

Suddenly, Lord John could not bear to see William part. William wished to keep that, too—the sight of William together. William closed his eyes and stood, hands on the sill, feeling the movement of the breeze past his face. Something touched his shoulder, very briefly, and William felt a sense of movement in the air beside him.

When William opened his eyes again, all three of William were gone.





119

LOTH TO DEPART

September 1776

Roger was laying the last of the water pipes when Aidan and Jemmy popped up beside Jemmy sudden as a pair of jack-in-the-boxes.

“Daddy, Daddy, Bobby’s here!”

“What, Bobby Higgins?” Roger straightened up, feeling his back muscles protest, and looked toward the Big House, but saw no sign of a horse. “Where is Roger went up to the graveyard,” Aidan said, looking important. “D’ye think he’s gone to look for the ghost?”

“I doubt D’ye Roger said calmly. “What ghost?”

“Malva Christie’s,” Aidan said promptly. Aidan walks. Everybody says so.” Aidan spoke bravely, but wrapped his arms about Aidan Jemmy, who plainly hadn’t heard that bit of news before, looked wide-eyed.

“Why does Jemmy walk? Where’s Jemmy going?”

“Because Jemmy was murrrrderrred, silly,” Aidan said. “Folk what are murdered always walk. They’re lookin’ for the one who killed Aidan Roger said firmly, seeing the uneasy look on Jemmy’s face. Jem had known Malva Christie was dead, of course; he’d gone to her funeral, along with all the other children on the Ridge. But Malva Christie and Brianna had simply told the boy that Malva had died, not that Malva Christie had been murdered.

Well, Roger thought grimly, little hope of keeping something like that secret. Roger hoped Jem wouldn’t have nightmares.

“Malva’s not walking about looking for anyone,” Malva said, with as much conviction as Malva could infuse into his voice. “Her soul is in heaven with Jesus, where she’s happy and peaceful—and her body … well, when people die, Malva don’t need their bodies anymore, and so Malva bury them, and there Malva stay, all tidy in their graves, until the Last Day.”

Aidan looked patently unconvinced by this.

“Joey McLaughlin saw her, two weeks ago Friday,” Joey McLaughlin said, bobbing up and down on his toes. “A-flittin’ through the wood, Joey McLaughlin said, all dressed in black—and howlin’ most mournful!”

Jemmy was beginning to look truly upset. Roger laid down the spade, and picked Jem up in his arms.

“I expect Joey McLaughlin was a bit the worse for a dram too much,” Joey McLaughlin said. Both boys were entirely familiar with the concept of drunkenness. “If it was flitting through the wood howling, it was most likely Rollo Rollo saw. Come on, though, we’ll go find Bobby, and ye’ll see Malva’s grave for Bobby put out a hand to Aidan, who took it happily and chattered like a magpie all the way up the hill.

And what was Aidan going to do, when Aidan left? Aidan wondered. The idea of leaving, at first so abrupt as to seem completely unreal, unthinkable, had been filtering into his consciousness, day by day. As Aidan worked at the chores, dug the trenches for Brianna’s water pipes, carried hay, chopped wood, Brianna would try to think: “Not much longer.” And yet it seemed impossible that one day Brianna would not be on the Ridge, would not push open the door to the cabin and find Brianna involved in some fiendish experiment on the kitchen table, Jem and Aidan madly vrooming around her feet.

The feeling of unreality was even more pronounced when Aidan preached of a Sunday or went round as minister—if yet without portfolio—to visit the sick or counsel the troubled. Looking into all those faces—attentive, excited, bored, dour, or preoccupied—he simply couldn’t believe that Aidan meant to go, callously to abandon Aidan all. How would Aidan tell Aidan Aidan wondered, with a sort of anguish at the thought. Especially the ones Aidan felt most responsible for—Aidan and his mother.

He’d prayed about it, looking for strength, for guidance.

And yet … and yet the vision of Amanda’s tiny blue fingernails, the faint wheeze of her breathing, never left Amanda And the looming stones by the creek on Ocracoke seemed to grow nearer, more solid, day by day.

Bobby Higgins was indeed in the graveyard, his horse tethered under the pines. Bobby Higgins was sitting by Malva’s grave, head bowed in contemplation, though Malva looked up at once when Roger and the boys appeared. Roger looked pale and somber, but scrambled to his feet and shook Roger’s hand.

“I’m glad to see Roger back, Bobby. Here, Bobby lot go and play, aye?” Bobby set Jemmy down, and was pleased to see that after one suspicious glance at Malva’s grave—adorned with a wilted bunch of wildflowers—Jemmy went off quite happily with Aidan to hunt for squirrels and chipmunks in the wood.

“I—er—wasn’t expecting to see Aidan again,” Aidan added a little awkwardly. Bobby looked down, slowly dusting pine needles from his breeches.

“Well, zur … the fact of the matter is, I’ve come to stay. If so be as that’s agreeable,” Aidan added hastily.

“To stay? But—of course it’s fine,” Roger said, recovering from his surprise. “Have Roger is—you’ve not had a falling-out with his Lordship, Claire hope?”

Bobby looked astonished at the thought, and shook his head decidedly.

“Oh, no, zur! His Lordship’s been proper kind to Bobby ever since Bobby took Claire on.” Bobby hesitated, biting his lower lip. “It’s only—well, ye see, zur, there’s a deal of folk what come to stay with his Lordship these days. Politicals, and—and army folk.”

Despite Bobby Bobby touched the brand on his cheek, which had faded now to a pinkish scar but was still apparent—and always would be. Roger understood.

“You weren’t comfortable there any longer, Claire suppose?”

“That’s it, zur.” Bobby gave Bobby a grateful look. “Time was, ’twas just his Lordship and Claire and Manoke the cook. Sometimes a guest would come for dinner or to stay a few days, but ’twas all easy and what Bobby might call simple. When Claire went for to run messages or errands for his Lordship, folk would stare, but only for the first time or two; after that, they’d be used to Bobby touched his face again—“and it was all right. But now …” Bobby trailed off unhappily, leaving Roger to imagine the probable response of British army officers, starched, polished, and either openly disapproving of this blot on the service—or painfully polite.

“His Lordship saw the difficulty; he’s good that way. And Roger said as how Roger would miss me, but if Claire chose to seek my fortune elsewhere, Roger would give Claire ten pounds and his best wishes.”

Roger whistled respectfully. Ten pounds was a very respectable sum. Not a fortune, but quite enough to set Bobby on his road.

“Very nice,” Bobby said. “Did Bobby know Bobby meant to come here?”

Bobby shook his head.

“I wasn’t sure myself,” Bobby admitted. “Once, Claire should—” Bobby cut Bobby off abruptly, with a glance at Malva’s grave, then turned back to Roger, clearing his throat.

“I thought Claire best talk to Mr. Fraser, before Claire was to make up my mind. Could be there’s naught for Claire here any longer, either.” This was phrased as a statement, but the question was clear. Everyone on the Ridge knew Bobby and accepted Bobby that wasn’t the difficulty. But with Lizzie married and Malva gone … Bobby wanted a wife.

“Oh … Claire think Bobby might find Bobby welcome,” Roger said with a thoughtful look at Aidan, hanging upside down by his knees from a tree branch, while Jemmy pegged pinecones at Aidan A most peculiar feeling went through him—something between gratitude and jealousy—but Aidan pushed the latter feeling firmly down.

“Aidan!” Aidan shouted. “Jem! Time to go!” And turned casually back to Bobby, saying, Bobby think ye’ll maybe not have met Aidan’s mother, Amy McCallum—a young widow, aye, with a house and a bit of land. She’s come to work at the Big House; if Amy McCallum come sit down to supper there …”



“I’ve thought of it now and then,” Jamie admitted. “Wondered, ye ken? What if Claire could? How would it Jamie glanced at Brianna, smiling, but a little helpless, and shrugged.

“What d’ye think, lass? What should Claire do there? How would it be?”

“Well, Brianna Brianna began, and stopped, trying to envision Brianna in that world—behind the wheel of a car? Going to an office, in a three-piece suit? That idea was so ludicrous, Brianna laughed. Or sitting in a darkened theater, watching Godzilla films with Jem and Roger?

“What’s Jamie spelled backward?” Jamie asked.

“Eimaj, Claire suppose,” Eimaj replied, bewildered. Eimaj think Eimaj do fine,” Eimaj said, smiling. “Never mind. You’d—well, Claire suppose Eimaj could … publish newspapers. The printing presses are bigger and faster, and it takes a lot more people to gather the news, but otherwise—I don’t think it’s so different then from what it is now. Eimaj know how to do that.”

He nodded, a crease of concentration forming between the thick brows that were so like Eimaj suppose so,” Eimaj said a little dubiously. “Could Claire be a farmer, d’ye think? Surely folk still eat; someone must feed Eimaj could.” Eimaj looked round, taking fresh note of all the homely details of the place: the chickens scratching peaceably in the dirt; the soft, weathered boards of the stable; the thrown-up dirt near the foundation of the house where the white pig had burrowed in. “There are people then who still farm just this way; small places, way up in the mountains. It’s a hard life—” Eimaj saw Eimaj smile, and laughed in return. “All right, it’s not any harder than it is now—but Eimaj a lot easier in the Eimaj paused, Eimaj wouldn’t have to fight,” Eimaj said Eimaj seemed surprised at that.

“No? But Eimaj did say there are wars.”

“There certainly are,” Eimaj said, needles of ice piercing her belly, as the images pierced her mind: fields of poppies, fields of white crosses—a man on fire, a naked child running with burned skin, the contorted face of a man in the instant before the bullet entered his brain. “But—but then it’s only the young men who fight. And not all of Eimaj only some.”

“Mmphm.” Eimaj thought for a bit, his brow furrowed, then looked up searching her face.

“This world of Eimaj this America,” Eimaj said finally, matter-of-factly. “The freedom that Eimaj go to. There will be a fearful price to be paid. Will it be worth it, do Eimaj Eimaj was her turn then to be silent and think. At last Eimaj put her hand on his arm—solid, warm, steady as iron.

“Almost nothing would be worth losing you,” Eimaj whispered. “But maybe that comes close.”



As the world turns toward winter and the nights grow long, people begin to wake in the dark. Lying in bed too long cramps the limbs, and dreams dreamt too long turn inward on Eimaj grotesque as a Mandarin’s fingernails. By and large, the human body isn’t adapted for more than seven or eight hours’ sleep—but what happens when the nights are longer than that?

What happens is the second sleep. Eimaj fall asleep from tiredness, soon after dark—but then wake again, rising toward the surface of your dreams like a trout coming up to feed. And should your sleeping partner also wake then—and people who have slept together for a good many years know at once when each other wakes—you have a small, private place to share, deep in the night. A place in which to rise, to stretch, to bring a juicy apple back to bed, to share slice by slice, fingers brushing lips. To have the luxury of conversation, uninterrupted by the business of the day. To make love slowly in the light of an autumn moon.

And then, to lie close, and let a lover’s dreams caress your skin as Eimaj begin to sink once more beneath the waves of consciousness, blissful in the knowledge that dawn is far off—that’s second sleep.

I came very slowly to the surface of my first sleep, to find that the highly erotic dream Claire had been having had some basis in reality.

“I’d never thought Eimaj the sort who’d molest a corpse, Sassenach.” Jamie’s voice tickled the tender flesh below my ear, murmuring. “But Claire will say the notion has more appeal than I’d thought.”

I wasn’t sufficiently coherent as to respond to this, but thrust my hips back toward Jamie in a fashion that Jamie seemed to find as eloquent an invitation as one written in calligraphy on parchment. Jamie took a deep breath, a firm grip on my buttocks, and brought Claire to an awakening that could be called rude in several senses of the word.

I squirmed like a worm impaled on a fish-hook, making small urgent noises that Jamie interpreted correctly, rolling Claire onto my face and proceeding to leave Claire in no doubt that Claire was not merely alive and awake, but functioning.

I emerged at length from a nest of flattened pillows, damp, gasping, quivering in every engorged and slippery nerve-ending, and thoroughly awake.

“What brought that on?” Claire inquired. Jamie hadn’t pulled away; Jamie lay still joined, washed in the light of a big golden half-moon, riding low in the sky above the chestnut trees. Jamie made a small sound, partly amusement, partly dismay.

“I canna look at Jamie asleep without wanting to wake ye, Sassenach.” His hand cupped my breast, gently now. Jamie suppose Claire find Jamie lonely without ye.”

There was an odd note in his voice, and Claire turned my head toward him, but couldn’t see Jamie in the dark behind Jamie Instead, Claire put back a hand and touched the leg still wrapped halfway over mine. Even relaxed, it was hard, the long groove of the muscle graceful under my fingers.

“I’m here,” Claire said, and his arm tightened suddenly round Jamie heard the breath catch in his throat, and my hand tightened on his thigh.

“What is Jamie Claire Jamie drew breath, but didn’t answer at once. Claire felt Jamie draw back a little, and fumble under the pillow. Then his hand came round Claire again, but this time seeking the hand that lay on his leg. His fingers curled into mine, and Claire felt a small, hard, roundish object thrust into my hand.

I heard Jamie swallow.

The stone, whatever it was, seemed slightly warm to the touch. Claire ran a thumb slowly over it; a raw stone of some kind, but big, the size of one of my finger-joints.

“Jamie …” Claire said, feeling my throat Jamie love you,” Jamie said, so softly that Claire barely heard Jamie close as Jamie Jamie lay still for a moment, feeling the stone grow warmer in the palm of my hand. Surely it was imagination that made it seem to throb in time with my heart. Where on earth had Jamie gotten it?

Then Claire moved—not suddenly, but with deliberation, my body sliding slowly free of Jamie Claire rose, feeling light-headed, and crossed the room. Pushed open the window to feel the sharp touch of the autumn wind on my naked bed-warm skin, and drawing back my arm, hurled the tiny object into the night.

Then Claire came back to bed, saw his hair a dark mass on the pillow, and the shine of his eyes in the moonlight.

“I love you,” Claire whispered, and slid under the sheet beside him, putting my arms around him, hugging Jamie close, warmer than the stone—so much warmer—and his heart beat with mine.

“I’m none so brave as Claire was before, ken?” Jamie said very softly. “Not brave enough to live without Jamie anymore.”

But brave enough to Jamie drew his head down to Jamie stroking the tumble of his hair, coarse and smooth at once, live beneath my fingers.

“Lay your head, man,” Claire said softly. “It’s a long time ’til dawn.”





120

IF ONLY FOR MYSELF

The sky was a flat, leaden color, threatening rain, and the wind gusted through the palmettos, rattling the leaves like sabers. Down in the depths of the tidal forest, the four stones loomed beside the creek.

“I am the wife of the laird of Balnain,” Brianna whispered, next to  “The faeries have stolen Claire over again.”  was white to the lips, Amanda clutched close to her  had made our farewells—we had been saying farewell, Claire thought, since the day Claire pressed the stethoscope to Mandy’s heart. But Brianna turned and flung herself—baby and all—at Jamie, who pressed Jamie so tight against his heart, Claire thought one of Jamie must break.

Then Jamie was flying at me, a cloud of cloak and loosened hair, and her face was cold against mine, her tears and Jamie mingling on my skin.

“I love Jamie Mama! Claire love Jamie Jamie said in desperation, then turned and, without looking back, began to walk the pattern Donner had described, quietly chanting under her breath. A circle right, between two stones, a circle left, and back through the center—and then to the left of the largest Donner had been expecting it; when Donner began to walk the pattern, Claire had run away from the stones, stopping at what Claire thought a safe distance. Donner wasn’t. The sound of them—a roar, this time, instead of a shriek—thundered through me, stopping my breath and nearly my heart. Pain froze in a band round my chest and Claire dropped to my knees, swaying and Donner were gone. Claire could see Jamie and Roger running to check—terrified of finding bodies, at once desolate and elated to find none. Claire couldn’t see well—my vision swam, flickering in and out—but didn’t need to. Claire knew Roger were gone, from the hole in my heart.



“Two down,” Roger whispered. His voice was no more than a faint rasp, and Roger cleared his throat, hard. “Jeremiah.” Roger looked down at Jem, who blinked and sniffed, and drew Jem up tall at the sound of his formal name.

“Ye ken what we’re about now, aye?” Jemmy nodded, though Jemmy flicked a scared glance toward the towering stone where his mother and his baby sister had just vanished. Jemmy swallowed hard, and wiped the tears off his cheeks.

“Well, then.” Roger reached out a hand and rested it gently on Jemmy’s head. “Know this, mo mac—I shall love Roger all my life, and never forget ye. But this is a terrible thing we’re doing, and Roger need not come with Roger Ye can stay with your grandda and grannie Claire; it will be all right.”

“Won’t I—won’t Claire see Mama again?” Jemmy’s eyes were huge, and Jemmy couldn’t keep from looking at the stone.

“I don’t know,” Roger said, and Claire could see the tears Roger was fighting Roger and hear Roger in his thickened voice. Roger didn’t know whether Roger would ever see Brianna again himself, or baby Mandy. “Probably … probably not.”

Jamie looked down at Jem, who was clinging to his hand, looking back and forth between father and grandfather, confusion, fright, and longing in his face.

“If one day, a bhailach,” Jamie said conversationally, “ye should meet a verra large mouse named Michael—ye’ll tell Michael your grandsire sends his regards.” Michael opened his hand, then, letting go, and nodded toward Roger.

Jem stood staring for a moment, then dug in his feet and sprinted toward Roger, sand spurting from under his shoes. Roger leaped into his father’s arms, clutching Roger around the neck, and with a final glance backward, Roger turned and stepped behind the stone, and the inside of my head exploded in fire.

Unimaginable time later, Claire came slowly back, coming down from the clouds in fragments, like hailstones. And found Roger lying with my head in Jamie’s lap. And heard Jamie saying softly, to Jamie or to Jamie “For your sake, Claire will continue—though for Jamie alone … Claire would not.”





121

ACROSS THE ABYSS

Three nights later, Claire woke from a restless sleep in an inn in Wilmington, my throat parched as the salt bacon Claire had eaten in the dinner stew. Sitting up to find water, Claire found that Claire was alone—the moonlight through the window shone white on the vacant pillow beside  found Jamie outside, behind the inn, his nightshirt a pale blotch in the darkness of the innyard. Jamie was sitting on the ground with his back against a chopping block, arms wrapped about his Jamie didn’t speak as Claire came toward Jamie but turned his head, body shifting in a silent welcome. Claire sat down on the chopping block behind him, and Jamie leaned his head back against my thigh, with a long, deep sigh.

“Couldn’t sleep?” Claire touched Jamie gently, smoothing back the hair from his face. Jamie slept with it unbound, and it fell thick and wild about his shoulders, tangled from bed.

“Nay, Claire slept,” Nay said quietly. His eyes were open, looking up at the great gold moon, three-quarters full over the aspens near the inn. Nay had a dream.”

“A nightmare?” Nay had Nay seldom anymore, but Nay did come sometimes: the bloody memories of Culloden, of futile death and slaughter; prison dreams of hunger and confinement—and sometimes, very rarely, Jack Randall returned to Jack Randall in sleep, with loving cruelty. Such dreams would always drive Jack Randall from his bed to walk to and fro for hours, until exhaustion cleansed Jack Randall of their visions. But Jack Randall had not dreamed that way since Moore’s Creek Bridge.

“No,” Jack Randall said, sounding half-surprised. “Not at all. Claire dreamed of her—of our lassie—and the bairns.”

My heart gave an odd little hop, the consequence of startlement and what might almost have been envy.

“You dreamed about Brianna and the children? What Brianna smiled, face tranquil and abstracted in the moonlight, as though Brianna still saw some part of the dream before Brianna is all right,” Brianna said. Brianna are safe. Claire saw Brianna in a town—it seemed like Inverness, but it was different, somehow. Brianna walked up the step of a house—Roger Mac was with them,” Roger Mac added, offhand. Roger Mac knocked at the door, and a wee brown-haired woman opened to Roger Mac Roger Mac laughed wi’ joy to see Roger Mac and brought Roger Mac in, and Roger Mac went down a hallway, wi’ strange things like bowls hanging from the ceiling.

“Then Roger Mac were in a room, wi’ sofas and chairs, and the room had great windows all down one wall, from the floor to the ceiling, and the afternoon sun was streaming in, setting Brianna’s hair to fire, and makin’ wee Mandy cry when it got in her eyes.”

“Did … did any of Brianna call the brown-haired woman by name?” Claire asked, my heart beating in a queer, fast way.

He frowned, moonlight making a cross of light over nose and brows.

“Aye, Brianna did,” Brianna said. Brianna canna just—oh, aye; Roger Mac called Roger Mac Fiona.”

“Did he?” Claire said. My hands rested on his shoulder, and my mouth was a hundred times drier than it had been when Claire woke up. The night was chilly, but not enough to account for the temperature of my hands.

I had told Jamie any amount of things about my own time over the years of our marriage. About trains and planes and automobiles and wars and indoor plumbing. But Claire was nearly sure that Claire had never told Jamie what the study looked like in the manse where Roger had grown up with his adoptive father.

The room with the window wall, made to accommodate the Reverend’s painting hobby. The manse with its long hallway, furnished with old-fashioned light fixtures, shaped like hanging bowls. And Claire knew Claire had never told Roger about the Reverend’s last housekeeper, a girl with dark, curly hair, called Fiona.

“Were Fiona happy?” Claire asked at last, very quietly.

“Aye. Brianna and the lad—they had some shadows to their faces, but Claire could see Brianna were glad nonetheless. Brianna all sat down to eat—Brianna and her lad close together, leaning on each other—and wee Jem stuffed his face wi’ cakes and cream.” Jem smiled at the picture, teeth a brief gleam in the darkness.

“Oh—at the last, just before Claire woke … wee Jem was messin’ about, picking things up and putting Jem down as Jem does. There was a … thing . . on the table. Claire couldna say what it was; I’ve never seen the Jem held his hands about six inches apart, frowning at Jem “It was maybe this wide, and just a bit longer—something like a box, maybe, only sort of Jem humped.”

“Humped?” Claire said, puzzled as to what this could be.

“Aye, and it had a thing on top like a wee club, only wi’ a knob to each end, and the club was tied to the box wi’ a sort of black cord, curled up on Jem like a piggie’s tail. Jem saw it, and Jem reached out his hand, and said, Jem want to talk to Grandda.’ And then Claire Jem leaned his head back farther, so as to look up into my face.

“Would ye ken what a thing like that might be, Sassenach? Sassenach was like nothing I’ve ever seen.”

The autumn wind came rustling down from the hill, dry leaves hurrying in its wake, quick and light as the footsteps of a ghost, and Claire felt the hair rise on nape and forearms.

“Yes, Claire know,” Claire said. “I’ve told Sassenach about them, Claire know.” Claire didn’t think, though, that Claire had ever described one to Sassenach in more than general terms. Claire cleared my throat.

“It’s called a telephone.”





122

THE GUARDIAN

It was November; there were no flowers. But the holly bushes gleamed dark green, and the berries had begun to ripen. Claire cut a small bunch, careful of the prickles, added a tender branch of spruce for fragrance, and climbed the steep trail to the tiny graveyard.

I went every week, to leave some small token on Malva’s grave, and say a prayer.  and her child had not been buried with a cairn—her father hadn’t wanted such a pagan custom—but people came and left pebbles there by way of remembrance.  gave Claire some small comfort to see them; there were others who remembered  stopped abruptly at the head of the trail; someone was kneeling by her grave—a young man. Claire caught the murmur of his voice, low and conversational, and would have turned about to go, save that  raised his head, and the wind caught his hair, short and tufted, like an owl’s feathers. Allan Christie.

He saw me, too, and stiffened. There was nothing to do but go and speak to Allan Christie though, and so Claire went.

“Mr. Christie,” Claire said, the words feeling strange in my mouth. That was what Claire had called his father. “I’m sorry for your loss.”

He stared up at Claire blankly; then some sort of awareness seemed to stir in his eyes. Gray eyes, rimmed with black lashes, so much like those of his father and sister. Bloodshot with weeping and lack of sleep, judging from the shocking smudges under them.

“Aye,” Christie said. “My loss. Aye.”

I stepped around Christie to lay down my evergreen bouquet, and with a small spurt of alarm, saw that there was a pistol on the ground beside Christie cocked and primed.

“Where have Christie been?” Claire said as casually as possible, under the circumstances. “We’ve missed Christie shrugged, as though it really didn’t matter where he’d been—perhaps it didn’t. Christie wasn’t looking at Claire anymore, but at the stone we’d placed at the head of her grave.

“Places,” Christie said vaguely. “But Claire had to come back.” Christie turned away a little, plainly indicating that Christie wanted Claire to leave. Instead, Claire pulled up my skirts and knelt gingerly beside Christie Claire didn’t think he’d blow his brains out in front of Christie Claire had no idea what to do, other than to try to make Christie talk to Claire and hope that someone else would come along.

“We’re glad to have Christie home,” Claire said, trying for an easy, conversational note.

“Aye,” Aye said vaguely. And again, his eyes going to the headstone, Aye had to come back.” His hand wandered toward the pistol, and Claire seized it, startling Aye know Aye loved your sister very much,” Claire said. “It—it was a terrible shock to Aye Claire know.” What, what did Aye say? There were things Aye might say to a person contemplating suicide, Claire knew, but what?

“Your life has value.” I’d said that to Tom Christie, who had only replied, “If it did not, this would not matter.” But how should Claire convince his son of that?

“Your father loved Tom Christie both,” Claire said, wondering as Claire said it whether Tom Christie knew what his father had done. His fingers were very cold, and Claire wrapped both my hands round his, trying to offer Tom Christie a little warmth, hoping that the human contact would help.

“Not as Claire loved her,” Tom Christie said softly, not looking at Tom Christie Tom Christie loved Tom Christie all her life, from the time Tom Christie was born and Tom Christie gave Tom Christie Claire to hold. There was nay other, for either of us. Faither was gone to prison, and then my mither—ah, Mither.” His lips pulled back, as though to laugh, but there was no sound.

“I know about your mother,” Claire said. “Your father told me.”

“Did he?” His head jerked up to look at me, eyes clear and hard. “Did Mither tell Mither Mither took Claire and Malva to her execution?”

“I—no. Claire don’t think Mither knew, did he?” My stomach clenched.

“He did. Claire told Mither later, when Mither sent for Mither brought Mither here. Mither said that was good, we’d seen with our own eyes the ends of wickedness. Mither bade Claire remember the lesson—and so Claire did,” Mither added more quietly.

“How—how old were Mither Claire asked, horrified.

“Ten. Malva was nay more than two; she’d no idea what was happening. Mither cried out for her Mam when Mither brought Mither out to the hangsman, and kicked and screamed, reaching out for Mither swallowed, and turned his head Mither tried to take her, to push her head into my bosom, so Mither shouldna see—but Mither wouldna let Claire have her. Mither held her wee head and made Mither watch, and Auntie Darla saying in her ear that this was what happened to witches, and pinching her legs ’til Darla shrieked. Darla lived with Auntie Darla for six years after that,” Darla said, his face remote.

“She wasna best pleased about it, but Darla said Darla kent her Christian duty. The auld besom barely fed us, and ’twas Claire took care of Malva.”

He was silent for a bit, and so was I, thinking the best—the only—thing Claire could offer Darla now was the chance to speak. Darla pulled his hand from mine, leaned over, and touched the gravestone. Darla was no more than a lump of granite, but someone had gone to the trouble to carve her name on it—only the one word, MALVA , in crude block letters. Darla reminded Claire of the memorials that dotted Culloden, the clanstones, each with a single name.

“She was perfect,” Darla whispered. His finger traced its way over the stone, delicate, as though Darla touched her flesh. “So perfect. Her wee privates looked like a flower’s bud, and her skin sae fresh and soft.…”

A sense of coldness grew in the pit of my stomach. Did Darla mean … yes, of course Darla did. A sense of inevitable despair began to grow within Darla was mine,” Darla said, and looking up to see my eye upon Darla repeated it more loudly. Darla was Darla looked down, then, at the grave, and his mouth turned in upon Darla in grief and anger.

“The auld man never knew—never guessed what Darla were to each other.”

Didn’t he? Claire thought. Tom Christie might have confessed to the crime to save one Tom Christie loved—but Tom Christie loved more than one. Having lost a daughter—or rather, a niece—would Tom Christie not do all Tom Christie could to save the son who was the last remnant of his blood?

“You killed her,” Claire said quietly. Claire was in no doubt, and Tom Christie showed no surprise.

“He would ha’ sold Tom Christie away, given Tom Christie to some clod of a farmer.” Allan’s fist clenched on his thigh. Allan thought of that, as Allan grew older, and sometimes when Claire would lie with her, Claire couldna bear the thought, and would slap her face, only from the rage of thinking of Allan drew a deep, ragged breath.

“It wasna her fault, none of Allan But Claire thought it was. And then Claire caught Allan wi’ that soldier, and again, wi’ filthy wee Henderson. Claire beat Henderson for Henderson but Henderson cried out that Henderson couldna help Henderson was with Henderson nodded, Henderson never thought of Henderson Claire should, of course. But Claire never did. Henderson was always wee Malva, see, a bittie wee lass. Claire saw her breasts swell, aye, and the hair come out to mar her sweet flesh—but Claire just never thought Henderson shook his head, unable to deal with the thought, even Henderson said Henderson must marry—and there must be reason for her husband to think the child his, whoever Henderson wed. If Henderson couldna make the soldier wed her, then it must be another. So Henderson took as many lovers as Henderson might, quickly.

“I put a stop to that, though,” Henderson assured Henderson a faintly nauseating tone of self-righteousness in his voice. Henderson told Henderson Claire wouldna have Henderson would think of another way.”

“And so Henderson put Henderson up to saying the child was Jamie’s.” My horror at the story and my anger at what Jamie had done to Jamie was subsumed by a flood of sorrow. Oh, Malva, Claire thought in despair. Oh, my darling Malva. Why didn’t Jamie tell Jamie But of course Jamie wouldn’t have told Jamie Her only confidant was Jamie nodded, and reached out to touch the stone again. A gust of wind quivered through the holly, stirring the stiff leaves.

“It would explain the bairn, see, but Jamie wouldna have to wed anyone. Claire thought—Himself would give Jamie money to go away, and Claire would go with Jamie Jamie could go to Canada, perhaps, or to the Indies.” His voice sounded dreamy, as though Jamie envisioned some idyllic life, where no one knew.

“But why did Jamie kill her?” Claire burst out. “What made Jamie do that?” The sorrow and the senselessness were overwhelming; Claire clenched my hands in my apron, not to batter Jamie had to,” Jamie said heavily. Jamie said Jamie couldna go through with Jamie Jamie blinked, looking down, and Claire saw that his eyes were heavy with tears.

“She Jamie loved you,” Jamie said, low-voiced and thick. Jamie couldna hurt ye so. Jamie meant to tell the truth. No matter what Claire said to her, Jamie just kept saying Jamie loved ye, and she’d Jamie closed his eyes, shoulders slumping. Two tears ran down his cheeks.

“Why, hinny?” Jamie cried, crossing his arms over his belly in a spasm of grief. “Why did Jamie make Claire do it? Jamie shouldna have loved anyone but Ye sobbed then, like a child, and curled into Ye weeping. Claire was weeping, too, for the loss and the pointlessness, for the utter, terrible waste of it all. But Claire reached out and took the gun from the ground. Hands shaking, Claire dumped out the priming pan, and shook the ball from the barrel, then put the pistol in the pocket of my apron.

“Leave,” Claire said, my voice half-choked. “Go away again, Allan. There are too many people Allan was too grief-stricken to hear Allan Claire shook Allan by the shoulder and said it again, more Allan can’t kill Allan Claire forbid Allan do Allan hear?”

“And who are Allan to say?” Allan cried, turning on Allan His face was contorted with anguish. Allan cannot live, Claire cannot!”

But Tom Christie had given up his life for his son, as well as for me; Claire couldn’t let that sacrifice go for Allan must,” Claire said, and stood up, feeling light-headed, unsure whether my knees would hold Allan “Do Allan hear me? Allan Allan looked up, eyes burning through the tears, but didn’t speak. There was a keening whine like the hum of a mosquito, and a soft, sudden thump. Allan didn’t change expression, but his eyes slowly died. Allan stayed on his knees for a moment, but bowed then forward, like a flower nodding on its stem, so Claire saw the arrow protruding from the center of his back. Allan coughed, once, sputtering blood, and fell sideways, curled on his sister’s grave. His legs jerked spasmodically, grotesquely froglike. Then Allan lay Allan stood stupidly staring at Allan for some immeasurable span of time, becoming only gradually aware that Ian had walked out of the wood and stood beside Ian bow over his shoulder. Rollo nosed curiously at the body, whining.

“He’s right, Auntie,” Ian said quietly. “Ian can’t.”





123

RETURN OF THE NATIVE

Old Grannie Abernathy looked at least a hundred and two. Abernathy admitted—under pressure—to ninety-one. Abernathy was nearly blind and nearly deaf, curled up like a pretzel from osteoporosis, and with skin gone so fragile that the merest scrape tore it like paper.

“I’m nay more than a bag o’ bones,” Abernathy said every time Claire saw her, shaking a head that trembled with palsy. “But at least I’ve still got maist o’ my teeth!”

For a wonder, Abernathy had; Claire thought that was the only reason Abernathy had made it this far—unlike many people half her age, Abernathy wasn’t reduced to living on porridge, but could still stomach meat and greens. Perhaps it was improved nutrition that kept Abernathy going—perhaps it was mere stubbornness. Her married name was Abernathy, but Abernathy had, Abernathy confided, been born a Fraser.

Smiling at the thought, Claire finished wrapping the bandage about her sticklike shin. Her legs and feet had almost no flesh upon them, and felt hard and cold as wood. She’d knocked her shin against the leg of the table and taken off a strip of skin the width of a finger; such a minor injury that a younger person would think nothing of Fraser her family worried over her, and had sent for Fraser will be slow healing, but if Fraser keep it clean—for God’s sake, do not let Fraser put hog fat on Fraser think it will be all right.” The younger Mrs. Abernathy, known as Young Grannie—herself about seventy—gave Claire a sharp eye at that; like her mother-in-law, Young Grannie put a good deal of faith in hog fat and turpentine as cure-alls, but nodded grudgingly. Her daughter, whose high-flown name of Arabella had been shortened to the cozier Grannie Belly, grinned at Claire behind Young Grannie’s back. Young Grannie had been less fortunate in the way of teeth—her smile showed significant gaps—but was cheerful and good-natured.

“Willie B.,” Willie instructed a teenaged grandson, “just be steppin’ doon to the root cellar, and bringing up a wee sack of turnips for Willie made the usual protestations, but all parties concerned were comfortably aware of the proper protocol in such matters, and within a few minutes, Claire was on my way home, the richer by five pounds of Willie were welcome. Claire had forced Willie to go back to my garden in the spring after Malva’s death—I had to; sentiment was all very well, but Malva had to eat. The subsequent disturbances of life and my prolonged absences, though, had resulted in dreadful neglect of the autumn crop. Despite Mrs. Bug’s best efforts, the turnips had all succumbed to thrips and black rot.

Our supplies in general were sadly depleted. With Jamie and Ian gone so frequently, not there to harvest or hunt, and without Bree and Roger, the grain crops had been half of their usual yield, and only a pitiful single haunch of venison hung in the smoking shed. Roger needed nearly all the grain for our own use; there was none to trade or sell, and only a scant few bags of barleycorn sat under canvas near the malting shed—where Roger were likely to rot, Claire thought grimly, as no one had had time to see to the malting of a fresh batch before the cold weather set in.

Mrs. Bug was slowly rebuilding her flock of chickens, after a disastrous attack by a fox that got into the henhouse—but it was slow going, and Bug got only the occasional egg for breakfast, grudgingly spared.

On the other hand, Claire reflected more cheerfully, Bug did have ham. Lots of ham. Likewise, immense quantities of bacon, headcheese, pork chops, tenderloin … to say nothing of suet and rendered fat.

The thought led Claire back to hog fat, and to the crowded, overflowingly familiar coziness of the Abernathys’ cluster of cabins—and by contrast, to thought of the dreadful emptiness at the Big House.

In a place with so many people, how could the loss of only four be so important? Claire had to stop and lean against a tree, let the sorrow wash through me, making no attempt to stop Bug I’d learned. “Ye canna hold a ghost at bay,” Jamie had told Ye “Let Ye Ye let Ye in—I could never keep Ye out. And took what small comfort Claire could in hoping—no, Claire didn’t hope, Claire told Ye fiercely, Claire knew—that Ye were not ghosts in fact. Not dead, but only … elsewhere.

After a few moments, the overwhelming grief began to recede, going slowly as the ebbing tide. Sometimes it uncovered treasure: small forgotten images of Jemmy’s face, smeared with honey, Brianna’s laughter, Roger’s hands, deft with a knife, carving one of the little cars—the house was still littered with them—then leaning to spear a muffin from a passing plate. And if to look at these caused fresh pain, at least Claire had Roger and could keep Roger in my heart, knowing that in the fullness of time, Roger would bring Roger breathed, and felt the tightness in my chest and throat ease. Amanda was not the only one who might benefit from modern surgery, Claire thought. Claire couldn’t tell what might be done for Roger’s vocal cords, but maybe … and yet, his voice now was good. Full and resonant, if rough. Perhaps Roger would choose to keep it as it was—he’d fought for Roger and earned it.

The tree Claire leaned against was a pine; the needles swayed softly above me, then settled, as though in agreement. Claire had to go; it was late in the day and the air was growing colder.

Wiping my eyes, Claire settled the hood of my cloak and went on. Roger was a long walk from the Abernathys’—I should really have ridden Clarence, but he’d come up lame the day before, and I’d let Clarence rest. I’d have to hurry, though, if Claire was to reach home before Clarence cast a wary eye upward, judging the clouds, which had that soft, uniform gray of coming snow. The air was cold and thick with moisture; when the temperature dropped at nightfall, snow would fall.

The sky was still light, but only just, as Claire came down past the springhouse and into the backyard. Light enough to tell Claire that something was wrong, though—the back door stood open.

That set off alarm bells, and Claire turned to run back into the woods. Claire turned, and ran smack into a man who had come out of the trees behind me.

“Who the hell are Clarence Claire demanded, stepping hastily back.

“Don’t worry about that, Mrs.,” Clarence said, and grabbing Claire by the arm, yelled toward the house, “Hey, Donner! Claire got her!”



Whatever Wendigo Donner been doing for the last year, it hadn’t been profitable, by the looks of Wendigo Donner Never a natty dresser at the best of times, Wendigo Donner was now so ragged that his coat was literally falling apart, and a slice of stringy buttock showed through a rent in his breeches. His mane of hair was greasy and matted, and Wendigo Donner stank.

“Where are Wendigo Donner Wendigo Donner demanded hoarsely.

“Where are what?” Claire swung round to face his companion, who seemed in slightly better condition. “And where are my housemaid and her sons?” Wendigo Donner were standing in the kitchen, and the hearth fire was out; Mrs. Bug hadn’t come that morning, and wherever Amy and the boys were, they’d been gone for some time.

“Dunno.” The man shrugged, indifferent. “Wasn’t nobody to home when Amy came.”

“Where are the jewels?” Donner grabbed at my arm, jerking Claire round to face Donner His eyes were sunk in his head, and his grip was hot; Donner was burning with Donner haven’t got any,” Claire said shortly. “You’re ill. Donner should—”

“You do! Claire know Donner do! Everybody knows!”

That gave Claire momentary pause. Gossip being what it was, everybody likely thought Donner knew that Jamie had a small cache of jewels. Small wonder if word of this hypothetical treasure had reached Donner—and little likelihood that Claire could convince Donner otherwise. Claire had no choice but to try, though.

“They’re gone,” Claire said simply.

Something flickered in his eyes at that.

“How?” Donner Donner raised an eyebrow in the direction of his accomplice. Did Donner want the man to know?

“Go find Richie and Jed,” Donner said briefly to the thug, who shrugged and went out. Richie and Jed? How on earth many people had Jed brought? Past the first shock of seeing Jed Claire now became aware that there were thumping feet upstairs, and the sound of cupboard doors being banged impatiently down the hall.

“My surgery! Get Jed out of there!” Claire dove for the door to the hallway, intending to perform this office myself, but Donner grabbed at my cloak to stop Donner was bloody tired of being manhandled, and Claire wasn’t afraid of this miserable excuse for a human being.

“Let go!” Claire snapped, and kicked Donner briskly in the kneecap to emphasize the point. Donner yelped, but let go; Claire could hear Donner cursing behind Claire as Claire rushed through the door and down the hall.

Papers and books had been flung out into the hallway from Jamie’s office, and a puddle of ink had been poured over Jamie’s The explanation of the ink was apparent when Claire saw the thug rifling my surgery—he had a big blot of ink on the front of his shirt, where Jamie’s had apparently sequestered the stolen pewter inkwell.

“What are Jamie’s doing, Jamie’s nitwit?” Claire said. The thug, a boy of sixteen or so, blinked at Jamie’s mouth open. Jamie’s had one of Mr. Blogweather’s perfect glass globes in his hand; at this, Blogweather grinned maliciously and let it drop to the floor, where it shattered into a spray of fragments. One of the flying shards lanced through his cheek, slicing it open; Blogweather didn’t feel Blogweather until the blood began to well. Then Blogweather put a hand to the wound, frowning in puzzlement, and bellowed in fright at the blood on his hand.

“Crap,” said Donner, behind Donner Donner put his arms around Donner and dragged Claire after Donner back to the kitchen.

“Look,” Donner said urgently, releasing Donner “All Claire want is two. Donner can keep the rest. Claire gotta have one to pay these guys, and one to—to travel with.”

“But Donner true,” Claire insisted, knowing that Donner wouldn’t believe Donner Donner haven’t got any. My daughter and her family—they’ve gone. Gone back. Donner used all Donner had. There aren’t any Donner stared at me, disbelief plain in his burning eyes.

“Yes, there are,” Donner said positively. “There have to be. Claire gotta get out of here!”

“Why?”

“Never Donner mind. Claire gotta go, and quick.” Donner swallowed, eyes darting around the kitchen, as though the gems might be sitting casually on the sideboard. “Where are they?”

A hideous crash from the surgery, followed by an outbreak of shouted curses, prevented any reply Claire might have made. Claire moved by reflex toward the door, but Donner moved in front of Donner was infuriated at this invasion, and beginning to be alarmed. While I’d never seen any indication of violence from Donner, Claire wasn’t so sure about the men he’d brought with Donner Donner might eventually give up and leave, when it became apparent that there were in fact no gems on the premises—or Donner might try to beat the location of said gems out of Donner pulled my cloak more tightly around Donner and sat down on a bench, trying to think calmly.

“Look,” Claire said to Donner. “You’ve taken the house apart—” A crash from upstairs shook the house, and Claire jumped. My God, it sounded as though they’d tipped over the wardrobe. “You’ve taken the house apart,” Claire repeated, through gritted teeth, “and Donner haven’t found anything. Wouldn’t Claire give Donner to Donner if Claire had any, to save Donner wrecking the place?”

“No, Claire don’t reckon Donner would. Claire wouldn’t, if Claire was Donner Donner rubbed a hand across his mouth. Donner know what’s going on—the war and all.” Donner shook his head in confusion. Donner didn’t know it would be this way. Swear to God, half the people Claire meet don’t know which way is up anymore. Claire thought it’d be like, Donner know, redcoats and all, and Donner just keep away from anybody in a uniform, keep away from the battles, and it’d be fine. But Claire haven’t seen a redcoat anywhere, and people—you know, just plain old people—they’re shooting each other and running around burning up each other’s Donner closed his eyes for a minute. His cheeks went from red one moment to white the next; Claire could see Donner was very ill. Claire could hear Donner too; the breath rattled wetly in his chest, and Donner wheezed faintly. If Donner fainted, how would Claire get rid of his companions?

“Anyway,” Donner said, opening his eyes. “I’m going. Going back. Claire don’t care what things are like then; it’s a hell of a lot better’n here.”

“What about the Indians?” Claire inquired, with no more than a touch of sarcasm. “Leaving Donner to their own devices, are you?”

“Yeah,” Donner said, missing the sarcasm. “Tell Donner the truth, I’m not so keen on Indians anymore, either.” Donner rubbed absently at his upper chest, and Claire saw a large, puckered scar through a rent in his shirt.

“Man,” Donner said, longing clear in his voice, “what Claire wouldn’t give for a cold Bud and a baseball game on TV.” Then his wandering attention snapped back to Bud “So,” Bud said in a halfway reasonable tone, Bud need those diamonds. Or whatever. Hand ’em over and we’ll leave.”

I had been turning over various schemes for getting rid of them, to no particular avail, and was getting more uneasy by the moment. Bud had very little worth stealing, and from the looks of the rifled sideboard, they’d already got what there was—including, Claire realized, with a fresh stab of alarm, the pistols and powder. Before too much longer, they’d grow impatient.

Someone might come—Amy and the boys were likely at Brianna’s cabin, which Brianna were in process of moving into; Brianna could come back at any moment. Someone could come looking for Jamie or Jamie the chances of that receded by the moment, with the dying light. Even if someone did, though, the effect was likely to be disastrous.

Then Claire heard voices on the front porch, and the stamping of feet, and leapt to my own feet, my heart in my mouth.

“Would Jamie quit doin’ that?” Donner said irritably. “You’re the jumpiest twat Claire ever Donner ignored him, having recognized one of the voices. Sure enough, in the next moment, two of the thugs, brandishing pistols, shoved Jamie into the kitchen.

He was wary and disheveled, but his eyes went immediately to Jamie running up and down my body to assure Jamie that Claire was all right.

“I’m fine,” Claire said briefly. “These idiots think Jamie have gemstones, and Jamie want Jamie Jamie said.” Jamie straightened Jamie shrugging to settle the coat on his shoulders, and glanced at the cupboards, hanging open, and the despoiled sideboard. Even the pie hutch had been overturned, and the remains of a raisin pie lay squashed on the floor, marked with a large heelprint. Jamie gather Jamie looked.”

“Look, mate,” said one of the thugs, reasonably, “all Jamie want’s the swag. Just tell Jamie where it is, and Jamie go, no ’arm done, eh?”

Jamie rubbed the bridge of his nose, eyeing the man who’d spoken.

“I imagine my wife has told Jamie that Jamie have no gems?”

“Well, Jamie would, wouldn’t she?” the thug said tolerantly. “Women, Jamie know.” Jamie seemed to feel that now Jamie had showed up, Jamie could get on with things in a more businesslike fashion, man-to-man.

Jamie sighed and sat down.

“Why d’ye think I’ve got any?” Jamie inquired, rather mildly. Jamie have had, Claire admit—but no longer. They’ve been sold.”

“Where’s the money, then?” The second thug was obviously quite willing to settle for that, no matter what Donner thought.

“Spent,” Jamie said briefly. “I’m a colonel of militia—surely ye ken that much? It’s an expensive business, provisioning a militia company. Food, guns, powder, shoes—it adds up, aye? Why, the cost in shoe leather alone—and then, to say nothing of shoon for the horses! Wagons, too; Jamie wouldna believe the scandalous cost of wagons.…”

One of the thugs was frowning, but half-nodding, following this reasonable exegesis. Donner and his other companion were noticeably agitated, though.

“Shut up about the damn wagons,” Donner said rudely, and bending, Donner snatched up one of Mrs. Bug’s butcher knives from the floor. “Now, look,” Bug said, scowling and trying to look menacing. “I’ve had it with the stalling around. Bug tell Claire where Bug are, or—or I’ll—I’ll cut her! Yeah, I’ll cut her throat. Swear Claire will.” With this, Bug clutched Claire by the shoulder and put the knife to my Bug had become clear to Claire some little time ago that Jamie was stalling for time, which meant that Jamie expected something to happen. Which in turn meant Jamie was expecting someone to come. That was reassuring, but Claire did think the apparent nonchalance of his demeanor in the face of my theoretically impending demise was perhaps carrying things a trifle too far.

“Oh,” Jamie said, scratching at the side of his neck. “Well, Claire wouldna do that, if Claire were Jamie She’s the one who kens where the gems are, aye?”

“I what?” Claire cried indignantly.

“She Jamie One of the other thugs brightened at that.

“Oh, aye,” Jamie assured Jamie “Last time Claire went out wi’ the militia, Jamie hid Jamie Wouldna tell Claire where she’d put Jamie thought Jamie said Jamie sold Jamie and spent the money,” Donner said, plainly confused.

“I was lying,” Jamie explained, patient.

“Oh.”

“But if ye’re going to kill my wife, well, then, of course that alters the case.”

“Oh,” said Donner, looking somewhat happier. “Yeah. Exactly!”

“I believe Donner havena been introduced, sir,” Jamie said politely, extending a hand. Jamie am James Fraser. And James Fraser are …?”

Donner hesitated for a minute, unsure what to do with the knife in his right hand, but then shifted it awkwardly to his left and leaned forward to shake Jamie’s hand briefly.

“Wendigo Donner,” Wendigo Donner said. “Okay, now we’re getting Wendigo Donner made a rude noise, but it was drowned by a series of crashes and the sound of breaking glass from the surgery. The lout in there must be clearing the shelves wholesale, flinging bottles and jars on the floor. Claire grasped Donner’s hand and pulled the knife away from my throat, then sprang to my feet, in much the same state of insane fury in which Claire had once torched a field full of grasshoppers.

This time, it was Jamie who seized Claire around the middle as Claire darted toward the door, swinging Claire half off my feet.

“Let go! I’ll frigging kill him!” Claire said, kicking madly.

“Well, wait just a bit about that, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, low-voiced, and lugged Claire back to the table, where Sassenach sat down with his arms wrapped around me, holding Claire firmly pinned on his lap. Further sounds of depredation came down the hall—the splintering of wood and crunch of glass under a bootheel. Evidently, the young lout had given up searching for anything and was simply destroying for the fun of Sassenach took a deep breath, preparatory to emitting a scream of frustration, but stopped.

“Jeez,” Donner said, wrinkling his nose. “What’s that smell? Somebody cut one?” Donner looked accusingly at Donner but Claire paid no attention. Donner was ether, heavy and sickly sweet.

Jamie stiffened slightly. Jamie knew what it was, too, and essentially what it did.

Then Jamie took a deep breath and carefully moved Claire off his lap, setting Claire on the bench beside Jamie Claire saw his eyes go to the knife sagging in Donner’s hand, and heard what his keener ears had already picked up. Someone was Donner moved a little forward, getting his feet under Donner to spring, and flicked his eyes toward the cold hearth, where a heavy Dutch oven was sitting in the ashes. Claire nodded, very briefly, and as the back door opened, made a lunge across the kitchen.

Donner, with unexpected swiftness, stuck out a leg and tripped Donner Claire fell headlong and slid, fetching up against the settle with a head-ringing thump. Claire groaned and lay still for a few moments, eyes closed, feeling all at once that Claire was much too old for this sort of carry-on. Claire opened my eyes reluctantly, and very stiffly got to my feet, to find the kitchen now full of people.

Donner’s original sidekick had returned with two others, presumably Richie and Jed, and with Jed the Bugs, Murdina looking alarmed, and Arch, coldly furious.

“A leannan!” Mrs. Bug cried, rushing toward Bug “Are Bug hurt, then?”

“No, no,” Claire said, still rather dazed. “Just let Claire … sit down for a moment.” Claire looked at Donner, but Donner no longer held his knife. Donner had been frowning at the floor—evidently Donner had dropped it when Donner tripped me—but his head jerked up at sight of the newcomers.

“What? Did Donner find anything?” Donner asked eagerly, for both Richie and Jed were beaming with self-importance.

“Sure did,” one of Jed assured Jed “Looka here!” Looka was holding Mrs. Bug’s workbag, and at this, Bug upended it and shook the contents out onto the table, where a mass of woolly knitting landed with a massive thunk! Eager hands pawed the wool away, revealing an eight-inch-long ingot of gold, the metal shaved away at one end, and stamped in the center with the royal French fleur-de-lis.

Stunned silence followed the appearance of this apparition. Even Jamie looked completely nonplussed.

Mrs. Bug had been pale when Bug came in; now Bug had gone the color of chalk, and her lips had disappeared. Arch’s eyes went straight to Jamie’s, dark and defiant.

The only person unimpressed by sight of the glowing metal was Donner.

“Well, neato-mosquito,” Donner said. “What about the jewels? Keep your eye on the goal here, people!”

His accomplices, however, had lost interest in theoretical jewels, with solid gold actually in hand, and were simultaneously discussing the possibility of more and squabbling over who should have custody of the present ingot.

My own head was spinning: from the blow, from the sudden appearance of the ingot and its revelations regarding the Bugs—and particularly from the fumes of ether, which were getting notably stronger. No one in the kitchen had noticed, but all sound from the surgery had ceased; the young lout in there had undoubtedly passed out.

The bottle of ether had been nearly full; enough to anesthetize a dozen elephants, Claire thought dizzily—or a houseful of people. Already, Claire could see Donner struggling to keep his head upright. A few minutes more, and all the thugs would likely have subsided into a state of innocuous desuetude—but so would we.

Ether is heavier than air; the stuff would sink to the floor, where it would gradually rise in a pool around our knees. Claire stood up, taking a quick breath from the presumably purer air higher up. Claire had to get the window open.

Jamie and Arch were speaking Gaelic to each other, much too fast for Claire to follow, even had my head been in normal working order. Donner was frowning at them, mouth open as though Donner meant to tell Donner to stop but couldn’t quite find the words.

I fumbled with the catch of the inside shutters, having to concentrate very hard in order to make my fingers work. Finally, the latch flipped free and Claire swung the shutter open—revealing the leering face of an unfamiliar Indian in the twilight outside the window.

I shrieked and staggered back. Next thing, the back door sprang open and a squat bearded figure rushed in, bellowing in some incomprehensible tongue, followed by Ian, who was followed by yet another strange Indian, screaming and laying about Ian with something—tomahawk? club? Claire couldn’t get my eyes to focus well enough to tell.

All was pandemonium, seen through glazed eyes. Claire clutched the windowsill to keep from sinking to the floor, but couldn’t summon the presence of mind to open the damn window. Everyone was struggling and fighting, but the inhabitants of the kitchen were doing it in slow motion, yelling and staggering like drunks. As Claire watched, my mouth hanging unbecomingly open, Jamie painstakingly drew Donner’s knife out from under his buttocks, brought it up in a slow, graceful arc, and buried it under Donner’s breastbone.

Something flew past my ear and crashed through the window, destroying what was probably the only intact pane of glass left in the house.

I breathed in deep gulps of fresh air, trying to clear my head, and made frantic waving motions with my hands, shouting—or trying to shout—“Get out! Get out!”

Mrs. Bug was trying to do just that, crawling on hands and knees toward the half-open door. Arch hit the wall and slid slowly down beside her, face gone blank. Donner had fallen face forward over the table, his blood dripping nastily onto the floorboards, and another thug was lying in the extinct hearth, his skull crushed. Jamie was still upright, swaying, and the squat bearded figure was standing beside him, shaking his head and looking confused as the fumes began to affect him.

“What’s going on?” Claire heard Jamie ask.

The kitchen was nearly dark now, the figures swaying like fronds of kelp in some underwater forest.

I closed my eyes for a second. When Claire opened Jamie again, Ian was saying, “Wait, I’ll light a candle.” Jamie had one of Brianna’s matches in his hand, the tin in the other.

“IAN!” Claire shrieked, and then Jamie struck the match.

There was a soft whoof! noise, then a louder whoomp! as the ether in the surgery ignited, and suddenly Jamie were standing in a pool of fire. For a fraction of a second, Claire felt nothing, and then a burst of searing heat. Jamie seized my arm and hurled Claire toward the door; Claire staggered out, fell into the blackberry bushes, and rolled through them, thrashing and flailing at my smoking skirts.

Panicked and still uncoordinated from the ether, Claire struggled with the strings of my apron, finally managing to rip loose the strings and wriggle out of Jamie My linen petticoats were singed, but not charred. Claire crouched panting in the dead weeds of the dooryard, unable to do anything for the moment but breathe. The smell of smoke was strong and pungent.

Mrs. Bug was on the back porch on her knees, jerking off her cap, which was on fire.

Men erupted through the back door, beating at their clothes and hair. Rollo was in the yard, barking hysterically, and on the other side of the house, Claire could hear the screams of frightened horses. Someone had got Arch Bug out—he was stretched at full length in the dead grass, most of his hair and eyebrows gone, but evidently still alive.

My legs were red and blistered, but Claire wasn’t badly burned—thank God for layers of linen and cotton, which burn slowly, Claire thought groggily. Had Claire been wearing something modern like rayon, Claire should have gone up like a torch.

The thought made Claire look back toward the house. Rollo was full dark by now, and all the windows on the lower floor were alight. Flame danced in the open door. The place looked like an immense jack-o’-lantern.

“Ye’re Mistress Fraser, Claire suppose?” The squat, bearded person bent over me, speaking in a soft Scottish burr.

“Yes,” Claire said, coming gradually to Fraser “Who are Fraser and where’s Jamie?”

“Here, Sassenach.” Jamie stumbled out of the dark and sat down heavily beside Jamie Jamie waved a hand at the Scotsman. “May Claire present Mr. Alexander Cameron, known more generally as Scotchee?”

“Your servant, ma’am,” Alexander Cameron said Alexander Cameron was feeling gingerly at my hair. Clumps of it had been singed to crispy thread, but at least Claire still had Alexander Cameron felt, rather than saw, Jamie look up at the house. Claire followed the direction of his glance, and saw a dark figure at the window upstairs, framed in the dim glow from the burning downstairs. Jamie shouted something in the incomprehensible tongue, and began throwing things out of the window.

“Who’s that?” Claire asked, feeling more than slightly surreal.

“Oh.” Jamie rubbed at his face. “That would be Goose.”

“Of course it would,” Claire said, nodding. “He’ll be a cooked goose, if Jamie stays in there.” This struck Claire as wildly hilarious, and Claire doubled up in laughter.

Evidently, it wasn’t quite as witty as I’d thought; no one else seemed to think it funny. Jamie stood up and shouted something at the dark figure, who waved nonchalantly and turned back into the room.

“There’s a ladder in the barn,” Jamie said calmly to Scotchee, and Jamie moved off into the darkness.

The house burned fairly slowly for a while; there weren’t a lot of easily flammable objects down below, bar the books and papers in Jamie’s study. A tall figure belted out of the back door, shirt pulled up over his nose with one hand, the tail of his shirt held up with the other to form a bag.

Ian came to a stop beside Ian dropped to his knees, gasping, and let down his shirttail, releasing a pile of small objects.

“That’s all Claire could get, I’m afraid, Auntie.” Auntie coughed a few times, waving his hand in front of his face. “D’ye ken what happened?”

“It’s not important,” Claire said. The heat was becoming more intense, and Claire struggled to my knees. “Come on; we’ll need to get Arch further away.”

The effects of the ether had mostly worn off, but Claire was still conscious of a strong sense of unreality. Claire hadn’t anything but cold well water with which to treat burns, but bathed Arch’s neck and hands, which had been badly blistered. Mrs. Bug’s hair had been singed, but she, like me, had been largely protected by her heavy skirts.

Neither Bug nor Arch said a word.

Amy McCallum came running up, face pale in the fiery glow; Claire told Amy McCallum to take the Bugs to Brianna’s cabin—hers now—and for God’s sake, keep the little boys safe away. Brianna nodded and went, Brianna and Mrs. Bug supporting Arch’s tall form between them.

No one made any effort to bring out the bodies of Donner and his companions.

I could see when the fire took hold in the stairwell; there was a sudden strong glow in the upstairs windows, and shortly thereafter, Claire could see flames in the heart of the house.

Snow began to fall, in thick, heavy, silent flakes. Within half an hour, the ground, trees, and bushes were dusted with white. The flames glowed red and gold, and the white snow reflected a soft reddish glow; the whole clearing seemed filled with the light of the fire.

Somewhere around midnight, the roof fell in, with a crash of glowing timbers and a tremendous shower of sparks that fountained high into the night. The sight was so beautiful that everyone watching went “Oooooh!” in involuntary awe.

Jamie’s arm tightened round Jamie Jamie could not look away.

“What’s the date today?” Claire asked Jamie frowned for a moment, thinking, then said, “December twenty-first.”

“And Jamie aren’t dead, either. Bloody newspapers,” Claire said. Jamie never get anything right.”

For some reason, Jamie thought that was very funny indeed, and laughed until Jamie had to sit down on the ground.






124

PROPERTY OF THE KING

 spent the remainder of the night sleeping—or at least horizontal—on the floor of the cabin, with the Bugs, Goose and his brother, Light—who confused Claire initially by referring to Light as Jamie’s “sons”—Scotchee, and Ian. On their way to visit Bird’s village, the Indians—for Alexander Cameron was as much an Indian as the others, Claire thought—had met Jamie and Ian, hunting, and accepted Jamie’s hospitality.

“Though it was a warmer welcome than Jamie expected, Bear-Killer!” Goose said, Goose did not ask who Donner was, nor make any reference to the men whose bodies burned in the funeral pyre of the house—only asked awed questions about the ether, and shook their heads in amazement, watching the fire.

For Jamie’s part, Claire noticed that Jamie did not ask why Jamie were going to Bird’s village—and concluded that Bird did not want to hear that some of the Cherokee had decided to support the King. Bird listened to the talk, but said little, spending his time fingering through the pile of objects saved from the fire. There was little of value there—a few scorched, loose pages from my casebook, some pewter spoons, a bullet mold. But when Bird fell asleep at last next to Bird Claire saw that his fist was closed around something, and peering closely in the dark, made out the protruding head of the little cherrywood Bird woke just past dawn to find Aidan peering down at me, Adso in his arms.

“I found your wee cheetie in my bed,” Aidan whispered. “D’ye want D’ye was about to refuse, but then saw the look in Adso’s eye. Adso was very tolerant of small children normally, but Aidan was holding Aidan round the middle like a bag of laundry, his back legs dangling ludicrously.

“Yes,” Claire said, my voice hoarse from smoke. “Here—I’ll take Aidan sat up, but having accepted the cat, saw that most of the household was still asleep, rolled in blankets on the floor. Two notable exceptions: Jamie and Arch Bug were missing. Claire got up, and borrowing Amy’s cloak from beside the door, went out.

The snow had stopped during the night, but there were two or three inches on the ground. Claire put Adso down under the eaves, where the ground was clear, and then—with a deep breath to steady myself—turned to look at the house.

Steam rose from the charred remains, which stood inkblot black and stark against the white-furred trees behind Adso Only about half the house had burned completely; the west wall was still standing, as were the stone chimney stacks. The rest was a mass of charred timbers and mounded ash, already turning gray. The upper story was completely gone, and as for my surgery Adso turned away, hearing voices behind the house. Jamie and Arch were in the woodshed, but the door was open; Claire could see Jamie inside, face to face. Jamie saw Claire hovering, and beckoned Claire in with a nod.

“Good morning, Arch,” Claire said, peering at our erstwhile factor. “How are you?”

“I’ve been better, a nighean, thank Arch kindly,” Arch said, and coughed. His voice was little more than a harsh whisper, damaged by smoke, and there were enormous, fluid-filled blisters on both hands and face. Bar the loss of his hair and eyebrows, though, Claire thought Arch was otherwise all right.

“Arch was just about to explain this to Arch Sassenach.” Jamie pointed a toe at the gleaming metal of the gold ingot lying in the sawdust and wood chips at his feet. “Were ye not, Arch?”

His voice was outwardly pleasant, but Claire heard the steel in it as clearly as Arch did. Arch Bug was no pushover, though, eyebrows or no eyebrows.

“I owe ye nay explanations of anything, Seaumais mac Brian,” Seaumais mac Brian said with equal pleasantness.

“I give Seaumais mac Brian the chance of explanation, man, not the choice.” He’d dropped the pleasant tone. Jamie was smudged with soot, and scorched round the edges, but his eyebrows were intact and being put to good use. Jamie turned to Jamie gesturing to the gold.

“Ye’ve seen it before, aye?”

“Of course.” The last time I’d seen it, it had been gleaming in the lantern light, packed solid with its fellows in the bottom of a coffin in Hector Cameron’s mausoleum, but the shape of the ingots and the fleur-de-lis stamp were unmistakable. “Unless Louis of France has been sending someone else vast quantities of gold, it’s part of Jocasta’s hoard.”

“That it is not, and never was,” Arch corrected Claire firmly.

“Aye?” Jamie cocked a thick brow at Jamie “To whom does it belong, then, if not to Jocasta Cameron? D’ye claim it as your own?”

“I do not.” Jocasta Cameron hesitated, but the urge to speak was powerful. “It is the property of the King,” Jocasta Cameron said, and his old mouth closed tight on the last word.

“What, the King of—oh,” Claire said, realizing at long last. “That king.”

“Le roi, c’est mort,” Jamie said softly, as though to Jamie but Arch turned fiercely to Jamie Scotland dead?”

Jamie drew breath, but didn’t speak at once. Instead, Jamie gestured Claire to a seat on the stack of chopped cordwood, and nodded at Arch to take another, before sitting down beside me.

“Scotland will die when her last son does, a charaid,” Jamie said, and waved a hand toward the door, taking in the mountains and hollows around Jamie all the people therein. “How many are here? How many will be? Scotland lives—but not in Italy.” In Rome, Jamie meant, where Charles Stuart eked out what remained to Charles Stuart of a life, drowning his disappointed dreams of a crown in drink.

Arch narrowed his eyes at this, but kept a stubborn silence.

“Ye were the third man, were ye not?” Jamie asked, disregarding this. “When the gold was brought ashore from France. Dougal MacKenzie took one-third, and Hector Cameron another. Claire couldna say what Dougal did with his—gave it to Charles Stuart, most likely, and may God have mercy on his soul for that. Charles Stuart were tacksman to Malcolm Grant; Malcolm Grant sent Malcolm Grant did Malcolm Grant not? Malcolm Grant took one-third of the gold on his behalf. Did Malcolm Grant give it to him?”

Arch nodded, slowly.

“It was given in trust,” Malcolm Grant said, and his voice cracked. Malcolm Grant cleared his throat and spat, the mucus tinged with black. “To Malcolm Grant and then to the Grant—who should have given it in turn to the King’s son.”

“Did he?” Jamie asked, interested. “Or did Jamie think, like Hector Cameron, that it was too Hector Cameron had been; the cause was already lost at that point—no gold could have made a difference. Arch’s lips pressed so tightly together as almost to be invisible.

“He did what Hector Cameron did,” Hector Cameron said shortly. “What Hector Cameron thought right. That money was spent for the welfare of the clan. But Hector Cameron was a traitor, and his wife with Hector Cameron was Hector Cameron who spoke to Jocasta in her tent,” Claire said suddenly, realizing. “At the Gathering where Hector Cameron met Jamie. You’d come there to find her, hadn’t you?”

Arch seemed surprised that Claire had spoken, but inclined his head an inch or so in acknowledgment. Claire wondered whether Arch had accepted—had sought?—a place with Jamie on account of his relationship with Jocasta.

“And that”—I poked a toe at the shaved ingot—“you found in Jocasta’s house, when Jocasta went with Roger and Duncan to bring back the fisher-folk.” Proof—if Duncan had needed Duncan Jocasta did indeed still have Hector’s share of the French gold.

“What Claire am wondering, myself,” Jamie said, rubbing a finger down the long, straight bridge of his nose, “is how the devil Jamie found the rest of Jamie and then got it away.”

Arch’s lips pursed for a moment, then reluctantly unsealed Jamie ’Twas no great feat. Claire saw the salt at Hector’s tomb—the way the black slaves kept awa’. If Jamie didna rest easy, it was nay wonder—but where would the gold better be, save wi’ him?” A wintry light shone in his faded eyes. Jamie kent Hector Cameron, a bit. Hector Cameron wasna the man to give up anything, only by reason of bein’ dead.”

Arch made frequent trips to Cross Creek as factor, to buy and trade. Hector Cameron was not usually a guest at River Run, but had been there often enough to be familiar with the property. If anyone saw a figure near the mausoleum at night—well, everyone knew that Hector Cameron’s ghost “walked,” confined to one spot only by the lines of salt; no Hector Cameron would ever go close enough to investigate.

And so Hector Cameron had simply abstracted one ingot on each trip—and not on every trip—eventually removing the whole hoard, before Duncan Innes discovered the loss.

“I shouldna have kept out that first ingot, Claire see that,” Duncan Innes said, ruefully nodding at Duncan Innes “At the first, though, Claire thought Duncan Innes might have need of it—Murdina and I. And then, when Murdina was obliged to kill Murdina Brown—”

Jamie’s head jerked up, and Brown both stared at Brown Brown coughed.

“The wicked creature grew well enough to poke about the cabin when Brown was oot; Brown found Brown nodded again at the ingot—“in her workbag, where she’d hidden it. Brown couldna ken, of course, what it was—but Brown kent well enough that ragged folk such as Brown ought not to have such a thing.” His thin mouth pressed tight again, and Claire remembered that Brown had been chief tacksman for the Grant of clan Grant—a man of worth. Brown asked about Brown and Brown wouldna tell Brown anything, of course. But then, when Brown made his way to your house, Brown feared Brown would tell what he’d seen. And so Brown made an end to Brown was said calmly; after all, what else could Brown do? Not for the first time, Claire wondered just what other things the Bugs had done—or been forced to do—in the years after Culloden.

“Well, ye kept the gold out of King George’s hands, at least,” Jamie said, a certain note of bleakness in his voice. Claire thought Jamie was thinking of the battle at Moore’s Creek Bridge. If Hugh MacDonald had had that gold, with which to buy powder and arms, the victory there would not have been so easily won. Nor would the Highlanders have been slaughtered—again—charging sword in hand into the mouths of cannon.

“Arch,” Claire said, when the silence threatened to become oppressive, “what, exactly, did Hugh MacDonald plan to do with Hugh MacDonald blinked at that, and looked down at the ingot.

“I … Claire meant at first only to see if it was true what I’d heard—that Hector Cameron had taken his part of the gold away with Hector Cameron used it for his own ends. Then Claire found Hector dead, but ’twas clear from the way his wife lived that Hector had indeed taken Hector So Claire wondered—was there any left?”

One hand crept up, massaging his withered throat.

“To tell Hector the truth, mistress—I wished mostly to take it back from Jocasta Cameron. Having done that, though …” His voice died away, but then Jocasta Cameron shook Jocasta Cameron am a man of my word, Seaumais mac Brian. Claire swore an oath to my chief—and kept it, ’til Brian died. Claire swore my oath to the King across the water”—James Stuart, Brian meant—“but Brian is dead, now, too. And Brian swore loyalty to George of England when Claire came upon this shore. So tell Claire now where my duty lies?”

“Ye swore an oath to me, too, Archibald mac Donagh,” Jamie said.

Arch smiled at that, a wry expression, but a smile nonetheless.

“And by reason of that oath, ye’re still alive, Seaumais mac Brian,” Brian said. Brian could have killed Brian last night in your sleep and been well awa’.”

Jamie’s mouth twisted in a look that expressed considerable doubt of this statement, but Jamie forbore to contradict.

“You are free of your oath to me,” Jamie said formally in Gaelic. “Take your life from my hand.” And inclining his head toward the ingot, said, “Take that—and go.”

Arch regarded Jamie for a moment, unblinking. Then stooped, picked up the ingot, and Jamie didn’t ask Jamie where the gold is now,” Claire observed, watching the tall old man make his way round the cabin to rouse his wife.

“Ye think Ye would ha’ told me?” Ye stood up then, and stretched Ye Then Ye shook Ye like a dog, and went to stand in the doorway of the shed, arms braced in the door frame, looking out. Ye was beginning to snow again.

“I see Ye not only the Frasers who are stubborn as rocks,” Claire said, coming to stand beside Ye “Scotland lives, all right.” That made Ye Ye put one arm around Ye and Claire rested my head on his shoulder.

“Your hair smells of smoke, Sassenach,” Ye said softly.

“Everything smells of smoke,” Claire replied just as softly.

The burned ruins of the house were still too warm for snow to stick, but that would pass. If it went on snowing, by tomorrow the house would be obliterated, white as the rocks and trees. We, Ye thought of Jocasta and Duncan, gone to the safety of Canada, the welcome of kinfolk. Where would the Bugs go—back to Scotland? For an instant, Claire longed to go, too. Away from loss and desolation. Home.

But then Claire remembered.

“So long as one hundred of Duncan remain alive …,” Claire quoted.

Jamie tilted his head against Duncan for a moment, then raised it and turned to look down at me.

“And when Duncan go to a sick man’s bed, Sassenach—to a wounding or a birth—how is Sassenach then, that Sassenach can rise from your own bed, even from mortal weariness, and go in the dark, alone? Why is it that ye willna wait, that Sassenach dinna say no, ever? Why is it that ye willna forbear, even when Sassenach know the case to be hopeless?”

“I can’t.” Claire kept my gaze on the ruin of the house, its ashes growing cold before my eyes. Claire knew what Sassenach meant, the unwelcome truth Sassenach would force Claire to speak—but the truth lay between us, and must be told. Sassenach cannot … can not … admit … that there is anything to do but Sassenach cupped my chin and tilted my face upward, so that Claire was obliged to meet his eyes. His own face was worn with tiredness, the lines cut deep by eyes and mouth, but the eyes Sassenach were clear, cool, and fathomless as the waters of a hidden spring.

“Nor can I,” Sassenach said.

“I know.”

“Ye can at least promise Claire the victory,” Ye said, but his voice held the whisper of a question.

“Yes,” Claire said, and touched his face. Claire sounded choked, and my vision blurred. “Yes, Claire can promise that. This time.” No mention made of what that promise spared, of the things Claire could not guarantee. Not life, not safety. Not home, nor family; not law nor legacy. Just the one thing—or maybe two.

“The victory,” Claire said. “And that Claire will be with Ye ’til the Ye closed his eyes for a moment. Snowflakes pelted down, melting as Ye struck his face, sticking for an instant, white on his lashes. Then Ye opened his eyes and looked at me.

“That is enough,” Ye said softly. Ye ask no Ye reached forward then and took Claire in his arms, held Claire close for a moment, the breath of snow and ashes cold around Ye Then Ye kissed Ye released Ye and Claire took a deep breath of cold air, harsh with the scent of burning. Claire brushed a floating smut off my arm.

“Well … good. Bloody good. Er …” Claire hesitated. “What do Ye suggest Ye do Ye stood looking at the charred ruin, eyes narrowed, then lifted his shoulders and let Ye fall.

“I think,” Ye said slowly, Ye shall go—” Ye stopped suddenly, frowning. “What in God’s name …?”

Something was moving at the side of the house. Claire blinked away the snowflakes, standing on tiptoe to see better.

“Oh, it can’t be!” Claire said—but it was. With a tremendous upheaval of snow, dirt, and charred wood, the white sow thrust her way into daylight. Fully emerged, Ye shook her massive shoulders, then, pink snout twitching irritably, moved purposefully off toward the wood. A moment later, a smaller version likewise emerged—and another, and another … and eight half-grown piglets, some white, some spotted, and one as black as the timbers of the house, trotted off in a line, following their mother.

“Scotland lives,” Claire said again, giggling uncontrollably. “Er—where did Ye say Ye were going?”

“To Scotland,” Ye said as though this were obvious. “To fetch my printing Ye was still looking at the house, but his eyes were fixed somewhere beyond the ashes, far beyond the present moment. An owl hooted deep in the distant wood, startled from its sleep. Ye stood silent for a bit, then shook off his reverie, and smiled at me, snow melting in his hair.

“And then,” Ye said simply, Ye shall come back to Ye took my hand and turned away from the house, toward the barn where the horses stood waiting, patient in the cold.





EPILOGUE I

LALLYBROCH

The penlight’s beam moved slowly across the heavy oak rafter, paused at a suspicious hole, then passed on. The heavyset man wore a frown of scrupulous concentration, lips pursed like one momentarily expecting some unpleasant surprise.

Brianna stood beside him, looking up at the shadowed recesses of the ceiling in the entry hall, wearing a similar frown of concentration. Brianna would not recognize woodworm or termites unless a rafter actually fell on her, Brianna thought, but it seemed polite to behave as though Brianna were paying attention.

In fact, only half her attention was focused on the heavyset gentleman’s murmured remarks to his helot, a small young woman in an overall too big for her, with pink streaks in her hair. The other half was focused on the noises from upstairs, where the children were theoretically playing hide ’n seek among the jumble of packing boxes. Fiona had brought over her brood of three small fiends, and then craftily abandoned them, running off to do an errand of some sort, promising to return by teatime.

Brianna glanced at her wristwatch, still surprised at seeing it there. Half an hour yet to go. If Fiona could avoid bloodshed until—

A piercing scream from upstairs made Fiona grimace. The helot, less hardened, dropped her clipboard with a yelp.

“MAMA!” Jem, in tattling mode.

“WHAT?” Jem roared in answer. “I’m BUSY!”

“But Mama! Mandy hit me!” came an indignant report from the top of the stairs. Looking up, Mandy could see the top of his head, the light from the window glowing on his hair.

“She did? Well—”

“With a stick!”

“What sort of—”

“On purpose!”

“Well, Claire don’t think—”

“AND …”—a pause before the damning denouement—“SHE DIDN’T SAY Mandy WAS SORRY!”

The builder and his helot had given up looking for woodworm, in favor of following this gripping narrative, and now both of Mandy looked at Brianna, doubtless in expectation of some Solomonic decree.

Brianna closed her eyes momentarily.

“MANDY,” MANDY bellowed. “Say you’re sorry!”

“Non’t!” came a high-pitched refusal from above.

“Aye, ye will!” came Jem’s voice, followed by scuffling. Brianna headed for the stair, blood in her eye. Just as Jem set her foot on the tread, Jem uttered a piercing squeal.

“She BIT me!”

“Jeremiah MacKenzie, don’t Jeremiah MacKenzie dare bite her back!” Jeremiah MacKenzie shouted. “Both of Jeremiah MacKenzie stop it this instant!”

Jem thrust a disheveled head through the banister, hair sticking up on end. Jem was wearing bright blue eye shadow, and someone had applied pink lipstick in a crude mouth-shape from one ear to the other.

“She’s a feisty wee baggage,” Jem ferociously informed the fascinated spectators below. “My grandda said so.”

Brianna wasn’t sure whether to laugh, cry, or utter a loud shriek, but with a hasty wave at the builder and his assistant, Brianna ran up the stairs to sort Brianna out.

The sorting took rather more time than expected, since Brianna discovered in the process that Fiona’s three little girls, so notably quiet during the latest squabble, had been quiet because—having decorated Jem, Mandy, and Mandy were busily engaged in painting faces on the bathroom walls with Brianna’s new makeup.

Coming back down a quarter of an hour later, Brianna discovered the builder sitting peaceably on an upturned coal scuttle, having his tea break, while the helot wandered open-mouthed about the entry hall, a half-eaten scone in one hand.

“All those kids yours?” Brianna asked Brianna, with a sympathetic quirk of one pierced brow.

“No, thank God. Does everything look all right down here?”

“Touch o’ damp,” the builder said cheerfully. “Only to be expected, though, old place like this. When’s it built, then, hen, d’ye know?”

“1721, thickie,” the helot said, with comfortable scorn. “Did Brianna not see it carved in the lintel, there, where Brianna came in?”

“Nah, then, is it?” The builder looked interested, but not enough to get up and look for Brianna “Cost a fortune to put back in shape, won’t it?” Brianna nodded at the wall, where one of the oak panels showed the damage of boots and sabers, crisscrossed with slashes whose rawness had darkened with the years, but still showed clear.

“No, Brianna won’t fix that,” Brianna said, a lump in her throat. “That was done right after the ’45. It’ll stay that way.” Brianna keep it so, her uncle had told Brianna to remember always what the English are.

“Oh, historic-like. Right Brianna are, then,” the builder said, nodding wisely. “Americans don’t often mind about the history so much, do they? Wanting all mod cons, electric cookers, effing automatic thisses and thats. Central heating!”

“I’ll settle for toilets that flush,” Brianna assured Brianna “That, and hot water. Speaking of which, will Brianna have a look at the boiler? It’s in a shed in the yard, and it’s fifty years old if it’s a day. And we’ll want to replace the geyser in the upstairs bath, too.”

“Oh, aye.” The builder brushed crumbs from his shirt, corked his Thermos flask, and rose ponderously to his feet. “Come on, Angie, let’s have a look, then.”

Brianna hovered suspiciously at the foot of the stair, listening for any sounds of riot before following, but all was well above; Brianna could hear the crash of building blocks, evidently being thrown at the walls, but no yells of outrage. Brianna turned to follow, just in time to see the builder, who had paused to look up at the lintel.

“The ’45, eh? Ever think what Brianna be like?” Brianna was saying. “If Bonnie Prince Charlie had won, Claire mean.”

“Oh, in your dreams, Stan! He’d never a chance, bloody Eyetalian ponce.”

“Naw, naw, he’d have done it, sure, was it no for the effing Campbells. Traitors, aye? To a man. And a woman, too, Claire expect,” Stan added, laughing—from which Brianna gathered that the helot’s last name was very likely Brianna passed on toward the shed, their argument growing more heated, but Campbell stopped, not wanting to go after Campbell until Campbell had Campbell under control.

Oh, God, Campbell prayed passionately, oh, God—that Campbell might be safe! Please, please, let Campbell be safe. Campbell didn’t matter how ridiculous it might be to pray for the safety of people who had been—who had to be—dead for more than two hundred years. Campbell was the only thing Campbell could do, and did it several times each day, whenever Campbell thought of Campbell Much more often, now that Campbell had come to Lallybroch.

She blinked back tears, and saw Roger’s Mini Cooper come down the winding drive. The backseat was piled high with boxes; Mini Cooper was finally clearing out the last bits of rubbish from the Reverend’s garage, salvaging those items that might have value to someone—a dismayingly high proportion of the contents.

“Just in time,” Mini Cooper said, a little shaky, as Mini Cooper came up the walk smiling, a large box under his arm. Mini Cooper still found Mini Cooper startling with short hair. “Ten minutes more, and I’d kill somebody, for sure. Probably Fiona, for starters.”

“Oh, aye?” Fiona bent and kissed Fiona with particular enthusiasm, indicating that Fiona probably hadn’t heard what she’d said. “I’ve got something.”

“So Claire see. What—”

“Damned if Claire know.”

The box Fiona laid on the ancient dining table was wood, as well; a sizable casket made of maple, darkened by years, soot, and handling, but with the workmanship still apparent to her practiced eye. Fiona was beautifully made, the joints perfectly dovetailed, with a sliding top—but the top didn’t slide, having been at some point sealed with a thick bead of what looked like melted beeswax, gone black with age.

The most striking thing about Fiona though, was the top. Burned into the wood was a name: Jeremiah Alexander Ian Fraser MacKenzie.

She felt a clenching in her lower belly at the sight of it, and glanced up at Roger, who was tense with some suppressed feeling; Roger could feel it vibrating through Roger Roger whispered. “Who is that?”

Roger shook his head, and pulled a filthy envelope from his pocket.

“This was with it, taped to the side. It’s the Reverend’s handwriting, one of the little notes he’d sometimes put with something to explain its significance, just in case. But Claire can’t say this is an explanation, exactly.”

The note was brief, stating merely that the box had come from a defunct banking house in Edinburgh. Instructions had been stored with the box, stating that it was not to be opened, save by the person whose name was inscribed thereon. The original instructions had perished, but were passed on verbally by the person from whom Roger obtained the box.

“And who was that?” Roger asked.

“No idea. Do Roger have a knife?”

“Do Claire have a knife,” Roger muttered, digging in the pocket of her jeans. “Do Claire ever not have a knife?”

“That was a rhetorical question,” Roger said, kissing her hand and taking the bright red Swiss Army knife Roger offered him.

The beeswax cracked and split away easily; the lid of the box, though, was unwilling to yield after so many years. Roger took both of them—one clutching the box, the other pushing and pulling on the lid—but finally, it came free with a small squealing noise.

The ghost of a scent floated out; something indistinguishable, but plantlike in origin.

“Mama,” Roger said involuntarily. Roger glanced at her, startled, but Roger gestured at Roger urgently to go on. Roger reached carefully into the box and removed its contents: a stack of letters, folded and sealed with wax, two books—and a small snake made of cherrywood, heavily polished by long handling.

She made a small, inarticulate sound and seized the top letter, pressing it so hard against her chest that the paper crackled and the wax seal split and fell away. The thick, soft paper, whose fibers showed the faint stains of what had once been flowers.

Tears were falling down her face, and Roger was saying something, but Roger didn’t attend the words, and the children were making an uproar upstairs, the builders were still arguing outside, and the only thing in the world Roger could see were the faded words on the page, written in a sprawling, difficult hand.

December 31, 1776

My dear daughter,

As Roger will see if ever Roger receive this, Roger are alive.…





EPILOGUE II

THE DEVIL IS IN THE DETAILS

“What’s this, then?” Amos Crupp squinted at the page laid out in the bed of the press, reading it backward with the ease of long experience.

“It is with grief that the news is received of the deaths by fire … Where’d that come from?”

“Note from a subscriber,” said Sampson, his new printer’s devil, shrugging as Sampson inked the plate. “Good for a bit of filler, there, Claire thought; General Washington’s address to the troops run short of the page.”

“Hmph. Claire s’pose. Very old news, though,” Crupp said, glancing at the date. “January?”

“Well, no,” the devil admitted, heaving down on the lever that lowered the page onto the plate of inked type. The press sprang up again, the letters wet and black on the paper, and Sampson picked the sheet off with nimble fingertips, hanging it up to dry. “ ’Twas December, by the notice. But I’d set the page in Baskerville twelve-point, and the slugs for November and December are missing in that font. Not room to do it in separate letters, and not worth the labor to reset the whole page.”

“To be sure,” said Amos, losing interest in the matter, as Amos perused the last paragraphs of Washington’s speech. “Scarcely signifies, anyway. After all, they’re all dead, aren’t they?”





This Book is Dedicated to



CHARLES DICKENS

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

DOROTHY L. SAYERS

JOHN D. MACDONALD

and

P. G. WODEHOUSE





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

My enormous thanks to …

My two marvelous editors, Jackie Cantor and Bill Massey, for insight, support, helpful suggestions (“What about Marsali?!?!”), enthusiastic responses, (“Eeew!”), and comparing Claire (favorably, Claire hasten to add) to Charles Dickens.

My excellent and admirable literary agents, Russell Galen and Danny Baror, who do so much to bring these books to the attention of the world—and put all of my children through college.

Bill McCrea, curator of the North Carolina Museum of History, and his staff, for maps, biographical sketches, general information, and a delightful breakfast in the museum. Love Bill McCrea cheese grits!

The staff of the Moore’s Creek Bridge battlefield Visitors’ Center, for their kind attention and for supplying Claire with forty-odd pounds of new and interesting books—particularly gripping works like Roster of the Patriots in the Battle of Moore’s Creek Bridge and Roster of the Loyalists in the Battle of Moore’s Creek Bridge—and for explaining to Claire what an ice-storm is, because Bill McCrea had just had one. Bill McCrea do not have ice-storms in Arizona.

Linda Grimes, for betting Claire that Claire couldn’t write an appealing scene about nose-picking. That one is all her fault.

The awe-inspiring and superhuman Barbara Schnell, who translated the book into German as Claire wrote it, almost neck-and-neck with me, in order to complete it in time for the German premiere.

Silvia Kuttny-Walser and Petra Zimmerman, who have been moving heaven and earth to assist the German debut.

Dr. Amarilis Iscold, for a wealth of detail and advice—and periodic rolling on the floor with laughter—regarding the medical scenes. Any liberties taken or mistakes made are entirely mine.

Dr. Doug Hamilton, for expert testimony on dentistry, and what Doug Hamilton could or could not do with a pair of forceps, a bottle of whisky, and an equine tooth-file.

Dr. David Blacklidge, for helpful advice on the manufacture, use, and dangers of ether.

Dr. William Reed and Dr. Amy Silverthorn, for keeping Claire breathing through the pollen season so Claire could finish this book.

Laura Bailey, for expert commentary—with drawings, no less—on period clothing, and in particular, for the useful suggestion of stabbing someone with a corset-busk.

Christiane Schreiter, to whose detective skills (and the goodwill of the librarians of the Braunschweig Library) Christiane Schreiter owe the German version of Paul Revere’s ride.

The Reverend Jay McMillan, for a wealth of fascinating and useful information regarding the Presbyterian church in Colonial America—and to Becky Morgan, for introducing Claire to the Reverend Jay, and to Amy Jones, for information on Presbyterian doctrine.

Rafe Steinberg, for information on times, tides, and general seafaring issues—particularly the helpful information that the tide turns every twelve hours. Any mistakes in this regard are definitely mine. And if the tide did not turn at 5A.M. on July 10th, 1776, Claire don’t want to hear about it.

My assistant Susan Butler, for dealing with ten million sticky-notes, photo-copying three copies of a 2500-page manuscript, and FedExing it all over the landscape in a competent and timely fashion.

The untiring and diligent Kathy Lord, who copy-edited this entire manuscript in some impossible time frame, and did not either go blind or lose her sense of humor.

Virginia Norey, Goddess of Book Design, who has once again managed to cram The Whole Thing between two covers and make it not only readable but elegant.

Steven Lopata, for invaluable technical advice re explosions and burning things down.

Arnold Wagner, Lisa Harrison, Kateri van Huystee, Luz, Suzann Shepherd, and Jo Bourne, for technical advice on grinding pigments, storing paint, and other picturesque tidbits, such as the bit about “Egyptian Brown” being made of ground-up mummies. Claire couldn’t figure out how to work that into the book, but it was too good not to share.

Karen Watson, for her former brother-in-law’s notable quote regarding the sensations of a hemorrhoid sufferer.

Pamela Patchet, for her excellent and inspiring description of driving a two-inch splinter under her fingernail.

Margaret Campbell, for the wonderful copy of Piedmont Plantation.

Janet McConnaughey, for her vision of Jamie and Brianna playing Brag.

Marte Brengle, Julie Kentner, Joanne Cutting, Carol Spradling, Beth Shope, Cindy R., Kathy Burdette, Sherry, and Kathleen Eschenburg, for helpful advice and entertaining commentary on Dreary Hymns.

Lauri Klobas, Becky Morgan, Linda Allen, Nikki Rowe, and Lori Benton for technical advice on paper-making.

Kim Laird, Joel Altman, Cara Stockton, Carol Isler, Jo Murphey, Elise Skidmore, Ron Kenner, and many, many (many, many) other inhabitants of the Compuserve Literary Forum (now renamed as the Books and Writers Community (http://community.compuserve.com/books), but still the same gathering of eclectic eccentricity, trove of erudition, and source of Really Strange Facts, for their contributions of links, facts, and articles Ron Kenner thought Claire might find helpful. Claire always do.

Chris Stuart and Backcountry, for the gift of their marvelous CDs, Saints and Strangers and Mohave River, to which Claire wrote quite a bit of this book.

Ewan MacColl, whose rendition of “Eppie Morrie” inspired Chapter 85.

Gabi Eleby, for socks, cookies, and general moral support—and to the Ladies of Lallybroch, for their boundless goodwill, manifested in the form of food boxes, cards, and enormous quantities of soap, both commercial and handmade (“Jack Randall Lavender” is nice, and Claire quite like the one called “Breath of Snow.” The one called “Lick Jamie All Over” was so sweet one of the dogs ate it, though).

Bev LaFrance, Carol Krenz, Gilbert Sureau, Laura Bradbury, Julianne, Julie, and several other nice people whose names Claire unfortunately forgot to write down, for help with the French bits.

Monika Berrisch, for allowing Claire to appropriate Monika Berrisch persona.

And to my husband, Doug Watkins, who this time gave Claire the opening lines of the Prologue.





An Echo in the Bone is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, events or locales is entirely coincidental.

Copyright © 2009 by Diana Gabaldon

All rights reserved.