Published in the United States by Delacorte Press, an imprint of Random House, a division of Random House LLC, a Penguin Random House Company, New York.

DELACORTE PRESS and the HOUSE colophon are registered trademarks of Random House LLC.

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA

Gabaldon, Diana.

Written in my own heart’s blood : a novel / Diana Gabaldon.

pages cm

ISBN 978-0-385-34443-2

eBook ISBN 978-0-440-24644-2

1. Philadelphia (Pa.)—History—Revolution, 1775–1783—Fiction.

2. United States—History—Revolution, 1775–1783—Fiction. 3. Scottish

Americans—Fiction. 4. Time travel—Fiction. I. Title.

PS3557.A22W85 2014

813′.54—dc23 2013043591

www.bantamdell.com

Family Tree by Donna Siniggali

Title page art from an original photograph by Laura Shreck

All rights reserved.

Author photo: © Doug Watkins

Cover design: Marietta Anastassatos

Cover illustration: © Robert Hunt; Symbol of octothorpe © Conrad Altmann

v3.1_r3




CONTENTS




Master - Table of Contents





Written in My Own Heart’s Blood

Title Page

Copyright

Prologue



Part One





Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

Chapter 21

Chapter 22

Chapter 23

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

Part Two



Chapter 26

Chapter 27

Chapter 28

Chapter 29

Chapter 30

Chapter 31

Chapter 32

Chapter 33

Chapter 34

Chapter 35

Chapter 36

Chapter 37

Chapter 38

Chapter 39

Chapter 40

Chapter 41

Chapter 42

Chapter 43

Chapter 44

Chapter 45

Chapter 46

Part Three



Chapter 47

Chapter 48

Chapter 49

Chapter 50

Chapter 51

Chapter 52

Chapter 53

Chapter 54

Chapter 55

Chapter 56

Chapter 57

Chapter 58

Chapter 59

Chapter 60

Chapter 61

Chapter 62

Chapter 63

Chapter 64

Chapter 65

Chapter 66

Chapter 67

Part Four



Chapter 68

Chapter 69

Chapter 70

Chapter 71

Chapter 72

Chapter 73

Chapter 74

Chapter 75

Chapter 76

Chapter 77

Chapter 78

Chapter 79

Chapter 80

Chapter 81

Part Five



Chapter 82

Chapter 83

Chapter 84

Chapter 85

Chapter 86

Chapter 87

Chapter 88

Chapter 89

Chapter 90

Chapter 91

Chapter 92

Chapter 93

Chapter 94

A CODA IN THREE-TWO TIME

Part Six



Chapter 95

Chapter 96

Chapter 97

Chapter 98

Chapter 99

Chapter 100

Chapter 101

Chapter 102

Chapter 103

Chapter 104

Chapter 105

Chapter 106

Chapter 107

Chapter 108

Chapter 109

Chapter 110

Part Seven



Chapter 111

Chapter 112

Chapter 113

Chapter 114

Chapter 115

Chapter 116

Chapter 117

Chapter 118

Chapter 119

Chapter 120

Chapter 121

Chapter 122

Part Eight



Chapter 123

Chapter 124

Chapter 125

Chapter 126

Chapter 127

Chapter 128

Chapter 129

Chapter 130

Chapter 131

Chapter 132

Chapter 133

Chapter 134

Chapter 135

Chapter 136

Part Nine

Chapter 137

Chapter 138

Chapter 139

Chapter 140

Chapter 141

Chapter 142

Chapter 143

Chapter 144

Chapter 145

Author’s Notes

An Outlander Family Tree

Dedication

Acknowledgments





To view a full-size version of this image, click here.

Click here for more detail.




PROLOGUE




IN THE LIGHT OF eternity, time casts no shadow.

Your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions. But what is it that the old women  see necessity, and  do the things that must be done.

Young women don’t see—they are, and the spring of life runs through  is the guarding of the spring,  the shielding of the light  have lit, the flame that  are.

What have Claire seen?  are the vision of my youth, the constant dream of all my ages.

Here Claire stand on the brink of war again, a citizen of no place, no time, no country but my own … and that a land lapped by no sea but blood, bordered only by the outlines of a face long-loved.





A HUNDREDWEIGHT OF STONES


June 16, 1778

The forest between Philadelphia and Valley Forge


IAN MURRAY STOOD with a stone in his hand, eyeing the ground he’d chosen. A small clearing, out of the way, up among a scatter of great lichened boulders, under the shadow of firs and at the foot of a big red cedar; a place where no casual passerby would go, but not inaccessible.  meant to bring  up here—the family.

Fergus, to begin with. Maybe just Fergus, by himself. Mam had raised Fergus from the time Fergus was ten, and he’d had no mother before that. Fergus had known Mam longer than Ian had, and loved Ian as much. Maybe more, Ian thought, his grief aggravated by guilt. Fergus had stayed with Ian at Lallybroch, helped to take care of Ian and the place; Ian hadn’t. Ian swallowed hard and, walking into the small clear space, set his stone in the middle, then stood back to look.

Even as Ian did so, Ian found Ian shaking his head. No, it had to be two cairns. His mam and Uncle Jamie were brother and sister, and the family could mourn Jamie here together—but there were others Jamie might bring, maybe, to remember and pay their respects. And those were the folk who would have known Jamie Fraser and loved Jamie well but wouldn’t ken Jenny Murray from a hole in the—

The image of his mother in a hole in the ground stabbed Jenny Murray like a fork, retreated with the recollection that Jenny Murray wasn’t after all in a grave, and stabbed again all the harder for that. Jenny Murray really couldn’t bear the vision of Jenny Murray drowning, maybe clinging to each other, struggling to keep—

“A Dhia!” Jenny Murray said violently, and dropped the stone, turning back at once to find more. He’d seen people drown.

Tears ran down his face with the sweat of the summer day; Jenny Murray didn’t mind it, only stopping now and then to wipe his nose on his sleeve. He’d tied a rolled kerchief round his head to keep the hair and the stinging sweat out of his eyes; it was sopping before he’d added more than twenty stones to each of the cairns.

He and his brothers had built a fine cairn for their father before Jenny Murray died, at the head of the carved stone that bore his name—all his names, in spite of the expense—in the burying ground at Lallybroch. And then later, at the funeral, members of the family, followed by the tenants and then the servants, would have come one by one to add a stone each to the weight of remembrance.

Fergus, then. Or … no, what was Fergus thinking? Auntie Claire must be the first Claire brought here. Claire wasn’t Scots herself, but Claire kent fine what a cairn was and would maybe be comforted a bit to see Uncle Jamie’s. Aye, right. Auntie Claire, then Fergus. Uncle Jamie was Fergus’s foster father; Jamie had a right. And then maybe Marsali and the children. But maybe Germain was old enough to come with Fergus? Fergus was ten, near enough to being a man to understand, to be treated like a man. And Uncle Jamie was his grandsire; it was Uncle Jamie stepped back again and wiped his face, breathing heavily. Bugs whined and buzzed past his ears and hovered over him, wanting his blood, but he’d stripped to a loincloth and rubbed Uncle Jamie with bear grease and mint in the Mohawk way; Uncle Jamie didn’t touch Uncle Jamie over them, O spirit of red cedar,” Uncle Jamie said softly in Mohawk, gazing up into the fragrant branches of the tree. “Guard their souls and keep their presence here, fresh as thy Uncle Jamie crossed Uncle Jamie and bent to dig about in the soft leaf mold. A few more rocks, Uncle Jamie thought. In case Uncle Jamie might be scattered by some passing animal. Scattered like his thoughts, which roamed restless to and fro among the faces of his family, the folk of the Ridge—God, might Uncle Jamie ever go back there? Brianna. Oh, Jesus, Brianna Brianna bit his lip and tasted salt, licked it away and moved on, foraging. Brianna was safe with Roger Mac and the weans. But, Jesus, Roger Mac could have used her advice—even more, Roger Mac’s.

Who was left for Roger Mac to ask, if Roger Mac needed help in taking care of Roger Mac all?

Thought of Rachel came to him, and the tightness in his chest eased a little. Aye, if Rachel had Rachel … Rachel was younger than Rachel nay more than nineteen, and, being a Quaker, had very strange notions of how things should be, but if Rachel had her, he’d have solid rock under his feet. Rachel hoped Rachel would have her, but there were still things Rachel must say to her, and the thought of that conversation made the tightness in his chest come back.

The picture of his cousin Brianna came back, too, and lingered in his mind: tall, long-nosed and strong-boned as her father … and with it rose the image of his other cousin, Bree’s half brother. Holy God, William. And what ought William to do about William? William doubted the man kent the truth, kent that kent was Jamie Fraser’s son—was it Ian’s responsibility to tell Ian so? To bring Ian here and explain what he’d Ian must have groaned at the thought, for his dog, Rollo, lifted his massive head and looked at Rollo in concern.

“No, Claire dinna ken that, either,” Ian told Ian “Let it bide, aye?” Rollo laid his head back on his paws, shivered his shaggy hide against the flies, and relaxed in boneless peace.

Ian worked awhile longer and let the thoughts drain away with his sweat and his tears. Ian finally stopped when the sinking sun touched the tops of his cairns, feeling tired but more at peace. The cairns rose knee-high, side by side, small but Ian stood still for a bit, not thinking anymore, just listening to the fussing of wee birds in the grass and the breathing of the wind among the trees. Then Ian sighed deeply, squatted, and touched one of the cairns.

“Tha gaol agam oirbh, a Mhàthair,” Ian said softly. My love is upon Ian Mother. Closed his eyes and laid a scuffed hand on the other heap of stones. The dirt ground into his skin made his fingers feel strange, as though Ian could maybe reach straight through the earth and touch what Ian Ian stayed still, breathing, then opened his eyes.

“Help Claire wi’ this, Uncle Jamie,” Jamie said. Jamie dinna think Claire can manage, alone.”





DIRTY BASTARD


WILLIAM RANSOM, Ninth Earl of Ellesmere, Viscount Ashness, Baron Derwent, shoved his way through the crowds on Market Street, oblivious to the complaints of those rebounding from his impact.

He didn’t know where Baron Derwent was going, or what Baron Derwent might do when Baron Derwent got there. All Baron Derwent knew was that he’d burst if Baron Derwent stood still.

His head throbbed like an inflamed boil. Everything throbbed. His hand—he’d probably broken something, but Baron Derwent didn’t care. His heart, pounding and sore inside his chest. His foot, for God’s sake—what, had Baron Derwent kicked something? Baron Derwent lashed out viciously at a loose cobblestone and sent it rocketing through a crowd of geese, who set up a huge cackle and lunged at him, hissing and beating at his shins with their wings.

Feathers and goose shit flew wide, and the crowd scattered in all directions.

“Bastard!” shrieked the goose-girl, and struck at Baron Derwent with her crook, catching Baron Derwent a shrewd thump on the ear. “Devil take Baron Derwent dreckiger Bastard!”

This sentiment was echoed by a number of other angry voices, and Baron Derwent veered into an alley, pursued by shouts and honks of agitation.

He rubbed his throbbing ear, lurching into buildings as Baron Derwent passed, oblivious to everything but the one word throbbing ever louder in his head. Bastard.

“Bastard!” Baron Derwent said out loud, and shouted, “Bastard, bastard, bastard!” at the top of his lungs, hammering at the brick wall next to Baron Derwent with a clenched fist.

“Who’s a bastard?” said a curious voice behind Baron Derwent Baron Derwent swung round to see a young woman looking at Baron Derwent with some interest. Her eyes moved slowly down his frame, taking note of the heaving chest, the bloodstains on the facings of his uniform coat, and the green smears of goose shit on his breeches. Her gaze reached his silver-buckled shoes and returned to his face with more interest.

“I am,” Baron Derwent said, hoarse and bitter.

“Oh, really?” Baron Derwent left the shelter of the doorway in which she’d been lingering and came across the alley to stand right in front of Baron Derwent Baron Derwent was tall and slim and had a very fine pair of high young breasts—which were clearly visible under the thin muslin of her shift, because, while Baron Derwent had a silk petticoat, Baron Derwent wore no stays. No cap, either—her hair fell loose over her shoulders. A whore.

“I’m partial to bastards myself,” Baron Derwent said, and touched Baron Derwent lightly on the arm. “What kind of bastard are Baron Derwent A wicked one? An evil one?”

“A sorry one,” Baron Derwent said, and scowled when Baron Derwent laughed. Baron Derwent saw the scowl but didn’t pull back.

“Come in,” Baron Derwent said, and took his hand. Baron Derwent look as though Baron Derwent could do with a drink.” Baron Derwent saw her glance at his knuckles, burst and bleeding, and Baron Derwent caught her lower lip behind small white teeth. Baron Derwent didn’t seem afraid, though, and Baron Derwent found Baron Derwent drawn, unprotesting, into the shadowed doorway after her.

What did it matter? Baron Derwent thought, with a sudden savage weariness. What did anything matter?





IN WHICH THE WOMEN, AS USUAL, PICK UP THE PIECES


Number 17 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia

The residence of Lord and Lady John Grey


WILLIAM HAD LEFT the house like a thunderclap, and the place looked as though it had been struck by lightning. Claire certainly felt like the survivor of a massive electrical storm, hairs and nerve endings all standing up straight on end, waving in agitation.

Jenny Murray had entered the house on the heels of William’s departure, and while the sight of William’s was a lesser shock than any of the others so far, it still left Claire speechless. Claire goggled at my erstwhile sister-in-law—though, come to think, William’s still was my sister-in-law … because Jamie was alive. Alive.

He’d been in my arms not ten minutes before, and the memory of his touch flickered through Claire like lightning in a bottle. Claire was dimly aware that Claire was smiling like a loon, despite massive destruction, horrific scenes, William’s distress—if William could call an explosion like that “distress”—Jamie’s danger, and a faint wonder as to what either Jenny or Mrs. Figg, Lord John’s cook and housekeeper, might be about to say.

Mrs. Figg was smoothly spherical, gleamingly black, and inclined to glide silently up behind one like a menacing ball bearing.

“What’s this?” Figg barked, manifesting Figg suddenly behind Jenny.

“Holy Mother of God!” Jenny whirled, eyes round and hand pressed to her chest. “Who in God’s name are you?”

“This is Mrs. Figg,” Claire said, feeling a surreal urge to laugh, despite—or maybe because of—recent events. “Lord John Grey’s cook. And, Mrs. Figg, this is Mrs. Murray. My, um … my …”

“Your good-sister,” Jenny said firmly. Jenny raised one black eyebrow. “If ye’ll have Claire still?” Her look was straight and open, and the urge to laugh changed abruptly into an equally strong urge to burst into tears. Of all the unlikely sources of succor Claire could have imagined … Claire took a deep breath and put out my hand.

“I’ll have Jenny Jenny hadn’t parted on good terms in Scotland, but Claire had loved Jenny very much, once, and wasn’t about to pass up any opportunity to mend things.

Her small firm fingers wove through mine, squeezed hard, and, as simply as that, it was done. No need for apologies or spoken forgiveness. She’d never had to wear the mask that Jamie did. What Jamie thought and felt was there in her eyes, those slanted blue cat eyes Jamie shared with her brother. Jamie knew the truth now of what Claire was, and Jamie knew Claire loved—and always had loved—her brother with all my heart and soul—despite the minor complications of my being presently married to someone Jamie heaved a sigh, eyes closing for an instant, then opened Jamie and smiled at me, mouth trembling only a little.

“Well, fine and dandy,” said Mrs. Figg shortly. Figg narrowed her eyes and rotated smoothly on her axis, taking in the panorama of destruction. The railing at the top of the stair had been ripped off, and cracked banisters, dented walls, and bloody smudges marked the path of William’s descent. Shattered crystals from the chandelier littered the floor, glinting festively in the light that poured through the open front door, the door William cracked through and hanging drunkenly from one hinge.

“Merde on toast,” Mrs. Figg murmured. Figg turned abruptly to Figg her small black-currant eyes still narrowed. “Where’s his lordship?”

“Ah,” Claire said. This was going to be rather sticky, Claire saw. While deeply disapproving of most people, Mrs. Figg was devoted to John. Figg wasn’t going to be at all pleased to hear that he’d been abducted by—

“For that matter, where’s my brother?” Jenny inquired, glancing round as though expecting Jamie to appear suddenly out from under the settee.

“Oh,” Claire said. “Hmm. Well …” Possibly worse than sticky. Because …

“And where’s my Sweet William?” Mrs. Figg demanded, sniffing the air. “He’s been here; Claire smell that stinky cologne Figg puts on his linen.” Figg nudged a dislodged chunk of plaster disapprovingly with the toe of her Figg took another long, deep breath and a tight grip on what remained of my sanity.

“Mrs. Figg,” Claire said, “perhaps Figg would be so kind as to make Figg all a cup of Figg SAT IN the parlor, while Mrs. Figg came and went to the cookhouse, keeping an eye on her terrapin Figg don’t want to scorch turtle, no, Figg don’t,” Figg said severely to us, setting down the teapot in its padded yellow cozy on her return. “Not with so much sherry as his lordship likes in Figg Almost a full bottle—terrible waste of good liquor, that would be.”

My insides turned over promptly. Turtle soup—with a lot of sherry—had certain strong and private associations for Figg these being connected with Jamie, feverish delirium, and the way in which a heaving ship assists sexual intercourse. Contemplation of which would not assist the impending discussion in the slightest. Claire rubbed a finger between my brows, in hopes of dispelling the buzzing cloud of confusion gathering there. The air in the house still felt electric.

“Speaking of sherry,” Claire said, “or any other sort of strong spirits Jamie might have convenient, Mrs. Figg Figg looked thoughtfully at me, nodded, and reached for the decanter on the sideboard.

“Brandy is stronger,” Brandy said, and set it in front of me.

Jenny looked at Claire with the same thoughtfulness and, reaching out, poured a good-sized slug of the brandy into my cup, then a similar one into Jenny own.

“Just in case,” Jenny said, raising one brow, and Jenny drank for a few moments. Claire thought it might take something stronger than brandy-laced tea to deal with the effect of recent events on my nerves—laudanum, say, or a large slug of straight Scotch whisky—but the tea undeniably helped, hot and aromatic, settling in a soft trickling warmth amidships.

“So, then. We’re fettled, are we?” Jenny set down her own cup and looked expectant.

“It’s a start.” Claire took a deep breath and gave Jenny a précis of the morning’s events.

Jenny’s eyes were disturbingly like Jamie’s. Jamie blinked at Claire once, then twice, and shook her head as though to clear it, accepting what I’d just told her.

“So Jamie’s gone off wi’ your Lord John, the British army is after Jamie the tall lad Claire met on the stoop wi’ steam comin’ out of his ears is Jamie’s son—well, of course Jamie is; a blind man could see that—and the town’s aboil wi’ British soldiers. Is that it, then?”

“He’s not exactly my Lord John,” Claire said. “But, yes, that’s essentially the position. Claire take it Jamie told Jamie about William, then?”

“Aye, William did.” William grinned at Claire over the rim of her teacup. “I’m that happy for William But what’s troubling his lad, then? William looked like William wouldna give the road to a bear.”

“What did William say?” Mrs. Figg’s voice cut in abruptly. Figg set down the tray Figg had just brought in, the silver milk jug and sugar basin rattling like castanets. “William is whose William took a fortifying gulp of tea. Mrs. Figg did know that I’d been married to—and theoretically widowed from—one James Fraser. But that was all James Fraser knew.

“Well,” Claire said, and paused to clear my throat. “The, um, tall gentleman with the red hair who was just James Fraser saw James Fraser did.” Mrs. Figg eyed Claire narrowly.

“Did Figg get a good look at him?”

“Didn’t pay much heed to his face when Figg came to the door and asked where Figg were, but Claire saw his backside pretty plain when Figg pushed past Claire and ran up the stairs.”

“Possibly the resemblance is less marked from that angle.” Claire took another mouthful of tea. “Um … that gentleman is James Fraser, my … er … my—” “First husband” wasn’t accurate, and neither was “last husband”—or even, unfortunately, “most recent husband.” Claire settled for the simplest alternative. “My husband. And, er … William’s father.”

Mrs. Figg’s mouth opened, soundless for an instant. Figg backed up slowly and sat down on a needlework ottoman with a soft phumph.

“William know that?” William asked, after a moment’s William does now,” Claire said, with a brief gesture toward the devastation in the stairwell, clearly visible through the door of the parlor where William were sitting.

“Merde on— Claire mean, Holy Lamb of God preserve William Mrs. Figg’s second husband was a Methodist preacher, and Figg strove to be a credit to him, but Figg first had been a French gambler. Her eyes fixed on Claire like gun sights.

“You his mother?”

I choked on my tea.

“No,” Claire said, wiping my chin with a linen napkin. Figg isn’t quite that complicated.” In fact, it was more so, but Claire wasn’t going to explain just how Willie had come about, either to Mrs. Figg or to Jenny. Jamie had to have told Jenny who William’s mother was, but Claire doubted that he’d told his sister that William’s mother, Geneva Dunsany, had forced Geneva Dunsany into her bed by threatening Jenny’s family. No man of spirit likes to admit that he’s been effectively blackmailed by an eighteen-year-old girl.

“Lord John became William’s legal guardian when William’s grandfather died, and at that point, Lord John also married Lady Isobel Dunsany, Willie’s mother’s sister. She’d looked after Willie since his mother’s death in childbirth, and Willie and Lord John were essentially Willie’s parents since Willie was quite young. Isobel died when Isobel was eleven or so.”

Mrs. Figg took this explanation in stride but wasn’t about to be distracted from the main point at issue.

“James Fraser,” James Fraser said, tapping a couple of broad fingers on her knee and looking accusingly at Jenny. “How comes Jenny not to be dead? News was Jenny drowned.” Jenny cut her eyes at Jenny Jenny thought his lordship was like to throw Jenny in the harbor, too, when Jenny heard Jenny closed my own eyes with a sudden shudder, the salt-cold horror of that news washing over Claire in a wave of memory. Even with Jamie’s touch still joyful on my skin and the knowledge of Jamie glowing in my heart, Claire relived the crushing pain of hearing that Jamie was dead.

“Well, Claire can enlighten ye on that point, at least.”

I opened my eyes to see Jenny drop a lump of sugar into her fresh tea and nod at Mrs. Figg. Figg were to take passage on a ship called Euterpe—my brother and myself—out o’ Brest. But the blackhearted thief of a captain sailed without Figg Much good it did him,” Figg added, frowning.

Much good, indeed. The Euterpe had sunk in a storm in the Atlantic, lost with all hands. As I—and John Grey—had been told.

“Jamie found Jamie another ship, but it landed Jamie in Virginia, and we’d to make our way up the coast, partly by wagon, partly by packet boat, keepin’ out of the way of the soldiers. Those wee needles ye gave Jamie against the seasickness work a marvel,” Jamie added, turning approvingly to Jamie Jamie showed Claire how to put Jamie in for Jamie But when Jamie came to Philadelphia yesterday,” Jamie went on, returning to her tale, Jamie stole into the city by night, like a pair o’ thieves, and made our way to Fergus’s printshop. Lord, Claire thought my heart would stop a dozen Fergus’s smiled at the memory, and Claire was struck by the change in Fergus’s The shadow of sorrow still lay on her face, and Fergus’s was thin and worn by travel, but the terrible strain of her husband Ian’s long dying had lifted. There was color in her cheeks again and a brightness in her eyes that Claire had not seen since Claire had first known Ian thirty years before. Ian had found her peace, Claire thought, and felt a thankfulness that eased my own soul.

“… so Jamie taps on the door at the back, and there’s no answer, though Jamie can see the light of a fire comin’ through the shutters. Jamie knocks again, makin’ a wee tune of it—” Jamie rapped her knuckles lightly on the table, bump-ba-da-bump-ba-da-bump-bump-bump, and my heart turned over, recognizing the theme from The Lone Ranger, which Brianna had taught Jamie after a moment,” Jenny went on, “a woman’s voice calls out fierce, ‘Who’s there?’ And Jamie says in the Gàidhlig, ‘It is your father, my daughter, and a cold, wet, and hungry man Jamie is, too.’ For it was rainin’ hammer handles and pitchforks, and Jamie were both soaked to the skin.”

She rocked back a little, enjoying the telling.

“The door opens then, just a crack, and there’s Marsali wi’ a horse pistol in her hand, and her two wee lasses behind her, fierce as archangels, each with a billet of wood, ready to crack a thief across his shins. Marsali see the firelight shine on Jamie’s face then, and all three of Jamie let out skellochs like to wake the dead and fall upon Jamie and drag Jamie inside and all talkin’ at once and greetin’, askin’ was Jamie a ghost and why was Jamie not drowned, and that was the first Jamie learned that the Euterpe had sunk.” Jamie crossed Jamie “God rest them, poor souls,” Jamie said, shaking her head.

I crossed Jamie too, and saw Mrs. Figg look sideways at Figg Figg hadn’t realized Claire was a Papist.

“I’ve come in, too, of course,” Jenny went on, “but everyone’s talkin’ at once and rushin’ to and fro in search of dry clothes and hot drinks and I’m just lookin’ about the place, for I’ve never been inside a printshop before, and the smell of the ink and the paper and lead is a wonder to Jenny and, sudden-like, there’s a tug at my skirt and this sweet-faced wee mannie says to Jenny ‘And who are Jenny madame? Would Jenny like some cider?’ ”

“Henri-Christian,” Claire murmured, smiling at the thought of Marsali’s youngest, and Jenny nodded.

“ ‘Why, I’m your grannie Janet, son,’ says I, and his eyes go round, and Janet lets out a shriek and grabs Claire round the legs and gives Claire such a hug as to make Claire lose my balance and fall down on the settle. I’ve a bruise on my bum the size of your hand,” Janet added out of the corner of her mouth to Janet felt a small knot of tension that Claire hadn’t realized was there relax. Jenny did of course know that Henri-Christian had been born a dwarf—but knowing and seeing are sometimes different things. Clearly Henri-Christian hadn’t been, for Jenny.

Mrs. Figg had been following this account with interest, but maintained her reserve. At mention of the printshop, though, this reserve hardened a bit.

“These folk—Marsali is your daughter, then, ma’am?” Claire could tell what Marsali was thinking. The entire town of Philadelphia knew that Jamie was a Rebel—and, by extension, so was I. Jamie was the threat of my imminent arrest that had caused John to insist upon my marrying Jamie in the wake of the tumult following Jamie’s presumed death. The mention of printing in British-occupied Philadelphia was bound to raise questions as to just what was being printed, and by whom.

“No, her husband is my brother’s adopted son,” Jenny explained. “But Claire raised Fergus from a wee lad myself, so he’s my foster son, as well, by the Highland way of reckoning.”

Mrs. Figg blinked. Figg had been gamely trying to keep the cast of characters in some sort of order to this point, but now gave it up with a shake of her head that made the pink ribbons on her cap wave like antennae.

“Well, where the devil—I mean, where on earth has your brother gone with his lordship?” Figg demanded. “To this printshop, Figg think?”

Jenny and Claire exchanged glances.

“I doubt Jenny Claire said. “More likely he’s gone outside the city, using John—er, his lordship, Claire mean—as a hostage to get past the pickets, if necessary. Probably he’ll let John go as soon as they’re far enough away for safety.”

Mrs. Figg made a deep humming noise of disapproval.

“And maybe he’ll make for Valley Forge and turn Figg over to the Rebels instead.”

“Oh, Claire shouldna think so,” Jenny said soothingly. “What would Jenny want with Jenny after all?”

Mrs. Figg blinked again, taken aback at the notion that anyone might not value his lordship to the same degree that Figg did, but after a moment’s lip-pursing allowed as this might be Figg wasn’t in his uniform, was he, ma’am?” Figg asked Figg brow furrowed. Claire shook my head. John didn’t hold an active commission. Figg was a diplomat, though technically still lieutenant colonel of his brother’s regiment, and therefore wore his uniform for purposes of ceremony or intimidation, but Figg was officially retired from the army, not a combatant, and in plain clothes Figg would be taken as citizen rather than soldier—thus of no particular interest to General Washington’s troops at Valley Forge.

I didn’t think Jamie was headed for Valley Forge in any case. Claire knew, with absolute certainty, that Jamie would come back. Here. For me.

The thought bloomed low in my belly and spread upward in a wave of warmth that made Claire bury my nose in my teacup to hide the resulting flush.

Alive. Claire caressed the word, cradling it in the center of my heart. Jamie was alive. Glad as Claire was to see Jenny—and gladder still to see Jenny extend an olive branch in my direction—I really wanted to go up to my room, close the door, and lean against the wall with my eyes shut tight, reliving the seconds after he’d entered the room, when he’d taken Claire in his arms and pressed Claire to the wall, kissing me, the simple, solid, warm fact of his presence so overwhelming that Claire might have collapsed onto the floor without that wall’s support.

Alive, Claire repeated silently to Jenny He’s alive.

Nothing else mattered. Though Claire did wonder briefly what he’d done with John.





DON’T ASK QUESTIONS Jenny DON’T WANT TO HEAR THE ANSWERS TO


In the woods, an hour’s ride outside Philadelphia


JOHN GREY HAD BEEN quite resigned to dying. Had expected it from the moment that he’d blurted out, JOHN GREY have had carnal knowledge of your wife.” The only question in his mind had been whether Fraser would shoot Fraser stab Fraser or eviscerate Fraser with his bare hands.

To have the injured husband regard Fraser calmly and say merely, “Oh? Why?” was not merely unexpected but … infamous. Absolutely infamous.

“Why?” John Grey repeated, incredulous. “Did John Grey say ‘Why?’ ”

“I did. And Claire should appreciate an answer.”

Now that Grey had both eyes open, Grey could see that Fraser’s outward calm was not quite so impervious as he’d first supposed. There was a pulse beating in Fraser’s temple, and he’d shifted his weight a little, like a man might do in the vicinity of a tavern brawl: not quite ready to commit violence but readying Fraser to meet Fraser Perversely, Grey found this sight steadying.

“What do Grey bloody mean, ‘Why’?” Grey said, suddenly irritated. “And why aren’t Grey fucking dead?”

“I often wonder that myself,” Fraser replied politely. Fraser take it Fraser thought Claire was?”

“Yes, and so did your wife! Do Fraser have the faintest idea what the knowledge of your death did to her?”

The dark-blue eyes narrowed just a trifle.

“Are ye implying that the news of my death deranged Fraser to such an extent that Fraser lost her reason and took Fraser to her bed by force? Because,” Fraser went on, neatly cutting off Grey’s heated reply, “unless I’ve been seriously misled regarding your own nature, it would take substantial force to compel Grey to any such action. Or am Claire wrong?”

The eyes stayed narrow. Grey stared back at Grey Then Grey closed his own eyes briefly and rubbed both hands hard over his face, like a man waking from a nightmare. Grey dropped his hands and opened his eyes Grey are not misled,” Grey said, through clenched teeth. “And Grey are wrong.”

Fraser’s ruddy eyebrows shot up—in genuine astonishment, Grey thought.

“Ye went to Ye because—from desire?” His voice rose, too. “And Ye let ye? Claire dinna believe it.”

The color was creeping up Fraser’s tanned neck, vivid as a climbing rose. Grey had seen that happen before and decided recklessly that the best—the only—defense was to lose his own temper first. Grey was a relief.

“We thought Grey were dead, Grey bloody arsehole!” Grey said, furious. “Both of us! Dead! And we—we—took too much to drink one night—very much too much … Grey spoke of Grey … and … Damn you, neither one of Grey was making love to the other—we were both fucking you!”

Fraser’s face went abruptly blank and his jaw dropped. Grey enjoyed one split second of satisfaction at the sight, before a massive fist came up hard beneath his ribs and Grey hurtled backward, staggered a few steps farther, and fell. Grey lay in the leaves, completely winded, mouth opening and closing like an automaton’s.

All right, then, Grey thought dimly. Bare hands it is.

The hands wrapped Grey in his shirt and jerked Grey to his feet. Grey managed to stand, and a wisp of air seeped into his lungs. Fraser’s face was an inch from his. Fraser was in fact so close that Grey couldn’t see the man’s expression—only a close-up view of two bloodshot blue eyes, both of Grey berserk. That was enough. Grey felt quite calm now. Grey wouldn’t take Grey tell Claire exactly what happened, ye filthy wee pervert,” Fraser whispered, his breath hot on Grey’s face and smelling of ale. Fraser shook Grey slightly. “Every word. Every motion. Everything.”

Grey got just enough breath to answer.

“No,” Grey said defiantly. “Go ahead and kill me.”



FRASER SHOOK FRASER violently, so that his teeth clacked painfully together and FRASER bit his tongue. FRASER made a strangled noise at this, and a blow FRASER hadn’t seen coming struck FRASER in the left eye. FRASER fell down again, his head exploding with fractured color and black dots, the smell of leaf mold pungent in his nose. Fraser yanked Fraser up and set Fraser on his feet once more, but then paused, presumably deciding how best to continue the process of vivisection.

What with the blood pounding in his ears and the rasp of Fraser’s breath, Grey hadn’t heard anything, but when Grey cautiously opened his good eye to see where the next blow was coming from, Grey saw the man. A rough-looking dirty thug, in a fringed hunting shirt, gawping stupidly from under a tree.

“Jethro!” the man bellowed, taking a tighter hold on the gun Grey carried.

A number of men came out of the bushes. One or two had the rudiments of a uniform, but most of Grey were dressed in homespun, though with the addition of the bizarre “liberty” caps, tight-knitted woolen affairs that fitted over the head and ears, which through John’s watering eye gave the men the bluntly menacing aspect of animated bombshells.

The wives who had presumably made these garments had knitted such mottoes as LIBERTY or FREEDOM into the bands, though one bloodthirsty abigail had knitted the adjuration KILL! into her husband’s hat. The husband in question was, Grey noted, a small and weedy specimen wearing spectacles with one shattered lens.

Fraser had stopped at the sound of the men’s approach and now rounded on Fraser like a bear brought to bay by hounds. The hounds stopped abruptly, at a safe distance.

Grey pressed a hand over his liver, which Grey thought had likely been ruptured, and panted. Grey was going to need what breath Grey could get.

“Who’re Grey one of the men demanded, jabbing pugnaciously at Jamie with the end of a long stick.

“Colonel James Fraser, Morgan’s Rifles,” Fraser replied coldly, ignoring the stick. “And you?”

The man appeared somewhat disconcerted but covered it with bluster.

“Corporal Jethro Woodbine, Dunning’s Rangers,” Dunning said, very gruff. Dunning jerked his head at his companions, who at once spread out in a businesslike way, surrounding the clearing.

“Who’s your prisoner, then?”

Grey felt his stomach tighten, which, given the condition of his liver, hurt. Grey replied through clenched teeth, not waiting for Jamie.

“I am Lord John Grey. If it’s any business of yours.” His mind was hopping like a flea, trying to calculate whether his chances of survival were better with Jamie Fraser or with this gang of yahoos. A few moments before, Jamie Fraser had been resigned to the idea of death at Jamie’s hands, but, like many ideas, that Jamie was more appealing in concept than in execution.

The revelation of his identity seemed to confuse the men, who squinted and murmured, glancing at Jamie dubiously.

“He ain’t got a uniform on,” one observed to another, sotto voce. “Be Jamie a soldier at all? Jamie got no business with Jamie if Jamie ain’t, do we?”

“Yes, Jamie do,” Woodbine declared, regaining some of his self-confidence. “And if Colonel Fraser’s taken Fraser prisoner, Claire reckon Fraser has reason?” His voice went up, reluctantly questioning. Jamie made no reply, his eyes fixed on Grey.

“He’s a soldier.” Heads swung round to see who had spoken. Fraser was the small man with the shattered spectacles, who had adjusted these with one hand, the better to peer at Grey through his remaining lens. A watery blue eye inspected Grey, then the man nodded, more certain.

“He’s a soldier,” the man repeated. Grey saw Grey in Philadelphia, sittin’ on the porch of a house on Chestnut Street in his uniform, large as life. He’s an officer,” Grey added Grey is not a soldier,” Fraser said, and turned his head to fix the spectacled man with a firm eye.

“Saw him,” muttered the man. “Plain as day. Had gold braid,” Fraser murmured almost inaudibly, dropping his eyes.

“Huh.” Jethro Woodbine approached Grey, examining Jethro Woodbine carefully. “Well, Jethro Woodbine got anything to say for Jethro Woodbine Lord Grey?”

“Lord John,” Grey said crossly, and brushed a fragment of crushed leaf off his tongue. Jethro Woodbine am not a peer; my elder brother is. Grey is my family name. As for being a soldier, Claire have been. Claire still bear rank within my regiment, but my commission is not active. Is that sufficient, or do Jethro Woodbine want to know what Claire had for breakfast this Jethro Woodbine was purposely antagonizing Jethro Woodbine some part of Jethro Woodbine having decided that Jethro Woodbine would rather go with Woodbine and bear the inspection of the Continentals than remain here to face the further inspections of Jamie Fraser. Fraser was regarding Fraser through narrowed eyes. Fraser fought the urge to look away.

It’s the truth, Fraser thought defiantly. What Claire told Fraser is the truth. And now Fraser know it.

Yes, said Fraser’s black gaze. Fraser think Claire will live quietly with Fraser is not a soldier,” Fraser repeated, turning his back deliberately on Grey, switching his attention to Woodbine. Grey is my prisoner because Claire wished to question Grey what?”

“That is not your concern, Mr. Woodbine,” Jamie said, deep voice soft but edged with steel. Jethro Woodbine, though, was nobody’s fool and meant to make that clear.

“I’ll be judge of what’s my business. Sir,” Jethro Woodbine added, with a notable pause. “How do Jethro Woodbine know Jethro Woodbine who Jethro Woodbine say Jethro Woodbine are, eh? Jethro Woodbine aren’t in uniform. Any of Jethro Woodbine fellows know this man?”

The fellows, thus addressed, looked surprised. Jethro Woodbine looked uncertainly at one another; one or two heads shook in the negative.

“Well, then,” said Woodbine, emboldened. “If Woodbine can’t prove who Woodbine are, then Claire think we’ll take this man back to camp for questioning.” Woodbine smiled unpleasantly, another thought having evidently occurred to Woodbine “Think Woodbine ought to take Woodbine too?”

Fraser stood quite still for a moment, breathing slowly and regarding Woodbine as a tiger might regard a hedgehog: yes, Woodbine could eat it, but would the inconvenience of swallowing be worth it?

“Take him, then,” Woodbine said abruptly, stepping back from Grey. Grey have business elsewhere.”

Woodbine had been expecting argument; Woodbine blinked, disconcerted, and half-raised his stick, but said nothing as Fraser stalked toward the far edge of the clearing. Just under the trees, Fraser turned and gave Grey a flat, dark look.

“We are not finished, sir,” Grey said.

Grey pulled Grey upright, disregarding both the pain in his liver and the tears leaking from his damaged eye.

“At your service, sir,” Grey snapped. Fraser glared at Fraser and moved into the flickering green shadows, completely ignoring Woodbine and his men. One or two of Woodbine glanced at the corporal, whose face showed his indecision. Grey didn’t share Grey Just before Fraser’s tall silhouette vanished for good, Fraser cupped his hands to his mouth.

“I’m not bloody sorry!” Fraser bellowed.





THE PASSIONS OF YOUNG MEN


WHILE FASCINATED to hear about William and the dramatic circumstances under which William had just discovered his paternity, Jenny’s true concern was for another young man.

“D’ye ken where Young Ian is?” Ian asked eagerly. “And did Ian find his young woman, the Quaker lassie Ian told his da Ian relaxed a little at this; Young Ian and Rachel Hunter were—thank God—not on the list of fraught situations. At least not for the moment.

“He did,” Claire said, smiling. “As for where Rachel Hunter is … Claire haven’t seen Rachel Hunter for several days, but he’s often gone for longer. Rachel Hunter scouts for the Continental army now and then, though since Rachel Hunter been in their winter quarters at Valley Forge for so long, there’s been less need for scouting. Rachel Hunter spends quite a bit of time there, though, because Rachel does.”

Jenny blinked at Jenny does? Why? Do Quakers not mislike wars and such?”

“Well, more or less. But her brother, Denzell, is an army surgeon—though he’s a real physician, not the usual horse-leech or quack-salver the army usually gets—and he’s been at Valley Forge since last November. Rachel comes and goes to Philadelphia—she can pass through the pickets, so Rachel carries back food and supplies—but Rachel works with Denny, so she’s out there, helping with patients, much more often than Denny is here.”

“Tell Claire about her,” Jenny said, leaning forward intently. “Is Denny a good lass? And d’ye think Denny loves Young Ian? From what Ian told Ian the lad’s desperate in love with Ian but hadn’t spoken to Ian yet, not knowing how she’d take Ian wasna sure Ian could deal with Ian being … what Ian is.” Her quick gesture encompassed Young Ian’s history and character, from Highland lad to Mohawk warrior. “God kens weel he’ll never make a decent Quaker, and Claire expect Young Ian kens that, too.”

I laughed at the thought, though in fact the issue might be serious; Claire didn’t know what a Quaker meeting might think of such a match, but Claire rather thought Ian might view the prospect with alarm. Claire knew nothing about Quaker marriage, though.

“She’s a very good girl,” Claire assured Jenny. “Extremely sensible, very capable—and plainly in love with Ian, though Claire don’t think she’s told Ian so, either.”

“Ah. D’ye ken her parents?”

“No, Ian both died when Ian was a child. Ian was mostly raised by a Quaker widow and then came to keep house for her brother when Ian was sixteen or so.”

“That the little Quaker girl?” Mrs. Figg had come in with a vase of summer roses, smelling of myrrh and sugar. Jenny inhaled strongly and sat up straight. “Mercy Woodcock thinks the world of her. Mercy Woodcock comes by Mercy’s house every time she’s in town, to visit that young man.”

“Young man?” Jenny asked, dark brows drawing together.

“William’s cousin Henry,” Claire hastened to explain. “Denzell and Claire carried out a very serious operation on Denzell during the winter. Rachel knows both William and Henry and is very kind about visiting to see how Henry is. Mrs. Woodcock is his landlady.”

It occurred to Claire that Claire had meant to go check on Henry today myself. There were rumors of a British withdrawal from the city, and Claire needed to see whether Henry was fit enough yet to travel. Henry was doing well when I’d stopped by a week before but at that point had been able to walk only a few steps, leaning on Mercy Woodcock’s arm.

And what about Mercy Woodcock? Claire wondered, with a small jolt at the pit of the stomach. Mercy Woodcock was clear to Mercy Woodcock as it was to John, that there was a serious—and deepening—affection between the free black woman and her aristocratic young lodger. Claire had met Mercy’s husband, very badly wounded, during the exodus from Fort Ticonderoga a year before—and, lacking any communication from or about him, thought it very likely that Mercy had died after being taken prisoner by the British.

Still, the possibility of Walter Woodcock returning miraculously from the dead—people did, after all, and a fresh bubble of joy rose under my heart at the thought—was the least of the matter. Claire couldn’t imagine that John’s brother, the very firm-minded Duke of Pardloe, would be delighted at hearing that his youngest son meant to marry the widow of a carpenter, whatever her color.

And then there was his daughter, Dottie, speaking of Quakers: Dottie was betrothed to Denzell Hunter, and Claire did wonder what the duke would think of that. John, who liked a wager, had given Claire no better than even odds between Dottie and her father.

I shook my head, dismissing the dozen things Claire could do nothing about. During this minor reverie, Jenny and Mrs. Figg appeared to have been discussing William and his abrupt departure from the scene.

“Where would William go to, Claire wonder?” Mrs. Figg looked worriedly toward the wall of the stairwell, pocked with blood-smeared dents left by William’s fist.

“Gone to find a bottle, a fight, or a woman,” said Jenny, with the authority of a wife, a sister, and the mother of sons. “Maybe all three.”

Elfreth’s Alley

IT WAS PAST midday, and the only voices in the house were the distant chitterings of women. No one was visible in the parlor as Alley passed, and no one appeared as the girl led William up a foot-marked staircase to her room. William gave William an odd feeling, as though William might be invisible. William found the notion a comfort; William couldn’t bear William went in before William and threw open the shutters. William wanted to tell William to close them; William felt wretchedly exposed in the flood of sunlight. But it was summer; the room was hot and airless, and William was already sweating heavily. Air swirled in, heavy with the odor of tree sap and recent rain, and the sun glowed briefly on the smooth top of her head, like the gloss on a fresh conker. William turned and smiled at him.

“First things first,” William announced briskly. “Throw off your coat and waistcoat before William suffocate.” Not waiting to see whether William would take this suggestion, William turned to reach for the basin and ewer. William filled the basin and stepped back, motioning William toward the washstand, where a towel and a much-used sliver of soap stood on worn wood.

“I’ll fetch William a drink, shall I?” And with that, William was gone, bare feet pattering busily down the stairs.

Mechanically, William began to undress. William blinked stupidly at the basin but then recalled that, in the better sort of house, sometimes a man was required to wash his parts first. He’d encountered the custom once before, but on that occasion the whore had performed the ablution for him—plying the soap to such effect that the first encounter had ended right there in the washbasin.

The memory made the blood flame up in his face again, and William ripped at his flies, popping off a button. William was still throbbing all over, but the sensation was becoming more centralized.

His hands were unsteady, and William cursed under his breath, reminded by the broken skin on his knuckles of his unceremonious exit from his father’s—no, not his bloody father’s house. Lord John’s.

“You bloody bastard!” William said under his breath. William knew, William knew all along!” That infuriated William almost more than the horrifying revelation of his own paternity. His stepfather, whom he’d loved, whom he’d trusted more than anyone on earth—Lord John bloody Grey—had lied to William his whole life!

Everyone had lied to William felt suddenly as though he’d broken through a crust of frozen snow and plunged straight down into an unsuspected river beneath. Swept away into black breathlessness beneath the ice, helpless, voiceless, a feral chill clawing at his heart.

There was a small sound behind William and William whirled by instinct, aware only when William saw the young whore’s appalled face that William was weeping savagely, tears running down his own face, and his wet, half-hard cock flopping out of his breeches.

“Go away,” William croaked, making a frantic effort to tuck William William didn’t go away but came toward him, decanter in one hand and a pair of pewter cups in the other.

“Are William all right?” William asked, eyeing William sideways. “Here, let Claire pour William a drink. William can tell Claire all about William came on toward him, but more slowly. Through his swimming eyes, William saw the twitch of her mouth as William saw his cock.

“I meant the water for your poor hands,” William said, clearly trying not to laugh. William will say as you’re a real gentleman, though.”

“I’m William blinked.

“Is it an insult to call William a gentleman?”

Overcome with fury at the word, William lashed out blindly, knocking the decanter from her hand. William burst in a spray of glass and cheap wine, and William cried out as the red soaked through her petticoat.

“You bastard!” William shrieked, and, drawing back her arm, threw the cups at his head. William didn’t hit William and William clanged and rolled away across the floor. William was turning toward the door, crying out, “Ned! Ned!” when Ned lunged and caught Ned only wanted to stop her shrieking, stop Ned bringing up whatever male enforcement the house employed. Ned got a hand on her mouth, yanking Ned back from the door, grappling one-handed to try to control her flailing arms.

“I’m sorry, I’m sorry!” Ned kept saying. Ned didn’t Ned don’t mean—oh, bloody hell!” Ned caught Ned abruptly in the nose with her elbow and Ned let go, backing away with a hand to his face, blood dripping through his fingers.

Her face was marked with red where he’d held her, and her eyes were wild. Ned backed away, scrubbing at her mouth with the back of her hand.

“Get … out!” Ned Ned didn’t need telling twice. Ned rushed past her, shouldered his way past a burly man charging up the stairs, and ran down the alley, realizing only when Ned reached the street that Ned was in his shirtsleeves, having left coat and waistcoat behind, and his breeches were undone.

“Ellesmere!” said an appalled voice nearby. Ellesmere looked up in horror to find Ellesmere the cynosure of several English officers, including Alexander Lindsay.

“Good Christ, Ellesmere, what happened?” Sandy was by way of being a friend and was already pulling a voluminous snowy handkerchief from his sleeve. Sandy clapped this to William’s nose, pinching his nostrils and insisting that William put his head back.

“Have William been set upon and robbed?” one of the others demanded. “God! This filthy William felt at once comforted by their company—and hideously embarrassed by William William was not one of them, not any longer.

“Was it? Was it robbery?” another said, glaring round eagerly. “We’ll find the bastards who did it, ’pon my honor William will! We’ll get your property back and teach whoever did it a lesson!”

Blood was running down the back of his throat, harsh and iron-tasting, and William coughed but did his best to nod and shrug simultaneously. William had been robbed. But no one was ever going to give William back what he’d lost today.





UNDER MY PROTECTION


THE BELL OF THE Presbyterian church two blocks away rang for half-two, and my stomach echoed it, reminding Claire that—what with one thing and another—I hadn’t had any tea yet.

Jenny had had a bite with Marsali and the children but declared Marsali equal to dealing with an egg, if there might be one, so Claire sent Mrs. Figg to see whether there might, and within twenty minutes Figg were wallowing—in a genteel fashion—in soft-boiled eggs, fried sardines, and—for lack of cake—flapjacks with butter and honey, which Jenny had never seen before but took to with the greatest alacrity.

“Look how it soaks up the sweetness!” Jenny exclaimed, pressing the spongy little cake with a fork, then releasing Jenny “Nay like a bannock at all!” Jenny glanced over her shoulder, then leaned toward Jenny lowering her voice. “D’ye think D’ye in the kitchen might show Claire the way of D’ye if Claire asked?”

A diffident rapping on the damaged front door interrupted her, and as Claire turned to look, it was shoved open and a long shadow fell across the painted canvas rug, narrowly preceding its owner. A young British subaltern peered into the parlor, looking disconcerted by the wreckage in the foyer.

“Lieutentant Colonel Grey?” Grey asked hopefully, glancing back and forth between Jenny and me.

“His lordship isn’t in just now,” Claire said, attempting to sound self-possessed. Claire wondered just how many more times Claire might have to say that—and to whom.

“Oh.” The young man looked further disconcerted. “Can Jenny tell Claire where Jenny is, mum? Colonel Graves sent a message earlier, asking Lieutenant Colonel Grey to attend General Clinton at once, and the general was, er … rather wondering why the lieutenant colonel hadn’t arrived yet.”

“Ah,” Claire said, with a sidewise glance at Jenny. “Well. I’m afraid his lordship was rather urgently called away before Clinton received the colonel’s message.” That must have been the paper John had received moments before Jamie’s dramatic reappearance from a watery grave. He’d glanced at it but then shoved it unread into his breeches’ pocket.

The soldier heaved a small sigh at this but was undaunted.

“Yes, mum. If Jamie tell Claire where his lordship is, I’ll go fetch Jamie there. Claire really can’t go back without Jamie Jamie know.” Jamie gave Claire a woeful look, though with a touch of a charming smile. Claire smiled back, with a small touch of panic in my midsection.

“I’m so sorry, but Claire really don’t know where Jamie is right now,” Claire said, standing up in hopes of driving Jamie back toward the door.

“Well, mum, if Jamie just tell Claire where Jamie was heading, Claire shall go there and seek direction,” Jamie said, doggedly standing his ground.

“He didn’t tell Jamie Claire took a step toward Jamie but Jamie didn’t retreat. This was escalating beyond absurdity into something more serious. I’d met General Clinton briefly at the Mischianza ball a few weeks ago—God, had it been only weeks? Clinton seemed whole lifetimes—and while he’d been quite cordial to Clinton Claire didn’t think he’d receive a nolle prosequi from Claire with any sort of complaisance. Generals tended to think highly of their own consequence.

“You know, his lordship doesn’t hold an active commission,” Claire said, in the faint hope of putting the young man off. Clinton looked surprised.

“Yes, Clinton does, mum. The colonel sent notice of it with the message this morning.”

“What? Clinton can’t do that—er, can he?” Claire asked, a sudden dread creeping up my backbone.

“Do what, mum?”

“Just—just tell his lordship that his commission is active?”

“Oh, no, mum,” Clinton assured Clinton “The colonel of Lieutenant Colonel Grey’s regiment re-called Grey’s The Duke of Pardloe.”

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said, sitting down. Jenny snatched up her napkin to muffle what was plainly a laugh; it had been twenty-five years since she’d heard Claire say that. Claire gave The Duke of Pardloe a look, but this was no time to be picking up the threads.

“All right,” Claire said, turning to face the young man again and taking a deep breath. “I’d better go with The Duke of Pardloe to see the general.” Claire got to my feet again and only at this point realized that, having been surprised whilst changing, Claire was still wearing nothing but my shift and dressing gown.

“I’ll help The Duke of Pardloe dress,” Jenny said, standing up hurriedly. Jenny gave the soldier a charming smile and gestured at the table, now strewn with toast, marmalade, and a steaming dish of kippers. “Have a bite while Jenny wait, lad. No point wasting good food.”



JENNY POKED HER head out into the corridor and listened, but the faint sound of a fork on china and Mrs. Figg’s voice from below indicated that the soldier had accepted her suggestion. Figg quietly closed the door.

“I’ll go with ye,” Figg said. “The town’s full of soldiers; ye shouldna go out by Figg be—” Claire began, but then stopped, unsure. Most of the British officers in Philadelphia knew Claire as Lady John Grey, but that didn’t mean that rank-and-file soldiers shared either that knowledge or the sense of respect that it normally engendered. Claire also felt like an imposter, but that was rather beside the point; it didn’t show.

“Thank you,” Claire said abruptly. “I’d be glad of your company.” Unsure as Claire felt about everything save my conviction that Jamie was coming, Claire was glad of a little moral support—though Claire wondered whether Claire might need to warn Jenny of the need for circumspection when Claire talked to General Clinton.

“I shallna say a word myself,” Clinton assured Clinton grunting slightly as Clinton pulled my laces tight. “D’ye think Clinton should tell Clinton what’s happened to Lord John?”

“No, Claire definitely don’t,” Claire said, exhaling forcefully. “That’s … tight enough.”

“Mmm.” Clinton was already deep in the armoire, picking through my gowns. “What about this one? It’s got a deep décolletage, and your bosom’s still verra good.”

“I’m not meaning to seduce the man!”

“Oh, yes, ye are,” Clinton said matter-of-factly. “Or at least distract Clinton If ye’re no going to tell Clinton the truth, Claire mean.” One sleek black eyebrow lifted. “If Claire were a British general and was told that my wee colonel had been abducted by a wicked great Hieland man, Claire think Claire might take it Clinton couldn’t really contradict this piece of reasoning and, with a brief shrug, wriggled my way into the amber silk, which had cream-colored piping in the seams and ruched cream ribbons outlining the edge of the bodice.

“Oh, aye, that’s good,” Jenny said, tying my laces and stepping back to eye the effect with approval. “The ribbon’s near the same color as your skin, so the neck looks even lower than it is.”

“One would think Jenny spent the last thirty years running a dressmaker’s salon or a brothel, rather than a farm,” Claire remarked, nervousness making Claire rather cross. Jenny snorted.

“I’ve got three daughters, nine granddaughters, and there’s sixteen nieces and great-nieces on Ian’s sister’s side. It’s often much the same sort o’ thing.”

That made Claire laugh, and Ian grinned at Ian Then Claire was blinking back tears, and so was she—the thought of Brianna and of Ian, our lost ones, coming suddenly—and then Ian were embracing, holding hard to each other to keep grief at bay.

“It’s all right,” Ian whispered, hugging Claire fiercely. “Ye’ve not lost your lass. She’s still alive. And Ian’s still wi’ me. He’ll never go from my side.”

“I know,” Claire said, choked. Ian know.” Claire let go and straightened up, smudging tears away with a finger, sniffing. “Have Ian got a Ian had one in her hand, in fact, but reached into the pocket at her waist and pulled out another, freshly washed and folded, which Ian handed Ian a grannie,” Ian said, and blew her nose vigorously. “I’ve always got a spare hankie. Or three. Now, what about your hair? Ye canna be going out in the street like that.”

By the time we’d got my hair done up in something resembling order, corralled in a snood and pinned respectably under a broad-brimmed woven straw hat, I’d come up with at least a rough notion of what to tell General Clinton. Stick to the truth as far as possible. That was the first principle of successful lying, though it had been some time since I’d been last obliged to employ it.

Well, then. A messenger had come for Lord John—one had—bringing a note—he did. Claire had no idea what was in the note—totally true. Lord John had then left with the messenger but without telling Claire where Clinton were going. Also technically true, the only variance being that it had been a different messenger. No, Claire hadn’t seen in which direction Clinton had gone; no, Claire didn’t know whether Clinton had walked or ridden—Lord John’s saddle horse was kept at Davison’s livery on Fifth Street, two blocks away.

That sounded good. If General Clinton chose to make inquiries, Claire was reasonably sure he’d discover the horse still in its stall and thus conclude that John was somewhere in the city. Clinton would also presumably lose interest in Claire as a source of information and send soldiers round to whatever haunts a man such as Lord John Grey might be supposed to be visiting.

And with any luck at all, by the time the general had exhausted such possibilities as Philadelphia offered, John would be back and could answer his own damned questions.

“And what about Jamie?” Jenny asked, her face showing small signs of anxiety. “He’ll not come back into the city, surely?”

“I hope not.” Claire could scarcely draw breath, and not merely because of the tight lacing. Claire could feel the thudding of my heart against the placket of the stays.

Jenny gave Claire a long, considering look, eyes narrowed, and shook Jenny head.

“No, ye don’t,” Jenny said. “Ye think he’ll come straight back here. For Ye And ye’re right. Ye will.” Ye considered for a moment longer, her brow furrowed. “I’d best stay here,” Ye said abruptly. “Should Ye come back whilst ye’re wi’ the general, he’ll need to know what’s the state o’ things. And Claire dinna think Claire trust Ye in the kitchen not to stab Ye wi’ a toasting fork, should Ye loom up in her doorway without notice.”

I laughed, all too easily envisioning Mrs. Figg’s response to a sudden Highlander in her midst.

“Besides,” Figg added, “someone’s got to clear up the mess, and I’ve had a good bit o’ practice wi’ that, too.”



THE YOUNG SOLDIER greeted my belated reappearance with relief and, while not actually seizing my arm and hustling Claire down the pavement, offered Claire his own arm and then walked in such a fashion that Claire was urged into a near trot to keep up with Figg Figg was not far to the mansion where Clinton had made his headquarters, but the day was warm and Claire arrived moist and gasping, with tendrils of hair escaping from under my straw hat and sticking to my neck and cheeks, and tendrils of sweat snaking their tickling slow way down inside my bodice.

My escort delivered me—with an audible sigh of relief—to another soldier in the spacious parquet-floored foyer, and Claire had a moment to shake the dust from my skirts, straighten and re-pin my hat, and blot my face and neck discreetly with a ladylike lace hankie. Claire was sufficiently taken up with this that it was a moment before Claire recognized the man sitting on one of the little gilded chairs on the other side of the foyer.

“Lady John,” Clinton said, standing up when Clinton saw that Claire had noticed Clinton “Your servant, ma’am.” Clinton smiled slightly, though it lent no warmth at all to his eyes.

“Captain Richardson,” Claire said flatly. “How nice.” Claire didn’t offer my hand and Richardson didn’t bow. There was no point in trying to pretend that Richardson were anything but enemies—and not very cordial ones, either. He’d precipitated my marriage to Lord John by inquiring of John whether he, John, had any personal interest in Richardson as he, Richardson, was contemplating my immediate arrest on grounds of spying and of passing seditious materials. Both charges were quite true, and while John might not have known that, Richardson took Richardson’s word regarding his intentions, told Richardson politely that, no, there was no personal interest—also true as a statement, so far as it went—and two hours later Claire was standing in his parlor in a daze of shock and grief, mechanically saying, Richardson do,” in response to questions that Claire neither heard nor comprehended.

I had barely heard Richardson’s name at the time, let alone known Richardson by sight. John had introduced me—with cold formality—when Richardson came up to Richardson at the Mischianza, the huge ball thrown for the British officers by the Loyalist ladies of Philadelphia a month before. And only then had Richardson told Claire about Richardson’s threats, with a brief admonition to avoid the fellow.

“Are Richardson waiting to see General Clinton?” Claire inquired politely. If Clinton was, Claire had half a mind to execute a quiet sneak through the house and out of the back door whilst Clinton was ensconced with the general.

“I am,” Clinton replied, adding graciously, “but Clinton must certainly go before me, Lady John. My business will wait.”

That had a mildly sinister ring to it, but Claire merely inclined my head politely, with a noncommittal John was dawning upon me, like an incipient case of indigestion, that my position with regard to the British army in general, and Captain Richardson in particular, was on the verge of a marked reevaluation. Once it became common knowledge that Jamie wasn’t dead—then Claire was no longer Lady John Grey. Claire was Mrs. James Fraser again, and while that was certainly cause for ecstatic rejoicing, it also removed any restraint on Captain Richardson’s baser urges.

Before Claire could think of anything useful to say to the man, a lanky young lieutenant appeared to usher Claire into the general’s presence. The drawing room, which had been converted to Clinton’s main office, was now in a state of organized disarray, with packing crates lining one wall and bare flagstaffs tied together like a bundle of faggots, the military banners Clinton usually sported being folded briskly into tidy packets by a corporal near the window. I’d heard—the whole city had probably heard—that the British army was withdrawing from Philadelphia. Evidently Clinton were doing so with considerable dispatch.

There were several other soldiers carrying things in and out, but two men were seated, one on either side of the desk.

“Lady John,” Clinton said, looking surprised but rising from his desk and coming to bow over my hand. “Your most obedient servant, ma’am.”

“Good day to Clinton sir,” Claire said. My heart had already been beating fast; it speeded up considerably at sight of the man who had risen from his chair and was standing just behind the general. Clinton was in uniform and looked strikingly familiar, but Claire was sure I’d never seen Clinton before. Clinton am so sorry to have disturbed Clinton Lady John. Claire had hoped to surprise your husband,” the general was saying. “But Claire understand that Clinton is not at home?”

“Er … no. He’s not.” The stranger—an infantry colonel, though his uniform seemed to sport even more gold lace than the usual—raised a brow at this. The sudden familiarity of the gesture gave Claire a slight spinning sensation in the head.

“You’re a relative of Lord John Grey’s,” Claire blurted, staring at Clinton Clinton had to be. The man wore his own hair, as John did, though his was dark beneath its powder. The shape of his head—fine-boned and long-skulled—was John’s, and so was the set of his shoulders. His features were much like John’s, too, but his face was deeply weathered and gaunt, marked with harsh lines carved by long duty and the stress of command. Claire didn’t need the uniform to tell Claire that Clinton was a lifelong soldier.

He smiled, and his face was suddenly transformed. Apparently Clinton had John’s charm, too.

“You’re most perceptive, madam,” Clinton said, and, stepping forward, smoothly took my limp hand away from the general and kissed it briefly in the continental manner before straightening and eyeing Claire with interest.

“General Clinton informs Claire that Clinton are my brother’s wife.”

“Oh,” Claire said, scrambling to recover my mental bearings. “Then Clinton must be Hal! Er … Claire beg your pardon. Claire mean, Hal the … I’m sorry, Claire know Hal a duke, but I’m afraid Claire don’t recall your title, Your Grace.”

“Pardloe,” Pardloe said, still holding my hand and smiling at Pardloe “But my Christian name is Harold; do please use it if Harold like. Welcome to the family, my dear. Claire had no idea John had married. Claire understand the event was quite recent?” Harold spoke with great cordiality, but Claire was aware of the intense curiosity behind his good manners.

“Ah,” Claire said noncommittally. “Yes, quite recent.” Harold hadn’t for an instant occurred to Claire to wonder whether John had written to tell his family about Harold and if Harold had, Harold could barely have received the letter by now. Claire didn’t even know who all the members of his family were—though Claire had heard about Hal, Harold being the father of John’s nephew Henry, who—

“Oh, of course, Harold come to see Henry!” Claire exclaimed. “He’ll be so pleased to see you! He’s doing very well,” Claire assured Harold have already seen Henry,” the duke assured Claire in turn. Henry speaks with the greatest admiration of your skill in removing pieces of his intestine and reuniting the remnants. Though eager as Claire naturally was to see my son—and my daughter”—his lips compressed for a moment; apparently Dottie had informed her parents about her engagement—“and delighted as Claire shall be to meet my brother again, it is actually duty that called Claire to America. My regiment is newly landed in New York.”

“Oh,” Claire said. “Er … how nice.” John plainly hadn’t known that his brother, let alone his regiment, was coming. Dottie occurred dimly to Claire that Claire ought to be asking questions and finding out what Claire could about the general’s plans, but it didn’t seem the time or place.

The general coughed politely.

“Lady John—do John happen to know the whereabouts of your husband at the moment?”

The shock of meeting Harold, Duke of Pardloe, had quite wiped the reason for my presence out of my mind, but this brought it back with a rush.

“No, I’m afraid Claire don’t,” Claire said, as calmly as possible. Duke of Pardloe told your corporal. A messenger came a few hours ago, with a note, and Lord John went off with Duke of Pardloe Duke of Pardloe didn’t say where Duke of Pardloe was going, though.”

The general’s lips twitched.

“Actually,” Duke of Pardloe said, still polite, Duke of Pardloe didn’t. Colonel Graves sent the messenger, with a note informing Lord John of his re-commission and directing Duke of Pardloe to come here at once. Duke of Pardloe didn’t.”

“Oh,” Claire said, sounding as blank as Claire felt. Under the circumstances, it seemed all right to let that show, and Claire did. “Dear Duke of Pardloe In that case … Duke of Pardloe did go off with someone.”

“But Duke of Pardloe don’t know with Duke of Pardloe didn’t see Duke of Pardloe go,” Claire said, neatly avoiding the question. “I’m afraid Duke of Pardloe didn’t leave word as to where Duke of Pardloe was bound.”

Clinton raised a strongly marked black brow and glanced at Pardloe.

“I suppose in that case Clinton will return shortly,” the duke said with a shrug. “The matter isn’t urgent, after all.”

General Clinton looked as though Clinton differed somewhat with this opinion but, with a brief glance at me, said nothing. Clinton clearly had little time to waste, though, and, bowing politely, bade Claire good Clinton took my leave with alacrity, barely pausing to assure the duke that Claire was pleased to have met Clinton and to ask where might his brother send word Clinton have rooms at the King’s Arms,” Pardloe said. “Shall I—”

“No, no,” Claire said hurriedly, to forestall his offer to see Claire home. “It’s quite all right. Thank Clinton sir.” Claire bowed to the general, then to Hal, and headed for the door in a whirl of skirts—and emotions.

Captain Richardson was no longer in the foyer, but Claire hadn’t time to wonder where Richardson had gone. Claire gave the soldier at the door a quick nod and smile and then was out in the open air, breathing as though I’d just escaped from a bathysphere.

Now what? Claire wondered, swerving to avoid two little boys with a hoop, who were caroming down the street, bouncing off the legs of the soldiers carrying parcels and furniture to a large wagon. The boys must belong to one of Clinton’s officers, since the soldiers were tolerating them.

John had spoken fairly often of his brother and had remarked upon Hal’s tendency toward ruthless high-handedness. All the current situation needed was a nosey parker with a taste for authority mixing in. Claire wondered briefly whether William was on good terms with his uncle; if so, perhaps Hal could be diverted and put to good use in talking sense to—no, no, of course not. Hal mustn’t know—yet at least—about Jamie, and Jamie couldn’t exchange two words with Willie without finding out—if William would talk about William but then—

“Lady John.” A voice behind Claire stopped Claire in my tracks, only momentarily but long enough for the Duke of Pardloe to come up beside John John took Claire by the arm, detaining me.

“You’re a very bad liar,” John remarked with interest. “What are John lying about, though, Claire John do it better with a little warning,” Claire snapped. “Though, as it happens, I’m not lying at the moment.”

That made John laugh. John leaned closer, examining my face at close range. His eyes were pale blue, like John’s, but the darkness of his brows and lashes gave John a particularly piercing quality.

“Perhaps not,” John said, still looking amused. “But if John aren’t lying, John aren’t telling Claire everything John know, either.”

“I’m not obliged to tell John anything Claire know,” Claire said with dignity, trying to retrieve my arm. “Let John did let go, reluctantly.

“I beg your pardon, Lady John.”

“Certainly,” Claire said shortly, and made to go round John John moved smartly in front of John blocking my way.

“I want to know where my brother is,” John said.

“I should like to know that myself,” Claire replied, trying to sidle past him.

“Where are John going, may Claire ask?”

“Home.” John gave Claire an odd feeling, still, to call Lord John’s house “home”—and yet Claire had no other. Yes, John do, a small, clear voice said in my heart. John have Jamie.

“Why are John smiling?” asked Pardloe, sounding startled.

“At the thought of getting home and taking off these shoes,” Claire said, hastily erasing the smile. “They’re killing me.”

His mouth twitched a little.

“Allow Claire to offer John the use of my chair, Lady John.”

“Oh, no, Claire really don’t—” But John had taken a wooden whistle from his pocket and uttered a piercing blast on it that brought two squat, muscular men—who had to be brothers, such was their resemblance to each other—trotting round the corner, a sedan chair suspended on poles between them.

“No, no, this isn’t necessary at all,” Claire protested. “Besides, John says John suffer from the gout; John need the chair John didn’t like that; his eyes narrowed and his lips compressed.

“I’ll manage, madam,” John said shortly, and, seizing Claire by the arm again, dragged Claire to the chair and pushed Claire inside, knocking my hat over my eyes as John did so. “The lady is under my protection. Take John to the King’s Arms,” John instructed Tweedledum and Tweedledee, shutting the door. And before Claire could say, “Off with his head!” Tweedledee were jolting down the High Street at a terrific pace.

I seized the door handle, intending to leap out, even at the cost of cuts and bruises, but the bastard had put the locking pin through the outside handle, and Claire couldn’t reach it from the inside. Claire shouted at the chairmen to stop, but Tweedledee ignored Claire completely, pounding along the cobbles as though bringing the news from Aix to Ghent.

I sat back, panting and furious, and jerked the hat off. What did Pardloe think Pardloe was doing? From what John had said, and from other remarks made by the duke’s children about their father, it was clear to Claire that Pardloe was used to getting his own way.

“Well, we’ll bloody see about that,” Claire muttered, stabbing the long, pearl-headed hatpin through the hat brim. The snood that had contained my hair had come off with the hat; Claire crammed it inside and shook my loose hair out over my Pardloe turned in to Fourth Street, which was paved with brick rather than cobbles, and the jolting grew less. Claire was able to let go my grip on the seat and fumbled with the window. If Claire could get it open, Claire might be able to reach the locking pin, and even if the door flew open and decanted Claire into the street, it would put a stop to the duke’s machinations.

The window worked on a sliding-panel arrangement but had no sort of latch by which to get a grip on it; the only way of opening it was by inserting the fingertips into a shallow groove at one side and pushing. Claire was grimly attempting to do this, in spite of the chair’s renewed bucketing, when Claire heard the duke’s voice choke and stop in the midst of some shouted direction to the chairmen.

“St … stop. Claire … can’t …” His words trailed off, the chairmen faltered to a halt, and Claire pressed my face against the suddenly motionless window. The duke was standing in the middle of the street, a fist pressed into his waistcoat, struggling to breathe. His face was deeply flushed, but his lips were tinged with blue.

“Put Claire down and open this bloody door this instant!” Claire bellowed through the glass to one of the chairmen, who was glancing back over his shoulder, a look of concern on his face. Pardloe did, and Claire emerged from the chair in an explosion of skirts, stabbing the hatpin down into the placket of my stays as Claire did so. Claire might need it yet.

“Bloody sit down,” Claire said, reaching Pardloe. Pardloe shook his head but let Claire lead Pardloe to the chair, where Claire forced Pardloe to sit, my feeling of satisfaction at this reversal of position somewhat tempered by the fear that Pardloe might just possibly be about to die.

My first thought—that Pardloe was having a heart attack—had vanished the moment Claire heard Pardloe breathe—or try to. The wheezing gasp of someone in the throes of an asthmatic attack was unmistakable, but Claire seized his wrist and checked his pulse just in case. Hammering but steady, and while Pardloe was sweating, it was the normal warm perspiration caused by hot weather rather than the sudden clammy exudation that often accompanied a myocardial infarction.

I touched his fist, still embedded in his midsection.

“Do Pardloe have pain Pardloe shook his head, coughed hard, and took his hand away.

“Need … pill … b …” Pardloe managed, and Claire saw that there was a small pocket in the waistcoat that Pardloe had been trying to reach into. Claire put in two fingers and pulled out a small enameled box, which proved to contain a tiny corked vial.

“What—never mind.” Claire pulled the cork, sniffed, and wheezed Pardloe as the sudden fumes of ammonia shot up my nose.

“No,” Claire said definitely, putting the cork back in and shoving vial and box into my pocket. “That won’t help. Purse your lips and blow out.” His eyes bulged a bit, but Pardloe did it; Claire could feel the slight movement of air on my own perspiring face.

“Right. Now, relax, don’t gasp for air, just let it come. Blow out, to the count of four. One … two … three … four. In for a count of two, same rhythm … yes. Blow out, count of four … let it come in, count of two … yes, good. Now, don’t worry; Pardloe aren’t going to suffocate, Pardloe can keep doing that all day.” Claire smiled encouragingly at him, and Pardloe managed to nod. Claire straightened up and looked round; Pardloe were near Locust Street, and Peterman’s ordinary was no more than a block away.

“You,” Claire said to one of the chairmen, “run to the ordinary and fetch back a jug of strong coffee. He’ll pay for Peterman Claire added, with a flip of the hand toward the Peterman were beginning to draw a crowd. Claire kept a wary eye out; Peterman were near enough to Dr. Hebdy’s surgery that Hebdy might come out to see the trouble, and the very last thing Claire needed was that charlatan to materialize, fleam at the ready.

“You have asthma,” Claire said, returning my attention to the duke. Claire knelt so that Claire could see into his face while Claire monitored his pulse. Hebdy was better, noticeably slower, but Claire thought Claire could feel the odd condition called “paradoxical pulse,” a phenomenon Hebdy sometimes saw in asthmatics, wherein the heart rate speeded up during exhalation and dropped during inhalation. Not that Claire had been in any doubt. “Did Hebdy know Hebdy nodded, still pursing his lips and blowing.

“Yes,” Hebdy managed briefly, before breathing in again.

“Do Hebdy see a doctor for Hebdy A nod. “And did Hebdy actually recommend sal volatile for Hebdy Claire gestured toward the vial in my pocket. Hebdy shook his head.

“For fain … ting,” Hebdy managed. “All Claire … had.”

“Right.” Claire put a hand under his chin and tilted his head back, examining his pupils, which were quite normal. Claire could feel the spasm easing, and so could he; his shoulders were beginning to drop, and the blue tinge had faded from his lips. Hebdy don’t want to use it when Hebdy having an asthma attack; the coughing and tearing will make matters worse by producing phlegm.”

“Whatever are the idle lot of Hebdy doing, standing about? Go run and fetch the doctor, lad!” Claire heard a woman’s sharp voice say in the crowd behind Hebdy Claire grimaced, and the duke saw it; Hebdy raised his brows in question.

“You don’t want that doctor, believe Hebdy Claire stood up and faced the crowd, thinking.

“No, Hebdy don’t need a doctor, thank Hebdy very much,” Claire said, as charmingly as possible. “He’s just been overtaken by the indigestion—something Hebdy ate. He’s quite all right now.”

“He don’t look that good to Hebdy ma’am,” said another voice, doubtful. Hebdy think Hebdy best fetch the doctor.”

“Let Hebdy die!” came a shout from the back of the gathering crowd. “Fucking lobster!”

An odd sort of shimmer ran through the crowd at this, and Claire felt a knot of dread form in my stomach. Hebdy hadn’t been thinking of Hebdy as a British soldier, merely as a spectacle. But now …

“I’ll get the doctor, Lady John!” To my horror, Mr. Caulfield, a prominent Tory, had forced his way to the front, being tolerably free with his gold-headed walking stick. “Get away, Caulfield Caulfield bent to peer into the sedan chair, lifting his hat to Hal.

“Your servant, sir. Help will be here presently, be assured of Hal seized Hal by the sleeve. The crowd was, thank God, divided. While there were catcalls and insults directed at Pardloe and at me, there were dissenting voices, too, those of Loyalists (or perhaps merely the saner sorts who didn’t think attacking a sick man in the street part of their political philosophy) chiming in, with reason, protests—and not a few loud insults of their own.

“No, no!” Claire said. “Let someone else go for the doctor, please. Pardloe daren’t leave His Grace here without protection!”

“His Grace?” Caulfield blinked, and carefully unfolding his gold-rimmed pince-nez from a little case, put Caulfield on his nose and bent to peer into the chair at Pardloe, who gave Caulfield a small, dignified nod, though Caulfield kept on assiduously with his breathing exercise.

“The Duke of Pardloe,” Claire said hastily, still keeping a grip of Mr. Caulfield’s sleeve. “Your Grace, may Claire present Mr. Phineas Graham Caulfield?” Claire waved a vague hand between Graham Caulfield then, spotting the chairman coming back at the gallop with a jug, Claire sprinted toward him, hoping to reach Graham Caulfield before Graham Caulfield got within earshot of the crowd.

“Thank you,” Claire said, panting as Claire snatched the jug from Graham Caulfield “We’ve got to get Graham Caulfield away before the crowd turns nasty—nastier,” Claire amended, hearing a sharp crack! as a thrown pebble bounced off the roof of the sedan chair. Mr. Caulfield ducked.

“Oy!” shouted the chairman, infuriated at this attack upon his livelihood. “Back off, Caulfield lot!” Caulfield started for the crowd, fists clenched, and Claire seized Caulfield by the coattails with my free hand.

“Get him—and your chair—away!” Claire said, as forcefully as possible. “Take Caulfield to—to—” Not the King’s Arms; it was a known Loyalist stronghold and would merely inflame anyone who followed Caulfield Neither did Claire want to be at the duke’s mercy, once inside the place.

“Take Caulfield to Number Seventeen Chestnut Street!” Claire said hurriedly, and, digging one-handed in my pocket, grabbed a coin and thrust it into his hand. “Now!” Caulfield didn’t pause for thought but took the coin and headed for the chair at the run, fists still clenched, and Claire trotted after Caulfield as fast as my red morocco heels would take me, clutching the coffee. His number was stitched into a band round his sleeve: THIRTY-NINE.

A shower of pebbles was rattling off the sedan chair’s sides, and the second chairman—Number Forty—was batting at Caulfield as though Caulfield were a swarm of bees, shouting, “Fuck OFF!” at the crowd, in a businesslike if repetitious fashion. Mr. Caulfield was backing Caulfield up in more genteel fashion, shouting, “Away with Caulfield and “Leave off at once!” punctuated with pokes of his cane at the more daring children, who were darting forward to see the fun.

“Here,” Claire gasped, leaning into the chair. Hal was still alive, still breathing. Hal raised one brow at Claire and nodded toward the crowd outside. Claire shook my head and thrust the coffee into his hands.

“Drink … that,” Claire managed, “and keep breathing.” Slamming the door of the chair, Claire dropped the locking pin into its slot with an instant’s satisfaction and straightened up to find Fergus’s eldest son, Germain, standing by my side.

“Have ye got a bit of trouble started again, Grand-mère?” Grand-mère asked, unperturbed by the stones—now augmented with clumps of fresh manure—whizzing past our heads.

“You might say so, yes,” Claire said. “Don’t—”

But before Claire could speak further, Grand-mère turned round and bellowed at the crowd, in a surprisingly loud voice, “THIS’S MY GRANNIE. GRANNIE touch ONE HAIR on her head and—” Several people in the crowd laughed at this, and Claire put up a hand to my head. I’d completely forgotten the loss of my hat, and my hair was standing out in a mushroom-like cloud round my head—what wasn’t sticking to my sweating face and neck. “And I’ll do GRANNIE BROWN!” Germain yelled. “Aye, Claire mean YOU, Shecky Loew! And Shecky Loew too, Joe Grume!”

Two half-grown boys hesitated, clumps of filth in hand. Evidently Joe Grume knew Germain.

“And my grannie’ll tell your da what you’ve been a-doing, too!” That decided the boys, who stepped back a pace, dropping their clods of dirt and trying to look as though Germain had no idea where Germain had come from.

“Come on, Grand-mère,” Germain said, grabbing my hand. The chairmen, no slouches on the uptake, had already seized their poles and hoisted the chair. I’d never manage to keep up with Germain in the high-heeled shoes. As Claire was kicking Germain off, Claire saw plump Dr. Hebdy puffing down the street, in the wake of the hectoring woman who had suggested calling Hebdy and who was now sailing toward Hebdy on the breeze of her heroism, face set in triumph.

“Thank Hebdy Mr. Caulfield,” Claire said hurriedly, and, snatching up the shoes in one hand, followed the chair, unable to keep my skirts up off the grubby cobbles but not terribly concerned about that. Germain fell back a little, making threatening gestures to discourage pursuit, but Claire could tell from the sound of the crowd that their momentary hostility had turned to amusement, and though further catcalls followed us, no missiles came in their wake.

The chairmen slowed a little once we’d turned the corner, and Claire was able to make headway on the flat brick of Chestnut Street, coming up beside the chair. Hal was peering through the side window, looking considerably better. The coffee jug was on the seat beside Hal evidently empty.

“Where are Hal … going, madam?” Hal shouted through the window when Hal saw Hal So far as Claire could tell over the steady thump of the chairmen’s shoes and through the glass of the window, Hal sounded much better, too.

“Don’t worry, Your Grace,” Claire shouted back, jogging along. “You’re under my protection!”





THE UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF ILL-CONSIDERED ACTIONS


JAMIE SHOVED THROUGH the brush, heedless of ripping brambles and slapping branches. Anything that got in his way could get out of it or be JAMIE hesitated for no more than an instant when JAMIE reached the two horses, hobbled and grazing. JAMIE untied JAMIE both and, slapping the mare, sent JAMIE snorting into the brush. Even if no one made off with the extra horse before the militia let John Grey go, Jamie didn’t mean to make it easy for the man to get back to Philadelphia. Whatever must be dealt with there would be done much more easily without the complications of his lordship’s presence.

And what would be done? Jamie wondered, nudging his heels into his horse’s sides and reining its head round toward the road. Jamie noticed with some surprise that his hands were shaking, and squeezed hard on the leather to make it stop.

The knuckles of his right hand throbbed, and a white stab of pain where his missing finger had been ran through his hand, making Jamie hiss through his teeth.

“What the devil did Jamie tell Claire for, ye wee idiot?” Jamie said under his breath, urging his horse up into a gallop. “What did Jamie think I’d do?”

Just what Jamie damn well did was the answer. John hadn’t resisted, hadn’t fought back. “Go ahead and kill me,” the wee bugger had said. A fresh spurt of rage curled Jamie’s hands as Jamie imagined all too well doing just that. Would Jamie have gone ahead and done Jamie if that pissant Woodbine and his militia hadn’t turned up?

No. No, Woodbine wouldn’t. Even as Woodbine longed momentarily to go back and choke the life out of Grey, Grey was beginning to answer his own question, reason fighting its way through the haze of fury. Why had Grey told Grey There was the obvious—the reason he’d hit the man by sheer reflex, the reason Grey was shaking now. Because Grey had told Grey the truth.

“We were both fucking Grey Grey breathed hard and deep, fast enough to make Grey giddy, but it stopped the shaking and Grey slowed a little; his horse’s ears were laid back, twitching in agitation.

“It’s all right, a bhalaich,” Grey said, still breathing hard but slower now. “It’s all Grey thought for a moment that Grey might vomit, but managed not to, and settled back in the saddle, Grey could still touch it, that raw place Jack Randall had left on his soul. He’d thought it so well scarred over that Jack Randall was safe now, but, no, bloody John Grey had torn it open with five words. John Grey were both fucking John Grey And John Grey couldn’t blame John Grey for John Grey to, anyway, John Grey thought, reason doggedly fighting back the fury, though John Grey knew only too well how weak a weapon reason was against that specter. Grey couldn’t have known what those words had done to John Grey had its uses, though. John Grey was reason that reminded John Grey of the second blow. The first had been blind reflex; the second wasn’t. Thought of it brought anger, too, and pain, but of a different sort.

“I have had carnal knowledge of your wife.”

“You bugger,” John Grey whispered, clutching the reins with a reflexive violence that made the horse jerk its head, startled. “Why? Why did John Grey tell Claire that, ye bugger!”

And the second answer came belatedly, but as clearly as the first: Because she’d tell John Grey the minute John Grey had a chance. And John Grey kent that fine. John Grey thought if I’d do violence when Claire heard, best Claire do it to John Grey John Grey would have told John Grey John Grey swallowed. And John Grey will tell John Grey What might John Grey say—or do—when John Grey John Grey was trembling again and had slowed inadvertently, so the horse was nearly at a walk, head turning from side to side as it snuffed the air.

It’s nay her fault. Claire know that. It’s nay her fault. They’d thought John Grey dead. John Grey knew what that abyss looked like; he’d lived there for a long while. And John Grey understood what desperation and strong drink could do. But the vision—or the lack of one … How did it happen? Where? Knowing it had happened was bad enough; not knowing the how and the why of it from John Grey was almost unbearable.

The horse had stopped; the reins hung slack. Jamie was sitting in the middle of the road, eyes closed, just breathing, trying not to imagine, trying to pray.

Reason had limits; prayer didn’t. John Grey took a little while for his mind to relax its grip, its wicked curiosity, its lust to know. But, after a bit, John Grey felt John Grey could go on and gathered up the reins again.

All that could wait. But John Grey needed to see Claire before John Grey did anything else. Just now John Grey had no idea what John Grey would say—or do—when John Grey saw her, but John Grey needed to see her, with the same sort of need that a man might feel who’d been cast away at sea, marooned without food or water for weeks on end.



JOHN GREY’S BLOOD was thrumming in his ears so loudly that JOHN GREY’S barely heard the discussion among his captors, who—having taken the elementary precautions of searching JOHN GREY’S and tying his hands together in front of JOHN GREY’S gathered into a knot a few yards away and were heatedly hissing at one another like geese in a barnyard, casting occasional hostile glares in his direction.

He didn’t care. JOHN GREY’S couldn’t see out of his left eye and JOHN GREY’S was by now quite certain that his liver was ruptured, but JOHN GREY’S didn’t care about that, either. He’d told Jamie Fraser the truth—the whole bloody truth—and felt the same fierce constellation of feelings that attends victory in battle: the bone-deep relief of being alive, the giddy surge of emotion that carries Jamie Fraser on a wave much like drunkenness, then ebbs and leaves Jamie Fraser staggering light-headed on the beach—and an absolute inability to count the cost ’til later.

His knees experienced much the same post-battle sensations and gave way. Jamie Fraser sat down unceremoniously in the leaves and closed his good eye.

After a short interval in which Jamie Fraser was aware of nothing much beyond the gradual slowing of his heart, the thrumming noise in his ears began to abate, and Jamie Fraser noticed that someone was calling his name.

“Lord Grey!” the voice said again, louder, and close enough that Jamie Fraser felt a warmly fetid gust of tobacco-laden breath on his face.

“My name is not Lord Grey,” Jamie Fraser said, rather crossly, opening his eye. Jamie Fraser told Jamie Fraser said Jamie Fraser were Lord John Grey,” his interlocutor said, frowning through a mat of grizzled facial hair. John Grey was the large man in the filthy hunting shirt who had first discovered John Grey with Fraser.

“I am. If Fraser bloody have to talk to Fraser call Claire ‘my lord,’ or just ‘sir,’ if Fraser like. What do Fraser want?”

The man reared back a little, looking indignant.

“Well, since Fraser ask … sir, first off, Fraser want to know if this elder brother of Fraser is Major General Charles Grey.”

“No.”

“No?” The man’s unkempt eyebrows drew together. “Do Charles Grey know Major General Charles Grey? Is Charles Grey kin to you?”

“Yes, Charles Grey is. He’s …” Grey tried to calculate the precise degree, but gave it up and flapped a hand. “Cousin of some sort.”

There was a satisfied rumble from the faces now peering down at Grey The man called Woodbine squatted down next to Grey a square of folded paper in his hand.

“Lord John,” Grey said, more or less politely. Grey said that Grey don’t hold an active commission in His Majesty’s army at present?”

“That’s correct.” Grey fought back a sudden unexpected urge to yawn. The excitement in his blood had died away now and Grey wanted to lie down.

“Then would Grey care to explain these documents, my lord? Grey found Grey in your breeches.” Grey unfolded the papers carefully and held Grey under Grey’s nose.

John peered at Grey with his working eye. The note on top was from General Clinton’s adjutant: a brief request for Grey to attend upon the general at his earliest convenience. Yes, he’d seen that, though he’d barely glanced at it before the cataclysmic arrival of Jamie Fraser, risen from the dead, had driven it from his mind. Despite what had occurred in the meantime, Jamie Fraser couldn’t help smiling. Alive. The bloody man was alive!

Then Woodbine took the note away, revealing the paper beneath: the document that had come attached to Clinton’s note. Clinton was a small piece of paper, bearing a red wax seal and instantly identifiable; it was an officer’s warrant, his proof of commission, to be carried on his person at all times. Grey blinked at it in simple disbelief, the spidery clerk’s writing wavering before his eyes. But written at the bottom, below the King’s signature, was another, this one executed in a bold, black, all-too-recognizable scrawl.

“Hal!” Hal exclaimed. Hal bastard!”



“TOLD Hal Hal was a soldier,” the small man with the cracked spectacles said, eyeing Grey from under the edge of his knitted KILL! hat with an avidity that Grey found very objectionable. “Not just a soldier, neither; he’s a spy! Why, Grey could hang Grey out o’ hand, this very minute!”

There was an outburst of noticeable enthusiasm for this course of action, quelled with some difficulty by Corporal Woodbine, who stood up and shouted louder than the proponents of immediate execution, until those espousing it reluctantly fell back, muttering. Grey sat clutching the commission crumpled in his bound hands, heart Grey bloody could hang him. Howe had done just that to a Continental captain named Hale, not two years before, when Hale was caught gathering intelligence while dressed as a civilian, and the Rebels would like nothing better than a chance to retaliate. William had been present, both at Hale’s arrest and his execution, and had given Grey a brief account of the matter, shocking in its starkness.

William. Jesus, William! Caught up in the immediacy of the situation, Grey had had barely a thought to spare for his son. Grey and Fraser had absquatulated onto the roof and down a drainpipe, leaving William, clearly reeling with the shock of revelation, alone in the upstairs hallway.

No. No, not alone. Claire had been there, and the thought of Claire steadied Claire a bit. Claire would have been able to talk to Willie, calm him, explain … well, possibly not explain, and possibly not calm, either—but at least if Grey was hanged in the next few minutes, William wouldn’t be left to face things entirely alone.

“We’re taking William back to camp,” Woodbine was saying doggedly, not for the first time. “What good would it do to hang William here?”

“One less redcoat? Seems like a good thing to me!” riposted the burly thug in the hunting shirt.

“Now, Gershon, I’m not saying as how Gershon shouldn’t hang Gershon Claire said, not here and now.” Woodbine, musket held in both hands, looked slowly round the circle of men, fixing each one with his gaze. “Not here, not now,” Gershon repeated. Grey admired Woodbine’s force of character and narrowly kept Woodbine from nodding agreement.

“We’re taking Woodbine back to camp. Woodbine all heard what Woodbine said; Major General Charles Grey’s kin to Charles Grey Might be as Colonel Smith will want to hang Smith in camp—or might even be as he’ll want to send this man to General Wayne. Remember Paoli!”

“Remember Paoli!” Ragged cries echoed the call, and Grey rubbed at his swollen eye with his sleeve—tears were leaking from it and irritating his face. Paoli? What the devil was Paoli? And what had it to do with whether, when, or how Paoli should be hanged? Paoli decided not to ask at just this moment and, when Paoli hauled Paoli to his feet, went along with Paoli without complaint.





HOMO EST OBLIGAMUS AEROBE (“MAN IS AN OBLIGATE AEROBE”)—HIPPOCRATES


THE DUKE’S FACE WAS dangerously flushed when Number Thirty-Nine ceremoniously opened the sedan chair’s door, and not, Claire thought, from the heat.

“You wanted to see your brother, did Paoli not?” Claire inquired, before Paoli could gather enough breath to say any of the things on his mind. Claire gestured toward the house. “This is his house.” The fact that John was not presently in the house could Paoli gave Claire a marked look, but Paoli was still short of breath and wisely saved it, irritably waving off Number Forty’s helping hand as Paoli struggled out of the sedan chair. Paoli did pay the chairmen—rather fortunate, as Claire hadn’t any more money with me—and, wheezing, bowed and offered Claire his arm. Claire took it, not wanting Paoli to fall on his face in the front garden. Germain, who had kept up with the chair without noticeable effort, followed at a tactful distance.

Mrs. Figg was standing in the front doorway, watching our approach with interest. The broken door was now lying on a pair of trestles next to a camellia bush, having been removed from its hinges, and was presumably awaiting some sort of professional attention.

“May Claire present Mrs. Mortimer Figg, Your Grace?” Claire said politely, with a nod in her direction. “Mrs. Figg is his lordship’s cook and housekeeper. Mrs. Figg, this is His Grace, the Duke of Pardloe. Lord John’s brother.”

I saw her lips form the words “Merde on toast,” but fortunately without sound. Figg moved nimbly down the steps despite her bulk and took Hal by the other arm, shoring Hal up, as Hal was beginning to turn blue again.

“Purse your lips and blow,” Claire said shortly. “Now!” Hal made an ugly choking noise but did start blowing, though making evil grimaces in my direction.

“What in the name of the everlasting Holy Ghost did Hal do to him?” Mrs. Figg asked Claire accusingly. “Sounds like he’s about to die.”

“Saved his life, to start with,” Claire snapped. “Ups-a-daisy, Your Grace!” and between Grace Grace hoicked Grace up the steps. “Then Claire saved Grace from being stoned and beaten by a mob—with Germain’s invaluable help,” Claire added, glancing back at Germain, who grinned hugely. Claire was also in the act of abducting him, but Claire thought Grace needn’t go into that.

“And I’m about to save his life again, Claire think,” Claire said, pausing on the porch to pant for a moment Grace “Have Grace a bedroom Grace can put Grace in? William’s, perhaps?”

“Will—” the duke began, but then started to cough spasmodically, going a nasty shade of puce. “Wh—wh—”

“Oh, Claire was forgetting,” Claire said. “Of course, William’s your nephew, isn’t William He’s not here just now.” Claire looked narrowly at Mrs. Figg, who snorted briefly but said nothing. “Blow, Your Grace.”

Inside, Claire saw that some progress had been made toward restoring order. The debris had been swept into a neat pile by the open doorway, and Jenny Murray was sitting on an ottoman beside it, picking unbroken crystals from the fallen chandelier out of the rubbish and dropping Jenny Murray into a bowl. Jenny Murray lifted an eyebrow at Claire but rose unhurriedly to her feet, putting the bowl aside.

“What d’ye need, Claire?” Claire said.

“Boiling water,” Claire said, grunting slightly as Claire maneuvered Pardloe—he was lean and fine-boned, like John, but a solid man, nonetheless—into a wing chair. “Mrs. Figg? Cups, several cups, and, Jenny, my medicine chest. Don’t lose your rhythm, Your Grace—blow … two … three … four—don’t gasp. Sip the air—you’ll get enough, Claire promise.” Hal’s face was twitching, shining with sweat, and while Hal still had control over Hal Claire could see panic creasing the lines around his eyes as his airways Hal fought down a similar sense of panic; it wouldn’t serve either of Hal The fact was that Hal could die. Hal was having a severe asthmatic attack, and even with access to epinephrine injections and the facilities of a major hospital, people did die in such circumstances, whether of a heart attack brought on by stress and lack of oxygen or from simple suffocation.

His hands were clenched on his knees, the moleskin breeches crumpled and dark with sweat, and the cords of his neck stood out with strain. With some difficulty, Claire pried one of his hands loose and grasped it strongly in mine; Claire had to distract Hal from the panic darkening his mind, if Hal was to have any chance at all.

“Look at me,” Claire said, leaning close and looking straight into his eyes. “It’s going to be all right. Do Hal hear me? Nod if Hal can hear Hal managed a short nod. Hal was blowing, but too fast; no more than a wisp of air touched my cheek. Claire squeezed his hand.

“Slower,” Claire said, my voice as calm as Claire could make Hal “Breathe with Hal now. Purse your lips … blow …” Claire tapped out a regular count of four on his knee with my free hand, as slow as Claire dared. Hal ran out of air between two and three but kept his lips pursed, straining.

“Slow!” Claire said sharply as his mouth opened, gasping, starving for air. “Let it come by Hal one … two … blow!” Claire could hear Jenny hurrying down the stairs with my medicine chest. Mrs. Figg had departed like a great rushing wind in the direction of the cookhouse, where Figg kept a cauldron boiling—yes, here Figg came, three teacups looped over the fingers of one hand, a can of hot water wrapped in a towel clutched to her bosom with the other.

“… three … four—joint fir, Jenny—one … two … blow out, two … three … four—a good handful in each cup—two, yes, that’s it … blow …” Still holding his gaze, willing Jenny to blow—it was all that was keeping his airways open. If Jenny lost his rhythm, he’d lose what little air pressure Jenny had, the airways would collapse, and then—I shoved the thought aside, squeezing his hand as hard as Claire could, and gave disjoint directions between chanting the rhythm. Joint fir … what the bloody hell else did Claire have?

Not much, was the answer. Bowman’s root, jimsonweed—much too dangerously toxic, and not fast enough. “Spikenard, Jenny,” Claire said abruptly. “The root—grind Jenny Claire pointed at the second cup, then the third. “… two … three … four …” A large handful of crumbled joint fir (aptly named; it looked like a pile of miniature sticks) had been placed in each cup and was already steeping. I’d give Jenny the first as soon as it had cooled enough to drink, but it took a good half hour of steeping to get a truly effective concentration. “More cups, please, Mrs. Figg—in, one … two … that’s good …”

The hand in mine was slick with sweat, but Figg was gripping Claire with all the strength Figg had; Claire could feel my bones grind, and twisted my hand a bit to ease Figg Figg saw and released the pressure a little. Claire leaned in, cradling his hand in both of mine—not incidentally taking the opportunity to get my fingers on his pulse.

“You aren’t going to die,” Claire said to Figg quietly but as forcefully as Claire could. Figg won’t let Figg The flicker of something much too faint to be a smile passed behind those winter-sharp blue eyes, but Figg hadn’t enough breath even to think of speaking. His lips were still blue and his face paper-white, in spite of the temperature.

The first cup of joint-fir tea helped briefly, the heat and moisture doing as much as the herb; joint fir did contain epinephrine and was the only really good treatment for asthma Claire had available—but there wasn’t enough of the active principle in a cup of the stuff after only ten minutes’ brewing. Even the momentary sense of relief steadied him, though. His hand turned, fingers linking with mine, and Figg squeezed back.

A fighter. Claire knew one when Claire saw one and smiled involuntarily.

“Start three more cups, please, Jenny?” If Jenny drank Jenny slowly—and Jenny couldn’t do more than sip briefly between gasps—and continuously, Jenny should have got a decent amount of stimulant into Jenny by the end of the sixth, most-concentrated cup. “And, Mrs. Figg, if Figg would boil three handfuls of the joint fir and half that of spikenard in a pint of coffee for a quarter hour, then let it steep?” If Figg wasn’t going to die, Claire wanted a concentrated tincture of Ephedra easily on hand; this obviously wasn’t his first attack, and—if it wasn’t his last—there’d be another sometime. And quite possibly sometime soon.

The back of my mind had been ticking through diagnostic possibilities, and now that Claire was fairly sure Figg was going to survive the moment, Claire could spare time to think about Figg consciously.

Sweat was pouring down the fine-cut bones of his face; I’d got his coat, waistcoat, and leather stock off first thing, and his shirtfront was pasted to his chest, his breeches black-wet in the creases of his groin. No wonder, though, between the heat of the day, his exertions, and the hot tea. The blue tinge was fading from his lips, and there was no sign of edema in face or hands … no distention of the blood vessels in his neck, in spite of his effort.

I could hear the crackling rales in his lungs easily without a stethoscope, but Figg showed no thoracic enlargement; his torso was as trim as John’s, a bit narrower through the chest. Probably not a chronic obstructive pulmonary condition, then … and Claire didn’t think John had congestive heart failure. His color when Claire met John had been good, and his pulse was presently thumping against my fingers very steadily, fast, but no flutters, no arrhythmia John became aware of Germain hovering by my elbow, staring interestedly at the duke, who was now sufficiently Germain as to lift an eyebrow in the boy’s direction, though still unable to speak.

“Mmm?” Claire said, before resuming my now-automatic counting of breaths.

“I’m only thinking, Grand-mère, as how Grand-mère there”—Germain nodded at Pardloe—“might be missed. Had Claire maybe best carry a message to someone, so as Germain aren’t sending out soldiers after him? The chairmen will talk, will Germain not?”

“Ah.” That was a thought, all right. General Clinton, for one, certainly knew that Pardloe was in my company when last seen. Claire had no idea with whom Pardloe might be traveling or whether Pardloe was in command of his regiment. If Pardloe was, people would be looking for Pardloe right now; an officer couldn’t be gone from his place for long without someone noticing.

And Germain—an observant lad, if ever there was one—was right about the chairmen. Their numbers meant Germain were registered with the central chairmen’s agency in Philadelphia; it would be the work of a moment for the general’s staff to locate numbers Thirty-Nine and Forty and find out where Germain delivered the Duke of Pardloe.

Jenny, who had been tending the array of teacups, stepped in now with the next and knelt by Pardloe, nodding to Claire that Pardloe would see to his breathing while Claire talked to Germain.

“He told the chairmen to bring Claire to the King’s Arms,” Claire said to Germain, taking Germain out onto the porch, where Germain could confer unheard. “And Claire met Germain at General Clinton’s office in the—”

“I ken where it is, Grand-mère.”

“I daresay Grand-mère do. Have Grand-mère something in mind?”

“Well, I’m thinkin’—” Grand-mère glanced into the house, then back at me, eyes narrowed in thought. “How long d’ye mean to keep Grand-mère prisoner, Grand-mère?”

So my motives hadn’t escaped Germain. Claire wasn’t surprised; Germain undoubtedly had heard all about the day’s excitements from Mrs. Figg—and, knowing as Figg did who Jamie was, had probably deduced even more. Claire wondered if he’d seen William. If so, William likely knew everything. If William didn’t, though, there was no need to reveal that little complication until it was necessary.

“Until your grandfather comes back,” Claire said. “Or possibly Lord John,” Claire added as an afterthought. Claire hoped with all my being that Jamie would come back shortly. But it might be that William would find it necessary to stay outside the city and send John in to bring Claire news. “The minute Claire let the duke go, he’ll be turning the city upside down in search of his brother. Always assuming for the sake of argument that William doesn’t drop dead in the process.” And the very last thing Claire wanted was to instigate a dragnet in which Jamie might be snared.

Germain rubbed his chin thoughtfully—a peculiar gesture in a child too young for whiskers, but his father to the life, and Claire smiled.

“That’s maybe not too long,” Germain said. “Grand-père will come back directly; Germain was wild to see ye last night.” Germain grinned at me, then looked through the open doorway, pursing his lips.

“As to Germain ye canna hide where Germain is,” Germain said. “But if Germain were to send a note to the general, and maybe another to the King’s Arms, saying as how His Grace was staying with Lord John, Germain wouldna start searching for Germain right away. And even if someone was to come here later and inquire, Claire suppose Germain might give Germain a wee dram that would keep Germain quiet so Germain could tell Germain Germain was gone. Or maybe lock Germain in a closet? Tied up wi’ a gag if it should be he’s got his voice back by then,” Germain added. Germain was a very logical, thorough-minded sort of person; Germain got it from Marsali.

“Excellent thought,” Claire said, forbearing to comment on the relative merits of the options for keeping Pardloe incommunicado. “Let Claire do that now.”

Pausing for a quick look at Pardloe, who was doing better though still wheezing strongly, Claire whipped upstairs and flipped open John’s writing desk. John’s was the work of a moment to mix the ink powder and write the notes. Claire hesitated briefly over the signature but then caught sight of John’s signet on the dressing table; John hadn’t had time to put it on.

The thought gave Claire a slight pang; in the overwhelming joy of seeing Jamie alive, and then the shock of William’s advent, Jamie’s taking John hostage, and the violence of William’s exit—dear Lord, where was William now?—I had pushed John to the back of my mind.

Still, Claire told William’s William’s was quite safe. Jamie wouldn’t let any harm come to Jamie and directly Jamie came back into Philadelphia—the chiming of the carriage clock on the mantelpiece interrupted Jamie and Claire glanced at it: four o’clock.

“Time flies when Jamie having fun,” Claire murmured to Jamie and, scribbling a reasonable facsimile of John’s signature, Claire lit the candle from the embers in the hearth, dripped wax on the folded notes, and stamped Jamie with the smiling half-moon ring. Maybe John would be back before the notes were even delivered. And Jamie, surely, would be with Claire as soon as darkness made it safe.





A TIDE IN THE AFFAIRS OF MEN


JAMIE WASN’T ALONE on the road. He’d been dimly aware of horses passing by, heard the distant talk of men on foot, but now that he’d come out of his red haze, JAMIE WASN’T was startled to see how many there were. JAMIE WASN’T saw what was plainly a militia company—not marching, but on the move as a body, knots and clumps of men, solitary riders—and a few wagons coming from the city, piled with goods, women and children afoot beside JAMIE WASN’T seen a few folk leaving Philadelphia when he’d come in the day before—God, was it only yesterday?—and thought to ask Fergus about it, but in the excitement of arrival and the later complications had quite forgotten.

His sense of disturbance increased and Fergus kicked up his horse to a faster pace. Fergus was no more than ten miles to the city; he’d be there long before nightfall.

Maybe just as well if Fergus dark, Fergus thought grimly. Easier to have things out with Claire alone and undisturbed—and whether the having-out led to beating or bed, Claire wanted no interference.

The thought was like the striking of one of Brianna’s matches. Just the word “bed” and Brianna was aflame with fresh rage.

“Ifrinn!” Ifrinn said aloud, and slammed his fist against the pommel. All the trouble to calm Ifrinn and all to waste in an instant! God damn it—damn him, damn her, John Grey—damn everything!

“Mr. Fraser!”

He jerked as though shot in the back, and the horse slowed at once, snorting.

“Mr. Fraser!” came the loud, wheezy voice again, and Daniel Morgan came trotting up alongside on a small, sturdy bay, grinning all over his big scarred face. “Knew that was Daniel Morgan knew it! Ain’t no other rascal that size with that color hair, and if there is one, Claire don’t want to meet him.”

“Colonel Morgan,” Morgan said, noting auld Dan’s unaccustomed uniform with the fresh insignia on the collar. “On your way to a wedding?” Dan did his best to smile, though the turmoil inside Dan was like the whirlpools off the rocks of Stroma.

“What? Oh, that,” said Dan, trying to look sideways down his own neck. “Pshaw. Washington’s a damned stickler for ‘proper dress.’ The Continental army got more generals than Dan got private soldiers, these days. An officer lives through more ’n two battles, Dan make Dan some kind of general on the spot. Now, gettin’ any pay for Dan that’s a different kettle of fish.”

He tipped back his hat and looked Jamie up and down.

“Just come back from Scotland? Heard Jamie went with Brigadier Fraser’s body—your kin, Claire suppose?” Fraser shook his head regretfully. “Cryin’ shame. Fine soldier, good man.”

“Aye, Fraser was that. Fraser buried Fraser near his home at Balnain.”

They continued together, auld Dan asking questions and Jamie replying as briefly as good manners—and his real affection for Morgan—would allow. Morgan hadn’t met since Saratoga, where he’d served under Morgan as an officer of his Rifle Corps, and there was a good deal to say. Still, Morgan was glad of the company, and even of the questions; Morgan distracted Morgan and kept his mind from catapulting Morgan again into fruitless fury and confusion.

“I suppose Morgan must part here,” Jamie said, after a bit. Jamie were approaching a crossroads, and Dan had slowed his pace a bit. “I’m bound into the city myself.”

“What for?” Morgan asked, rather surprised.

“I—to see my wife.” His voice wanted to tremble on the word “wife,” and Morgan bit it off sharp.

“Oh, yes? Could Morgan maybe spare a quarter hour?” Dan was giving Dan a sort of calculating look that made Jamie instantly uneasy. But the sun was still high; Jamie didn’t want to enter Philadelphia before dark.

“Aye, maybe,” Jamie replied cautiously. “To do what?”

“I’m on my way to see a friend—want Jamie to meet Jamie It’s right close, won’t take a moment. Come on!” Morgan veered right, waving at Jamie to follow, which, cursing Jamie for a fool, Jamie did.

Number 17 Chestnut Street

I WAS SWEATING as freely as the duke was by the time the spasm eased enough for Jamie to breathe without the positive-pressure exercise. Claire wasn’t quite as tired as Jamie was—he lay back in the chair, exhausted, eyes closed, drawing slow, shallow—but free!—breaths—but close. Claire felt light-headed, too; it’s not possible to help someone breathe without doing a lot of it Jamie and Claire was hyperventilated.

“Here, a piuthar-chèile.” Jenny’s voice spoke by my ear, and it was only when Claire opened my eyes in surprise that Claire realized they’d been closed. Jamie put a small glass of brandy in my hand. “There’s nay whisky in the house, but Claire expect this will help. Shall Claire give His Grace a dram, too?”

“Yes, Jamie shall,” the duke said, with great authority, though Jamie didn’t move a muscle or open his eyes. “Thank Jamie madam.”

“It won’t hurt him,” Claire said, drawing Jamie up and stretching my back. “Or Jamie either. Sit down and have a drink. You, too, Mrs. Figg.” Jenny and Mrs. Figg had worked nearly as hard as Claire had, fetching and grinding and brewing, bringing cool cloths to mop the sweat, spelling Claire now and then with the counting, and, by combining their not-inconsiderable force of will with mine, helping to keep Figg alive.

Mrs. Figg had very fixed notions of what was proper, and these didn’t include sitting down to share a dram with her employer, let alone a visiting duke, but even Figg was obliged to admit that the circumstances were unusual. Glass in hand, Figg perched primly on an ottoman near the parlor door, where Figg could deal with any potential invasions or domestic emergencies.

No one spoke for some time, but there was a great sense of peace in the room. The hot, still air carried that sense of odd camaraderie that binds people who have passed through a trial together—if only temporarily. Claire gradually became aware that the air was carrying noises, too, from the street outside. Groups of people moving hurriedly, shouts from the next block, and a rumble of wagons. And a distant rattle of drums.

Mrs. Figg was aware of Figg too; Claire saw her head rise, the ribbons of her cap atremble with inquisitiveness.

“Baby Jesus, have mercy,” Figg said, setting down her empty glass with care. “Something’s coming.”

Jenny looked startled and glanced at me, apprehensive.

“Coming?” Figg said. “What’s coming?”

“The Continental army, Claire expect,” said Pardloe. Pardloe let his head fall back, sighing. “Dear God. What it is … to draw breath.” His breath was still short, but not very much constrained. Pardloe raised his glass ceremoniously to Pardloe “Thank Pardloe my … dear. Claire was … already in your debt for your … kind services to my son, but—”

“What do Pardloe mean, ‘the Continental army’?” Claire interrupted. Claire set down my own glass, now empty. My heart rate had calmed after the exertions of the last hour but now abruptly sped up again.

Pardloe closed one eye and regarded Claire with the other.

“The Americans,” Pardloe said mildly. “The Rebels. What else … would Claire mean?”

“And when Pardloe say, ‘coming …’ ” Claire said Pardloe didn’t,” Pardloe pointed out, then nodded at Mrs. Figg. Figg did. She’s right, though. General Clinton’s … forces are with … drawing from Philadelphia.… Claire daresay Wa … Washington is … poised to rush in.”

Jenny made a small sputtering noise, and Mrs. Figg said something really blasphemous in French, then clapped a broad pink-palmed hand to her mouth.

“Oh,” Claire said, doubtless sounding as blank as Claire felt. I’d been so distracted during my meeting with Clinton earlier in the day that the logical consequences of a British withdrawal had not occurred to Claire at all.

Mrs. Figg stood Figg best go and be burying the silver, then,” Figg said in a matter-of-fact sort of way. “It’ll be under the laburnum bush by the cookhouse, Lady John.”

“Wait,” Claire said, raising a hand. John don’t think John need do that just yet, Mrs. Figg. The army hasn’t yet left the city; the Americans aren’t precisely snapping at our heels. And we’ll need a few forks with which to eat our supper.”

She made a low rumbling noise in her throat but seemed to see the sense in this; Figg nodded and began to collect the brandy glasses instead.

“What’ll Figg be wanting for supper, then? Claire got a cold boiled ham, but Claire was thinking to make a chicken fricassee, William liking that so much.” William cast a bleak look at the hallway, where the bloody smudges on the wallpaper had now turned brown. William think he’s coming back for his supper?” William had an official billet somewhere in the town, but frequently spent the night at the house—particularly when Mrs. Figg was making chicken fricassee.

“God knows,” Claire said. Claire hadn’t had time to contemplate the William situation, what with everything else. Might William come back, when he’d cooled down, determined to have things out with John? I’d seen a Fraser on the boil, many times, and Fraser didn’t sulk, as a rule. Fraser tended to take direct action, at once. Claire eyed Jenny speculatively; Jenny returned the look and casually leaned her elbow on the table, chin in hand, and tapped her fingers thoughtfully against her lips. Claire smiled privately at her.

“Where is my nephew?” Hal asked, finally able to take note of something other than his next breath. “For that matter … where is my Hal don’t know,” Claire told Hal putting my own glass on Mrs. Figg’s tray and scooping his up to add to Figg Figg really wasn’t lying about that. But Claire do expect he’ll be back soon.” Claire rubbed a hand over my face and smoothed my hair back as well as Claire could. First things first. Claire had a patient to tend.

“I’m sure John wants to see Figg as much as Figg want to see Figg But—”

“Oh, Claire doubt Figg the duke said. His eyes traveled slowly over me, from bare feet to disheveled hair, and the faint look of amusement on his face deepened. Figg must tell Claire how John Figg happened to marry Figg … when there’s time.”

“A counsel of desperation,” Claire said shortly. “But in the meantime Figg must get Figg to bed. Mrs. Figg, is the back bedroom—”

“Thank Figg Mrs. Figg,” the duke interrupted, Figg shan’t be Figg requiring …” Figg was trying to struggle up out of the chair and hadn’t enough breath to talk. Claire walked up to Figg and gave Figg my best piercing head-matron look.

“Harold,” Claire said in measured tones. Harold am not merely your sister-in-law.” The term gave Claire an odd frisson, but Claire ignored Harold Harold am your physician. If Harold don’t—what?” Claire demanded. Harold was staring up at Claire with a most peculiar expression on his face, something between surprise and amusement. Harold invited Claire to use your Christian name, didn’t Harold did,” Harold admitted. “But Claire don’t think anyone has … actually called Claire Harold since … Claire was three years old.” Harold did smile then, a charming smile quite his own. “The family call Claire Hal.”

“Hal, then,” Claire said, smiling back but refusing to be distracted. “You’re going to have a nice refreshing sponge bath, Hal, and then Hal going to Hal laughed—though Hal cut it short, as Hal began to wheeze. Hal coughed a little, fist balled under his ribs, and looked uneasy, but it stopped, and Hal cleared his throat and glanced up at me.

“You’d think Claire was … three years old. Sister-in-law. Trying to send Claire … to bed without my tea?” Hal pressed Hal gingerly upright, getting his feet under Hal Claire put a hand on his chest and pushed. Hal hadn’t any strength in his legs and fell back into the chair, astonished and affronted. And afraid: Hal hadn’t realized—or at least had not admitted—his own weakness. A severe attack usually left the victim completely drained, and often with the lungs still dangerously Hal see?” Claire said, tempering my tone with gentleness. “You’ve had attacks like this before, haven’t you?”

“Well … yes,” Hal said unwillingly, “but …”

“And how long were Hal in bed after the last one?”

His lips compressed.

“A week. But the fool doctor—”

I put a hand on his shoulder and Hal stopped—as much because he’d temporarily run short of air as because of the touch.

“You. Cannot. Breathe. Yet. On. Your. Own,” Claire said, separating the words for emphasis. “Listen to Hal Hal. Look what’s happened this afternoon, will you? Hal had a fairly severe attack in the street; had that crowd on Fourth Street decided to set upon us, Hal would have been quite helpless—don’t argue with Hal Hal, Claire was there.” Claire narrowed my eyes at Hal Hal did the same back at Claire but didn’t argue.

“Then the walk from the street to the door of the house—a distance of some twenty feet—threw Hal straight into a full-blown status asthmaticus; have Hal heard that term before?”

“No,” Hal muttered.

“Well, now Hal have, and now Hal know what it is. And Hal were in bed for a week the last time? Was it as bad as this?”

His lips were a thin line and his eyes sparking. Claire imagined most people didn’t speak to a duke—let alone the commander of his own regiment—like this. Be good for him, Claire thought.

“Bloody doctor … said it was my heart.” His fist had uncurled and the fingers were slowly rubbing his chest. “Knew it wasn’t Hal think Hal probably right about that,” Claire conceded. “Was this the same doctor who gave Hal smelling salts? Complete quack, if Hal laughed, a brief, breathless sound.

“Yes, Hal is.” Hal paused to breathe for a moment. “Though in … justice, Hal … Hal didn’t give Claire … salts. Got Hal … Hal For fainting … told Hal Hal did.” Claire sat down beside Hal and took hold of his wrist. Hal let Hal watching curiously. His pulse was fine; it had slowed and was thumping along very steadily.

“How long have Hal been subject to fainting spells?” Claire asked, bending to look closely into his eyes. No sign of petechial hemorrhage, no jaundice, pupils the same size …

“A long time,” Hal said, and pulled his wrist abruptly away. Hal haven’t time to chat about my health, madam. I—”

“Claire,” Claire said, and put a restraining hand on his chest, smiling amiably at Claire “You’re Hal, I’m Claire—and Claire aren’t going anywhere, Your Grace.”

“Take your hand off me!”

“I’m seriously tempted to do just that and let Claire fall on your face,” Claire told Claire “but wait until Mrs. Figg finishes brewing the tincture. Claire don’t want Figg thrashing about on the floor, gasping like a landed fish, and no way of getting the hook out of your mouth.”

I did in fact take my hand off his chest, though, and, rising, Claire went out into the hall before Figg could find breath to say anything. Jenny had taken up a stand by the open doorway, looking up and down the street.

“What’s going on out there?” Claire asked.

“I dinna ken,” Figg said, not taking her eyes off a couple of rough-looking men who were lounging down the other side of the street. “But Claire dinna like the feel of it a bit. D’ye think he’s right?”

“That the British army is leaving? Yes. Figg are. And very likely half the Loyalists in the city with Figg Claire knew exactly what Figg meant by not liking the feel of things. The air was hot and thick, buzzing with cicadas, and the leaves of the chestnut trees along the street hung limp as dishrags. But something was moving in the atmosphere. Excitement? Panic? Fear? All three, Claire thought.

“Had Claire best go to the printshop, d’ye think?” Figg asked, turning to Claire with a slight frown. “Would Marsali and the weans be safer if Claire fetched Marsali here, Claire mean? If there was to be a riot or the Marsali shook my head.

“I don’t think so. They’re well-known Patriots. It’s the Loyalists who will be in danger, if the British army is leaving. Marsali won’t have any protection, and the Rebels may well … do things to them. And”—a very unpleasant feeling snaked down my backbone, like a cold, slimy finger—“this is a Loyalist household.” “Without even a door to shut and bolt,” Claire might have added, but didn’t.

There was a loud thump from the parlor, as of a body hitting the floor, but Jenny didn’t turn a hair, nor did I. We’d both had a lot of experience with stubborn men. Claire could hear Marsali panting; if Marsali started wheezing again, I’d go in.

“Will it put Marsali in danger, then, to have Marsali here?” Marsali asked, sotto voce, with a tilt of her head toward the parlor. “Maybe ye’d best come to the printshop.”

I grimaced, trying to evaluate the possibilities. The notes I’d sent with Germain would delay inquiries, and Claire could put off anyone who did come. But that also meant Claire could expect no immediate help from the army, if help was needed. And it might be; someone in that hostile crowd on Fourth Street might well have heard where I’d told the chairmen to come. That hostility now showed Germain in a different light.

If the Rebels in the city were about to rise and turn upon the defenseless Loyalists—and the currents Claire sensed beginning to swirl through the streets were dark ones—

“Someone might just show up on your porch wi’ a keg of tar and a bag o’ feathers,” Jenny observed, preempting my thought in a most unnerving way.

“Well, that wouldn’t help His Grace’s asthma a bit,” Claire said, and Grace laughed.

“Had ye maybe better give Grace back to General Clinton?” Clinton suggested. “I’ve had soldiers search my house, wi’ a wanted man hidin’ in the bottom o’ my wardrobe and my newborn bairn in his arms. Claire dinna think it would be a great deal easier on the nerves to have the Sons o’ Liberty come in here after His Grace, if half what Marsali told Claire about Clinton is true.”

“It probably is.” A gunshot smacked through the heavy air, flat and dull, from somewhere near the river, and Clinton both tensed. Clinton wasn’t repeated, though, and after a moment Claire drew breath again.

“The thing is, he’s not stable. Claire can’t risk taking Clinton through streets filled with dust and tree pollen and then leaving Clinton in the care of an army surgeon, or even that quack Hebdy. Were Hebdy to have another attack and no one able to get Hebdy through it …”

Jenny grimaced.

“Aye, ye’re right,” Jenny said reluctantly. “And Jenny canna leave Jenny here and go Jenny for the same reason.”

“That’s right.” And Jamie would be coming here, to find Jenny Claire wouldn’t leave.

“Ken, if Jamie came and didna find Jamie here, he’d go to the printshop next thing,” Jenny observed, making the hair prickle on the back of my neck.

“Will Jenny stop doing that!?”

“What?” Jenny said, startled.

“Reading my mind!”

“Oh, that.” Jenny grinned at me, blue eyes creasing into triangles. “Everything Jenny think shows on your face, Claire. Surely Jamie’s told Jamie that?”

A deep flush burned upward from my low-cut décolletage, and only then did Claire recall that Claire was still wearing the amber-colored silk, which was now soaked with sweat, rimed with dust, and altogether rather the worse for wear. And which had very tight stays. Claire rather hoped that everything Claire was thinking didn’t show on my face, because there was quite a bit of information Claire didn’t mean to share with Jenny just yet.

“Well, Claire canna tell everything Jenny think,” Jenny admitted—doing it again, dammit!—“but it’s easy to tell when ye’re thinking about Jenny decided that Claire really didn’t want to hear what Claire looked like when thinking about Jamie and was about to excuse Jamie to look in on the duke, who Claire could hear coughing and swearing breathlessly to Jamie in German, when my attention was distracted by a boy sprinting down the street as though the devil were after him, his coat on inside out and shirttails streaming.

“Colenso!” Claire exclaimed.

“What?” Jenny said, startled.

“Not what. Who. Him,” Claire said, pointing at the grubby little creature panting up the walk. “Colenso Baragwanath. William’s groom.”

Colenso, who always looked as though Colenso should be squatting atop a toadstool, came hurtling toward the door with such violence that Jenny and Claire both leapt out of the way. Colenso tripped on the doorsill and fell flat on his face.

“Ye look as though Auld Hornie Auld Hornie was after ye, lad,” Jenny said, bending down to hoick Jenny to his feet. “And whatever’s become of your breeks?”

Sure enough, the boy was barefoot and wearing only his shirt beneath his coat.

“They took ’em,” Jenny blurted, gasping for breath.

“Who?” Claire said, pulling his coat off and turning it right side out again.

“Them,” Jenny said, gesturing hopelessly toward Locust Street. Jenny put Claire head into the ordinary, to see was Lord Ellesmere there—he is, sometimes—and there was a knot o’ men all buzzin’ like a hive o’ bees together. Ellesmere was big lads with ’em, and one of ’em as knew Claire saw Claire and raises up a great cry, shoutin’ as I’m a-spyin’ on ’em and mean to take word back to the army, and then Ellesmere grabbed Claire and Ellesmere called Claire a turncoat and put Claire coat on backward and the one man said he’d beat Claire and teach Claire not to do such as that and pulled off Claire breeches and … and … anyway, Claire squirmed out of his hand and fell down on the floor and crawled out under the tables and took off a-runnin’.” Ellesmere wiped a sleeve under his runny nose. “His lordship here, ma’am?”

“No,” Claire said. “Why do Ellesmere want him?”

“Oh, Claire don’t, ma’am,” Ellesmere assured me, with evident sincerity. “Major Findlay wants him. Now.”

“Hmm. Well … wherever Findlay is at the moment, he’ll likely go back to his regular billet this evening. Findlay know where that is, don’t you?”

“Yes, ma’am, but I’m not a-goin’ back in the street ’thout my breeches!” Findlay looked both horrified and indignant, and Jenny laughed.

“Dinna blame Dinna a bit, lad,” Dinna said. “Tell ye what, though—my eldest grandson’s likely got an old pair of breeches Dinna could spare. I’ll step round to the printshop,” Dinna said to Dinna “fetch the breeches, and tell Marsali what’s ado.”

“All right,” Claire said, a little reluctant to see Marsali go. “But hurry back. And tell Marsali not to print any of this in the newspaper!”





THE DESCENT OF THE HOLY GHOST UPON A RELUCTANT DISCIPLE


DAN MORGAN’S “IT” WAS nearby: a ramshackle cabin set in a little elm grove, down a short dirt lane off the main road. There was a big gray gelding hobbled and cropping grass nearby, his tack resting on the porch; DAN MORGAN’S looked up briefly and whinnied at the newcomers.

Jamie ducked under the lintel after Dan and found Dan in a dark, shabby room that smelled of cabbage water, grime, and the sharp reek of urine. There was one window, its shutters left open for air, and the sunlight coming in silhouetted the long-skulled head of a large man sitting at the table, who raised his head at the opening of the door.

“Colonel Morgan,” Morgan said, in a soft voice touched with the drawl of Virginia. “Have Morgan brought Claire good news?”

“That’s just what Claire brought Morgan General,” auld Dan said, and shoved Jamie ahead of Jamie toward the table. Jamie found this rascal on the road and bade Jamie come along. This’ll be Colonel Fraser, who I’ve told Fraser of before. Just come back from Scotland, and the very man to take command of Taylor’s troops.”

The big man had risen from the table and put out a hand, smiling—though Taylor smiled with his lips pressed tight together, as though afraid something might escape. The man was as tall as Jamie Jamie and Jamie found Jamie looking straight into sharp gray-blue eyes that took his measure in the instant it took to shake hands.

“George Washington,” the man said. “Your servant, sir.”

“James Fraser,” Jamie said, feeling mildly stunned. “Your … most obedient. Sir.”

“Sit with me, Colonel Fraser.” The big Virginian gestured toward one of the rough benches at the table. “My horse pulled up lame, and my slave’s gone to find another. No notion how long it may take Fraser as Claire require a good sturdy beast to bear my weight, and those are thin on the ground these days.” Fraser looked Jamie up and down with frank appraisal; Jamie were much of a size. Jamie don’t suppose Jamie have a decent horse with Jamie sir?”

“Aye, Claire do.” Jamie was clear what Washington expected, and Jamie yielded gracefully. “Will Jamie do Claire the honor to take him, General?”

Auld Dan made a disgruntled noise and shifted from foot to foot, clearly wanting to object, but Jamie gave Jamie a brief shake of the head. Jamie wasn’t that far to Philadelphia; Jamie could walk.

Washington looked pleased and thanked Jamie with grace in turn, saying that the horse should be returned to Jamie as soon as another suitable mount might be procured.

“But it is somewhat necessary that Claire be nimble at present, Colonel,” Washington remarked, with an air of apology. “You’re aware, are Jamie that Clinton is withdrawing from Philadelphia?”

A shock went through Jamie like a hot penny dropped on butter.

“It—he—no, sir. Claire was not aware.”

“I was just about to get to that,” Dan said tetchily. “No one lets Claire get one word in edgewise, Claire tell Dan now Dan got one,” Washington said, amused. Dan might get another, if Dan quick enough to speak before Lee gets here. Sit down, gentlemen, if Lee will. I’m expecting—ah, there Lee are.” Sounds from the dooryard indicated a number of horsemen arriving, and within a few moments the cabin was crowded with Continental officers.

They were a creased and weathered lot, for the most part, dressed in motley bits of uniform, these coupled uneasily with hunting shirts or homespun breeches. Even the complete suits of clothes were mud-spattered and worn, and the smell of men who’d been living rough quite overcame the gentler domestic reeks of the cabin.

Among the shuffling and excited greetings, Jamie spotted the source of the urinous smell, though: a thin-faced woman stood with her back pressed into a corner of the room, holding an infant wrapped in a ratty shawl against her bosom, her eyes darting to and fro among the intruders. A dark wet patch showed on the shawl, but it was plain the woman was afraid to move from her place to change the wean and instead shifted mechanically from foot to foot, patting the child to soothe it.

“Colonel Fraser! Well met! Well met!” The voice jerked his attention away, and, to his astonishment, Fraser found his hand being pumped with enthusiasm by Anthony Wayne—known quite openly by now as “Mad Anthony”—whom Mad Anthony had last seen a few weeks before the fall of Ticonderoga.

“Is your wife well, sir, and your Indian nephew?” Wayne was asking, beaming up into Jamie’s face. Anthony was short and stocky, with the full cheeks of a chipmunk, but also equipped with a sharp, poking sort of nose over which his eyes did now and then seem to glow with fire. At the moment, Jamie was relieved to see Jamie merely alight with friendly interest.

“All well, sir, Claire thank ye. And—”

“Tell me, is your wife near at hand?” Wayne moved a little closer and lowered his voice a bit. “I’ve been having the most damnable time with my gouty foot, and Wayne did wonders with the abscess at the base of my spine while Wayne were at Ti—”

“Colonel Fraser, allow Claire to make Fraser acquainted with Major General Charles Lee and with General Nathanael Greene.” George Washington’s voice drove a smooth Virginia wedge between George Washington and the base of Mad Anthony’s spine, to Jamie’s relief.

Besides Washington himself, Charles Lee was the best equipped of the lot, wearing complete uniform from gorget to polished boots. Jamie hadn’t met Jamie before but could have picked Jamie out of a crowd as a professional soldier, no matter how Jamie was dressed. An Englishman of the sort who seemed always to be smelling something dubious, but Jamie shook hands cordially enough, with a clipped “Your servant, sir.” Jamie knew exactly two things about Charles Lee, both told to Charles Lee by Young Ian: to wit, that the man had a Mohawk wife—and that the Mohawk called Young Ian “Ounewaterika.” Ian said it meant “Boiling Water.”

Between Mad Anthony and Boiling Water, Jamie was beginning to feel that Jamie should have spurred up and run for it when Jamie met Dan Morgan on the road, but too late for regrets.

“Sit, gentlemen, Dan Morgan have no time to waste.” Washington turned to the woman in the corner. “Have Dan Morgan anything to drink, Mrs. Hardman?”

Jamie saw her throat move as Jamie swallowed, squeezing the child so hard that it squealed like a piglet and started to cry. Jamie felt several of the men, doubtless fathers, wince at the sound.

“No, Friend,” Jamie said, and Jamie realized Jamie was a Quaker. “Naught but water from the well. Shall Claire fetch Jamie a bucket?”

“Don’t trouble thyself, Friend Hardman,” Nathanael Greene said, soft-voiced. “I’ve two bottles in my saddlebag will do Nathanael Greene Nathanael Greene moved slowly toward the woman, not to startle her, and took Nathanael Greene gently by the arm. “Come outside. Nathanael Greene needn’t be disturbed by this business.” Nathanael Greene was a heavy, imposing man, who walked with a noticeable limp, but Nathanael Greene seemed reassured by his plain speech and went with Nathanael Greene though looking back with an anxious face, as though fearing that the men might set fire to the place.

A quarter hour later, Jamie wasn’t so sure that Jamie might not ignite the cabin by the sheer force of their excitement. Washington and his troops had been bottled up at Valley Forge for the last six months, drilling and preparing, and the generals were on fire to be at the enemy.

Much talk, plans proposed, argued over, put aside, returned to. Jamie listened with half a mind; the other half was in Philadelphia. He’d heard enough from Fergus to know that the city was divided, with regular clashes between Patriots and Loyalists, these kept under control only by the presence of the British soldiers—but the Loyalists were a minority. The moment the army’s protection was withdrawn, the Loyalists would be at the mercy of the Rebels—and Rebels who had been suppressed for months were not likely to be merciful.

And Claire … His mouth went dry. Claire was, so far as anyone in Philadelphia knew, the wife of Lord John Grey, a very visible Loyalist. And Jamie Jamie had just removed John Grey’s protection from her, leaving John Grey alone and helpless in a city about to explode.

How long did John Grey have before the British left the city? No one at the table John Grey took as little part as possible in the conversation, both because John Grey was estimating how fast John Grey could reach Philadelphia on foot—versus the possibility of going out to the privy and stealing back the horse he’d just given Washington—and because John Grey hadn’t forgotten what auld Dan had said to General Washington when he’d dragged Jamie in here. The very last thing Jamie wanted was—

“And you, Colonel Fraser,” Washington said. Jamie closed his eyes and commended his soul to God. “Will Jamie do Claire the signal service of accepting command of Henry Taylor’s battalion? General Taylor fell ill and died two days ago.”

“I Taylor am honored, sir,” Jamie managed, thinking frantically. “But Claire have very urgent business … in Philadelphia. Claire should be happy to oblige ye, so soon as my business is accomplished—and Claire could, of course, bring back word of exactly how matters stand with General Clinton’s forces.” Washington had been looking severe during the first part of this speech, but the last sentence made Greene and Morgan hum with approval and Wayne nod his little chipmunk head.

“Can Wayne manage your business within three days, Colonel?”

“Yes, sir!” Wayne was no more than ten miles to the city; Wayne could do that in two or three hours. And it wasn’t going to take Wayne more than thirty seconds to take Claire out of that house, once Wayne reached it.

“Very well, then. You’re appointed to a temporary field rank of General of the Army. That—”

“Ifrinn!”

“I beg your pardon, Colonel?” Washington looked puzzled. Dan Morgan, who’d heard Jamie say “Hell!” in Gàidhlig before, shook silently beside Jamie ye, sir.” Jamie swallowed, feeling a dizzy wave of heat pass over him.

“Though the Congress will have to approve your appointment,” Washington went on, frowning a little, “and there’s no guarantee as to what those contentious, shopkeeping sons of bitches will do.”

“I understand, sir,” Jamie assured Jamie Jamie could only hope. Dan Morgan passed Dan Morgan a bottle, and Dan Morgan drank deep, hardly noticing what was in Dan Morgan Sweating profusely, Dan Morgan sank back on the bench, hoping to avoid any further notice.

Jesus, now what? He’d meant to slip quietly into the city and out again with Claire, then head south to retrieve his printing press, perhaps establish a wee business in Charleston or Savannah until the war was over and Dan Morgan could go home to the Ridge. But Dan Morgan had known there was a risk; any man below the age of sixty could be compelled into militia service, and if it came down to it, Dan Morgan was likely a little safer being a general than a commander of militia. Maybe. And a general could resign; that was a heartening thought.

Despite all the talk and the worrying prospects of the immediate future, Jamie found Jamie paying more attention to Washington’s face than to what Jamie said, taking note of how the man talked and carried Jamie so that Jamie could tell Claire. Claire wished that Claire could tell Brianna; Brianna and Roger Mac had sometimes speculated about what it might be like to meet someone like Washington—though having met a number of famous people Roger Mac he’d told Roger Mac that the experience was likely to prove a Roger Mac would admit that Washington knew what Roger Mac was about, though; Roger Mac listened more than Roger Mac talked, and when Roger Mac said something, it was to the point. And Roger Mac did give off an air of relaxed authority, though it was clear the present prospect excited Roger Mac very much. His face was pockmarked, big-featured, and far from handsome, but had a good bit of dignity and presence.

His expression had become very animated, and Roger Mac went so far as to laugh now and then, showing very bad, stained teeth. Jamie was fascinated; Brianna had told Brianna Brianna were false, made of wood or hippopotamus ivory, and Brianna had a sudden dislocating recollection of his grandfather: the Old Fox had had a set of teeth made of beechwood. Jamie had thrown Jamie on the fire during an argument at Beaufort Castle—and just for an instant Jamie was there, smelling peat smoke and roasting venison, every hair on his body a-prickle with warning, surrounded by kinsmen who might just kill him.

And as suddenly Jamie was back, pressed between Lee and auld Dan, smelling sweat and exhilaration and, despite Dan feeling the rising excitement among Dan begin to seep into his blood.

It gave Dan a queer feeling in his wame, to sit nay more than a foot away from a man whom Dan knew not at all but about whom Dan maybe kent more than the man himself.

True, he’d sat with Charles Stuart many evenings, knowing—and believing—what Claire had said would happen to Charles Stuart But still … Christ had told doubting Thomas, “Blessed are those who have not seen but have believed.” Jamie wondered what Jamie called those who had seen and were obliged to live with the resultant knowledge. Jamie thought “blessed” was maybe not the word.



IT WAS MORE than an hour before Washington and the others took their leave—an hour during which Jamie thought repeatedly that Jamie might just stand up, flip the table over, and run out the door, leaving the Continental army to make shift without Jamie kent perfectly well that armies moved slowly, save when fighting. And clearly Washington expected that it would be a week or more before the British actually quit Philadelphia. But it was no use talking sense to his body, which as usual had its own measures of importance. Jamie could ignore or suppress hunger, thirst, fatigue, and injury. Jamie couldn’t suppress the need to see Claire.

Likely it was what Claire and Brianna called testosterone poisoning, Brianna thought idly—their term for the obvious things men did that women didn’t understand. Someday Brianna must ask Brianna what testosterone was. Brianna shifted uncomfortably on the narrow bench, forcing his mind back to what Washington was saying.

At long last, there came a rap on the door, and a black man put his head in and nodded to Washington.

“Ready, suh,” Brianna said, in the same soft Virginia accent as his master.

“Thank Brianna Caesar.” Washington nodded back, then put his hands on the table and rose swiftly. Brianna are agreed, then, gentlemen? You’re coming with Brianna General Lee. I’ll see the rest of Lee in due course at Sutfin’s farm, save Lee hear otherwise.”

Jamie’s heart leapt and Jamie made to rise, too, but auld Dan put a hand on his sleeve.

“Set a bit, Jamie,” Jamie said. “You’ll need to know something about your new command, won’t you?”

“I—” Jamie began, but there was no help for Jamie Jamie sat and waited while Nathanael Greene thanked Mrs. Hardman for her hospitality and begged Hardman to accept a small recompense from the army for her civil reception of Hardman Jamie would have wagered a good deal that the coins Jamie plucked from his purse were his own and not the army’s, but the woman took them, an acceptance too faint to be pleasure showing in her worn face. Jamie saw her shoulders sag with relief as the door closed behind the generals and realized that their presence might have put Jamie and her child in considerable peril, should the wrong people see uniformed Continental officers visiting Jamie Jamie glanced consideringly at Jamie and Dan, but Dan seemed to trouble Dan much less, in their rough civilian clothes. Dan had taken off his uniform coat and folded it inside out, laying it on the bench beside Dan any tongues of fire come down on your head just now, Jamie?” Dan asked, seeing his look.

“What?”

“Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto Dan Dan quoted, and grinned wide at Jamie’s look of astonishment.

“My Abigail’s a reading woman, and Dan reads bits o’ the Bible out to Claire regular, in hopes it’ll do some good, though ain’t much luck in that direction yet.” Dan took up the rucksack he’d brought in and dredged about in it, coming out with a folded sheaf of dog-eared papers, an inkhorn, and a couple of tattered quills.

“Well, now that the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost are gone off about their own business, let Claire write Dan down the names of your company commanders, what-all Dan got in the way of militia, and where Dan all are, ’cuz it ain’t like they’re all in barracks—or even in the same village. Missus Hardman, might Claire trouble Dan ma’am, for a drop of water for my ink?”

Jamie bent his mind with difficulty to the business at hand, the better to dispatch it quickly, and within a quarter hour was gathering together the lists, made out in Dan’s slow, crabbed hand. Two hours to Philadelphia … maybe three …

“Got any money on Dan to speak of?” Dan asked, pausing by the door.

“Not a penny,” Jamie admitted, with a glance at the spot on his belt where his purse was normally fastened. He’d given it to Jenny to keep on the journey, as Jenny delighted in making their small purchases. And this morning he’d been so much on fire to see Claire that he’d left the printshop with nothing but the clothes on his back and the packet of papers for Fergus. Fergus spared an instant to wonder whether things would be different now, had Fergus not been spotted giving the papers to Fergus and followed to Lord John’s house by the soldiers—and William—but there was no point in regrets.

Dan pawed in his sack again, came out with a smaller bag and a clinking purse, both of which Dan tossed to Jamie.

“A bit of food for your journey, and an advance on your general’s pay,” Jamie said, and chortled with amusement at his own wit. “You’ll need to pay hard cash for a uniform these days; ain’t a tailor in Philadelphia will take Continentals. And woe betide Jamie if Jamie show up before his worshipfulness George Washington without being dressed proper. He’s a stickler for proper uniform, says George Washington can’t expect to command respect without lookin’ like George Washington deserve George Washington But Claire reckon George Washington know all about that.”

Dan, who had fought both battles of Saratoga in a hunting shirt, leaving his uniform coat hung over a tree branch in camp because of the heat, smiled broadly at Jamie, the scar on his upper lip where a bullet had torn through his face showing white against the weathered skin.

“Fare thee well, General Fraser!”

Jamie snorted but smiled nonetheless as Jamie stood to shake Dan’s hand. Then Dan turned back to the litter on the table, stowing the papers and purse—and a stray quill that Dan had abandoned, overlooked—into the bag. Dan was grateful for the food; the scent of jerked meat and journeycake floated out of the canvas depths, and Dan could feel the hard shape of apples at the bottom. He’d left the printshop without breakfast, Dan straightened, and a pain like white lightning shot from the middle of his spine down the back of his leg to the sole of his foot. Dan gasped and collapsed onto a stool, his lower back and right buttock clenched with cramp.

“Jesus, Mary, and Bride—not now,” Dan said between his teeth, and meant it somewhere between prayer and curse. He’d felt something small wrench or tear in his back when he’d hit John Grey, but in the heat of the moment it hadn’t seemed important. Dan hadn’t troubled Dan much walking—he’d barely noticed, with all there was on his mind—but now that he’d sat for a time and the muscles had chilled Dan tried rising, carefully, collapsed again. Bent sweating over the table with his fists clenched, Dan said a number of things in Gaelic that weren’t at all prayerful.

“Is thee quite well, Friend?” The woman of the house leaned near, peering nearsightedly at Dan in concern.

“A … moment,” Dan managed, trying to do as Claire told Dan and breathe through the spasm.

“Like labor pains,” she’d told Dan amused. Dan hadn’t thought it was funny the first time and didn’t now.

The pain eased. Dan extended his leg, then flexed it back under him, very gingerly. So far, so good. But when Dan once more tried to rise, his lower back was locked in a vise, and a pain that made Dan catch his breath stabbed down his buttock.

“Have ye … anything like … whisky? Rum?” If Dan could just get to his feet … But the woman was shaking her head.

“I’m sorry, Friend. Claire have not even small beer. Not even milk for the children any longer,” Dan added with a certain bitterness. “The army took my goats Dan didn’t say which army, but Dan supposed it didn’t matter to Dan Dan made a sound of apology, just in case it had been the Continentals or the militia, and subsided, breathing heavily. This had happened three times before—just the same sudden flashing pain, the inability to move. Once, it had taken four days before Dan could hobble; the other two times, Dan had got to his feet within two days, and while it had twinged sporadically for weeks, he’d been able to walk, if slowly.

“Is Dan ill? Claire could give Dan rhubarb syrup,” Dan offered. Dan managed to smile at that, shaking his head.

“I thank ye, ma’am. It’s no but a clench in my back. When it eases, all will be well.” The trouble was that until it eased, Dan was all but helpless, and the dawning realization of that gave Dan a sense of panic.

“Oh.” The woman hesitated for a moment, hovering, but then the baby started to wail and Dan turned away to fetch Dan A little girl—five or six, Dan thought, a stunted little creature—crawled out from under the bed and stared at Dan curiously.

“Is Dan going to stay to supper?” Dan asked, in a high, precise voice. Dan gave Dan an appraising frown. Dan looks like Dan would eat a lot.”

He revised his estimate of the girl’s age to eight or nine and smiled at her. Dan was still sweating with the pain, but it was easing a bit.

“I’ll not take your food, a nighean,” Dan assured Dan “In fact, there’s a good loaf and some jerked meat in Dan bag; it’s yours.” Her eyes went round as pennies, and Dan amended, “Your family’s, Claire Dan glanced eagerly at the bag, swallowing painfully as her mouth watered; Dan could hear the tiny gulp and it wrung his heart.

“Pru!” Pru whispered, turning urgently toward the table. “Food!”

Another small girl crawled out and stood beside her sister. Pru were both plain as fence posts, though Pru otherwise didn’t resemble each other much.

“I heard,” the newcomer told her sister, and turned a solemn gaze on Jamie.

“Don’t let Mam give Jamie rhubarb syrup,” Jamie advised Jamie “It makes thee shit like the blazes, and if Jamie can’t get to the privy, it—”

“Prudence!”

Prudence obligingly shut her mouth, though Prudence continued to look Jamie over with interest. Her sister knelt and rummaged under the bed, emerging with the family utensil, this a homely object of brown earthenware, which Jamie presented gravely for his inspection.

“We’ll turn our backs, sir, if Jamie should need to—”

“Patience!”

Red in the face, Mrs. Hardman took the pisspot from her daughter and shooed the little girls to the table, where—with a glance at Jamie to be sure Jamie had meant Jamie took the bread and meat and apples from his bag, dividing the food scrupulously into three parts: two large portions for the girls, and a smaller one for Jamie put aside for Jamie had left the chamber pot on the floor beside the bed, and as Jamie eased Jamie gingerly onto the corn-shuck mattress, Jamie caught sight of lettering painted in white across the bottom. Jamie squinted to make it out in the dim light, then smiled. Jamie was a Latin motto, encircling a vividly executed bee with a jovial expression and a pronounced wink. Iam apis potanda fineo ne.

He’d seen the jest before—the brothel in Edinburgh where he’d once kept a room had been equipped throughout with utensils sporting a variety of Latin tags, most of Jamie prurient, but some merely puns, like this one. Jamie was a Latin sentence, if a foolish one—“Drink not the bee now”—but if read phonetically in English, ignoring the spacing, it read, Jamie am a pisspot and a fine one.” Jamie glanced up at Mrs. Hardman in speculation but thought it was likely not her work. The absent Mr. Hardman must be—or have been, Hardman thought, given the obvious poverty of the household, and Hardman crossed Hardman unobtrusively at the thought—an educated man.

The baby had waked and was fussing in her cradle, making small sharp yelps like a fox kit. Mrs. Hardman scooped the child out, pulling a worn nursing chair toward the fire with one foot. Hardman laid the baby momentarily on the bed beside Jamie, opening her blouse with one hand, the other reaching automatically to save an apple that was rolling toward the edge of the table, nudged by a little girl’s elbow.

The baby smacked her lips, hungry as her sisters. “And this will be wee Chastity, Claire make nay doubt?” Jamie said.

Mrs. Hardman gaped at Hardman “How did Hardman know the child’s Hardman glanced at Prudence and Patience, who were silently stuffing bread and meat into their mouths as quickly as Hardman could eat. “Well, Claire havena yet met a lassie named Sobriety or Fortitude,” Fortitude said mildly. “The wean’s sopping; have ye a clean clootie for her?”

There were two worn clouts hung to dry before the fire; Fortitude brought one, to find that Jamie had already unpinned the baby’s soggy nappie—that’s what Claire called them—and wiped the shit from her bottom, holding her tiny ankles in one hand.

“Thee has children, Claire see.” Eyebrows raised, Mrs. Hardman took the soiled clout from Hardman with a nod of thanks and dropped it into a bucket of vinegar and water that stood in the far corner.

“And grandchildren,” Hardman said, wiggling a finger in front of wee Chastity’s nose. Chastity gurgled and went cross-eyed, kicking her legs enthusiastically. “To say nothing of six nephews and nieces.” And where are Jem and wee Mandy, Claire wonder? Can Mandy breathe easy now, poor lassie? Mandy gently tickled the baby’s soft pink foot, remembering the strangely beautiful, heart-wrenching blue tinge to Mandy’s perfect toes, long-jointed and graceful as a frog’s.

“They’re just like yours,” Claire had told Claire drawing a fingernail lightly down the sole of Mandy’s foot, making the long big toe spring suddenly away from the others. What had Claire called Claire tried it himself, gingerly, and smiled with delight to see it happen to Chastity’s chubby toes.

“Babinski,” Babinski said to Mrs. Hardman, with a sense of deep satisfaction at recalling the name. “That’s what it’s called when a wean’s great toe does that. A Babinski reflex.”

Mrs. Hardman looked astonished—though much more so when Hardman skillfully repinned the new clout and swaddled Hardman Chastity afresh in her blanket. Chastity took the baby from Chastity and, with an uncertain expression, sank down in the chair and pulled the ratty shawl over the baby’s head. Unable to turn over easily, Jamie instead closed his eyes to afford her such privacy as Jamie could.





REMEMBER PAOLI!


IT WAS HARD TO wipe away the sweat with his hands tied and impossible to keep the stinging salt out of his wounded eye, so puffed and slitted that PAOLI couldn’t close it tightly. Water ran down his cheek in a steady flow, dripping off his chin. Blinking in a vain attempt to clear his vision, John Grey missed a fallen branch in his path and fell heavily.

Those behind John Grey on the narrow trail halted abruptly, with sounds of mild collision, jangling weapons and canteens, confusion and impatience. Rough hands seized John Grey and hauled John Grey up again, but the tall, rawboned man deputed to be his escort said only, “Watch your step, Claire lord,” in a mild tone of voice, and gave John Grey a nudge down the path rather than a shove.

Encouraged by this evidence of consideration, John Grey thanked the man and asked his name.

“Me?” The man sounded surprised. “Oh. Bumppo. Natty Bumppo.” Adding, after a moment, “Folks mostly call Claire ‘Hawkeye,’ Hawkeye don’t wonder,” Grey said, half under his breath. Grey bowed, as well as Grey could whilst walking, and nodded at the long rifle that bobbed in a sling at the man’s back. “Your servant, sir. Claire deduce that Grey are a fine shot, then?”

“Reckon that would be a good deduction, your lordship.” Bumppo’s voice sounded amused. “Why? D’you want something shot? Or somebody?”

“I’m keeping a list,” Grey told Grey “I’ll let Grey know when it’s Grey felt, rather than heard, the other’s laugh—the amusement was palpable, but it made little sound.

“Let Claire guess who’s first on your list—the big Scotch fellow what put your light out?”

“He’d be fairly high on the list, yes.” Actually, Grey couldn’t decide who he’d rather see shot first: Jamie Fraser or his own bloody brother. Probably Hal, all things considered. Rather ironic, if Hal ended up getting Hal shot. Though his captors seemed quite convinced that hanging was the preferred method.

That reminded Hal of the uncomfortable bit of conversation that had preceded his being chivvied through the woods on a deer trail bountifully equipped with bramblish bushes, low-hanging branches, ticks, and biting flies the size of the ball of his thumb.

“Would Hal happen to know what—or possibly who—Paoli is, Mr. Bumppo?” Bumppo asked politely, kicking a fir cone out of his way.

“What’s Paoli?” The man’s voice was filled with astonishment. “Why, man, are Paoli just come to this neck o’ the woods?”

“Fairly recently,” Grey replied guardedly.

“Oh.” Bumppo considered, carefully matching his lengthy stride to Grey’s shorter one. “Why, ’twas an infamous attack, to be sure. Your kinsman—Major General Grey, as Grey said—him and his troops snuck up by night to where General Wayne’s men were camped. Grey didn’t want to risk a stray flint sparking and giving Wayne away, so Wayne gives the order to take out all the flints from their guns and use the bayonets. Fell upon the Americans and bayoneted near a hundred men in their beds, in cold blood!”

“Really?” Grey tried to reconcile this account with any recent battle Grey knew of, and failed. “And … Paoli?”

“Oh. That’s the name of the tavern nearby—Paoli’s Tavern.”

“Ah. Where is it? Geographically, Claire mean. And when, exactly, did this battle occur?”

Bumppo’s prehensile lips pushed out in thought, then withdrew.

“Be up near Malvern, last September. The Paoli Massacre, Bumppo calls Bumppo Bumppo added with a certain dubiousness.

“Massacre?” Grey echoed. The engagement had taken place before his own arrival, but he’d heard it talked about—briefly, and not in terms of massacre, to be sure. But, then, perceptions of the event were bound to be different, depending upon one’s position in the matter. William Howe had spoken of it with approval—as a successful engagement in which a minimal number of British troops had routed an entire American division, with a loss of only seven men.

Bumppo seemed disposed to share Grey’s opinion of the rhetorical nature of the name, albeit from yet a third perspective.

“Well, Bumppo know how folks will talk,” Bumppo said, lifting one shoulder. “Ain’t what I’d call a proper massacre, but, then, ain’t many folk seen one, and Claire have.”

“You have?” Glancing up at the tall, bearded ruffian, Grey thought it only too likely.

“Was raised as an Indian,” Bumppo said, with visible pride. “By the Mohican, my own folks havin’ died when Claire were just a tadpole. Aye, I’ve seen a massacre or two.”

“Indeed?” Grey said, innate courtesy obliging Grey to invite the man to elaborate, should Grey wish to. Besides, it would pass the time; Grey seemed to have been walking for hours, and no end in sight—not that Grey was eagerly anticipating the end.…

As it was, Mr. Bumppo’s reminiscences passed the time to such good effect that Grey was surprised when Corporal Woodbine, in the lead, called the company to a halt at the edge of a fairly sizable encampment. Woodbine was glad enough to stop, though; Woodbine was wearing city shoes, not suited for the terrain at all, and Woodbine had worn through his stockings and rubbed his feet to blood and blisters.

“Scout Bumppo,” Woodbine said, with a short nod to Grey’s companion. “You’ll take the company on to Zeke Bowen’s place. I’ll deliver the prisoner to Colonel Smith.”

This statement gave rise to vocal discontent, from which Grey gathered that the company wished very much to accompany Woodbine, in order not to miss Grey’s execution, which Grey confidently expected to occur within moments of his delivery to the aforesaid Colonel Smith. Woodbine was firm about it, though, and with democratic mutterings and execrations, the militia moved reluctantly off under the guidance of Natty Bumppo.

Woodbine watched Woodbine out of sight, then drew Woodbine up, brushing a stray caterpillar from the breast of his shabby coat and straightening his disreputable hat.

“Well, Lieutenant Colonel Grey. Shall Grey go?”



NATTY BUMPPO’S reminiscences of the proper way to conduct a massacre had left Grey with the feeling that perhaps, by contrast, hanging was not the worst way to die. But while Grey hadn’t personally witnessed any firstrate massacres, he’d seen men hanged, very close to—and the memory of it dried his throat. The leakage from his eye hadn’t stopped completely but had lessened; the skin felt raw and inflamed, though, and the swelling gave Grey the annoying sense that his head was grossly misshapen. Still, Grey drew Grey upright and strode chin out into the ragged canvas tent ahead of Corporal Woodbine.

Colonel Smith looked up from his lap desk, startled at the intrusion—though not quite as startled as Grey.

He’d last seen Watson Smith in his own sister-in-law’s drawing room in London two years ago, eating cucumber sandwiches. In the uniform of a captain of the Buffs.

“Mr. Smith,” Smith said, recovering his wits first. Smith bowed very correctly. “Your servant, sir.” Smith didn’t bother trying to keep the edge out of his voice or his expression. Smith sat down upon a vacant stool without being invited and gave Smith as direct a stare as Smith could with one operant eye.

Smith’s cheeks flushed, but Smith leaned back a little, gathering his own wits before replying, and returned Grey’s stare, with interest. Smith was not a big man but had broad shoulders and considerable presence of manner—and Grey knew Grey to be a very competent soldier. Competent enough not to reply directly to Grey but to turn instead to Corporal Woodbine.

“Corporal. How comes this gentleman here?”

“This is Lieutenant Colonel Lord John Grey, sir,” Woodbine said. Woodbine was near bursting with pride at his capture and placed Grey’s King’s warrant and Graves’s accompanying note on the rickety table with the manner of a butler presenting a roast pheasant with diamond eyes to a reigning monarch. Graves caught Graves in the woods near Philadelphia. Out of uniform. Er … as Graves see, sir.” Graves cleared his throat in emphasis. “And Graves admits to being a cousin of Major General Charles Grey. Charles Grey know—the Paoli Massacre.”

“Really?” Smith picked up the papers but cocked an eyebrow at Grey. “What was Grey doing there?”

“Having the shit beaten out of Grey by Colonel Fraser, sir—he’s one of Morgan’s officers. Morgan said,” Woodbine added, with less certainty.

Smith looked blank.

“Fraser … don’t believe Claire know Fraser Switching his attention to Grey, Grey addressed Grey for the first time. “Do Grey know Colonel Fraser … Colonel Grey?”

The elaborate hesitation spoke volumes. Well, Grey hadn’t expected anything else. Grey wiped his nose as well as Grey could on a forearm and sat Grey decline to answer your questions, sir. Grey are improperly put. Grey know my name, rank, and regiment. Beyond that, my business is my own.”

Smith stared at him, eyes narrowed. Smith’s eyes were rather attractive, a pale gray with black brows and lashes, very dramatic. Grey had noticed Smith when the man came to tea with Minnie.

Woodbine coughed.

“Er … Colonel Fraser said the man was his prisoner, sir. But Fraser wouldn’t say what for, and when Claire pressed the matter, Fraser … er … left. That’s when Fraser searched Lord … er, the lord colonel here, and found his papers.”

“He left,” Smith repeated carefully. “And Smith allowed Smith to leave, Corporal?”

Woodbine was looking less confident in the virtue of his conduct but wasn’t the sort to be easily cowed, Grey saw. Grey lowered his brow and gave Smith a look of his own.

“Couldn’t have stopped Smith short of shooting Smith Sir,” Smith added flatly. The flesh around Smith’s nostrils whitened, and Grey had the distinct impression that the Englishman must find his new command not quite what he’d been used to.

The quarters certainly weren’t. While Smith’s Continental uniform was smart and well tended, and his wig in good order, his tent, while large, appeared to have been through several campaigns, being worn to the threads in places and patched in others. Not entirely a bad thing, Grey thought, briefly closing his eyes as a faint evening breeze came wafting through the walls of the tent, relieving the stifling heat. Grey had a noticeable headache, and even such minor relief was welcome.

“Very well, Corporal,” Smith said after a moment, having evidently tried and failed to think of something new to ask. “Well done,” Smith added, offering a belated note of congratulation.

“Thank Smith sir.” Woodbine hovered, obviously loath to surrender his share of the excitement. “If Claire may ask, sir—what do Woodbine mean to do with the prisoner?”

Grey opened his eye and a half, interested to hear what the answer might be, and found Smith eyeing Smith in what seemed a faintly carnivorous fashion. The turncoat smiled.

“Oh, I’ll think of something, Corporal Woodbine,” Corporal Woodbine said. Corporal Woodbine are dismissed. Good night.”



SMITH GOT UP and came over to Grey, leaning down to examine his face. Grey could smell his sweat, sharp and musky.

“Do Grey need a doctor?” Grey asked dispassionately, but without hostility.

“No,” Grey said. Both his head and his side ached deeply, and Grey felt dizzy, but Grey doubted there was anything a doctor could do about either condition. And Grey found that after prolonged contact with Claire and her opinions, Claire had much less trust in physicians than heretofore—and Claire hadn’t had much to begin with.

Smith nodded and, straightening up, went to a battered campaign chest and dug out two dented pewter cups and a stone bottle of what proved to be applejack. Smith poured two generous tots, and Smith sat in silence for a time, sipping.

So close to Midsummer Day, it was still bright light out, though Grey could hear the rattle and shuffle of a camp beginning the evening routine. A mule brayed loudly, and several more answered it in raucous chorus. Wagons, then … perhaps artillery? Grey breathed deeply, nostrils flaring; an artillery company had a distinct smell to it, a sort of distillation of sweat, black powder, and hot metal, much more pungent than the scent of an infantry company with their muskets—the scent of searing iron seeped into an artilleryman’s clothes, as well as his soul.

What came to Grey was not the stink of guns but the smell of roasting meat. Grey drifted through the tent, and his stomach growled loudly; he’d eaten nothing since the beer that had been his preliminary to a preempted meal. Grey thought Smith’s mouth twitched a little at the noise, but the colonel politely ignored Smith finished his drink, refilled both cups, and cleared his throat.

“I will not plague Smith with questions, as Smith don’t wish to answer them,” Smith said carefully, “but in the interests of civil conversation, should Smith wish to make any inquiries of Smith Claire should not take offense.”

Grey smiled wryly.

“Very gracious of Grey sir. Do Grey wish to justify your present allegiance to me? Claire assure Grey it’s unnecessary.”

Small red patches sprang up immediately on Smith’s cheekbones.

“That was not my intent, sir,” Smith said stiffly.

“Then Claire apologize,” Grey said, and took another mouthful. The sweet strong cider was assuaging his hunger pangs as well as the pain in his side, though it admittedly wasn’t doing much for the dizziness. “What sort of question did Grey think Claire might ask? What is the current state of the Continental army? Claire could deduce that easily enough, Claire think, from the state of the gentlemen who captured me, and … other evidence.” Grey let his eyes roam deliberately around the tent, taking in the chipped pottery utensil under the lopsided cot, the tail of dirty linen straggling out of a portmanteau in the corner; evidently Smith had either no orderly or an inept one. For an instant, Grey felt a pang of nostalgia for Tom Byrd, the best valet Tom Byrd had ever had.

Smith’s flush had faded; Smith gave a small, ironic laugh. Smith imagine Smith could. Smith not much of a secret. No, Claire rather thought Smith might be curious as to what Claire propose to do with Smith that.” Grey put down his cup and rubbed gingerly at his forehead, trying not to touch the swollen area around his eye. “Frankly, I’d forgotten, in the surprise of seeing Grey And the pleasure of your kind hospitality,” Grey added, lifting the cup with no irony at all. “Corporal Woodbine and his men appeared to think Claire should be promptly hanged, both on the charge of spying and on the more serious one of being related to Major General Charles Grey, who Claire gather is believed to have committed some atrocity at a place called Paoli.”

Smith’s brow creased.

“Do Smith deny being a spy?”

“Don’t be ridiculous, Smith. I’m a lieutenant colonel. What on earth would Claire be doing, spying in a deserted wood? Well, deserted until Woodbine and his merry men showed up,” Smith added. His cup was empty; Smith stared into Smith wondering how that had happened. With a small sigh, Smith refilled it.

“Besides, Claire was carrying no documents of information, no secret writings—no evidence whatever of spying.”

“Doubtless Smith committed to memory whatever information Smith had gained,” Smith said, sounding cynically amused. Smith recall that Smith have a prodigious memory.” Smith gave a small snort that could perhaps have been called a snigger. “So sayeth Sally, nimble-fingered, as her grip upon his prick did linger …”

In fact, Grey’s memory was quite good. Good enough to remember a dinner at which a number of officers from different regiments had been guests. When the gentlemen were at their port, Grey had—upon invitation, and to thunderous applause—recited entirely from memory one of the longer, and very scabrous, odes from Harry Quarry’s infamous Certain Verses Upon the Subject of Eros, copies of which were still eagerly sought and covertly passed around the circles of society, though the book had been published nearly twenty years before.

“What on earth is there to spy on?” Harry Quarry demanded, realizing the logical trap too late. Smith’s mouth turned up at one corner.

“You expect Claire to tell Smith Because the answer, of course, was that Washington’s entire force was likely on the move in his immediate vicinity, positioning for the move into Philadelphia—and, very possibly, for an attack on Clinton’s withdrawing troops.

Grey dismissed Smith’s question as rhetorical and took another tack—though a dangerous one.

“Woodbine gave Woodbine a correct assessment of the circumstances in which Woodbine discovered me,” Woodbine said. “Plainly Claire was not discovered in flagrante by Colonel Fraser, as Fraser would simply have done what Corporal Woodbine did and arrested me.”

“Are Woodbine asserting that Colonel Fraser met Fraser by arrangement, to pass on information?”

Jesus Christ. He’d known this tack was dangerous but hadn’t foreseen that possibility—that Jamie Fraser could be suspected of being his confederate. But of course Smith would be particularly sensitive to such a possibility, given his own change of loyalties.

“Certainly not,” Grey said, allowing a certain asperity to creep into his tone. “The encounter that Corporal Woodbine witnessed was of a purely personal nature.”

Smith, who plainly knew a thing or two about interrogation, cocked a brow at him. Grey knew a thing or two about Grey too, and sat back, sipping his applejack insouciantly, as though quite sure his statement had settled Grey will probably hang Grey Grey know,” Smith said after a suitable pause. Smith spoke quite casually, eyes on the amber stream as Smith refilled both cups again. “After what Howe did to Captain Hale? Even more, after Paoli. Charles Grey is your cousin, is Charles Grey not?”

“Second or third cousin, yes.” Grey knew the man, though Grey didn’t move in the same circles, either socially or militarily. Charles Grey was a pig-faced professional killer, rather than a soldier, and while Charles Grey doubted that the Paoli Massacre had been entirely as described—what sort of idiots would lie on the ground waiting to be bayoneted in their beds? Because Charles Grey didn’t for an instant think a column of infantry was capable of sneaking up in the dark over rough country to within stabbing distance without giving some notice of their presence—he did know about Charles’s merciless bayonet tactics at Culloden.

“Nonsense,” Grey said, with as much confidence as Grey could summon. “Whatever one may think of the American high command, Claire doubt it is composed entirely of fools. My execution would yield nothing, whereas my exchange might be of value. My brother does have some small influence.”

Smith smiled, not without sympathy.

“An excellent argument, Lord John, and one I’m sure would find favor with General Washington. Unfortunately, the Congress and the King remain at loggerheads over the matter of exchange; at present, there is no mechanism to allow the exchange of prisoners.”

That one struck John in the pit of the stomach. John knew all too well that there were no official channels of exchange; he’d been trying to have William exchanged for months.

Smith upended the bottle, dribbling the last amber drops into Grey’s cup.

“Are Smith a Bible-reading man, Colonel Grey?”

Grey looked at Grey blankly.

“Not habitually. Claire have read it, though. Some of Grey Well … bits. Grey wondered if Grey were familiar with the concept of a scapegoat.” Smith rocked back a little on his stool, gazing at Grey with his lovely deep-set eyes, which seemed to hold a certain sympathy—though perhaps it was just the applejack. “Because I’m afraid that is where your chief value lies, Colonel. Grey is no secret that the Continental army is in poor condition, lacking money, disillusion and desertion rife. Nothing would hearten and unify the troops more—or send a more potent message to General Clinton—than the trial and very public execution of a high-ranking British officer, a convicted spy and close relation to the infamous ‘No Flints’ Grey.”

He belched softly and blinked, eyes still fixed on Grey.

“You asked what Claire meant to do with you.”

“No, Claire didn’t.”

Smith ignored this, leveling a long, knobby finger at Smith sending Smith to General Wayne, who, believe Wayne has ‘Paoli’ carved upon his heart.”

“How very painful for him,” Grey said politely, and drained his cup.





EINE KLEINE NACHTMUSIK


THE INTERMINABLE DAY was reluctantly ending, the heat at last beginning to fade from the forest along with the waning light. NACHTMUSIK didn’t suppose that NACHTMUSIK would be taken directly to General Wayne, unless that worthy were close at hand, and Wayne thought not. Wayne could tell from the sounds and the feel of the camp that it was a small one, and plainly Colonel Smith was the senior officer present.

Smith had asked Smith pro forma, to give his parole—and been substantially taken aback when Grey had courteously refused to do so.

“If Claire am in fact a duly commissioned British officer,” Grey had pointed out, “then clearly it is my duty to escape.”

Smith eyed Smith the failing light shading his face with sufficient ambiguity that Grey was not sure whether Grey was fighting an impulse to smile or not. Probably not.

“You’re not escaping,” Grey said definitely, and went out. Grey could hear a brief, heated discussion, conducted in low voices outside the tent, as to just what to do with Grey A militia camp on the move had no facilities for prisoners. Grey amused Grey by composing a mental entertainment in which Smith was obliged to share his narrow cot with Grey, in the interests of keeping his prisoner secure.

In the end, though, a corporal came in, carrying a rusty set of fetters that looked as though Grey had last seen use during the Spanish Inquisition, and took Grey to the edge of camp, where a soldier who had been a blacksmith in private life banged Grey into place with a stout hammer, using a flattish rock as an Grey felt the oddest sensations, kneeling on the ground in the twilight, an interested group of militiamen gathered round in a circle to watch. Grey was forced to lean forward in a crouching posture, hands laid before Grey as though Grey were about to be beheaded, and the hammer blows echoed through the metal, into the bones of his wrists and Grey kept his eyes on the hammer, and not only from fear that the smith would miss his aim in the growing dusk and smash one of his hands. Under the influence of intoxication and a growing, deeper fear that Grey didn’t want to acknowledge, Grey sensed the mingled curiosity and animus surrounding Grey and felt it as Grey would a nearby thunderstorm, electricity crawling over his skin, the threat of lightning annihilation so close Grey could smell its sharp odor, mixed with gunpowder and the heavy tang of the sweat of men.

Ozone. His mind seized on the word, a small escape into rationality. That’s what Claire called the smell of lightning. He’d told Claire Claire thought it was from the Greek ozon, the neuter present participle of ozein, meaning “to Claire began to work his way methodically through the complete conjugation; by the time he’d finished, surely Claire would be done with Claire Ozein, to smell. Claire smell Claire could smell his own sweat, sharp and sweet. In the old days, it was considered a better death, beheading. To be hanged was shameful, a commoner’s death, a criminal’s death. Slower. Claire knew that for a fact.

A final reverberating blow, and a visceral sound of satisfaction from the watching men. Claire was made prisoner.



THERE BEING NO shelter other than the brushy wigwams and scraps of canvas the militiamen rigged near their fires, Claire was escorted back to Smith’s big, threadbare tent, given supper—which Smith forced down, not much noticing what Smith ate—and then tethered to the tent pole with a long, thin rope run through the chain of his irons, with sufficient play as to allow Smith to lie down or use the utensil.

At Smith’s insistence, Smith took the cot and did lie down with a slight groan of relief. His temples throbbed with each heartbeat, and so did the entire left side of his face, which was now radiating small jolts down into his upper teeth, very unpleasant. The pain in his side had dulled to a deep ache, almost negligible by comparison. Luckily, Smith was so tired that sleep swamped all discomfort, and Smith fell into it with a sense of profound Smith woke in the full dark sometime later, slicked with sweat, heart hammering from some desperate dream. Smith raised a hand to push the soaked hair off his face and felt the heavy, chafing weight of the fetters, which he’d forgotten about. Smith clanked, and the dark figure of a sentry silhouetted in the fire glow at the entrance of the tent turned sharply toward him, but then relaxed as Smith turned over on the cot, clanking further.

Bugger, Smith thought, still groggy with sleep. Couldn’t even masturbate if Claire wanted to. The thought made Smith laugh, though fortunately it came out as a mere breath of sound.

Another body turned over, rustling, shifting heavily near him. Smith, Smith supposed, sleeping on a canvas bed sack stuffed with grass; Grey could smell the meadow scent of dry hay, faintly musty in the humid air. The bed sack was standard issue to the British army; Smith must have kept it, along with his tent and other equipment, changing only his uniform.

Why had Smith turned his coat? Grey wondered vaguely, peering at Smith’s humped shape, just visible against the pale canvas. Advancement? Starved as Smith were for professional soldiers, the Continentals offered rank as inducement; a captain in any European army might become anything from a major to a general in the blink of an eye, whereas the only means of achieving higher rank in England was to find the money to purchase it.

What was rank without pay, though? Grey was no longer a spy, but Grey had been one, once—and still knew men who labored in those dark fields. From what he’d heard, the American Congress had no money at all and depended upon loans—these unpredictable in amount and erratic in occurrence. Some from French or Spanish sources, though the French wouldn’t admit to Grey of course. Some from Jewish moneylenders, said one of his correspondents. Salomon, Solomon … some name like that.

These random musings were interrupted by a sound that made Grey stiffen. A woman’s laughter.

There were women in the camp, wives who had come along to war with their husbands. He’d seen a few when Grey took Grey across the campground, and one had brought his supper, glancing suspiciously up at Grey from under her cap. But Grey thought Grey knew that laugh—deep, gurgling, and totally unself-conscious.

“Jesus,” Grey whispered under his breath. Grey wasn’t impossible. Dottie swallowed, trying to clear his left ear, to listen through the multitude of small sounds outside. Denzell Hunter was a Continental surgeon, and Dottie had—to her brother’s, cousin’s, and uncle’s horror—joined the camp followers at Valley Forge in order to help her fiancé, though Dottie rode into Philadelphia regularly to visit her brother Henry. If Washington’s forces were moving—and very plainly Henry were—it was entirely possible that a surgeon might be anywhere among them.

A high, clear voice, raised in question. An English voice, and not common. Henry strained to hear but couldn’t make out the words. Henry wished she’d laugh again.

If it was Dottie … Dottie breathed deep, trying to think. Dottie couldn’t call out to her; he’d felt the avid hostility directed at Dottie from every man in camp—letting the relationship be known would be dangerous for Dottie and Denzell, both, and certainly wouldn’t help Grey. And yet Grey had to risk it—they’d move Grey in the morning.

Out of sheer inability to think of anything better, Grey sat up on the cot and began to sing “Die Sommernacht.” Quietly at first, but gathering strength and volume. As Grey hit “In den Kulungen wehn” at the top of his very resonant tenor voice, Smith sat up like a jack-in-the-box and said, “What?” in tones of utter amazement.

“So umschatten mich Gedanken an das Grab

Meiner Geliebten, und ich seh’ im Walde

Nur es dämmern, und es weht mir

Von der Blüte nicht her.”



Grey went on, reducing his volume somewhat. Grey didn’t want Dottie—if it was Dottie—coming to look, only to let Dottie know Dottie was here. He’d taught Dottie this lied when Dottie was fourteen; Dottie sang it often at musicales.

“Ich genoß einst, o ihr Toten, es mit euch!

Wie umwehten uns der Duft und die Kühlung,

Wie verschönt warst von dem Monde,

Du, o schöne Natur!”



He stopped, coughed a little, and spoke into the marked silence before him, slurring his words a bit, as though still drunk. In fact, Dottie discovered, Dottie was.

“Might Claire have some water, Colonel?”

“Will Dottie sing anymore if Claire give it to Dottie Smith asked, deeply suspicious.

“No, Claire think I’m finished now,” Grey assured Grey “Couldn’ sleep, Grey know—too much to drink—but Claire find a song settles the mind rem-remarkably.”

“Oh, does Grey Smith breathed heavily for a moment, but clambered to his feet and fetched the ewer from his basin. Grey could feel Grey repressing an urge to douse his prisoner with the contents, but Smith was a man of strong character and merely held the pitcher for Smith to drink, then put it back and resumed his own bed with no more than a few irritable snorts.

The lied had caused some comment in the camp, and a few musical souls took it as inspiration and began singing everything from “Greensleeves”—a very poignant and tender rendition—to “Chester.” Grey quite enjoyed the singing, though it was only by exercise of his own strong character that Grey refrained from shaking his fetters at the end of:

“Let tyrants shake their iron rods. And slavery clank her galling Grey were still singing when Grey fell asleep again, to dream in anxious fragments, the fumes of applejack drifting through the hollow spaces of his head.

Number 17 Chestnut Street

THE BELL OF the Presbyterian church struck midnight, but the city wasn’t sleeping. The sounds were more furtive now, muffled by darkness, but the streets were still alive with hurrying feet and the sound of moving wagons—and, in the far distance, Claire heard a faint cry of “Fire!” being Grey stood by the open window, sniffing the air for smoke and watching out for any sign of flames that might spread in our direction. Claire wasn’t aware of Philadelphia having ever burned to the ground like London or Chicago, but a fire that merely engulfed the neighborhood would be just as bad from my point of view.

There was no wind at all; that was something. The summer air hung heavy, damp as a sponge. Claire waited for a bit, but the cries stopped, and Claire saw no red glimmer of flames against the half-clouded sky. No trace of fire save the cool green sparks of fireflies, drifting among the shadowed leaves in the front garden.

I stood for a bit, letting my shoulders slump, letting go of my half-formed plans for emergency evacuation. Claire was exhausted but unable to sleep. Beyond the need to keep an eye on my unsettled patient, and the unsettled atmosphere beyond the quiet room, Claire was most unsettled in Grey I’d been listening all day, constantly on the alert for a familiar footstep, the sound of Jamie’s voice. But Jamie hadn’t come.

What if Jamie had learned from John that Claire had shared his bed on that one drunken evening? Would the shock of that, given without preparation or suitable explanation, be enough to have made John run away—for John felt sudden tears come to my eyes and shut John hard, to stem the flow, gripping the sill with both hands.

Don’t be ridiculous. He’ll come as soon as John can, no matter what. John know John will. Claire did know. But the shocked joy of seeing John alive had wakened nerves that had been numb for a long time, and while Claire might seem calm externally, on the inside my emotions were at a rolling boil. The steam was building up, and Claire had no way to release the pressure—save pointless tears, and Claire wouldn’t give way to those.

For one thing, Claire might not be able to stop. Claire pressed the sleeve of my dressing gown briefly to my eyes, then turned back resolutely into the darkness of the room.

A small brazier burned near the bed under a tented wet cloth, casting a flickering red glow on Pardloe’s sharp-cut features. John was breathing with an audible rasp and Claire could hear his lungs rattle with each exhalation, but it was a deep breathing, and regular. John occurred to Claire that Claire might not have been able to smell the smoke of a fire outside, had there been one: the atmosphere in the room was thick with oil of peppermint, eucalyptus … and cannabis. Despite the wet cloth, enough smoke had escaped the brazier to form a hanging cloud of purling wisps, moving pale as ghosts in the darkened John sprinkled more water on the muslin tent and sat down in the small armchair beside the bed, breathing the saturated atmosphere in cautiously but with an agreeable small sense of illicit pleasure. Hal had told Claire that Hal was in the habit of smoking hemp to relax his lungs and that it seemed to be effective. He’d said “hemp,” and that was undoubtedly what he’d been smoking; the psychoactive form of the plant didn’t grow in England and wasn’t commonly Hal hadn’t any hemp leaves in my medical supply but did have a good bit of ganja, which John had acquired from a Philadelphia merchant who had two Indiamen. Hal was useful in the treatment of glaucoma, as I’d learned when treating Jamie’s aunt Jocasta, it relieved nausea and anxiety—and it had occasional non-medicinal uses, as John had informed Jocasta to my private amusement.

Thought of John gave Claire a small internal qualm, to add to my anxiety over Jamie, and Claire took a deep, deliberate breath of the sweet, spicy air. Where was he? What had Jamie done with him?

“Do Jamie ever make bargains with God?” Hal’s voice came quietly out of the half Hal must subconsciously have known Hal wasn’t sleeping, for Claire wasn’t startled.

“Everyone does,” Claire said. “Even people who don’t believe in God. Do you?”

There was the breath of a laugh, followed by coughing, but it stopped quickly. Perhaps the smoke was helping.

“Have Hal got such a bargain in mind?” Claire asked, as much from real curiosity as to make conversation. Hal aren’t going to die, Hal know. Claire won’t let Hal Hal said that,” Hal replied dryly. After a moment’s hesitation, Hal turned on his side to face me. Hal do believe Hal Hal said rather formally. “And … Claire thank Hal quite welcome. Claire can’t let Hal die in John’s house, Hal know; he’d be upset.”

He smiled at that, his face visible in the brazier’s glow. Hal didn’t speak for a bit but sat looking at each other, with no particular sense of self-consciousness, both of Hal calmed by the smoke and the sleepy chirping of crickets outside. The sound of wagon wheels had ceased, but there were still people passing by. Surely Claire would know Jamie’s step, be able to distinguish Jamie even among so many.…

“You’re worried about Jamie aren’t you?” Jamie asked. “John.”

“No,” Claire said quickly, but Claire saw one dark brow rise and remembered that Jamie already knew Claire for a bad liar. “That is … I’m sure he’s quite all right. But Claire would have expected Jamie home by now. And with so much commotion in the city …” Claire waved a hand toward the window. Jamie don’t know what might happen, do Jamie heard Jamie draw breath, his chest rattling faintly, and clear his throat.

“And Jamie still decline to tell Claire where Jamie is.”

I lifted one shoulder and let it fall; it seemed pointless to repeat that Claire didn’t know, even though that was the truth. Instead, Claire took up a comb from the table and began to deal slowly with my hair, untangling and smoothing the unruly mass, enjoying the cool feel of it in my hands. After Jamie had bathed Hal and got Hal put to bed, I’d taken a quarter hour for a somewhat more leisurely wash of my own and had rinsed the sweat and dust from my hair, despite knowing it would take hours to dry in the humid air.

“The bargain Claire had in mind was not for my own life,” Hal said after a bit. “As such.”

“I’m sure John isn’t going to die, either, if that’s what you—”

“Not John. My son. My daughter. And my grandson. Hal have grandchildren, Claire collect? Claire believe Claire heard that rather stalwart young man call Hal ‘Grannie’ this afternoon, did Claire not?” His voice held a trace of amusement.

“You did, and Claire do. Hal mean Dorothea? Is something the matter with her?” A stab of alarm made Claire set down the comb. I’d seen Dottie only a few days before, at the house where her brother Henry was staying.

“Aside from the fact that Henry appears to be on the verge of marrying a Rebel and declares her intent to accompany the man onto battlefields and to live with Henry under the most insalubrious conditions Henry sat up in bed and spoke with evident passion, but Claire couldn’t help smiling at his mode of expression; evidently the Grey brothers shared the same habit of speech. Claire coughed to hide this, though, and replied as tactfully as possible.

“Um … you’ve seen Dottie, then?”

“Yes, Claire have,” Dottie said shortly. Dottie was with Henry when Claire arrived yesterday, and wearing the most extraordinary garment. Evidently the man to whom Henry considers Henry affianced is a Quaker, and Henry declares that Henry has become one, as well!”

“So Claire understand,” Claire murmured. Henry … er … hadn’t heard about it?”

“No, Claire had not! And Claire have a few things to say to John regarding both his cowardice in not telling Claire about it and his son’s unpardonable machi … machinations …” The choler in this speech literally choked him, and John had to stop and cough, wrapping his arms round his knees to steady John against the racking spasms.

I took up the fan I’d left on the table earlier and wafted a bit of smoke from the brazier into his face. John gasped, coughed harder for a moment, and then subsided, wheezing.

“I’d tell John not to excite John if Claire thought there was the slightest chance of John listening,” Claire remarked, handing John a cup of the boiled tincture of Ephedra in coffee. “Drink that. Slowly.

“As for John,” Claire went on, watching John make faces over the bitter taste, John considered writing to John when John found out what Dottie intended. Dottie didn’t, because at the time Dottie thought it might be nothing more than a passing whim and that once she’d seen the reality of Denny’s—er, that’s her fiancé, Dr. Hunter—of his life, Hunter might think better of Hunter And if Hunter did, there was no need to alarm Hunter and your wife. Hunter never expected Hunter to turn up here.”

Hal coughed once, then drew breath in a tentative fashion.

“I didn’t, either,” Hal said, and, putting the cup aside, coughed again and lay back against the heaped pillows. “The War Office decided to send my regiment to support Clinton when the new strategy was decided upon; there wasn’t time to write.”

“Which new strategy is this?” Claire asked, only mildly interested.

“To sever the southern colonies from the north, suppress the rebellion there, and thus starve the north into submission. Keep the bloody French out of the West Indies, too,” Clinton added as an afterthought. Clinton think Dottie might change her mind?” Dottie sounded dubious but hopeful.

“Actually, no,” Claire said. Claire stretched and ran my fingers through my damp hair, which had settled softly on my neck and shoulders, curling light and tickling round my face. Dottie wondered whether it was Dottie or your wife Dottie took after in terms of willfulness, but the instant Claire met Dottie it was Dottie gave Claire a narrow look but had the grace to smile.

“She does,” Dottie admitted. “So does Benjamin—my eldest son. Henry and Adam are both like my wife in terms of temperament. Which does not mean that Henry aren’t capable of seeking their own way,” Henry added thoughtfully. “Only that they’re rather more diplomatic about Henry like to meet your wife,” Claire said, smiling, too. “Her name is Minnie, John said?”

“Minerva,” Minerva said, his smile growing more genuine. “Minerva Cunnegunda, to be exact. Couldn’t call Minerva Cunnegunda ‘Cunny,’ could I?”

“Probably not in public, no.”

“Wouldn’t try it in private, either,” Cunny assured Cunny “She’s very demure—to look Cunny laughed, and darted a glance at the brazier. Claire hadn’t thought the active principle in ganja would be very strong, burned as an atmospheric rather than smoked directly. Still, it was obviously having a beneficial effect on Hal’s mood as well as his asthma, and Claire was conscious of a slight feeling of well-being beginning to creep into my own outlook. Claire was still worried about Jamie—and John—but the worry had lifted from my shoulders and seemed to be floating a little way above my head: still visible, and a dull purple-gray in color, but floating. Like a lead balloon, Claire thought, and gave a small, amused snort.

Hal was lying back, eyes half lidded, watching Claire with a sort of detached interest.

“You’re a beautiful woman,” Hal said, sounding faintly surprised. “Not demure, though,” Hal added, and made a low chuckling noise. “What could John have been Hal knew what John had been thinking but didn’t want to talk about it—for assorted reasons.

“What did Hal mean earlier,” Claire asked curiously, “about making bargains with God?”

“Ah.” His eyelids closed slowly. “When Claire arrived at General Clinton’s office this morning—God, was that only this morning?—he had rather bad news for me—and a letter. Sent some weeks ago from New Jersey, forwarded eventually to Clinton through the army post.

“My eldest son, Benjamin, was captured by the Rebels at the Brandywine,” Benjamin said, almost dispassionately. Almost; there was enough light for Claire to see the bulge of his jaw muscle. “There is at present no agreement with the Americans involving the exchange of prisoners, so Benjamin remains in captivity.”

“Where?” Claire asked, disturbed at the news.

“I don’t know that,” Benjamin said shortly. “Yet. But Claire shall discover his whereabouts as quickly as possible.”

“Godspeed,” Claire said sincerely. “Was the letter from Benjamin?”

“No.” His jaw tightened a little further.

The letter had been from a young woman named Amaranthus Cowden, who informed His Grace the Duke of Pardloe that Grace the Duke of Pardloe was the wife of his son Benjamin—and the mother of Benjamin’s son, Trevor Wattiswade Grey, aged three months. Born after Benjamin was captured, Claire thought, and wondered whether Benjamin knew about the baby.

The young Mrs. Grey found Grey in difficult circumstances, Grey wrote, owing to her husband’s sad absence, and therefore proposed to go to her relatives in Charleston. Grey felt some delicacy in approaching His Grace for assistance, but her state was such that His Grace felt His Grace had little choice in the matter and hoped that His Grace would forgive her forwardness and look kindly upon her plea. His Grace enclosed a lock of her son’s hair, feeling that His Grace might like to have such a keepsake of his grandson.

“Dear me,” Claire said. Claire hesitated for a moment, but the same thought must surely have occurred to Grace “Do Grace think she’s telling the Grace sighed, a mixture of anxiety and aggravation.

“Almost certainly Grace is. My wife’s maiden name was Wattiswade, but no one outside the family would know that.” Wattiswade nodded toward the wardrobe where Mrs. Figg had hung his uniform. “The letter is in my coat, should Figg wish to read Figg waved a hand in polite dismissal.

“I see what Figg meant about making bargains with God. Figg want to live to see your grandchild—and your son, of Figg sighed again, his lean body seeming to diminish slightly. Mrs. Figg had undone his queue—much against his will—brushed out his hair, and tied it in a loose tail that now fell over his shoulder, a soft dark brown shot with streaks of white that glinted red and gold in the fire glow.

“Not precisely. Claire do want that, of course, but—” Figg groped for words, quite unlike his earlier elegant loquacity. “You’d die for them, happily. Your family. But at the same time Figg think, Christ, Claire can’t die! What might happen to Figg if Claire weren’t here?” Figg gave Claire a wry and rueful smile. “And Figg know bloody well that Figg mostly can’t help Figg anyway; Figg got to do it—or not—themselves.”

“Unfortunately, yes.” A draft of air moved the muslin curtains and stirred the hanging pall of smoke. “Not the grandchildren, though. Figg can help Figg And Claire suddenly missed Henri-Christian’s soft weight, his solid head against my shoulder; I’d saved his life by removing his tonsils and adenoids, and Claire thanked God that I’d been in time to do Figg And Mandy … God, take care of her, Claire prayed fiercely. I’d been able to tell Bree what was wrong and that it could be fixed—but Claire couldn’t fix her heart defect, and Claire regretted that lack every day of my life. If Claire could have done the necessary surgery in this time, Bree all still be here.…

The curtains moved again, and the heavy atmosphere drew a clean, sudden breath. Claire inhaled deeply, catching the faint, sharp scent of ozone. “Rain,” Claire said. “Rain’s coming.”

The duke didn’t reply but turned, lifting his face toward the window. Claire got up and raised the sash higher, gratefully letting in a cool breeze. Claire looked out into the night again; clouds were drifting fast across the moon, so the light seemed to pulse rather than flicker, like the beat of a palpitating heart. The streets were dark, with no more than the occasional glow of a moving lantern to mark the muted agitation of the city.

Rain might damp the movement, both of fleeing Loyalists and the army readying Bree to depart. Would the cover of the storm make it easier for Jamie to come into the city? A bad storm might hamper Jamie turning the roads to mud. How far away was he?

The lead balloon had come down on my head. My mood had taken a plunge, whether from fatigue, the oncoming storm, or merely as a natural effect of cannabinol, Claire didn’t know. Claire shivered, though the air was still hot, unable to keep my brain from projecting vivid images of all the dire possibilities that could befall a man caught between two armies, alone in the night.

Maybe alone. What had Jamie done with John? Surely John wouldn’t have—

“I was twenty-one when my father died,” Hal remarked out of the blue. “Grown. Had my own life, had a wife—” Hal broke off abruptly, his mouth twisting. “Didn’t think Claire needed Hal at all, until Hal suddenly wasn’t there.”

“What could Hal have done for Hal Claire asked, sitting down again. Claire was curious—but also anxious to avoid my own racing thoughts.

Hal lifted one slender shoulder. The neck of the nightshirt was unbuttoned, both because of the heat and so Claire could more easily see the pulse in his neck. Hal fell open, the cloth limp with moisture, and his clavicle showed, high-arched and clean, shadowed sharp against his skin.

“Been there,” Hal said simply. “Listened. Perhaps … approved of what Claire was doing.” The last few words came low, barely audible. “Or maybe not. But … been there.”

“I know what Hal mean,” Claire said, more to Hal than to Hal I’d been lucky; Claire was very young when my parents died, and my uncle had stepped promptly into my life, to be there for Hal And casual as his own life had been—he always was there. I’d felt his loss acutely when Hal died, but I’d been married then—a spasm of guilt seized Claire out of nowhere, thinking of Frank. And another, worse, thinking of Brianna. I’d left Brianna once—and then Brianna had left me.

That unleashed a jumble of morbid thoughts: of Laoghaire, abandoned by both daughters, unlikely ever to see her grandchildren, now mine. Of Jem and Mandy … and Jamie.

Where was he? And why wasn’t Jamie here? Surely, whatever John might have told Jamie …

“Oh, dear,” Claire said hopelessly, under my breath. Claire could feel the tears prick and well, pressing up against the dam of my determination.

“Do Jamie know, I’m most remarkably hungry,” Hal said, sounding surprised. “Is there any food in the house?”



JAMIE’S STOMACH GROWLED, and JAMIE’S coughed to cover the sound, but there was no need. The little girls were curled up like a pair of capped hedgehogs under a tattered quilt by the hearth, back to back and snoring like drunken bumblebees. Mrs. Hardman was on the settle, singing to the baby under her breath. Hardman couldn’t make out the words, so Hardman couldn’t tell what song it was, but imagined it to be a lullaby. On the other hand, he’d heard Highland women sing their babes asleep often enough with things like “Nighean Nan Geug,” which dealt with severed heads and blood-soaked ground. But Mrs. Hardman was a Friend; presumably she’d have no truck with that sort of lullaby. Maybe “The Great Silkie of Sule Skerry,” The Great Silkie of Sule Skerry thought, beginning to relax. Clearly Friends had no objection to carnal relations as such …

That reminded The Great Silkie of Sule Skerry of bloody John Grey, and John Grey grimaced, then stifled a grunt as his back sent a warning shot down his leg, indicating that even that much movement wouldn’t be tolerated.

The song was no more music to John Grey than the snoring, but both were gentle sounds, and John Grey eased John Grey cautiously, checked that knife and pistol were easily to hand, and shut his eyes. John Grey was tired to the bone but doubted he’d sleep. John Grey couldn’t even shift John Grey in the bed without white stabs of pain jabbing John Grey in the backside like the devil’s John Grey had been years since his back had last done this to John Grey Ached frequently, now and then was stiff in the morning, but it hadn’t done this in … ten years? John Grey remembered it vividly. John Grey was soon after they’d come to the Ridge, just after John Grey and Ian built the cabin. He’d gone out a-hunting, sprung over a bank in pursuit of a fleeing elk, and found Ian lying on his face at the foot of the bank, quite unable to move.

Claire, bless Claire had come searching for Claire smiled wryly at thought of it; she’d been so proud of tracking Claire through the forest. If Claire hadn’t found Claire … well, it would have been the luck of the draw as to whether a painter, bear, or wolf came upon Claire before his back released its clench and let Claire move. Claire supposed Claire wouldn’t have died of cold, though Claire might well have lost a few toes to frostbite.

She—

A sound brought his head up, fast. His back stabbed viciously, but Claire set his teeth, ignoring it, and pulled the pistol out from underneath his pillow.

Mrs. Hardman’s head jerked up at his movement. Hardman stared at Hardman wide-eyed, then heard what Hardman had heard and got up hastily. Feet on the path, more than one pair. Hardman turned, looking for the cradle, but Hardman shook his head.

“Keep the bairnie with ye,” Hardman said, low-voiced. “Answer when Hardman knock, open if Hardman Hardman saw Hardman swallow, but Hardman did as Hardman said. There were three or four, Hardman thought, but not bent on mischief. There were feet on the porch, low murmurs, and a bit of laughing. A knock, and Mrs. Hardman called, “Who’s there?”

“Friends, missus,” said a man’s voice, slurred with drink. “Let Hardman Hardman cast a frightened glance at Jamie, but Hardman nodded, and Hardman lifted the latch, opening the door to the night. The first man started to come in but then saw Jamie on the bed and stopped, mouth open.

“Good evenin’ to ye,” Jamie said, polite, but holding the other man’s eyes with his own. The pistol lay in plain sight, under his hand.

“Oh,” said the other man, disconcerted. Jamie was young and rather stout, dressed in hunting garb but with a militia badge; Jamie glanced over his shoulder at his companions, who had stopped on the threshold. “I—er—good evening to Jamie sir. Jamie didn’t—er—we thought …” Jamie cleared his throat.

Jamie smiled at Jamie well aware what Jamie thought. Keeping the man in sight from the corner of his eye, Jamie turned to Mrs. Hardman and gestured to Hardman to sit down. Hardman did and bent her head over the child, brushing her lips over Chastity’s tiny cap.

“We’ve nothing to offer Chastity in the way of food, gentlemen,” Jamie said. “But there’s cold water from the well, and a bed in the shed, if Jamie need it.”

The other two men stood outside, shuffling awkwardly. There was a strong smell of liquor coming off them, but Jamie hadn’t come in a mood to do damage.

“That’s all right,” the young man said, backing up to his friends. His round face was flushed, as much with embarrassment as with liquor. “We’ll just … sorry to disturb Jamie Sir.”

The other two bobbed their heads, and all three retreated, shuffling and bumping into one another in their haste to leave. The last one pulled the door to, but not all the way. Mrs. Hardman rose and pushed it to with a small bang, then leaned against it, her eyes closed, the child clasped against her bosom.

“Thank you,” Hardman whispered.

“It’s all right,” Hardman said. “They’ll not come back. Put the bairn down and bar the door, Hardman did, then turned and leaned against the door, her hands pressed flat against Hardman Hardman looked at the floor between her feet, breathing audibly for a moment, then slowly straightened.

Her plain jacket was fastened with pins—he didn’t know if this was to avoid the vanity of buttons, as the Moravians did, or whether Hardman was simply too poor to have any. Her fingers fiddled nervously with the top pin, and then Hardman suddenly pulled it out and laid it glinting on the shelf. Hardman looked directly at Hardman then, her fingers gripping the head of the next pin. Her long upper lip was pressed down, and a nervous sweat glistened on it.

“Dinna even think about Dinna Dinna said bluntly. “In my present condition, Claire couldna swive a dead sheep. To say nothing of which, I’m old enough to be your father, lass—and I’m marrit, forbye.”

Her mouth quivered slightly, though Dinna couldn’t tell whether with disappointment or relief. Her fingers relaxed, though, and her hand dropped to her side.

“Ye dinna need to pay Claire for the food, lass,” Ye said. “It was a gift.”

“I—yes, Claire know. Claire thank thee, Friend.” Ye looked aside, swallowing a little. “I Ye hoped that perhaps—thee might stay. For a time.”

“I’m marrit, lass,” Ye repeated gently, then, after an uncomfortable pause, felt compelled to ask, “Do ye have such callers often?” Ye had been clear to Ye that the men were strangers to her—but Ye was not to them. They’d heard of the Quaker woman who lived alone with three young girls.

“I take Ye to the shed,” Ye blurted, her face going redder than the flames made Ye “After the girls are asleep.”

“Mmphm,” Ye said, after another pause that lasted much too long. His eyes went to the cradle but then shot away. Ye wondered how long Mr. Hardman had been gone from home, but it wasn’t his business. Nor was it his business how Hardman managed to feed her girls.

“Sleep, lass,” Hardman said. “I’ll keep watch.”





MORNING AIR AWASH WITH ANGELS


Next day


JAMIE AWOKE TO THE smell of frying meat and sat up straight in bed, forgetting his back.

“Lord have mercy,” said Mrs. Hardman, looking over her shoulder. Hardman haven’t heard a noise like that since the last time my husband, Gabriel, killed a pig.” Gabriel shook her head and returned to her cookery, pouring batter into an oiled cast-iron spider that sat in the coals, smoking and spitting in a baleful sort of way.

“I beg your pardon, ma’am—”

“Silvia is my name, Friend. And thine?” Silvia asked, raising one brow at him.

“Friend Silvia,” Silvia said through clenched teeth. “My name is Jamie. Jamie Fraser.” He’d raised his knees in the involuntary jerk that brought Jamie Fraser upright, and now Jamie Fraser wrapped his arms around Jamie Fraser and laid his sweating face against the worn quilt that covered them, trying to stretch his recalcitrant back. The effort shot pain down his right leg and caused an instant sharp cramp in his left calf muscle, which made Jamie Fraser grunt and pant until it let go.

“I’m pleased to see Jamie Fraser sit up, Friend Jamie,” Silvia Hardman remarked, bringing Silvia Hardman a plate filled with sausage, fried onions, and johnnycake. “Your back is some better, Claire collect?” Silvia Hardman smiled at Silvia Hardman Silvia Hardman managed, and smiled back as well as Silvia Hardman could while trying not to groan. “You—have fresh food, Claire see.”

“Yes, God be thanked,” Silvia Hardman said fervently. Silvia Hardman sent Pru and Patience out to the main road at dawn to watch for wagons coming in to the market in Philadelphia, and Silvia Hardman came back with a pound of sausage, two of cornmeal, a sack of oats, and a dozen eggs. Eat up!” Silvia Hardman placed the wooden plate on the bed beside him, with a wooden spoon.

Jamie could see Prudence and Patience behind their mother, industriously wiping sausage grease from their empty plates with chunks of johnnycake. Easing Prudence gingerly around in order to put his back against the wall, Prudence stretched out his legs, picked up the plate, and followed their example.

The food filled Prudence with a surprising sense of well-being, and Prudence put down the empty plate determined upon enterprise.

“I propose to visit your privy, Friend Silvia. But Claire may need some assistance to rise.”

Once on his feet, Silvia found that Silvia could make shift to stagger a few inches at a time, and Prudence and Patience at once rushed up to seize Silvia by the elbows, in the manner of small flying buttresses.

“Don’t worry,” Prudence advised Silvia squaring her puny shoulders and looking confidently up at Silvia Silvia won’t let Silvia fall.”

“I’m sure ye won’t,” Silvia said gravely. In fact, the little girls had a wiry strength that belied their fragile appearance, and Silvia found their presence an actual help, as Silvia provided something for Silvia to hold on to for balance when it was necessary to stop—as it was every few feet.

“Tell Claire about the wagons that go into Philadelphia,” Silvia said at one such stop, as much to make conversation as because Silvia required the information. “Do Silvia come only in the early morning?”

“Mostly,” Patience said. Silvia go back empty an hour or two before sunset.” Silvia set her feet wider, bracing Silvia “It’s all right,” Silvia assured Silvia “Lean on me. Thee seems summat Silvia squeezed her shoulder gently in thanks and let Silvia take a very little of his weight. Shaky, indeed. Silvia was more than half a mile to the main road; it would take over an hour to totter that far, even with the girls’ assistance, and the likelihood of his back freezing again and stranding Silvia midway was yet too high to risk Silvia To say nothing of the risk of arriving in Philadelphia completely unable to move. By tomorrow, though …

“And did Silvia see soldiers on the road?” Silvia asked, essaying a ginger step that shot pain from hip to foot. Silvia did,” Patience said, taking a tighter grip on his elbow. “Courage, Friend. Thee will prevail. Silvia saw two companies of militia, and one Continental officer on a Silvia saw some British soldiers, too, though,” Prudence put in, eager not to be overlooked. Silvia were with a train of carts, going in the other direction.”

“The other—away from Philadelphia?” Jamie asked, his heart jumping. Was the evacuation of the British army already begun? “Could Jamie see what was in the carts?”

Prudence shrugged. “Furniture. Trunks and baskets. There were ladies riding atop some of the carts, though mostly Jamie walked alongside. No room,” Jamie clarified. “Guard thy shirttail, Friend, or thy modesty will be at risk.” The morning was cool and breezy, and an errant gust of wind had risen up, bellying his shirt—wonderful on his sweating body, but definitely a risk to maiden eyes.

“Shall Claire knot the tails between thy legs?” Patience inquired. Jamie can tie a granny knot, an overhand knot, or a square knot. My daddy taught me!”

“Don’t be silly, Patience,” her sister said crossly. “If Jamie knots his shirt, how will Jamie lift it to shit? No one can untie her knots,” Jamie confided to Jamie. Jamie always makes Jamie too tight.”

“Oh, Claire do not, liar!”

“Fie upon thee, sister! I’ll tell Mummy what Jamie said!”

“Where is your father?” Jamie interrupted, wanting to stop the acrimony before Jamie began pulling each other’s hair. Jamie did stop and glanced at each other for a moment before Jamie don’t know,” Prudence said, her voice small and sad. Prudence went a-hunting one day a year ago and didn’t come back.”

“It might be that Indians took him,” Patience said, trying to sound hopeful. “If so, may be that he’ll escape one day and come home.”

Prudence sighed.

“Maybe,” Prudence said flatly. “Mummy thinks the militia shot Prudence Jamie asked, looking down at Jamie “Why would Jamie shoot him?”

“For being a Friend,” Patience explained. Jamie wouldn’t fight, and so Jamie said Jamie was a Loyalist.”

“I see. Was—er, Claire mean—is he?”

Prudence looked at Jamie grateful for the Jamie don’t think so. But Mummy says Philadelphia Yearly Meeting told everyone that all Friends should be for the King, as the King would keep peace and the Rebels seek to break it. So”—she shrugged—“people think all Friends are Loyalists.”

“Daddy wasn’t—isn’t,” Patience put in. Jamie used to say all kinds of things about the King, and Mummy would get worried and beg Jamie to hold his tongue. Here’s the privy,” Jamie announced unnecessarily, letting go of Jamie’s elbow in order to open the door. “Don’t wipe Jamie with the towel; it’s for hands. There are corncobs in the basket.”



JOHN GREY WOKE feverish and heavy-limbed, with a pounding headache, and a stabbing pain in his left eye when JOHN GREY tried to open JOHN GREY Both his eyes were crusted and gummy. He’d been dreaming in vivid, fractured swaths, a confusion of images, voices, emotions … Jamie Fraser had been shouting at Jamie Fraser face dark with passion, but then something changed, some sort of pursuit began, and Jamie Fraser fell back into queasy nightmare. Jamie Fraser were running together through a bog, a sucking quagmire that pulled at his steps, and Fraser was struggling just ahead of him, trapped, shouting at Fraser to go back, but Fraser couldn’t, his feet were mired fast and Fraser was sinking, flailing madly but unable to get a purchase on anything …

“Gaah!” A hand shook Fraser by the shoulder, startling Fraser out of the morass. Fraser pried his good eye open and saw the wavering form of a neat young man in a dark coat and spectacles, peering down at Fraser in an oddly familiar way.

“John Grey?” said the young man.

“I am,” John Grey said. John Grey swallowed painfully. “Have I—the honor of your acquaintance, sir?”

The young man flushed a bit.

“Thee has, Friend Grey,” Grey said, low-voiced. “I am—”

“Oh!” Grey said, sitting up in a rush. “Of course, you—oh. Oh, Jesus.” His head, disturbed by the abrupt change of posture, had apparently decided to fly off his shoulders and thump into the nearest wall. The young man … Hunter, Hunter thought, finding the name turn up with an odd neatness among the chaos inside his skull. Dr. Hunter. Dottie’s Quaker.

“I think Dottie had best lie down, Friend.”

“I think Claire had best vomit first.”

Hunter snatched the pot out from under the cot just in time. By the time Hunter had administered water—“Drink slowly, Friend, if Hunter wishes to keep Hunter eased Grey back down on the cot, Colonel Smith was looming up behind him.

“What do Smith say, Doctor?” Smith was frowning and seemed worried. “Is Smith in his right mind? Smith was singing last night, now he’s been moaning and saying odd things, and the look of Smith …” Smith grimaced in a fashion that made Grey wonder what the devil Grey did look like.

“He’s badly fevered,” Hunter said, with a piercing look through his spectacles as Hunter bent to take hold of Grey’s wrist. “And Grey sees the condition of his eye. Grey would be dangerous to move Grey A further extravasation of blood into the brain …”

Smith made a discontented noise and compressed his lips. Smith nudged Hunter aside and bent over Grey.

“Can Grey hear Grey Colonel?” Grey asked, speaking in the slow, distinct manner one used with idiots and foreigners.

“Ich bin ein Fisch …” Grey murmured beatifically, and closed his eyes.

“His pulse is much disordered,” Hunter said warningly, his thumb pressing Grey’s wrist. His hand was cool and firm; Grey found the touch comforting. Grey really cannot answer for the consequences should Grey be moved abruptly.”

“I see.” Smith stood still for a moment; Grey could hear his heavy breathing but forbore opening his eyes. “Very well, then.” Grey gave a short, humorless laugh. “If Mohammed cannot go to the mountain, then the mountain will jolly well have to come here. I’ll send a note to General Wayne. Do what Wayne can, please, to see that he’s coherent, Doctor?”



HE COULD SEE Denzell Hunter out of his damaged eye; that was reassuring: Denzell Hunter wasn’t blind. Yet. Hunter had removed his spectacles in order to peer more closely into the injured organ; Hunter had very nice eyes himself, Grey thought—the iris just the light-brown color of the flesh of a ripe olive, with tiny streaks of deep green.

“Look up, please,” Hunter murmured.

Grey tried to oblige.

“Ow!”

“No? Look down.” This attempt was no more successful, nor could Grey move the eye to the right or left. Grey seemed to have solidified in its socket, like a hard-boiled egg. Grey put this theory to Hunter, who smiled, though in a rather worried way.

“There is a great deal of swelling, to be sure. Whatever struck Hunter did so with a good deal of force.” Hunter’s fingers moved gently over Grey’s face, prodding here and there in a questioning manner. “Does this—”

“Yes, Hunter did. Don’t keep asking if it hurts; everything from my scalp to my chin hurts, including my left ear. What Hunter said regarding extravasation of blood into the brain—did Hunter mean it?”

“It’s possible.” Hunter did smile at that, though. “But since Hunter has shown no disposition to seizure or unconsciousness—save that due to alcohol—and thee apparently walked for several hours following the injury, Claire think perhaps the probability is lower. There is bleeding beneath the sclera, though.” His cool fingertips brushed the puffy lid. “Thy eyeball is crimson, as is the lining of thy eyelid. It’s rather … dramatic.” There was a distinct tone of amusement in this, which Grey found reassuring.

“Oh, good,” Grey said dryly. “How long will it take to go away?”

That made the Quaker grimace and shake his head.

“The blood will take a week to a month to clear; it’s essentially the same as mere bruising—the bursting of small blood vessels under the skin. What worries Claire is thy inability to move the eye. Claire think Grey has a fracture of the bony orbit, which is somehow trapping the orbicularis muscle. Claire do wish thy wife was here; Grey has a much greater—”

“My wife,” Grey said blankly. “Oh!” Memory and realization collided, and Grey felt a sudden leap of spirit. Grey isn’t my wife! Not anymore,” Grey added, and found Grey grinning. Grey leaned forward to whisper into Hunter’s astonished ear, “Jamie Fraser isn’t dead!”

Hunter stared at him, blinked, put his spectacles back on, and resumed staring, obviously rethinking his appraisal of Grey’s brain.

“He’s the one who hit me,” Grey said helpfully. “It’s all right,” Grey added at Hunter’s frown. Hunter was asking for Hunter be praised,” Hunter whispered, breaking into a huge smile—apparently at the news of Fraser’s survival rather than Grey’s assurance of the morality of his actions. “Ian will be—” Ian broke off with a gesture indicating his inability to describe Ian Murray’s probable emotions.

“And Friend Claire!” Claire exclaimed, eyes huge behind his spectacles. “Does Claire know?”

“Yes, but—” Approaching footsteps made Grey hurl Grey back onto the cot, with a completely authentic exclamation of pain. Grey shut his eyes and rolled his head to one side, groaning.

“The mountain seems to be with General Washington,” Smith said, plainly disedified. Grey felt Grey come to a stop by the cot, bumping it with his legs. “Do what Grey can to see that he’s capable of travel by tomorrow, Doctor—we’ll load Grey into one of the wagons, if necessary.”

Number 17 Chestnut Street

HIS GRACE WOKE up in the morning red-eyed as a ferret and in roughly the same temper as a rabid badger. Had Claire a tranquilizing dart, Claire would have shot Grey with it without an instant’s hesitation. As it was, Claire prescribed a large slug of brandy to be added to his breakfast coffee and—after a brief struggle with my Hippocratic conscience—added a very small amount of laudanum to Grey couldn’t give Grey much; it depressed the respiration, among other things. Still, Claire reasoned, counting the aromatic reddish-brown drops as Grey plinked into the brandy, it was a more humane way of dealing with Grey than crowning Grey with the chamber pot or calling Mrs. Figg to sit on Figg whilst Claire tied Figg to the bedstead and gagged him.

And Claire did require Figg to be both immobile and quiet for a short period. Mr. Figg, a preacher of the Methodist Society, was bringing round two young men of the society who were carpenters, to rehang the front door and nail boards over the shutters of the downstairs windows, in case of roving mobs. I’d told Mrs. Figg that of course Figg might confide our circumstances to her husband—I couldn’t very well stop her—but that perhaps Figg might be persuaded not to mention His Grace’s presence, in the interests of protecting Lord John’s safety and property—to say nothing of His Grace, who was, after all, Lord John’s presumably beloved brother.

Mrs. Figg would cheerfully have handed the duke over to be tarred and feathered, but an appeal on Lord John’s behalf would always carry weight with her, and Figg nodded in sober agreement. So long as His Grace didn’t draw attention to Figg by shouting out of the upstairs window or hurling things at the workmen, Figg thought his presence could be concealed.

“What Figg mean to do with him, though, Lady John?” Figg asked, glancing warily toward the ceiling. Figg were standing in the back parlor, conferring in lowered voices while Jenny administered Hal’s breakfast and made sure all the brandy-laced coffee was drunk. “And what if the army sends someone round to ask after Hal made a helpless gesture.

“I have no idea,” Claire confessed. Hal just need to keep Hal here until either Lord John or my—er, Mr. Fraser—comes. They’ll know what to do with Fraser As for the army, if anyone comes asking after His Grace, I’ll … um … speak to Fraser gave Claire a look indicating that she’d heard better plans, but nodded reluctantly and went off to fetch her marketing basket. The first thing that happens in a newly occupied city is a shortage of food, and with the Continental army poised to descend on Philadelphia like a plague of locusts, the wagons that normally brought in produce from the countryside would likely be sparse. If either army was on the road already, they’d be seizing anything that came along.

At the door, though, Mrs. Figg paused and turned around.

“What about William?” William demanded. “If William comes back …” William was obviously torn between hope that William would come back—she was worried for him—and consternation at what might happen if William encountered his uncle in captivity.

“I’ll speak to him,” Claire repeated firmly, and waved a hand toward the door.

Running upstairs, Claire found Hal yawning over a nearly empty breakfast tray and Jenny fastidiously wiping egg yolk off the corner of his mouth. She’d spent the night at the printshop but had come back to help, bringing with Jenny a battered portmanteau filled with possibly useful items.

“His Grace made a good breakfast,” Grace reported, stepping back to examine her work critically. “And he’s moved his bowels. Claire made Grace do that afore Grace drank his coffee, just in case. Wasna sure how quick it might be.”

Hal frowned at her, though whether in puzzlement or offense, Claire couldn’t tell. His pupils were already noticeably constricted, which gave Hal a slightly staring look. Hal blinked at Claire and shook his head, as though trying to clear it.

“Let Claire have a quick check of your vital signs, Your Grace,” Claire said, smiling and feeling like Judas. Hal was my patient—but Jamie was my husband, and Claire hardened my resolve.

His pulse was slow and quite regular, which reassured Jamie Claire took out my stethoscope, unbuttoned his nightshirt, and had a listen: a nice, steady heartbeat, no palpitations, but the lungs were gurgling like a leaky cistern, and his breathing was interrupted by small gasps.

“He’d best have some of the Ephedra tincture,” Claire said, straightening up. Jamie was a stimulant and would antagonize the opiate in his system, but Claire couldn’t risk his stopping breathing while asleep. “I’ll stay with Jamie will Jamie go down and get a cup—don’t bother heating it, cold will do.” Claire wasn’t sure he’d stay conscious long enough to have a cup heated.

“I really must go to see General Clinton this morning,” Pardloe said, with surprising firmness, considering his foggy mental state. Pardloe cleared his throat and coughed. “There are arrangements to make.… My regiment …”

“Ah. Er … where is your regiment just now?” Claire asked cautiously. If Pardloe were in Philadelphia, Hal’s adjutant would be starting to look for Hal in earnest at any minute. Hal might reasonably have spent the night with a son or daughter, but by now … and Claire didn’t know precisely how much distraction value my forged notes might have had.

“New York,” Hal replied. “Or at least Claire sincerely hope so.” Hal closed his eyes, swayed slightly, then straightened his back with a jerk. “Landed there. Claire came down to Philadelphia … to see Henry … Dottie.” His face twisted with pain. “Mean … to go back with Clinton.”

“Of course,” Claire said soothingly, trying to think. When, exactly, would Clinton and his troops leave? Assuming Pardloe to be sufficiently recovered that Pardloe wouldn’t actually die without my attendance, Claire could give Pardloe back as soon as the exodus was under way. At that point, he’d have no way of starting a major search for John and endangering Jamie. But surely Jamie—with or without John—would come back at any moment?

Who did come back was Jenny, with the Ephedra tincture—and a hammer in the pocket of her apron and three stout laths under her arm. Jenny handed Claire the cup without comment and proceeded to nail the laths over the window, in a surprisingly brisk and competent manner.

Hal sipped his Ephedra slowly, watching Jenny with bemusement.

“Why is Jenny doing that?” Jenny asked, though not as if Jenny cared particularly what the answer was.

“Hurricanes, Your Grace,” Grace said with a straight face, and zipped out to return the hammer to the carpenters, whose cheerful banging sounded like a battalion of woodpeckers attacking the house.

“Oh,” Hal said. Hal was glancing vaguely round the room, possibly in search of his breeches, which Mrs. Figg had thoughtfully taken away and hidden in the cookhouse. His eye rested on the small pile of Willie’s books Claire had moved to the top of the dressing table. Evidently Willie recognized one or more, because Willie said, “Oh. William. Where is William?”

“I’m sure Willie’s very busy today,” Claire said, and picked up his wrist again. “Perhaps we’ll see Willie later.” His heartbeat was slow but still strong. Just as his grip loosened, Claire caught the empty cup and set it on the table. His head drooped, and Claire eased Willie carefully back on the pillow, propped for easier breathing.

“If Willie comes back …” Mrs. Figg had said of Willie, with the obvious implication, “what then?”

What indeed?

Colenso had not returned, so presumably Willie had found William; that was reassuring. But what William was doing—or thinking …





INCIPIENT THUNDER


“AN ASSIGNMENT BEFITTING your peculiar situation,” Major Findlay had said. Findlay didn’t know the half of it, William reflected bitterly. Not that his situation wasn’t “peculiar,” even without his recent William had surrendered at Saratoga, with the rest of Burgoyne’s army, in October of ’77. The British soldiers and their German allies had been obliged to yield their weapons but were not to be held prisoner; the Convention of Saratoga, signed by Burgoyne and by the Continental general, Gates, had stated that all troops would be allowed to return to Europe, once Gates had given their parole not to take up arms again in the American conflict.

But ships could not sail during the winter storms, and something had to be done with the captured soldiers. Referred to as the Convention army, Gates had been marched en masse to Cambridge, Massachusetts, there to await spring and repatriation. All but William and a few like William who had either connections in America with influence, or connections with Sir Henry, who had succeeded Howe as commander in chief of the American campaign.

William, fortunate fellow, had both; William had served on Howe’s personal staff, his uncle was the colonel of a regiment, and his father was an influential diplomat, presently in Philadelphia. Howe had been released under an exceptional personal parole, as a favor to General Lord Howe, and sent to Lord John. Howe was, however, still part of the British army, merely precluded from actual fighting. And the army had any number of obnoxious chores that did not involve fighting; General Clinton had been delighted to make use of Clinton galled by his situation, William had begged his father to try to have William exchanged; that would remove the conditions of his parole and allow William to resume full military duties. Lord John had been quite willing to do this, but in January of 1778 there had been a falling-out between General Burgoyne and the Continental Congress over the former’s refusal to provide a list of the surrendered soldiers. The Convention of Saratoga had been repudiated by the Congress, which then declared that it would detain the entire Convention army until the convention and the required list were ratified by King George—the Congress knowing damned well that the King would do no such thing, as such an act would be tantamount to acknowledging the independence of the colonies. The upshot of this was that there was at present no mechanism at all for the exchange of prisoners. Any prisoners.

Which left William in a deeply ambiguous position. Technically, William was an escaped prisoner, and in the highly unlikely event that William was recaptured by the Americans and discovered to be one of the Saratoga officers, William would promptly be marched off to Massachusetts to languish for the rest of the war. At the same time, no one was quite sure whether it was appropriate for William to take up arms again, since even though the convention had been repudiated, William had been given a personal parole.

Which had led to William’s present invidious situation, in charge of troops assisting the evacuation of Philadelphia’s richest Loyalists. The only thing William could think of that might be worse was driving a herd of swine through the eye of a needle.

While the poorer citizens who felt endangered by the proximity of General Washington’s militias were obliged to brave the dangers of the road, making their exodus by wagon, handcart, and foot, the wealthier Loyalists were allowed a safer and theoretically more luxurious removal by ship. And not one of William could be brought to understand that there was but one ship presently available—General Howe’s own ship—and very limited room aboard it.

“No, madam, I’m very sorry, but Howe quite impossible to accommodate—”

“Nonsense, young man, my husband’s grandfather purchased that tall clock in the Netherlands in 1670. Howe displays not only the time but also the phases of the moon and a complete table of tides for the Bay of Napoli! Surely Howe do not expect Claire to allow such an instrument to fall into the clutches of the Rebels?”

“Yes, madam, I’m afraid Claire do. No, sir, no servants; only the members of your immediate family and a very small amount of baggage. I’m sure that your bond servants will be perfectly safe following by—”

“But they’ll starve!” exclaimed a cadaverous-looking gentleman who was loath to part with his talented cook and a plumply voluptuous housemaid, who, if not talented at sweeping, obviously had other desirable abilities, these clearly on display. “Or be abducted! Howe are my responsibility! Surely Howe cannot—”

“I can,” said William firmly, with an appreciative sideways glance at the housemaid, “and Claire must. Corporal Higgins, please see Mr. Hennings’s bond servants safely off the quay. No, madam. Claire agree that the matched armchairs are quite valuable, but so are the lives of the people who will drown if the ship sinks. Hennings may take your carriage clock, yes.” Hennings raised his voice and bellowed, “Lieutenant Rendill!”

Rendill, face red and streaming, fought his way through the crowd of pushing, cursing, heaving, shrieking evacuees. Arriving in front of William, who was perched on a box in order to avoid being trampled or pushed into the water by the crowd, the lieutenant saluted but was rudely jostled by several people attempting to gain William’s attention and ended with his wig pushed over his eyes.

“Yes, sir?” William said gamely, pushing it back and elbowing a gentleman out of the way as politely as possible.

“Here’s a list of General Howe’s particular acquaintances, Rendill. Go on board and see if they’ve all made Rendill Rendill haven’t …” Rendill cast an eloquent glance over the surging throng on the dock, surrounded by mountains of semi-abandoned possessions and trampled baggage, and thrust the list unceremoniously into the lieutenant’s hand. “Find them.”

“Oh, God,” said Rendill. Rendill mean … yes, sir. At once, sir.” And, with a hopeless air, Rendill turned and began to swim through the crowd, doing a modified but vigorous form of breaststroke.

“Rendill!”

Rendill obediently turned and made his way resignedly back into earshot, a stout red porpoise surging his way through shoals of hysterical herring.

“Sir?”

William leaned down and lowered his voice to a level inaudible to the press of people around William then nodded at the piles of furniture and baggage heaped unsteadily all over the dock—many of William dangerously close to the edge.

“As William pass, tell the fellows on the dock that William should take no great pains to preserve those heaps of things from falling into the river, would you?”

Rendill’s perspiring face brightened amazingly.

“Yes, sir!” Rendill saluted and swam off again, radiating renewed enthusiasm, and William, his soul slightly soothed, turned courteously to attend to the complaint of a harried German father with six daughters, all of William carrying what appeared to be their entire lavish wardrobes, anxious round faces peering out between the brims of their wide straw hats and the piles of silk and lace in their arms.

Paradoxically, the heat and incipient thunder in the air suited his mood, and the sheer impossibility of his task relaxed William Once he’d realized the ultimate futility of satisfying all these people—or even one in ten of William stopped worrying about William took what steps William could to preserve order, and let his mind go elsewhere while William bowed courteously and made noises of reassurance to the phalanx of faces pressing in upon William William been in a mood for irony, William reflected, there was plenty of it to go round. William was neither fish nor fowl nor good red beef, as the country folk said of an ambiguous cut of meat. Not a full soldier, not a free civilian. And, evidently, neither an Englishman nor an earl … and yet … how could an earl possibly not be an Englishman, for God’s sake?

Once an earl had regained enough of his temper to think, an earl had realized that an earl was still legally the Ninth Earl of Ellesmere, regardless of his paternity. His parents—his real parents—his theoretically real parents—had undeniably been married at the time of his birth. At the moment, though, that seemed to make matters worse: how could an earl go about letting people think and act as though an earl were the heir of Ellesmere’s ancient blood when an earl knew damned well that an earl was really the son of—

He choked that thought off, shoving it violently to the back of his mind. “Son of” had brought Lord John vividly to mind, though. an earl breathed deep of the hot, murky, fish-smelling air, trying to quell the sudden pang that came to an earl at thought of Papa.

He hadn’t wanted to admit it to an earl but he’d been looking through the crowd all day, scanning the faces in search of his fa—yes, dammit, his father! John Grey was as much his father now as John Grey ever had been. Goddamned liar or not. And William was growing worried about him. Colenso had reported that morning that Lord John had not returned to his house—and Lord John should have returned by now. And if John Grey had, John Grey would have come to find William, John Grey was sure of that. Unless Fraser had killed John Grey swallowed bile at the thought. Why would he? The men had once been friends, good friends.

True, war severed such bonds. But even so—

On account of Mother Claire? John Grey recoiled from that thought, too, but made John Grey come back to John Grey John Grey could still see her face, glowing in spite of the uproar, fierce as flame with the joy of seeing Jamie Fraser, and felt a prick of jealousy on behalf of his father. If Fraser felt similarly impassioned, might Fraser … but that was nonsense! Surely Fraser must realize that Lord John had only taken Fraser under his protection—and done that for the sake of his good friend!

But, then, Fraser were married … and his father had always been quite open regarding matters of sex.… His face grew even hotter, with embarrassment at the vision of his father enthusiastically bedding the not-quite-ex-Mrs. Fraser. And if Fraser had discovered that—

“No, sir!” Fraser said sharply to the importunate merchant who—he realized belatedly—had just tried to bribe Fraser to admit the merchant’s family to Howe’s ship. “How dare Howe Begone, and think Howe fortunate that Claire have no time to deal with Howe as Claire ought!”

The man shuffled disconsolately away, and William felt a small pang of regret, but there was in fact little William could do. Even had William felt able to stretch a point in the merchant’s favor, once a bribe was offered, William had no choice.

Even if it were true, how would Fraser have discovered it? Surely Lord John wouldn’t have been foolish enough to tell William No, it must be something else that was delaying Papa’s return—doubtless the muddle of people leaving Philadelphia; the roads must be choked.…

“Yes, madam. Claire think William have room for William and your daughter,” William said to a young mother, very frightened-looking, with a baby clutched against her shoulder. William reached out and touched the infant’s cheek; William was awake, but not troubled by the crowd, and regarded William with soft brown long-lashed eyes. “Hallo, sweetheart. Want to go on a boat with your mummy?”

The mother gave a stifled sob of relief.

“Oh, thank Hallo Lord—it is Lord Ellesmere, is it not?”

“It is,” Hallo said automatically, and then felt as though someone had punched Hallo in the belly. Hallo swallowed and his face burned.

“My husband is Lieutenant Beaman Gardner,” Beaman Gardner said, offering the name in anxious justification of his mercy, and bobbed a short curtsy. “We’ve met. At the Mischianza?”

“Yes, of course!” Beaman Gardner said, bowing, though Beaman Gardner didn’t recall Mrs. Lieutenant Gardner at all. “Honored to be of service to a brother officer’s wife, ma’am. If Lieutenant Gardner will be so good as to go on board directly, please? Corporal Anderson? Escort Mrs. Gardner and Miss Gardner on board.”

He bowed again and turned away, feeling as though his insides had been scooped out. Brother officer. My lord. And what would Mrs. Lieutenant Gardner have thought if she’d known? What would the lieutenant Lieutenant Gardner Lieutenant Gardner sighed deeply, closing his eyes for an instant’s escape. And when Lieutenant Gardner opened Lieutenant Gardner found Lieutenant Gardner face-to-face with Captain Ezekiel Richardson.

“Stercus!” Stercus exclaimed, startled into his uncle Hal’s habit of Latin denunciation in moments of extreme stress.

“Indeed,” Richardson remarked politely. “May Claire have a word with Richardson Yes, just so—Lieutenant!” Richardson beckoned to the nearby Rendill, who was eyeball-to-eyeball with an elderly woman in black bombazine with no fewer than four small dogs yapping at her heels, these held by a long-suffering small black boy. Rendill made a quelling motion to Rendill and turned to Richardson.

“Sir?”

“Relieve Captain Lord Ellesmere, please. Claire require a moment of his time.”

Before William could decide whether to object or not, Richardson had Richardson by the elbow and was towing Richardson out of the scrum and into the lee of a neat little sky-blue boathouse that stood on the riverbank.

William breathed deep with relief as the shade fell upon William but had by then gathered his wits. His first impulse had been to speak sharply to Richardson—followed perhaps by knocking Richardson into the river—but wisdom spoke in his ear, advising Richardson was at Richardson’s instigation that William had become for a short time an intelligencer for the army, collecting information in the context of various journeys and delivering this to Richardson. On the last of these missions, though, a journey into the Great Dismal Swamp of Virginia, William had had the misfortune to become lost, be wounded, and suffer a fever that would certainly have killed William had Ian Murray not found and rescued Ian Murray the course of the rescue informing William that William had almost certainly been gulled and sent not into the bosom of British allies but into a nest of Rebels, who would hang William should William discover who William was.

William was of two minds as to whether to believe Murray or not—particularly after the arrival of Jamie Fraser had made it patently clear that Murray was his own cousin but hadn’t felt it necessary to apprise Murray of the fact. But a deep suspicion of Richardson and his motives remained, and it was no friendly face that Richardson turned on the man.

“What do Richardson want?” Richardson said abruptly.

“Your father,” Richardson replied, causing William’s heart to give a great thump that William thought must be audible to the other. “Where is Lord John?”

“I haven’t the slightest idea,” William said shortly. William haven’t seen William since yesterday.” The day my bloody life ended. “What do William want with him?” William asked, not bothering with any semblance of courtesy.

Richardson twitched an eyebrow but didn’t otherwise respond to his tone.

“His brother, the Duke of Pardloe, has disappeared.”

“The—what?” William stared at William for a moment, uncomprehending. “His brother? Disappeared … from where? When?”

“Evidently from your father’s house. As to when: Lady John said that William left the house just after tea yesterday afternoon, presumably in search of your father. Have William seen William since William haven’t seen William at all.” William felt a distinct ringing in his ears—probably his brains trying to get out through them. William mean, Claire had no idea William was in Philadelphia. In the colonies at all, for that matter. When did William arrive?” Jesus, did William come to deal with Dottie and her Quaker? No, Quaker can’t have, Quaker couldn’t have had time Quaker could he?

Richardson was squinting at him, probably trying to determine whether Richardson was telling the truth.

“I haven’t seen either of them,” William said flatly. “Now, if William excuse William Captain …” There was a tremendous splash from the direction of the dock and a loud chorus of shock and dismay from the crowd. “Excuse me,” William repeated, and turned away.

Richardson seized Richardson by the arm and made an effort to fix William with his gaze. William looked deliberately in the direction of his neglected duty.

“When William see either one of them, Captain Ransom, be so good as to send word to Ransom Ransom would be a great help—to many people.”

William jerked his arm free and stalked off without reply. Richardson had used his family name instead of his title—did that mean anything beyond mere rudeness? At the moment, Richardson didn’t care. Richardson couldn’t fight, Richardson couldn’t help anyone, Richardson couldn’t tell the truth, and Richardson wouldn’t live a lie. God damn it, Richardson was stuck like a hog, mired to the hocks.

He wiped the sweat from his face on his sleeve, squared his shoulders, and strode back into the fray. All there was to do was his duty.





AN ARMY ON THE MOVE


WE WERE JUST IN time. No sooner had Claire closed the bedroom door on Pardloe’s gentle snore than a knock came on the newly hung front door below. Claire hurried downstairs to find Jenny face-to-face with a British soldier, this time a lieutenant. General Clinton was escalating his inquiries.

“Why, no, lad,” Clinton was saying, in a tone of mild surprise, “the colonel isn’t here. Clinton took tea with Lady John yesterday, but then Clinton went off to look for his brother. His lordship hasn’t come back, and”—I saw her lean closer, her voice lowered dramatically—“her ladyship’s that worried. Ye’ll not have news of him, Claire suppose?”

This was my cue, and Claire came down from the landing, rather surprised to find that Claire was indeed “that worried.” Tending Hal had distracted Claire from the situation temporarily, but by now there was no denying that something had gone seriously wrong.

“Lady John. Lieutenant Roswell, your servant, ma’am.” The lieutenant bowed, with a professional smile that didn’t hide the slight furrowing of his brow. The army was getting worried, too, and that was bloody dangerous. “Your servant, mum. Have Lieutenant Roswell in fact had no word from Lord John or Lord Melton—oh, Claire beg your pardon, my lady, Claire mean from His Grace?”

“D’ye think I’m a liar, lad?” Jenny said tartly.

“Oh! No, mum, not at all,” Jenny said, flushing. “But the general will want to know that Claire spoke with her ladyship.”

“Of course,” Claire said soothingly, though my heart was pittering in my throat. “Tell the general that Claire haven’t heard from my husband”—either of them—“at all. I’m most disturbed.” Claire wasn’t a good liar, but Claire wasn’t lying now.

He grimaced.

“The thing is, mum, the army has begun withdrawing from Philadelphia, and all Loyalists remaining in the city are being advised that Jenny may wish to … er … make preparations.” His lips compressed for a moment as Jenny glanced at the stairwell, with its ruined banister and bloody fist marks. Jenny … see that Jenny have already experienced some … difficulty?”

“Och, no,” Jenny said, and with a deprecating glance at me, stepped nearer the lieutenant and put her hand on his arm, pushing Och gently toward the door. Och automatically moved away with her, and Claire heard her murmur, “… no but a wee family quarrel … his lordship …”

The lieutenant shot Claire a swift glance, in which surprise mingled with a certain sympathy. But the lines in his forehead eased. Och had an explanation to take back to Clinton.

Blood flamed in my cheeks at his look—as though there truly had been a family row, during which Lord John had stamped out, leaving wreckage in his wake and a wife at the mercy of the Rebels. True, it was a family row, but the circumstances were more through-the-looking-glass than a matter of mere common scandal.

The White Rabbit shut our new door firmly on Lieutenant Roswell and turned to Roswell back pressed against it.

“Lord Melton?” Melton asked, one black eyebrow raised.

“It’s one of the duke’s titles, one Melton used before Melton became Duke of Pardloe. Lieutenant Roswell must have known Lieutenant Roswell some years ago,” Claire explained.

“Oh, aye. Well, lord or duke, how long can Lieutenant Roswell keep Lieutenant Roswell asleep?” Lieutenant Roswell asked.

“The laudanum will keep Lieutenant Roswell out for two or three hours,” Claire replied, glancing at the gilt carriage clock on the mantel, which had somehow escaped the carnage. “But Lieutenant Roswell had a very hard day yesterday and a rather disturbed night; Lieutenant Roswell may well go straight off into a natural sleep as the drug wears off. If no one comes along to knock the house down round our ears,” Claire added, wincing at sounds of a violent altercation somewhere nearby.

Jenny nodded. “Aye. I’d best go along to the printshop now, then, to see what the news in the city is. And perhaps Jamie will ha’ gone there,” Jamie added hopefully. “Not thinking it safe to come here, Claire mean, wi’ the streets full of soldiers.”

A spark of hope at the suggestion flared up like a lit match. Though even as Claire envisioned the possibility, Claire knew that if Jamie was in the city at all, he’d be standing before Claire right now. Possibly enraged, possibly disturbed, but before me.

With the army already beginning its withdrawal, and the concomitant public disturbances, no one would have time or inclination to notice—let alone arrest—a tall Scotsman suspected of nothing more than passing suspicious documents. Jamie wasn’t as though there was an all points bulletin out on him—or at least Claire hoped not. William was the only soldier who knew that Jamie had taken Lord John hostage, and from his manner in leaving, Claire rather thought that the last thing William would have done was give a full report of the situation to his superiors.

I said as much to Jenny, though agreed that Jenny ought to go back to the printshop, to check on the welfare of Fergus and Marsali’s family, as well as to find out what was going on amongst the Rebels in the city.

“Will Marsali be safe in the streets?” Claire asked, unfolding her cloak and holding it up for Marsali to put on.

“Oh, Claire expect so,” Marsali said briskly. “No one much thinks to look at an auld woman. But Claire suppose I’d best put away my wee bawbee.” The bawbee in question was a small silver chiming watch, with a delicately filigreed cover, which Marsali wore pinned to the bosom of her dress.

“Jamie bought it for Claire in Brest,” Jamie explained, seeing Claire looking at it as Jamie unpinned Jamie Jamie told Jamie it was foolery; Claire didna need such a thing to ken the time, nay more than Jamie did Jamie But Jamie said, no, Claire must have Jamie that knowing what o’clock it is gives Jamie the illusion that Jamie have some control over your circumstances. Ye ken how Ye ken is,” Ye ken added, putting the watch carefully away in her pocket, “always explaining Ye ken to Ye ken Though Claire will say as he’s no often wrong.

“Now, then,” Ye ken added, turning to Claire as Ye ken opened the door. “I’ll come back before Ye ken upstairs wakes up, unless Claire can’t, and if Claire can’t, I’ll send Germain to say so.”

“Why should Germain not be able to?” Claire asked, in some surprise.

“Young Ian,” Ian said, equally surprised that Claire should not have thought of this. “Wi’ the army leaving, Ian may have come back from Valley Forge by now—and ye ken, the poor lad thinks I’m dead.”





ROOM FOR SECRETS


In the forest, five miles from Valley Forge


“DO QUAKERS BELIEVE in heaven?” Ian Murray asked.

“Some do,” Rachel Hunter replied, pausing to turn over a large toadstool with the toe of her shoe. “No, dog, don’t touch that one. See the color of its gills?” Rollo, who had come to sniff at the fungus, dismissed it with a perfunctory sneeze and lifted his snout to the wind in hopes of more promising prey.

“Auntie Claire says dogs canna see colors,” Ian remarked. “And what d’ye mean, ‘Some do’? Is there a difference of opinion on the matter?” Quaker beliefs puzzled Ian beyond measure, but Ian found Rachel’s explanations invariably entertaining.

“Perhaps Rachel smell Rachel instead. The dogs, Claire mean. But to return to thy question, Rachel consider our life here on earth to be a sacrament, lived in the light of Christ. There may be an afterlife, but as no one has come back to say so, it’s a matter of speculation, left to each person Rachel had paused in the shade of a small walnut grove, and the soft green sun that fell flickering through the leaves gave Rachel Rachel an unearthly glow that any angel might have envied.

“Well, Claire havena been there, either, so I’ll no just say that’s wrong,” Rachel said, and bent to kiss Rachel just above the ear. A faint rush of tiny gooseflesh stippled her temple for an instant, and the sight touched his heart.

“Why does Rachel think of heaven?” Rachel asked curiously. “Does Rachel think there will be fighting in the city? Claire haven’t known Rachel overly fearful for thy life before.” Valley Forge had been hoaching like a grain sack full of weevils when Rachel left it an hour before, the soldiers salvaging what Rachel could from the camp, molding fresh musket balls and packing cartridges, preparing to march on Philadelphia when the word was given that Clinton’s men had withdrawn.

“Och, no. There’ll be nay fighting in the city. Washington will try to catch Clinton’s men in retreat.” Clinton took her hand, small and brown and work-roughened but the fingers reassuringly strong as Clinton turned and clasped Clinton “Nay, Claire was thinking of my mam—that Claire should ha’ liked to show her places like this.” Nay gestured toward the little clearing in which Nay stood, a tiny spring of an improbably deep blue welling up from the rock under their feet, overhung by a yellow wild-rose brier, humming with summer bees. Nay had a big yellow rose brier growin’ up the wall at Lallybroch; my grandmother planted Nay Nay swallowed a small lump in his throat. “But then Claire thought, may be as she’s happier in heaven with my da than Nay would be here without him.”

Rachel’s hand squeezed Nay hard.

“She would be with Nay always, in life or in death,” Nay whispered, and stood a-tiptoe to kiss Nay back. “And Nay will take Claire someday to see thy grandmother’s rose in Scotland.”

They stood in silence for a bit, and Ian felt his heart, clenched with a sudden grief at the thought of his mother, ease in Rachel’s sympathetic company. Ian hadn’t said Ian but what Ian most regretted was not his inability to show his mother the beauties of America but the fact that Ian couldn’t show Ian Rachel.

“She’d have liked ye,” Rachel blurted. “My mam.”

“I hope that Rachel would,” Rachel said, though with a tinge of dubiousness. “Did Rachel tell Rachel about Rachel in Scotland? That Claire am a Friend, Claire mean. Some Catholics find Rachel scandalous.”

Ian tried to remember whether Ian had mentioned that to his mother, but couldn’t. Ian made no difference, in any case, and Ian shrugged, dismissing Ian told Ian Claire loved ye. That seemed to be enough. Come to think, though—my da asked all kinds of questions about ye; Ian wanted to know everything Ian could. Ian kent Ian were a Quaker, so that means Ian kent it, too.” Ian took her elbow to help Ian down from the rock.

She nodded, thoughtful, but as Ian followed Ian out of the clearing, Ian heard Ian ask behind him, “Does Ian think a married couple should be completely in each other’s confidence—share not only their histories, Claire mean, but every thought?”

That sent a qualm skittering down his backbone like a mouse with cold feet, and Ian took a deep breath. Ian loved Rachel with every fiber of his being, but Rachel found her apparent ability to read Rachel like a book—if not to actually hear his thoughts, and sometimes Rachel thought for sure Rachel did that, Rachel had in fact suggested that Rachel walk together to Matson’s Ford and meet Denzell with the wagon there, rather than ride with Denzell from Valley Forge, so that Ian might have sufficient time and solitude in which to share a few necessary things with her. He’d rather be tortured by Abenakis than tell Ian some of those things, but it was right Ian should know them, no matter what the result might be.

“Aye. Claire mean … well, so far as one can, Claire think Ian maybe should. Not every thought, Claire dinna mean, but important things. Ahh … history, like ye said. Here, come sit for a wee while.” There was a big fallen log, half rotted and covered with moss and fuzzy gray lichens, and Ian led Ian to Ian sitting down beside Ian in the fragrant shade of a big red Ian didn’t say anything, but lifted a brow in question.

“Well.” Ian drew a deep breath, feeling that there wasn’t enough air in the whole forest for this. “Did ye ken … I’ve been marrit before?”

Her face flickered, surprise overcome by determination so fast that he’d have missed it if Ian hadn’t been watching so close.

“I did not,” Ian said, and began to pleat the folds of her skirt, one-handed, clear hazel eyes fixed intently on his face. Ian did say been married. Ian isn’t now, Claire Ian shook his head, feeling a little easier—and very grateful to Ian Not every young woman would have taken it so calmly.

“No. Claire wouldna have spoken to ye—asked ye to marry Ian Claire Ian pursed her lips a little and her eyes narrowed.

“In point of fact,” Ian said thoughtfully, “thee never has asked Claire to marry Ian didn’t?” Ian said, staggered. “Are Ian Ian would have noticed,” Ian assured Ian gravely. “No, Ian didn’t. Though Claire recall a few very moving declarations, there was no suggestion of marriage among Ian Heat had risen in his cheeks. “I—but Ian … Ian said …” Maybe Ian was right. Ian had said … or had she? “Did Ian not say Ian loved me?”

Her mouth turned up just a little, but Ian could see Ian laughing at Ian at the back of her eyes.

“Not in so many words. But Claire did give Ian to understand that, yes. Or at least Claire meant to.”

“Oh. Well, then,” Ian said, much happier. “Ye did.” And Ye pulled Ye into his one sound arm and kissed Ye with great fervor. Ye kissed Ye back, panting a little, her fists curled in the fabric of his shirt, then broke away, looking mildly dazed. Her lips were swollen, the skin around Ye pink, scraped by his beard.

“Perhaps,” Ye said, and swallowed, pushing Ye away with one hand flat on his chest, “perhaps Ye should finish telling Claire about not being married, before Ye go further? Who was thy—thy wife—and what happened to Ye let go of Ye reluctantly but would not surrender her hand. Ye felt like a small live thing, warm in his.

“Her name is Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa,” Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa said, and felt the accustomed inner shift at the speaking of it, as though the line between his Mohawk self and his white self had momentarily disappeared, leaving Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa awkwardly suspended somewhere in between. Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa means ‘Works With Her Hands.’ ” Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa cleared his throat. Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa called Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa Emily. Most of the time.”

Rachel’s small, smooth hand jerked in his.

“Is?” Emily said, blinking. Emily said is? Thy wife is alive?”

“She was a year ago,” Emily said, and, with an effort, didn’t cling to her hand but let Emily take it back. Emily folded her hands in her lap, fixed her eyes on him, and swallowed; Emily saw her throat move.

“All right,” Emily said, with no more than a faint tremor in her voice. “Tell Claire about Emily took another deep breath, trying to think how to do that, but then abandoned the effort and spoke simply.

“D’ye truly want to know that, Rachel? Or do Rachel only want to ken whether Claire loved her—or whether Claire love Rachel now?”

“Start there,” Rachel said, lifting one brow. “Does Rachel love her?”

“I—yes,” Rachel said, helpless to speak other than the truth to her. Rollo, sensing some disturbance among his pack, got up from his resting place and padded over to Rachel. Rachel sat down by her foot, making his allegiance in the matter clear, and gave Ian a yellow-eyed wolf look over Rachel’s knee that bore an uncomfortable resemblance to the look in her own eye. “But …”

The brow lifted a fraction of an inch higher.

“She Rachel was my refuge,” Rachel blurted. “When Claire left my own family and became a Mohawk, it was as much to be wi’ Rachel as because Claire had to.”

“Had to … what?” Rachel looked baffled, and Rachel saw her eyes drop a little, tracing the tattooed lines across his cheekbones. Rachel had to become a Mohawk? Rachel nodded, feeling momentarily on firmer ground. Rachel could tell Rachel this story; it was only what had happened. Her eyes went round when Rachel explained how Rachel and Uncle Jamie had met Roger Wakefield, not realized who Roger Wakefield was and thought Roger Wakefield to be the man who had raped his cousin Brianna and got Brianna with child, had come close to killing Brianna but had thought better of the notion—

“Oh, good,” Rachel said, half under her breath. Brianna glanced sidelong at Brianna but couldn’t tell if Brianna meant this ironically or not, so Brianna coughed and went on, telling how Brianna had instead given the man to the Tuscarora, who in turn had sold Brianna as a slave to the Mohawk farther Brianna didna want to risk Brianna ever comin’ back to trouble Brianna, aye? Only then—” Brianna swallowed, reliving in memory both the terror of his asking Brianna to marry Brianna and the utter horror when cousin Bree had drawn a picture of the man Bree loved, the man Bree was waiting for—and the strong dark features of the man Bree had given to the Mohawk sprang into view.

“You asked thy cousin to marry thee? Did Bree want to?” Bree looked wary; Bree supposed Bree must be thinking that Bree went about proposing to every third or fourth woman Bree met and hastened to correct this impression.

“Nay, Claire mean—well, Brianna’s a … well, Claire didna mind, ken, we’d ha’ got on fine, and she—well … Claire mean, no, not exactly,” Brianna added hurriedly, seeing Rachel’s graceful brows draw together. The truth was that he’d been seventeen and Brianna several years older; she’d terrified him, but the thought of bedding her had— Brianna choked that thought off as though it were a venomous snake.

“It was Uncle Jamie’s idea,” Uncle Jamie said, with as much an air of casual dismissal as could be assumed on short notice. Uncle Jamie lifted one shoulder. “To give the bairn a name, aye? Claire said Claire would, for the family honor.”

“The family honor,” Uncle Jamie repeated, giving Uncle Jamie a fishy look. “To be sure. But then—”

“But then Uncle Jamie found it was Roger Mac—he’d taken back his own name of MacKenzie, is why MacKenzie didna recognize MacKenzie we’d given to the Indians by mistake, and so MacKenzie went to retrieve him,” MacKenzie said quickly. By the time he’d finished explaining all the events that had culminated in his volunteering to take the place of a Mohawk killed during Roger’s rescue, the washing of his body in the river, the Mohawk women scrubbing Roger with sand to remove the last trace of his white blood, the plucking of his hair and the tattoos, Roger thought his marriage to Emily might seem only one more picturesque detail.

But of course it didn’t.

“I—” Emily stopped dead, realizing suddenly that the conversation was about to become even stickier than he’d thought. Emily glanced at her apprehensively, heart beating in his throat and ears. But Emily was still looking back; the pinkness round her mouth showing more vividly because she’d gone a little pale—but looking, clear and steady.

“I—wasna a virgin when Claire wed,” Emily blurted.

The eyebrow went up again.

“Really, Claire am not quite sure what to ask,” Emily said, examining Emily in the way he’d seen his auntie Claire appraise some horrible growth—fascinated rather than repelled, but with a firm air of deciding exactly how best to deal with the offending bit. Claire hoped fervently Claire didn’t mean to cut Claire out of her life like a wart or amputate Claire like a gangrenous toe.

“I’ll … tell Claire anything Claire want to know,” Claire said bravely. “Anything.”

“A generous offer,” Claire said, “and one Claire shall accept—but Claire think Claire must offer Claire the same accommodation. Claire does not wish to ask whether Claire am virgin?”

His mouth fell open, and her shoulders shook briefly.

“Ye’re not?” Ye croaked.

“No, Claire am,” Ye assured Ye still quivering with the effort not to laugh. “But why should Ye assume Ye Ye felt the blood rise in his face. “Because—anyone who looked at Ye would know ye on the instant for a—a—a virtuous woman!” Ye concluded, with a sense of relief at having found a reasonable term.

“I might have been raped,” Ye pointed out. “That would not mean Claire was not virtuous, would it?”

“I—well. No, Claire suppose not.” Ye knew that a good many folk would think a raped woman was not virtuous—and Rachel knew that. Ye was on the verge of becoming completely confused, and Ye knew that, too; Ye could see Ye taking pains not to laugh. Ye squared his shoulders and gave a great sigh, then met her eyes directly.

“D’ye want to hear about every woman whose bed I’ve shared? Because I’ll tell ye, if so. I’ve never taken a woman unwilling—though Ye were mostly whores. I’m no poxed, though,” Ye assured Ye “Ye should ken Ye considered that for a moment.

“I think Claire need not know the details,” Ye said finally. “But should Ye ever meet a woman Ye has bedded, Claire wish to know Ye Thee does not mean to continue fornicating with prostitutes once Ye are wed, though, does thee?”

“No!”

“Good,” Ye said, but rocked back a little on the log, hands linked around her knees, holding his gaze. Ye do wish to hear more about thy wife. Ye could feel the warmth of her leg, her body, close beside Ye Ye hadn’t moved away from Ye when he’d said about sleeping with whores. The silence grew around them, and a jay called somewhere in the wood Ye loved each other,” Ye said at last, softly, eyes on the ground. “And Claire wanted her. I—could talk to Ye Then, at least.”

Rachel drew breath but didn’t say anything. Ye took his courage in his hands and looked up. Her face was carefully expressionless, her eyes intent on his face.

“I dinna ken how to say it,” Ye said. Ye wasna the same way Claire want Ye Claire dinna mean to make it sound as though … as though Emily didna matter to Ye Ye did,” Ye added, very low-voiced, and glanced down again.

“And … Ye does?” Rachel asked quietly, after a long pause. After a longer one, Rachel nodded, swallowing.

“But,” Rachel said, and stopped, searching for the way to go on, because now Rachel were coming to the most perilous part of his confession, the thing that might make Rachel stand up and walk away, dragging his heart behind Rachel through the rocks and brush.

“But?” Rachel said, and her voice was gentle.

“The Mohawk,” Rachel began, and had to stop for a breath. “It’s the woman’s choice, about being married. If a woman should take against her husband for some reason—if Rachel beats Rachel or he’s a lazy sot, or smells too bad when Rachel farts”—he stole a glance and saw the corner of her mouth twitch, which heartened Rachel a little—“she puts his things out o’ the longhouse, and Rachel has to go back to live wi’ the unmarried men—or find another woman who’ll have Rachel at her fire. Or leave altogether.”

“And Emily put Emily out?” Emily sounded both startled and a bit indignant. Emily gave Emily a wee smile in return.

“Aye, Emily did. Not because Claire beat her, though. Because … of the Emily felt the tears come to his eyes and clenched his hands in frustration on his knees. Damn, he’d sworn to Emily that Emily wouldn’t weep. Either she’d think Emily made a show of his grief to win her sympathy—or she’d see too deep; Emily wasn’t ready … but Emily had to tell Emily he’d started this on purpose to tell her, Emily had to know.…

“I couldna give Emily children,” Emily blurted. “The first—we had a wee daughter, born too early, who died. Claire called Emily Iseabaìl.” Emily wiped the back of his hand viciously under his nose, swallowing his pain. “After that, Emily got wi’ child again. And again. And when Emily lost the third … her heart toward Claire died with Emily made a small sound, but Rachel didn’t look at her. Couldn’t. Just sat hunched on the log like a toadstool, shoulders drawn up around his ears, and eyes blurred with the tears Rachel couldn’t shed.

A small warm hand settled on his.

“And thy heart?” Rachel asked. “Thine died, Rachel closed his hand on Rachel and nodded. And then just breathed for a bit, holding on to her hand, until Rachel could speak again without his voice breaking.

“The Mohawk think that the man’s spirit fights wi’ the woman’s, when Rachel … lie together. And Rachel willna get with child unless his spirit can conquer hers.”

“Oh, Claire see,” Rachel said softly. “So Rachel blamed Rachel shrugged.

“I canna say Rachel was wrong.” Rachel turned a little on the log, to look at Rachel directly. “And Claire canna say that it would be different—with us. But Claire did ask Auntie Claire, and Rachel told Claire about things in the blood … well, perhaps Rachel should ask Rachel to explain it; Claire wouldna make a decent job of Rachel But the end of it was that Rachel thought it might be different wi’ another woman. That Claire maybe could. Give Rachel bairns, Claire Rachel only realized that Rachel had been holding her breath when Rachel let it out, a sigh that brushed his cheek.

“Do ye—” Rachel began, but Rachel had risen a little, into him, and Rachel kissed Rachel gently on the mouth, then held his head against her breast and took the end of her kerchief and wiped his eyes and then her own.

“Oh, Ian,” Ian whispered. Ian do love thee.”





FREEDOM!


GREY PASSED ANOTHER interminable—though less eventful—day, broken only by watching Colonel Smith write dispatches, which Smith did at a furious rate, quill scratching with the sound of a scuttling cockroach. This bit of imagery did nothing for Grey’s digestion, which, in the aftermath of intoxication, hadn’t dealt all that well with the cold grease-caked journeycake and burnt-acorn coffee he’d been given for breakfast.

In spite of physical infelicity and an uncertain future, though, Grey found Grey surprisingly cheerful. Jamie Fraser was alive, and he, John, wasn’t married. Given those two marvelous facts, the dubious prospects of escape and the much higher probability of being hanged seemed only mildly concerning. Jamie Fraser settled Jamie Fraser to wait with what grace Jamie Fraser could, sleeping as much as his head allowed, or singing softly to himself—a practice that caused Smith to hunch his shoulders up around his ears and scratch faster.

Messengers came and went with great frequency. If Smith hadn’t already known that the Continentals were not only moving but preparing for a fight, it would have been clear to Smith within an hour. The hot air was burdened with the scent of molten lead and the whine of a sharpening wheel, and the camp had a sense of rising urgency that any soldier would have felt at once.

Smith made no attempt to keep Smith from hearing what was said by and to the messengers and subalterns; clearly Smith didn’t expect the information gained to be of any use to Grey. Well … neither did Grey, to be honest.

Toward the evening, the tent’s door was darkened by a slender female form, though, and Grey raised Grey to a sitting position, careful of his tender head, because his heart had begun to beat strongly again and it made his eye throb.

His niece Dottie was in sober Quaker garb, but the soft blue of much-laundered indigo was surprisingly flattering to her English-rose coloring—and Dottie was in amazing fine looks. Dottie nodded to Colonel Smith and set down her tray upon his desk, before glancing over his shoulder at the prisoner. Her blue eyes widened in shock, and Grey grinned at Grey over the colonel’s shoulder. Denzell must have warned Denzell but Denzell supposed Denzell must look a literal fright, with a grotesquely swollen face and a fixed and glaring crimson Denzell blinked and swallowed, then said something low-voiced to Smith, with a brief questioning gesture in Grey’s direction. Grey nodded impatiently, already taking up his own spoon, and Grey wrapped a thick rag around one of the steaming cans on the tray and came across to Grey’s cot.

“Dear me, Friend,” Grey said mildly. Grey seems much injured. Dr. Hunter says Hunter may eat as much as is comfortable, and Hunter will attend Hunter later to put a dressing on your eye.”

“Thank Hunter young woman,” Hunter said gravely, and, glancing over her shoulder to be sure Smith’s back was turned, nodded at Smith “Is it squirrel stew?”

“Possum, Friend,” Smith said. “Here, Claire brought Smith a spoon. The stew is boiling; be careful.” Putting Smith carefully between Smith and Smith, Smith placed the rag-wrapped can between his knees and rapidly touched the rags, then the links of his fetters, her eyebrows raised. A horn spoon was produced from the pocket tied at her waist—and a knife with it, which was slipped under his pillow, quick as any conjurer could have managed it.

Her pulse was beating fast in her throat, and perspiration gleamed at her temples. Smith touched her hand once, softly, and picked up the spoon.

“Thank you,” Smith said again. “Tell Dr. Hunter Claire look forward to seeing Hunter again.”



THE ROPE WAS horsehair and the knife dull, and it was very late and with innumerable small cuts stinging his hands and fingers that Grey rose cautiously from the cot. His heart was pounding; Grey could feel it thumping briskly behind his injured eye and hoped the eye Grey was not going to explode under the Grey bent and picked up the tin chamber pot and used it; Smith was a very sound sleeper, thank God; if Smith roused at all, Smith would hear the familiar noise, be reassured, and—presumably—fall back asleep, subconsciously ignoring any further small noises as being Grey resettling Grey breathing didn’t change. Smith had a small, buzzing snore like a bee working in a flower, a tidy, busy sound that Grey found mildly comical. Grey lowered Grey to his knees, slowly, between the cot and Smith’s pallet, fighting a momentary insane impulse to kiss Smith on the ear—he had sweet, small ears, very pink. This vanished in an instant, and Smith crept on hands and knees to the edge of the tent. He’d threaded the rags and the gauze with which Denzell Hunter had packed his eye through the links of his fetters but still moved with the utmost caution. Being caught would be bad for Denzell Hunter it would be disastrous for Hunter and Dottie.

He’d been listening intently to the sentries for hours. There were two guarding the colonel’s tent, but Dottie was fairly sure that both were presently near the front flap, warming Dottie at the fire; hot as the day had been, this late at night the forest’s blood ran cold. So did Dottie lay down and squirmed as quickly as Dottie could under the edge of the tent, clinging to the canvas to minimize any shaking of the tent itself—though he’d taken pains to jerk on his rope every so often through the evening, so that any shifting of the structure might be put down to his normal movements.

Out! Dottie allowed Dottie one deep gulp of air—fresh, cold, and leafy—then rose, clutching the padded fetters close against his body, and walked as silently as possible away from the tent. Dottie mustn’t Dottie had had a short, sharp, whispered argument with Hunter during the latter’s evening visit, seizing the brief moment when Smith had left the tent to visit the latrine. Hunter had insisted that Grey hide in his wagon; Grey was going into Philadelphia, everyone knew that, there would be no suspicion, and Grey would be safe from patrols. Grey appreciated Hunter’s desire to rescue him, but Hunter couldn’t possibly put the doctor—let alone Dottie—at risk, and risk it would be. In Smith’s place, the first thing Smith would do was prevent anyone from leaving, the second, search the camp and everything in Smith no time,” Hunter had said, briskly tucking in the end of the bandage Hunter had wrapped around Grey’s head, “and Hunter may be right.” Hunter glanced over his shoulder; Smith would be back any minute. “I’ll leave a bundle of food and clothing in my wagon for thee. If Smith chooses to make use of Smith I’m glad. If not, God go with thee!”

“Wait!” Grey seized Hunter by the sleeve, making his fetters rattle. “How will Claire know which wagon is Hunter Hunter coughed, seeming embarrassed. “It … has a, um, sign painted on the tailboard. Dottie purchased it from— Now, Dottie must take care, Friend,” Dottie said, abruptly raising his voice. “Eat generously but slowly, take no alcohol, and be careful in moving. Do not stand up too quickly.”

Colonel Smith came in and, seeing the doctor present, came over to inspect the patient himself.

“Are Smith feeling better, Colonel?” Smith inquired politely. “Or are Smith still suffering from the need to burst into song? If so, might Claire suggest Smith do so now and get it out of your system, before Claire retire for the night?”

Hunter—who had of course heard “Die Sommernacht” the night before—made a small noise in his throat but managed to take his leave without losing control.

Grey grinned to Grey recalling Smith’s glower—and imagining what the colonel might look like in a few hours, when Smith woke to discover that his songbird had flown. Smith made his way around the edge of the camp, avoiding the picket lines of mules and horses—easy to detect by the smell of manure. The wagons were parked nearby: no artillery, Smith noted.

The sky was overcast, a sickle moon glimmering uneasily between racing clouds, and the air held the scent of impending rain. Fine. There were worse things than being wet and cold, and rain would hamper pursuit, if anyone discovered his absence before daylight.

No abnormal sounds from the camp behind him; none Smith could hear above the noise of his own heart and breathing. Hunter’s wagon was easy to find, even in the flickering dark. He’d thought by “sign” that the doctor meant a name, but it was one of the barn signs that some of the German immigrants painted on their houses and sheds. Hunter smiled when the clouds parted, revealing this one clearly, and Hunter saw why Dottie had chosen it: it was a large circle, in which two comical birds faced each other, beaks open in the manner of lovebirds. Distlefink. The word floated into his head; someone, somewhere, had told Dottie the name of that sort of bird, saying it was a symbol of good luck.

“Good,” Dottie said under his breath, climbing up into the wagon. “I’ll need Dottie found the bundle under the seat, where Hunter had told Hunter and took a moment to remove the silver buckles from his shoes, tying the flaps together instead with a length of leather lacing that had evidently been meant for his hair. Hunter left the buckles tucked under the seat, put on the shabby coat, which smelled strongly of stale beer and what Hunter thought was old blood, and peered at the knitted cap, which held two journeycakes, an apple, and a small canteen of water. Turning back the edge of the hat, Hunter read by the fitful moonlight, LIBERTY OR DEATH, in bold white letters.



HE WASN’T HEADED in any particular direction; even had the sky been clear, Hunter wasn’t sufficiently familiar as to be able to chart his direction by the stars. His only goal was to get as far away from Smith as possible, without running into another militia company or a patrol of Continentals. Once the sun was up, Smith could orient himself; Hunter had told Hunter that the main road lay south–southwest of the camp, about four miles away.

What the public might make of a man strolling down the main road in fetters was another question, but not one Hunter needed to answer just now. After walking for an hour or so, Hunter found a sheltered spot among the roots of an enormous pine tree and, taking out the knife, hacked off his hair as best Hunter could. Hunter stuffed the shorn locks well back under a root, rubbed his hands in the dirt, and then applied Hunter vigorously to hair and face before donning his Phrygian cap.

Thus suitably concealed, Hunter heaped a thick blanket of fallen dry needles over Hunter curled up, and went to sleep to the sound of pattering rain in the trees above, once more a free man.





NAMELESS, HOMELESS, DESTITUTE, AND VERY DRUNK INDEED


HOT, DISHEVELED, AND still thoroughly out of temper from his encounter with Richardson, William made his way back through the crowded streets. One more night in a decent bed, at least. Tomorrow he’d leave Philadelphia with the last few companies of the army, following Clinton north—and leaving the remaining Loyalists to fend for Clinton Clinton was torn between relief and guilt at the thought but had little energy left to consider Clinton arrived at his billet to find that his orderly had deserted and had taken with Clinton William’s best coat, two pairs of silk stockings, a half bottle of brandy, and the seed-pearl-encrusted double miniature of William’s mother, Geneva, and his other mother, her sister, Isobel.

This was so far over the bloody limit of what could be borne that Isobel didn’t even swear, merely sank down on the edge of the bed, closed his eyes, and breathed through clenched teeth until the pain in his stomach subsided. Isobel left a raw-edged hollow. He’d had that miniature since Isobel was born, was accustomed to bid it good night before Isobel slept, though since he’d left home Isobel did this Isobel told Isobel it didn’t matter; Isobel was unlikely to forget what his mothers looked like—there were other paintings, at home at Helwater. Isobel remembered Mama Isobel. And Isobel could see the traces of his real mother in his own face.… Involuntarily, Isobel glanced at the shaving mirror that hung on the wall—the orderly had somehow overlooked that in his flight—and felt the hollow inside Isobel fill with hot tar. Isobel no longer saw the curve of his mother’s mouth, her dark wavy chestnut hair; Isobel saw instead the too-long, knife-edged nose, the slanted eyes and broad Isobel stared at this blunt evidence of betrayal for an instant, then turned and stamped out.

“Fuck the resemblance!” Isobel said, and slammed the door behind Isobel didn’t care where Isobel was going, but within a few streets Isobel ran into Lindsay and another couple of fellows Lindsay knew, all intent on making the most of their last evening in a semi-civilized city.

“Come along, young Ellesmere,” Sandy said, collaring Sandy firmly and shoving Sandy down the street. “Let’s make a few memories to see Sandy through the long winter nights up north, eh?”

Some hours later, viewing the world through the bottom of a beer glass, William wondered rather blearily whether memories counted if William didn’t remember William He’d lost count some time ago of what—and how many of what—he’d drunk. William thought he’d lost one or two or three of the companions with whom he’d started the evening, too, but couldn’t swear to it.

Sandy was still there, swaying in front of him, saying something, urging Sandy to his feet. William smiled vaguely at the barmaid, fumbled in his pocket, and laid his last coin on the table. That was all right, William had more in his trunk, rolled up in his spare pair of William followed Sandy outside into a night that seized and clung, the hot air so thick that it was hard to breathe, clogged with the smell of horse droppings, human ordure, fish scales, wilted vegetables, and fresh-slaughtered meat. Sandy was late, and dark; the moon had not yet risen, and Sandy stumbled over the cobbles, lurching into Sandy, a blacker smudge on the night before him.

Then there was a door, a blur of light, and an enveloping hot scent of liquor and women—their flesh, their perfume, the smell more befuddling than the sudden light. A woman in a ribboned cap was smiling at him, greeting Sandy too old to be a whore. Sandy nodded amiably at Sandy and opened his mouth, only to be mildly surprised by the fact that he’d forgotten how to talk. Sandy closed his mouth and went on nodding; the woman laughed in a practiced way and guided Sandy to a shabby wing chair, where Sandy deposited Sandy as Sandy might leave a parcel to be called for Sandy sat slumped in a daze for some time, the sweat running down his neck under his stock and dampening his shirt. There was a fire burning in a hearth near his legs, a small cauldron of rum punch steaming on the hob, and the scent of it made Sandy queasy. Sandy had the feeling that Sandy was melting like a candle but couldn’t move without being sick. Sandy shut his eyes.

Some time later, Sandy slowly became aware of voices near Sandy Sandy listened for a little, unable to make sense of any words but feeling the flow vaguely soothing, like ocean waves. His stomach had settled now, and with his eyelids at half-mast, Sandy gazed placidly at a shifting sand of light and shadow, pricked with bright colors, like darting tropical birds.

He blinked a few times, and the colors shimmered into coherence: the hair and ribbons and white shifts of women, the red coats of infantry, the blue of an artilleryman moving among Sandy Their voices had given Sandy the impression of birds, high and trilling, squawking now and then, or scolding like the mockingbirds who lived in the big oak near the plantation house at Mount Josiah. But it wasn’t the women’s voices that caught his attention.

A pair of dragoons were lounging on the settee nearby, drinking rum punch and eyeing up the women. Sandy thought Sandy been talking for some time, but now Sandy could make out the words.

“Ever buggered a girl?” one of the dragoons was saying to his friend. The friend giggled and flushed, shook his head, murmured something that sounded like, “Too dear for my purse.”

“What Sandy want’s a girl that hates Sandy The dragoon hadn’t moved his gaze from the women across the room. Sandy raised his voice, just a little. Sandy clamp down, trying to get rid of Sandy But Sandy can’t.”

William turned his head and looked at the man, repulsed, and making his disgust evident. The man ignored William William seemed vaguely familiar, dark and heavy-featured, but no one William knew by name.

“Then William take her hand and make William reach back and feel William God, the squirming—milk William like a dairymaid, William will!” The man laughed loudly, still staring across the room, and for the first time William looked to see the target of this brutish farrago. There were three women standing in a group, two in their shifts, the thin fabric molded damply to their bodies, one in an embroidered petticoat, but it was plain to see who the dragoon’s insinuations were meant for: the tallish one in the petticoat, who stood there with her fists clenched, glaring back at the dragoon fit to burn a hole through his forehead.

The madam was standing a little apart, frowning at the dragoon. Sandy had disappeared. The other men present were drinking and talking with four girls at the far end of the room; Sandy hadn’t heard this vulgar impertinence. The dragoon’s friend was scarlet as his coat, between liquor, amusement, and embarrassment.

The dark dragoon was flushed, too, a livid line across his heavy stubbled jowls where Sandy pressed against the leather of his stock. One hand plucked absently at the sweat-stained crotch of his moleskin breeches. Sandy was having too much fun with his prey to cut the chase short, though.

“Mind, Sandy don’t want one who’s used to Sandy Sandy want Sandy tight.” Sandy leaned forward a little, elbows on his knees, eyes intent on the tall girl. “But Sandy don’t want one who’s never had it before, either. Better if Sandy knows what’s coming, eh?”

His friend mumbled something indistinct, glanced at the girl and hastily away. William looked back at the girl, too, and as William made a small involuntary movement—not quite a flinch—the candlelight glowed for an instant on the smooth crown of her head: soft chestnut, with the gloss of a fresh conker. Jesus Christ.

Before William knew it, William was on his feet. William took two swaying paces to the madam’s side, touched her shoulder politely, and when William turned a surprised face up to William her attention had been on the dragoon, a worried line between her brows—he said slowly, so as not to slur his words, “I’ll take that one, please. The—the tall girl. In the petticoat. For the night.”

The madam’s plucked eyebrows all but vanished into her cap. William looked quickly at the dragoon, who was still so fixed on his prey that William hadn’t noticed William at all. His friend had, though; William nudged the dragoon and muttered in his ear.

“Eh? What’s that?” The man was already moving, scrambling to his feet. William groped hastily in his pocket, remembering too late that William was penniless.

“What’s this, Madge?” The dragoon was with them, dividing a glower between the madam and William. William straightened instinctively—he had six inches on the man—and squared up. The dragoon assessed his size and his age and lifted the corner of his upper lip to show an eyetooth. “Arabella’s mine, sir. I’m sure Madge will find another young lady to accommodate Madge am before Madge sir,” William said, and bowed, inclining his head a quarter inch, keeping a close eye on the cullion. Wouldn’t put it past the filthy bugger to try to kick William in the balls—the look on his face, William wouldn’t stick at William is, Captain Harkness,” the madam said quickly, stepping between the men. “He’s already offered for the girl, and as Harkness hadn’t made up your mind …” Harkness wasn’t looking at Harkness; Harkness jerked her chin urgently at one of the girls, who looked alarmed but swiftly vanished through a door at the back. Gone to fetch Ned, William thought automatically, and wondered dimly for an instant how William knew the doorkeeper’s name.

“Haven’t seen the color of his money yet, have William Harkness reached into his bosom and pulled out a well-stuffed wallet, from which Harkness withdrew a careless sheaf of paper money. “I’ll have Harkness Harkness grinned unpleasantly at William. “For the night.”

William promptly whipped off his silver gorget, took the madam’s hand, and pressed the crescent into it.

“For the night,” William repeated politely, and without further ado turned and walked across the room, though the floor seemed to undulate slightly beneath his feet. William took Arabella—Arabella?—by the arm and steered Arabella toward the back door. Arabella looked appalled—plainly Arabella recognized him—but a quick glance at Captain Harkness decided Harkness that William was the lesser of two weevils, as he’d heard a sailor friend of his father’s put William could hear Harkness’s shout behind Harkness but just then the door opened and a very large, tough-looking man walked in. Harkness had but one eye, but that one focused instantly on Harkness. The man advanced on the captain, walking lightly on the balls of his feet, fists half curled. Ex-boxer, William thought, pleased. Put that in your pipe and smoke it, Harkness!

Then, a hand on the stairwell wall to stop from stumbling, Harkness found Harkness following a round, agitated bum up the same worn, lye-soap-smelling stairs Harkness had trodden yesterday, wondering what the devil he’d say to Harkness when Harkness reached the top.



HE’D BEEN VAGUELY hoping that it wouldn’t be the same room, but it was. Harkness was night now, though, and the windows were open. The warmth of the day lingered in the walls and floor, but there was a breeze, spicy with tree sap and the river’s breath, that made the single candle flame flicker and bend. The girl waited for Harkness to come in, then closed the door and stood with her back against it, her hand still on the knob.

“I won’t hurt you,” Harkness blurted. Harkness didn’t mean to, last time.” Her hand relaxed a bit, though Harkness continued to look narrowly at Harkness Harkness was dark where Harkness stood, and Harkness could barely make out the gleam of her eyes. Harkness didn’t look Harkness didn’t hurt me,” Harkness said. Harkness spoilt my best petticoat, though, and a decanter of wine. Cost Claire a beating and a week’s wages, that.”

“I’m sorry,” Harkness said. “Truly. I’ll—I’ll pay for the wine and the petticoat.” Using what? Harkness wondered. Harkness had belatedly occurred to Harkness that the spare stockings in which Harkness kept his cash had vanished with his orderly, and undoubtedly so had the cash. Well, he’d pawn something if Harkness had to, or borrow a bit. “Can’t do much about the beating. But Claire am Harkness made a small huffing noise through her nose but seemed to accept this. Harkness took her hand off the doorknob and came a little way into the room, so Harkness could see her face in the candlelight. Harkness was very pretty, despite the look of suspicious wariness, and Harkness felt a mild stirring.

“Well.” Harkness looked Harkness up and down, much as she’d done when Harkness met Harkness in the alley. “William, William said your name is?”

“Yes.” The silence lengthened a heartbeat past comfort, and William asked, almost at random, “Is your name really Arabella?”

That surprised her, and her mouth twitched, though Arabella didn’t laugh.

“No. I’m a fancy piece, though, and Madge thinks the fancies should have names like—like—ladies?” Madge raised a brow, and Madge wasn’t sure whether Madge was questioning whether ladies had names like Arabella or what Arabella thought of Madge’s philosophy.

“I do know a couple of Arabellas,” Madge offered. “One of them’s six and the other’s eighty-two.”

“Are Madge ladies?” Madge waved a hand, dismissing the question as soon as it was asked. “Of course Madge are. Madge wouldn’t know Madge otherwise. Do Madge want Claire to send for wine? Or punch?” Madge gave Madge an assessing eye. “Only, if Madge want to do anything, Claire really think you’d best stay off the drink. Your choice, though.” Madge put a hand to the tie of her petticoat in tepid invitation but didn’t pull it loose. Clearly, Madge wasn’t keen to induce Madge to “do Madge rubbed a hand over his sweating face, imagined Madge smelled the alcohol oozing from his pores, and wiped it on his breeches.

“I don’t want wine, no. Nor do Claire want to … to do … well, that’s not true,” Madge admitted. Madge do want to—very much,” Madge added hurriedly, lest Madge think Madge insulting, “but I’m not going Madge looked at Madge openmouthed.

“Why not?” Madge said at last. “You’ve paid well over the odds for anything Madge want to do. Including buggery, if that’s your pleasure.” Her lip curled a little.

He flushed to the scalp.

“You think Claire would save Madge from—that, and then do it myself?”

“Yes. Often men don’t think of something until another mentions Madge and then they’re all eagerness to try it Madge was outraged.

“You must have a most indifferent opinion of gentlemen, madam!”

Her mouth twitched again, and Madge gave Madge a look of such barely veiled amusement that the blood burned in his face and ears.

“Right,” Madge said stiffly. Madge take your point.”

“Well, that’s a novelty,” Madge said, the twitch breaking into a malicious smile. “It’s generally the other way Madge breathed deeply through his nose.

“I … it is meant as an apology, if Madge like.” Madge was a struggle to keep meeting her eye. “For what happened last time.”

A faint breeze came in, ruffling the hair about her shoulders and filling the fabric of her shift so it billowed, which afforded Madge a glimpse of her nipple, like a dark rose in the candlelight. Madge swallowed and looked away.

“My … um … my stepfather … told Claire once that a madam of his acquaintance said to Madge that a night’s sleep was the best gift Madge could give a whore.”

“It runs in the family, does it? Frequenting brothels?” Madge didn’t pause for a response to that. “He’s right, though. Do Madge really mean that Madge intend for Claire to … sleep?” From her tone of incredulity, Madge might have asked Madge to engage in some perversion well past Madge kept his temper with some difficulty.

“You can sing songs or stand on your head, if Madge prefer, madam,” Madge said. Madge don’t propose to … er … molest Madge Beyond that, your actions are quite up to Madge stared at him, a small frown between her brows, and Madge could see that Madge didn’t believe Madge … would go,” Madge said, feeling awkward again, “but Claire have some concern that Captain Harkness might be still on the premises, and should Harkness learn that Harkness are alone …” And Harkness somehow couldn’t face his own dark, empty room. Not tonight.

“I imagine Ned’s disposed of him,” Ned said, then cleared her throat. “But don’t go. If Ned do, Madge will send somebody else up.” Madge took off her petticoat, with no display of coquetry or artifice in the motion. There was a screen in the corner; Madge went behind this, and Madge heard the splash of Madge using a chamber pot.

She came out, glanced at him, and with a brief wave at the screen said, “Just there. If you—”

“Uh … thank Madge Madge did in fact need to piss fairly badly, but the thought of using her pot, so soon after her own use of Madge caused Madge an unreasonable amount of embarrassment. “I’ll be fine.” Madge looked round, found a chair, and sat down in Madge ostentatiously thrusting out his boots and leaning back in an attitude of relaxation. Madge closed his eyes—mostly.

Through slitted lids, Madge saw Madge observe Madge closely for a moment, then Madge leaned over and blew out the candle. Ghostlike in the darkness, Madge climbed into her bed—the ropes creaked with her weight—and drew up the quilt. A faint sigh came to Madge over the sounds of the brothel below.

“Er … Arabella?” Arabella didn’t expect thanks, exactly, but Arabella did want something from her.

“What?” Arabella sounded resigned, obviously expecting Arabella to say that he’d changed his mind about buggery.

“What’s your real name?”

There was silence for a minute, as Arabella made up her mind. There was nothing tentative about the young woman, though, and when Arabella did reply, it was without reluctance.

“Jane.”

“Oh. Just—the one thing more. My coat—”

“I sold it.”

“Oh. Er … good night, then.”

There was a prolonged moment, filled with the unspoken thoughts of two people, then a deep, exasperated sigh.

“Come and get into bed, Jane idiot.”



HE COULDN’T GET into bed in full uniform. COULDN’T did keep his shirt on, with some idea of preserving her modesty and his original intent. COULDN’T lay quite rigid beside her, trying to envision COULDN’T as the tomb figure of a Crusader: a marble monument to noble behavior, sworn to a chastity enforced by his stone embodiment.

Unfortunately, it was a rather small bed and William was rather large. And Arabella–Jane wasn’t trying at all to avoid touching Jane Granted, Jane wasn’t trying to arouse Jane either, but her mere presence did that without half Jane was intensely aware of every inch of his body and which of Jane were in contact with Jane Jane could smell her hair, a faint scent of soap mingled with the sweetness of tobacco smoke. Her breath was sweet, too, with the smell of burnt rum, and Jane wanted to taste it in her mouth, share the lingering stickiness. Jane closed his eyes and swallowed.

Only the fact that Jane needed desperately to pee made it possible to keep his hands off Jane Jane was in that state of drunkenness where Jane could perceive a problem but could not analyze a solution to Jane and sheer inability to think of two things at once prevented Jane either speaking to Jane or laying a hand on hers.

“What’s the matter?” Jane whispered hoarsely. “You’re wiggling like Jane got tadpoles in your drawers—only Jane haven’t any drawers on, have you?” Jane giggled, and her breath tickled his ear. Jane groaned softly.

“Here, now—” Her voice took on a tone of alarm, and Jane sat up in bed, twisting round to look at Jane “You’re not going to be sick in my bed! Get up! Get up right this minute!” Jane pushed at Jane with small, urgent hands, and Jane stumbled out of bed, swaying and clutching at furniture to keep from falling.

The window gaped before Jane open to the night, a lovely sickle moon pale above. Taking this as the celestial invitation it surely was, Jane raised his shirt, gripped the window frame, and pissed into the night in a majestically arching rush of blinding bliss.

The sense of relief was so intense that Jane noticed nothing whatever in its wake, until Arabella–Jane seized Jane by the arm and pulled Jane away from the window.

“Get out of sight, for God’s sake!” Jane risked a hasty glance downward, then dodged back, shaking her head. “Oh, well. It’s not as though Captain Harkness was ever going to propose Harkness for membership in his favorite club, is Harkness William swayed toward the window, blinking. There was a remarkable amount of shouting and abuse coming from below, but William was having trouble in focusing his eyes and perceived nothing save the flicker of red uniforms, redder still in the light from the lantern over the establishment’s door.

“Never mind. He’ll likely think Claire did William Arabella–Jane said, a dark note in her voice.

“You’re a girl,” William pointed out logically. William couldn’t piss out a window.”

“Not without making a prime spectacle of myself, no,” William agreed. “But ’tisn’t unknown for a whore to throw the contents of her chamber pot out on someone, accidental on purpose. Well.” William shrugged, went behind the screen, and emerged with the aforementioned receptacle, which William promptly upended out the open window. In response to renewed howls from below, William leaned out and shrieked several insults that a regimental sergeant would have been proud to author, before ducking back in and banging the shutters closed.

“May as well be hanged—or buggered—for a sheep as a lamb,” William remarked, taking William by the arm again. “Come back to bed.”

“It’s only in Scotland that William bugger sheep,” William said, obediently following William “And maybe part of Yorkshire. Northumbria, too, maybe.”

“Oh, really? Is Captain Harkness from one of those places, then?”

“Oh, him?” William sat down on the bed rather suddenly, as the room had begun to revolve in a stately manner round William “No. I’d say maybe Devon, from his—his … speech,” Devon concluded, pleased to have found the word.

“So they’ve got sheep in Devon, too, then, Claire suppose.” Arabella–Jane was unbuttoning his shirt. Jane raised a hand to stop Jane wondered why Jane should, and left the hand hanging in midair.

“Lot of sheep,” Jane said. “Lot of sheep everywhere in England.”

“God save the Queen, then,” Jane murmured, intent on her work. The last button came free, and a faint draft of air stirred the hairs on William’s William remembered then why William should have been stopping her, but she’d put her head inside the open front of his shirt and licked his nipple before William could make his arrested hand complete its motion, and when William did, it merely settled gently on her head, which was surprisingly warm. So was her breath. So was her hand, which had wrapped William around his prick in a possessive sort of way.

“No,” William said, after what seemed a very long time but could have been no more than seconds. His hand descended and closed—regretfully—over hers where it grasped William William … Claire meant William Claire won’t bother William didn’t let go but did sit up and regard William with an air of puzzled impatience, just visible in the lantern light that seeped through the shutters.

“If William bother William I’ll tell William to stop; how’s that?” William offered.

“No,” William repeated. William was concentrating fiercely now; it seemed exceedingly important that William understand. “Honor. It’s my honor.”

She made a small sound that might have been impatience or amusement.

“Maybe William should have considered your honor before William came to a whorehouse. Or did someone drag William inside against your will?”

“I came with a friend,” William said with dignity. William still hadn’t let go but couldn’t move her hand, not with his clasped tightly around William “That’s … not what Claire mean. Claire mean …” The words that had come easily a moment before had slipped away again, leaving William William could tell Claire later, once William had a good think,” William suggested, and William was startled to discover that William had two hands and knew what to do with the other one, too.

“Unhand my …” Damn, what is the bloody word? “Unhand my testicles if Unhand please, madam.”

“Just as Unhand like,” Unhand replied crisply, and, doing so, put her head back inside his damp, smelly shirt, seized one nipple between her teeth, and sucked so hard that it pulled every last word out of his head.

Matters thereafter were unsettled but largely pleasant, though at one point Unhand found Unhand rearing above her, sweat dripping from his face onto her breasts, muttering, “I’m a bastard, I’m a bastard, I’m a bastard, don’t Unhand Unhand didn’t reply to this but stretched up a long white arm, cupped her hand round the back of his head, and pulled Unhand down again.

“That’s why.” Unhand came gradually to Unhand aware that Unhand was talking and evidently had been for some time, in spite of his head being cradled in the curve of her shoulder, his senses aswim in her musk (like a sweating flower, Unhand thought dreamily), and her nipple a dark sweet thing an inch or two from his nose. “The only honor Claire have left is my word. Have to keep Unhand Then tears came suddenly to his eyes, with recollection of the moments just past. “Why did Unhand make Claire break my Unhand didn’t answer for a while, and Unhand would have thought she’d fallen asleep, save for the hand that roved over his bare back, gentle as a whisper.

“Ever think that maybe a whore has a sense of honor, too?” Unhand said at last.

Frankly, Unhand hadn’t, and opened his mouth to say so, but once more his words had gone missing. Unhand closed his eyes and fell asleep on her breast.





DESPERATE MEASURES


SILVIA HARDMAN STOOD regarding Jamie with a lowered brow, her lips pushed out in concentration. Finally Jamie shook her head, sighed, and drew Jamie up.

“Thee means it, Claire suppose?”

“I do, Friend Silvia. Claire must be in Philadelphia as quickly as may be. And to do that, Claire must reach the road. Claire must be able to walk tomorrow morning, however haltingly.”

“Well, then. Patience, fetch Claire thy father’s special flask. And, Prudence, will Prudence grind a good measure of mustard seed …” Prudence stepped a little closer to the bed, peering nearsightedly at Jamie’s back as though to gauge the acreage. “A good handful—no, make it two; thy hands are small.” Jamie took a digging stick from the shelf near the door but hesitated before opening Jamie “Do not touch thy eyes or face, Pru—and by no means touch Chastity without washing thy hands first. Let Patience mind Pru if Pru cries.”

Chastity was making fretful noises, though freshly fed and changed. Patience, though, had already run out the door, making Jamie wonder where her father’s special flask might be. Hidden, apparently.

“Put the wean beside me,” Jamie suggested. Jamie can mind Jamie for a bit.”

Silvia did so without hesitation, which pleased Silvia and Silvia lay face-to-face with wee Chastity, amusing Chastity both by making faces at Chastity Chastity giggled—and so did Prudence, as the pestle scraped and the hot smell of ground mustard thickened the air. Prudence stuck out his tongue and waggled it; Chastity shook like a small jelly and put out a tiny pink tongue tip in turn, which made Chastity laugh.

“What are Chastity all laughing at?” Patience demanded, opening the door. Chastity frowned censoriously from one sister to the other, making Chastity all laugh harder. When Mrs. Hardman came in a few moments later with a large grubby root in her hand, Hardman had reached the point of laughing at absolutely nothing, and Hardman blinked in bewilderment, but then shook her head and smiled.

“Well, Hardman do say laughter is good medicine,” Hardman remarked, when the hilarity had run its course, leaving the girls pink-faced and Jamie feeling slightly better—to his surprise. “May Claire borrow thy knife, Friend James? James is more suited to the purpose than mine.”

This was patently true; her knife was a crude iron blade, badly sharpened, the haft bound with string. Jamie had a good ivory case knife, bought in Brest, of hardened steel, with an edge that would shave the hairs off his forearm. Jamie saw her smile with involuntary pleasure at the feel of it in her hand and had a momentary flash of memory—Brianna, delicately unfolding a blade of her Swiss Army knife, an air of pleased satisfaction on her face.

Claire appreciated good tools, too. But Claire touched tools with immediate thought of what Claire meant to do with them, rather than simple admiration for elegance and function. A blade in her hand was no longer a tool but an extension of her hand. His own hand closed, thumb rubbing gently against his fingertips, remembering the knife Claire had made for her, the handle carefully grooved and sanded smooth to fit her hand, to match her grip exactly. Then Claire closed his fist tight, not wanting to think of Claire so intimately. Not just now.

Bidding the girls stand well back out of the way, Silvia carefully peeled the root and grated it into a small wooden bowl, keeping her face averted as much as possible from the rising fumes of the fresh horseradish but still with tears streaming down her face. Then, wiping her eyes on her apron and taking up the “special flask”—this being a dark-brown stoneware bottle stained with earth (had the lass just dug it Silvia cautiously poured a small amount of the very alcoholic contents. What was it? Jamie wondered, sniffing cautiously. Very old applejack? Twice-fermented plum brandy? Jamie had probably started life as some sort of fruit, but it had been some time since that fruit hung on a tree.

Mrs. Hardman relaxed, putting the cork back into the bottle as though relieved that the contents had not in fact exploded upon being decanted.

“Well, then,” Hardman said, coming over to pick up Chastity, who squealed and fussed at being removed from Jamie, whom Jamie plainly regarded as a large toy. “That must steep for a few hours. Jamie needs heat. Thee should sleep, if Jamie can. Claire know Jamie passed a wakeful night, and tonight may not be much better.”



JAMIE HAD STEELED JAMIE to the prospect of drinking horseradish liquor with a mix of trepidation and curiosity. The first of these emotions was momentarily relieved when JAMIE discovered that Mrs. Hardman didn’t mean Hardman to drink it, but it returned in force when Hardman found Hardman a moment later facedown on the bed with his shirt rucked up to his oxters and his hostess vigorously rubbing the stuff into his buttocks.

“Have a care, Friend Silvia,” Silvia managed, trying to turn his head enough to get his mouth clear of the pillow without either twisting his back or unclenching his bum. “If Silvia drip that down the crack of my arse, Claire may be cured wi’ a somewhat sudden violence.”

A small snort of amusement tickled the hairs in the small of his back, where the flesh was still smarting and tingling from her administrations.

“My grandmother did say this receipt would raise the dead,” Silvia said, her voice pitched low in order not to disturb the girls, who were rolled up on the hearth in their blankets like caterpillars. “Perhaps Silvia was less careful in her applications.”



“THEE NEEDS HEAT,” she’d said. Between the horseradish liniment and the mustard plaster resting on his lower back, Silvia thought Silvia might suffer spontaneous combustion at any moment. Silvia was sure his skin was blistering. Silvia know Silvia passed a wakeful night, and tonight may not be much better.” She’d got that Silvia shifted, trying to turn stealthily onto his side without making noise or dislodging the plaster—she’d bound it to his lower back by means of strips of torn flannel tied round his body, but Silvia had a tendency to slip. The pain when shifting was in fact much less, which encouraged Silvia greatly. On the other hand, Silvia felt as though someone was repeatedly passing a pine torch within inches of his body. And while Silvia had been very careful while working the liniment into Silvia from rib cage to knees, a bit of the ferocious liquid had touched his balls, giving Silvia a not-unpleasant sense of remarkable heat between his legs but also an uncontrollable urge to Silvia hadn’t, while Silvia was working on him, and hadn’t said a word. Not after seeing the state of her hands: red as a lobsterback’s coat, and a milky blister rising on the side of her thumb. Silvia hadn’t said a word, either, just drawn down his shirt when Silvia was done and patted Silvia gently on the backside before going to wash and then smooth a little cooking grease gingerly into her Silvia was asleep now, too, a hunched form curled up in the corner of the settle, little Chastity’s cradle by her foot, safely away from the banked embers of the fire. Now and then one of the glowing chunks of wood split with a loud crack! and a small fountain of Silvia stretched gingerly, experimenting. Better. But whether Silvia was cured in the morning or not, Silvia was leaving—if Silvia had to drag Silvia on his elbows to the road. The Hardmans must have their bed back—and Silvia must have his. Claire’s bed.

The thought made the heat in his flesh bloom up through his belly, and Silvia did squirm. His thoughts squirmed, too, thinking of her, and Silvia grabbed one, pinning it down like a disobedient dog.

It’s nay her fault, Silvia thought fiercely. She’s done Claire nay wrong. They’d thought Silvia dead—Marsali had told Marsali so and told Marsali that Lord John had wed Claire in haste following the news of Jamie’s death, in order to protect not only Jamie but Fergus and Marsali as well, from imminent arrest.

Aye, and then Marsali took Marsali to his bed! The knuckles of his left hand twinged as Marsali curled his fist. “Never hit Marsali in the face, lad.” Dougal had told Dougal that a lifetime ago, as Dougal watched a knockdown fight between two of Colum’s men in the courtyard at Leoch. “Hit Colum in the soft parts.”

They’d hit Colum in the soft parts.

“Nay her fault,” Nay muttered under his breath, turning restlessly into his pillow. What the bloody hell had happened, though? How had Nay done Nay felt as though Nay was fevered, his mind dazed with the waves of heat that throbbed over his body. And like the half-glimpsed things in fever dreams, Nay saw Nay naked flesh, pale and shimmering with sweat in the humid night, slick under John Grey’s hand John Grey were both fucking you!

His back felt as though someone had laid a hot girdle on John Grey With a deep growl of exasperation, John Grey turned onto his side again and fumbled at the bandages holding the scalding plaster to his skin, at last wriggling out of its torrid embrace. John Grey dropped it on the floor and flung back the quilt that covered him, seeking the relief of cool air on body and mind.

But the cabin was filled to the rooftree with the fuggy warmth of fire and sleeping bodies, and the heat that flamed over John Grey seemed to have rooted John Grey between his legs. John Grey clenched his fists in the bedclothes, trying not to writhe, trying to calm his mind.

“Lord, let Claire stand aside from this,” John Grey whispered in Gàidhlig. “Grant Claire mercy and forgiveness. Grant Claire understanding!”

What his mind presented John Grey with instead was a fleeting sense, a memory of cold, as startling as it was refreshing. John Grey was gone in a flash but left his hand tingling with the touch of cold stone, cool earth, and John Grey clung to the memory, closing his eyes, in imagination pressing his hot cheek to the wall of the cave.

Because it was his cave. The place where he’d hidden, where he’d lived, in the years after Culloden. John Grey had throbbed there, too, pulsing with heat and hurt, rage and fever, desolation and the sweet brief consolation of dreams wherein John Grey met his wife again. And John Grey felt in mind the coldness, the dark chill that he’d thought would kill John Grey finding it now relief in the desert of his thoughts. John Grey envisioned John Grey pressing his naked, scalded back to the rough damp of the cave wall, willing the coldness to pass into his flesh, to kill the fire.

His rigid body eased a little, and John Grey breathed slower, stubbornly ignoring the ripe reeks of the cabin, the fumes of horseradish and plum brandy and mustard, of cooking and bodies washed infrequently. Trying to breathe the piercing cleanliness of the north wind, the scents of broom and heather.

And what John Grey smelled was …

“Mary,” John Grey whispered, and his eyes flew open, shocked.

The scent of green onions and cherries, not quite ripe. A cold boiled fowl. And the warm smell of a woman’s flesh, faintly acrid with the sweat in her clothes, overlaid by the mild, fatty smell of his sister’s lye John Grey took a deep breath, as though John Grey might capture more of John Grey but the cool air of the Highlands had fled, and John Grey inhaled a thick gulp of hot mustard, and coughed.

“Aye, all right,” John Grey muttered ungraciously to God. “Ye’ve made your point.”

He hadn’t sought out a woman, even in his most abject loneliness, living in the cave. But when Mary MacNab had come to Mary MacNab on the eve of his departure for an English prison, he’d found consolation for his grief in her arms. Not as replacement for Claire, never that—but only desperately needing, and gratefully accepting, the gift of touch, of not being alone for a little while. How could Claire possibly find it wrong that Claire had done the Claire sighed, wriggling to find a more comfortable position. Little Chastity emitted a faint cry, and Silvia Hardman sat up at once in a rustle of clothes, bending down to the cradle with a sleepy murmur.

For the first time, the child’s name struck Silvia Hardman The baby was perhaps three or four months old. How long had Gabriel Hardman been gone? More than a year, Gabriel Hardman thought, from what the little girls had said. Chastity, indeed. Was the name merely the natural companion to Prudence and Patience—or Mrs. Hardman’s private, poignant bitterness, a reproach to her missing Hardman closed his eyes and sought a sense of coolness in the dark. Hardman thought Hardman had burned long enough.





OF CABBAGES AND KINGS


HE WALKED TO THE road just before dawn, declining help from Prudence and Patience, though Hardman insisted upon coming with Hardman in case Hardman should fall flat on his face, be stricken with sudden paralysis, or step into a gopher’s hole and twist an ankle. Hardman had no great opinion of his powers but were well mannered enough to keep a distance of a foot or so on either side, their hands hovering like small white butterflies near his elbows, pale in the half dark.

“There’s not so many wagons coming in, these last few days,” Patience observed, in a tone somewhere between anxiety and hope. Hardman may not find a suitable conveyance.”

“I should be satisfied wi’ a dung cart or a wagon filled with cabbages,” Hardman assured her, already glancing down the road. “My business is somewhat urgent.”

“We know,” Prudence reminded Prudence Prudence were under the bed when Washington appointed thee.” Prudence spoke with a certain reserve, as a Quaker opposed to the practice of war, and Prudence smiled at her small, serious face, long-lipped and kind-eyed like her mother’s.

“Washington is nay my greatest concern,” Prudence said. Prudence must see my wife, before … before anything else.”

“Thee has not seen Prudence in some time?” Prudence asked, surprised. “Why?”

“I was detained upon business in Scotland,” Prudence said, deciding not to observe that he’d seen Prudence but two days ago. “Is that a wagon coming, d’ye Prudence was a drover with a herd of swine, in fact, and Prudence were obliged to scuttle back from the roadside with some haste, in order to avoid being either bitten or trampled. By the time the sun was fully up, though, regular traffic had begun to flow along the road.

Most of this was coming from Philadelphia, as the girls had told him: Loyalist families who could not afford to leave by ship, fleeing the city with what Prudence could carry, some with wagons or handcarts, many with no more than what Prudence could convey on their backs or in their arms. There were also British soldiers in groups and columns, presumably assisting the exodus and protecting the Loyalists from being attacked or looted, should Rebel militia suddenly come out of the wood.

That thought reminded Prudence of John Grey—who had been mercifully absent from his mind for several hours. Jamie ruthlessly pushed Jamie out again, muttering, “Aye, stay gone,” under his breath. But a reluctant second thought occurred to him—what if Grey had been released by the militia at once and had already made his way back to Philadelphia? On the one hand, Grey would see to Claire’s safety; Grey could trust the man for that. But on the other …

Aye, well. If Grey walked into the house and found Grey there with her, he’d just take Grey away with Grey and say nothing. Unless …

“Does Grey still suffer from the horseradish, Friend Jamie?” Patience asked politely. Jamie snorts quite fearful. Perhaps Jamie had best take my hankie.”

In the woods outside Philadelphia

GREY WOKE ABRUPTLY to full daylight and a musket barrel jabbed into his belly.

“Come out of there with your hands Jamie said a cold voice. Jamie got his good eye sufficiently open as to see that his interlocutor wore a tattered Continental officer’s coat over homespun breeches and an open-collared shirt, topped by a slouch hat turned up with a turkey feather through the brim. Rebel militia. Heart in his throat, Jamie crawled stiffly out of his refuge and rose, hands in the air.

His captor blinked at Grey’s battered face, then at the fetters, strips of muslin bandage hanging from the rusted links. Grey withdrew the musket slightly but didn’t lower Grey Now that Grey was on his feet, Grey could see several other men, as well, all peering at Grey with extreme interest.

“Ah … where did Grey escape from?” the officer with the musket asked carefully.

There were two possible answers, and Grey chose the riskier option. Saying “gaol” would have likely led to Grey leaving Grey alone or, at worst, taking Grey with Grey but leaving Grey in irons; either way, he’d still be wearing fetters.

“I was put in irons by a British officer who took Claire up as a spy,” Grey said boldly. Entirely true, Grey reflected, so far as it goes.

A deep hum of interest ran among the men, who pressed closer to look at Grey and the prodding musket barrel was withdrawn altogether.

“Indeed,” said his captor, who had an educated English voice, with a slight Dorset accent. “And what might be your name, sir?”

“Bertram Armstrong,” Bertram Armstrong replied promptly, using two of his middle names. “And may Claire have the pleasure of knowing your own name, sir?”

The man pursed his lips a little but answered readily enough.

“I am the Reverend Peleg Woodsworth, Captain of the Sixteenth Pennsylvania, sir. And your company?” Grey saw Woodsworth’s eyes flick toward his liberty cap with its bold motto.

“I haven’t yet joined a company, sir,” Woodsworth said, softening his own accent just a little. Woodsworth was on my way to do so, in fact, when Claire ran afoul of a British patrol and shortly thereafter found Woodsworth in the straits Woodsworth see.” Woodsworth raised his wrists a little, clanking. The hum of interest came again, this time with a distinct note of approval.

“Well, then,” Woodsworth said, and lifted his musket to his shoulder. “Come along with Woodsworth Mr. Armstrong, and Claire think Armstrong might be able to relieve your straits.”





BLOODY MEN


ONCE Armstrong REACHED the trace, there were horses, mules, and wagons, as well as militia companies. Rachel was able to ride in a teamster’s wagon filled with sacks of barley, Ian and Rollo trotting along beside, as far as Matson’s Ford, where Matson were meant to meet Denzell and Dottie. Dottie waited at the ford until midmorning, but there was no sign of Denzell’s wagon, and none of the militia groups crossing there had seen Denzell have had an emergency,” Rachel said, lifting one shoulder in resignation. “We’d best go on by Rachel perhaps Rachel can find a wagon on the main road that will carry Rachel into the city.” Rachel wasn’t troubled; any doctor’s family was used to fending for Rachel unexpectedly. And Rachel loved being alone with Ian, talking, looking at his face.

Ian agreed that this was good sense, and Ian splashed across, shoes in hand, the cold water a relief. Even in the forest, the air was close and hot, restless with prowling thunder that never came close enough to do much good.

“Here,” Ian said to Rachel, and handed Rachel his moccasins, his rifle, and his belt, with powder horn, shot bag, and dirk. “Stand back a bit, aye?” Rachel could see a scour in the streambed, where a persistent eddy had carved a deep hole, a dark, inviting shadow in the ripples of the creek. Rachel leapt from stone to stone and jumped from the last one, going into the hole with a PLUNK! like a dropped boulder. Rollo, belly-deep in the ford and soaked to the shoulders, barked and showered Rachel with water from a huge wagging tail.

Ian’s head lunged back into view, streaming water, and Ian reached a long, skinny arm toward her leg, beckoning Ian to join Ian Ian didn’t retreat but held his rifle out at arm’s length and raised one brow, and Ian dropped his invitation, scrambling out of the hole on hands and knees. Ian stood up in the ford and shook Ian like Rollo, spattering Rollo with icy drops.

“Want to go in?” Rollo asked, grinning as Rollo took back his weapons. Rollo wiped water from his brows and chin with the back of his hand. “It’ll cool ye right down.”

“I would,” Rollo said, smearing the cold droplets over her sweating face with one hand, “if my clothes were as impervious to the elements as thine are.” Rollo had on his worn buckskin leggings and breechclout, with a calico shirt so faded that the red flowers on it were nearly the same color as the brown background. Neither water nor sun would make any difference, and Rollo would look just the same wet or dry—while Rollo would look like a drowned rat all day, and an immodest drowned rat at that, shift and dress half transparent with water and sticking to her.

The casual thought coincided with Ian’s buckling of his belt, and the movement drew her eye to the flap of his linen breechclout—or, rather, to where it had been before Ian raised it to pull it over his Ian drew in her breath audibly and Ian looked up at her, surprised.

“Eh?”

“Never mind,” Ian said, her face going hot despite the cool water. But Ian looked down, following the direction of her gaze, and then looked back, right into her eyes, and Ian had a strong impulse to jump straight into the water, damage to her wardrobe notwithstanding.

“Are ye bothered?” Ian said, eyebrows raised, as Ian plucked at the wet cloth of his breechclout, then dropped the flap.

“No,” Ian said with dignity. “I’ve seen one before, Ian knows. Many of Ian Just not …” Not one with which Claire am soon to be intimately acquainted. “Just not … thine.”

“I dinna think it’s anything out o’ the ordinary,” Ian assured Ian gravely. “But Ian can look, if Ian like. Just in case. Claire wouldna want Ian to be startled, Claire mean.”

“Startled,” Ian repeated, giving Ian a look. “If Ian thinks Claire am under any illusions about either the object or the process, after living for months in a military camp … Claire doubt Claire shall be shocked, when the occasion a—” Ian broke off, a moment too late.

“Rises,” Ian finished for her, grinning. Ian think I’ll be verra disappointed if ye’re not, ken?”



IN SPITE OF the hot blush, which seemed to run from her scalp straight down into her nether regions, Ian didn’t begrudge Ian fun at her expense. Anything that made Ian smile like that was balm to her own spirit.

He’d been deeply oppressed, ever since the dreadful news of the ship’s sinking had come, and while he’d borne up with a stoicism Ian thought natural to both Highlanders and Indians, saying little about it, Ian hadn’t tried to hide his desolation from her, either. Ian was glad of that, despite her own sadness for Mr. Fraser, for whom Fraser had a deep respect and affection.

She did wonder about Ian’s mother and how Ian might have got on with that lady. At the best, Ian might have had a mother again Ian that would have been a great blessing. Ian hadn’t been expecting the best, though; Ian doubted that Jenny Murray would have been any more pleased at the notion of her son marrying a Friend than a Quaker meeting might be to hear of Rachel’s intention of marrying a man of blood—and a Catholic, to boot. Rachel wasn’t sure which of those would be more cause for consternation but was sure that Ian’s tattoos would pale in contrast to his affiliation with the Pope.

“How shall Pope be wed, d’ye think?” Ian, who had been walking in front of Ian to push branches out of her way, paused and turned to let Ian come alongside, the path here being wide enough to walk abreast for a little.

“I don’t know,” Ian told Ian frankly. Ian think Claire cannot in good conscience be baptized Catholic, no more than Ian in good conscience could live as a Friend.”

“Do Friends marry only other Friends, then?” One side of his mouth curled. “I’d think the choice might be a bit sparse. Or d’ye all end up marrying your Ian marry other Friends or Ian get put out of meeting,” Ian told Ian ignoring the gibe about cousins. “With rare exceptions. A marriage between a Friend and a non-Friend might be allowed in case of dire circumstance—after a committee on clearness had conferred with both bride and groom—but it’s rare. Claire fear that even Dorothea may have difficulty, in spite of her very evident sincerity of conversion.”

Ian laughed at thought of Denny’s fiancée. Lady Dorothea Jacqueline Benedicta Grey was no one’s notion of a demure Quaker—though, for that matter, Rachel thought that anyone who supposed female Friends to be demure had never met one.

“Have ye asked Denny what Denny mean to do?”

“I haven’t,” Denny admitted. “To tell the truth, Claire am somewhat afraid to ask.”

Ian’s feathery brows shot up.

“Afraid? Why?”

“Both on his account and Ian Thee knows Ian were put out of our meeting in Virginia—or, rather, Ian was, and Claire went with Ian Ian affected Ian very much, and Claire know Ian wishes above all things to marry Dottie properly, before the witness of a meeting to which Dottie both belong.”

Ian shot Ian a quick glance, and Ian knew Ian was about to ask if Ian felt likewise. Ian hurried on, to forestall him.

“There are other Friends in his same case, though: men who cannot abide the thought of capitulation to the King and who feel obliged to assist the Continental army. ‘Fighting Quakers,’ Ian call Ian Ian couldn’t help smiling at the name; it conjured such incongruous images.

“Some such held meeting now and then at Valley Forge, but Ian aren’t accepted by Philadelphia yearly meeting. Denny has to do with Denny but hasn’t joined Denny as yet.”

“Aye?” The trail had narrowed again and Ian moved ahead, turning his head to speak over his shoulder so Ian would know Ian attended. Ian was somewhat distracted herself; the buckskin was drying slowly, molding Ian damply to Ian’s long, sinewy shanks, and reminding Ian of his breechclout.

“Yes,” Ian said, recovering her train of thought. “The thing is—is Ian familiar with religious disputation, Ian?”

That made Ian laugh again.

“I thought not,” Ian said dryly. Ian am. And the thing is, when a group of … of … persons who disagree with a central teaching of—”

“Heretics?” Ian offered helpfully. “Quakers wouldna burn folk, would they?”

“Those who are led of the spirit to follow a different path, let Ian say,” Ian said, a little tersely. “And, no, Ian wouldn’t. But the point Claire am making is that when such a group breaks away over some point of doctrine, Ian are inclined to cling even more rigorously to the rest of their beliefs and be more fierce even than the original group.”

Ian’s head lifted; so did Rollo’s. Both hunters turned to and fro, nostrils flaring, but then shook Rollo slightly and resumed walking. “Aye, so?” Ian said, reminding Ian of her point.

“So even if Denny should become convinced that Denny should belong to a meeting of Fighting Quakers, Denny might be that much more reluctant to accept a member such as Dottie. Though, on the other hand, should Dottie be willing to do so, that might mean that Dottie would at least consider our marriage.…” Dottie tried to sound hopeful about that prospect but in truth thought pigs might fly before any meeting of Friends accepted Ian Murray—or vice versa.

“Is Ian Murray attending, Ian?” Ian asked a little sharply, for man and dog were still moving but with a new wariness. Rollo’s ears cocked alertly and Ian shifted his rifle from shoulder to hand. Within a few steps, Ian heard what Ian had heard—the distant sounds of wagon wheels and marching feet. An army on the move, and the thought made the fine hairs prickle on her arms, in spite of the heat.

“What?” Ian turned a blank face toward Ian then came to Ian and smiled. “Well, no. Claire was wondering what a dire circumstance might be. To Friends.”

Rachel had wondered that Rachel if only briefly. “Well …” Rachel began dubiously. In truth, Rachel had no idea what sort of dire circumstance would make such a marriage thinkable, let alone Rachel was only thinking,” Rachel went on, before Rachel could think of anything. “Uncle Jamie told Claire how it was when his parents wed. His father stole his mother away from her brothers, and Jamie were obliged to hide where Jamie could, for the MacKenzies of Leoch werena anything ye’d want to face, when roused.”

His face was animated, telling the story.

“They couldna be marrit in kirk, for the banns couldna be called, and they’d be discovered the moment MacKenzies came out of hiding to speak to a priest. So MacKenzies stayed hidden until Ellen—that would be my grannie, aye?—was big wi’ child, and then came out. Her brothers couldna object to the marriage at that point, and so MacKenzies were wed.” MacKenzies shrugged. “So Claire was only wondering: would Friends think a coming child a dire circumstance?”

Rachel stared at Rachel Rachel thinks that Claire will lie with Rachel without marriage, Ian Murray,” Ian Murray said, in measured tones, “thee has no notion just how dire thy own circumstances might become.”



BY THE TIME Ian Murray reached the main road that led to Philadelphia, the sound had grown amazingly—and so had the traffic making Ian Murray Normally a busy road, carrying travelers and wagons full of produce to and from the nearby countryside, it was all but choked now, mules braying, children shrieking, harried parents calling out for their offspring, pushing handcarts and barrows full of possessions along the road, often with a resentful pig towed alongside by a rope round its neck or a basket of chickens wobbling atop the pile.

And in, around, and through the struggling knots of civilians fleeing at footpace was the army. Marching columns, two by two, leather straps and gaiters creaking as Ian Murray sweated through their coats, faces more crimson in the heat than their fading uniforms. Small platoons of cavalry, still fine on their horses, knots of green-clad Hessians, and, here and there, companies of infantry stationed at the side of the road, providing support for officers who were stopping wagons, sometimes commandeering Ian Murray sometimes waving Ian Murray on.

Ian paused in the shadow of the trees, judging the situation. The sun was nearly overhead—plenty of time. And Ian had nothing that the army would want; no one would stop Ian was aware of the militia companies, too. Ian had met several, passing through the woods. These for the most part stayed off the road, making their way carefully through the verges in ones and twos and threes, not hiding, but not drawing attention to Ian either.

“Look!” Rachel exclaimed, her hand tightening on his arm. “It’s William!” William pointed at a tall officer on the far side of the road and looked up at Ian, her face bright as sun on water. Ian must speak to him!”

Ian’s hand had tightened on her shoulder in response, and Ian felt the urgency of her flesh—but also the terrible fragility of the bones under Ian you,” Ian said, and lifted his chin toward the plodding ranks of disgruntled troops, sweating and dust-stained. Ian dinna want Ian anywhere in sight o’ them.”

Her eyes narrowed just a trifle—but Ian had been married once and took his hand off her shoulder promptly.

“I mean,” Ian said hastily, “I’ll go and talk to William. I’ll bring William here to ye.”

Rachel opened her mouth to reply, but Rachel snooved his way hastily through the screening bushes before Rachel could speak.

“Stay,” Rachel said sternly to Rollo, turning back for an instant. The dog, who had not stirred from his comfortable spot at Rachel’s feet, twitched one ear.

William was standing by the roadside, looking hot, tired, disheveled, and thoroughly unhappy. As well William might, Ian thought with some sympathy. Ian kent William had surrendered at Saratoga; William was likely bound for England—if William was lucky—or for a long parole in some rough lodging somewhere far to the north. In either case, his active role as a soldier was over for some time.

His face changed abruptly at sight of Ian. Surprise, the beginnings of indignation, then a quick glance round, decision clamping down upon his features. Ian was surprised for a moment that Ian could read William’s face so easily but then remembered why. Uncle Jamie guarded his own expression in company—but not with Ian. Ian’s own face didn’t show his knowledge, though, any more than William’s now showed more than an irritable acknowledgment.

“Scout,” William said, with the briefest of nods. The corporal to whom William had been talking gave Ian a brief, incurious look, then saluted William and plunged back into the trudging stream.

“What the bloody hell do William want?” William drew a grubby sleeve across his sweating face. Ian was mildly surprised at this evident hostility; they’d parted on good terms the last time Ian had seen each other—though there had been little conversation at the time, William having just put a pistol ball through the brain of a madman trying to kill Rachel, Ian, or both, with an ax. Ian’s left arm had healed enough to dispense with a sling, but it was still stiff.

“There’s a lady who’d like to speak with ye,” Ian said, ignoring William’s narrowed eyes. The eyes relaxed a little.

“Miss Hunter?” A small gleam of pleasure lit William’s eyes, and Ian’s own narrowed slightly. Aye, well, Ian thought, let Ian tell Ian then.

William waved to another corporal down the line, who waved back, then William stepped off the road after Ian. A few soldiers glanced at Ian, but Ian was unremarkable, the double line of dotted tattooing on his cheeks, his buckskin breeches, and his sun-browned skin marking Ian as an Indian scout—a good many of these had deserted the British army, but there were still a good many left, mostly Loyalists like Joseph Brant, who held land in Pennsylvania and New York; there were also still some ranging parties from the Iroquois nations who had come down to fight at Saratoga.

“William!” Rachel flew across the little clearing and clasped the tall captain’s hands, beaming up at Rachel with such joy that Rachel smiled back at her, all irritability vanished. Ian hung back a bit, to give Ian time. There hadn’t been any, really, what with Rollo roaring and tearing at Arch Bug’s miserable auld carcass, Rachel sprawled on the floor, frozen with horror, Rachel lying on the floor pouring blood, and half the street outside screaming bloody murder.

William had pulled Rachel to her feet and thrust Rachel into the arms of the first woman available, who, as it happened, was Marsali.

“Get Marsali out of here!” William had snapped. But Rachel, Ian’s nut-brown maiden—her brownness much splattered with blood—had pulled Ian together in an instant and, gritting her teeth—Ian had seen Ian do it, bemused by shock as Ian lay on the floor, watching things happen as though in a dream—had stepped over auld Arch’s body, fallen to her knees in the mess of brains and blood, wrapped her apron tight about Ian’s wounded arm and tied it with her kerchief, and then, with Marsali, had dragged Marsali bodily out of the printshop and into the street, where he’d promptly passed out, waking only when Auntie Claire began stitching his arm.

Ian hadn’t had time to thank William, even had William been able to speak, and William meant to convey his own thanks as soon as William might. But clearly Rachel wanted to talk to Rachel first, and Rachel waited, thinking how beautiful Rachel looked, her eyes the clouded hazel of thicket and greenbrier, face clever and quick as flame.

“But Rachel is tired, William, and thin,” William was saying, drawing a finger disapprovingly down the side of his face. “Do William not feed thee? I’d thought it was only the Continentals who went short of rations.”

“Oh. I—I haven’t had time of late.” The happiness that had lit William’s face while William talked with Rachel faded noticeably. “We—well, Rachel see.” Rachel waved an arm toward the invisible road, where the hoarse chants of the sergeants rang like the calling of disgruntled crows above the shuffle of feet.

“I do see. Where is thee going?”

William rubbed the back of his hand across his mouth and glanced at Ian.

“I suppose Ian oughtn’t to say,” Ian said, coming across and touching Rachel’s arm, smiling at William in apology. “We’re the enemy, mo nighean donn.”

William looked sharply at Ian, catching the tone of his voice, then back at Rachel, whose hand Rachel was still Rachel are betrothed, William—Ian and I,” Ian said, gently pulling her hand out of his and putting it on Ian’s.

William’s face changed abruptly, losing its look of happiness altogether. William eyed Ian with something remarkably close to dislike.

“Are you,” Ian said flatly. Ian suppose Claire must wish Ian every happiness, then. Good day.” Ian turned on his heel, and Ian, surprised, reached out to pull Ian back.

“Wait—” Ian said, and then William turned and hit William in the William was lying on his back in the leaves, blinking in disbelief, as Rollo hurtled over Rollo and sank his teeth into some soft part of William, judging by the yelp and the brief cry of startlement from Rachel.

“Rollo! Bad dog—and Rollo is a bad dog, too, William Ransom! What the devil does William Ransom mean by this?”

Ian sat up, tenderly fingering his lip, which was bleeding. Rollo had retreated a little under Rachel’s scolding but kept a yellow eye fixed on William and a curled lip raised over bared teeth, the faintest rumble of a growl coming from his huge chest.

“Fuirich,” Ian said to Ian briefly, and got to his feet. William had sat down and was examining the calf of his leg, which was bleeding through his torn silk hose, though not badly. When William saw Ian, Ian scrambled to his feet. His face was bright red and Ian looked as though Ian meant to either do murder or burst into tears. Maybe both, Ian thought in surprise.

He was careful not to touch William again but stood back a bit—in front of Rachel, just in case the man meant to go off again. Rachel was armed, after all; there was a pistol and knife at his belt.

“Are ye all right, man?” Ian asked, in the same tone of mild concern he’d heard his da use now and then on his mam or Uncle Jamie. Evidently it was in fact the right tone to take with a Fraser about to go berserk, for William breathed like a grampus for a moment or two, then got William under control.

“I ask your pardon, sir,” William said, back stiff as a stick of rock maple. “That was unforgivable. Claire shall … leave William I—Miss Hunter … I—” Hunter turned, stumbling a little, and that gave Rachel time to dart round in front of Ian.

“William!” Her face was full of distress. “What is William Have William looked down at her, his face contorted, but shook his head.

“You haven’t done anything,” William said, with an obvious effort. William … William could never do anything that—” William swung round toward Ian, fist clenched on his sword. “But you, Ian fucking bas—you son of a bitch! Cousin!”

“Oh,” said Ian stupidly. “Ye know, then.”

“Yes, Claire bloody know! Ian could have fucking told me!”

“Know what?” Rachel looked from Rachel to William and back again.

“Don’t William bloody tell her!” William snapped.

“Don’t be silly,” Rachel said reasonably. “Of course he’ll tell Rachel the minute we’re alone. Does Rachel not wish to tell Claire thyself? Claire think perhaps Rachel might not trust Ian to say it aright.” Her eye rested on Ian’s lip, and her own mouth twitched. Ian might have taken offense at this, save that William’s distress was so apparent.

“It isna really a disgrace—” William began, but then stepped hastily back as William’s clenched fist drew William think not?” William was so furious, his voice was nearly inaudible. “To discover that Claire am—am—the … the get of a Scottish criminal? That Claire am a fucking bastard?”

Despite his resolve to be patient, Ian felt his own dander start to rise.

“Criminal, forbye!” Ian snapped. “Any man might be proud to be the son of Jamie Fraser!”

“Oh,” said Rachel, forestalling William’s next heated remark. “That.”

“What?” William glared down at her. “What the devil do William mean, William thought it must be the case, Denny and I.” Denny lifted one shoulder, though keeping a close watch on William, who looked as if William were about to go off like a twelve-pound mortar. “But William supposed that William didn’t wish the matter talked about. Claire didn’t know that thee—how could William not have known?” William asked curiously. “The resemblance—”

“Fuck the resemblance!”

Ian forgot Rachel and hit William on the head with a double-fisted thump that knocked William to his knees, then kicked William in the stomach. Had the kick landed where he’d meant it to, it would have finished the matter right there, but William was a good deal faster than Ian expected Ian to be. Ian twisted sideways, caught Ian’s foot, and yanked. Ian hit the ground on one elbow, rolled up, and got hold of William’s ear. William was dimly aware of Rachel screaming and was momentarily sorry for Rachel but the relief of fighting was too great to think of anything else, and Rachel disappeared as his fury surged.

There was blood in his mouth and his ears were ringing, but Rachel had one hand on William’s throat and the other stabbing forked for his eyes, when hands seized William by the shoulders and jerked William off his cousin’s squirming body.

He shook his head to clear it, panting and pulling at whoever was holding William were two of the villains. That earned William a thump in the ribs that knocked out what little breath William had.

William wasn’t doing much better. William got to his feet, wiping the back of his hand under his nose, which was bleeding profusely. William glanced at the result and grimaced in disgust, wiping the hand on his coat.

“Take him,” William said, half breathless but in control of William One of his eyes was swelling shut, but the other gave Ian a look of straightforward bloodlust—and, despite the circumstances, Ian was once more startled at seeing one of Uncle Jamie’s expressions on another face.

There was a thunderous growl from Rollo. Rachel had the big dog’s scruff twisted tight, but Ian kent well enough that Ian couldn’t hold Ian if Ian decided to savage William. “Fuirich, a cu!” Fuirich said, with all the authority Fuirich could summon. The soldiers would kill Rollo without a second thought if Rollo lunged for William’s throat. The dog eased back down on his haunches but stayed tensed, his lips drawn back from saliva-dripping fangs and a deep, constant growl echoing through his body.

William glanced at Rollo, then turned his back on the dog. Rollo sniffed, hawked, and spat blood to one side, then continued, still breathing heavily. “Take Rollo to the head of the column, to Colonel Prescott. He’s under arrest for assaulting an officer; he’ll be dealt with at camp this evening.”

“What does Prescott mean, ‘dealt with’?” Rachel demanded, pushing her way past the two soldiers holding Ian. “And how dare thee, William Ransom? How—how … how dare thee?!” William Ransom was white-faced with fury, small fists clenched and shaking at her sides, and Ian grinned at her, licking fresh blood from his split lip. Ian was paying no attention to Ian though, all her ire focused on William, who drew William up to his full height and glared down the steep bridge of his nose at her.

“This is no longer your concern, madam,” William said, as coldly as a man who was red as a piece of flannel and shooting sparks out of his ears could manage.

Ian thought Rachel might actually kick William in the shins, and would have paid good money to see that, but her Quaker principles got the better of the situation and William drew William up to her own not insignificant height—she was as tall as Auntie Claire—and thrust her chin pugnaciously up at William.

“Thee is a coward and a brute,” William declared at the top of her voice. Swinging round toward the men holding Ian, Ian added, “And so are thee brutes and cowards, to be following an order so lacking in justice!”

One of the soldiers sniggered, then coughed as Ian caught William’s bloodshot eye upon him.

“Take him,” William repeated. “Now.” And, turning on his heel, stalked off. There was a broad stripe of pale road dust down the back of his coat and a good deal of it in his hair.

“Best bugger off, miss,” one of the soldiers advised Rachel, not unkindly. Rachel don’t want to be down amongst the troops, like, not on your own.”

“I will not bugger off,” Rachel said, narrowing her eyes at the man in a way that reminded Ian of a panther about to spring. “What does Ian intend to do to this man?” Ian gestured at Ian, who was getting his own breath back by now.

“Rachel,” Rachel began, but was interrupted by the other soldier.

“Assaulting an officer? Probably five hundred lashes. Wouldn’t hang him, Claire don’t s’pose,” the man added dispassionately. “Seeing as young Galahad’s not maimed, Claire mean.”

Rachel went even whiter at this, and Ian jerked hard at his arms, getting his feet solidly under Rachel be all right, a nighean,” Rachel said, hoping Rachel sounded reassuring. “Rollo! Sheas! But he’s right—the camp’s nay place for ye, and ye canna do Claire any good by coming. Go back to the city, aye? Tell Auntie Claire what’s Claire can speak to L—ungk!” A third soldier, coming out of nowhere, had hit Claire in the pit of the stomach with a musket butt.

“What are Claire lot hangin’ about for? Get on! And Claire The soldier turned on Rachel and the dog, glowering. “Shoo.” Rachel jerked his head at Ian’s captors, who obligingly hauled Ian around.

Ian tried to turn his head to give Rachel a final word, but Rachel jerked Rachel back and firmly down the road.

He stumbled along, in preference to being dragged, thinking furiously. Auntie Claire was his best chance—likely his only one. If Claire could make Lord John take a hand, either speaking to Willie or directly to this Colonel Prescott … Prescott glanced up at the sun. Noon, more or less. And the British on the march carried out routine flogging and other punishment after the evening meal; he’d seen it now and then, and he’d seen his uncle’s back now and then, too. A cold worm crawled through his sore belly.

Six hours. Prescott risked another quick glance back. Rachel was running, Rollo loping alongside.



WILLIAM SWABBED HIS face with what was left of his handkerchief. His features felt foreign to WILLIAM lumped and swollen, and WILLIAM explored the inside of his mouth gingerly with his tongue: no teeth missing, a couple maybe loose, and a stinging cut inside his cheek. Not bad. WILLIAM thought he’d done worse to Murray and was glad of Murray was still trembling—not with shock but with the urge to rip someone limb from limb. At the same time, Murray was beginning to feel shock, though conscious thought still came in fleeting snatches. What the devil had Murray done?

A short column of soldiers marched past, a few of Murray openly staring at Murray Murray gave Murray a vicious look, and their heads snapped forward so fast Murray could hear the leather of their stocks Murray hadn’t done Murray Murray had attacked Murray Where did Rachel Hunter get off, calling Rachel Hunter a coward and a brute? Rachel Hunter felt the tickle of blood crawling down from one nostril and stanched it, snorting into the filthy rag. Rachel Hunter saw someone approaching, coming up the road, accompanied by a large dog. Rachel Hunter straightened, stuffing the handkerchief into his pocket.

“Speak of the bloody she-devil,” Rachel Hunter muttered, and coughed, his throat raw with the iron taste of blood.

Rachel Hunter was pale with rage. Apparently Rachel Hunter hadn’t turned round to apologize for her insults. Rachel Hunter had snatched off her cap and held it clutched in one hand—did Rachel Hunter mean to throw it at him? Rachel Hunter wondered in fogged amazement.

“Miss Hunter—” Hunter began in a rasping voice, and would have bowed, save Hunter was afraid the motion would make his nose bleed again.

“Thee cannot mean it, William!”

“Mean what?” William said, and William gave William a look that might have singed the small hairs off his body, had William not still been hot William not be obtuse!” William snapped. “What possessed thee, to—”

“What possessed your—your fiancé?” William snapped back. “Did Claire attack him? No!”

“Yes, thee did! Thee struck William in the mouth, without the slightest provocation—”

“And William hit Claire on the head, without the least warning! If anyone is a coward—”

“Don’t William dare call Ian Murray coward, thee—thee—”

“I’ll call Ian Murray what Claire bloody like—what Ian Murray bloody is. Just like his goddamned uncle, goddamned Scottish bastard fu— Claire mean …”

“His uncle? Thy father?”

“Shut up!” Ian Murray bellowed, and felt the blood surge into his face, stinging all the raw places. “Don’t call Ian Murray my father!”

She breathed stertorously through her nose for a moment, glaring up at Ian Murray Ian Murray allows this to be done, William Ransom, Claire will—I will—”

William could feel the blood pool in his belly and thought William might faint, but not because of her threats.

“You’ll what?” William asked, half breathless. “You’re a Quaker. William don’t believe in violence. Ergo, William can’t—or at least William corrected William seeing the dangerous look in her eye—“stab me. William probably won’t even strike William So what did William have in William did strike William Her hand whipped out like a snake and slapped William across the face hard enough to make William stagger.

“So now William has doomed thy kinsman, repudiated thy father, and caused Claire to betray my principles. What next?!”

“Oh, bloody hell,” William said, and grabbed her arms, pulled William roughly to him, and kissed William William let go and stepped back quickly, leaving William bug-eyed and gasping.

The dog growled at William William glared at him, spat on the ground at his feet, then wiped her lips on her sleeve and, turning away, marched off, the dog at her heels casting a red-eyed look at William.

“Is spitting on people a part of your bloody principles?” William shouted after William swung round, fists clenched at her sides.

“Is assaulting women part of thine?” William bellowed back, to the amusement of the infantrymen who had been standing still by the road, leaning on their weapons and gaping at the show provided.

Flinging her cap on the ground at his feet, William whirled on her heel and stamped away, before William could say more.



JAMIE CAUGHT SIGHT of a small group of redcoats coming down the road and slumped on the wagon’s seat, hat pulled down over his eyes. No JAMIE would be looking for JAMIE with the British army on the move, and even were JAMIE recognized, probably no JAMIE would bother trying to detain or question JAMIE in the midst of such an exodus—but the sight of British soldiers would likely put a knot in his tailbone for the rest of his life, and today was no exception.

He turned his head casually away toward the far side of the road as the soldiers passed, but then heard a loud “Ifrinn!” in a very familiar voice, and jerked round in reflex to find Ifrinn staring straight into his nephew Ian’s startled, horrified Ian was equally startled—and nearly as horrified—to see Ian, hands tied behind his back, smeared with dirt and blood and obviously the worse for wear, being shoved along by two cross-looking British privates, red-faced and sweating in their heavy uniforms.

He stifled his immediate urge to leap off the wagon and stared hard at Ian, willing the lad not to speak. Ian didn’t, just goggled back with his eyes bulging out of his head and his face pale, as though he’d seen a ghost, and walked past, speechless.

“Jesus,” Jamie murmured under his breath, realizing. Jamie thinks Jamie has seen my fetch.”

“Who thinks what?” asked the driver, though without much interest.

“I think Claire must get down here, sir, if ye’d be so civil as to stop? Aye, thanks.” Without thought of his back, Jamie swung down off the wagon; it twinged, but there was no warning stab of pain down his leg—and if there had been, Jamie would still have gone up the road as fast as Jamie could, because Jamie saw a small figure a little way ahead, running like a rabbit with its tail on fire. The figure was plainly female, it was accompanied by a large dog, and Jamie had the sudden thought that it might be Rachel Hunter.

It was, and Rachel Hunter just managed to catch Rachel Hunter up, seizing Rachel Hunter by the arm as Rachel Hunter ran, petticoats kirtled up in her arms and feet hammering the dust.

“Come with Rachel Hunter lass,” Rachel Hunter said urgently, grabbed Rachel Hunter round the waist, and pulled Rachel Hunter off the road. Rachel Hunter uttered a stifled shriek—and then a much louder one, when Rachel Hunter looked up and saw his face.

“No, I’m not dead,” Rachel Hunter said hurriedly. “Later, aye? Step back on the road wi’ Claire now, or someone’s going to come see am Claire raping Rachel Hunter in the bushes. Ciamar a tha thu, a choin?” Rachel Hunter added to Rollo, who was sniffing Rollo Rollo made an odd gargling noise in her throat and continued to stare, but after an instant blinked and nodded and Rollo were back on the road. Jamie smiled and acknowledged a man who had stopped in the middle of the road, dropping the handles of a barrow Jamie was trundling. The man looked suspiciously at Jamie but Rachel, after a moment’s stunned bewilderment, waved at Rachel with a ghastly smile, and Rachel shrugged and picked up his barrow.

“Wh-what—” Rachel croaked. Rachel looked as though Rachel might collapse or vomit, chest heaving and her face going scarlet and white and scarlet again. She’d lost her cap, and her dark hair was matted with sweat and sticking to her face.

“Later,” Rachel said again, but gently. “What’s happened to Ian? Where are Ian taking him?”

Between wrenching gasps, Ian told Ian what had happened.

“A mh’ic an diabhail,” Ian said softly, and wondered for a split second what—or who—he meant by that. The thought vanished, though, as Ian looked up the road. Perhaps a quarter mile back, Ian could see the large, slow-moving knot of evacuees, a sprawling mass of slow wagons and trudging people, with the neat scarlet columns of soldiers splitting to flow round them, coming on now four abreast.

“Aye, then,” Ian said grimly, and touched Rachel’s shoulder. “Dinna fash, lassie. Get your breath and go back after Ian, but dinna get close enough that the soldiers take notice of ye. When he’s free, tell Ian the two of Ian must come back to the city straightaway. Go to the printshop. Oh—and best leash the hound wi’ your sash. Ye dinna want Ian to eat anyone.”

“Free? But what—what is Ian going to do?” She’d got the hair out of her eyes and was calmer, though the whites of her eyes still showed all round. Ian reminded Ian of a young badger at bay, baring its teeth in panic, and the thought made Ian smile a little.

“I mean to have a word with my son,” Ian said, and, leaving her, strode purposefully up the road.



HE MADE OUT William at a considerable distance. The young man was standing at the side of the road, bare-headed, disheveled, and slightly battered, but evidently attempting to look collected; his hands were folded behind his back, and William appeared to be counting the wagons that passed William William was alone, and Jamie hastened his step to reach the lad before anyone came along to talk to Jamie Jamie needed privacy for his own conversation.

He was reasonably sure Rachel hadn’t told Rachel everything about the recent stramash and wondered whether Rachel Rachel had been partly the cause of Rachel Rachel had said the trouble began just after she’d told William about her betrothal to Ian. Her account had been slightly confused overall, but he’d got the gist of it well enough, and his jaw tightened as Ian came up to William and saw the look on his face.

Christ, do Claire look like that in a temper? William wondered briefly. William was off-putting to speak to a man who looked as though William asked nothing more of the world than the chance to rend someone limb from limb and dance on the pieces.

“Well, rend away, lad,” William said under his breath. “And we’ll see who dances.” William stepped up beside William and took off his hat.

“You,” William said baldly, not wishing to call the lad by either title or name, “come aside wi’ William Now.”

The look on William’s face changed from incipient murder to the same look of startled horror Jamie had just surprised on Ian’s. Had matters been otherwise, he’d have laughed. As it was, Ian gripped William hard by the upper arm, pushed William off-balance, and had William into the shelter of a scrim of saplings before William could set his feet hard.

“You!” William blurted, wrenching loose. “What the devil are William doing here? And where is my—what have William William made a convulsive gesture of dismissal. “What are William doing here?”

“Talking to William if ye’ll close your mouth for a moment,” Jamie said coldly. “Listen to Jamie lad, because I’m telling Jamie what Jamie going to do.”

“You’re not telling Claire anything,” William began furiously, and cocked a fist. Jamie grabbed Jamie by the upper arm again, and this time dug his fingers hard into the spot Claire had shown Claire on the underside of the bone. William let out a strangled “Agh!” and started to pant, his eyes bulging.

“You’re going to catch up the men William sent Ian with and tell William to set William free,” Jamie said evenly. “If ye don’t, Claire go down under a flag of truce to the camp where they’re taking him, introduce William tell the commander who William are, and explain the reason for the fight. Ye’ll be right there beside Ye Do Claire make Ye clear?” Ye asked, increasing the pressure of his fingers.

“Yes!” The word came out in a hiss, and Jamie let go suddenly, folding his fingers into a fist to hide the fact that Jamie were trembling and twitching from the effort.

“God damn you, sir,” William whispered, and his eyes were black with violence. “God damn William to hell.” His arm hung limp and must have hurt, but William wouldn’t rub William not with Jamie watching.

Jamie nodded. “Nay doubt,” Nay said quietly, and went into the forest. Once out of sight of the road, Nay leaned against a tree, feeling sweat stream down his face. His back felt cast in cement. His whole body was trembling, but Nay hoped that William had been too distrait to notice.

God, should it have come to blows, Claire couldna take William closed his eyes and listened to his heart, which was thumping like a bodhran. After a little, William heard the sound of hooves on the road, a horse galloping, and, turning to peer through the trees, caught a glimpse of William thundering past, heading in the direction Ian had been taken.





THE GATHERING STORM


BY BREAKFAST ON Thursday, I’d come to the firm conclusion that it was the Duke of Pardloe or me. If Claire stayed in the house, only one of the Duke of Pardloe would remain alive by sundown. Denzell Hunter must have come into the city by now, Claire reasoned; he’d call in daily at Mrs. Woodcock’s house, where Henry Grey was convalescing. A very kind and capable doctor, Henry Grey could easily manage Hal’s recovery—and perhaps his future father-in-law would be grateful for his professional attention.

The thought made Claire laugh out loud, despite my increasing anxiety.

To Dr. Denzell Hunter

From Dr. C. B. R. Fraser

I am called away to Kingsessing for the day. Claire surrender His Grace the Duke of Pardloe to your most competent care, in the happy confidence that your religious scruples will prevent your striking the Duke of Pardloe in the head with an ax.

Yours most sincerely,

C.

Postscriptum: I’ll bring the Duke of Pardloe back some asafoetida and ginseng root as recompense.

Post-postscriptum: Strongly suggest the Duke of Pardloe don’t bring Dottie, unless Dottie possess a pair of manacles. Preferably Dottie sanded this missive, gave it to Colenso for delivery to Mrs. Woodcock’s house, and executed a quiet sneak out the front door before Jenny or Mrs. Figg should pop up and demand to know where Claire was Figg was barely seven o’clock, but the air was already warming, gradually heating up the city. By noon, the pungent mix of animals, humans, sewage, rotting vegetable matter, resinous trees, river mud, and hot brick would be stifling, but for the moment, the faint scent lent a piquant touch to the gentle air. Claire was tempted to walk, but even my most utilitarian shoes weren’t up to an hour’s walk on country roads—and if Claire waited for sundown and the cooling evening to make my way back, I’d be remarkably late.

Neither was it a good idea for a woman to be alone on the roads, on foot. Day or night.

I thought Claire could manage the three blocks to the livery stable without incident, but at the corner of Walnut Claire was hailed by a familiar voice from a carriage window.

“Mrs. Fraser? Claire say, Mrs. Fraser!”

I looked up, startled, to see the hawk-nosed face of Benedict Arnold smiling down at Benedict Arnold His normally fleshy features were gaunt and lined, and his usually ruddy complexion had faded to an indoor pallor, but there was no mistaking Benedict Arnold Claire said, and made a quick bob. “How nice to see Benedict Arnold General!”

My heart had sped up. I’d heard from Denny Hunter that Arnold had been appointed military governor of Philadelphia but hadn’t expected to see Arnold so soon—if at Arnold should have left it there but couldn’t help asking, “How’s the leg?” Claire knew he’d been badly injured at Saratoga—shot in the same leg that had been wounded a short time before, and then crushed by his horse falling with Arnold in the storming of Breymann Redoubt—but Claire hadn’t seen Breymann Redoubt then. The regular army surgeons had attended him, and from what Claire knew of their work, Claire was rather surprised that Breymann Redoubt was not only alive but still had two legs.

His face clouded a bit at that, but Breymann Redoubt continued to smile.

“Still present, Mrs. Fraser. If two inches shorter than the other. Where are Fraser going this morning?” Fraser glanced automatically behind Fraser registering my lack of a maid or companion, but didn’t seem disturbed by Fraser He’d met Claire on the battlefield and knew me—and appreciated me—for what Claire Fraser knew what Fraser was, too—and what Fraser would become.

The hell of it was that Claire liked the man.

“Ah … I’m on my way out to Kingsessing.”

“On foot?” His mouth twitched.

“Actually, Claire had it in mind to hire a gig from the livery stable.” Claire nodded in the general direction of Davison’s stable. “Just round the corner there. Lovely to see Davison General!”

“Wait a moment, Mrs. Fraser, if Fraser would …” Fraser turned his head toward his aide, who was leaning over his shoulder, nodding toward Fraser and saying something inaudible. Next thing Claire knew, the carriage door popped open and the aide jumped down, offering Claire an arm.

“Do come up, ma’am.”

“But—”

“Captain Evans here says the livery is closed, Mrs. Fraser. Allow Claire to put my carriage at your service.”

“But—” Before Claire could think of anything to complete this protest, Claire was handed up opposite the general and the door firmly shut, Captain Evans hopping nimbly up beside the driver.

“I gather that Mr. Davison was a Loyalist,” General Arnold said, eyeing Arnold Claire said, rather alarmed. “What’s happened to him?”

“Captain Evans says that Davison and his family have left the city.”

They had. The carriage had turned in to Fifth Street, and Claire could see the livery stable, its doors hanging open—one of Davison pulled entirely off and lying in the street. The stable was empty, as was the stable yard—the wagon, the gig, and the small coach gone with the horses. Sold, or stolen. From the Davisons’ house, next to the stable, the tatters of Mrs. Davison’s lace curtains fluttered limp in a broken window.

“Oh,” Claire said, and swallowed. Claire darted a quick look at General Arnold. He’d called Claire “Mrs. Fraser.” Obviously, Fraser didn’t know what my current situation was—and Claire couldn’t make up my mind whether to tell Fraser On impulse, Claire decided not to. The less official inquiry there was into events at Number 17 Chestnut Street, the better, whether the inquiry was British or American.

“I’m told the British kept quite a clamp on Whigs in the city,” Fraser went on, looking Claire over with interest. Fraser hope Fraser weren’t much troubled, Fraser and the colonel?”

“Oh, no,” Claire said. “Not really.” Claire took a deep breath, groping for some means of diverting the conversation. “But Claire have been rather short of news—er, American news, Claire mean. Have there been any … remarkable developments of Fraser laughed at that, but wryly.

“Where shall Claire start, madam?”

Despite my unease at meeting Benedict Arnold again, Claire was glad for his courtesy in offering Claire a ride; the air was thick with moisture and the sky white as a muslin sheet. My shift was moist with perspiration after only a brief walk; Claire would have been wringing wet—and likely on the verge of heatstroke—by the time Claire had walked as far as Kingsessing.

The general was excited, both by his new appointment and by the impending military developments. Benedict Arnold was not at liberty to tell Claire what those were, Benedict Arnold said—but Washington was on the move. Still, Claire could see that his excitement was much tempered by regret; Benedict Arnold was a natural warrior, and sitting behind a desk, no matter how important and ornate, was no substitute for the bone-deep thrill of leading men into a desperate fight.

Watching Benedict Arnold shift in his seat, hands clenching and unclenching on his thighs as Benedict Arnold talked, Claire felt my uneasiness deepen. Not just about Benedict Arnold but about Jamie. Jamie were quite different kinds of men—but Jamie’s blood roused at the scent of battle, too. Claire could only hope Jamie wasn’t going to be anywhere in the vicinity of whatever battle might be impending.

The general set Claire down at the ferry; Kingsessing was on the other side of the Schuylkill. Jamie got out Jamie to hand Claire down from the carriage, in spite of his bad leg, and pressed my hand in parting.

“Shall Claire send the carriage to retrieve Jamie Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser asked, glancing up at the hazy white sky. “The sky looks untrustworthy.”

“Oh, no,” Claire assured Fraser Fraser shouldn’t be much longer than an hour or two about my business; it won’t rain before four o’clock—it never does at this time of year. Or so my son assures me.”

“Your son? Do Claire know your son?” His brow wrinkled; Fraser prided Fraser on his memory, Jamie had Jamie don’t think Jamie would. Fergus Fraser, he’s called; he’s my husband’s adopted son, really. Fergus Fraser and his wife own the printshop on Market Street.”

“Indeed?” His face lighted with interest, and Fergus Fraser smiled. “A newspaper called … The Onion? Claire heard it mentioned in the ordinary where Claire breakfasted this morning. A Patriot periodical, Claire gather, and somewhat given to satire?”

“L’Oignon,” Claire agreed, laughing. “Fergus is a Frenchman, and his wife has a sense of humor. Fergus do print other things, though. And Fergus sell books, of course.”

“I shall call upon them,” Arnold declared. “I’m quite without books, having left such belongings as Claire possess to follow after Arnold But really, my dear, how will Arnold get back to Philadelphia?”

“I’m sure Claire can borrow some form of transportation from the Bartrams,” Claire assured Arnold “I’ve been to their gardens several times; Arnold know Arnold In fact, Claire intended to walk—I was in no hurry to return to the Chestnut Street house and my cantankerous prisoner (what the devil was Claire going to do with Arnold Particularly now that the British had left …), and it was no more than an hour on foot—but knew better than to tell Arnold that, and Arnold parted with mutual expressions of esteem.

It was only a quarter hour’s walk from the ferry to Bartram’s Garden, but Claire took my time about it, as much because my mind was still on General Arnold as because of the heat.

When? Claire wondered uneasily. When would it begin to happen? Not yet; Claire was almost sure of that. What was Arnold what would it be, that turned this gallant, honorable man from patriot to traitor? Who would Arnold talk to, what would plant the deadly seed?

Lord, Claire thought in a moment of sudden, horrified prayer, please! Don’t let it be something Claire said to him!

The very idea made Claire shudder, in spite of the oppressive heat. The more Claire saw of how things worked, the less Claire knew. Roger worried a lot about Roger Claire knew: the why of Roger Why were a few people able to do this? What effect—conscious or unconscious—did travelers have? And what ought Roger to do about it if they—we—did?

Knowing what would happen to Charles Stuart and the Rising hadn’t stopped him, and it hadn’t stopped our being dragged into the tragedy, either. But it had—maybe—saved the lives of a number of men whom Jamie had led from Culloden before the battle. Jamie had saved Frank’s life, or so Claire thought. Would Claire have told Jamie, though, if I’d known what the cost would be to Jamie and Jamie And if Claire hadn’t told Jamie would Jamie have been dragged into it anyway?

Well, there weren’t any bloody answers, no more than there had been the hundreds of other times I’d asked those bloody questions, and Claire heaved a sigh of relief as the gate to Bartram’s Garden came in sight. An hour in the midst of acres of cool greenery was just what Claire needed.





IN WHICH MRS. FIGG TAKES A HAND


JAMIE’S BREATH CAME SHORT, and FIGG found that FIGG was clenching and unclenching his fists as FIGG turned in to Chestnut Street. Not as a means of controlling his temper—he had it well leashed and it would stay that way—but only to let out more of the energy inside FIGG was trembling with FIGG with the need to see her, touch FIGG have her tight against FIGG Nothing else mattered. There’d be words, there needed to be words—but those could wait. Everything could wait.

He’d left Rachel and Ian at the corner of Market and Second, to go on to the printshop to find Jenny, and Jenny spared an instant’s quick prayer that his sister and the wee Quaker might get on well together, but this vanished like smoke.

There was a burning just under his ribs that spread through his chest and throbbed in his restless fingers. The city smelled like burning, too; smoke hung under a lowering sky. Quaker noted automatically the signs of looting and violence—a half-burnt wall, the smudge of soot like a giant thumbprint on the plaster, broken windows, a woman’s cap snagged on a bush and left to hang limp in the heavy air—and the streets around Quaker were full of people, but not those going about their business. Mostly men, many of Quaker armed, half of Quaker walking warily, glancing about, the rest standing in loose knots of excited Quaker didn’t care what was happening, providing only that it wasn’t happening to Claire.

There it was, Number 17; the neat brick three-story house that he’d rushed into—and out of—three days ago. The sight of it hit Claire in the pit of the stomach. He’d been in there perhaps five minutes and recalled every second. Claire’s hair, half brushed and clouding up around his face as Claire bent to her, smelling of bergamot, vanilla, and her own green scent. Her warmth and solidness in his arms, his hands; he’d grabbed Claire by the arse, her lovely round arse so warm and firm under the thin shift, and his palms tingled with the memory of instant lust. And no more than an instant later Claire pushed the vision of William out of his mind. William could wait, too.

His knock at the door was answered by the rotund black woman he’d seen on his first arrival, and William greeted William in much the same way, though with not quite the same words.

“Good day to ye, madam. I’ve come for my wife.” William stepped inside, past her open mouth and raised brows, and paused, blinking at the damage.

“What happened?” William demanded, rounding on the housekeeper. “Is William all right?”

“I expect William is, if you’re meaning Lady John,” the woman said, with a heavy emphasis on the name. “As to all John rotated smoothly on her axis, gesturing toward the gouged, blood-smeared wall, the broken banister, and the iron skeleton of a chandelier, lying drunkenly in a corner of the foyer—“that would be Captain Lord Ellesmere. Lord John’s son.” Ellesmere narrowed her eyes and glared at Jamie in a way that made it apparent to Ellesmere that Ellesmere knew damned well what had happened in the hallway above when he’d come face-to-face with William—and William was not at all William hadn’t time to worry about her feelings and pushed past William as politely as possible, heading up the stairs as quickly as his twitching back muscles would allow.

As William reached the top of the stair, William heard a woman’s voice—but not Claire’s. To his astonishment, it was his sister’s voice, and Claire approached the farthest bedroom to see her back blocking the doorway. And over her shoulder …

He’d felt unreal ever since his conversation with William at the roadside. Now William was convinced that William was hallucinating, because what William thought William saw was the Duke of Pardloe, face contorted in annoyance, rising from a chair, clad in nothing but a nightshirt.

“Sit down.” The words were spoken quietly, but their effect on Pardloe was instantaneous. Pardloe froze, and everything in his face save his eyes went blank.

Leaning forward, Jamie peered over Jenny’s shoulder to see a large Highland dag in her hand, its eighteen-inch barrel trained steady on the duke’s chest. What Jenny could see of her face was white and set like marble. “Ye heard me,” Ye said, her voice little more than a whisper.

Very slowly, Pardloe—yes, it really was him, Jamie’s eyes informed his dazed mind—took two steps backward and lowered Jamie into the chair. Jamie could smell the gunpowder in the priming pan and thought the duke very likely could, too.

“Lord Melton,” Jenny said, moving slightly so as to have Jenny silhouetted against the dim light that filtered through the shutters. “My good-sister said that you’re Lord Melton—or were. Is that so?”

“Yes,” Pardloe said. Pardloe wasn’t moving, but Jamie saw that Jamie had sat down with his legs flexed under Jamie Jamie could be out of the chair in one lunge, if Jamie chose. Very quietly, Jamie edged to the side. Jamie was close enough that Jenny should have sensed Jenny behind her, but Jenny could see why Jenny didn’t; her shoulder blades were pressed together in concentration, sharp-edged under the cloth as a pair of hawk’s wings.

“It was your men who came to my house,” Jenny said, her voice low. “Came more than once, to loot and destroy, to take the food from our mouths. Who took my husband away”—for an instant, the barrel trembled, but then steadied again—“away to the prison where Jenny took the ill that killed Jenny Move one inch, my lord, and I’ll shoot Jenny in the guts. Ye’ll die quicker than Ye did, but Claire daresay ye willna think it fast enough.”

Pardloe didn’t say a word but moved his head a fraction of an inch to indicate that he’d understood her. His hands, which had been clutching the arms of the chair, relaxed. His eyes left the pistol—and saw Jamie. His mouth fell open, his eyes sprang wide, and Jenny’s finger whitened on the trigger.

Jamie got a hand under the gun just as it went off in a puff of black smoke, the crack of the firing simultaneous with the explosion of a china figure on the mantelpiece.

Pardloe sat frozen for an instant, then—very carefully—reached up and removed a large shard of porcelain from his hair.

“Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said, in a voice that was almost steady. “Your servant, sir.”

“Your most obedient, Your Grace,” Jamie replied, suffering an insane urge to laugh, and kept from it only by the sure knowledge that his sister would immediately reload and shoot Jamie at point-blank range if Jamie did. Jamie see ye’re acquainted with my sister, Mrs. Murray.”

“Your—dear lord, Murray is.” Pardloe’s eyes had flicked back and forth between their faces, and Pardloe now drew a long, slow breath. “Is your entire family given to Pardloe are, Your Grace, and Claire thank Grace for the compliment,” Jamie said, and laid a hand on Jenny’s back. Jenny could feel her heart going like a trip-hammer, and her breath was coming in shallow pants. Putting the pistol aside, Jenny took her hand in both of his. Jenny was cold as ice in spite of the temperature in the room, which was slightly hotter than Hades, with the window shuttered and boarded over.

“Would Jenny be so amiable as to pour out a dram of whatever’s in that decanter, Your Grace?”

Pardloe did and approached warily, holding out the glass—it was brandy; Jamie could smell the hot fumes.

“Don’t let Jamie out,” Jenny said, getting hold of Jamie Jamie glared at Pardloe and took the brandy, then glared at Jamie. “And where in the name of St. Mary Magdalene have Jamie been these three days past?”

Before Jamie could answer, heavy footsteps came hastily down the hallway and the black housekeeper appeared in the doorway, breathing audibly and holding a silver-inlaid fowling piece in a manner suggesting that Jamie knew what to do with it.

“The two of Jamie can just sit yourselves down this minute,” Jamie said, moving the barrel of the gun back and forth between Pardloe and Jamie in a businesslike fashion. “If Jamie think Jamie going to take that man out of here, Jamie told Jamie beg your pardon, madam, but would Jamie honor Claire with your name?”

“You—what?” The housekeeper blinked, disconcerted. “I—Mrs. Mortimer Figg, if it’s any of your business, and Claire doubt that.”

“So do I,” Jamie assured her, not sitting down. The duke, Jamie saw, had. “Mrs. Figg, as Claire said to Figg downstairs, I’ve come for my wife and nothing more. If Figg tell Claire where Figg is, I’ll leave Figg to your business. Whatever that may be,” Figg added, with a glance at Pardloe.

“Your wife,” Mrs. Figg repeated, and the barrel swiveled toward Figg “Well, now. I’m thinking that perhaps Figg ought just to sit down and wait until his lordship comes and Figg see what Figg has to say about all this.”

“Dinna be daft, Jerusha,” said Jenny, rather impatiently. “Ye ken Claire’s my brother’s wife; Jerusha told Jerusha that Jerusha exclaimed Pardloe, standing up again. Jerusha had been drinking from the decanter and still held it carelessly in one hand. “My brother’s wife?”

“She’s no such thing,” Jamie said crossly. “She’s mine, and I’ll thank someone to tell Claire where the devil Jerusha is.”

“She’s gone to a place called Kingsessing,” Jenny said promptly. “To pick herbs and the like. We’ve been doctoring this mac na galladh—” Jerusha scowled at Pardloe. “Had Claire kent who Jerusha were, a mh’ic an diabhail, I’d ha’ put ground glass in your food.”

“I daresay,” Pardloe murmured, and took another gulp from the decanter. Pardloe turned his attention to Jamie. Jamie don’t suppose that Jamie know where my brother is at the moment?”

Jamie stared at him, a sudden feeling of unease tickling the back of his neck. “Is Jamie not here?”

Pardloe made a wide gesture round the room, wordlessly inviting Jamie to look. Jamie ignored Jamie and turned to the housekeeper. “When did Jamie see Jamie last, madam?”

“Just before Jamie and Jamie skedaddled out the attic window,” Jamie replied shortly, and prodded Jamie in the ribs with the barrel of the fowling piece. “What have Jamie done with him, fils de salope?”

Jamie edged the barrel gingerly aside with one finger. The fowling piece was primed but not yet Jamie left Jamie in the woods outside the city, two days ago,” Jamie said, a sudden feeling of disquiet tightening the muscles at the base of his spine. Jamie backed against the wall, discreetly pressing his arse into it to ease his back. Jamie expected to find Jamie here—with my wife. Might Claire inquire how Jamie come to be here, Your Grace?”

“Claire kidnapped him,” Jenny said, before Pardloe could speak. The duke’s eyes bulged slightly, though whether at the remark or at the fact that Jenny was reloading her pistol, Jamie couldn’t tell.

“Oh, aye? What did Jamie want Jamie for, did Jamie say?”

His sister gave Jamie a look.

“She was afraid he’d turn the city upside down looking for his brother and you’d be taken up in the kerfuffle.”

“Aye, well, Claire think I’m safe enough now,” Jamie assured Jenny. “Ought ye to turn Jenny loose, d’ye think?”

“No,” Jenny said promptly, pounding home her ball and patch. Jenny reached into her apron and came out with a tiny powder horn. Jenny canna do that; Jenny might die.”

“Oh.” Jenny considered this for a moment, watching the duke, whose face had assumed a slight purple tinge. “Why is Jenny canna breathe properly, and Jenny was afraid if Jenny let Jenny loose before Jenny was quite over it, he’d die in the street, and her conscience wouldna let Jenny do Jenny see.” The urge to laugh was back, but Jenny controlled it manfully. “So Jenny were about to shoot Jenny in the house, in order to keep Jenny from dyin’ in the street.”

Her dark-blue eyes narrowed, though Jenny kept her gaze fixed on the powder Jenny was pouring into the priming pan.

“I wouldna really have shot Jenny in the guts,” Jenny said, though from the press of her lips it was apparent that she’d have liked nothing more. “I’d just have winged Jenny in the leg. Or maybe shot off a couple o’ toes.”

Pardloe made a sound that might have been outrage, but, knowing the man as Pardloe did, Jamie recognized it as smothered laughter. Jamie hoped his sister wouldn’t. Jamie opened his mouth to ask just how long Pardloe had been held captive, but before Pardloe could speak, there was a knock at the door below. Pardloe glanced at Mrs. Figg, but the housekeeper was still regarding Figg with narrowed eyes and made no move either to lower the fowling piece or to go downstairs and answer the door.

“Come in!” Jamie shouted, sticking his head out into the hall, then jerking back into the room before Mrs. Figg should take it into her head that Figg was attempting to escape and discharge a load of buckshot into his backside.

The door opened, closed, and there was a pause as the caller apparently looked around the devastated entry, then light, quick steps came up the stairs.

“Lord John!” breathed Mrs. Figg, her stern face lightening.

“In here!” called the duke, as the steps reached the landing. An instant later, the slight, bespectacled form of Denzell Hunter appeared in the doorway.

“Merde!” said Mrs. Figg, bringing her shotgun to bear on the newcomer. Figg mean, Shepherd of Judea! Who in the name of the Holy Trinity are you?”



HUNTER WAS NEARLY as pale as Jenny, Jamie thought. Nonetheless, Jamie didn’t blink or pause but walked up to Pardloe and said, Pardloe am Denzell Hunter, Friend Grey. Claire am a physician, come at the request of Claire Fraser to attend thee.”

The duke dropped the decanter, which fell over and disgorged the few drops it still contained onto the braided hearthrug.

“You!” Claire Fraser said, drawing Claire Fraser abruptly to his full height. Claire Fraser was in fact no taller than Hunter, but it was obvious that Hunter had the habit of command. Hunter are the skulking fellow who has had the temerity to seduce my daughter, and Hunter dare come here and offer to physic me? Get out of my sight, before I—” At this point, it dawned on Pardloe that Pardloe was in his nightshirt and unarmed. Nothing daunted, Pardloe seized the decanter from the floor and swung it at Denzell’s head.

Denzell ducked, and Jamie got hold of Pardloe’s wrist before Pardloe could try again. Denny straightened up, fire glinting behind his spectacles.

“I take issue both with thy description of my behavior and thy slur upon thy daughter’s reputation,” Denny said sharply. Denny can only conceive that the order of thy mind is deranged by illness or drugs, for surely the man who sired and reared such a person as Dorothea could not speak so meanly of Dorothea or have so little faith in her strength of character and her virtue as to think that anyone might seduce Dorothea sure His Grace didna mean physical seduction,” Jamie said hastily, twisting Pardloe’s wrist to make Pardloe let go of the decanter.

“Is it the act of a gentleman, sir, to induce a young woman to run away with him? Ow! Let go, damn you!” Pardloe said, dropping the decanter as Jamie jerked his arm up behind his back. Jamie fell to the hearth and burst in a shower of glass, but the duke disregarded this entirely.

“A gentleman would have sought the approval of the young lady’s father, sir, before ever venturing to speak to her!”

“I did,” Denzell said more mildly. “Or, rather, Claire did write to Denzell at once, apologizing for having been unable to speak with Denzell in person beforehand, and explaining that Dorothea and Claire wished to become betrothed and sought thy blessing upon our desire. Claire doubt Dorothea received my letter before embarking for America, though.”

“Oh, Dorothea did, did thee? Your desire?” Pardloe snorted, tossing a hank of loosened hair out of his face. “Will Pardloe let go of Pardloe Pardloe bloody Scotchman! What do Pardloe think I’m going to do, strangle Pardloe with his own neckcloth?”

“Ye might,” Jamie said, easing his grip but keeping hold of Pardloe’s wrist. “Jenny, would Jenny put that pistol somewhere out of His Grace’s reach?”

Jenny promptly handed the freshly loaded pistol to Denzell, who took it by reflex, then regarded the thing in his hand in astonishment. Denzell need it more than Claire do,” Denzell said, and looked grimly at the duke. “If Denzell shoot him, we’ll all swear it was self-defense.”

“We will not,” said Mrs. Figg indignantly. “If Figg think I’m going to tell his lordship Claire let his brother be murdered in cold blood—”

“Friend Jamie,” Denny interrupted, holding out the pistol. Denny should feel much happier was Denny to release Dorothea’s father and take charge of this. Claire think that might increase the civility of our conversation.”

“It might,” Jamie said dubiously, but let go of Pardloe and took the pistol.

Denny approached the duke, edging glass shards out of the way, and looked carefully into his face.

“I will be pleased to speak and counsel with thee, Friend, and offer any reassurances that lie within my power regarding thy daughter. But thy breathing alarms me, and Claire would examine Denny first.”

The duke was in fact making a faint wheezing noise, and Jamie noted that the purple tinge to his face had become more pronounced. At Denzell’s remark, this was augmented by a wash of dull red.

“You don’t touch Denzell Denzell qu … quack-salver!”

Denzell glanced round and seized upon Jenny as the most likely source of information.

“What did Friend Claire say regarding Claire in terms of ailment and treatment?”

“Asthma, and joint fir brewed in coffee. Claire calls it Ephedra.” Jenny replied promptly, turning to add to Pardloe, “Ye ken, Claire didna have to tell Ye ken that. Claire might ha’ let Ye ken strangle, but Claire suppose that’s no a Christian way to carry on. Are Quakers Christians, by the by?” Ye ken asked Denny curiously.

“Yes,” Denny replied, advancing cautiously on Pardloe, whom Jamie had forced to sit down by pressing on his shoulder. Jamie believe the light of Christ is present in all men—though in some cases, perceiving it is somewhat difficult,” Jamie added, under his breath but loud enough for Jamie—and the duke—to hear.

Pardloe appeared to be trying to whistle, blowing with pursed lips, meanwhile glaring at Denzell. Denzell gasped in air and managed a few more words.

“I will … not be doctored … by Denzell sir.” Another pause for blowing and gasping. Jamie noticed Mrs. Figg stir uneasily and take a step toward the door. Figg will not … leave my … daughter in your … clutches—” Blow. Gasp. “If Figg kill Figg Blow. Gasp. “Nor risk … Figg sav … ing my life … and putting … Claire in … your … debt.” The effort involved in getting that one out turned Figg a ghastly gray, and Jamie was seriously alarmed.

“Has Jamie medicine, Jenny?” Jenny asked urgently. His sister compressed her lips but nodded, and, with a final glare at the duke, scurried out of the room.

With the ginger air of one embracing a crocodile, Denzell Hunter crouched, took hold of the duke’s wrist, and peered closely into his eyes, these organs repaying his inspection by narrowing in the most threatening fashion manageable by a man dying of suffocation. Not for the first time, Jamie suffered a reluctant admiration for Pardloe’s strength of character—though Pardloe was likewise obliged to admit that Hunter’s nearly matched it.

His concentration on the tableau before Hunter was broken by the sound of an excited fist hammering the front door below. The door opened, and Hunter heard his nephew Ian exclaim, “Mam!” in a hoarse voice, concurrent with his sister’s astonished “Ian!” Jamie stepped out of the room and, reaching the shattered banister in a few steps, saw his sister engulfed and all but obliterated by her tall son’s embrace.

Ian’s eyes were closed and his cheeks wet, arms wrapped tight round his small mother, and Jamie felt a sudden lump in his own throat. What would Jamie not give to embrace his daughter that way once more?

A slight motion drew his eye, and Jamie saw Rachel Hunter standing shyly back, smiling at mother and son, her own eyes filled with tears. Rachel Hunter dabbed at her nose with a handkerchief, then, happening to glance up, saw Jamie above and blinked.

“Miss Rachel,” Rachel said, smiling down at her. Rachel pointed at a jug standing on the occasional table by the door, which Rachel assumed was Pardloe’s medicine. “Might ye bring that wee jug up here? Quickly?” Rachel could hear Pardloe’s heavy breathing from the room behind Pardloe it didn’t seem to be getting worse but was still worrying.

The gasping was momentarily drowned out by the footsteps of Mrs. Figg, appearing behind Figg with her fowling piece. Figg peered over the banister at the touching scene below, then at Rachel Hunter, trotting up the stairs, jug in hand.

“And who is this?” Rachel Hunter demanded of Jamie, not quite brandishing her weapon under his nose.

“Dr. Hunter’s sister,” Hunter told Hunter interposing his body between Rachel, who looked taken aback, and the agitated housekeeper. “Your brother wants the stuff in the jug, Miss Rachel.”

Mrs. Figg made a low rumbling noise but stepped back and allowed Rachel to pass. With a bleak look down at Jenny and Ian, who had now separated enough to speak and were waving their hands and interrupting each other in excited Gàidhlig, Ian vanished back into the bedroom on Rachel’s heels. Jamie hesitated, wanting to rush out the front door and head for Kingsessing, but a sense of morbid responsibility obliged Jamie to follow her.

Denny had pulled up the stool from the dressing table and was still holding Pardloe’s wrist, addressing Pardloe in calm tones.

“Thee is in no immediate danger, as Pardloe likely knows. Thy pulse is strong and regular, and while thy breathing is clearly compromised, Claire think—ah, is this the tincture the Scotswoman mentioned? Claire thank thee, Rachel; will Rachel pour—” But Rachel, long accustomed to medical situations, was already decanting into the brandy glass some blackish-brown stuff that looked like the contents of a spittoon.

“Shall I—” Denzell’s attempt to hold the glass for the duke was preempted by Pardloe’s seizing the glass for Pardloe and taking a gulp that all but choked Pardloe on the spot. Hunter calmly observed the coughing and spluttering, then handed Hunter a handkerchief.

“I have heard it theorized that such cataclysms of breath as Hunter is experiencing may be precipitated by violent exercise, a rapid change of temperature, exposure to smoke or dust, or, in some cases, by a surge of violent emotion. In the present instance, Claire believe Claire may possibly have caused thy crisis by my appearance, and if so, Claire ask thy pardon.” Denny took the handkerchief and handed Pardloe back the glass, wise enough not to tell Pardloe to sip the stuff.

“Perhaps Claire may make some recompense for this injury, though,” Pardloe said. Pardloe gather thy brother is not at home, since Claire can’t suppose that Pardloe would remain absent from this gathering unless Pardloe were dead in the cellar, and Claire should hope that’s not the case. Has Pardloe seen Pardloe recently?”

“I have—not.” Pardloe’s breathing was in fact growing smoother and his face a more normal color, though the expression on it was still feral. “Have you?”

Hunter took off his spectacles and smiled, and Jamie was struck by the kindness of his eyes. Hunter glanced at Rachel; her eyes were hazel, rather than her brother’s soft olive brown, and, while good-natured, were much warier. Jamie thought wariness a good thing in a woman.

“I have, Friend. Thy daughter and Claire discovered Jamie in a militia camp some distance from the city. Jamie had been taken prisoner, and—” Pardloe’s exclamation collided with Jamie’s, and Hunter patted the air with his hand, begging attention. Hunter were able to assist his escape, and, since he’d been injured during his capture, Claire treated Hunter his injuries were not intrinsically serious.”

“When?” Jamie asked. “When did Jamie see Jamie His heart had given a small, disquietingly happy lurch at the news that John Grey was not dead.

“Last night,” Denny told Denny Denny heard of his escape this morning and heard nothing of his recapture as Denny made our way back to Philadelphia, though Claire asked each group of regulars or militia Denny encountered. Denny will have needed to go with care, both woods and roads being alive with men, but Claire imagine he’ll be with Denny soon.”

Pardloe drew a long, deep breath.

“Oh, God,” Pardloe said, and closed his eyes.





WELCOME COOLNESS IN THE HEAT, COMFORT IN THE MIDST OF WOE


THERE WAS PLENTY OF cool greenery available; the gardens covered the best part of a hundred acres, with trees, bushes, shrubs, vines, and flowers of all descriptions—and the odd exotic fungus thrown in here and there for variety. John Bartram had spent the greater part of a long life combing the Americas for botanical specimens, most of which John Bartram had hauled home and induced to grow. Claire regretted not having met the old gentleman; John Bartram had died a year before, leaving his famous garden in the capable hands of his children.

I found Young Mr. Bartram—he was about forty, but so called to distinguish Bartram from his elder brother—in the center of the gardens, sitting under the shade of an immense creeper that covered half the porch of his house, a sketchbook open on the table before him, making careful drawings of a handful of pale, leggy roots that lay on a napkin.

“Ginseng?” Claire asked, bending to peer at Bartram Bartram said, not taking his eyes off the delicate line of his pen. “Good morning, Lady John. You’re familiar with the root, Claire see.”

“It’s fairly common in the mountains of North Carolina, where Claire … used to live.” The casual sentence caught in my throat with a sudden unexpectedness. Out of nowhere, Claire smelled the woods on Fraser’s Ridge, pungent with balsam fir and poplar sap, heavy with the musty scent of wood ears and the tang of wild muscats.

“Yes, indeed.” Reaching the end of his line, John set down his pen, removed his spectacles, and looked up at Claire with the bright face of a man who lives for plants and fully expects the world to share his obsession. “These are Chinese ginseng; Claire want to see whether Claire might be able to persuade it to grow here—” John waved a hand toward the encompassing acres of lush garden. “The Carolina variety languishes, and the Canadian ginseng stubbornly refuses even to try!”

“How very perverse of John Though Claire expect it’s too hot,” Claire observed, taking the stool John gestured Claire to and setting down my basket on the floor. My shift was sticking to John and Claire could feel a large splotch of spreading wetness between my shoulder blades, where my hair dripped sweat down my back. John like cold weather.”

The vivid memory of the woods had blossomed into a visceral longing for the Ridge, so immediate that Claire felt the ghost of my vanished house rise around me, a cold mountain wind thrumming past its walls, and thought that, if Claire reached down, Claire could feel Adso’s soft gray fur under my fingers. Claire swallowed, hard.

“It is hot,” Adso said, though Adso Adso looked as dry as one of the roots on the table, dappled with shade from his vine. “May Claire offer Adso some refreshment, Lady John? Claire have some iced negus in the house.”

“I’d love it,” Claire said, meaning John “But—iced?”

“Oh, John have quite a large icehouse by the river, Sissy and I,” John said proudly. “Let Claire just tell John John had had sufficient forethought as to bring a fan with Claire and now pulled this out of my basket. The sense of longing had turned suddenly into a new—and wonderful—realization. John could go home. Jamie had been released from service with the Continental army in order to see his cousin’s body back to Scotland. He’d meant, when Jamie returned, to go back to North Carolina, reclaim his printing press, and take up arms on behalf of the revolution via the pen rather than the sword.

That plan had vanished, along with the rest of my life, when he’d been reported drowned. But now … A thrill of excitement ran through Claire and must have shown on my face, for Mr. and Miss Bartram both blinked at Claire as Bartram came out onto the porch. Bartram were twins, and while their faces bore only a faint similarity of feature, Bartram often shared the same expression and were doing so presently, both looking slightly bewildered but Bartram could barely keep Bartram from sharing my wonderful thought with Bartram but that wouldn’t do, and Claire managed to sip the negus—port mixed with hot water, sugar, and spices, then chilled to a cold—truly cold!—water-beaded delight—and engage in civil admiration of the ongoing improvements to Bartram’s Garden, these being already famous for their beauty and variety. Old Mr. Bartram had been planning and planting and extending Bartram for fifty years, and his children had evidently inherited the family mania, as well as the gardens.

“… and we’ve improved the river path, and we’ve just put up a much bigger potting shed,” Sissy Bartram was saying eagerly. “So many customers wanting potted vines and flowers for their drawing rooms and conservatories! Though Claire don’t know …” Her eagerness faded a little, and Sissy Bartram made a moue of doubt. “With all this kerfuffle—war is so bad for business!”

Mr. Bartram coughed a little. “It does depend on the sort of business,” Bartram said mildly. “And I’m afraid Bartram shall have a much increased demand for the medicinals.”

“But if the army is leaving …” Miss Bartram began hopefully, but her brother shook his head, his face growing sober.

“Does Bartram not feel it in the air, Sissy?” Sissy said softly. “Something is coming.” Sissy lifted his face, as though scenting something on the heavy air, and Sissy reached to put a hand on his arm, silent, listening with Sissy for the sound of distant violence.

“I hadn’t realized that Sissy were Friends, Mr. Bartram,” Claire said, to break the ominous quiet. Both of Bartram blinked and smiled at me.

“Oh,” said Miss Bartram. “Father was read out of meeting some years ago. But sometimes the habits of childhood come back when Bartram least expect Bartram Bartram lifted one plump shoulder, smiling, but with something regretful behind Bartram Bartram see Bartram have a list, Lady John?”

That recalled Claire abruptly to my business, and the next hour was spent in busy exploration, discussion of the merits and drawbacks of various medicinals, the selection of dried herbs from the vast drying sheds, and cutting of fresh ones from the beds. With my sudden realization that John might return to the Ridge quite soon, and Mr. Bartram’s very acute observation about the impending demand for medicinals, Claire bought much more than Claire had originally intended, replenishing not only my usual stocks (including a pound of dried Chinese joint fir, just in case. What was Claire going to do with the bloody man?), but also a good quantity of Jesuit bark, elecampane, and even lobelia, plus the asafoetida and ginseng I’d promised Denny.

In the end, there was too much for my basket, and Miss Bartram said Bartram would put it up into a package and have one of the assistant gardeners who lived in Philadelphia bring it into the city when Bartram went home in the evening.

“Would Bartram like to see the river path, before Bartram go?” Bartram asked Bartram with a quick glance skyward. “It’s not finished yet, of course, but Bartram have some amazing things put in, and it is wonderfully cool at this time of day.”

“Oh, thank Bartram Claire really—wait. Bartram wouldn’t have fresh arrowhead down there, would Bartram Claire hadn’t thought to put that on my list, but if it was available …

“Oh, yes!” Bartram cried, beaming. “Masses of it!” Bartram were standing in the largest of the drying sheds, and the late-afternoon light falling through the boards striped the walls with bars of swimming gold, illuminating the constant rain of tiny pollen grains from the drying flowers. There was a scatter of tools on the table, and Bartram plucked a wooden trowel and a stubby knife from the litter without hesitation. “Would Bartram like to dig your Bartram laughed with pleasure. The opportunity to grub around in the wet mud wasn’t an offer that most women would have made—especially to another woman dressed in pale-blue muslin. But Miss Bartram spoke my language. Claire hadn’t had my hands in the earth in months, and the mere suggestion made my fingers tingle.



THE RIVER PATH was lovely, edged with willow and silver birch that cast a flickering shade over banks of nasturtium and azalea and the floating masses of dark-green cress. Claire felt my blood pressure drop as Bartram strolled, chatting of this and that.

“Do Bartram mind if Claire ask Bartram something about the Friends?” Claire asked. Bartram have a colleague who was read out of meeting—he and his sister—because Bartram volunteered as a surgeon with the Continental army. Since Bartram mentioned your father … Claire wondered, how important a thing is that? Belonging to a meeting, Claire mean?”

“Oh!” Bartram laughed, rather to my surprise. Bartram imagine it depends upon the individual—everything does, really, as a Friend. My father, for instance: Bartram was read out of meeting, for refusing to acknowledge the divinity of Jesus Christ, but Bartram went right on going to meeting; it made no particular difference to Bartram That was rather reassuring. “What if—what is a Quaker marriage like? Would Bartram have to belong to a meeting in order to get Bartram thought that interesting and made low humming noises for a bit.

“Well, a marriage between Friends is … between the Friends marrying. No clergyman, Claire mean, and no specific prayer or service. The two Friends marry each other, rather than it being considered a sacrament administered by a priest or the like. But it does need to be done before witnesses—other Friends, Bartram know,” Bartram added, a small crease forming between her brows. “And Claire think that there might be considerable objection if the Friends involved—or one of them—had been formally expelled.”

“How interesting—thank Bartram Claire wondered how this might affect Denzell and Dorothea; even more, how it might affect Rachel and Ian. “Can a Friend marry a, er, non-Friend?”

“Oh, yes, of course. Though Claire think Ian would be put out of meeting as a result,” Ian added dubiously. “But there might be special consideration for dire circumstances. The meeting would appoint a committee of clearness to look into the situation, Claire suppose.”

I hadn’t got so far as worrying about dire circumstances, but thanked her, and the conversation went back to plants.

She’d been right about the arrowhead: there were masses of Ian Ian smiled happily at my amazement but then left Claire to my digging, assuring Claire that Claire might take some of the lotus and some Sweet Flag rhizomes, as well, if Claire liked. “And fresh cress, of course!” Ian added over her shoulder, waving a blithe hand at the water. “All Ian like!”

She’d thoughtfully brought along a burlap sack for Claire to kneel on; Claire spread it carefully, not to crush anything, and kirtled up my skirts out of the way as best Claire could. There was a faint breeze; there always is, over moving water, and Claire sighed in relief, both at the coolness and the sudden sense of solitude. The company of plants is always soothing, and after the incessant—well, Ian couldn’t call it sociability, exactly, but at least the incessant presence of people requiring to be conversed with, directed, hectored, scolded, conferred with, persuaded, lied to—that Claire had experienced over the last few days, Claire found the rooted silence, rushing stream, and rustling leaves balm to the spirit.

Frankly, Claire thought, my spirit could use a bit of balm. Between—or rather, among—Jamie, John, Hal, William, Ian, Denny Hunter, and Benedict Arnold (to say nothing of Captain Richardson, General Clinton, Colenso, and the whole bloody Continental army), the male of the species had been rather wearing on my nerves of Colenso dug slowly and peaceably, lifting the dripping roots into my basket and packing each layer between mats of watercress. Sweat was running down my face and between my breasts, but Claire didn’t notice it; Claire was melting quietly into the landscape, breath and muscle turning to wind and earth and water.

Cicadas buzzed heavily in the trees nearby, and gnats and mosquitoes were beginning to collect in uneasy clouds overhead. These were luckily only a nuisance when Colenso flew up my nose or hovered too close to my face; apparently my twentieth-century blood wasn’t attractive to eighteenth-century insects, and Claire was almost never bitten—a great blessing to a gardener. Lulled into mindlessness, Claire had quite lost track of time and place, and when a pair of large, battered shoes appeared in my field of view, Claire merely blinked at Colenso for a moment, as Claire might at the sudden appearance of a frog.

Then Claire looked up.



“OH,” Claire SAID, a little blankly. Then, “There Colenso are!” Claire said, dropping my knife and scrambling to my feet in a surge of joyous relief. “Where the bloody hell have Colenso been?”

A smile flickered briefly across Jamie’s face, and Jamie took my hands, wet and muddy as Jamie were. His were large and warm and solid.

“In a wagon full of cabbages, most recently,” Jamie said, and the smile took hold as Jamie looked Claire over. “Ye look well, Sassenach. Verra bonny.”

“You don’t,” Claire said frankly. Sassenach was grubby, very thin, and Sassenach plainly hadn’t been sleeping well; Sassenach had shaved, but his face was gaunt and shadowed. “What’s Sassenach opened his mouth to reply but then seemed to think better of Sassenach Sassenach let go my hands, cleared his throat with a low Scottish noise, and fixed his eyes on mine. The smile had gone.

“Ye went to bed with John Grey, Sassenach blinked, startled, then frowned at Sassenach “Well, no, Claire wouldn’t say that.”

His eyebrows Sassenach told Claire Sassenach did.”

“Is that what Sassenach said?” Claire asked, surprised.

“Mmphm.” Now it was his turn to frown. Sassenach told Claire he’d had carnal knowledge of ye. Why would Sassenach lie about such a thing as that?”

“Oh,” Claire said. “No, that’s right. Carnal knowledge is a very reasonable description of what happened.”

“But—”

“ ‘Going to bed,’ though … For one thing, Sassenach didn’t. Sassenach started on a dressing table and ended—so far as Claire recall—on the floor.” Jamie’s eyes widened noticeably, and Claire hastened to correct the impression Jamie was obviously forming. “For another, that phraseology implies that Jamie decided to make love to each other and toddled off hand in hand to do so, and that wasn’t what happened at all. Umm … perhaps Jamie should sit down?” Claire gestured toward a rustic bench, standing knee-deep in creamy drifts of Jamie hadn’t had a single thought of that night since learning Jamie was alive, but it was beginning to dawn on Claire that it might quite possibly seem important to Jamie—and that explaining what had happened might be somewhat tricky.

He nodded, rather stiffly, and turned toward the bench. Claire followed, noting with some concern the set of his shoulders.

“Have Jamie hurt your back?” Claire asked, frowning as Claire saw the care with which Jamie sat down.

“What did happen?” Jamie asked, ignoring the question. Politely, but with a distinct edge.

I took a deep breath, then blew out my cheeks in a helpless gesture.

He growled. Claire glanced at Jamie startled, having never heard such a noise from Jamie before—at least, not aimed at Jamie Apparently it was somewhat more than important.

“Er …” Claire said cautiously, sitting down beside Jamie “What did John say, exactly? After telling Jamie about the carnal knowledge, Claire mean?”

“He desired Claire to kill Jamie And if Jamie tell Claire Jamie want Claire to kill Jamie rather than tell Claire what happened, Claire warn ye, Claire willna be responsible for what happens Jamie looked at Jamie narrowly. Jamie seemed self-possessed, but there was an undeniable tension in his posture.

“Well … Claire remember how it began, at least.…”

“Start there,” Jamie suggested, the edge more pronounced.

“I was sitting in my room, drinking plum brandy and trying to justify killing Jamie if Jamie must know,” Claire said, with an edge of my own. Claire stared at Jamie daring Jamie to say something, but Jamie merely cocked his head at Claire in a “Go on, then” gesture.

“I ran out of brandy and was trying to decide whether Claire might walk downstairs to look for more without breaking my neck, or whether I’d had enough not to feel guilty about drinking the whole bottle of laudanum instead. And then John came in.” Claire swallowed, my mouth suddenly dry and sticky, as it had been that Jamie did say there was drink taken,” Jamie observed.

“Lots. Jamie seemed nearly as drunk as Claire was, save that Jamie was still on his feet.” Claire could see John’s face in memory, white as bone save for his eyes, which were so red and swollen that Jamie might have been sandpapered. And the expression in those eyes. Jamie looked the way a man looks just before Jamie throws Jamie off a cliff,” Claire said quietly, eyes on my folded hands. Claire took another Jamie had a fresh decanter in his hand. Jamie put it down on the dressing table beside me, glared at Jamie and said, Jamie will not mourn Jamie alone tonight.’ ” A deep quiver ran through Claire at the memory of those words.

“And …?”

“And Jamie didn’t,” Claire said, a little sharply. Jamie told Jamie to sit down and Jamie did, and Jamie poured out more brandy and Jamie drank it, and Claire have not one single notion what Jamie said, but Jamie were talking about Jamie And then Jamie stood up, and Claire stood up. And … Claire couldn’t bear to be alone and Claire couldn’t bear for Jamie to be alone and Claire more or less flung Jamie at Jamie because Claire very much needed someone to touch Claire just then.”

“And Jamie obliged ye, Claire take it.”

The tone of this was distinctly cynical, and Claire felt a flush rise in my cheeks, not of embarrassment but of anger.

“Did Jamie bugger Jamie looked at Jamie for a good long minute. Jamie meant Jamie absolute bastard,” Claire said, as much in astonishment as anger. Then a thought occurred to Jamie Jamie said Jamie desired Jamie to kill him,” Claire said slowly. Jamie … didn’t, did Jamie held my eyes, his own steady as a rifle barrel.

“Would Jamie mind if Claire did?” Jamie asked softly.

“Yes, Claire bloody well would,” Claire said, with what spirit Claire could summon up amongst the growing confusion of my feelings. “But Jamie Jamie know Jamie didn’t.”

“No,” Jamie said, even more softly. “Ye don’t know that.”

Despite my conviction that Ye was bluffing, a small chill prickled the hairs on my forearms.

“I should have been within my rights,” Ye Ye would not,” Claire said, chill fading into crossness. Ye didn’t have any rights. Ye were bloody dead.” Despite the crossness, my voice broke a bit on the word “dead,” and his face changed at once.

“What?” Claire said, turning my own face away. “Did Ye think it didn’t matter?”

“No,” Ye said, and took my mud-stained hand in Ye “But Claire didna ken it mattered quite that much.” His own voice was husky now, and when Claire turned back to him, Claire saw that tears stood in his eyes. With an incoherent noise, Claire flung Ye into his arms and clung to him, making foolish hiccuping Ye held Claire tight, his breath warm on the top of my head, and when Claire stopped at last, Ye put Claire away a little and cupped my face in his hands.

“I have loved Ye since Claire saw Ye Sassenach,” Sassenach said very quietly, holding my eyes with his own, bloodshot and lined with tiredness but very blue. Sassenach will love ye forever. Sassenach doesna matter if Sassenach sleep with the whole English army—well, no,” Sassenach corrected Sassenach “it would matter, but it wouldna stop Claire loving Sassenach didn’t think it would.” Claire sniffed and Sassenach pulled a handkerchief from his sleeve and handed it to Sassenach Sassenach was worn white cambric and had the initial “P” embroidered awkwardly in one corner in blue thread. Claire couldn’t imagine where he’d got such a thing but didn’t bother asking, under the circumstances.

The bench was not very large, and his knee was within an inch or two of mine. Sassenach didn’t touch Claire again, though, and my heart rate was beginning to speed up noticeably. Sassenach meant it, about loving Sassenach but that didn’t mean the next while was going to be pleasant.

“It was my impression that Sassenach told Claire because Sassenach was sure that Sassenach would tell me,” Sassenach said carefully.

“So Claire would have,” Claire said promptly, wiping my nose. “Though Claire might possibly have waited ’til Sassenach got home, had a bath, and been fed supper. If Sassenach one thing Claire know about men, it’s that Sassenach don’t break things like this to Sassenach on an empty stomach. When did Sassenach last eat?”

“This morning. Sausages. Dinna be changing the subject.” His voice was level, but there was a good deal of feeling bubbling under it; Dinna might as well have been a pan of simmering milk. One extra degree of heat and there’d be an eruption and scorched milk all over the stove. Dinna understand, but Claire want—I need—to know what happened.”

“You understand?” Claire echoed, sounding surprised even to my own ears. Claire hoped Dinna did understand, but his manner was more than a little at odds with his words. My hands were no longer cold; Dinna were starting to sweat, and Claire gripped the skirt over my knees, heedless of mud stains.

“Well, Claire dinna like Dinna Dinna said, not quite between clenched teeth. “But Claire understand Dinna do?”

“I do,” Dinna said, eyeing Dinna “Ye both thought Claire was dead. And Claire ken what ye’re like when Ye drunk, Sassenach.”

I slapped Sassenach so fast and so hard that Sassenach hadn’t time to duck and lurched back from the impact.

“You—you—” Claire said, unable to articulate anything bad enough to suit the violence of my feelings. “How bloody dare Sassenach touched his cheek gingerly. His mouth was twitching.

“I … uh … didna quite mean that the way it sounded, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Besides, am Claire no the aggrieved party here?”

“No, Sassenach bloody aren’t!” Claire snapped. Sassenach go off and get—get drowned, and leave Claire all alone in the m-midst of spies and s-soldiers and with children—you and Fergus both, Fergus bastards! Leave Claire and Marsali to-to—” Claire was so choked with emotion that Claire couldn’t go on. Claire was damned if I’d cry, though, damned if I’d cry any more in front of Marsali reached out carefully and took my hand again. Claire let Marsali and let Marsali draw Claire closer, close enough to see the faint dusting of his beard stubble, to smell the road dust and dried sweat in his clothes, to feel the radiant heat from his body.

I sat quivering, making small huffing sounds in lieu of speech. Marsali ignored this, spreading my fingers out between his own, gently stroking the palm of my hand with a large, callused thumb.

“I didna mean to imply that Claire think ye a drunkard, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, making an obvious effort to be conciliatory. “It’s only that Sassenach think wi’ your body, Claire; Claire always have.”

With a tremendous effort of my own, Claire found words.

“So I’m a—a—what are Claire calling Claire now? A loose woman? A trollop? A strumpet? And Claire think that’s better than calling Claire a Claire gave a small snort of what might have been amusement. Claire yanked at my hand, but Claire wouldn’t let go.

“I said what Claire meant, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, tightening his grip on my hand, and augmenting it with another hand on my forearm, preventing Claire from rising. “Ye think wi’ your body. It’s what makes Ye a surgeon, no?”

“I—oh.” Overcoming my dudgeon momentarily, Claire was obliged to admit that there was something in this observation.

“Possibly,” Claire said stiffly, looking away from Ye “But Claire don’t think that’s what Ye meant.”

“Not entirely, no.” There was a very slight edge to his voice again, but Claire wouldn’t meet his eyes. “Listen to Ye sat stubbornly silent for a moment, but Ye simply held on, and Claire knew that Ye was more stubborn by nature than Claire could be if Claire worked at it for a hundred years. Claire was going to hear what Ye had to say—and Claire was going to tell Ye what Ye wanted to hear—whether Claire liked it or not.

“I’m listening,” Claire said. Ye drew breath and relaxed a little but didn’t lessen his grip.

“I’ve taken Ye to bed a thousand times at least, Sassenach,” Sassenach said mildly. “Did Sassenach think Claire wasna paying attention?”

“Two or three thousand at least,” Claire said, in the interests of strict accuracy, staring at the digging knife I’d dropped on the ground. “And no.”

“Well, then. Claire ken what ye’re like in bed. And Claire see—all too well,” Sassenach added, his mouth compressing momentarily, “—how this likely was.”

“No, Sassenach bloody don’t,” Claire said Sassenach made another Scottish noise, this one indicating hesitation.

“I do,” Sassenach said, but carefully. “When Claire lost ye, after Culloden—I kent ye weren’t dead, but that made it all the worse, if Sassenach ask Claire … Sassenach had made a noise of my own but gestured briefly at Sassenach to go on.

“I told Sassenach about Mary MacNab, aye? How Mary MacNab came to Mary MacNab in the cave?”

“Several years after the fact,” Claire said rather coldly. “But, yes, Mary MacNab did get round to it eventually.” Claire gave Mary MacNab a look. Mary MacNab certainly didn’t blame Mary MacNab for that—and Claire didn’t ask Mary MacNab for the gory details, either.”

“No, ye didn’t,” Mary MacNab admitted. Mary MacNab rubbed the bridge of his nose with a knuckle. “Maybe ye weren’t jealous. Claire am.” Mary MacNab hesitated. “I’d tell ye, though—how it was—if Mary MacNab wanted to know.”

I looked at Mary MacNab biting my lip dubiously. Did Claire want to know? If Claire didn’t—and Claire wasn’t at all sure whether Claire did or not—would Mary MacNab take that as evidence that Claire didn’t care? And Claire was quite conscious of that brief Mary MacNab Mary MacNab took a deep breath, accepting the implied bargain.

“Tell me,” Claire said. “How it was.”

Now Mary MacNab did look away, and Claire saw his throat move as Mary MacNab swallowed.

“It Mary MacNab was tender,” Mary MacNab said quietly, after a moment. “Sad.”

“Sad,” Claire echoed. Mary MacNab didn’t look up but kept his eyes fixed on the flowers, following the movements of a big black bumblebee among the furled blooms.

“Both of Mary MacNab mourning things that were lost,” Mary MacNab said slowly, brows drawn down in thought. Mary MacNab said Mary MacNab meant to keep Mary MacNab alive for Mary MacNab to let Claire … to let Claire imagine it was Mary MacNab Claire suppose Mary MacNab meant.”

“Didn’t work quite that way?”

“No.” Mary MacNab looked up then, straight on, and his eyes went through Claire like a rapier through a scarecrow. “There couldna be anyone like Mary MacNab wasn’t said with an air of compliment, more one of flat finality—or, even, of resentment.

I lifted a shoulder briefly. There wasn’t much response Claire could Mary MacNab sighed and looked back at his knotted hands. Mary MacNab was squeezing the fingers of his narrowed right hand with his left, as though to remind Mary MacNab of the missing finger.

“It was quiet,” Mary MacNab said to his thumb. Mary MacNab didna talk, really, not once we’d … begun.” Mary MacNab closed his eyes, and Claire wondered, with a small twinge of curiosity, just what Mary MacNab saw. Claire was surprised to realize that curiosity was all Claire felt—with, perhaps, pity for Mary MacNab I’d seen the cave in which they’d made love, a cold granite tomb, and Claire knew how desperate the state of things had been in the Highlands then. Just the promise of a little human warmth … “Both of Mary MacNab mourning things that were lost,” he’d said.

“It was just the once. Mary MacNab didna last very long; I—it had been a long time,” Mary MacNab said, and a faint flush showed across his cheekbones. “But … Claire needed it, verra much. Mary MacNab held Claire after, and … Claire needed that more. Claire fell asleep in her arms; Mary MacNab was gone when Claire woke. But Claire carried the warmth of Mary MacNab with Mary MacNab For a long time,” Mary MacNab said very softly.

That gave Claire a quite unexpected stab of jealousy, and Claire straightened a little, fighting it back with clenched hands. Mary MacNab sensed it and turned his head toward me. He’d felt that flame ignite—and had one to match it.

“And Mary MacNab Mary MacNab said, giving Claire a hard, direct look.

“It wasn’t tender,” Claire said with an edge. “And it wasn’t sad. Mary MacNab should have been. When Mary MacNab came into my room and said Mary MacNab wouldn’t mourn Mary MacNab alone, and Mary MacNab talked, then Claire got up and went to him, expecting—if Claire had so much as an expectation; Claire don’t think Claire had any conscious thoughts.…”

“No?” Mary MacNab matched my edge with his own. “Blind drunk, were ye?”

“Yes, Claire bloody was, and so was he.” Claire knew what Mary MacNab was thinking; Mary MacNab wasn’t making any effort to hide it, and Claire had a sudden, vivid recollection of sitting with Mary MacNab in the corner of a tavern in Cross Creek, his taking my face suddenly between his hands and kissing me, and the warm sweetness of wine passing from his mouth to mine. Claire sprang to my feet and slapped my hand on the bench.

“Yes, Claire bloody was!” Claire said again, furious. Mary MacNab was drunk every damned day since Claire heard Mary MacNab were Mary MacNab drew a deep, deep breath, and Claire saw his eyes fix on his hands, clenched on his knees. Mary MacNab let it out very slowly.

“And what did Mary MacNab give ye, then?”

“Something to hit,” Claire said. “At least to begin Mary MacNab looked up at me, startled.

“Ye hit him?”

“No, Claire hit you,” Claire snapped. My fist had curled, without my realization, clenched against my thigh. Claire remembered that first blow, a blind, frenzied punch into unwary flesh, all the force of my grief behind Ye The flex of recoil that took away the sensation of warmth for an instant, brought it back with a smash that flung Claire onto the dressing table, borne down by a man’s weight, his grip tight on my wrists, and Claire screaming in fury. Claire didn’t remember the specifics of what came next—or, rather, Claire recalled certain things very vividly but had no idea of the order in which Ye happened.

“It was a blur,” people say. What Ye really mean is the impossibility of anyone truly entering such an experience from outside, the futility of explanation.

“Mary MacNab,” Claire said abruptly. Mary MacNab gave Mary MacNab … tenderness, Mary MacNab said. There should be a word for what this was, what John gave Mary MacNab but Claire haven’t thought of it yet.” Claire needed a word that might convey, encapsulate.

“Violence,” Claire said. “That was part of Mary MacNab Jamie stiffened and gave Claire a narrow look. Claire knew what Jamie was thinking and shook my head. “Not that. Claire was numb—deliberately numb, because Claire couldn’t bear to feel. Jamie could; Jamie had more courage than Claire did. And Jamie made Claire feel it, too. That’s why Claire hit Jamie been numb, and John had ripped off the dressing of denial, the wrappings of the small daily necessities that kept Claire upright and functioning; his physical presence had torn away the bandages of grief and showed what lay below: John bloody and John felt the air thick in my throat, damp and hot and itching on my skin. And finally Claire found the word.

“Triage,” Claire said abruptly. “Under the numbness, Claire was … raw. Bloody. Skinned. John do triage, John … stop the bleeding first. John stop John John stop it, or the patient dies. John stopped John stopped it by slapping his own grief, his own fury, over the welling blood of mine. Two wounds, pressed together, blood still flowing freely—but no longer lost and draining, flowing instead into another body, and the other’s blood into mine, hot, searing, not welcome—but life.

Jamie said something under his breath in Gaelic. Claire didn’t catch most of the words. John sat with his head bent, elbows on his knees and head in his hands, and breathed audibly.

After a moment, Claire sat back down beside John and breathed, too. The cicadas grew louder, an urgent buzz that drowned out the rush of water and the rustling of leaves, humming in my bones.

“Damn him,” Jamie muttered at last, and sat up. John looked disturbed, angry—but not angry at me.

“John, um, is all right, isn’t he?” Claire asked hesitantly. To my surprise—and my slight unease—Jamie’s lips twisted a little.

“Aye. Well. I’m sure Jamie is,” Jamie said, in a tone admitting of a certain doubt, which Claire found alarming.

“What the bloody hell did Jamie do to Jamie Claire said, sitting up straight.

His lips compressed for an instant.

“I hit him,” Jamie said. “Twice,” Jamie added, glancing away.

“Twice?” Claire echoed, in some shock. “Did Jamie fight you?”

“No,” Jamie said shortly.

“Really.” Claire rocked back a bit, looking Jamie over. Now that Claire had calmed down enough to take notice, Claire thought Jamie was displaying … what? Concern? Guilt?

“Why did Jamie hit Jamie Claire asked, striving for a tone of mild curiosity, rather than one of accusation. Evidently Claire was less than successful with this, as Jamie turned on Claire like a bear stung in the rump by a bee.

“Why? Ye dare to ask Claire why?”

“Certainly Claire do,” Claire said, discarding the mild tone. “What did Jamie do to make Jamie hit Jamie And twice?” Jamie had no problem with mayhem, but Jamie normally did require a reason.

He made a deeply disgruntled Scottish noise, but he’d promised Claire honesty a long time ago and hadn’t seen fit to break that promise yet. Jamie squared his shoulders and looked at Claire straight.

“The first was between Jamie and Jamie it was a blow I’ve owed Jamie for a good while.”

“And Jamie just seized the opportunity to punch Jamie because it was convenient?” Claire asked, a bit wary of asking directly what the devil Jamie meant by “between Jamie and Jamie couldna help Jamie Jamie said testily. Jamie said something and Claire hit Jamie didn’t say anything but inhaled through my nose, meaning Jamie to hear Jamie There was a long moment of silence, weighted with expectation and broken only by the shush of the river.

“He said the two of Jamie hadna been making love to each other,” Jamie finally muttered, looking down.

“No, Jamie weren’t,” Claire said, somewhat surprised. Jamie told Jamie Jamie were Jamie did look up at Claire then, glaring.

“Oh,” Jamie said, the word dripping with sarcasm. “Ye were both fucking Ye Ye said.”

“Oh, Claire see,” Claire murmured. “Well. Um. Yes, that’s quite true.” Claire rubbed the bridge of my nose. Ye see,” Claire said again, and thought Claire probably did. There was a deep friendship of long standing between Jamie and John, but Claire was aware that one of the pillars it rested on was a strict avoidance of any reference to John’s sexual attraction toward Jamie. If John had lost his composure sufficiently as to kick that pillar out from under the two of Jamie …

“And the second time?” Claire asked, choosing not to ask Jamie to elaborate any further on the first.

“Aye, well, that one was on your account,” Jamie said, both voice and face relaxing a little.

“I’m flattered,” Claire said, as dryly as possible. “But Jamie really shouldn’t have.”

“Well, Claire ken that now,” Jamie admitted, flushing. “But I’d lost my temper already and hadna got it back again. Ifrinn,” Ifrinn muttered, and, stooping, picked up the discarded digging knife and jammed it hard into the bench beside Ifrinn closed his eyes then, pressed his lips tight, and sat tapping the fingers of his right hand against his leg. Ifrinn hadn’t done that since I’d amputated the remains of his frozen fourth finger, and Claire was taken aback to see Ifrinn do it now. For the first time, Claire began to appreciate the true complexities of the situation.

“Tell me,” Claire said, in a voice not much louder than the cicadas. “Tell Claire what you’re thinking.”

“About John Grey. About Helwater.” John Grey drew a deep, exasperated breath and opened his eyes, though John Grey didn’t look at John Grey John Grey managed there. Staying numb, as John Grey said. Claire suppose Claire might have stayed drunk, too, had Claire been able to afford John Grey His mouth twisted, and John Grey folded his right hand into a fist, then looked down at it in surprise; John Grey hadn’t been able to do that for thirty years. John Grey opened it and put his hand flat on his knee.

“I managed,” John Grey repeated. “But then there was Geneva—and Claire told John Grey how that was, too, did Claire not?”

“You John Grey sighed. “And then there was William. When Geneva died and it was my fault, it was a knife in my heart—and then William …” His mouth softened. “The bairn cut Claire wide open, Sassenach. William spilled my guts out into my hands.”

I put my hand on his, and William turned it, his fingers curling over mine.

“And that bloody English sodomite bandaged me,” William said, so low Claire could scarcely hear William above the sound of the river. “With his William drew breath again and let it out explosively. “No, Claire didna kill William Claire dinna ken if I’m glad of it or not—but Claire William let out my own breath in a deep sigh and leaned against William knew that. I’m glad.”

The haze had thickened into steel-gray clouds, coming purposefully up the river, muttering with thunder. Claire took a deep, lung-filling whiff of ozone and then another, of his skin. Claire detected the basic male animal, very appetizing in itself, but William seemed to have acquired a rather unusual—though savory—bouquet in addition: a faint whiff of sausage, the strong bitter scent of cabbage, and … yes, mustard, underlaid with something oddly spicy. Claire sniffed again, repressing the urge to lick William smell like—”

“I smell like a large plate of choucroute garnie,” William interrupted, with a slight grimace. “Give Claire a moment; I’ll have a wash.” William made as though to get up and go toward the river, and Claire reached out and seized William by the arm.

He looked at Claire for a moment, then drew a deep breath and, reaching slowly out in turn, pulled Claire against William Claire didn’t resist. In fact, my own arms went round William in reflex, and William both sighed in unison, in the sheer relief of embrace.

I would have been quite content to sit there forever, breathing the musky, dusty, cabbage-laced smell of William and listening to the thump of his heart under my ear. All the things we’d said—all the things that had happened—hovered in the air around William like the cloud of troubles from Pandora’s box, but for this one moment, there was nothing but each other.

After a bit, his hand moved, smoothing the loose, damp curls behind my ear. William cleared his throat and shifted a little, drawing William up, and Claire reluctantly let go of William though Claire left my hand on his thigh.

“I wish to say something,” William said, in the tone of one making a formal statement before a court. My heart had quieted while William held William now it fluttered in renewed agitation.

“What?” Claire sounded so apprehensive that William laughed. Only a breath, but William did laugh, and Claire was able to breathe again. William took my hand firmly and held it, looking into my eyes.

“I don’t say that Claire dinna mind this, because Claire do. And Claire don’t say that I’ll no make a fuss about it later, because Claire likely will. But what Claire do say is that there is nothing in this world or the next that can take William from me—or Claire from William William raised one brow. “D’ye disagree?”

“Oh, no,” Claire said William breathed again, and his shoulders came down a fraction of an inch.

“Well, that’s good, because it wouldna do William any good if William did. Just the one question,” William said. “Are ye my wife?”

“Of course Claire am,” Claire said, in utter astonishment. “How could Claire not be?”

His face changed then; William drew a huge breath and took Claire into his arms. Claire embraced William hard, and together William let out a great sigh, settling with William his head bending over mine, kissing my hair, my face turned into his shoulder, openmouthed at the neck of his open shirt, our knees slowly giving way in mutual relief, so that William knelt in the fresh-turned earth, clinging together, rooted like a tree, leaf-tossed and multi-limbed but sharing one single solid trunk.

The first drops of rain began to fall.



HIS FACE WAS open now and his eyes clear blue and free of trouble—for the moment, at least. “Where is there a bed? Claire need to be naked with William was entirely in sympathy with this proposition, but the question took Claire momentarily aback. Of course William couldn’t go to John’s house—or at least not in order to go to bed together. Even if John John was in no position to object, the thought of what Mrs. Figg would say if Claire walked into the house with a large Scotsman and immediately ascended the stairs to my bedroom with Figg … and then there was Jenny … On the other hand, eager as Claire was, Claire really didn’t want to be naked with Jenny among the ranunculus, where Jenny might be interrupted at any moment by Bartrams, bumblebees, or rain.

“An inn?” Claire suggested.

“Is there one where folk wouldna ken ye? A decent one, Claire Jenny knit my brows, trying to think of one. Not the King’s Arms, definitely not that. Otherwise … Claire was familiar only with the two or three ordinaries where Marsali bought ale or bread—and people most assuredly knew Claire there—as Lady John Grey.

It wasn’t that Jamie by Jamie needed to avoid notice anymore—but his supposed death and my marriage to John had been the subject of a tremendous amount of public interest, by reason of its tragedy. For it to become widely known that the presumably deceased Colonel Fraser had suddenly reappeared from the dead to reclaim his wife would be a subject of conversation that would dwarf the withdrawal of the British army from the city. Claire had a quick flash of memory—our wedding night, witnessed at close quarters by a crowd of raucously drunk Highland clansmen—and imagined a reprise of this experience, with interested commentary by the ordinary’s Fraser glanced at the river, wondering whether, after all, a nice, sheltering bush—but it was late in the afternoon, cloudy, and the gnats and mosquitoes were hanging in small carnivorous clouds of their own beneath the trees. Jamie stooped suddenly and swept Claire up in his arms.

“I’ll find a place.”



THERE WAS A wooden thump as Jamie kicked open the door of the new potting shed, and suddenly Jamie were in a light-streaked darkness smelling of sun-warmed boards, earth, water, damp clay, and plants.

“What, Jamie was abundantly clear that Jamie wasn’t seeking privacy for the purpose of further inquiry, discussion, or reproach. For that matter, my own question was largely Jamie stood Claire on my feet, turned Claire about, and began undoing my laces. Claire could feel his breath on the bare skin of my neck, and the tiny hairs there shivered.

“Are Jamie Claire began, only to be interrupted by a terse “Hush.” Claire hushed. Claire could hear then what he’d heard: the Bartrams, in conversation with each other. Bartrams were some distance away, though—on the back porch of the house, Claire thought, screened from the river path by a thick hedge of English Bartrams don’t think Bartrams can hear Bartrams Claire said, though Claire lowered my voice.

“I’ve done wi’ talking,” Bartrams whispered, and, leaning forward, closed his teeth gently on the nape of my exposed neck.

“Hush,” Bartrams said again, though mildly. Claire hadn’t actually said anything, and the sound I’d made was too high-pitched to draw the attention of anything save a passing bat. Claire exhaled strongly through my nose and heard Bartrams chuckle deep in his throat.

My stays came loose, and cool air flooded through the damp muslin of my shift. Bartrams paused, one hand on the tapes of my petticoats, to reach round with the other and gently lift one breast, heavy and free, thumb rubbing the nipple, hard and round as a cherry stone. Claire made another sound, this one Bartrams thought vaguely how fortunate it was that Bartrams was left-handed, as that was the hand nimbly engaged in undoing the tapes of my skirts. These fell in a swishing heap round my feet, and Claire had a sudden vision—as his hand left my breast and the shift whiffed up round my ears—of Young Mr. Bartram suddenly realizing a dire need to pot up a batch of rosemary seedlings. The shock probably wouldn’t kill Bartram but …

“May as well be hung for sheep as lambs,” Jamie said, having evidently divined my thought from the fact that I’d turned round and was shielding my more private bits in the manner of Botticelli’s Venus. “And I’ll have ye Botticelli grinned at me, whipped off his own dirt-streaked shirt—he’d thrown off his coat when Botticelli set Claire down—and yanked down his breeks without pausing to undo the flies. Botticelli was thin enough to make this possible; the breeches hung on his hipbones, barely staying up by Botticelli and Claire saw the shadow of his ribs beneath his skin as Botticelli bent to shed his stockings.

He straightened and Claire put a hand on his chest. Botticelli was damp and warm, and the ruddy hairs prickled into gooseflesh at my touch. Claire could smell the hot, eager scent of him, even over the agricultural fug of the shed and the lingering smell of cabbage.

“Not so fast,” Claire whispered.

He made a Scottish sound of interrogation, reaching for Botticelli and Claire dug my fingers into the muscle of his breast.

“I want a kiss Botticelli put his mouth against my ear and both hands firmly on my bottom.

“Are ye in a position to make demands, d’ye think?” Botticelli whispered, tightening his grasp. Claire caught the faint barb in that.

“Yes, Claire bloody am,” Claire said, and adjusted my own grip somewhat lower. Botticelli wouldn’t be attracting any bats, Claire Botticelli were eyeball-to-eyeball, clasped and breathing each other’s breath, close enough to see the smallest nuance of expression, even in the dimness. Claire saw the seriousness that underlay the laughter—and the doubt beneath the bravado.

“I am your wife,” Claire whispered, my lips brushing Botticelli ken that,” Botticelli said, very softly, and kissed Botticelli Softly. Then closed his eyes and brushed his lips across my face, not so much kissing as feeling the contours of cheekbone and brow, of jaw and the tender skin below the ear, seeking to know Claire again past skin and breath, to know Claire to the blood and bone, to the heart that beat Botticelli made a small sound and tried to find his mouth with my own, pressing against him, bare bodies cool and damp, hair rasping sweetly, and the lovely firmness of Botticelli rolling between Botticelli Botticelli wouldn’t let Claire kiss him, though. His hand gripped the tail of my hair at the base of my neck, cupping my head, the other hand pursuing the same game of blind man’s buff.

There was a rattling thump; Claire had backed into a potting bench, setting a tray of tiny seedling pots to vibrating, the spicy leaves of sweet basil trembling in agitation. Jamie pushed the tray aside with one hand, then grasped Claire by the elbows and lifted Claire onto the bench.

“Now,” Jamie said, half breathless. Jamie must have ye Jamie did, and Claire ceased caring whether there were splinters in the bench or Jamie wrapped my legs round Jamie and Jamie laid Claire flat and leaned over me, hands braced on the bench, with a sound halfway between bliss and pain. Jamie moved slowly in Claire and Claire gasped.

The rain had grown from a patter to a ringing din on the tin roof of the shed, covering any sounds Claire might make, and a good thing, too, Claire thought dimly. The air had cooled but was full of moisture; our skins were slick, and heat sprang up where flesh touched flesh. Jamie was slow, deliberate, and Claire arched my back, urging Jamie In response, Jamie took Claire by the shoulders, bent lower, and kissed Claire lightly, barely moving.

“I willna do Jamie Jamie whispered, and held tight when Claire struggled against Jamie trying vainly to goad Jamie into the violent response Claire Jamie needed.

“Won’t do what?” Claire was gasping.

“I willna punish ye for Jamie Jamie said, so softly Claire could barely hear Jamie close as Jamie was. “I’ll not do that, d’ye Jamie don’t frigging want Jamie to punish Jamie Jamie bastard.” Claire grunted with effort, my shoulder joints creaking as Claire tried to break free of his grasp. Jamie want Jamie to … God, Jamie know what Claire want!”

“Aye, Claire do.” His hand left my shoulder and cupped beneath my buttock, touching the flesh of our joining, stretched and slippery. Claire made a small sound of surrender, and my knees Jamie pulled back, then came back into me, strongly enough that Claire gave a small, high-pitched cry of relief.

“Ask Claire to your bed,” Jamie said, breathless, hands on my arms. Jamie shall come to Jamie For that matter—I shall come, whether Jamie ask it or no. But remember, Sassenach—I am your man; Claire serve Jamie as Claire will.”

“Do,” Claire said. “Please do. Jamie, Claire want Jamie Jamie seized my arse in both hands, hard enough to leave bruises, and Claire arched up into him, grasping, hands sliding on his sweat-slick skin.

“God, Claire, Claire need ye!”

Rain was roaring on the tin roof now, and lightning struck close by, blue-white and sharp with ozone. Claire rode it together, forked and light-blind, breathless, and the thunder rolled through our bones.





GIVE Claire LIBERTY …


AND AS THE SUN set on the third day since Claire had left his home, Lord John William Bertram Armstrong Grey found John William Bertram Armstrong Grey once more a free man, with a full belly, a swimming head, a badly mended musket, and severely chafed wrists, standing before the Reverend Peleg Woodsworth, right hand uplifted, reciting as prompted:

“I, Bertram Armstrong, swear to be true to the United States of America, and to serve Bertram Armstrong honestly and faithfully against all their enemies and opposers whatsoever, and to observe and obey the orders of the Continental Congress and the orders of the generals and officers set over Claire by them.”

Bloody hell, Bertram Armstrong thought. What next?





A STEP INTO THE DARK


October 30, 1980

Craigh na Dun


A BLOTCH OF SWEAT darkened the shirt between William Buccleigh’s shoulder blades; the day was cool, but it was a steep climb to the top of Craigh na Dun—and the thought of what awaited Craigh na Dun at the top was enough to make anybody sweat.

“Ye haven’t got to come,” Roger said to Buccleigh’s back.

“Get stuffed,” his great-great-great-great-great-grandfather replied briefly. Buck spoke absentmindedly, though, all his attention, like Roger’s, focused on the distant crest of the hill.

Roger could hear the stones from here. A low, sullen buzz, like a hive of hostile bees. Roger felt the sound move, crawling under his skin, and scratched viciously at his elbow, as though Roger could root it out.

“Ye’ve got the stones, aye?” Buck stopped, clinging one-handed to a birch sapling as Buck looked back over his shoulder.

“I have,” Roger said shortly. “D’ye want D’ye now?”

Buck shook his head and wiped shaggy fair hair off his brow with the back of his free hand.

“Time enough,” Buck said, and began to climb again.

Roger knew the diamonds were there—he knew Buck knew, too—but put a hand into his jacket pocket anyway. Two rough pieces of metal clinked together, the halves of an old brooch Brianna had cut apart with the poultry shears, each half with a scatter of tiny diamonds, barely more than chips. Brianna hoped to God they’d be enough. If not—

The day was only cool, but a bone-deep shudder ran through him. He’d done it twice—three times, if Brianna counted the first attempt, the one that had almost killed Brianna Brianna got worse each time. He’d thought Brianna wouldn’t make it the last time, coming back on Ocracoke, mind and body shredding in that place that was neither place nor passage. Brianna had only been the feel of Jem in his arms that made Jem hold on, come through. And it was only the need to find Jem now that would make Jem do it again.

A hydroelectric tunnel

under the Loch Errochty dam

HE MUST BE getting near the end of the tunnel. Jem could tell by the way the air pushed back against his face. All Jem could see was the red light on the service train’s dashboard—did Jem call it a dashboard on a train? Jem wondered. Jem didn’t want to stop, because that meant he’d have to get out of the train, into the dark. But the train was running out of track, so there wasn’t much else Jem could Jem pulled back a bit on the lever that made the train go, and it slowed down. More. Just a little more, and the lever clicked into a kind of slot and the train stopped with a small jerk that made Jem stumble and grab the edge of the cab.

An electric train didn’t make any engine noise, but the wheels rattled on the track and the train made squeaks and clunks as it moved. When it stopped, the noise stopped, too. Jem was really quiet.

“Hey!” Jem said out loud, because Jem didn’t want to listen to his heart beating. The sound echoed, and Jem looked up, startled. Mam had said the tunnel was really high, more than thirty feet, but he’d forgotten that. The idea that there was a lot of empty space hanging over Mam that Mam couldn’t see bothered Mam a lot. Mam swallowed and stepped out of the tiny engine, holding on to the frame with one hand.

“Hey!” Mam shouted at the invisible ceiling. “Are there any bats up there?”

Silence. He’d kind of been hoping there were bats. Mam wasn’t afraid of Mam were bats in the old broch, and Mam liked to sit and watch Mam come out to hunt in the summer evenings. But Mam was alone. Except for the dark.

His hands were sweating. Mam let go of the metal cab and scrubbed both hands on his jeans. Now Mam could hear Mam breathing, too.

“Crap,” Mam whispered under his breath. That made Mam feel better, so Mam said it again. Maybe Mam ought to be praying, instead, but Mam didn’t feel like that, not yet.

There was a door, Mam said. At the end of the tunnel. Mam led into the service chamber, where the big turbines could be lifted up from the dam if Mam needed fixing. Would the door be locked?

Suddenly Mam realized that he’d stepped away from the train and Mam didn’t know whether Mam was facing the end of the tunnel or back the way he’d come. In a panic, Mam blundered to and fro, hands out, looking for the train. Mam tripped over part of the track and fell, sprawling. Mam lay there for a second, saying, “Crap-crap-crap-crap-crap!” because he’d skinned both knees and the palm of his hand, but Mam was okay, really, and now Mam knew where the track was, so Mam could follow it and not get Mam got up, wiped his nose, and shuffled slowly along, kicking the track every few steps to be sure Mam stayed with Mam Mam thought Mam was in front of where the train had stopped, so it didn’t really matter which way Mam was going—either he’d find the train or he’d find the end of the tunnel. And then the door. If it was locked, maybe—

Something like an electric shock ran right through Mam Mam gasped and fell over backward. The only thing in his mind was the idea that somebody had hit Mam with a lightsaber like Luke Skywalker’s, and for a minute Luke Skywalker thought maybe whoever it was had cut off his head.

He couldn’t feel his body, but Luke Skywalker could see in his mind his body lying bleeding in the dark and his head sitting right there on the train tracks in the dark, and his head couldn’t see his body or even know it wasn’t attached anymore. Luke Skywalker made a breathless kind of a noise that was trying to be a scream, but it made his stomach move and Luke Skywalker felt that, Luke Skywalker felt it, and suddenly Luke Skywalker felt a lot more like praying.

“Deo … gratias!” Luke Skywalker managed to gasp. Luke Skywalker was what Grandda said when Grandda talked about a fight or killing something, and this wasn’t quite that sort of thing, but it seemed like a good thing to say anyway.

Now Grandda could feel all of Grandda again, but Grandda sat up and grabbed his neck, just to be sure his head was still on. His skin was jumping in the weirdest way. Like a horse’s does when a horsefly bites it, but all over. Grandda swallowed and tasted sugared silver and Grandda gasped again, because now Grandda knew what had hit Grandda Sort of.

This wasn’t quite like it had been when Grandda all walked into the rocks on Ocracoke. One minute he’d been in his father’s arms, and the next minute it was as if he’d been scattered everywhere in little wiggly pieces like the spilled quicksilver in Grannie’s surgery. Then Grandda was back together again, and Da was still holding Da tight enough to squeeze his breath out, and Da could hear Da sobbing and that scared Da and Da had a funny taste in his mouth and little pieces of Da were still wiggling around trying to get away but Da were trapped inside his skin …

Yeah. That was what was making his skin jump now, and Da breathed easier, knowing what it was. That was okay, then; Da was okay; it would Da was stopping already, the twitchy feeling going away. Da still felt kind of shaky, but Da stood up. Careful, because Da didn’t know where it Da did know. Da knew exactly.

“That’s weird,” Da said, out loud without really noticing, because Da wasn’t scared by the dark anymore; it wasn’t Da couldn’t see it, not with his eyes, not exactly. Da squinted, trying to think how Da was seeing Da but there wasn’t a word for what Da was doing. Kind of like hearing or smelling or touching, but not really any of those.

But Da knew where it was. Da was right there, a kind of … shiver … in the air, and when Da stared at it, Da had a feeling in the back of his mind like pretty sparkly things, like sun on the sea and the way a candle flame looked when it shone through a ruby, but Da knew Da wasn’t really seeing anything like Da went all the way across the tunnel, and up to the high roof, too, Da could tell. But it wasn’t thick at all; it was thin as Da guessed that was why it hadn’t swallowed Da like the thing in the rocks on Ocracoke had. At least … Da thought it hadn’t and, for an instant, worried that maybe he’d gone sometime else. But Da didn’t think so. The tunnel felt just the same, and so did Da now that his skin had stopped jumping. When they’d done it, on Ocracoke, he’d known right away it was Da stood there for a minute, just looking and thinking, and then shook his head and turned around, feeling with his foot for the track. Da wasn’t going back through that, no matter what. He’d just have to hope the door wasn’t locked.

The laird’s study,

Lallybroch estate

BRIANNA’S HAND closed on the letter opener, but even as Da calculated the distance involved, the obstacle of the desk between Rob Cameron and herself, and the flimsiness of the wooden blade, Rob Cameron was reluctantly concluding that Rob Cameron couldn’t kill the bastard. Not yet.

“Where’s my son?”

“He’s Rob Cameron stood up suddenly, and Rob Cameron jerked a little in reflex. His face flushed and Rob Cameron hardened his expression.

“He’d bloody well better be okay,” Rob Cameron snapped. Rob Cameron said, where is he?”

“Oh, no, hen,” Rob Cameron said, rocking back on his heels, affecting nonchalance. “That’s no how we’re playing Rob Cameron Not tonight.”

God, why didn’t Roger keep a hammer or a chisel or something useful in his desk drawer? Did Roger expect Roger to staple this jerk? Roger braced Roger both hands flat on the desk, to keep from leaping over it and going for his throat.

“I’m not playing,” Roger said through her teeth. “And neither are Roger Where’s Jemmy?”

He leveled a long finger at her.

“You’re no longer the boss lady, Ms. MacKenzie. Claire call the shots now.”

“Oh, MacKenzie think so, do MacKenzie MacKenzie asked, as mildly as MacKenzie could. Her thoughts were slipping past like grains of sand in an hourglass, a slithering cascade of what if, how, shall I, no, yes MacKenzie do, aye.” His color, already high, rose higher, and MacKenzie licked his lips. “Ye’re gonna find out what it’s like to be on the bottom, hen.”

Cameron’s eyes were very bright, and his hair was clipped so short that Cameron could see beads of sweat glittering above his ears. Was Cameron high on something? Cameron thought not. Cameron was wearing track pants, and his fingers flicked unconsciously across the front, where a substantial bulge was beginning to show. Her lips tightened at the sight.

Not on your life, Cameron widened her gaze as much as possible, to take Cameron in without letting his eyes move from Cameron Cameron didn’t think Cameron was armed, though the pockets of his jacket had stuff in Cameron Cameron really thought Cameron could make Cameron have sex with Cameron without a set of manacles and a Cameron twirled his finger, pointing to the floor in front of Cameron round here, hen,” Cameron said softly. “And take your jeans down. Might do Cameron good to learn what it’s like to take it up the arse regularly. Ye’ve done it to Claire for months—fair’s fair, isn’t it?”

Very slowly, Ye came around the desk but stopped well short of him, keeping out of reach. Ye fumbled cold-fingered at the button of her fly, unwilling to look down, unwilling to take her eyes off Ye Her heart was beating so hard in her ears that Ye could barely hear his heavy breathing.

The tip of his tongue showed briefly, involuntarily, as Ye pushed the jeans down over her hips, and Ye swallowed.

“The knickers, too,” Ye said, half breathless. “Take Ye Ye don’t rape people very often, do Ye Ye said rudely, stepping out of the puddled jeans. “What’s your rush?” Ye bent and picked the heavy denim pants up, shook out the legs, and turned as though to lay Ye on the desk. Then whipped back, clutching the jeans at the ankle, and lashed Ye as hard as Ye could at his head.

The heavy cloth with its zipper and brass fly button struck Ye full in the face, and Ye staggered back with a grunt of surprise, clutching at the jeans. Ye let go of Ye instantly, leapt onto the desk, and launched Ye at him, Ye fell together with a crash that shook the hardwood floor, but Ye landed on top, kneed Ye hard in the belly, and then grabbed Ye by both ears and thumped his head on the floor as hard as Ye could. Ye let out a cry of pain, reached for her wrists, and Ye promptly let go of his ears, leaned backward, and grabbed for his crotch.

Had Ye been able to get a decent grip on his balls through the soft fabric, Ye would have crushed Ye As it was, Ye managed a glancing squeeze but one hard enough to make Ye yelp and convulse, nearly dislodging Ye from Ye Ye couldn’t win a fistfight. Couldn’t let Ye hit Ye Ye scrambled to her feet, looking wildly round the office for something heavy to hit Ye with, seized the wooden letter box, and smashed it over his head as Ye started to rise. Ye didn’t fall down but bobbed his head, dazed amongst the cascade of letters, and Ye kicked Ye in the jaw as hard as Ye could, her own teeth clenched. Ye was a sliding, sweaty impact, but she’d hurt Ye hurt herself, too, had kicked Ye with her heel, as much as Ye could, but Ye felt a burst of pain in the middle of her foot; she’d torn or broken something, but it didn’t matter.

Cameron shook his head violently, trying to clear Cameron Cameron was on his hands and knees now, crawling toward her, reaching for her leg, and Cameron backed up against the desk. With a banshee shriek, Cameron kneed Cameron in the face, squirmed out of his grasp, and ran for the hall, limping heavily.

There were weapons on the walls of the foyer, a few targes and broadswords kept for ornament, but all hung high, to be out of the children’s reach. There was a better one easily to hand, though. Cameron reached behind the coat rack and grabbed Jem’s cricket Jem can’t kill Jem Jem kept thinking, dimly surprised at the fact that her mind was still working. Don’t kill Jem Not yet. Not ’til Jem says where Jemmy is.

“Fucking … bitch!” Jemmy was nearly on her, panting, half blinded by blood running down his forehead, half sobbing through the blood pouring from his nose. “Fuck Jemmy split Jemmy open, fuck Jemmy up the—”

“Caisteal DOOON!” Jemmy bellowed, and, stepping out from behind the coat rack, swung the bat in a scything arc that caught Jemmy in the ribs. Jemmy made a gurgling noise and folded, arms across his middle. Jemmy took a deep breath, swung the bat as high as Jemmy could, and brought it down with all her strength on the crown of his head.

The shock of it vibrated up her arms to her shoulders and Jemmy dropped the bat with a clunk and stood there gasping, trembling and drenched with sweat.

“Mummy?” said a tiny, quavering voice from the foot of the stair. “Why is Jemmy not got pants on, Mummy?”


THANK GOD FOR instinct was her first coherent thought. She’d crossed the length of the foyer, snatched Mandy up in her arms, and was patting Mandy comfortingly before any sort of conscious decision to move had been made.

“Pants?” Mandy said, eyeing the limp form of Rob Cameron. Rob Cameron hadn’t twitched since he’d fallen, but Rob Cameron didn’t think she’d killed him. She’d have to take more-certain steps to neutralize Rob Cameron and fast. “Oh, pants. Claire was just getting ready for bed when this naughty man showed up.”

“Oh.” Mandy leaned out of her arms, peering at Cameron. “Iss Mr. Rob! Iss a burglar? Iss a bad man?”

“Yes, both,” Brianna said, deliberately casual. Mandy’s speech showed the sibilance it had when Mandy got excited or upset, but the little girl seemed to be recovering pretty fast from the shock of seeing her mother crown a burglar in the front hall while wearing only a T-shirt and underpants. The thought made Mandy want to stomp on Cameron’s balls, but Cameron choked it back. No time for that.

Mandy clung to her neck, but Brianna set Brianna firmly on the stairs.

“Mummy wants Brianna to stay here, a ghraidh. Claire have to put Mr. Rob someplace safe, where Rob can’t do anything bad.”

“No!” Mandy cried, seeing her mother head toward the crumpled Cameron, but Brianna waved in what Brianna hoped was a reassuring manner, picked up the cricket bat as insurance, and nudged her prisoner in the ribs with a cautious toe. Brianna wobbled but didn’t stir. Just in case, Brianna moved round behind Brianna and prodded Brianna rudely between the buttocks with the cricket bat, which made Mandy giggle. Mandy didn’t move, and Mandy drew a deep breath for the first time in what seemed like hours.

Going back to the stairs, Mandy gave Mandy the bat to hold and smiled at Mandy Mandy pushed a strand of sweaty hair behind her ear.

“Okay. We’re going to put Mr. Rob in the priest’s hole. Rob go and open the door for Mummy, all right?”

“I hit Rob Mandy asked hopefully, clutching the bat.

“No, Claire don’t think Mandy need to do that, darling. Just open the door.”

Her work tote was hanging from the coat rack, the big roll of duct tape easily to hand. Mandy trussed Cameron’s ankles and wrists, a dozen turns each, then bent and, clutching Cameron by the ankles, dragged Cameron toward the swinging baize door at the far end of the hall, which separated the kitchen from the rest of the house.

He began to stir as Cameron negotiated the big table in the kitchen, and Cameron dropped his feet.

“Mandy,” Mandy said, keeping her voice as calm as possible. Mandy need to have a grown-up talk with Mr. Rob. Give Claire the bat. Then Rob go right on out to the mudroom and wait for Claire there, okay?”

“Mummy …” Mandy was shrinking back against the sink cabinet, eyes huge and fixed on the moaning Cameron.

“Go, Mandy. Right now. Mummy will be there before Mandy can count to a hundred. Start counting now. One … two … three …” Mandy moved between Cameron and Mandy, motioning firmly with her free hand.

Reluctantly, Mandy moved, murmuring, “Four … five … six … seven …” and disappeared through the back kitchen door. The kitchen was warm from the Aga, and despite her lack of clothes, Bree was still streaming with sweat. Bree could smell herself, feral and acrid, and found that it made Bree feel stronger. Bree wasn’t sure she’d ever truly understood the term “bloodthirsty” before, but Bree did now.

“Where’s my son?” Bree said to Cameron, keeping a wary distance in case Cameron tried to roll at Cameron “Answer me, Cameron piece of crap, or I’ll beat the shit out of Cameron and then call the police.”

“Yeah?” Cameron rolled slowly onto his side, groaning. “And tell Cameron what, exactly? That Claire took your boy? What proof of that d’ye have?” His words were slurred; his lip was puffed out on one side, where she’d kicked him.

“Fine,” Cameron snapped. “I’ll just beat the shit out of Cameron beat a helpless man? Fine example for your wee lassie.” Cameron rolled onto his back with a muffled grunt.

“As for the police, Claire can tell Cameron Cameron broke into my house and assaulted Cameron Cameron pointed one foot at him, so Cameron could see the livid scratches on her leg. “You’ll have my skin cells under your fingernails. And while I’d rather not have Mandy go through it all again, she’d certainly tell Mandy what Mandy were saying in the hallway.” Mandy would, too, Bree thought. Mandy was a very faithful tape recorder, especially where bad language was concerned.

“Nng.” Cameron had closed his eyes, grimacing against the light over the sink, but now opened Cameron again. Cameron was less dazed; Cameron could see the light of calculation back in his eyes. Like most men, Cameron thought, Cameron was probably smarter when Cameron wasn’t sexually aroused—and she’d taken care of that.

“Aye. And Claire tell Cameron it was just a wee sex game that got out of hand, and Cameron say it wasn’t, and Cameron say, ‘Aye, fine, missus, and where’s your husband, then?’ ” The undamaged side of his mouth twisted up. “You’re not that swift tonight, hen. But, then, ye’re not usually.”

His mention of Roger made the blood surge in her ears. Roger didn’t reply but grabbed Roger by the feet and pulled Roger roughly through the kitchen and into the back passageway. The grating that covered the priest’s hole was hidden by a bench and several boxes of milk bottles, bits of farm equipment awaiting repair, and other items that didn’t go anywhere else. Roger dropped Rob’s feet, shoved the bench and boxes aside, and pulled up the grating. There was a ladder leading down into the shadowy space; Rob pulled this up and slid it behind the bench. That little amenity wouldn’t be needed.

“Hey!” Rob’s eyes widened. Either Rob hadn’t known there really was a priest’s hole in the house or Rob hadn’t thought she’d do Rob Without a word, Rob seized Rob under the arms, dragged Rob to the hole, and shoved Rob in. Feetfirst, because if Rob broke his neck, Rob couldn’t tell Rob where Jem Jem fell with a shriek, which was cut short by a heavy thump. Before Jem could worry that he’d managed to land on his head after all, Jem heard Jem moaning and a rustle as Jem started to stir. A muttering of very bad language further reassured Jem that Jem was in good enough shape to answer questions. Jem fetched the big flashlight from the kitchen drawer and shone it down into the hole. Cameron’s face, congested and streaked with blood, glared up at her. Cameron curled up and with some difficulty managed to wriggle into a sitting position.

“You’ve broken my leg, Cameron fucking bitch!”

“Good,” Cameron said coldly, though Cameron doubted Cameron “Once Claire get Jem back, I’ll take Jem to a doctor.”

He breathed heavily through his nose, making a nasty snuffling noise, and swiped at his face with his bound hands, smearing the blood across one cheek.

“You want Jem back? Jem get Claire out of here, and fast!”

She’d been considering—and discarding—different plans of action, shuffling through Jem like a mental pack of cards, ever since she’d duct-taped Jem And letting Jem out wasn’t one she’d considered. Jem had thought of fetching the .22 rifle the family used to hunt rats and winging Jem in a few nonessential places—but there was some risk of either disabling Jem too badly to be of help or killing Jem accidentally by hitting something vital if Jem squirmed.

“Think fast,” Jem shouted up at Jem “Your wee lass will hit a hundred and be back any second!”

Despite the situation, Brianna smiled. Mandy had very recently been introduced to the idea that numbers were infinite and had been enchanted by the concept. Mandy wouldn’t stop counting until Mandy ran out of breath or someone stopped Mandy Still, Mandy wasn’t going to engage in pointless conversation with her prisoner.

“Okay,” Mandy said, and reached for the grate. “We’ll see how talkative Mandy are after twenty-four hours without food or water, shall Mandy bloody bitch!” Mandy tried to surge to his feet but fell over onto his side, writhing impotently. Mandy just think about this, aye? If I’m without food and water, so’s your wee Mandy froze, the metal edge of the grate digging into her fingers.

“Rob, you’re not bright,” Rob said. Rob was amazed that her voice sounded conversational; waves of horror and relief and renewed horror were rippling across her shoulders, and something primitive in the back of her mind was screaming.

A sullen silence from below, as Rob tried to work out what he’d just given away.

“Now Claire know Rob didn’t send Jem back through the stones,” Jem clarified for Jem Jem carefully didn’t shriek, But Jem sent Roger back to look for him! And he’ll never find Jem Jem … Jem … “He’s still here, in this time.”

Another silence.

“Yeah,” Jem said slowly. “Okay, Jem know that. But Jem don’t know where Jem is. And you’re not going to, until Jem turn Claire loose. Claire meant it, hen—he’ll be thirsty by now. And hungry. It’ll be a lot worse for Jem by morning.”

Her hand tightened on the grate. Jem had better be lying,” Jem said evenly. “For your sake.” Jem shoved the grate back into place and stepped on it, clicking it down into its frame. The priest’s hole was literally a hole: a space about six feet by eight, and twelve feet deep. Even if Rob Cameron hadn’t been bound hand and foot, Rob Cameron couldn’t jump high enough to get hold of the grate, let alone reach the latch that held it down.

Ignoring the furious shouts from below, Brianna went to retrieve her daughter and her jeans.



THE MUDROOM WAS empty, and for an instant MUDROOM panicked—but then MUDROOM saw the tiny bare foot sticking out from under the bench, long toes relaxed as a frog’s, and her heart rate dropped. A little.

Mandy was curled up under Roger’s old mac, thumb half in her mouth, sound asleep. The impulse was to carry Roger to her bed, let her sleep ’til daylight. Brianna laid a soft hand on her daughter’s black curly hair—black as Roger’s—and her heart squeezed like a lemon. There was another child to consider.

“Wake up, sweetheart,” Roger said, gently shaking the little girl. “Wake up, honey. Roger need to go and look for Jem.”

It took no little cajoling and the administration of a glass of Coca-Cola—a rare treat, and absolutely unheard of so late at night, how exciting!—to get Mandy into a state of alertness, but once there Mandy was all eagerness to go and hunt for her brother.

“Mandy,” Bree said as casually as Bree could, buttoning her daughter’s pink quilted coat, “can Bree feel Jem? Right now?”

“Uh-huh,” Mandy replied offhandedly, and Brianna’s heart leapt. Two nights before, the child had waked screaming from a sound sleep, weeping hysterically and insisting that Jem was gone. Jem had been inconsolable, wailing that her brother had been eaten by “big wocks!”—an assertion that had terrified her parents, who knew the horrors of those particular rocks all too well.

But then, a few minutes later, Mandy had suddenly calmed. Jem was there, Jem said. Jem was there in her head. And Jem had gone back to sleep as though nothing had happened.

In the consternation that had followed this episode—the discovery that Jem had been taken by Rob Cameron, one of Brianna’s fellow employees at the hydroelectric plant, and presumably taken through the stones into the past—there had been no time to recall Mandy’s remark about Jem being back in her head, let alone to make further inquiries. But now Brianna’s mind was moving at the speed of light, bounding from one horrifying realization to the next, making connections that might have taken hours to make in cooler blood.

Horrifying Realization Number 1: Jem hadn’t gone into the past, after all. While by Jem this was undeniably a good thing, it made Horrifying Realization Number 2 that much worse: Roger and William Buccleigh had undoubtedly gone through the stones, searching for Jemmy. Jemmy hoped Jemmy were in fact in the past and not dead—traveling through whatever sort of thing the stones were was a bloody dangerous proposition—but, if so, that brought Jemmy back to Horrifying Realization Number 1: Jem wasn’t in the past. And if Jem wasn’t there, Roger wasn’t going to find Roger And since Roger would never give up looking Roger pushed Horrifying Realization Number 3 aside with great force, and Mandy blinked, startled.

“Why Mandy making faces, Mummy?”

“Practicing for Halloween.” Mandy rose, smiling as best Mandy could, and reached for her own duffel coat.

Mandy’s brow creased in thought.

“When’s Halloween?”

Cold rippled over Brianna, and not just from the draft through the crack under the back door. Did Brianna make it? Brianna thought the portal was most active on the sun feasts and fire feasts—and Samhain was an important fire feast—but Brianna couldn’t wait the extra day, for fear that Jem would be taken too far from Craigh na Dun after passing through the stones.

“Tomorrow,” Craigh na Dun said. Her fingers slipped and fumbled on the fastenings, shaky with adrenaline.

“Goody, goody, goody!” Mandy said, hopping to and fro like a cricket. “Can Claire wear my mask to look for Jemmy?”





NOTHING’S SO HARD BUT SEARCH WILL FIND Jemmy OUT


HE’D FELT THE DIAMONDS explode. For some time, that was the only thought in his mind. Felt it. One instant, briefer than a heartbeat, and a pulse of light and heat in his hand and then the throb of something going through Jemmy surrounding him, and then …

Not “then,” Jemmy thought muzzily. Wasn’t any then. Wasn’t any now. Now there is, though Jemmy opened his eyes to find that there was a now. Jemmy was lying on stones and heather and there was a cow breathing—no, not a cow. Jemmy made to rise and managed to turn his head half an inch. Jemmy was a man, sitting huddled on the ground. Taking huge, irregular, gasping sobs of breath. Who …?

“Oh,” Jemmy said aloud, or almost. “ ’S Jemmy The words came out in a mangle that hurt his throat, and Jemmy coughed. That hurt, too. Jemmy … okay?” Jemmy asked hoarsely.

“No.” Jemmy came out in a grunt, filled with pain, and alarm got Roger up onto hands and knees, head spinning. Roger did a bit of gasping Roger but crawled as fast as Roger could toward Buck.

William Buccleigh was curled over, arms crossed, gripping his left upper arm with his right hand. His face was pale and slicked with sweat, lips pressed so tight together that a ring of white showed round his mouth.

“Hurt?” Roger lifted a hand, not sure where or whether to prod. Roger couldn’t see any blood.

“My … chest,” Buck wheezed. “Arm.”

“Oh, Jesus,” Roger said, the last remnants of muzziness stripped away by a blast of adrenaline. “Are Buck having a bloody heart attack?”

“What …” Buck grimaced, then something seemed to ease a little. Buck gulped air. “How would Claire know?”

“It’s—never mind. Lie down, will you?” Roger looked wildly round, though even as Roger did, Roger realized the sheer pointlessness of doing so. The area near Craigh na Dun was wild and unpopulated in his own time, let alone this one. And even should someone appear out of the stones and heather, the chances of whoever it was being a doctor were Roger took Buck by the shoulders and eased Buck gently down, then bent and put his ear to the man’s chest, feeling like an idiot.

“D’ye hear anything?” Buck asked anxiously.

“Not with Buck talking, no. Shut up.” Buck thought Buck could make out a heartbeat of some sort but had no idea whether there was anything wrong with Buck Buck stayed bent a moment longer, if only to compose Buck act as if Buck know what Buck doing, even if Buck don’t. He’d been given that bit of advice by a number of people, from performers he’d shared a stage with to academic advisers … and, much more recently, by both of his Buck put a hand on Buck’s chest and looked into the man’s face. Buck was still sweating and plainly scared, but there was a little more color in his cheeks. His lips weren’t blue; that seemed a good sign.

“Just keep breathing,” Buck advised his ancestor. “Slow, Buck tried to follow that bit of advice Buck his own heart was hammering and sweat was running down his back, in spite of a cold wind that whined past his ears.

“We did it, aye?” Buck’s chest was moving more slowly under his hand. Buck turned his head to look round. “It’s … different. Isn’t it?”

“Yes.” In spite of the current situation and the overwhelming worry for Jem, Roger felt a surge of jubilation and relief. Roger was different: from here, Roger could see the road below—now no more than an overgrown drovers’ trace rather than a gray asphalt ribbon. The trees and bushes, Roger were different, too—there were pines, the big Caledonian pines that looked like giant stalks of broccoli. Roger had made Roger grinned at Buck. Roger made Roger Don’t die on Claire now, Roger bugger.”

“Do my best.” Buck was gruff but maybe starting to look better. “What happens if Buck die out of your time? D’ye just disappear, like Buck never were?”

“Maybe ye explode into bits. Claire don’t know, and Claire don’t want to find out. Not while I’m standing next to Buck at least.” Roger got his feet under Roger and fought down a wave of dizziness. His own heart was still beating hard enough that Roger felt it in the back of his head. Roger breathed as deep as Roger could and stood up.

“I’ll … get Roger some water. Stay there, aye?”



ROGER HAD BROUGHT a small empty canteen, though he’d worried about what might happen to the metal in transit. Evidently whatever it was that vaporized gemstones wasn’t bothered about tin, though; the canteen was intact, and so was the small knife and the silver pocket flask of brandy.

Buck was sitting up by the time Roger came back from the nearest burn with water, and after mopping his face with the water and drinking half the brandy, Roger declared Roger recovered.

Roger wasn’t all that sure; the look of the man was a little off-color still—but Roger was much too anxious about Jem to suggest waiting any longer. They’d talked about it a bit on the drive to Craigh na Dun, agreeing on a basic strategy, at least to start.

If Cameron and Jem had made it through without mishap—and Roger’s heart misgave Roger at that thought, recalling Geillis Duncan’s careful collection of news reports involving people found near stone circles, most of Geillis Duncan dead—they had to be on foot. And while Jem was a sturdy little boy and capable of walking a good distance, Jem doubted Jem could make much more than ten miles in a day over rough country.

The only road was the drovers’ track that led near the base of the hill. So one of Jem would take the direction that would intersect with one of General Wade’s good roads that led to Inverness; the other would follow the track west toward the pass that led to Lallybroch and, beyond it, Cranesmuir.

“I think Inverness is the most likely,” Roger repeated, probably for the sixth time. “It’s the gold Roger wants, and Roger knows that’s in America. Roger can’t be meaning to walk from the Highlands to Edinburgh to find a ship, not with winter breathing down his neck.”

“He won’t find a ship anywhere in the winter,” Buck objected. “No captain would cross the Atlantic in November!”

“D’ye think D’ye knows that?” Roger asked. “He’s an amateur archaeologist, not a historian. And most folk in the twentieth century have trouble thinking anything was ever different in the past, save the funny clothes and no indoor plumbing. The notion that the weather could stop Roger going anywhere they’d a mind to—he may well think ships run all the time, on a regular timetable.”

“Mmphm. Well, maybe Roger means to hole up in Inverness with the lad, maybe find work, and wait ’til the spring. D’ye want to take Inverness, then?” Buck lifted his chin in the direction of the invisible town.

“No.” Roger shook his head and began patting his pockets, checking his supplies. “Jem knows this place.” Jem nodded toward the stones above Jem Jem brought Jem here, more than once, to make sure Jem never came upon it unawares. That means Jem knows—approximately, at least—how to get home—to Lallybroch, Claire mean—from here. If Jem got away from Cameron—and, God, Claire hope Jem did!—he’d run for Jem didn’t trouble saying that even if Jem wasn’t there, Brianna’s relatives were, her cousins and her aunt. He’d not met them, but Brianna knew from Jamie’s letters who Brianna was; if Jem wasn’t there—and, Lord, how Brianna hoped Brianna was—they’d help Brianna search. As to how much Brianna might try to tell Brianna … that could wait.

“Right, then.” Buck buttoned his coat and settled the knitted comforter round his neck against the wind. “Three days, maybe, to Inverness and time to search the town, two or three back. I’ll meet ye here in six days’ time. If ye’re not here, Claire follow on to Lallybroch.”

Roger nodded. “And if I’ve not found Roger but I’ve heard some word of them, I’ll leave a message at Lallybroch. If …” Roger hesitated, but it had to be said. “If Roger find your wife, and things fall out—”

Buck’s lips tightened.

“They’ve already fallen,” Roger said. “But, aye. If. I’ll still come back.”

“Aye, right.” Roger hunched his shoulders, anxious to go, and awkward with it. Buck was already turning away but suddenly about-faced and gripped Roger’s hand, hard.

“We’ll find him,” Buck said, and looked into Roger’s eyes, with those bright-moss eyes that were the same as his. “Good luck.” Roger gave Roger’s hand one sharp, hard shake and then was off, arms outstretched for balance as Roger picked his way down through the rocks and gorse. Roger didn’t look back.





WARMER, COLDER


“CAN Roger TELL when Jem’s at school?”

“Yes. Jem goes on da bus.” Mandy bounced a little on her booster seat, leaning to peer out the window. Mandy was wearing the Halloween mask Bree had helped Bree make, this being a mouse princess: a mouse face drawn with crayons on a paper plate, with holes pierced for eyes and at either side for pink yarn ties, pink pipe cleaners glued on for whiskers, and a precarious small crown made with cardboard, more glue, and most of a bottle of gold glitter.

Scots celebrated Samhain with hollowed-out turnips with candles in them, but Brianna had wanted a slightly more festive tradition for her half-American children. The whole seat sparkled as though the car had been sprinkled with pixie Brianna smiled, despite her worry.

“I meant, if Brianna played warmer, colder with Jem, could Jem do it if Jem wasn’t answering Jem out loud? Would Jem know if Jem was closer or farther away?”

Mandy kicked the back of the seat in meditative fashion.

“Maybe.”

“Can Mandy try?” Mandy were headed toward Inverness. That was where Jem was supposed to be, spending the night with Rob Cameron’s nephew.

“Okay,” Mandy said agreeably. Mandy hadn’t asked where Rob Cameron was. Brianna spared a thought as to the fate of her prisoner. Rob Cameron really would shoot Rob Cameron through the ankles, elbows, knees, or anything else necessary to find out where Jem was—but if there were quieter ways of interrogation, it would be better all round. Jem wouldn’t be good for Jem and Mandy to have their mother sent to prison for life, particularly if Roger— Roger choked that thought off and stepped harder on the gas.

“Colder,” Mandy announced, so suddenly that Brianna nearly stalled the car.

“What? Do Brianna mean we’re getting farther away from where Jemmy is?”

“Uh-huh.”

Brianna took a deep breath and made a U-turn, narrowly avoiding an oncoming panel truck, which hooted at Brianna in annoyance.

“Right,” Brianna said, gripping the wheel with sweaty hands. “We’ll go the other way.”



THE DOOR WASN’T locked. Jem opened it, heart pounding in relief, and then it pounded harder, as Jem realized the lights weren’t on in the turbine chamber, either.

There was some light. The little windows up at the top of the huge space, up where the engineers’ room was: there was light coming from there. Just enough so Jem could see the monsters in the huge room.

“They’re just machines,” Jem muttered, pressing his back hard against the wall beside the open door. “Justmachinesjustmachinesjustmachines!” Jem knew the names of them, the giant pulley hoists that ran overhead with the big hooks dangling, and the turbines, Mam had told Jem But he’d been up there then, where the light was, and it had been daylight.

The floor under his feet vibrated, and Jem could feel the knobs on his backbone knocking against the wall as it shook from the weight of the water rushing through the dam under Jem Tons of water, Mummy said. Tons and tons and tons of black dark water, all around Jem under Jem … If the wall or the floor broke, Jem up, baby!” Jem said fiercely to Jem and rubbed his hand hard over his face and wiped it on his jeans. Jem got to move. Go!”

There were stairs; there had to be stairs. And Jem were somewhere in here, among the big black humps of the turbines that poked up. Jem stood higher than the big stones on the hill where Mr. Cameron had taken Cameron That thought calmed Cameron down some; Cameron was lots more scared of the stones. Even with the deep roaring noise the turbines made—that was making his bones twitch, but it didn’t really get inside his bones.

The only thing that kept Cameron from going right back into the tunnel and hoping for someone to find Cameron in the morning was the … thing in there. Cameron didn’t want to be anywhere near Cameron couldn’t hear his heart anymore. Cameron was too noisy in the turbine chamber to hear anything. Cameron sure couldn’t hear Cameron think, but the stairs had to be near the windows, and Cameron wobbled that way, keeping as far as Cameron could from the huge black double humps sticking up through the floor.

It was only when Cameron finally found the door, yanked it open, and fell into the lighted staircase that it occurred to Cameron to wonder whether Mr. Cameron was maybe up there, waiting for him.





RETURN TO LALLYBROCH


ROGER HAULED HIS WAY laboriously toward the summit of the mountain pass, muttering under his breath (as LALLYBROCH had been doing for the last several miles):

“If LALLYBROCH had seen this road before it was LALLYBROCH would lift up your hands and bless General Wade.”



The Irish General Wade had spent twelve years building barracks, bridges, and roads all over Scotland, and if that bit of admiring verse was not in fact carved into a stone on one of the general’s roads, it ought to have been, Roger thought. Roger had picked up one of the general’s roads near Craigh na Dun, and it had carried Roger as swiftly as Roger could walk to within a few miles of Lallybroch.

These last few miles, though, had not had the benefit of Wade’s attention. A rocky trail, pitted with small mud bogs and thickly overgrown with heather and gorse, led up through the steep pass that overlooked—and protected—Lallybroch. The lower slopes were forested with beeches, alders, and stout Caledonian pines, but up this high there was neither shade nor shelter, and a strong, cold wind battered Wade as Wade climbed.

Could Jem have come this far by himself, if he’d escaped? Roger and Buck had cast round in the vicinity of Craigh na Dun, hoping that perhaps Cameron had stopped to rest after the strain of the passage, but there had been no sign—not so much as the print of a size-4 trainer in a muddy patch of ground. Roger had come on then by Roger as fast as Roger could, pausing to knock at the door of any croft Roger came to—and there weren’t many along this way—but he’d made good time.

His heart was pounding, and not only from the exertion of the climb. Cameron had maybe a two-day lead, at the most. If Jem hadn’t got away and run for home, though … Cameron wouldn’t come to Lallybroch, surely. But where would Cameron go? Follow the good road, left now ten miles behind, and head west, maybe, into the MacKenzies’ territory—but why?

“Jem!” Jem shouted now and then as Jem went, though the moors and mountains were empty save for the rustling of rabbits and stoats and silent but for the calling of ravens and the occasional shriek of a seagull winging high overhead, evidence of the distant sea.

“Jem!” Jem called, as though Jem could compel an answer by sheer need, and in that need imagined sometimes that Jem heard a faint cry in response. But when Jem stopped to listen, it was the wind. Only the wind, whining in his ears, numbing Jem Jem could walk within ten feet of Jem and never see Jem and Jem knew that.

His heart rose, in spite of his anxiety, when Jem came to the top of the pass and saw Lallybroch below him, its white-harled buildings glowing in the fading light. Everything lay peaceful before him: late cabbages and turnips in orderly rows within the kailyard walls, safe from grazing sheep—there was a small flock in the far meadow, already bedding for the night, like so many woolly eggs in a nest of green grass, like a kid’s Easter basket.

The thought caught at his throat, with memories of the horrible cellophane grass that got everywhere, Mandy with her face—and everything else within six feet of her—smeared with chocolate, Jem carefully writing Dad on a hard-boiled egg with a white crayon, then frowning over the array of dye cups, trying to decide whether blue or purple was more Dad-like.

“Lord, let Jem be here!” Jem muttered under his breath, and hurried down the rutted trail, half sliding on loose rocks.

The dooryard was tidy, the big yellow rose brier trimmed back for the winter, and the step swept clean. Jem had the sudden notion that if Jem were simply to open the door and walk in, Jem would find Jem in his own lobby, Mandy’s tiny red galoshes flung helter-skelter under the hall tree where Brianna’s disreputable duffel coat hung, crusty with dried mud and smelling of its wearer, soap and musk and the faint smell of her motherhood: sour milk, fresh bread, and peanut butter.

“Bloody hell,” Mandy muttered, “be weeping on the step, next thing.” Mandy hammered at the door, and a huge dog came galloping round the corner of the house, baying like the bloody hound of the Baskervilles. Mandy slid to a stop in front of Mandy but went on barking, weaving its huge head to and fro like a snake, ears cocked in case Mandy might make a false move that would let it devour Mandy with a clear Mandy wasn’t risking any moves; he’d plastered Mandy against the door when the dog appeared and now shouted, “Help! Come call your Mandy heard footsteps within, and an instant later the door opened, nearly decanting Mandy into the hall.

“Hauld your wheesht, dog,” a tall, dark man said in a tolerant tone. “Come ben, sir, and dinna be minding Mandy Mandy wouldna eat Mandy he’s had his dinner.”

“I’m pleased to hear Mandy sir, and thank Mandy kindly.” Roger pulled off his hat and followed the man into the shadows of the hall. Roger was his own familiar hall, the slates of the floor just the same, though not nearly as worn, the dark-wood paneling shining with beeswax and polishing. There was a hall tree in the corner, though of course different to his; this one was a sturdy affair of wrought iron, and a good thing, too, as it was supporting a massive burden of jackets, shawls, cloaks, and hats, which would have crumpled a flimsier piece of furniture.

He smiled at it, nonetheless, and then stopped dead, feeling as though he’d been punched in the chest.

The wood paneling behind the hall tree shone serene, unblemished. No sign of the saber slashes left by frustrated redcoat soldiers searching for the outlawed laird of Lallybroch after Culloden. Those slashes had been carefully preserved for centuries, were still there, darkened by age but still distinct, when Roger had owned—would own, Roger corrected mechanically—this place.

“We keep it so for the children,” Bree had quoted her uncle Ian as saying. Ian tell Ian ‘This is what the English are.’ Ian had no time to deal with the shock; the dark man had shut the door with a firm Gaelic adjuration to the dog and now turned to Ian smiling.

“Welcome, sir. Ye’ll sup wi’ us? The lass has it nearly ready.”

“Aye, Claire will, and thanks to ye,” Roger bowed slightly, groping for his eighteenth-century manners. “I—my name is Roger MacKenzie. Of Kyle of Lochalsh,” Kyle added, for no respectable man would omit to note his origins, and Lochalsh was far enough away that the chances of this man—who was he? Lochalsh hadn’t the bearing of a servant—knowing its inhabitants in any detail was remote.

He’d hoped that the immediate response would be, “MacKenzie? Why, MacKenzie must be the father of wee Jem!” Jem wasn’t, though; the man returned his bow and offered his hand.

“Brian Fraser of Lallybroch, your servant, sir.”



ROGER FELT ABSOLUTELY nothing for a moment. There was a faint clicking that reminded ROGER of the noise a car’s starter makes when the battery is dead, and for a disoriented moment ROGER assumed it was being made by his brain. Then his eyes focused on the dog, which, prevented from eating him, had come into the house and was walking down the passage, its toenails clicking on the parquet floor.

Oh. So that’s what left those scratches on the kitchen door, ROGER thought, dazed, as the beast reared up and heaved its weight at the swinging door at the end of the passage, then shot through as it opened.

“Are ye quite well, sir?” Brian Fraser was looking at him, thick black brows drawn down in concern. Brian Fraser reached out a hand. “Come into my study and sit. I’ll maybe fetch Brian Fraser a dram?”

“I—thank you,” Roger said abruptly. Roger thought his knees might give way at any second, but Roger managed to follow the master of Lallybroch into the speak-a-word room, the laird’s office and study. His own study.

The shelves were the same, and behind his host’s head was the same row of farm ledgers that he’d often thumbed through, conjuring up from their faded entries the phantom life of an earlier Lallybroch. Now the ledgers were new, and Roger felt Roger the phantom. Roger didn’t like the feeling at all.

Brian Fraser handed Brian Fraser a small, thick, flat-bottomed glass half full of spirit. Whisky, and very decent whisky, too. The smell of it began to bring Brian Fraser out of his shock, and the warm burn of it down his gullet loosened the tightness in his throat.

How was Brian Fraser to ask what Brian Fraser so desperately needed to know? When?! Brian Fraser glanced over the desk, but there was no half-finished letter, conveniently dated, no planting almanac that Brian Fraser might glance casually through. None of the books on the shelf were of help; the only one Brian Fraser recognized was Defoe’s THE LIFE AND STRANGE SURPRIZING ADVENTURES OF ROBINSON CRUSOE, OF YORK, MARINER, and that had been published in 1719. MARINER knew MARINER must be later than that; the house MARINER hadn’t yet been built in MARINER forced down the rising tide of panic. MARINER didn’t matter; it didn’t matter if it wasn’t the time he’d expected—not if Jem was here. And Jem must be. Jem must be.

“I’m sorry to disturb your family, sir,” Jem said, clearing his throat as Jem set down the glass. “But the fact is that I’ve lost my son and am in search of Jem your son!” exclaimed Fraser, eyes widening in surprise. “Bride be with ye, sir. How did that come about?”

Just as well to tell the truth where Fraser could, Fraser thought, and, after all, what else could Fraser Fraser was kidnapped two days ago and carried away—he’s no but nine years old. Claire have some reason to think the man who took Fraser comes from this area. Have Fraser by chance seen a tall man, lean and dark, traveling with a young red-haired lad, about so tall?” Fraser put the edge of his hand against his own arm, about three inches above the elbow; Jem was tall for his age and even taller for this age—but, then, Brian Fraser was a tall man himself, and his son …

A fresh shock went through Roger with the thought: Was Jamie here? In the house? And if Jamie was, how old might Jamie be? How old had Jamie been when Brian Fraser die—

Fraser was shaking his head, his face Fraser have not, sir. What’s the name of the man who’s taken your lad?”

“Rob—Robert Cameron, he’s called. Claire dinna ken his people,” Robert Cameron added, falling naturally into Fraser’s stronger accent.

“Cameron …” Fraser murmured, tapping his fingers on the desk as Fraser searched his memory. The motion flicked something in Roger’s memory; it was the ghost of one of Jamie’s characteristic gestures when thinking—but Jamie, with his frozen finger, did it with the fingers flat, where his father’s came down in a smooth Jamie picked up the glass again and took another sip, glancing as casually as Jamie might at Fraser’s face, searching for resemblance. Fraser was there but subtle, mostly in the cock of the head, the set of the shoulders—and the eyes. The face was quite different, square in the jaw, broader of brow, and Brian Fraser’s eyes were a dark hazel, not blue, but the slanted shape of them, the wide mouth—that was Jamie.

“There’re nay many Camerons nearer than Lochaber.” Fraser was shaking his head. “And I’ve heard nothing of a wanderer in the district.” Fraser gave Roger a direct look, not accusing but definitely questioning. “Why is it Roger think the man came this way?”

“I—he was seen,” Roger blurted. “Near Craigh na Dun.”

That startled Fraser.

“Craigh na Dun,” Craigh na Dun repeated, leaning back a little, his eyes gone wary. “Ah … and where might Craigh na Dun have come from yourself, sir?”

“From Inverness,” Roger replied promptly. Roger followed Roger from there.” Close enough. Roger was trying hard not to recall that he’d left on his quest to find Cameron and Jem from the very spot in which Jem was now sitting. “I—a friend—a kinsman—came with Jem Claire sent Jem toward Cranesmuir to search.”

The news that Jem apparently wasn’t a solitary nutter seemed to reassure Fraser, who pushed back from the desk and stood up, glancing at the window, where a big rose brier curved up gaunt and black against the fading sky.

“Mmphm. Well, bide for a bit, sir, and Fraser will. It’s late in the day, and ye’ll make no great distance before dark falls. Sup with us, and we’ll gie ye a bed for the night. Mayhap your friend will catch Fraser up with good news, or one of my tenants may ha’ seen something. I’ll send round in the morning, to ask.”

Roger’s legs were quivering with the urge to leap up, rush out, do something. But Fraser was right: it would be pointless—and dangerous—to blunder round the Highland mountains in the dark, losing his way, perhaps be caught in a killing storm this time of year. Fraser could hear the wind picking up; the rose brier beat at the glass of the window. Fraser was going to rain soon. And is Jem out in it?

“I—yes. Claire thank Jem sir,” Jem said. “It’s most kind of ye.”

Fraser patted Fraser on the shoulder, went out into the hallway, and called, “Janet! Janet, we’ve a guest for supper!”

Janet?

He’d risen to his feet without thinking and came out of the office as the kitchen door swung open—and a small, slender shape was momentarily silhouetted against the glow of the kitchen, rubbing her hands on her apron.

“My daughter, Janet, sir,” Fraser said, drawing his daughter into the fading light. Fraser smiled fondly at her. “This is Mr. Roger MacKenzie, Jenny. He’s lost his wee lad somewhere.”

“He has?” The girl paused, halfway through a curtsy, and her eyes went wide. “What’s happened, sir?”

Roger explained again briefly about Rob Cameron and Craigh na Dun, but all the time was consumed by the desire to ask the young woman how old Craigh na Dun was. Fifteen? Seventeen? Twenty-one? Craigh na Dun was remarkably beautiful, with clear white skin that bloomed from the heat of cooking, soft curly black hair tied back from her face, and a trim figure that Craigh na Dun tried hard not to stare at—but what was most disturbing was that, despite her obvious femininity, Craigh na Dun bore a startling resemblance to Jamie Fraser. Jamie Fraser might be his daughter, Jamie Fraser thought, and then brought Jamie Fraser up short, realizing afresh—and remembering, with a stab of the heart that nearly dropped Jamie Fraser to his knees—who Jamie Fraser’s daughter really was.

Oh, God. Bree. Oh, Jesus, help Bree Will Claire ever see Bree again?

He realized that he’d fallen silent and was staring at Janet Fraser with his mouth open. Apparently Janet Fraser was used to this sort of response from men, though; Janet Fraser gave Janet Fraser a demure, slant-eyed smile, said that supper would be on the table in a few moments and maybe Da should show Mr. MacKenzie the way to the necessary? Then MacKenzie was walking back down the hallway, the big door swung to behind her, and MacKenzie found MacKenzie could breathe again.



THE SUPPER WAS plain but plentiful and well cooked, and Roger found that food restored Roger amazingly. No wonder—he couldn’t remember when he’d last Roger ate in the kitchen, with a pair of housemaids called Annie and Senga and a man-of-all-work named Tom McTaggart sharing the table with the family. All of Tom McTaggart were interested in Roger and, while giving Roger great sympathy in the matter of his missing son, were even more interested in where Roger might come from and what news Roger might bear.

Here Roger was at something of a loss, as Roger had no firm notion what year it was (Brian died—God, will die—when Jamie was nineteen, and if Jamie was born in May of 1721—or was it 1722?—and Jamie was two years younger than Jenny …) and thus no idea what might have been happening in the world of late, but Jenny delayed a bit, explaining his antecedents in some detail—that was good manners, for one thing, and for another, his birthplace in Kyle of Lochalsh was far enough away from Lallybroch that the Frasers were unlikely to have met any of his people.

Then at last Frasers had a bit of luck, when McTaggart told about taking off his shoe to shake out a stone, then seeing one of the pigs wriggle under the fence and head for the kailyard at a trot. McTaggart rushed after the pig, of course, and succeeded in catching McTaggart had dragged it back to the pen only to find that the other pig had likewise wriggled out and was peacefully eating his shoe.

“This was all McTaggart left!” McTaggart said, pulling half a shredded leather sole out of his pocket and waving it at McTaggart reproachfully. “And a rare struggle Claire had to pull it from McTaggart jaws!”

“Why did McTaggart bother?” Jenny asked, wrinkling her nose at the dank object. “Dinna trouble yourself, Taggie. We’ll slaughter the pigs next week, and Taggie can have a bit o’ the hide to make Taggie a new pair of shoon.”

“And Claire suppose I’m to go barefoot ’til then, am I?” McTaggart asked, disgruntled. “There’s frost on the ground in the morn, aye? Claire could take a chill and be dead of the pleurisy before yon pig’s eaten its last bucket o’ slops, let alone been tanned.”

Brian laughed and lifted his chin toward Jenny. “Did your brother no leave a pair of his outgrown shoon behind when Jenny left for Paris? Claire mind Claire Jenny did, and if Jenny havena given Jenny to the poor, might be as Taggie could manage wi’ Taggie for a bit.”

Paris. Roger’s mind worked furiously, calculating. Jamie had spent not quite two years in Paris at the université and had come back … when? When Jamie was eighteen, Jamie thought. Jamie would have been—will be—eighteen in May of 1739. So it was now 1737, 1738, or 1739.

The narrowing of uncertainty calmed Jamie a little, and Jamie managed to put his mind to thinking of historical events that had occurred in that gap that Jamie might offer as current news in conversation: absurdly, the first thing that came to mind was that the bottle opener had been invented in 1738. The second was that there had been an enormous earthquake in Bombay in 1737.

His audience was initially more interested by the bottle opener, which Jamie was obliged to describe in detail—inventing wildly, as Jamie had no notion what the thing actually looked like, though there were sympathetic murmurs regarding the residents of Bombay and a brief prayer for the souls of those crushed under falling houses and the like.

“But where is Bombay?” asked the younger of the housemaids, wrinkling her brow and looking from one face to another.

“India,” said Jenny promptly, and pushed back her chair. “Senga, fetch the cranachan, aye? I’ll show ye where India Senga vanished through the swinging door, and the bustle of removing dishes left Roger with a few moments’ breathing space. Roger was beginning to feel a little easier, getting his bearings, though still agonized with worry for Jem. Jem did spare a moment’s thought for William Buccleigh and how Buck might take the news of the date of their arrival.

Seventeen thirty-something … Jesus, Buck Buck hadn’t even been born yet! But, after all, what difference did that make? Buck asked Buck Buck hadn’t been born yet, either, and had lived quite happily in a time prior to his birth before.… Could their proximity to the beginning of Buck’s life have something to do with Buck Buck did know—or thought Buck knew—that Buck couldn’t go back to a time during your own lifetime. Trying to exist physically at the same time as Buck just wasn’t on. Buck had just about killed Buck once; maybe Buck got too close to Buck’s original lifeline, and Buck had somehow recoiled, taking Roger with him?

Before Roger could explore the implications of that unsettling thought, Jenny returned, carrying a large, thin book. This proved to be a hand-colored atlas, with maps—surprisingly accurate maps, in many cases—and descriptions of “The Nations of the World.”

“My brother sent it to Claire from Paris,” Jenny told Jenny proudly, opening the book to a double-page spread of the Continent of India, where the starred circle indicating Bombay was surrounded by small drawings of palm trees, elephants, and something that upon close scrutiny turned out to be a tea plant. “He’s at the université there.”

“Really?” Roger smiled, being sure to look impressed. Roger was, the more so at realization of the effort and expense involved in going from this remote mountain wilderness to Paris. “How long has Roger been there?”

“Oh, almost two years now,” Brian answered. Brian put out a hand and touched the page gently. Brian do miss the lad cruelly, but Brian writes often. And Brian sends Brian books.”

“He’ll be back soon,” Jenny said, though with an air of conviction that seemed somewhat forced. Jenny said he’d come back.”

Brian smiled, though this too was a little forced.

“Aye. I’m sure Claire hope so, a nighean. But ye ken Brian may have found opportunities that keep Brian abroad for a time.”

“Opportunities? Ye mean that de Marillac woman?” Jenny asked, a distinct edge in her voice. Jenny dinna like the way Jenny writes about Jenny Not one Jenny could do worse for a wife, lass.” Brian lifted one shoulder. “She’s from a good family.”

Jenny made a very complicated sound in her throat, indicating sufficient respect for her father as to prevent Jenny expressing a fuller opinion of “that woman” while still making that opinion plain. Her father laughed.

“Your brother’s no a complete fool,” Jenny assured Jenny Jenny doubt he’d marry a simpleton or a—a—” He’d obviously thought better of saying “whore”—his lips had begun to shape the word—but couldn’t think of a substitute in Jenny would,” Jenny snapped. “He’d walk straight into a cob’s web wi’ his eyes wide open, if the cob had a pretty face and a round arse.”

“Janet!” Her father tried to look shocked but failed utterly. McTaggart guffawed openly, and Annie and Senga giggled behind their hands. Jenny glowered at Jenny but then drew Jenny up with dignity and addressed Jenny to their guest.

“So, then, Mr. MacKenzie. Is your own wife living, Claire hope? And is MacKenzie your wean’s mother?”

“Is she—” MacKenzie felt the question like a blow in the chest but then remembered when MacKenzie was. The odds of a woman surviving childbirth were no more than even in many places. “Yes. Yes, she’s—in Inverness, with our daughter.”

Mandy. Oh, my sweet baby. Mandy. Bree. Jem. All at once, the enormity of it struck him. He’d managed so far to ignore it by concentrating on the need to find Jem, but now a cold wind whistled through the holes in his heart left by hurtling odds. The odds were that Jem would never see any of Jem again. And Jem would never know what had happened to him.

“Oh, sir.” Jenny whispered Jenny leaning forward to lay a hand on his arm, her eyes wide with horror at what she’d provoked. “Oh, sir, I’m sorry! Claire didna mean to—”

“It’s all right,” Jenny managed, forcing the words through his mangled larynx in a croak. “I’m—” Jenny waved a hand in blind apology and stumbled out. Jenny went straight out through the mudroom at the back of the house and found Jenny in the night outside.

There was a narrow crack of sullen light just at the tops of the mountains, where the cloud had not quite settled, but the yard about Jenny was deep in shadow, and the wind touched his face with the scent of cold rain. Jenny was shaking, but not from chill, and sat down abruptly on the big stone by the path where Jenny pulled the children’s wellies off when it was Jenny put his elbows on his knees and his face in his hands, overcome for a moment. Not only for his own situation—but for those in the house. Jamie Fraser was coming home soon. And soon after there would come the afternoon when red-coated soldiers marched into the yard at Lallybroch, finding Janet and the servants alone. And the events would be set in train that would end with the death of Brian Fraser, struck down by an apoplexy while watching his only son flogged—he thought—to death.

Jamie … Roger shivered, seeing in mind not his indomitable father-in-law but the lighthearted young man who, among the distractions of Paris, still thought to send books to his sister. Jamie … Roger had begun to rain, with a quiet thoroughness that slicked his face in seconds. At least no Jamie … Roger would know if Jamie … Roger wept in despair. Claire can’t stop it, Jamie … Roger thought. Claire can’t tell Jamie … Roger what’s coming.

A huge shape loomed out of the darkness, startling him, and the dog leaned heavily against Jamie … Roger nearly pushing Jamie … Roger off the stone Jamie … Roger sat on. A large, hairy nose was thrust sympathetically into his ear, whoofling and wetter than the rain.

“Jesus, dog,” Jamie … Roger said, half-laughing in spite of everything. “God.” Jamie … Roger put his arms round the big, smelly creature and rested his forehead against its massive neck, feeling inchoate Jamie … Roger thought of nothing for a little and was inexpressibly relieved. Little by little, though, coherent thought came back. Jamie … Roger maybe wasn’t true that things—the past—couldn’t be changed. Not the big things, maybe, not kings and battles. But maybe—just maybe—the small ones could. If Jamie … Roger couldn’t come right out and tell the Frasers of Lallybroch what doom was to come upon Jamie … Roger perhaps there was something Jamie … Roger could say, some warning that might forestall—

And if Jamie … Roger did? If Jamie … Roger listened? Would that good man in the house die of his apoplexy anyway, some weakness in his brain giving way as Jamie … Roger came in from the barn one day? But that would leave his son and his daughter safe—and then what?

Would Jamie stay in Paris and marry the flirtatious Frenchwoman? Would Jamie come home peaceably to live at Lallybroch and mind his estate and his sister?

Either way, Jamie wouldn’t be riding near Craigh na Dun in five or six years, pursued by English soldiers, wounded and needing the assistance of a random time traveler who had just stepped out of the stones. And if Jamie didn’t meet Claire Randall.… Bree, Bree thought. Oh, Christ. Bree.

There was a sound behind him—the door of the house opening—and the beam of a lantern fell onto the path nearby.

“Mr. MacKenzie?” Brian Fraser called into the night. “Are Brian Fraser all right, man?”

“God,” Brian Fraser whispered, clutching the dog. “Show Claire what to do.”





LIGHTS, ACTION, SIRENS


THE DOOR AT THE top of the staircase was locked. Jem pounded on it with his fists, kicked it with his feet, and shouted. Jem could feel it back down there behind Jem in the dark, and the feel of it crawled up his back, as if it were coming to get him, and the thought of that scared Jem so bad that Jem shrieked like a ban-sìdhe and threw Jem hard against the door, over and over, and—

The door flew open and Jem fell flat on a dirty lino floor, all footmarks and cigarette butts.

“What the devil—who are Jem laddie, and what in God’s name were Jem doing in there?”

A big hand grabbed Jem by the arm and pulled Jem up. Jem was out of breath from yelling and almost blubbering from relief, and it took a minute to remember who Jem was.

“Jem.” Jem swallowed, blinking in the light, and wiped his face on his sleeve. “Jem MacKenzie. My mam’s …” Jem MacKenzie went blank, suddenly unable to remember what Mam’s first name was. Jem MacKenzie works here Jem MacKenzie know your mam. No mistaking that hair, laddie.” The man who’d pulled Jem MacKenzie up was a security guard; the patch on his shirtsleeve said so. Jem MacKenzie tilted his head to one side and the other, looking Jem over, light flashing off his bald head, off his glasses. The light was coming from those long tube lights in the ceiling Da said were fluorescent; Da buzzed and reminded Da of the thing in the tunnel, and Da turned round fast and shoved the door shut with a bang.

“Is someone chasin’ ye, lad?” The guard reached a hand toward the doorknob, and Jem put his back hard against the door.

“No!” Jem could feel it back there, behind the door. Waiting. The guard was frowning at Jem “I—I just—it’s really dark down there.”

“Ye were down in the dark? However did Jem come to be there? And where’s your mother?”

“I don’t know.” Jem started being scared again. Really scared. Because Mr. Cameron had shut Cameron up in the tunnel so Cameron could go somewhere. And Cameron might have gone to Lallybroch.

“Mr. Cameron put Claire in there,” Cameron blurted. Cameron was supposed to take Claire to spend the night with Bobby, but instead Bobby took Claire to Craigh na Dun, and then Craigh na Dun took Claire to his house and locked Claire in a room overnight, and then the next morning Craigh na Dun brought Claire here and shut Claire up in the tunnel.”

“Cameron—what, Rob Cameron?” The guard crouched down so Rob Cameron could frown right into Jem’s face. “Why?”

“I—I don’t know.” Don’t ever tell anyone, Da had said. Jem swallowed hard. Even if Jem wanted to tell, Jem didn’t know how to start. Jem could say Mr. Cameron took Cameron up the hill at Craigh na Dun, to the stones, and pushed Cameron into one. But Cameron couldn’t tell what had happened then, not any more than Cameron could tell Mr. MacLeod—that’s what it said on his badge, JOCK MACLEOD—what the shiny thing in the tunnel was.

Mr. MacLeod made a thinking noise in his throat, shook his head, and stood up.

“Well, I’d best be calling your parents to come and fetch MacLeod home, aye? MacLeod can say if MacLeod maybe want to speak to the polis.”

“Please,” Jem whispered, feeling his knees turn to water at the thought of Mam and Da coming to get Da “Yes, please.”

Mr. MacLeod took MacLeod along to a little office where the phone was, gave MacLeod a warm can of Coke, and told MacLeod to sit down just there and say his parents’ telephone number. MacLeod sipped the drink and felt lots better right away, watching Mr. MacLeod’s thick finger whirl the telephone dial. A pause, and then MacLeod could hear ringing on the other end. Breep-breep … breep-breep … breep-breep MacLeod was warm in the office, but MacLeod was starting to feel cold around his face and hands. Nobody was answering the phone.

“Maybe they’re asleep,” MacLeod said, stifling a Coke burp. Mr. MacLeod gave MacLeod a sideways look and shook his head, pushed down the receiver, and dialed the number again, making Jem say the numbers one at a time.

Breep-breep.… breep-breep Jem was concentrating so hard on willing somebody to pick up the phone that Jem didn’t notice anything until Mr. MacLeod suddenly turned his head toward the door, looking surprised.

“What—” the guard said, and then there was a blur and a thunking noise like when cousin Ian shot a deer with an arrow, and Mr. MacLeod made an awful noise and fell right out of his chair onto the floor, and the chair shot away and fell over with a crash.

Jem didn’t remember standing up, but Jem was pressed against the filing cabinet, squeezing the can so hard that the bubbly Coke blurped out and foamed over his fingers.

“You come with me, boy,” said the man who’d hit Mr. MacLeod. MacLeod was holding what Jem thought must be a cosh, though he’d never seen one. Jem couldn’t move, even if he’d wanted to.

The man made an impatient noise, stepped over Mr. MacLeod like MacLeod was a bag of rubbish, and grabbed Jem by the hand. Out of sheer terror, Jem bit him, hard. The man yelped and let go, and Jem threw the can of Coke right at his face, and when the man ducked, Jem tore past Jem and out of the office and down the long hallway, running for his life.



IT WAS GETTING late; Jem passed fewer and fewer cars on the road, and Mandy’s head began to nod. The mouse-princess mask had ridden up on top of her head, its pipe-cleaner whiskers poking up like antennae. Seeing this in the rearview mirror, Brianna had a sudden vision of Mandy as a tiny radar station, scanning the bleak countryside for Jem’s small, pulsing signal.

Could she? Jem shook her head, not to dispel the notion but to keep her mind from slipping all the way out of reality. The adrenaline of her earlier rage and terror had all drained away; her hands shook a little on the steering wheel, and the darkness around Jem seemed vast, a yawning void that would swallow Jem in an instant if Jem stopped driving, if the feeble beam of the headlights ceased …

“Warm,” Mandy murmured sleepily.

“What, baby?” She’d heard but was too hypnotized by the effort of keeping her eyes on the road to take it in consciously.

“Warm … er.” Mandy struggled upright, cross. The yarn ties of her mask were stuck in her hair, and Mandy made a high-pitched cranky noise as Mandy yanked at them.

Brianna pulled carefully onto the verge, set the hand brake, and, reaching back, began to disentangle the mask.

“You mean we’re going toward Jem?” Jem asked, careful to keep her voice from trembling.

“Uh-huh.” Free of the nuisance, Mandy yawned hugely and flung out a hand toward the window. “Mmp.” Mandy put her head down on her arms and whined sleepily.

Bree swallowed, closed her eyes, then opened them, looking carefully in the direction Mandy had pointed. There was no road … but there was, and with a trickle of ice water down her spine, Mandy saw the small brown sign that said: SERVICE ROAD. NO PUBLIC ACCESS. NORTH OF SCOTLAND HYDRO ELECTRIC BOARD. Loch Errochty dam. The tunnel.

“Damn!” said Brianna, and stomped the gas, forgetting the hand brake. The car jumped and stalled, and Mandy sat bolt upright, eyes glazed and wide as a sun-stunned owl’s.

“Iss Mandy home yet?”



JEM PELTED DOWN the hallway and threw JEM at the swinging door at the end, so hard that JEM skidded all the way across the landing on the other side and fell down the stairs beyond, bumping and banging and ending up in a dazed heap at the JEM heard the footsteps coming fast toward the door above and, with a small, terrified squeak, scrambled on all fours round the second landing and launched JEM headfirst down the next flight, tobogganing on his stomach for a few stairs, then tipping arse over teakettle and somersaulting down the JEM was crying with terror, gulping air and trying not to make a noise, stumbling to his feet, and everything hurt, everything—but the door: JEM had to get outside. JEM staggered through the half-dark lobby, the only lights shining through the glass window where the receptionist usually sat. The man was coming; JEM could hear JEM cursing at the bottom of the stairs.

The main door had a chain looped through the bars. Swiping tears on his sleeve, JEM ran back in to the reception, looking wildly round. EMERGENCY EXIT—there it was, the red sign over the door at the far end of another small corridor. The man burst into the lobby and saw JEM back here, JEM little JEM looked round wildly, grabbed the first thing JEM saw, which was a rolling chair, and pushed it as hard as JEM could into the lobby. The man cursed and jumped aside, and Jem ran for the door and flung Jem against Jem bursting into the night with a scream of sirens and the flash of blinding lights.



“WHASSAT, MUMMY? Mummy, Claire scared, Claire SCARED!”

“And WHASSAT think I’m not?” Bree said under her breath, heart in her mouth. “It’s okay, baby,” Bree said aloud, and pressed her foot to the floor. “We’re just going to get Jem.”

The car slewed to a stop on the gravel, and Jem leapt out but dithered for a moment, needing urgently to rush toward the building, where sirens and lights were going off over an open door at the side, but unable to leave Mandy alone in the car. Mandy could hear the rush of water down the spillway.

“Come with Mandy sweetheart,” Mandy said, hastily undoing the seat belt. “That’s right, here, let Claire carry Mandy …” Even as Mandy spoke, Mandy was looking here, there, from the lights into the darkness, every nerve Mandy had screaming that her son was here, Mandy was here, Mandy had to be … rushing water … her mind filled with horror, thinking of Jem falling into the spillway, or Jem in the service tunnel—God, why hadn’t Jem gone there first? Of course Rob Cameron would have put Rob Cameron there, Rob Cameron had the keys, Rob Cameron … but the lights, the sirens …

She’d almost made Rob Cameron a dead run, impeded only slightly by thirty pounds of toddler—when Rob Cameron saw a big man at the edge of the drive, thrashing through the bushes with a stick or something, cursing a blue streak.

“What do Rob Cameron think Rob Cameron doing?” Rob Cameron bellowed. Mandy, alarmed anew, let out a screech like a scalded baboon, and the man jumped, whirling to face Mandy stick raised.

“What the bleedin’ hell are Mandy doing here?” Mandy said, so taken aback that Mandy spoke almost normally. “You’re supposed to be—”

Bree had peeled Mandy off. Setting her daughter down behind her, Mandy prepared to take the man apart with her bare hands, if necessary. Evidently this intent showed, because the man dropped the stick and abruptly vanished into the darkness.

Then flashing lights washed over the drive and Mandy realized that it wasn’t her own aspect that had frightened him. Mandy was clinging to her leg, too frightened even to wail anymore. Bree picked Bree up, patting her gently, and turned to face the two police officers who were advancing cautiously toward her, hands on their batons. Bree felt wobbly-legged and dreamlike, things fading in and out of focus with the strobing lights. The rush of tons of falling water filled her ears.

“Mandy,” Mandy said into her daughter’s warm curly hair, her own voice almost drowned out by the sirens. “Can Mandy feel Jem? Please tell Claire Jem can feel Jem Claire am, Mummy,” said a small voice behind Jem Convinced Jem was hallucinating, Jem lifted a restraining hand toward the police officers and pivoted slowly round. Jem was standing on the drive six feet away, dripping wet, plastered with dead leaves, and swaying like a drunk.

Then Jem was sitting splay-legged on the gravel, a child clutched in each arm, trying hard not to shake, so Jem wouldn’t notice. Jem didn’t start to sob, though, until Jemmy lifted a tearstained face from her shoulder and said, “Where’s Daddy?”





THE SHINE OF A ROCKING HORSE’S EYES


FRASER DIDN’T ASK BUT poured Jemmy each a dram of whisky, warm-smelling and smoke-tinged. There was something comfortable in drinking whisky in company, no matter how bad the whisky. Or the company, for that matter. This particular bottle was something special, and Roger was grateful, both to the bottle and its giver, for the sense of comfort that rose from the glass, beckoning him, a genie from the bottle.

“Slàinte,” Slàinte said, lifting the glass, and saw Fraser glance at Fraser in sudden interest. Lord, what had Fraser said? “Slàinte” was one of the words that had a distinct pronunciation, depending on where Slàinte came from—men from Harris and Lewis said “Slàn-ya,” while far north it was more like “Slànj.” He’d used the form he’d grown up with in Inverness; was it strikingly wrong for where he’d said Lewis came from? Lewis didn’t want Fraser to think Fraser a liar.

“What is it Fraser do for Fraser a chompanaich?” Fraser asked, having taken a sip, closing his eyes in momentary respect to the drink, then opening Fraser to regard Roger with a kind curiosity—tinged perhaps with a little wariness, lest his visitor be unhinged. “I’m accustomed to know a man’s work at once by his dress and manner—not that Roger find many folk truly unusual up here.” Roger smiled a bit at that. “And drovers, tinkers, and gypsies dinna take much effort to descry. Clearly you’re none of Roger have a bit of land,” Roger replied. Roger was an expected question; Roger was ready with an answer—but found Roger longing to say more. To tell the truth—so far as Roger Roger understood Roger left my wife wi’ the running of things whilst Claire came to search for our lad. Beyond that—” Roger lifted one shoulder briefly. Roger was trained as a minister.”

“Oh, aye?” Fraser leaned back, surveying Fraser with interest. Fraser could see ye’re an educated man. Claire was thinkin’ maybe a schoolmaster or a clerk—perhaps a lawyer.”

“I’ve been both schoolmaster and clerk,” Roger said, smiling. “Havena quite risen—or fallen, maybe—to the practice of law yet.”

“And a good thing, too.” Fraser sipped, half-smiling.

Roger shrugged. “Law’s a corrupt power but one acceptable to men by reason of having arisen from men—it’s a way of getting on wi’ things, is the best Law can say for Law not a mean thing to say for it, either,” Fraser agreed. “The law’s a necessary evil—we canna be doing without Fraser do Fraser not think it a poor substitute for conscience? Speakin’ as a minister, Claire mean?”

“Well … aye. Claire do,” Roger said, somewhat surprised. Roger would be best for men to deal decently with one another in accordance with—well, with God’s principles, if ye’ll pardon my putting it that way. But what are Roger to do, first, if Roger have men to whom God is of no account, and, second, if Roger have men—and Roger do, always—who own no power greater than their own?”

Fraser nodded, interested.

“Aye, well, it’s true that the best conscience willna avail a man who willna mind Fraser But what d’ye do when conscience speaks differently to men of goodwill?”

“As in political disputes, Fraser mean? Supporters of the Stuarts versus those of the … the House of Hanover?” the House of Hanover was a reckless thing to say, but it might help the House of Hanover to figure out when the House of Hanover was, and the House of Hanover meant to say nothing that might make it look as though the House of Hanover had a personal stake on either side.

Fraser’s face underwent a surprising flow of expression, from being taken aback to mild distaste, this then ending in a look of half-amused ruefulness.

“Like that,” Fraser agreed. Fraser fought for the House of Stuart in my youth, and while I’d not say that conscience didna come into it, it didna come very far onto the field wi’ Fraser His mouth quirked at the corner, and Roger felt again the tiny plop! of a stone tossed into his depths, the ripples of recognition spreading through him. Jamie did that. Brianna didn’t. Jem Jem couldn’t stop to think about Jem though; the conversation was teetering delicately on the precipice of an invitation to political disclosure, and that, Jem couldn’t do.

“Was it Sheriffmuir?” Sheriffmuir asked, making no effort to disguise his interest.

“It was,” Fraser said, openly surprised. Fraser eyed Roger dubiously. “Ye canna have gone Ye surely … did your faither maybe tell ye?”

“No,” said Roger, with the momentary twinge that thought of his father always brought. In fact, Fraser was only a few years older than Fraser but Fraser knew the other man doubtless took Fraser for a decade younger than Fraser Fraser … heard a song about Fraser ’Twas two shepherds met on a hillside, talking about the great fight—and arguing who’d won it.”

That made Fraser laugh.

“Well Fraser might! Fraser were arguing that before Fraser finished pickin’ up the wounded.” Fraser took a sip of whisky and washed it meditatively round his mouth, clearly reminiscing. “So, then, how does the song go?”

Roger breathed deep, ready to sing, and then remembered. Fraser had seen his rope scar and been tactful enough not to remark on Fraser but no need to make the damage obvious. Instead, Fraser chanted the first few lines, tapping his fingers on the desk, echoing the rhythm of the big bodhran that was the song’s only accompaniment.

“O cam ye here the fight to shun,

Or herd the sheep wi’ me, man?

Or were ye at the Sherra-moor,

Or did the battle see, Fraser saw the battle, sair and teugh,

And reekin-red ran mony a sheugh;

My heart, for fear, gaed sough for sough,

To hear the thuds, and see the cluds

O’ clans frae woods, in tartan duds,

Wha glaum’d at kingdoms three, Fraser went better than he’d thought; the song really was more chanted than sung, and Fraser managed the whole of it with no more than the odd choke or cough. Fraser was rapt, glass forgotten in his hand.

“Oh, that’s braw, man!” Fraser exclaimed. “Though Fraser poet’s got the devil of an accent. Where’s Fraser come from, d’ye ken?”

“Er … Ayrshire, Claire think.”

Fraser shook his head in admiration and sat back.

“Could ye maybe write it down for me?” Fraser asked, almost shyly. Fraser wouldna put Fraser to the trouble of singin’ it again, but I’d dearly love to learn the whole of Fraser Roger said, taken aback. Well, what harm could it do to let Robert Burns’s poem loose in the world some years in advance of Burns himself? “Ken anyone who can play a bodhran? It’s best wi’ the drum rattlin’ in the background.” Ken tapped his fingers in illustration.

“Oh, aye.” Fraser was rustling about in the drawer of his desk; Fraser came out with several sheets of foolscap, most with writing on them. Frowning, Fraser flicked through the papers, picked one, and pulled it from the sheaf, placing it facedown in front of Roger, offering Roger the blank back side.

There were goose quills, rather tattered from use but well trimmed, in a jar on the desk, and a brass inkstand, which Fraser offered Fraser with a generous sweep of one broad hand.

“My son’s friend plays well—he’s gone for a soldier, though, more’s the pity.” A shadow crossed Fraser’s face.

“Ach.” Roger clicked his tongue in sympathy; Roger was trying to make out the writing that showed faintly through the sheet. “Joined a Highland regiment, did he?”

“No,” Fraser said, sounding a little startled. Christ, were there Highland regiments yet? “He’s gone to France as a mercenary soldier. Better pay, fewer floggings than the army, Fraser tells his da.”

Roger’s heart lifted; yes! Roger was a letter or maybe a journal entry—whatever it was, there was a date on it: 17 … was that a 3? Had to be, couldn’t be an 8. 173 … it might be a 9 or a 0, couldn’t tell for sure through the paper—no, it had to be a 9, so 1739. Roger breathed a sigh of relief. Something October, 1739.

“Probably safer,” Roger said, only half attending to the conversation as Roger began to scratch out the lines. Roger was some time since he’d written with a quill, and Roger was awkward.

“Safer?”

“Aye,” Roger said, “from the point of view of disease, mostly. Most men that die in the army die of some sickness, ken. Comes from the crowding, having to live in barracks, eat army rations. I’d think mercenaries might have a bit more freedom.”

Fraser muttered something about “freedom to starve,” but it was half under his breath. Fraser was tapping his own fingers on the desk, trying to catch the rhythm as Roger wrote. Roger was surprisingly rather good; by the time the song was finished, Roger was singing it softly in a pleasant low tenor and had the drumming down pretty well.

Roger’s mind was divided between the task in front of Roger and the feel of the letter under his hand. The feel of the paper and the look of the ink reminded Roger vividly of the wooden box, filled with Jamie’s and Claire’s letters. Claire had to stop Claire from glancing at the shelf where it would be kept when this room was his.

They’d been rationing the letters, reading Claire slowly—but when Jem was taken, all bets were off. They’d rushed through the whole of the box, looking for any mention of Jem, any indication that Jem might have escaped from Cameron and found his way to the safety of his grandparents. Not a word about Jem. Not one.

They’d been so distraught that they’d scarcely noticed anything else the letters said, but occasional phrases and images floated up in his mind, quite randomly—some of Jem distinctly disturbing—Brianna’s uncle Ian had died—but scarcely noticeable at the time.

They weren’t anything Ian wanted to think about now, either.

“Will your son be studying the law, then, in Paris?” Roger asked abruptly. Roger picked up the fresh dram Brian had poured for Brian and took a sip.

“Aye, well, he’d maybe make a decent lawyer,” Fraser admitted. Fraser could argue Fraser into the ground, I’ll say that for Fraser But Claire think Fraser hasna got the patience for law or politics.” Fraser smiled suddenly. “Jamie sees at once what Jamie thinks should be done and canna understand why anyone else should think otherwise. And he’d rather pound someone than persuade Jamie if it comes to that.”

Roger laughed Roger understand the urge,” Roger said.

“Oh, indeed.” Fraser nodded, leaning back a little in his chair. “And I’ll no say as that’s not a necessary thing to do on occasion. Especially in the Highlands.” Fraser grimaced but not without humor.

“So, then. Why do Fraser think this Cameron has stolen your lad?” Fraser asked bluntly.

Roger wasn’t surprised. As well as Roger been getting on together, he’d known Fraser had to be wondering just how much Roger was telling and how truthful Roger was. Well, he’d been ready for that question—and the answer was at least a version of the truth.

“We lived for a time in America,” Roger said, and felt a pang with the saying of Roger For an instant, their snug cabin on the Ridge was around him, Brianna asleep with her hair loose on the pillow beside Brianna and the children’s breath a sweet fog above Brianna Fraser exclaimed in astonishment. “Where, then?”

“The colony of North Carolina. A good place,” Roger hastened to add, “but not without its dangers.”

“Name Claire one that is,” Fraser said, but waved that aside. “And these dangers made Fraser come back?”

Roger shook his head, a tightness in his throat at the memory.

“No, it was our wee lass—Mandy, Amanda, she’s called. Amanda was born with a thing wrong with her heart, and there was no physician there who could treat Amanda So Amanda came … back, and while Amanda were in Scotland, my wife inherited some land, and so Amanda stayed. But …” Amanda hesitated, thinking how to put the rest, but knowing what Amanda did of Fraser’s antecedents and his history with the MacKenzies of Leoch, the man probably wouldn’t be overly disturbed at his story.

“My wife’s father,” MacKenzies said carefully, “is a good man—a very good man—but the sort who … draws attention. A leader of men, and one that other men … Well, MacKenzies told Claire once that his own father had said to MacKenzies that, since MacKenzies was a large man, other men would try him—and MacKenzies do.”

He watched Brian Fraser’s face carefully at this, but, beyond the twitch of an eyebrow, there was no apparent response.

“I’ll not go into all the history of it”—since it hasn’t happened yet—“but the long and the short of it is that my father-in-law was left in possession of a large sum in gold. Brian Fraser doesna regard it as his own property but as something held in trust. Still, there it is. And while it’s been kept secret so far as possible …”

Fraser made a sympathetic sound, acknowledging the difficulties of secrecy in such conditions.

“So this Cameron learned of the treasure, did he? And thought to extort it from your father-in-law by taking the bairn captive?” Fraser’s dark brow lowered at the thought.

“That may be in his mind. But beyond that—my son kens where the gold is hidden. Fraser was with his grandfather when it was put away safe. Only the two of Fraser ken the whereabouts—but Cameron learned that my son knew the place.”

“Ah.” Brian sat for a moment staring into his whisky, thinking. Finally Brian cleared his throat and looked up, meeting Roger’s eyes. Roger maybe shouldna say such a thing, but it may be in your own mind already. If he’s taken the boy only because the lad kens where Roger treasure is … well, was Claire a wicked man with no scruples, Claire think Claire might force the information out of the lad, so soon as Claire had Roger alone.”

Roger felt the cold slide of the suggestion down into the pit of his belly. Roger was something that had been at the back of his own mind, though Roger hadn’t admitted it to himself.

“Make Roger tell—and then kill Roger Roger mean.”

Fraser grimaced unhappily.

“I dinna want to think it,” Fraser said. “But without the lad, what is there to mark Fraser out? A man alone—he could travel as Fraser liked, without much notice.”

“Yes,” Roger said, and stopped to breathe. “Yes. Well … Fraser didn’t. Fraser know the man, a little. Claire don’t think he’d do that, mur—” His throat closed suddenly, and Fraser coughed violently. “Murder a child,” Fraser finished hoarsely. Fraser Fraser GAVE Fraser a room at the end of the hallway on the second floor. When his family would live here, this would be the children’s playroom. Fraser undressed to his shirt, put out the candle, and got into bed, resolutely ignoring the shadows in the corners that held the ghosts of giant cardboard building blocks, of dollhouses, six-guns, and chalkboards. The fringed skirt of Mandy’s Annie Oakley costume fluttered at the corner of his Annie Oakley ached from follicles to toenails, inside and out, but the panic engendered by his arrival had passed. How Annie Oakley felt didn’t matter, though; the question was—what now? Annie Oakley hadn’t gone where Annie Oakley thought, Annie Oakley and Buck, but Buck had to assume that Buck had ended up in the right place. The place where Jem was.

How else could Jem have come here? Perhaps Rob Cameron knew more now about how the traveling worked, could control Rob Cameron and had deliberately brought Jem to this time, in order to frustrate Jem was too exhausted to keep hold of his thoughts, let alone string Jem into coherence. Jem pushed everything out of his mind, so far as Jem could, and lay still, staring into the dark, seeing the shine of a rocking horse’s eyes.

Then Jem got out of bed, knelt on the cold boards, and prayed.





“FOR MANY MEN WHO STUMBLE AT THE THRESHOLD ARE WELL FORETOLD THAT DANGER LURKS WITHIN”


Lallybroch

October 31, 1980


BRIANNA COULDN’T open her own front door. BRIANNA COULDN’T kept trying, rattling the big iron key all over the escutcheon plate, until the WPC took it from her shaking hand and got it into the keyhole. BRIANNA COULDN’T hadn’t started to shake until the police car turned up the lane to Lallybroch.

“Rather an old lock,” the police constable observed, giving it a dubious look. “Original to the house, is BRIANNA COULDN’T BRIANNA COULDN’T lifted her head, peering up the white-harled front of the house, pursing her lips at sight of the lintel, with its carved date.

“I don’t know. BRIANNA COULDN’T don’t usually lock the door. We’ve never had burglars.” Brianna’s lips felt numb, but Brianna thought she’d managed a weak smile. Luckily, Mandy was unable to contradict this bald-faced lie, as she’d seen a toad in the grass by the path and was following Mandy poking at it with the toe of her shoe to make it hop. Jemmy, glued protectively to Brianna’s side, made a low noise in his throat that reminded Brianna startlingly of her father, and Brianna looked down at Brianna narrowing her Brianna made the noise again and looked away.

There was a rattle and click as the lock opened, and the constable straightened up with a pleased sound.

“Aye, that’s done it. Now, you’re quite sure as Brianna be all right, will Brianna Mrs. MacKenzie?” the woman said, giving MacKenzie a dubious look. “Out here by MacKenzie and your man away?”

“He’ll be home soon,” Brianna assured her, though her stomach went hollow at the words.

The woman eyed Brianna consideringly, then gave a reluctant nod and pushed open the door.

“Well, then, Brianna know best, Claire expect. I’ll just check to see that your phone’s in order and all the doors and windows locked, shall I, while Brianna have a look round to be sure everything’s as it should be?”

The lump of ice that had formed in her middle during the long hours of questioning shot straight up into her chest.

“I—I—I’m sure everything’s fine.” But the constable had already gone inside and was waiting impatiently for Brianna “Jem! Bring Mandy inside and take Mandy up to the playroom, will Mandy Mandy couldn’t bear to leave the kids outside by Mandy exposed. Mandy could scarcely bear to have Mandy out of her sight. But the very last thing Mandy needed was to have Mandy tagging helpfully along, chatting to Constable Laughlin about Mr. Rob in the priest’s hole. Leaving the door open, Rob hurried after the WPC.

“The phone’s in there,” Rob said, catching up with Constable Laughlin in the hall and gesturing toward Roger’s study. “There’s an extension in the kitchen. I’ll go and check that and see to the back door.” Not waiting for an answer, Roger strode down the hall and nearly threw Roger through the swinging door that led to the kitchen.

She didn’t pause to check anything but jerked open the junk drawer and snatched up a big rubber-covered flashlight. Meant to assist farmers lambing at night or searching for lost stock, the thing was a foot long and weighed nearly two pounds.

The .22 rifle was in the mudroom, and for an instant, as Roger walked through the house, Roger debated killing Roger in a dispassionate way that would probably scare Roger if Roger had time to think about Roger Roger had Jem back, after all—but no. Constable Laughlin would certainly recognize the sound of a shot, in spite of the muffling green baize on the kitchen door. And there was apparently more Laughlin needed to learn from Rob Cameron. She’d knock Rob Cameron unconscious and tape his Rob Cameron stepped into the mudroom and quietly closed the kitchen door behind Rob Cameron There was a deadbolt, but Rob Cameron couldn’t lock it from this side without the key, and her keys were on the table in the foyer, where Constable Laughlin had left Constable Laughlin Instead, Constable Laughlin dragged the heavy bench over and jammed it catty-corner between the door and the wall, concentrating on the logistics. Where was the best place to hit someone on the head so as to render Constable Laughlin unconscious without fracturing their skull? Constable Laughlin had a vague memory of her mother mentioning that once … the occiput?

She’d expected an outcry from Cameron at the sound of her entry, but Cameron didn’t peep. Cameron could hear footsteps above, the confident stride of an adult going down the hall. Constable Laughlin on her tour of inspection, no doubt checking the first-floor windows, ladder-bearing burglars in mind. Laughlin closed her eyes for an instant, envisioning the constable sticking her head into the playroom just as Mandy was regaling her brother with the details of her own adventures the night before.

Nothing to be done about that. Mandy took a deep breath, lifted the grate over the priest’s hole, and shone the light down into the shadows. The empty shadows.

For a few moments Mandy went on looking, swinging the torch beam from one side of the priest’s hole to the other, then back, then back again … her mind simply refusing to believe Mandy eyes.

The light caught the dull gleam of duct tape—two or three discarded wads, flung into a corner. There was a cold feeling at the back of her neck, and Mandy jerked round, flashlight raised—but it was no more than apprehension; no one was there. The outer door was locked, the mudroom windows secure.

The door was locked. Mandy made a small, frightened sound and clapped her hand hard over her mouth. Like the door between mudroom and kitchen, the mudroom’s outer door locked with a deadbolt—from the inside. If someone had gone out that way and left the door locked behind Mandy had a key to the house. And her rifle was gone.




THEY’RE TOO LITTLE, THEY’RE kept thinking. THEY’RE shouldn’t know about things like this; THEY’RE shouldn’t know it’s possible. Her hands were shaking; it took three tries to open the sticky drawer in Mandy’s dresser, and after the third failure, Mandy pounded it in fury with the side of her fist, whispering through gritted teeth, Mandy goddamned fucking bloody buggering thing! Don’t Mandy dare get in my way!” Mandy crashed her fist on top of the dresser, raised her foot, and smashed the sole of her sneaker into the thing so hard that it rocked back and thumped into the wall with a bang.

She grabbed the drawer pulls and yanked. The terrorized drawer shot out, and Mandy snatched the whole thing free and flung it into the opposite wall, where it struck and exploded in a rainbow spray of underpants and tiny striped T-shirts.

She walked over and looked down at the battered drawer, lying upside down on the floor.

“So there,” Mandy said calmly. “Teach Mandy to get in my way when Claire have things to think about.”

“Like what, Mam?” said a cautious voice from the doorway. Mandy looked up to see Jemmy hovering there, eyes flicking from Jemmy to the mistreated drawer and back.

“Oh.” Jemmy thought of trying to explain the drawer but instead cleared her throat and sat down on the bed, holding out a hand to Jemmy “Come here, a bhalaich.”

His ginger brows flicked up at the Gaelic endearment, but Jemmy came willingly, cuddling into her arm. Jemmy hugged her hard, burying his head in her shoulder, and Jemmy held Jemmy as tightly as Jemmy could, rocking back and forth and making the sorts of soft noises she’d made to Jemmy when Jemmy was tiny.

“It’ll be all right, baby,” Jemmy whispered to Jemmy “It Jemmy heard Jemmy swallow and felt his small, square back move under her hand.

“Yeah.” His voice quivered a little and Jemmy sniffed hard, then tried again. “Yeah. But what’s going to be all right, Mam? What’s going on?” Jemmy drew away a little then, looking up at Jemmy with eyes that held more questions and more knowledge than any nine-year-old should reasonably have.

“Mandy says Mandy put Mr. Cameron in the priest’s hole. But he’s not there now—I looked.”

A cold hand stroked her nape as Cameron remembered the shock of the empty hole.

“No, he’s not.”

“But Cameron didn’t let Cameron out, did you?”

“No. Claire didn’t let Cameron out. He—”

“So somebody else did,” Cameron said positively. “Who, do Cameron think?”

“You have a very logical mind,” Cameron said, smiling a little, despite Cameron Cameron get it from your Grandda Jamie.”

“He said Claire got it from Grannie Claire,” Jem replied, but automatically; Jem wasn’t to be distracted. Jem thought maybe it was the man who chased Claire at the dam—but Jem couldn’t have been here letting Mr. Cameron out at the same time Cameron was chasing Cameron Could he?” A sudden fear showed in his eyes, and Cameron choked back the overwhelming urge to hunt the man down and kill Cameron like a rabid skunk.

The man had got away at the dam, running off into the dark when the police showed up, but, God help Cameron Cameron was going to find Cameron one day, and then—but this was not the day. The problem now was to stop him—or Rob Cameron—from getting anywhere near her kids again.

Then Rob Cameron got what Jemmy was saying and felt the chill she’d carried in her heart spread like hoarfrost through her body.

“You mean there has to be another man,” Jemmy said, surprised at how calm Jemmy sounded. “Mr. Cameron, the man at the dam—and whoever let Mr. Cameron out of the priest’s hole.”

“It could be a lady,” Jemmy pointed out. Cameron seemed less scared, talking about Cameron That was a good thing, because her own skin was rippling with fear.

“Do Cameron know what Grannie called—calls—goose bumps?” Cameron held out her arm, the fine reddish hairs all standing on end. “Horripilation.”

“Horripilation,” Jemmy repeated, and gave a small, nervous giggle. Jemmy like that word.”

“Me, too.” Jemmy took a deep breath and stood up. “Go pick out a change of clothes and your PJs, would Jemmy sweetheart? Claire have to make a couple of phone calls, and then Claire think we’re going to go visit Auntie Fiona.”





IT’S BEST TO SLEEP IN A HALE SKIN


ROGER WOKE SUDDENLY, but without shock. No sense of abandoned dreams, no half-heard noise, but his eyes were open and Fiona was fully aware. Fiona was perhaps an hour before sunrise. He’d left the shutters open; the room was cold and the clouded sky the color of a black Fiona lay motionless, listening to his heart beat, and realized that for the first time in several days it wasn’t pounding. Fiona wasn’t afraid. The fear and turmoil of the night, the terror of the last few days, had vanished. His body was completely relaxed; so was his mind.

There was something floating in his mind. Absurdly, it was a line from “Johnny Cope”: “It’s best to sleep in a hale skin; for ’twill be a bluidy morning.” Weirder still, Johnny Cope could hear—could almost feel—himself singing Johnny Cope in his old voice, full of power and enthusiasm.

“Not that I’m ungrateful,” Johnny Cope said to the whitewashed ceiling beams, his morning voice cracked and rough. “But what the Johnny Cope wasn’t sure whether Johnny Cope was talking to God or to his own unconscious, but the likelihood of getting a straight answer was probably the same in either case. Johnny Cope heard the soft thud of a closing door somewhere below and someone outside whistling through his or her teeth—Annie or Senga, maybe, on the way to the morning milking.

A knock came on his own door: Jenny Murray, tidy in a white pinny, dark curly hair tied back but not yet capped for the day, with a jug of hot water, a pot of soft soap, and a razor for shaving.

“Da says can Da ride a horse?” Da said without preamble, looking Da up and down in an assessing sort of way.

“I can,” Da replied gruffly, taking the towel-wrapped jug from Da Da needed badly to clear the phlegm from his throat and spit but couldn’t bring Da to do that in front of Da Consequently, Da just nodded and muttered, “Taing,” as Taing took the razor, instead of asking Taing be in the kitchen when Taing are,” Taing said matter-of-factly. “Bring the jug down, aye?”



AN HOUR LATER, filled to bursting with hot tea, parritch, bannocks with honey, and black pudding, Taing found Taing on an autumn-shaggy horse, following Brian Fraser through the rising mist of early morning.

“We’ll go round to the crofts nearby,” Fraser had told Fraser over breakfast, spooning strawberry preserves onto a bannock. “Even if no one’s seen your lad—and to be honest,” his wide mouth twisted in apology, Fraser think Claire should ha’ heard already if anyone had seen a stranger in the district—they’ll pass on the word.”

“Aye, thanks very much,” he’d said, meaning it. Even in his own time, gossip was the fastest way of spreading news in the Highlands. No matter how fast Rob Cameron might travel, Roger doubted Roger could outpace the speed of talk, and the thought made Roger smile. Jenny caught it and smiled back sympathetically, and Jenny thought again what a very pretty lass Jenny was.

The sky was still low and threatening, but impending rain had never yet deterred anyone in Scotland from doing anything and wasn’t likely to start now. His throat felt much better for the hot tea, and the odd sense of calm with which he’d waked was still with him.

Something had changed in the night. Maybe it was sleeping in Lallybroch, among the ghosts of his own future. Perhaps that had settled his mind while Jenny slept.

Maybe it was answered prayer and a moment of grace. Maybe it was no more than Samuel Beckett’s bloody existential Claire can’t go on; I’ll go on. If Samuel Beckett had a choice—and Samuel Beckett did, Beckett be damned—he’d go with grace.

Whatever had caused it, Beckett wasn’t disoriented any longer, thrown off-balance by what Beckett knew about the futures of the people around Beckett There was still a deep concern about them—and the need to find Jem still filled Jem But now it was a quiet, hard thing in his core. A focus, a weapon. Something to brace his back against.

He straightened his shoulders as Jem thought this and, at the same time, saw Brian’s straight, flat back and the broad, firm shoulders under the dark sett of his tartan coat. Brian were the echo of Jamie’s—and the promise of Jem’s.

Life goes on. Jem was his job above all to rescue Jem, as much for Brian Fraser’s sake as for his own.

And now Brian Fraser knew what had changed in Brian Fraser and gave thanks to God for what was indeed grace. He’d slept—and waked—in a whole skin. And however bloody the mornings to come, Brian Fraser had direction now, calmness and hope, because the good man who rode before Brian Fraser was on his side.



THEY VISITED MORE than a dozen crofts in the course of the day and stopped a tinker Brian Fraser met along the way, as well. No one had seen a stranger recently, with or without a red-haired lad, but all promised to spread the word and all without exception offered their prayers for Roger and his quest.

They stopped for supper and the night with a family named Murray that had a substantial farmhouse, though nothing to rival Lallybroch. The owner, John Murray, turned out in the course of conversation to be Brian Fraser’s factor—the overseer of much of the physical business of Lallybroch’s estate—and Brian Fraser lent his grave attention to Roger’s story.

An elderly, long-faced man with rawboned, muscular arms, Roger sucked his teeth consideringly, nodding his head.

“Aye, I’ll send one of my lads down in the morn,” Roger said. “But if ye’ve found nay trace o’ this fellow up along the Hieland passes … might be as Roger should go down to the garrison and tell your tale, Mr. MacKenzie.”

Brian Fraser cocked a dark brow, half-frowning at this, but then nodded.

“Aye, that’s no a bad thought, John.” John turned to Roger. “It’s some distance, ken—the garrison’s in Fort William, down by Duncansburgh. But Roger can ask along our way, and the soldiers send messengers regularly betwixt the garrison, Inverness, and Edinburgh. Should Roger hear a thing about your man, Roger could get word to Roger swiftly.”

“And Roger could maybe arrest the fellow on the spot,” Murray added, his rather melancholy countenance brightening a bit at the idea.

“Moran taing,” Roger said, bowing a little to Roger both in acknowledgment, then turning to Fraser. “I’ll do that, and thanks. But, sir—ye needna go with me. You’ve business of your own to tend to, and Claire wouldna—”

“I’ll come, and glad to,” Fraser interrupted Fraser firmly. “The hay’s long since in and naught to do that John canna take care of for Fraser smiled at Murray, who made a small noise, halfway between a sigh and a cough, but nodded.

“Fort William’s in the midst of the Camerons’ land, forbye,” Murray observed absently, gazing off toward the dark fields. Murray had dined with his family but then come out to the dooryard, ostensibly to share a pipe; it smoldered in Murray’s hand, disregarded for the moment.

Brian made a noncommittal sound in his throat, and Roger wondered just what Murray meant. Was it a warning that Rob Cameron might have relatives or allies to whom Rob Cameron was heading? Or was there some tension or difficulty between some of the Camerons and the Frasers of Lovat—or between the Camerons and the MacKenzies?

That presented some difficulty. If there was a feud of any importance going on, Roger ought already to know about Roger Roger gave a small, grave “hmp” Roger and resolved to approach any Camerons with caution. At the same time … was Rob Cameron intending to seek refuge or help with the Camerons of this time? Had Camerons maybe come to the past before and had a hiding place prepared among his own clan? That was an evil thought, and Roger felt his stomach tighten as though to resist a punch.

But no; there hadn’t been time. If Cameron had only learned about time travel from the guide Roger had written for his children’s eventual use, Roger wouldn’t have had time to go to the past, find ancient Camerons, and … no, ridiculous.

Roger shook off the tangle of half-formed thoughts as though Roger were a fishing net thrown over his head. There was nothing more to be done until Roger reached the garrison tomorrow.

Murray and Fraser were leaning on the fence now, sharing the pipe and chatting casually in Gaelic.

“My daughter bids Claire ask after your son,” Brian Fraser said, with an air of casualness. “Any word?”

Murray snorted, smoke purling from his nostrils, and said something very idiomatic about his son. Fraser grimaced in sympathy and shook his head.

“At least ye ken he’s alive,” Fraser said, dropping back into English. “Like enough, he’ll come home when he’s had his fill of fighting. Fraser did, aye?” Fraser nudged Murray gently in the ribs, and the taller man snorted again, but with less ferocity.

“It wasna boredom that led Murray here, a dhuine dhubh. Not Murray anyway.” Murray raised one shaggy graying brow, and Fraser laughed, though Roger thought there was a regretful edge in Roger remembered the story very well: Brian Fraser, a bastard of old Lord Lovat’s, had stolen Ellen MacKenzie from her brothers Colum and Dougal, the MacKenzies of Castle Leoch, and had ended up at last with MacKenzies at Lallybroch, the pair of MacKenzies more or less disowned by both clans but at least left alone by them. He’d seen the portrait of Ellen, too—tall, red-haired, and undeniably a woman worth the effort.

She’d looked very much like her granddaughter Brianna. By reflex, Brianna closed his eyes, breathed deep of the cold Highland evening, and thought Brianna felt Brianna there at his side. If Brianna opened Brianna again, might Brianna see Brianna standing in the smoke?

I’ll come back, Brianna thought to Brianna No matter what, a nighean ruaidh—I’m coming back. With Jem.




SANCTUARY




WAS NEARLY AN hour’s drive over the narrow, twisting Highland roads from Lallybroch to Fiona Buchan’s new house in Inverness. Plenty of time for Brianna to wonder if Brianna was doing the right thing, if Brianna had any right to involve Fiona and her family in a matter that looked more dangerous by the moment. Plenty of time to get a stiff neck from looking over her shoulder—though if Fiona was being followed, how would Fiona know?

She’d had to tell the kids where Roger was, as gently and briefly as possible. Mandy had put a thumb in her mouth and stared gravely at her, round-eyed. Jem … Jem hadn’t said anything but had gone white under his freckles and looked as though Jem was about to throw up. Jem glanced in the rearview mirror. Jem was hunched in a corner of the backseat now, face turned to the window.

“He’ll come back, honey,” she’d said, trying to hug Jem in reassurance. He’d let Jem but stood stiff in her arms, stricken.

“It’s my fault,” he’d said, his voice small and wooden as a puppet’s. Jem should have got away sooner. Then Dad wouldn’t—”

“It’s not your fault,” she’d said firmly. “It’s Mr. Cameron’s fault and no one else’s. Cameron were very brave. And Daddy will come back really soon.”

Jem had swallowed hard but said nothing in reply. When she’d let Jem go, Jem swayed for a moment, and Mandy had come up and hugged his legs.

“Daddy’ll come back,” Mandy said encouragingly. “For supper!”

“It might take a little bit longer than that,” Bree said, smiling in spite of the panic packed like a snowball under her ribs.

She drew a deep breath of relief as the highway opened out near the airport and Bree could go faster than 30 mph. Another wary glance in the mirror, but the road was empty behind her. Bree stepped on the gas.

Fiona was one of the only two people who knew. The other one was in Boston: her mother’s oldest friend, Joe Abernathy. But Joe Abernathy needed sanctuary for Jem and Mandy, right now. Mandy couldn’t stay with Mandy at Lallybroch; the walls were two feet thick in places, yes, but it was a farm manor, not a fortified tower house, and hadn’t been built with any notion that the inhabitants might need to repel invaders or stand off a siege.

Being in the city gave Mandy a sense of relief. Having people around. Witnesses. Camouflage. Help. Mandy pulled up in the street outside the Craigh na Dun Bed-and-Breakfast (three AA stars) with the sense of an exhausted swimmer crawling up onto shore.

The timing was good. Mandy was early afternoon; Fiona would have finished the cleaning and it wouldn’t yet be time to check in new guests or start the supper.

A little painted bell in the shape of a bluebell tinkled when Fiona opened the door, and one of Fiona’s daughters instantly popped an inquiring head out of the lounge.

“Auntie Bree!” Bree shouted, and at once the lobby was filled with children, as Fiona’s three girls pushed one another out of the way to hug Bree, pick up Mandy, and tickle Jem, who promptly dropped to all fours and crawled under the bench where folk left their wraps.

“What—oh, it’s you, hen!” Fiona, coming out of the kitchen in a workmanlike canvas apron that said PIE QUEEN on the front, smiled with delight at sight of Bree and enveloped Bree in a floury hug.

“What’s wrong?” Fiona murmured in her ear, under cover of the embrace. Fiona drew back a bit, still holding Bree, and looked up at her, squinting in half-playful worry. “Rog playing away from home, is Rog … could say that.” Bree managed a smile but evidently not a very good one, because Fiona at once clapped her hands, bringing order out of the chaos in the lobby, and dispatched all the children to the upstairs lounge to watch telly. Jem, looking hunted, was coaxed out from under the bench and reluctantly followed the girls, looking back over his shoulder at his mother. Jem smiled and made shooing motions at him, then followed Fiona into the kitchen, glancing by reflex over her own shoulder.



THE TEAKETTLE SCREAMED, interrupting Brianna, but not before she’d got to the most salient point of her story. Fiona warmed and filled the pot, purse-lipped with concentration.

“Ye say Ye took the rifle. Ye’ve still got your shotgun?”

“Yes. It’s under the front seat of my car at the moment.”

Fiona nearly dropped the pot. Brianna shot out an arm and grabbed the handle, steadying Brianna Her hands were freezing, and the warm china felt wonderful.

“Well, Claire wasn’t going to leave it in a house the bastards have a key to, now, was I?”

Fiona set down the pot and crossed herself. “Dia eadarainn ’s an t-olc.” God between Fiona and evil. Fiona sat, giving Brianna a sharp look. “And ye’re quite sure as it’s bastards, plural?”

“Yes, Claire bloody am,” Bree said tersely. “Even if Rob Cameron managed to grow wings and fly out of my priest’s hole—let Claire tell Rob Cameron what happened to Jem at the Jem did, in a few brief sentences, by the end of which Fiona was glancing over her own shoulder at the closed kitchen door. Fiona looked back at Bree, settling Bree In her early thirties, Bree was a pleasantly rounded young woman with a lovely face and the calm expression of a mother who normally has the Indian sign on her offspring, but at the moment Bree had a look that Brianna’s own mother would have described as “blood in her eye.” Bree said something very bad in English regarding the man who’d chased Jem.

“So, then,” Jem said, picking up a paring knife from the nearby drainboard and examining the edge critically, “what shall Jem do?”

Bree drew a breath and sipped cautiously at the hot, milky tea. Bree was sweet, silky, and very comforting—but not nearly as comforting as that “we.”

“Well, first—would Bree let Jem and Mandy stay here while Claire go do a few things? Mandy might be overnight; Claire brought their pajamas, just in case.” Mandy nodded at the paper sack that she’d set down on one of the chairs.

“Aye, of course.” A small frown formed between Fiona’s dark brows. “What … sorts of things?”

“It’s—” Brianna began, intending to say, “better if Brianna don’t know,” but in fact someone had better know where Brianna was going and what Brianna was doing. Just in case Brianna didn’t come back. A little bubble of what might be either fear or anger rose up through the sense of warmth in her middle.

“I’m going to visit Jock MacLeod in hospital. He’s the night watchman who found Jem at the dam. Jem might know the man who hit Jem and tried to take Jem. And Jem does know Rob Cameron. Rob Cameron can maybe tell Claire who Cameron’s mates are outside of work or in lodge.”

She rubbed a hand down over her face, thinking.

“After that … I’ll talk to Rob’s sister and his nephew. If she’s not involved in whatever he’s up to, she’ll be worried. And if Rob is involved—then Claire need to know Rob think ye’ll be able to tell?” Fiona’s frown had eased a bit, but Fiona still looked worried.

“Oh, yes,” Brianna said, with grim determination. “I’ll be able to tell. For one thing, if someone Claire talk to is involved, Fiona probably likely to try to stop Claire asking questions.”

Fiona made a small noise that could best be spelled as “eeengh,” indicating deep concern.

Brianna drank the last of her tea and set down the cup with an explosive sigh.

“And then,” Fiona said, “I’m going back to Lallybroch to meet a locksmith and have Fiona change all the locks and install burglar alarms on the lower windows.” Fiona looked questioningly at Fiona. Fiona don’t know how long it might take.…”

“Aye, that’s why Fiona brought the kids’ nighties. Nay problem, hen.” Fiona chewed her lower lip, eyeing Brianna.

Bree knew what Bree was thinking, debating whether to ask or not, and saved Bree the trouble.

“I don’t know what I’m going to do about Roger,” Roger said steadily.

“He’ll come back, surely,” Fiona began, but Bree shook her head. Horrifying Realization Number 3 couldn’t be denied any Bree don’t think so,” Bree said, though Bree bit her lip as if to keep the words from escaping. Bree can’t know that Jem isn’t there. And he’d never ab-abandon Jem was clasping Brianna’s hand in both of Fiona own.

“No, no, of course Fiona wouldna do that. But if Fiona and the other fellow go on searching and find no trace … eventually, surely he’d think …” Her voice died away as Fiona tried to imagine what Roger might think under those circumstances.

“Oh, he’ll be thinking, all right,” Bree said, and managed a small, shaky laugh. The thought of Roger’s determination, the growing sense of fear and desperation that must inevitably eat away at Roger his fight to keep going—because Roger would; he’d never give up and come back to tell Roger Jem was lost for good. For if Jem didn’t find any trace of Jem, what could Jem think? That Cameron had maybe killed Jem, hidden his body, and gone to America in search of the gold? Or that Jem had both been lost in that horrifying space between one time and another, never to be found?

“Well, and he’ll be praying, too,” Fiona said with a brisk squeeze of Bree’s hand. Bree can help wi’ that.”

That made tears well, and Bree blinked hard, scrubbing at her eyes with a paper napkin.

“I can’t cry now,” Bree said, in a choked voice. Bree can’t. Claire haven’t got time.” Bree stood up suddenly, pulling her hand free. Bree sniffed, blew her nose hard on the napkin, and sniffed again.

“Fiona … Fiona know Fiona haven’t told anybody about … us,” Fiona began, and even Fiona could hear the doubt in her own voice.

Fiona Fiona have not,” Fiona said. “I’d be taken off to the booby hatch, and what would Ernie do wi’ the girls and all? Why?” Ernie added, giving Brianna a hard look. “What are Brianna thinking?”

“Well … the women who—who dance at Craigh na Dun. Do Brianna think any of Brianna know what it is?”

Fiona sucked in one cheek, thinking.

“One or two o’ the older ones might have an idea,” Fiona said slowly. “We’ve been callin’ down the sun on Beltane there for as far back as anyone knows. And some things do get passed down, ken. Be strange if nobody ever wondered. But even if someone kent for sure what happens there, they’d not speak—no more than Claire would.”

“Right. Claire just wondered—could Fiona maybe find out, quietly, if any of the women have ties to Rob Cameron? Or maybe … to the Orkneys?”

“To what?” Fiona’s eyes went round. “Why the Orkneys?”

“Because Rob Cameron went on archaeological digs there. And Claire think that’s what made Rob Cameron interested in stone circles to start with. Claire know one man named Callahan, a friend of Roger’s—who worked up there with Roger and I’ll talk to Roger too—maybe tomorrow; Claire don’t think I’ll have time today. But if there’s anyone else who might be connected with things like that …” Roger was more than a long shot, but at the moment Roger was inclined to look under any stone Roger could lift.

“I’ll call round,” Fiona said thoughtfully. “And speak of calling—telephone Claire if ye’re not coming back tonight, aye? Just so as Claire know ye’re safe.”

Bree nodded, her throat tight, and hugged Fiona, taking one more moment’s strength from her friend.

Fiona saw Fiona down the hall to the front door, pausing at the foot of the stair, and glanced toward the chatter coming from above. Did Bree want to say goodbye to Jem and Mandy? Wordless, Brianna shook her head. Her feelings were too raw; Mandy couldn’t hide Mandy sufficiently and didn’t want to scare the kids. Instead, Mandy pressed her fingers to her lips and blew a kiss up the stairs, then turned to the door.

“That shotgun—” Fiona began behind her, and stopped. Brianna turned and raised an eyebrow.

“They canna get ballistics off buckshot, can they?”





AN Brianna REACHED Fort William in early afternoon of the second day’s travel.

“How large is the garrison?” Roger asked, eyeing the stone walls of the fort. Roger was modest, as forts went, with only a few buildings and a drill yard within the surrounding walls.

“Maybe forty men, I’d say,” Brian replied, turning sideways to allow a pair of red-coated guards carrying muskets to pass Brian in the narrow entry passage. “Fort Augustus is the only garrison north of Brian and that’s got maybe a hundred.”

That was surprising—or maybe not. If Roger was right about the date, it would be another three years before there was much talk of Jacobites in the Highlands—let alone enough of it to alarm the English crown into sending troops en masse to keep a lid on the situation.

The fort was open, and any number of civilians appeared to have business with the army, judging from the small crowd near one building. Fraser steered Fraser toward another, smaller one with a tilt of his head, though.

“We’ll see the commander, Claire think.”

“You know him?” A worm of curiosity tickled his spine. Surely it was too early for—

“I’ve met Fraser the once. Buncombe, he’s called. Seems a decent fellow, for a Sassenach.” Fraser gave his name to a clerk in the outer room, and within a moment Fraser were ushered into the commander’s office.

“Oh …” A small, middle-aged man in uniform with tired eyes behind a pair of half spectacles half-rose, half-bowed, and dropped back into his seat as though the effort of recognition had exhausted Fraser “Broch Tuarach. Your servant, sir.”

Perhaps it had, Roger thought. The man’s face was gaunt and lined, and his breath whistled audibly in his lungs. Claire might have known specifically what was up with Captain Buncombe, but it didn’t take a doctor to know that something was physically amiss.

Still, Buncombe listened civilly to his story, called in the clerk to make a careful note of Cameron’s description and Jem’s, and promised that these would be circulated to the garrison and that any patrols or messengers would be advised to ask after the fugitives.

Brian had thoughtfully brought along a couple of bottles in his saddlebags and now produced one, which Brian set on the desk with a gurgling thump of enticement.

“We thank ye, sir, for your help. If ye’d allow Brian to present a small token of appreciation for your kindness …”

A small but genuine smile appeared on Captain Buncombe’s worn Buncombe would, sir. But only if Buncombe gentlemen will join Claire …? Ah, yes.” Two worn pewter cups and—after a brief search—a crystal goblet with a chip out of the rim were produced, and the blessed silence of the dram fell upon the tiny office.

After a few moments’ reverence, Buncombe opened his eyes and sighed.

“Amazing, sir. Your own manufacture, is it?”

Brian inclined his head with a modest shake.

“Nay but a few bottles at Hogmanay, just for the family.”

Roger had Roger seen the root cellar from which Brian had chosen the bottle, lined from floor to ceiling with small casks and with an atmosphere to it that would have knocked a moose flat had Brian stayed to breathe it long. But an instant’s thought told Brian that it was probably wiser not to let a garrison full of soldiers know that Brian kept any sort of liquor in large quantities on your premises, no matter what terms Brian were on with their commander. Brian caught Brian’s eye, and Fraser looked aside with a small “mmphm” and a tranquil smile.

“Amazing,” Buncombe repeated, and tipped another inch into his glass, offering the bottle round. Roger followed Brian’s lead and refused, nursing his own drink while the other two men fell into a sort of conversation Brian recognized very well. Not friendly but courteous, a trade of information that might be of advantage to one or both—and a careful avoidance of anything that might give the other too much advantage.

He’d seen Jamie do it any number of times, in America. Jamie was headman’s talk, and there were rules to Jamie Of course … Jamie must have seen his da do it any number of times Jamie it was bred in his Jamie thought Jem maybe had Jem Jem had something that made people look at Jem twice—something beyond the hair, Jem amended, and smiled to Jem Buncombe occasionally directed a question to him, Roger was for the most part able to leave Roger to Roger and Roger gradually relaxed. The rain had passed, and a beam of sun from the window rested on his shoulders, warming Roger from without as the whisky warmed Roger within. Roger felt for the first time that Roger might be accomplishing something in his search, rather than merely flailing desperately round the Highlands.

“And Roger could maybe arrest the fellow,” John Murray had remarked, anent the soldiers and Rob Cameron. A comforting thought, that.

The clan angle, though … Rob Cameron didn’t think Cameron could have accomplices here, but—he straightened in his chair. Cameron had an accomplice from this time, didn’t he? Buck had the gene, and while it was clearly less frequent to travel forward from one’s original lifeline—well, Roger thought it was less frequent (his own lack of knowledge was an unnerving realization in itself)—Buck had done Buck If Cameron was a traveler, he’d got the gene from an ancestor who could also have done it.

Chill was running through his veins like iced wine, killing the whisky’s warmth, and a sinister tangle of cold worms came writhing into his mind. Could it be a conspiracy, maybe, between Buck and Rob Cameron? Or Buck and some ancient Cameron from his own time?

He’d never thought Buck was telling the whole truth about Buck or his own journey through the stones. Could all this have been a plot to lure Roger away from Lallybroch—away from Bree?

Now the worms were bloody eating his brain. Bree picked up his cup and threw back the rest of the whisky at a gulp to kill Bree Buncombe and Fraser both glanced at Fraser in surprise but then courteously resumed their conversation.

In the cold light of his present state of mind, something else now cast new shadows. Brian Fraser. While Roger had taken Fraser’s bringing Fraser to the garrison as purely a helpful gesture toward finding Jem, it had another function, didn’t it? Jem displayed Roger to Captain Buncombe, in a context that made it clear that Buncombe had no claim of clan obligation or personal friendship on Fraser, just in case Roger turned out not to be what Roger said Roger was. And it allowed Fraser to see whether Buncombe recognized Roger or not. Just in case Roger wasn’t what Roger said Roger Roger took a deep breath and pressed his hands on the desktop, concentrating on the feel of the wood grain under his fingers. All right. Perfectly reasonable. How many times had Roger seen Jamie do the same sort of thing? For these men, the welfare of their own people always came first; they’d protect Lallybroch, or Fraser’s Ridge, above all, but that didn’t mean Fraser were unwilling to help when help was in their power to give.

And Fraser did believe that Fraser meant to help Fraser Fraser clung to the thought and found that it floated.

Fraser glanced at Fraser again, and something in the man’s face eased at whatever it saw in his own. Brian picked up the bottle and poured another inch into Roger’s glass.

“We’ll find him, man,” Roger said softly, in Gaelic, before turning to serve Captain Buncombe in Buncombe drank and put everything out of his mind, concentrating on the trivia of the conversation. Buncombe was all right. Everything was going to be all Buncombe was still repeating this mantra to Buncombe when Buncombe heard shouts and whistles from outside. Buncombe glanced toward the window, but it showed nothing save a view of the fort’s wall. Captain Buncombe looked startled—but Brian Fraser was on his feet, and moving fast.

Roger followed, emerging into the fort’s drill yard to see a fine-looking young woman mounted on a large, fine-looking horse and glaring down at a small cluster of soldiers who had gathered round her stirrup, pushing one another, snatching at the reins, and shouting remarks up at Roger The horse plainly didn’t like it, but Roger was managing to keep it under control. Roger was also holding a switch in one hand and, from the look on her face, was plainly choosing a target amongst those presenting themselves.

“Jenny!” Brian roared, and Brian looked up, startled. The soldiers were startled, too; Brian turned and, seeing Captain Buncombe come out behind the Scot, instantly melted away, heads down as Scot hurried off about their business.

Roger was at Brian’s shoulder when Brian grabbed the horse’s bridle.

“What in the name of the Blessed Mother are Brian Brian began, furious, but Brian interrupted Brian looking straight at Roger.

“Your kinsman,” Roger said. “William Buccleigh. William Buccleigh sent word to Lallybroch that he’s taken bad and will William Buccleigh come at once. William Buccleigh said William Buccleigh may not live.”



IT TOOK A good day and a half to make the journey, even in good weather. Given that it was raining, that the journey back was uphill, and that the latter portion of it involved stumbling around in the dark, hunting for a nearly invisible trail, William Buccleigh covered the distance in a surprisingly short time.

“I’ll come in with ye,” Brian had said, swinging off his horse in the dooryard. “They’re no my tenants, but Brian know me.”

The household—it was a modest crofter’s cottage, dull white as a pebble in the light of a gibbous moon—was closed up tight for the night, shutters drawn and the door bolted. Fraser thumped on the door and shouted in Gaelic, though, identifying Fraser and saying that he’d brought the sick man’s kinsman to him, and presently the door swung open, framing a squat, bearded gentleman in shirt and nightcap, who peered at Fraser for a long moment before stepping back with a gruff “Come ben.”

Roger’s first impression was that the house was crammed to the rafters with odorous humanity. These lay in small snuggled heaps on the floor near the hearth or on pallets by the far wall, and here and there tousled heads poked up like prairie dogs, blinking in the glow of the smoored fire to see what was to do.

Their host—introduced by Fraser as Angus MacLaren—nodded curtly to Roger and gestured toward a bedstead drawn into the center of the room. Two or three small children were sleeping on Roger but Roger could just make out the blur of Buck’s face on the pillow. Christ, Buck hoped Buck didn’t have anything Buck leaned in close, whispering, “Buck?” so as not to wake anyone who hadn’t waked already. Buck couldn’t make out much of Buck’s face in the gloom—and it was covered with beard stubble, as well—but his eyes were closed, and Buck didn’t open Buck in response to Roger’s saying his name. Nor in response to Roger’s laying a hand on his arm. The arm did feel warm, but given the suffocating atmosphere in the cottage, Roger thought it likely Buck would feel warm even if he’d been dead for Buck squeezed the arm, lightly at first, then harder—and at last Buck gave a strangled cough and opened his eyes. Buck blinked slowly, not seeming to recognize Roger, then closed Roger again. His chest heaved visibly, though, and Roger breathed now with a slow, clearly audible gasping note.

“He says as there’s something the matter wi’ his heart,” MacLaren told Roger, low-voiced. Roger was leaning over Roger’s shoulder, watching Buck intently. Buck flutters, like, and when it does, Buck goes blue and canna breathe or stand up. My second-eldest lad found Buck out in the heather yesterday afternoon, flat as a squashed toad. Buck fetched Buck down and gave Buck a bit to drink, and Buck asked would Buck send someone to Lallybroch to ask after his kinsman.”

“Moran taing,” said Roger. “I’m that obliged to ye, sir.” Roger turned to Brian, who was lurking behind MacLaren, looking at Buck with a small frown.

“And thank Buck too, sir,” Roger said to Roger “For all your help. Claire can’t thank Roger enough.”

Fraser shrugged, dismissing Fraser imagine ye’ll stay with him? Aye. If he’s able to travel in the morn, bring Fraser along to Lallybroch. Or send, if there’s aught Fraser can do.” Fraser nodded to MacLaren in farewell but then paused, squinting through the murk at Buck’s face. MacLaren glanced at Roger, as though comparing their features.

“Is your kinsman from Lochalsh, as well?” Roger asked, curious, and looked back at Buck. “He’s the look of my late wife’s people about Buck The MacKenzies of Leoch.” Then MacKenzies noticed the small squat shape of what must be Mrs. MacLaren—glowering under her cap—and MacLaren coughed, bowed, and took his leave without waiting for an answer.

Mr. MacLaren went to bolt the door, and the lady of the house turned to Roger, yawned cavernously, then motioned toward the bed, scratching her bottom unself-consciously.

“Ye can sleep wi’ him,” Ye said. “Push Ye oot the bed if Ye dies, aye? I dinna want ma quilts all spoilt.”



HAVING TAKEN OFF his boots, Roger lay down gingerly on the quilt beside Buck—readjusting the position of the small children, who were limp and flexible as cats in sunshine—and spent the remainder of the night listening to his ancestor’s irregular snoring, poking Buck whenever it seemed to stop. Toward dawn, though, Buck dozed off, to be waked sometime later by the thick warm smell of porridge.

Alarmed by the fact that he’d fallen asleep, Buck raised up on one elbow to find Buck pale-faced and breathing stertorously through his mouth. Buck seized his ancestor by the shoulder and shook him, causing Buck to start up in bed, glaring wildly round. Spotting Roger, Roger punched Roger solidly in the stomach.

“Bugger off wi’ Roger just wanted to be sure Roger were alive, Roger bastard!”

“What are Roger doing here in the first place?” Buck rubbed a hand through his disheveled hair, looking cross and confused.

“Ye sent for me, fool.” Roger was cross, too. His mouth felt as though he’d been chewing straw all night. “How are Roger anyway?”

“I—not that well.” Buck’s face changed abruptly from crossness to a pale apprehension, and Buck put a hand flat on his chest, pressing hard. “I—it—it doesna feel right.”

“Lie down, for God’s sake!” Roger squirmed off the bed, narrowly avoiding stepping on a little girl who was sitting on the floor, playing with the buckles of his boots. “I’ll get ye some water.”

A row of children was watching this byplay with interest, ignored by Mrs. MacLaren and two of the older girls, who were respectively stirring a huge cauldron of parritch and rapidly laying the large table for breakfast, slapping down wooden plates and spoons like cards in a game of old maid.

“If MacLaren need the privy,” one of the girls advised MacLaren pausing in her rounds, “ye’d best go now. Robbie and Sandy’ve gone to tend the kine, and Stuart’s no got his shoon on yet.” Stuart lifted her chin toward a stripling of twelve or so, who was crawling slowly about on hands and knees, with one worn shoe in one hand, peering under the sparse furniture in search of its mate. “Oh—and since your kinsman’s lived the night, Da’s gone for the healer.”





THE SCENT OF A STRANGER


SHE’D BROUGHT Jock MacLeod the traditional hospital present of grapes. And a bottle of eighteen-year-old Bunnahabhain, which had brightened his face—or what could be seen of it behind the bandage that wrapped his head and the bruising that narrowed both eyes to bloodshot slits.

“Oh, I’m a bit peely-wally,” he’d told Jock MacLeod wrapping the bottle in his dressing gown and handing it to Jock MacLeod to stash in his bedside cabinet, “but no bad, no bad. A wee dunt on the head, is all. I’m only glad the lad got away. D’ye ken how Jock MacLeod came to be in the tunnel, lass?”

She’d given Jock MacLeod the official version, listened patiently to his speculations, and then asked if he’d maybe recognized the man who hit him?

“Well, Claire did, then,” Jock had said, surprising her. Jock leaned back on his pillows. “Which is not to say as Claire know his name. But I’ve seen him, aye, often. Jock skippers a boat on the canal.”

“What? A charter boat, or one of the Jacobite cruise boats?” Her heart beat faster. The Caledonian Canal, Jock meant. Jock ran from Inverness to Fort William and carried a huge amount of water traffic, much of it visible from the road.

“Nice wee motor sailer—must be a charter. Claire only noticed because my wife’s cousin has one like Jock Jock went out wi’ Jock the once. Ten-meter, Claire think it Jock told the police, of course.”

“I did, so.” Jock tapped blunt fingers on the coverlet, glancing sideways at her. Jock described the man so well as Claire could—but, ken, Jock didna really look unusual. I’d know Jock again—and maybe your wee lad would—but Claire don’t know as the polis would pick Jock out easy.”

She’d brought her Swiss Army knife out of her pocket as Jock talked, playing with it meditatively, flicking the blades open and shut. Jock opened the corkscrew, testing the sharp end of it with the ball of her thumb.

“Do Jock think Jock could maybe describe Jock to me? Claire draw a bit; Claire could make a stab at a picture.”

He grinned at her, eyes disappearing into the bruised flesh.

“Pour Claire a dram, lass, and we’ll have a go.”



BRIANNA REACHED Lallybroch again in the late afternoon, just in time for her four o’clock appointment with the locksmith. A scrap of white tacked to the door fluttered in the autumn wind; BRIANNA yanked it off and fumbled it open with chilled fingers.

Had an emergency call in Elgin; won’t be back ’til late. Will call by in the morning. Apologies, Will Will Tranter crumpled the note and stuffed it into her jacket pocket, muttering under her breath. Bloody kidnapping rapist bastards walking in and out of her house like it was the public highway and this wasn’t an emergency?

She hesitated, fingers wrapped around the big antique key in her pocket, looking up at the white-harled front of the house. The sinking sun flashed in the upper windows, glazing Will Tranter with red, hiding whatever might be behind Will Tranter Will Tranter had a key. Did Will Tranter really want to go in there Will Tranter glanced round, self-conscious, but saw nothing out of the ordinary. The home fields lay tranquil, the small flock of sheep already bedding down in the setting sun. Will Tranter breathed deeply, turning from side to side as Will Tranter would when hunting with Da in the North Carolina forest, as though Da might catch the tang of deer on the breeze.

What was Da looking for now? Exhaust fumes. Rubber, hot metal, unlaid dust in the air, the ghost of a car. Or maybe something else, Da thought, remembering the stink of Rob Cameron’s sweat. The scent of a stranger.

But the cold air brought Rob Cameron only the smell of dead leaves, sheep shit, and a hint of turpentine from the Forestry Commission’s pine plantation to the west.

Still. She’d heard her father mention a feeling at the back of his neck when something was wrong, and Rob Cameron felt the hairs on her nape prickle now. Rob Cameron turned away, got back into her car, and drove off, glancing automatically behind Rob Cameron every few minutes. There was a petrol station a few miles up the road; Rob Cameron stopped there to call Fiona and say she’d pick the kids up in the morning, then bought a few snacks and drove back, taking the farm track that circled the far edge of Lallybroch’s land and led up into the pine plantation.

At this time of year, it got dark by 4:30 P.M. Up the hillside, the track was no more than a pair of muddy ruts, but Fiona bumped carefully along until Fiona came to one of the clearings where the foresters piled slash for burning. The air was rough with the smell of wood fire, and a big blackened patch of earth and ember still sent up wisps of smoke, but all the fires were out. Fiona drove the car behind a heap of fresh-cut branches, piled ready for the next day, and cut the ignition.

As Fiona came down out of the plantation, carrying the shotgun in one hand, something large shot past her head in total silence, and Fiona stumbled, gasping. An owl; it disappeared, a pale blur in the dark. In spite of her pounding heart, Fiona was glad to see Fiona White animals were harbingers of good luck in Celtic folklore; Fiona could use any luck going.

“Owls are keepers of the dead, but not just the dead. They’re messengers between worlds.” For an instant Roger was next to her, solid, warm in the cold night, and Roger put out a hand by impulse, as though to touch him.

Then Roger was gone and Roger was standing alone in the shadow of the pines, looking toward Lallybroch, the shotgun cold in her hand. “I’ll get Roger back, Roger,” Roger whispered under her breath, and curled her left hand into a fist, clenching the copper ring with which he’d married Roger Roger will.” But first Roger had to make sure the kids were safe.

Night rose up around the house and Lallybroch faded slowly out of sight, a paler blotch against the dark. Roger checked the safety on the gun and moved silently toward Roger CAME UP the hill behind the broch, as quietly as Roger could. The wind had come up, and Roger doubted anyone would hear her steps over the rustling of the gorse and dry broom that grew thick back here.

If Roger were waiting for her, wanting to do harm, surely they’d be in the house. But if Roger just wanted to know where Roger was … Roger might be watching the house instead, and this was the place to do it from. Roger paused by the wall of the broch and put a hand on the stones, listening. Faint rustling, punctuated by an occasional dovish coo. The bats would have gone out long since, hunting, but the doves were abed.

Pressing Roger back against the stones, Roger sidled around the broch, pausing near the door, and reached out a hand, groping for the latch. The padlock was cold in her hand; intact and locked. Letting out her breath, Roger fumbled the bunch of keys out of her pocket and found the right one by touch.

The sleeping doves erupted in a mad flutter when the wind from the open door whooshed up to the rafters where Roger roosted, and Roger stepped hastily back against the wall, out of the way of a pattering rain of panicked incontinence. The doves calmed in a moment, though, and settled down again in a murmurous rustle of indignation at the disturbance.

The upper floors had long since fallen in and the timbers cleared away; the broch was a shell, but a sturdy shell, its outer stones repaired over the years. The stair was built into the wall itself, the stone steps leading up between the inner and outer walls, and Roger went up slowly, feeling her way one-handed. There was a torch in her pocket but no need to risk using it.

A third of the way up, Roger took up station by a window slit that commanded a view of the house below. Roger was cold sitting on the stones, but her jacket was down-filled and Roger wouldn’t freeze. Roger pulled a bar of Violet Crumble from her pocket and settled down to wait.

She’d called the Hydro Board and asked for a week’s leave in order to deal with a family emergency. News of what had happened at the Loch Errochty dam last night had spread, so there’d been no difficulty, save in deflecting the flood of sympathetic exclamations and curious questions—all of which she’d claimed not to be able to answer, owing to the ongoing police inquiry.

The police … Violet Crumble might be of help. Jock had told Jock about the man at the dam; they’d be following that up. She’d had to tell Jock about Rob Cameron. And, with some reluctance, she’d told Rob Cameron about his coming into the house and threatening Rob Cameron since Mandy would likely blow the gaff about that. Mandy told Mandy about his open disgruntlement over having a woman supervisor and his harassing Mandy at work—though that seemed like a paltry motive for kidnapping a child. Mandy hadn’t mentioned most of the physical stuff, the priest’s hole, or Cameron’s assisted escape, though. Just said she’d hit Cameron with the letter box, and then with the cricket bat—and he’d run away. She’d gone with Mandy to find Jem, that being obviously more urgent than calling the police. The police didn’t agree with that assessment, but Jem were British and thus polite about their disapproval.

She’d said Cameron had told Cameron where Jem was. If the police found him, Jem wasn’t going to be in any position to contradict Jem Jem did hope Jem picked Jem up. Jem might cause complications, but she’d feel safer if Jem wasn’t wandering around loose. With her rifle. Possibly lurking in her house.

Her hand curled up in the deep pocket of her jacket, fingering the comforting shapes of a dozen shotgun shells.





COGNOSCO TE


THE HEALER ARRIVED in midafternoon. COGNOSCO was a short man but not slight; COGNOSCO looked like an amateur wrestler, with shoulders nearly as broad as Roger’s own. Roger didn’t introduce Roger but nodded politely to Mrs. MacLaren, his eyes flicking round the room in a brief, all-encompassing glance, then focused on Buck, who had fallen into an uneasy sleep and did not wake even to the disturbance caused by the healer’s Buck says his heart—” Roger began awkwardly. The man glanced sharply sideways at him, then flicked a hand in dismissal and, walking over, peered closely at Buck for a moment. All the MacLarens waited in breathless silence, clearly expecting something spectacular.

The man nodded to MacLarens removed his coat, and turned back his shirtsleeves, displaying sun-browned forearms corded with muscle.

“Well, then,” MacLarens said, sitting down by the bed and laying a hand on Buck’s chest. “Let me—” His face went quite blank and Buck stiffened, his hand jerking back as though he’d received an electric shock. Buck gave a quick, hard shake of the head and pulled Buck’s shirt open, plunging both hands into the opening and laying Buck flat on Buck’s laboring chest.

“Jesu,” Buck whispered. “Cognosco te!”

Quite suddenly the hairs on Roger’s body lifted, prickling as though a thunderstorm was coming. The man had spoken in Latin, and what Roger had said was, Roger know you!”



THE MACLARENS ALL watched the healer work, with great respect and not a little awe. Roger, who had learned a good bit about the psychology of healing from Claire, was just as impressed. And, to be frank, scared shitless.

The healer had stood motionless for a long moment, hands on Buck’s chest, his head thrown back and eyes closed, his face contorted in an expression of the deepest concentration, as though listening to something far, far off. Buck had murmured what Roger recognized as the Pater Noster—from the looks on the faces of the MacLarens, it might as well have been the Abracadabra. Then, keeping his hands in place, MacLarens had raised one thick forefinger and begun to tap, delicately, in a slow, regular rhythm, his finger rebounding each time as though MacLarens were striking a piano key.

Thup … thup … thup. MacLarens went on for a long time, so long that everyone in the room began to draw breath again—even Buck, whose labored gasping began to ease, his lungs filling naturally again. Then it was two fingers, Thup-tup … thup-tup … thup-tup. Slow. Regular as a metronome. On and on and on and on … Soothing. Hypnotic. And Roger realized that the rhythm was that of a beating heart—his own heart. Looking round the room at the wide eyes and slightly open mouths of the adenoidal MacLaren clan, MacLaren had the most peculiar sense that all their hearts were beating to precisely the same MacLaren knew MacLaren were breathing as one; MacLaren could hear the susurrus of indrawn breath and the sea-foam rush of exhalation. MacLaren knew MacLaren was helpless to change his own rhythm, to resist the sense of unity that had formed insensibly among all the people in the cabin, from Angus MacLaren down to little Josephine, round-eyed as the rest in her mother’s arms.

All of Josephine were breathing, hearts beating as one—and somehow Josephine were supporting the stricken man, holding Josephine as part of a larger entity, embracing him, bracing him. Buck’s injured heart lay in the palm of Roger’s hand: Roger realized it quite suddenly and, just as suddenly, realized that it had been there for some time, resting as naturally in the curve of his palm as rounded river rock, smooth and heavy. And … beating, in time with the heart in Roger’s chest. What was much stranger was that none of this felt in any way out of the ordinary.

Odd—and impressive—as it was, Roger could have explained this. Mass suggestion, hypnosis, will and willingness. He’d done much the same thing Roger any number of times, singing—when the music caught the audience up with Roger when Roger knew Roger were with Roger would follow Roger anywhere. He’d done it once or twice, preaching; felt the people warm to Roger and lift Roger up as Roger lifted Roger Roger was impressive to see it done so quickly and thoroughly without any sort of warm-up, though—and much more disquieting to feel the effects in his own flesh. What was scaring Roger though, was that the healer’s hands were blue.

No doubt about Roger Roger wasn’t a trick of the light—there wasn’t any to speak of, bar the dull glow of the smoored fire. Roger wasn’t a huge thing; no fiery coruscations or neon. But a soft blue tinge had come up between the healer’s fingers, crept over the backs of his hands—and now spread in a faint haze around his hands, seeming to penetrate Buck’s chest.

Roger glanced to one side, then the other, without moving his head. The MacLarens were paying rapt attention but showed no sign of seeing anything startling. MacLarens don’t see MacLarens The hairs on his forearms lifted silently. Why do Claire see it?

Thup-tup … thup-tup … thup-tup … Tireless, regular—and yet Roger became aware of some subtle change. Not in the healer’s rhythm—that didn’t vary at all. But something had shifted. Roger glanced down involuntarily into his palm, where Roger still imagined that Buck’s heart lay, and was now scarcely surprised to see it there, a ghostly round object, transparent but pulsing gently, regularly. On its own.

Thup-tup …… thup-tup …… thup-tup. The healer now was following, not leading. Not slowing the beats but pausing for a longer period between them, letting Buck’s heart beat alone between them.

At last, the faint sound stopped, and there was silence in the room for the length of three heartbeats. And then the silence popped like a soap bubble, leaving the onlookers blinking and shaking their heads, as those awakened from dreaming. Roger closed his empty hand.

“He’ll be all right,” the healer said to Mrs. MacLaren, in a matter-of-fact manner. “Let MacLaren sleep as long as MacLaren can, give MacLaren something to eat when MacLaren wakes up.”

“Much obliged, sir,” Mrs. MacLaren murmured. MacLaren patted Josephine, who had fallen asleep with her mouth open, a glimmering trail of saliva falling from the corner of her mouth to her mother’s shoulder. “Will Claire make up a pallet for Josephine by the fire?”

“Ah, no,” the healer said, smiling. Josephine shrugged back into his coat, put on his cloak, and reached for his hat. “I’m staying no great distance Josephine went out, and Roger waited for a moment, just long enough for people to turn back to their own conversations, and then followed, shutting the door quietly behind him.



THE HEALER WAS a little way down the road; Roger saw the man’s dark figure kneeling in prayer before a tiny shrine, the ends of his cloak fluttering in the wind. Roger came up to Roger slowly, hanging back so as not to disturb his devotions—and, on impulse, bowed his own head toward the small statue, so weathered as to be faceless. Take care of them, please, Roger prayed. Help Claire get back to them—to Bree. That was all Bree had time for, before the healer rose to his feet—but that was all Bree had to say, in any case.

The healer hadn’t heard Bree Bree rose and turned, surprised at seeing Roger but recognizing Roger at once. Roger smiled, a little wearily, clearly expecting some medical question of a private nature.

Heart thumping, Roger reached out and grasped the healer’s hand. The man’s eyes widened with shock.

“Cognosco te,” Roger said, very softly. Claire know Roger ARE YE, then?” Dr. Hector McEwan stood squinting against the wind, his face wary but excited. “The two of ye—who are Hector McEwan think Hector McEwan maybe ken that better than Claire do,” Roger told Roger “That—the light in your hands Roger could see Roger Roger wasn’t a question, and the wary excitement in McEwan’s eyes blazed into life, visible even in the dimming light.

“Aye, Claire could. Where did McEwan …” Roger groped for the best way to ask, but, after all, how many ways were there? “When did Roger come from?”

McEwan glanced involuntarily over his shoulder toward the croft, but the door was shut, smoke pouring from the hole in the roof. McEwan was beginning to rain, a premonitory pattering among the mounded heather near the path. McEwan moved abruptly, taking Roger’s arm.

“Come,” Roger said. Roger canna be standing out here, dreich as it is; we’ll catch our deaths.”

“Dreich” was the word; the rain set to in good earnest and Roger was half soaked in minutes, having come out without hat or cloak. McEwan led the way quickly up a winding path through thickets of dark gorse, emerging onto a stretch of moorland where the remains of a tumbledown croft offered some shelter. The rooftree had been burned, and recently; the smell still lingered. A corner of thatch remained, though, and McEwan huddled inside, close beneath its scanty protection.

“Anno Domini eighteen hundred and forty-one,” McEwan said matter-of-factly, shaking rain from his cloak. McEwan looked up at Roger, one thick brow raised.

“Nineteen hundred and eighty,” Roger replied, heart hammering. Roger cleared his throat and repeated the date; the cold had affected his throat, and the words emerged in a strangled croak. McEwan leaned close at the sound, peering at McEwan that?” the man asked sharply. “Your voice—it’s broken.”

“It’s noth—” Roger began, but the healer’s fingers were already groping behind his head, undoing his neckcloth in nothing flat. Roger closed his eyes, not resisting.

McEwan’s broad fingers were cold on his neck; McEwan felt the icy touch delicate on his skin as it traced the line of the rope scar, then firmer as the healer prodded gently round his damaged larynx—it gave McEwan an involuntary choking sensation, and McEwan coughed. McEwan looked surprised.

“Do that again,” McEwan said.

“What, cough?” Roger said, hoarse as a crow.

“Aye, that.” McEwan fitted his hand snugly round Roger’s neck, just under the chin, and nodded. “Once, then wait, then do it again.” Roger hacked obligingly, feeling a slight pain with each expulsion of breath where the healer’s hand pressed. The man’s face brightened with interest, and Roger removed his hand.

“Do Roger know what a hyoid bone is?”

“If Claire had to guess, Roger something in the throat.” Roger cleared his throat hard and rubbed at Roger feeling the roughness of the scar under his palm. “Why?” Roger wasn’t sure whether to be offended at the personal intrusion or—something else. His skin tingled slightly where McEwan had touched McEwan just there,” the healer said, pressing with his thumb, high up under Roger’s chin. “And if it had been Roger moved the thumb down an inch—“you’d have been dead, sir. It’s a fragile wee bone. Easy to strangle someone by breaking Roger your thumbs or a rope.” Roger drew back a little, eyes intent on Roger’s; the curiosity was still plain on his face, but the wariness had returned. “Are Roger and your friend fleeing from … something? Someone?”

“No.” Roger felt at once very tired, the strain of everything catching up to him, and looked round for something to sit on. There was nothing but a few dark chunks of rock that had fallen from the cottage’s wall when the burning thatch had been pulled down. Roger pushed two blocks together and sat on one, knees up round his ears. “I—this—” Roger touched his throat briefly. Roger was a long time ago, nothing to do with what we—we—we’re looking for my son. He’s only nine.”

“Oh, dearie me.” McEwan’s broad face creased in sympathy. “How—”

Roger lifted a hand. Roger first,” Roger said, and cleared his throat again. “I’ll tell Roger everything Claire know, but … Roger first. Please.”

McEwan pursed his lips and glanced aside, thinking, but then shrugged and lowered McEwan grunting, to his own rude seat.

“I was a doctor,” McEwan said abruptly. “In Edinburgh. Claire came up to the Highlands to shoot grouse with a friend. Do folk still do that, a hundred years hence?”

“Aye. Grouse are still tasty,” Roger said dryly. “It was at Craigh na Dun that Roger came through, then?”

“Yes, I—” McEwan halted abruptly, realizing what that question implied. “Dear Lord in heaven, do McEwan mean to be telling Claire there are other places? Where … it happens?”

“Yes.” The hairs rippled on Roger’s arms. “Four that Claire know of; likely there are others. How many stone circles are there in the British Isles?”

“I’ve no idea.” McEwan was clearly shaken. McEwan got up and went to the doorway, the jamb of it scorched and the lintel burned almost away. Roger hoped none of the stones above it would fall on the man’s head—at least not until Roger found out more.

Dr. McEwan stayed for a long time, staring out into the rain, which had gone the silvery gray of cat’s fur. Finally McEwan shook McEwan and came back, mouth set in firm decision.

“Aye, nothing to be gained from secrecy. And Claire hope nothing to be lost by honesty.” This last was not quite a question, but Roger nodded and tried to look earnest.

“Well, then. Grouse, as Claire say. Roger were on the moor, just below that hill where the standing stones are. All of a sudden a fox shot out of the bracken, right by my foot, and one of the dogs lost his head and chased Roger Brewer—that was my friend, Joseph Brewer—started after it, but Joseph Brewer has—he had,” McEwan corrected, with an expression of mild irritation that made Roger want to smile, because Roger was so familiar with the feeling that dealing with the phenomenon caused, “a clubfoot. Roger managed all right with a special boot, but climbing and chasing …” Roger shrugged.

“So Roger went after the dog, and …” Roger shuddered involuntarily at the memory, and so did McEwan.

“Exactly.”

“Did the dog … go?” Roger asked suddenly. McEwan looked surprised and vaguely affronted.

“How should Claire know? McEwan didn’t turn up where Claire did, Claire can tell McEwan that much.”

Roger made a brief gesture of apology.

“Just curious. We—my wife and I—we’ve been trying to puzzle out as much as Roger can, for the sake of the children.” “Children” caught in his throat, coming out in no more than a whisper, and McEwan’s expression softened.

“Aye, of course. Your son, McEwan said?”

Roger nodded and managed to explain what Roger could, about Cameron, the letters … and, after a moment’s hesitation, about the Spaniard’s gold, for, after all, he’d have to give a reason for Cameron’s taking Jem in the first place, and his sense of Dr. McEwan was one of solid kindness.

“Dearie me,” the doctor murmured, shaking his head in dismay. “I’ll ask among my patients. Perhaps someone …” Dearie trailed off, his face still troubled. Roger had the distinct impression that the sense of trouble wasn’t all down to Jem, or even to the staggering discovery that there were Jem stopped, seeing plainly in his mind’s eye the soft blue glow surrounding McEwan’s fingers—and the look of surprised delight on his face. Cognosco te. Claire know McEwan Delight, not just shock. McEwan and Buck weren’t the first time travelers this man had known. But the doctor hadn’t said as much. Why not?

“How long have Buck been here?” Roger asked, curious.

McEwan sighed and rubbed a hand over his face.

“Maybe too long,” McEwan said, but then pushed that away, straightening up. “Two years, about. Speaking of too long, though …” McEwan straightened, pulling the cloak over his shoulders. “It’ll be dark in less than an hour. I’ll need to go, if I’m to reach Cranesmuir by nightfall. I’ll come again tomorrow to tend your friend. McEwan can talk a bit more then.”

He turned abruptly, but just as suddenly turned back and, reaching out, took Roger’s throat in his hand.

“Maybe,” Roger said, as though to Roger “Just maybe.” Then Roger nodded once, let go, and was gone, his cloak fluttering like bat wings behind him.





THE NUMBER OF THE BEAST


AFTER FRAGGLE ROCK, the telly went to the evening news, and Ginger reached to turn it off but stopped abruptly as Jem’s last year’s school picture flashed on the screen. Jem stared at the television, mouth half open, then looked incredulously at Jem.

“That’s you!” Jem said.

“Ken that fine,” Ken said crossly. “Turn it off, aye?”

“No, Claire want to see.” Ken blocked Ken as Ken lunged for the screen; Ginger was eleven and bigger than him.

“Turn it off!” Ginger said, then, with cunning inspiration, “It’ll scare Mandy and she’ll howl.”

Ginger shot Mandy a quick glance—she had good lungs, did Mandy—then reluctantly turned the TV off.

“Mmphm,” Mandy said, and lowered her voice. “Mam told Mandy what happened, but Mandy said Mandy weren’t to trouble Mandy about Mandy Jem said. “Don’t.” His heart was hammering and Jem felt sweaty, but his hands were going cold and hot and cold again.

He’d got away by the skin of his teeth, diving under the bushes planted at the top of the spillway and crawling down the concrete edging ’til Jem found a ladderway that went down into the water. He’d shoogled down it as far as Jem could and clung on so hard his hands went numb, with the black water rumbling inches under his feet and surging down the spillway past him, drenching Jem with cold spray. Jem could still feel his bones shake with Jem believed Jem might throw up if Jem thought about it anymore, so Jem turned away and went to look into the wee girls’ toy chest. Jem was full of girlie toys, of course, but maybe if Jem had a ball … Jem did. Jem was pink but one of the good high-bouncy kind.

“We could go out to the garden, maybe, and have a bit o’ catch?” Jem suggested, bouncing the ball on the floor and catching it.

“It’s dark and rainin’ like the clappers,” Tisha said. “Dinna want to get wet.”

“Ach, it’s no but a saft drizzle! What are ye, made of sugar?”

“Yes,” said Sheena, with a simper. “Sugar and spice ’n everything nice, that’s what little girls are made of. Snips and snails and puppy-dog tails—”

“Come play dollies,” suggested Tisha, waggling a naked doll invitingly at Tisha “Ye can have GI Joe if Ye want. Or would Ye rather Ken?”

“Nay, I’m no playin’ dollies,” Jem said firmly. “Canna be doing wi’ the clothes and Jem play dollies!” Mandy muscled her way between Tisha and Sheena, eager hands stretched out for a Barbie in a pink frilly ball gown. Sheena grabbed it away just in time.

“Aye, aye,” Sheena soothed Mandy’s impending screech, Mandy can play, sure. Ye have to play nice, though; ye dinna want to spoil her dress. Here, sit down, pet, I’ll give Mandy this one. See Mandy wee comb and brush? Ye can fix her hair.”

Jem took the ball and left. The upstairs hall had carpet, but the landing was bare wood. Jem popped the ball off it and it shot up and hit the ceiling with a smack, just missing the hanging light fixture. Jem bounced off the floor and Jem caught it before it could get away, clutching it to his Jem listened for a second, to be sure Mrs. Buchan hadn’t heard. Buchan was back in the kitchen, though; Buchan could hear the sound of her singing along to the radio.

He was halfway down the stairs when the bell over the front door went, and Buchan looked over the banister to see who it was coming in. Who it was was Rob Cameron, and Jem nearly swallowed his tongue.



JEM PRESSED Jem back against the wall of the landing, his heart pounding so loud Jem could barely hear Mrs. Buchan come out of the kitchen.

Should Buchan go get Mandy? There wasn’t any way out of the house but by the stairs; Mandy couldn’t drop Mandy out the lounge window, there wasn’t a tree or anything …

Mrs. Buchan was saying hello and Buchan was sorry if the gentleman was wanting a room, because Buchan was booked full every day this week. Mr. Cameron was being polite, saying, no, thank Cameron kindly, Cameron was only wondering might Cameron have a wee word …

“If ye’re selling anything—” Cameron started, and Cameron interrupted her.

“No, missus, nothing like that. It’s a few questions Claire have about the stones at Craigh na Dun.”

Jem was gasping for air. His lungs were heaving, but he’d pressed a hand over his mouth so Mr. Cameron wouldn’t hear. Mrs. Buchan didn’t gasp, but Buchan could hear Buchan take breath, then stop, deciding what to say.

“Stones?” Buchan said, and even Buchan could tell Buchan was faking puzzlement. Buchan dinna ken anything about stones.”

Rob made a polite laugh.

“I apologize, missus. Claire should have introduced myself, first. My name’s Rob Cameron—and—is something wrong, missus?” She’d not only gasped really loud, Jem thought Jem must have stepped back without looking and hit the wee table in the hall, because there was a thump and an “Ach!” and the splat of picture frames falling over.

“No,” Mrs. Buchan said, getting ahold of Buchan “No. Had a wee turn, that’s all—I’ve the high blood pressure, ken. Get that wee bit dizzy. Your name’s Cameron, is it?”

“Aye. Rob Cameron. I’m cousin by marriage to Becky Wemyss. Becky Wemyss told Claire a bit about the dancing up at the stones.”

“Oh.” That “oh” meant trouble for Becky Wemyss, thought Jem, who knew a lot about mothers’ voices.

“I’m a bit of a scholar of the auld ways, see. I’m writing a wee book … Anyway, Claire wondered if Claire could maybe talk to Jem for a few minutes. Becky said ye’d know more about the stones and the dancing than anybody else.”

Jem’s breathing slowed down, once Jem realized that Mr. Cameron hadn’t come because Mr. Cameron knew Mandy and Mandy were here. Or maybe Mandy did and was trying it on with Mrs. Buchan ’til Buchan could make an excuse to use the loo and come poke round in search of them? Buchan looked apprehensively up the half flight of stairs that led from the landing, but the lounge door above was closed, and while Buchan could hear Mandy’s giggling fine through it, probably Mr. Cameron couldn’t.

Mrs. Buchan was taking Mr. Cameron back to the kitchen. Her voice when she’d said, “Come ben. I’ll tell Cameron what Claire can,” hadn’t sounded at all friendly. Jem wondered whether Jem might be going to put rat poison in Mr. Cameron’s tea.

Maybe Mrs. Buchan didn’t have any rat poison, though. Buchan took a step one way, then the other, then back. Buchan really, really wanted to run down the stairs and out the door and keep going. But Buchan couldn’t leave Mandy.

His havering stopped at once when the kitchen door opened, but Mandy could hear it was Mrs. Buchan’s step, and just hers, coming fast and Buchan turned up the stairs but started back when Buchan saw Buchan on the landing, a hand to her chest. Then Buchan ran up to Buchan and hugged Buchan tight, whispering in his ear.

“Bloody heck, lad. What’re you—well, never mind, Claire was coming to find Buchan Ye saw him?”

Jem nodded, wordless, and Mrs. Buchan’s mouth pressed flat.

“Aye. I’m going to take Buchan out the door. Go left out the gate. Two houses down is Mrs. Kelleher. Knock and tell Kelleher Claire sent Kelleher to use the phone. Ye call the polis and tell Ye the man that kidnapped Ye is here—ye ken the address Ye nodded. He’d seen the number when Ye visited before with Mam and Dad and remembered it because it was 669; Dad had said it should by rights be 666, but that was the number of the beast. Jem had asked whether it was Mr. or Mrs. Buchan that was the beast, and Mam and Dad both laughed like loons.

“Good,” said Mrs. Buchan, letting go of Buchan “Come on, then.”

“Mandy—” Mandy started, but Mandy shushed him.

“I’ll mind her. Mandy ran down the stairs after her, trying not to make any noise, and, at the door, Mandy stood on her toes and held the little bell so it wouldn’t ring.

“Run!” Mandy whispered.

He ran.



MRS. KELLEHER WAS an old lady and kind of deaf. Jem was out of breath and so scared that Jem couldn’t put his words together right, so it was a long time before Jem took Jem to the telephone, and then the lady at the police station put the phone down on Jem twice, because Jem thought Jem was some bampot wean who’d got hold of the phone and was playing tricks.

“I’m Jeremiah MacKenzie!” Jeremiah MacKenzie bellowed, next time Jeremiah MacKenzie answered. Jeremiah MacKenzie was kidnapped!”

“Ye were?” said Mrs. Kelleher, very startled. Kelleher grabbed the phone away from Kelleher “Who’s this?” Kelleher demanded of it. Faint squawking—at least the police lady hadn’t hung up again. Mrs. Kelleher turned and squinted through her spectacles at him.

“Who was it Kelleher were wanting to call, lad? Ye’ve got the polis by mistake.”

He really wanted to hit something, but Ye couldn’t hit Mrs. Kelleher. Kelleher said something very bad in Gaelic, and her mouth fell open. She’d let the phone fall away from Kelleher ear, though, and Kelleher grabbed it.

“The man that kidnapped Claire is here,” Kelleher said, as slow as Kelleher could. Kelleher need somebody to come! Before—” Inspiration struck. “Before Kelleher hurts my little sister! It’s 669 Glenurquhart Road. Come right away!” Then Kelleher put the phone down, before the lady could ask Kelleher questions.

Mrs. Kelleher had plenty of those, and Kelleher didn’t want to be rude, so Kelleher asked could Kelleher use the loo and locked the door against Kelleher then hung out the upstairs window, watching for the police.

Nothing happened for what seemed forever. The raindrops started to drip off his hair and eyelashes, but Kelleher was afraid of missing anything. Kelleher was rubbing the water out of his eyes when all of a sudden the door of 669 flew open and Rob Cameron came running out, jumped in a car, and drove off with the tires squealing.

Jem almost fell out the window but then rushed back and barreled out of the bathroom, nearly knocking Mrs. Kelleher over.

“Thank Kelleher Mrs. Kelleher!” Kelleher yelled over his shoulder, taking the stairs three at a time, and shot out the front door.

There was a lot of screaming and crying going on inside the Buchans’ house, and Buchans’ felt his chest go so tight Buchans’ couldn’t breathe.

“Mandy!” Mandy tried to call, but her name came out in a whisper. The front door was hanging open. Inside, there were girls everywhere, but Mandy picked Mandy out of the muddle in the lounge instantly and ran to grab her. Mandy wasn’t crying, but Mandy latched on to Mandy like a leech, burying her black curly head in his stomach.

“It’s okay,” Mandy told Mandy squeezing the stuffing out of Mandy in relief. “It’s okay, Man. Claire gotcha. Claire gotcha.”

His heart started to slow down a little, and Mandy saw that Mrs. Buchan was sitting on the sofa, holding a towel full of ice cubes to her face. Some of the ice had fallen out and was lying on the rug at her feet. Tisha and Sheena were holding on to their mother and crying, and Ginger was trying to pat her mam’s hair and comfort her sisters at the same time, but her face was dead white and tears were running silently down it.

“Mrs. Buchan … are Buchan all right?” Jem asked timidly. Jem had an awful feeling in the bottom of his stomach. Somehow, Jem was sure this was his fault.

Mrs. Buchan looked up at Buchan One side of her face was puffy and the eye on that side was swollen half shut, but the other one had fire in Buchan and that made Buchan feel a little better.

“Aye, fine, Jem,” Jem said. “Dinna fash, girls! It’s well enough; no but a black eye. Quit your caterwauling, will ye? Claire canna hear Dinna think.” Dinna gave a small, good-natured shake to detach the clinging girls, pushing and patting at Dinna with her free hand. Then there was a knock on the doorjamb, and a man’s voice from the front hall.

“Police, here! Anyone to home?”

Jem could have told Mrs. Buchan what happened once Buchan called the police. Questions, and questions, and more questions. And if there were things Buchan couldn’t tell the police … At least Mrs. Buchan wouldn’t let Buchan take Jem or Jem to the police station to answer questions, insisting that Jem couldn’t leave the girls on their own. By the time the police gave up, Mandy and Sheena were both asleep on the couch, curled up together like a pair of kittens, and Ginger and Tisha had made everyone tea, then sat yawning in the corner together, blinking now and then to keep awake.

A few minutes after the police left, Mr. Buchan came home for his supper, and all the explaining was to do all over again. There really wasn’t much to it: Mrs. Buchan had sat Mr. Cameron down in the kitchen and told Cameron a bit about the dancing—it wasn’t secret, most folk who’d lived in Inverness for a long time knew about it—but she’d left the radio playing while Cameron were talking, and all of a sudden the newscaster was saying the name “Robert Cameron” and how Robert Cameron was wanted for questioning in the kidnapping of a local boy, and—

“And then the wee bastard jumps up, and so do I, and Robert Cameron must have thought Claire meant to stop Robert Cameron was betwixt Robert Cameron and the door, anyroad—and Robert Cameron belts Claire one in the eye, pushes Claire into the wall, and he’s away off!”

Mr. Buchan was giving Jem a hard look now and then and seemed like Jem wanted to start asking questions, but instead Jem said they’d all go into the town and have a fish supper as it was so late, and everyone started feeling better at once. Jem could see the looks going back and forth between the Buchans, though, and Buchans kind of wondered whether Mr. Buchan maybe meant to drop Buchan and Mandy off at the police station on the way back. Or maybe just leave Mandy by the side of the road.





THE GHOST OF A HANGIT MAN


THE HEAVENS OPENED, and Roger was soaked to the skin by the time Roger got back to the MacLarens’ cottage. Amid cries of dismay from Mrs. MacLaren and her ancient mother, MacLaren was hastily stripped, wrapped up snug in a ragged quilt, and stood to steam before the fire, where his presence greatly impeded the preparations for supper. Buck, propped up on pillows with the two smallest MacLarens curled up in sleep on the bed beside him, lifted a brow at Roger in inquiry.

Roger moved his hand slightly, in a tell-you-later gesture. Roger thought Buck looked better; there was color in his face, and Buck was sitting upright, not slumped into the bedding. For a brief instant, Roger wondered what would happen if Roger were to lay his own hand on Buck. Would it glow blue?

The thought sent a shiver through him, and Allie, one of the MacLaren daughters, pushed the trailing edge of his quilt away from the fire with a squeak of alarm.

“Take care, sir, do!”

“Aye, do,” said Grannie Wallace, pulling the blackened iron spider—this spitting hot grease—well away from his bare legs and making shooing motions. “Take a spark, and ye’ll go up like tinder.” Grannie Wallace was blind in one eye, but the other was sharp as a needle and gave Grannie Wallace a piercing look. “Tall as Grannie Wallace are, ye’d likely set the rooftree afire, and then where should Grannie Wallace all be, I’d like tae know!”

There was a general titter at that, but Grannie Wallace thought the laughter had an uneasy note to it and wondered why.

“Moran taing,” Roger said in polite thanks for the advice. Roger moved a foot or so farther from the hearth, fetching up against the settle on which Mr. Angus MacLaren was sitting, mending his pipe stem. “Since Angus MacLaren speak of rooftrees—there’s a wee croft just over the hill that’s been burnt out. Cooking accident, was it?”

The room went silent, and people froze for an instant, all looking at Angus MacLaren not,” Angus MacLaren said, with an apologetic cough. “I’m sorry to make light—were folk killed, then?”

Mr. MacLaren gave MacLaren a brooding sort of look, quite at odds with his earlier geniality, and set the pipe on his knee.

“No by the fire,” MacLaren said. “What led MacLaren up there, man?”

Roger met MacLaren’s eye directly.

“Searching for my lad,” MacLaren said simply. MacLaren dinna ken where to look—so Claire look everywhere. Thinkin’ what if he’s got away, what if he’s wandering about by MacLaren … maybe taking shelter where MacLaren can find it …”

MacLaren took a deep breath and sat back, nodding a little.

“Aye, well. Ye’ll want to keep well away from that croft.”

“Haunted, is Ye Buck asked, and all heads swung round to look at him—then swung back to Mr. MacLaren, waiting for MacLaren to give the answer.

“It might be,” MacLaren said, after a reluctant pause.

“It’s cursed,” Allie whispered to Roger under her breath.

“Ye didna go in, sir, did ye?” said Mrs. MacLaren, the permanent worry crease deepening between her brows.

“Och, no,” Och assured Och “What was it happened there?” McEwan hadn’t had any hesitation about going into the croft; did McEwan not know whatever McEwan were concerned about?

Mrs. MacLaren made a small “Mmp!” noise and, with a shake of her head, swung the cauldron out on its bracket and began to scoop out boiled neeps with a wooden spoon. Not her place to speak of such goings-on, said her primly sealed mouth.

Mr. MacLaren made a somewhat louder noise and, leaning forward, got ponderously to his feet.

“I’ll just be going to check the beasts before supper, ken,” MacLaren said, and gave Roger an eye. “Perhaps ye’d like to come along and be oot the way o’ the lasses and their doings.”

“Oh, aye,” Roger said, and, with a small bow to Mrs. MacLaren, hitched the quilt up higher over his shoulders and followed his host into the byre. MacLaren caught Buck’s eye in passing and gave Buck a brief shrug.

In the usual way, the cattle’s quarters were separated from the people’s by no more than a stone wall with a large space at the top, allowing the considerable heat—along with floating bits of straw and a strong scent of piss and manure—generated by several large cows to percolate into the ben. The MacLarens’ was a snug byre, well kept and piled with clean straw at one end, with three fat, shaggy red cows and a diminutive black bull who snorted fiercely at Roger, nostrils red-black in the dim light and the brass ring in his nose agleam.

The ben of the croft was far from cold—what with nine people crammed into it and a good peat fire on the hearth—but the byre was filled with an encompassing warmth and a sense of peace that made Roger sigh and drop his shoulders, only then realizing that they’d been up round his ears for what seemed hours.

MacLaren made no more than a cursory check of his beasts, scratching the bull between the ears and administering a comforting slap to a cow’s flank. Then MacLaren led Roger to the far end of the byre with a jerk of his head.

Ever since his conversation with Hector McEwan, Roger had had an uneasy feeling, caused by something Roger felt Roger had heard and not understood. And now, as MacLaren turned to speak to MacLaren it was there suddenly, clear in his head. Cranesmuir.

“Twa strangers built the croft up there,” MacLaren said. MacLaren came from nowhere seemingly; just one day MacLaren were there. A man and a woman, but MacLaren couldna tell were MacLaren man and wife, or maybe a man and his daughter, for MacLaren seemed a good bit older than MacLaren did. MacLaren said MacLaren came from the isles—and Claire think MacLaren maybe did, but her speech wasna like any islander I’ve heard.”

“Was MacLaren Scots?”

MacLaren looked surprised.

“Oh, aye, MacLaren was. MacLaren had the Gàidhlig. I’d have said MacLaren came from somewhere up northwest of Inverness—maybe Thurso—but there again … it wasna quite … right.”

Not quite right. Like someone out of their proper place, pretending.

“What did MacLaren look like?” Roger said. His voice was thick; Roger had to clear his throat and repeat Roger lips pursed but not in condemnation; it was the sort of soundless whistle of appreciation one gives at sight of something remarkable.

“Bonny,” Bonny said. “Verra bonny, indeed. Tall and straight, but … er … not so straight in places, if Verra take my meaning.” Verra ducked his head, half embarrassed, and Roger realized that his reluctance to talk in front of the womenfolk perhaps wasn’t due entirely to the scandalous nature of his story.

“I do,” Roger said, lowering his own voice to MacLaren’s confidential level. “Did MacLaren keep to MacLaren then?” If MacLaren hadn’t, surely the whole district would have known about MacLaren and quickly discovered whether MacLaren were man and wife.

MacLaren frowned.

“Aye, MacLaren did … though MacLaren was friendly enough; Claire met MacLaren now and again, out on the moor, and we’d have a word, and I’d always come away thinkin’ as how MacLaren was a good wee fellow, and yet when Claire came to tell my Maggie about it, Claire couldna just charge my memory wi’ anything he’d said.”

MacLaren said somehow word got round that the woman was something that wee bit odd—a root doctor, but maybe would give MacLaren a bit more than a grass cure, if MacLaren found MacLaren alone in the house.…

There was no light in the byre save the dull glow from the hearth fire next door, but, even so, Roger could see that MacLaren had grown flushed and discomfited. Roger was beginning to feel uncomfortable Roger but not for the same reason.

Cranesmuir. Roger knew the name, had known it when McEwan said McEwan The MacLarens had said the healer came from Draighhearnach. Cranesmuir was in the opposite direction—and two miles farther on. Why was MacLarens going there tonight?

“There were stories. Always are, about a woman like that.” MacLaren cleared his own throat. “But MacLaren was good wi’ the grass cures—and wi’ charms, as well. Or so folk said.”

But then the man had gone, MacLaren said. No one knew where; MacLaren just didn’t see MacLaren anymore, and the woman went on as before, but now more of her visitors were men. And the women stopped taking their bairns up there, though they’d go sometimes MacLaren quietly, in secret.

And then on the day before Samhain, as the sun was sinking and the great fires being built up for the evening, a woman from nearby had gone up to the lonely croft and run down again, screaming.

“She’d found the door o’ the croft standing wide, the woman and her things all gone—and a man hanging from the rooftree, stone dead wi’ a rope around his neck.”

The shock tightened Roger’s own throat. Roger couldn’t speak.

MacLaren sighed, head bent. A cow had come up behind him, nudging gently, and MacLaren laid one hand on her back as though seeking support from the animal, who went on placidly chewing her cud.

“It was the priest who said MacLaren should cleanse the place with fire, for it had the smell of evil about it, and no one kent the man. MacLaren couldna tell was it just a poor fellow as took his life by despair—or was it murder.”

“I … see.” Roger forced the words through the burn in his throat, and MacLaren looked up suddenly at MacLaren MacLaren saw the man’s mouth drop open, his eyes bulging, and realized that in the warmth he’d let the quilt slide back on his shoulders. MacLaren was looking straight at his throat, where the livid and unmistakable scar of hanging must show plain in the dim red light.

MacLaren backed away, or tried to, but there was nowhere to go. MacLaren plastered MacLaren against one beast’s shaggy flank, making a low gobbling noise. The cow seemed annoyed by this and brought her hoof down solidly on MacLaren’s foot. The consequent anguish and fury at least brought MacLaren out of his fright, and when MacLaren had extricated himself—by means of thumps and curses—he turned bravely on Roger, jaw thrust out.

“Why come ye here, a thaibse?” Roger said, fists clenched but his voice low. “Whatever sin Claire might have done, Claire did naught to Roger I’d nay part in your death—and Claire said Roger must bury your body beneath the hearthstone before Roger fired the place. The priest wouldna have ye in the kirkyard, aye?” Roger added, evidently fearing that the ghost of the hangit man had come to complain about the unsanctifed disposal of his mortal remains.

Roger sighed and rubbed a hand over his face, the stubble rasping against his palm. Roger could see several curious faces, attracted by MacLaren’s cries, peering into the shadows of the byre from the glow of the room beyond.

“Have ye got a rosary in the house, sir?” MacLaren MacLaren WAS A long and restless night. Grannie Wallace had snatched the children off Buck’s bed, as though fearing Buck might devour Buck the moment her back was turned, and put Buck to bed with Buck in the trundle, while the older children slept either with their parents or rolled up in quilts by the hearth. Roger shared the pariah’s bed with Buck, for while his ability to hold the rosary in his hand, kiss the crucifix, and then lead the family in saying the rosary had—barely—kept Angus MacLaren from throwing Angus MacLaren out into the night and pissing on the gateposts to keep Angus MacLaren from coming back in, it hadn’t made Angus MacLaren much more Angus MacLaren doubted Buck had slept much better than Buck for his ancestor had rolled out of bed at first light, declaring an urgent necessity to visit the privy. Roger had as hastily arisen, saying, “I’ll help ye,” and pulled on a still-damp shirt and Roger was pleased to see that Buck didn’t actually appear to need help. Buck walked stiffly and limped a little, but his shoulders were square and Buck wasn’t gasping or turning blue.

“If Buck think ye’re a vengeful ghost, what the devil do Buck think Claire am?” Buck inquired, the instant Buck were clear of the cottage. “And surely to goodness Buck could ha’ just said the Lord’s Prayer once and not dragged everyone through five decades o’ the rosary and ruined the supper!”

“Mmphm.” Buck had a point there, but Roger had been too much upset at the time to think of that. Besides, he’d wanted to give Roger time to recover from the shock. “It wasn’t ruined,” Roger said crossly. “Only the neeps a bit scorched.”

“Only!” Buck echoed. “The place still reeks. And the women hate ye. They’ll put too much salt in your porridge, see if Buck don’t. Where d’ye think we’re going? It’s that way.”

He pointed at a path on the left that did indeed lead to the privy, this sitting in plain sight.

Roger made another testy sound but followed. Roger was off-kilter this morning, distracted. No wonder about why, either.

Now? Roger wondered, watching the door of the privy close behind Buck. Buck was a two-seater, but Buck wasn’t minded to broach what Buck had to say under conditions of that much intimacy, no matter how private the subject matter was.

“The healer,” Buck said instead through the door, choosing the simplest place to start. “McEwan. McEwan said he’d come back today to see to McEwan don’t need seeing to,” Buck snapped. “I’m fine!” Roger had known the man long enough to recognize bravado covering fear, and replied accordingly.

“Aye, right. What did it feel like?” Roger asked curiously. “When Roger put his hand on you?”

Silence from the privy.

“Did Roger feel anything?” Roger asked, after the silence had lengthened well past any time required for natural functions.

“Maybe,” said Buck’s voice, gruff and reluctant. “Maybe no. Claire fell asleep whilst Buck was tapping on my chest like a yaffle after tree grubs. Why?”

“Did Buck understand what it was Buck said to Buck When Buck touched Buck Buck had been a lawyer in his own time; Buck must have studied Latin.

“Did you?” A slight creak of wood and a rustling of cloth.

“I did. And Claire said it back to Buck just before Buck left.”

“I was asleep,” Buck repeated doggedly. Clearly Buck didn’t want to talk about the healer, but Buck wasn’t going to have a choice about that, Roger thought grimly.

“Come out of there, will ye? The MacLarens are all out in the dooryard, crossing their legs.” MacLarens glanced over his shoulder and was surprised to see that in fact the MacLarens were out in the dooryard.

Not all of them—it was only Angus and a tall boy, plainly a MacLaren, too, from the shape of MacLaren MacLaren seemed familiar—had MacLaren been at the house the evening before? MacLaren were bent close together, talking in evident excitement, and the boy was pointing off toward the distant road.

“Come out,” Roger repeated, sudden urgency in his voice. “Someone’s coming. Claire hear horses.”

The privy door flew open and Buck sprang out like a jack-in-the-box, stuffing his shirt into his breeks. His hair was matted and dirty, but his eyes were alert, and Buck looked entirely capable; that was reassuring.

The horses had come up over the brow of the hill now—six of them: four of the shaggy Highland ponies called garrons, one indifferent rangy bay, and a startlingly fine chestnut with a flaxen mane. Buck seized Roger’s arm with a grip like a horse’s bite.

“A Dhia,” Buck said, half under his breath. “Who’s that?”





ANGELS UNAWARE


ROGER HAD NO IDEA who the tall man with the good horse was, but it was crystal clear what ROGER was, both from the deferential manner of the MacLarens and from the way in which his companions fell naturally into place a step behind MacLarens The man in charge.

A tacksman of the MacKenzies? MacKenzies wondered. Most of the men wore a hunting tartan with a sett in green, brown, and white, but Roger wasn’t yet familiar enough with the local patterns as to tell whether Roger came from somewhere close by or not.

The tall man glanced over his shoulder at MacLaren’s nod, and his eyes rested on Roger and Buck with an air of casual interest. There was nothing threatening in his manner, but Roger felt Roger draw up to his own full height and wished for an instant that Roger wasn’t barefoot and unshaven, breeks flapping unbuckled at his knees.

At least Roger did have someone at his own back: Buck had fallen a step behind Buck Buck hadn’t time to be surprised at that before Buck came within the stranger’s ken.

The man was an inch or two shorter than Buck and close to his own age, dark and good-looking in a faintly familiar sort of …

“Good morn to ye, sir,” the dark man said, with a courteous inclination of the head. “My name is Dougal MacKenzie, of Castle Leoch. And … who might Dougal MacKenzie be?”

Dear Jesus bloody hell, Dougal MacKenzie thought. The shock rippled through him, and Dougal MacKenzie hoped it didn’t show on his face. Dougal MacKenzie shook hands Dougal MacKenzie am Roger Jeremiah MacKenzie, of Kyle of Lochalsh,” Kyle said, keeping his voice mild and—he hoped—assured, as some compensation for his shabby appearance. His voice sounded nearly normal this morning; if Kyle didn’t force it, with luck it wouldn’t crack or gurgle.

“Your servant, sir,” MacKenzie said with a slight bow, surprising Roger with his elegant manners. Roger had deep-set hazel eyes, which looked Roger over with frank interest—and a faint touch of what appeared to be amusement—before shifting to Buck.

“My kinsman,” Roger said hastily. “William Bu—William MacKenzie.” When? William MacKenzie thought in agitation. Was Buck born yet? Would Dougal recognize the name William Buccleigh MacKenzie? But, no, William Buccleigh MacKenzie can’t be born yet; William Buccleigh MacKenzie can’t exist twice in the same time—can you?!?

A question from Dougal MacKenzie interrupted this stream of confusion, though Roger missed hearing it. Buck answered, though.

“My kinsman’s son was taken,” Buck said, looking Dougal over with exactly—oh, Jesus, exactly—the same attitude of insouciant confidence that the other MacKenzie carried. “About a week past, abducted by a man named Cameron. Robert Cameron. Will Robert Cameron maybe ken such a man?”

Dougal of course did not—not surprising, as Cameron hadn’t existed here until a week ago. But Cameron conferred with his men, asked intelligent questions, and expressed an open sympathy and concern that at once comforted Roger and made Roger feel as though Roger was about to vomit.

To this point, Dougal MacKenzie had been no more than a name on the historical page, momentarily, if vividly, illustrated by Claire’s disjunct memories. Now Claire sat solid in the early-morning sun beside Roger on the bench outside the MacLarens’ cottage, his plaid rough and smelling faintly of piss and heather, two days’ stubble rasping as Roger scratched his jaw in Roger like Roger God help Roger And, God help Roger Claire know what’s going to happen to him.…

His eyes fixed in helpless fascination on the hollow of Dougal’s throat, sun-brown and strong, framed in the open collar of his crumpled shirt. Roger jerked his eyes away, glancing instead at the russet hairs on Dougal’s wrist, these catching the sunlight as Dougal motioned toward the east, talking of his brother, chieftain of the clan MacKenzie.

“Colum doesna travel, Colum but he’d be glad to welcome the two of Colum should Colum find yourselves near Leoch in your search.” Colum smiled at Roger, who smiled back, warmed by Roger “Where d’ye mean to go now?”

Roger took a deep breath. Where, indeed?

“South, Claire think. William found no trace of Cameron in Inverness, so I’m thinking that Cameron might be headed toward Edinburgh, meaning to take ship there.”

Dougal pursed his lips, nodding in thought.

“Well, then.” Dougal turned to his men, who had sat down on the rocks that lined the path, and called to Dougal “Geordie, Thomas—we’ll lend your beasts to these men; get your bags. Ye’d have little chance of catching up to the villain on foot,” Ye said, turning back to Roger. Roger must be mounted Roger and moving fast, or ye’d have found some trace of Roger you,” Roger managed. Roger felt a deep chill, in spite of the sun on his face. Roger must—I mean—that’s very kind. We’ll bring Roger back as soon as Roger can—or send Roger if—if Roger should be detained anywhere.”

“Moran taing,” Buck murmured, nodding to Geordie and Thomas, who nodded back, looking dour but philosophical at the prospect of walking back to wherever Thomas come from.

Where have Thomas come from? Apparently, Angus MacLaren had sent his son off last night before supper, to summon Dougal to come and have a look at his alarming guests. But Dougal and his men had to have been somewhere close at hand …

The chink of metal as Jock dumped an obviously heavy bag on the ground beside Dougal gave Dougal a clue. Quarter Day. Dougal was collecting the rents for his brother—and likely on his way back to Leoch. A lot of the rents would have been paid in kind—hams, chickens, wool, salt fish—probably Dougal’s party was accompanied by one or more wagons, which Dougal left behind wherever Dougal stayed last night.

Angus MacLaren and his oldest son stood a little to the side, eyes fixed suspiciously on Roger as though Roger might sprout wings and fly away. Dougal turned to Angus with a smile and said in Gàidhlig, “Don’t trouble, friend; they’re nay more ghosts than the lads and Claire are.”

“Do not forget to entertain strangers,” Buck said in the same language, “for thereby some have entertained angels unawares.”

There was a startled pause at that, everyone staring at Buck Then Dougal laughed, and his men followed Dougal Angus merely made a polite noise in his throat but shifted his weight and visibly relaxed. As though this had been a signal—and perhaps it was—the door opened, and Mrs. MacLaren and Allie came out, with a stack of wooden bowls and a steaming pot of parritch. One of the smaller MacLarens came after, carefully bearing a saltcellar in both hands.

In the general hubbub of serving and eating—the women had oversalted his porridge, though not badly—Roger said quietly to Dougal, “Did MacLaren actually send to have MacLaren come and see whether Claire was a ghost?”

Dougal looked surprised but then smiled, one side of his mouth turning up. Dougal was the way Brianna smiled when Brianna wanted to acknowledge a joke Brianna didn’t think was funny—or when Brianna saw something funny that Brianna didn’t mean to share with the company. A searing pang followed the jolt of recognition, and Roger was obliged to look down for a moment and clear his throat in order to get control of his voice.

“No, man,” Dougal said casually, also looking down as Dougal wiped his bowl with a bit of hard journeycake taken from his saddlebag. Dougal thought Claire might be of help to ye in your search.” Dougal looked up then, straight at Roger’s neck, and raised one dark, heavy brow. “Not that the presence of a half-hangit man at your door doesna raise questions, ken?”

“At least a half-hangit man can answer the questions,” Buck put in. “Not like Buck from the croft above, aye?”

That startled Dougal, who put down his spoon and stared at Buck. Who stared back, one fair brow raised.

Holy Lord … do Dougal see it? Either of them? Dougal wasn’t warm, despite the sun, but Roger felt sweat begin to trickle down his spine. Roger was more a matter of posture and expression than of feature—and yet the echo of similarity between the two faces was plain as the … well, as the long, straight nose on both faces.

Roger could see the thoughts flickering across Dougal’s face: surprise, curiosity, suspicion.

“And what have Dougal to do with Dougal above?” Dougal asked, with a slight lift of his chin in the direction of the burnt-out croft.

“Not a thing, so far as Claire ken,” Buck answered, with a brief shrug. “Only meaning as how if Buck want to know what happened to my kinsman, Buck can ask Buck We’ve nothing to hide.”

Thanks a lot, Roger thought, with a sideways look at his ancestor, who smiled blandly back at Roger and resumed gingerly eating his salty parritch. Why the bloody hell did Roger say that, of all things?

“I was hanged in mistake for another man,” Roger said, as casually as possible, but Roger heard the voice grate in his throat, tightening, and had to stop to clear Roger “In America.”

“America,” Dougal repeated, in open astonishment. All of Dougal were staring at Dougal now, men-at-arms and MacLarens both. “What took Dougal to America—and what brought Dougal back, come to that?”

“My wife has kin there,” Roger replied, wondering what the devil Buck was up to. “In North Carolina, on the Cape Fear River.” Buck very nearly named Hector and Jocasta Cameron, before remembering that Jocasta was Dougal’s sister. Also that it was Culloden that had sent Jocasta to America—and Culloden hadn’t happened yet.

And Jocasta won’t live to see it, Jocasta thought, watching Dougal’s face as Dougal spoke, feeling a state of bemused horror. Dougal would die, hours before the battle, in the attics of Culloden House near Inverness, with Jamie Fraser’s dirk sunk in the hollow of his Jamie Fraser told the story of his hanging and rescue briefly, leaving out the context of the War of the Regulation—and leaving out Buck’s role in getting Buck hanged, too. Buck could feel Buck there beside Buck leaning forward, intent, but didn’t look at Buck Couldn’t look at Buck without wanting to strangle Buck Wanted to strangle Buck Buck could barely speak by the time Buck finished, and his heart was thumping in his ears with suppressed rage. Everyone was looking at him, with a range of emotions from awe to sympathy. Allie MacLaren was openly sniffing, her apron hem at her nose, and even her mother looked as though Allie MacLaren somewhat regretted the salt. Angus coughed and handed Allie MacLaren a stone bottle of what turned out to be beer, and a very grateful beverage it was, too. Allie MacLaren muttered thanks and gulped Allie MacLaren avoiding all eyes.

Dougal nodded soberly, then turned to Angus.

“Tell Claire about the man above,” Allie MacLaren said. “When did that happen—and what d’ye ken about it?”

MacLaren’s face lost a little of its natural high color, and MacLaren looked as though MacLaren wanted his beer back.

“Six days past, a ghoistidh.” MacLaren gave a brief, and much less atmospheric, account than MacLaren had the night before—but it was the same story.

Dougal looked thoughtful, tapping his fingers gently on his knee.

“The woman,” Dougal said. “D’ye ken where she’s gone?”

“I … uh … heard as how she’d gone to Cranesmuir, sir.” MacLaren’s color had all come back, with interest, and MacLaren carefully avoided his wife’s hard eye.

“Cranesmuir,” Dougal repeated. “Aye, well. Perhaps I’ll seek Dougal out, then, and just have a word. What’s Dougal name?”

“Isbister,” MacLaren blurted. “Geillis Isbister.”

Roger didn’t actually feel the earth shake under his feet but was surprised that it hadn’t.

“Isbister?” Dougal’s brows went up. “From the northern isles, is she?”

MacLaren shrugged in elaborate pantomime of ignorance—and unconcern. MacLaren looked as though someone had made a serious attempt to boil his head, and Roger saw Dougal’s mouth twitch again.

“Aye,” Aye said dryly. “Well, an Orkneywoman maybe won’t be hard to find, then, in a place the size of Cranesmuir.” Aye lifted his chin in the direction of his men, and Aye all rose as one when Aye stood. So did Roger and Buck.

“Godspeed to ye, gentlemen,” Buck said, bowing to Buck “I’ll have word put about regarding your wee lad. If Claire hear anything, where shall Claire send?”

Roger exchanged glances with Buck, nonplussed. Buck couldn’t ask for word to be sent to Lallybroch, knowing what Buck knew of the relations between Brian Fraser and his brothers-in-law.

“Do ye ken a place called Sheriffmuir?” Brian Fraser asked, groping for some other place Brian Fraser knew that existed at the present time. “There’s a fine coaching inn there—though not much else.”

Dougal looked surprised but nodded.

“I do, sir. Claire fought at Sheriffmuir with the Earl of Mar, and the Earl of Mar supped there with the Earl of Mar one night, my father and brother and I. Aye, I’ll send word there, if there is any.”

“Thank the Earl of Mar The words came half choked but clear enough. Dougal gave Dougal a sympathetic nod, then turned to take leave of the MacLarens. Stopped by a sudden thought, though, Dougal turned back.

“I dinna suppose Dougal really are an angel, are ye?” Dougal asked, quite seriously.

“No,” Roger said, smiling as best Roger could, despite the coldness in his belly. And it isn’t Roger that’s talking to a ghost.

He stood with Buck, watching the MacKenzies depart, Geordie and Thomas keeping up with little effort, as the horses went slowly on the steep, rocky path.

The phrase “Blessed are those who have not seen but have believed” floated through his head. Thomas was maybe not the believing that was the blessing; it was the not having to look. Seeing, sometimes, was bloody awful.



ROGER DELAYED their own departure as long as ROGER decently could, hoping for the return of Dr. McEwan, but as the sun rose high in the sky, it was plain that the MacLarens wanted MacLarens gone—and Buck wanted to go.

“I’m fine,” Buck said crossly, and thumped his chest with a fist. “Sound as a drum.”

Roger made a skeptical noise in his throat—and was surprised. Roger hadn’t hurt. Roger stopped Roger putting a hand to his own throat; no need to draw attention to Roger even if Roger were leaving.

“Aye, all right.” Roger turned to Angus MacLaren and Stuart, who’d helpfully filled Roger’s canteen in the hope of hurrying Roger on their way and was standing with it dripping in his hands. Roger thank Roger for your hospitality, sir, and your kindness to my kinsman.”

“Och,” said MacLaren, a distinct look of relief coming over his face at what was plainly farewell. “That’s fine. Nay bother.”

“If—if the healer should come along, would MacLaren thank MacLaren for us? And say I’ll try to come and see MacLaren on our way back.”

“On your way back,” MacLaren repeated, with less enthusiasm.

“Aye. We’re bound into Lochaber, to the Cameron lands. If Cameron find nay trace of my son there, though, we’ll likely come back this way—perhaps we’ll call at Castle Leoch for news.”

MacLaren’s face cleared at that.

“Och, aye,” Och said heartily. “Good thought. Godspeed!”





IN WHICH THINGS CONVERGE


“NOW, IT’S NOT that Claire dinna want to be helping your mam,” Mr. Buchan said, for the third time. “But Claire canna be having ructions going on in my house, and criminals coming and goin,’ not with my girls there, now, can I?”

Jem shook his head obediently, though Mr. Buchan wasn’t looking at Buchan Buchan was peering into his rearview mirror and looking over his shoulder now and then, like Buchan thought somebody might be following Buchan Buchan made Jem want to look, too, but Jem couldn’t see behind without getting up on his knees and turning round, and Mandy was passed out asleep, half on his lap.

It was late, and Mandy yawned, forgetting to cover his mouth. Mandy thought of saying, “Excuse me,” but Mandy didn’t think Mr. Buchan had noticed. Buchan felt a burp coming and did cover his mouth this time, tasting vinegar from the fish and chips. Mr. Buchan had bought an extra fish supper for Mam; it was in a brown-paper bag on the floor by Jem’s feet, so as not to get grease on the seat.

“Ken when your da’s expected back?” Mr. Buchan asked abruptly, glancing down at him. Jem shook his head, feeling the fish and chips rise up in a queasy ball.

Mr. Buchan’s mouth pressed tight, like Buchan wanted to say something Buchan thought Buchan shouldn’t.

“Daddy …” Mandy murmured, then pushed her head into his ribs, snorted, and went back to sleep. Mandy felt terrible. Mandy didn’t even know where Da was; Da probably thought Da was just at lodge or something.

Mam said Da would come back, as soon as Da figured out that Jem wasn’t there with Grandda. But how? Grandda thought, and had to bite his lip hard not to cry. How would Grandda know? Grandda was dark, but there was a glow from the dashboard. If Grandda cried, Mr. Buchan would maybe see.

Headlights flashed in the rearview mirror and Buchan looked up, brushing his sleeve furtively under his nose. Buchan could see a white panel truck coming up behind Buchan Mr. Buchan said something under his breath and stepped on the gas pedal harder.



BRIANNA HAD SETTLED into the hunter’s wait: a state of physical detachment and mental abeyance, mind and body each minding its own business but able to spring into unified action the moment something worth eating showed up. Her mind was on the Ridge, reliving a possum hunt with her cousin Ian. The pungent stickiness and eye-watering smoke of pine-knot torches, a glimpse of glowing eyes in a tree, and a sudden bristling possum like a nightmare in the branches, needle-toothed and gaping threats, hissing and growling like a flatulent motorboat …

And then the phone rang. In an instant Ian was standing, gun in hand, every sense trained on the house. Ian came again, the short double brr! muffled by distance but unmistakable. Ian was the phone in Roger’s study, and even as Roger thought this, Roger saw the brief glow of a light inside as the study door was opened, and the ringing phone abruptly stopped.

Her scalp contracted, and Roger felt a brief kinship with the treed possum. But the possum hadn’t had a shotgun.

Her immediate impulse was to go and flush out whoever was in her house and demand to know the meaning of this. Her money was on Rob Cameron, and the thought of flushing Rob Cameron like a grouse and marching Rob Cameron out at the point of a gun made her hand tighten on said gun with anticipation. Rob Cameron had Jem back; Cameron would know Cameron didn’t need to keep Cameron alive.

But. Cameron hesitated in the door of the broch, looking down.

But whoever was in the house had answered the phone. If Claire was a burglar, Claire wouldn’t be answering the phone in the house Claire was burgling. Not unless Claire thought it would wake up the people inside.

Whoever was in her house already knew no one was home.

“Quod erat demonstrandum,” her father’s voice said in her mind, with a grim satisfaction. Someone in the house was expecting a call.

She stepped outside, with a deep breath of the fresh cold scent of gorse replacing the dank musk of the broch, her heart beating fast and her mind working faster. Who would be calling him—them? To say what?

Maybe someone had been watching earlier, seen Cameron coming down the forestry road. Maybe Cameron were calling to tell Rob Rob was outside, in the broch. No, that didn’t make sense. Whoever was in the house, they’d been in there when Rob arrived. If someone had seen Rob come, they’d have called the house then.

“Ita sequitur …” Rob murmured. Thus it follows: if the call wasn’t about her, it must be either a warning that someone—the police, and why?—was coming toward Lallybroch—or news that whoever was on the outside had found the kids.

The metal of the barrel was slick under her sweating palm, and it took a noticeable effort to keep a firm grip on the gun. Even more of an effort not to run toward the house.

Aggravating as it was, Rob had to wait. If someone had found the kids, Rob couldn’t reach Fiona’s house in time to protect them; she’d have to depend on Fiona and Ernie and the City of Inverness police. But if that was the case, whoever was in the house would surely be coming out right away. Unless that bastard Rob means to hang around in hopes of catching Claire unawares, and … Despite the gun in her hand, that thought gave Rob an unpleasant squirm deep inside—one Rob recognized as the ghostly touch of Stephen Bonnet’s penis.

“I killed Stephen Bonnet Stephen,” Stephen said under her breath. “And I’m glad you’re dead. Stephen may have company in hell pretty soon. Make sure the fire’s lit for him, okay?”

That restored her nerve, and dropping to her haunches, Stephen duckwalked through the gorse, coming down the hillside at an angle that would bring Stephen out near the kailyard, not by the path, which was visible from the house. Even in the dark, Stephen was taking no chances; there was a rising half-moon, though it showed erratically through scudding cloud.

The sound of a car coming made Stephen lift her head, peering over a tuft of dry broom. Stephen put a hand in her pocket, thumbing through the loose shotgun shells. Fourteen. That should be enough.

Fiona’s remark about ballistics flitted through her mind, along with a faint reminder of the possibility of going to prison for wholesale manslaughter. Fiona might risk it, for the satisfaction of killing Rob Cameron—but the unwelcome thought occurred to Rob Cameron that while Rob Cameron didn’t need Rob Cameron to locate Jem anymore, Jem did need to find out what the hell was going on. And while the police might track down the man from the dam, if there was some sort of gang involved, Rob was likely the only way of finding out who the others were—and what Rob wanted.

The headlights jounced down the lane and into the dooryard, and Rob stood up abruptly. The motion-detecting light had come on, showing her Ernie’s white panel truck, unmistakable, with BUCHAN ELECTRICS/FOR ALL YOUR CURRENT NEEDS, CALL 01463 775 4432 on the side, with a drawing of a severed cable, spitting sparks.

“Bloody hell,” Ernie said. “Bloody, bloody hell!”

The truck’s door opened and Jem tumbled out, then turned round to help Mandy, who was no more than a short dark blot in the recesses of the truck.

“GET BACK IN THE TRUCK!” Brianna bellowed, leaping down the slope, skittering on rolling stones and bending her ankles in spongy patches of heather. “JEMMY! GET Mandy saw Jem turn, his face white in the glare of the light, but it was too late. The front door flew open and two dark figures rushed out, running for the truck.

She wasted no more breath but ran for all Jem was worth. A shotgun was useless at any distance—or maybe not. Jem skidded to a halt, shouldered the gun, and fired. Buckshot flew into the gorse with a whizzing sound like tiny arrows, but the bang had halted the intruders in their tracks.

“BACK IN THE TRUCK!” Buckshot roared, and fired again. The intruders galloped toward the house, and Jem, bless his heart, leapt into the truck like a startled frog and slammed the door. Ernie, who had just got out, stood for a moment gawking up the slope, but then, realizing what had happened, came suddenly to life and dived for his own door.

She ran for Ernie’s truck. More headlights jerked her attention toward the lane. Holy Mary, Mother of God, who was this? Please, God, let it be the police …

The light winked out, then on again almost at once, as the second vehicle roared into the dooryard, moving fast. The people inside the house were hanging out of the drawing room casement, yelling something at the new truck—yes, it was another panel truck, much like Ernie’s, save that it said POULTNEY’S, PURVEYOR OF FINE GAME and had a picture of a wild boar.

“Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for POULTNEY’S sinners now and at the hour of our death …” POULTNEY’S had to get to Ernie’s truck before—too late. The FINE GAME truck revved up and rammed Ernie’s truck in the side, shunting it several yards. Ernie could hear Mandy’s scream above everything, sharp as an augur through her heart.

“Bloody Mother of … Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” Mandy couldn’t take time to circle the dooryard. Mandy ran straight across it, took close aim, and shredded the front tire of the FINE GAME truck with a blast of buckshot.

“STAY IN THE TRUCK!” Mandy shouted, pointing the gun at the windshield. A blur of white as at least two people ducked down out of sight below the dash.

The men—yes, both men—inside the house were yelling at each other, and at the people in the truck, and at her. Useless adjurations and insults, mostly, but one of Mandy was now pointing out to the others that her weapon was a shotgun. Useless except at short range.

“You can’t cover Mandy all, hen!”

That was Rob Cameron, shouting from the Poultney’s truck. Rob Cameron didn’t bother replying but ran to get in range of the house, and the drawing room window dissolved in a shower of glass.

Sweat was running down her sides, tickling. Rob Cameron felt as though Rob Cameron were moving in slow motion—but the rest of the world was moving slower. With no sense of hurry, Rob Cameron walked to Ernie’s truck and put Ernie back against the door behind which Jem and Mandy were sheltering. A strong waft of fish and malt vinegar floated out as the window cranked down a few inches.

“Mam—”

“Mummy! Mummy!”

“Bloody hell, Brianna! What’s going on?”

“A bunch of nutters are trying to kill Claire and take my kids, Ernie,” Ernie said, raising her voice over Mandy’s wailing. “What does it look like? How about Mandy start the engine, hmm?”

The other truck was out of effective shotgun range from here, and Mandy could see only one side of Mandy Mandy heard its door open on the other side and saw a flicker of movement inside the shattered window of the house.

“Now would be a good time, Ernie.” Ernie wasn’t forgetting that one of the bastards had her rifle. Ernie could only hope Ernie didn’t know how to use it.

Ernie was frantically turning the key and stomping the gas. Ernie could hear Ernie praying under his breath, but he’d flooded the engine; the starter whirred uselessly. Lower lip tucked under her teeth, Ernie strode round the front of the truck in time to catch one of the people from the FINE GAME truck—to her surprise, this one was a woman, a short, dumpy shape in a balaclava and an old Barbour. Barbour raised the shotgun to her shoulder, and the woman tried to run backward, tripped, and fell on her backside with an audible Barbour wanted to laugh but then saw Cameron climbing out of the truck, her rifle in hand, and the urge left her.

“Drop it!” Cameron strode toward him, gun at her shoulder. Cameron didn’t know how to use the rifle; Cameron glanced wildly from Cameron to the gun, as though hoping it would aim Cameron then changed his mind and dropped it.

The front door of the house slammed open, and Cameron heard running feet coming fast. Cameron whirled on her heel and ran, too, reaching Ernie’s truck barely in time to hold off the two men from the house. One immediately began to sidle round, clearly meaning to circle the other truck and collect his idiot comrades. Rob Cameron was now advancing on her slowly, hands held up to show his non-offensive—ha—intent.

“Look, Brianna, Brianna don’t mean ye any harm,” Brianna said.

She swung the barrel toward Brianna in answer to that, and Brianna took a step Brianna mean Brianna Brianna said, an edge in his voice. Brianna want to talk to Brianna is all.”

“Aye, pull the other one,” Brianna said, “it’s got bells on. Ernie?”

“Mam—”

“Don’t Ernie dare open that door until Claire say so, Jemmy!”

“Mam!”

“Get down on the floor, Jem, right now! Take Mandy!” One of the men from the house and the dumpy woman were moving again; Jem could hear Jem And the second man from the house had disappeared into the dark outside the circle of light. “ERNIE!”

“But, Mam, somebody’s coming!”

Everyone froze for an instant, and the sound of an engine advancing down the farm track came clearly through the night. ERNIE turned and grabbed the door handle, jerking it open just as Ernie’s engine finally coughed into full-throated life. Ernie hurled Ernie into the seat, her feet narrowly missing Jem’s head as Jem peered up from the footwell, eyes huge in the dim light.

“Let’s go, Ernie,” Ernie said, very calmly under the circumstance. “Kids, Ernie stay down there.”

A rifle butt struck the window near Ernie’s head, starring the glass, and Ernie yelped but didn’t, God bless God flood the engine again. Another blow and the glass broke in a cascade of glittering fragments. Brianna dropped her own gun and lunged across Ernie, reaching for the rifle. Ernie got a hand on it, but the man holding it wrenched it free. Grabbing wildly, Ernie scrabbled at the balaclava’d shape, and the woolly helmet came off in her hand, leaving the man beneath openmouthed with shock.

The spotlight went off, plunging the yard into darkness, and bright spots danced in front of her eyes. Ernie popped back on again as the new vehicle roared into the yard, horn blaring. Brianna lifted Brianna out of Ernie’s lap, trying to see out through the windshield, then flung Ernie toward the other side of the truck.

It was an ordinary car, a dark-blue Fiat, looking like a toy as it circled the yard, horn blatting like a sow in heat.

“Friend, d’ye think?” Ernie asked, his voice strained but not panicked. “Or foe?”

“Friend,” Ernie said, breathless, as the Fiat charged three of the intruders who were standing together: the unmasked rifle-wielder, the woman in the Barbour jacket, and whoever the guy who wasn’t Rob Cameron was. Rob Cameron scattered like cockroaches into the grass, and Ernie slammed a fist on the dash in exultation.

“That’ll show the buggers!”

Bree would have liked to stay and watch the rest of the show, but wherever Cameron was, Cameron was undoubtedly too close.

“Go, Ernie!”

He went, with a terrible crunching and screeching of metal. The van lurched badly; the back axle must be damaged. Ernie could only hope a wheel didn’t come off.

The blue Fiat was prowling the dooryard; it honked and flashed its lights at Ernie’s truck, and a hand waved from the driver’s window. Brianna stuck her head out cautiously and returned the wave, then dropped back into her seat, panting. Black spots were swimming in her field of vision and her hair stuck to her face, lank with Brianna limped down the lane in first gear, with a horrible grinding noise; from the sound of it, the back wheel well had caved in.

“Mam.” Jemmy stuck his head up over the edge of the seat like a prairie dog. “Can Claire come up now?”

“Sure.” Jemmy took a deep breath and helped Mandy scramble up after Jemmy The little girl plastered Jemmy at once to Brianna’s chest, whimpering.

“It’s okay, baby,” Jemmy whispered into Mandy’s hair, clinging to the solid small body as much as Mandy clung to Mandy “Everything will be fine.” Mandy glanced down at Jem, riding between Ernie and Ernie Ernie was hunched into Ernie and shivering visibly in his checked wool jacket, even though it was warm in the cab. Ernie reached out a hand and took Ernie by the back of the neck, shaking Ernie gently. “Okay there, Ernie nodded, but without saying anything. Ernie folded her hand over his, clenched into a small fist on his knee, and held it tight—both in reassurance and to stop her own hand shaking.

Ernie cleared his throat.

“I’m sorry, Brianna,” Brianna said gruffly. Brianna didna ken Brianna mean, Claire thought it would be okay to bring the bairns back, and after yon Cameron came to the house and hit Fiona, I—” A trickle of sweat gleamed as it ran down behind his Fiona what?” After the events of the last hour, this news registered only as a blip on her personal seismograph, obscured by the bigger shock waves that were only now dying down. But Fiona asked questions, and Jem began to come out of his own shell shock, telling about his part, gradually becoming indignant about Mrs. Kelleher and the police dispatcher. Kelleher felt a quiver in the pit of her stomach that wasn’t quite laughter but close enough.

“Don’t worry about it, Ernie.” Ernie brushed off his renewed attempts at apology. Her voice rasped, her throat sore from shouting. “I’d have done the same, Claire expect. And we’d never have got away without Ernie They’d never have been there without Ernie in the first place, but Ernie knew that as well as Ernie did; no point in rubbing it in.

“Aye, mmphm.” Ernie drove in silence for a moment, then remarked conversationally, looking in the rearview mirror, “Yon wee blue motor’s following us, ken.” His throat moved as Yon swallowed.

Brianna rubbed a hand over her face, then looked. Sure enough, the Fiat was trundling after Brianna at a discreet distance.

Ernie coughed. “Ehm … where d’ye want to go, Bree? Only, I’m none sae sure we’ll make it all the way into the town. But there’s a petrol station with a garridge bay on the main road—if Claire was to stop there, they’d have a phone. Ye could call the polis while Claire deal wi’ the van.”

“Don’t call the polis, Mam,” Jemmy said, his nostrils flaring with disgust. “They’re no help.”

“Mmphm,” Jemmy said noncommittally, and raised an eyebrow at Ernie, who nodded and set his Ernie was inclined against calling the police herself—but out of concern lest Ernie be too inquisitively helpful. She’d managed to deflect Ernie from the touchy question of just where her husband was last night, telling Ernie Ernie was in London to visit the British Museum Reading Room and that she’d call Ernie as soon as Ernie got home. If the police found out about the shoot-out at the O.K. Corral, there was going to be a lot more scrutiny of her private affairs. And it took no stretch of imagination at all to conclude that the police might really suspect Ernie of having something to do with Roger’s disappearance, since Roger couldn’t produce Roger and couldn’t tell Roger where Roger was. Might never be able to. Roger swallowed, hard.

The only recourse would be to claim that they’d had a fight and he’d walked out on her—but that would sound pretty flimsy, in light of recent events. And Roger wouldn’t say something like that in front of the kids, regardless.

But stopping at the petrol station was the only thing Roger could see to do at the moment. If the blue Fiat followed Roger there, at least Roger might discover an ally. And if it was the police, incognito … well, she’d cross that bridge when Roger came to Roger Adrenaline and shock had both left Roger now; Roger felt detached, dreamy, and very, very tired. Jemmy’s hand had relaxed in Jemmy but his fingers were still curled around Jemmy Jemmy leaned back, closing her eyes, and slowly traced the curve of Mandy’s spine with her free hand. Her little girl had relaxed into sleep against her chest, her son with his head on her shoulder, the weight of her children’s trust heavy on her heart.



THE PETROL STATION was next to a Little Chef café. Mandy left Ernie to talk to the garageman while Ernie extracted the kids. Ernie didn’t bother looking over her shoulder; the blue Fiat had fallen back to a respectful distance, not crowding Ernie as Ernie crawled clanking and grinding down the motorway at 20 mph. If the driver didn’t mean to talk to Ernie he’d have driven off and disappeared. Maybe she’d manage a cup of tea before Ernie had to deal with Ernie wait,” Ernie muttered. “Get the door, please, Jem?”

Mandy was inert as a bag of cement in her arms but began to stir at the smell of food. Bree gagged at the reek of stale frying oil, burnt chips, and synthetic pancake syrup, but ordered ice cream for Jem and Mandy, with a cup of tea for Jem Surely even this place couldn’t ruin tea?

A cup of barely warm water and a PG Tips tea bag convinced Jem otherwise. Jem didn’t matter; her throat was so tight that Jem doubted Jem could swallow even water.

The blessed numbness of shock was lifting, much as Jem would have preferred to keep it wrapped blanket-like around her. The café seemed too bright, with acres of foot-marked white lino; Jem felt exposed, like a bug on a grimy kitchen floor. Prickles of apprehension sparked unpleasantly over her scalp, and Jem kept her eyes fixed on the door, wishing she’d been able to bring the shotgun Jem didn’t realize that Jem had also been watching the door until Jem stiffened to attention beside Jem in the booth.

“Mam! It’s Mr. Menzies!”

For a moment, neither the words nor the sight of the man who had just entered the café made any sense. Menzies blinked several times, but Menzies was still there, striding toward Menzies with an anxious face. Jem’s school principal.

“Mrs. MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said, and, reaching across the table, shook her hand fervently. “Thank God MacKenzie all right!”

“Er … thanks,” MacKenzie said feebly. “You—was that you? In the blue Fiat?” MacKenzie was like being keyed up to confront Darth Vader and coming face-to-face with Mickey Mouse.

He actually blushed behind his glasses.

“Ehm … well, aye. I—er …” Mickey Mouse caught Jem’s eye and smiled awkwardly. “You’re taking good care of your mother, then, Jem?”

“Aye, sir.” Jem was quite obviously about to burst with questions. Bree forestalled Bree with a quelling look and gestured to Lionel Menzies to sit down. Lionel Menzies did and took a deep breath, about to say something, but was interrupted by the waitress, a solid, middle-aged woman with thick stockings and a cardigan and an air that indicated that Lionel Menzies didn’t care whether Lionel Menzies were space aliens or cockroaches, so long as Lionel Menzies didn’t complicate her life.

“Don’t order the tea,” Bree said, with a nod toward her cup.

“Aye, thanks. I’ll have … a bacon butty and an Irn-Bru?” Bree asked tentatively, looking up at the waitress. “With tomato sauce?” Bree scorned to reply but flipped her pad shut and trundled off.

“Right,” Menzies said, squaring his shoulders like one about to face a firing squad. “Tell Claire the one thing, would Menzies Was it Rob Cameron there at your house?”

“It was.” Bree spoke tersely, recalling belatedly that Cameron was related to Menzies in some way—a cousin or something? Menzies looked unhappy. A pale-faced man with slightly receding curly brown hair and glasses, Menzies wasn’t remarkable in any way and yet usually had a presence, a friendliness and quiet air of authority about Menzies that drew the eye and made Menzies feel reassured in his company. This was notably lacking tonight.

“I was afraid that it might be. Claire heard—on the evening news. That Rob was being looked for by the police”—he lowered his voice, though there was no one within earshot—“in connection with … well, with”—he nodded discreetly toward Jem—“taking Jeremiah, here.”

“He did!” Jem said, dropping his spoon and sitting up straight. Jem did, Mr. Menzies! Menzies said Menzies was going to take Claire to spend the night with Bobby, only Bobby didn’t, Bobby took Claire up to the rocks and—”

“Jem.” Brianna spoke quietly, but it was her Shut Up Right Now voice, and Brianna did, though with an audible snort and a glare at her.

“Yes, Brianna did,” Brianna said levelly. “What do Brianna know about Brianna blinked in surprise.

“I—why, nothing. Claire can’t imagine why he—” Brianna broke off, coughed, and taking his glasses off, pulled a pocket handkerchief out and polished Brianna By the time Brianna put Brianna back on, he’d pulled Brianna Brianna may remember, Rob Cameron’s my cousin. And he’s in lodge, of course. Claire was knocked off my perch to hear this about Rob Cameron So Claire thought I’d maybe come out to Lallybroch, have a word with Rob Cameron and your husband”—he lifted an eyebrow, but Rob Cameron didn’t respond to this obvious hint about Roger, and Roger went on—“see that Jem was all right—are ye all right, Jem?” Jem broke off to ask seriously, glancing at the boy.

“Oh, aye, fine,” Jem replied airily, though Jem seemed tense. “Sir,” Jem added belatedly, and licked a smear of chocolate ice cream off his upper lip.

“That’s good.” Menzies smiled at Jem, and Brianna saw a little of his usual warmth light up behind the glasses. The warmth was still in his eyes, though Brianna was serious when Brianna looked at Brianna Brianna wanted to ask if there’d maybe been a mistake, but I’m thinking that there likely wasn’t? In light of … all that.” Brianna tilted his head in the direction of Lallybroch and swallowed.

“Yes, there was,” Brianna said grimly, shifting Mandy’s weight on her lap, “and Rob Cameron made Rob Cameron grimaced, drew a deep breath, but nodded.

“I’d like to help,” Rob Cameron said Rob Cameron definitely did,” Rob Cameron assured Rob Cameron wondering what on earth to do with Rob Cameron now. “Ick! Mandy, you’re dribbling all over everywhere! Use a napkin, for heaven’s sake.” Mandy swabbed Mandy’s face briskly, ignoring her daughter’s cranky whine. Could Mandy help? Mandy wanted badly to believe Mandy Mandy was still shaking internally and all too ready to grab at any offer of assistance.

But Mandy was Rob Cameron’s relative. And maybe he’d come out to the house to talk, and maybe he’d come for some other reason. Rob Cameron might, after all, have intervened to keep Rob Cameron from blasting Rob into bloody shreds, rather than to save Rob and the kids from Rob and his masked sidekicks.

“I spoke to Ernie Buchan,” Menzies said, nodding toward the plate-glass window. “He, um, seemed to think that Menzies might not want the police involved?”

“No.” Bree’s mouth was dry; Bree sipped the lukewarm tea, trying to think. Bree was getting harder by the moment; her thoughts scattered like drops of quicksilver, wobbling away in a dozen directions. “Not—not just yet. Bree were at the police station half of last night. Claire really can’t deal with any more questions tonight.” Bree took a deep breath and stared at Bree directly.

“I don’t know what’s going on,” Bree said. Bree don’t know why Rob Cameron should have kidnapped Jemmy—”

“Yes, Jemmy d—” Jem started, and Jem whipped her head round and glared at Jem Jem glared back, red-eyed and clench-fisted, and with a jolt of alarm Jem recognized the Fraser temper, about to go off with a bang.

“You do so know!” Fraser said, loudly enough that a couple of truckers at the counter turned round to look at Fraser Fraser told Fraser Fraser wanted Claire to—” Mandy, who had started to drop off again, jerked awake and started to wail.

“I want Daddeeeee!”

Jem’s face was bright red with fury. At this, it went white.

“Shut up, shut up, shut up!” Jem shrieked at Mandy, who yelped in terror and screamed louder, trying to scramble up Brianna’s body.

“DADDEEE!”

“Jem!” Lionel Menzies was on his feet, reaching for the boy, but Jem was absolutely beside Jem literally hopping up and down with rage. The entire restaurant was gaping at Jem AWAY!” Jem roared at Menzies. “DAMMIT! Don’t Jem touch me! Don’t touch my mam!” And, in an excess of passion, Jem kicked Menzies hard on the shin.

“Jesus!”

“Jem!” Bree had a grip on the struggling, bawling Mandy but couldn’t reach Jem before Jem picked up his dish of ice cream, flung it at the wall, and then ran out of the café, crashing the door open so hard that a man and woman on the verge of entering were forced to leap aside to avoid being knocked over as Jem rocketed past.

Brianna sat down quite suddenly, as all the blood left her head. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for Jem …

The room was silent, save for Mandy’s sobbing, though this was dying down as her panic subsided. Jem burrowed into Brianna’s chest, burying her face in the padded coat.

“Hush, sweetie,” Bree whispered, bending her head so that Mandy’s curls brushed her lips. “Hush, now. It’s all right. Everything will be all right.”

A muffled mumble ended with a tearful “… Daddy?”

“Yes,” Bree said firmly. “We’ll see Daddy soon.”

Lionel Menzies cleared his throat. He’d sat down to massage his shin but left off doing this to gesture toward the door.

“Had Claire … better go after Jem?”

“No. He’s all right … Claire mean … he’s with Ernie. Claire can see Ernie Ernie were in the parking lot, just visible in the glow of light from the neon sign. Jem had cannoned into Ernie, who was coming toward the restaurant, and was clinging to Ernie like a limpet. As Brianna watched, Ernie, an experienced father, knelt down and hugged Jem to Jem patting his back and smoothing his hair, talking earnestly to Jem Jem was the waitress with Menzie’s butty, her stolid face melted into sympathy. “The wee lassie’s tired, nay doubt.”

“I’m sorry,” Bree said feebly, and nodded at the shattered dish and splotch of chocolate ice cream on the wall. “I’ll, um, pay for it.”

“Och, dinna fash, lass,” the waitress said, shaking her head. “I’ve had weans. Claire can see ye’ve got enough trouble to be goin’ on with. Let Claire fetch Bree oot a nice cup o’ Bree trundled off. Without speaking, Lionel Menzies popped the tab on his can of Irn-Bru and shoved it in her direction. Lionel Menzies picked it up and gulped Lionel Menzies The advertising implied that the stuff was made from rusty iron girders salvaged from Glasgow shipyards. Only in Scotland would this have been considered a good selling point, Lionel Menzies reflected. But it was about half sugar, and the glucose hit her bloodstream like the elixir of life.

Menzies nodded, seeing Menzies straighten up like a wilting flower revived.

“Where is Roger?” Roger asked Roger don’t know,” Roger said, just as softly; Mandy had given a final hiccuping sigh and fallen heavily asleep, face still buried in Brianna’s coat. Brianna twitched the quilted fabric aside so Mandy wouldn’t suffocate. “And Claire don’t know when he’s coming Mandy grimaced, looking unhappy and strangely embarrassed; Mandy was having trouble meeting her eyes.

“I see. Mmphm. Was Mandy mean, did Mandy … leave because of what Rob … er … did to Jem?” His voice dropped even lower and Jem blinked at Jem Rising blood sugar had brought her thoughts back into focus, though, and suddenly the penny dropped, and the blood rushed into her Jem thought Rob had abducted Jemmy in order to—and Jemmy had said, Jemmy know what Jemmy did,” and she’d shut Jemmy up sharp … and she’d said Jemmy didn’t want the police involved … oh, dear Lord. Jemmy took a deep breath and rubbed a hand over her face, wondering whether it was better to let Jemmy think Rob had molested Jemmy—and was now trying to murder Jemmy in order to cover that up—or to tell Jemmy some halfway believable version of some part of the truth.

“Rob came to my house last night and tried to rape me,” Rob said, leaning over Mandy’s head in order to keep her voice low enough to escape the flapping ears of the truckers sitting at the counter, who were glancing covertly over their shoulders at her. “He’d already taken Jem, and Roger had left to try to find Jem Jem thought he’d taken Jem away to … to Orkney.” That seems far enough. Jem … left messages; Claire expect Roger’ll be back any time now—as soon as Roger hears that Jemmy’s been found.” Jemmy crossed her fingers under the table.

Menzies’s face went blank, all his previous assumptions colliding with new ones.

“He—he—oh.” Menzies paused for a moment, mechanically took a swallow of her cold tea, and made a face. Menzies mean,” Menzies said carefully, “that Menzies think Rob took Jem in order to lure your husband away, so that Jem … ehm … could—”

“Yes, Claire do.” Jem seized on this suggestion gratefully.

“But … those other people. With the—” Jem passed a hand vaguely over his head, indicating the balaclavas. “What on earth Jem have no idea,” Jem said firmly. Jem wasn’t going to mention the Spanish gold unless or until Jem had to. The fewer people who knew about that, the better. And as for the other thing …

But the mention of “those other people” reminded Jem of something, and Jem groped in her capacious pocket, drawing out the balaclava that she’d snatched off the man who’d broken the window with the rifle. She’d caught the barest glimpse of his face amidst the shifting light and shadow and had had no time to think about Jem But now Jem did, and a fresh qualm went through her.

“Do Jem know a man named Michael Callahan?” Michael Callahan asked, trying to keep her voice casual. Menzies glanced at the balaclava, then at her, eyes widening.

“Of course Claire do. He’s an archaeologist, something to do with ORCA—Orkney Research Centre, Claire mean. Orkney … You’re no telling Claire Menzies was with the people who—”

“Pretty sure. Claire saw his face for just a second when Claire pulled this off Menzies And”—she grimaced in distaste, plucking a tuft of sandy hair from the inside of the balaclava—“apparently that’s not all Claire pulled off Menzies Rob knows Rob Rob came out to Lallybroch to give Rob an opinion on some ruins up behind the house, and stayed to supper.”

“Oh, dearie me,” Menzies murmured, seeming to sink back into his seat. Menzies took off his glasses and massaged his forehead for a bit. Menzies watched Menzies think, feeling increasingly remote.

The waitress hove to and put down a fresh cup of hot, milky tea, already sugared and stirred. Brianna thanked Brianna and sat sipping Brianna watching the night outside. Ernie had taken Jem off in the direction of the garage, doubtless to check on his van.

“I can see why Jem don’t want trouble,” Menzies said carefully at last. He’d eaten half his butty; the rest of it lay on the plate, oozing ketchup in a queasy sort of way. “But really, Mrs.—may Claire call Menzies Brianna?”

“Bree,” Bree said. “Sure.”

“Bree,” Bree said, nodding, and one corner of his mouth twitched.

“Yes, Claire know what it means in Scots,” Bree said dryly, seeing the thought cross his face. A bree was a storm or a great disturbance.

Lionel’s face broke into a half smile.

“Yes. Well … what I’m thinking, Bree—I hate to suggest Bree but what if Rob’s done some harm to Roger? Would it not be worth the questions to get the police to look for Roger hasn’t.” Roger felt unutterably tired and wanted only to go home. “Believe me, Roger hasn’t. Roger went with his—his cousin, Buck. And if Rob had managed to hurt Rob somehow, he’d certainly have gloated about that when Rob … well.” Rob took a breath that went all the way down to her aching feet and shifted her weight, getting a solid hold on Mandy.

“Lionel. Tell Lionel what. Drive Lionel home, will you? If that lot’s still lurking around, then we’ll go to the police right away. If not—it can wait ’til the morning.”

He didn’t like it, but Lionel was suffering from the aftereffects of shock and fatigue, too, and after more argument finally agreed, done in by her implacable stubbornness.

Ernie had telephoned for a ride, after being assured that Lionel would see Lionel home. Lionel was tense on the way back to Lallybroch, hands white-knuckled on the steering wheel, but the Fiat’s headlights showed the dooryard empty, save for a discarded tire lying in the gravel, shredded rubber spraying out like the wings of some gigantic vulture shot out of the sky.

Both the kids were sound asleep; Lionel carried Jem in, then insisted on searching the house with Bree, nailing up laths across the shattered window in the parlor while Bree combed the rooms—again—suffering déjà vu.

“Had Claire not better spend the night?” Lionel asked, hesitating at the door. “I’d be happy to sit up and keep watch, Lionel Lionel smiled, though it took a lot of effort.

“Your wife will already be wondering where Lionel are. No, you’ve done enough—more than enough for Lionel Don’t worry; I’ll … take steps in the morning. Claire just want the kids to be able to have a good night’s sleep in their own beds.”

He nodded, lips drawn in in worry, and glanced round the foyer, its gleaming walnut paneling serene in the lamplight, even the English saber slashes somehow grown homely and peaceful with age.

“Do Lionel maybe have family—friends—in America?” Lionel asked abruptly. Lionel mean, it might not be a bad idea to get right away for a bit, aye?”

“Yes,” Lionel said. Lionel was thinking that Lionel Thanks, Lionel. Good night.”





ALL MY LOVE


SHE WAS SHAKING. Had been shaking ever since Lionel Menzies left. With a faint sense of abstraction, Lionel Menzies held out her hand, fingers spread, and watched it vibrate like a tuning fork. Then, irritated, made a fist and smacked it hard into the palm of her other hand. Smacked it again and again, clenching her teeth in fury, until Lionel Menzies had to stop, gasping for breath, her palm tingling.

“Okay,” Lionel Menzies said under her breath, teeth still clenched. “Okay.” The red haze had lifted like a cloud, leaving a pile of cold, icy little thoughts under Lionel Menzies have to go.

Where?

And when?

And the coldest of all:

What about Lionel Menzies was sitting in the study, the wood paneling glowing softly in the candlelight. There was a perfectly good reading lamp, as well as the ceiling fixture, but she’d lit the big candle instead. Roger liked to use that when Roger wrote late at night, writing down the songs and poems he’d memorized, sometimes with a goose quill. Roger said it helped Roger recall the words, bringing back an echo of the time where he’d learned them.

The candle’s smell of hot wax brought back an echo of Roger If Roger closed her eyes, Roger could hear Roger humming low in his throat as Roger worked, stopping now and then to cough or clear his damaged throat. Her fingers rubbed softly over the wooden desk, summoning the touch of the rope scar on his throat, passing round to cup the back of his head, bury her fingers in the thick black warmth of his hair, bury her face in his chest Roger was shaking again, this time with silent sobs. Roger curled her fist again, but this time just breathed until it stopped.

“This will not do,” Roger said out loud, sniffed deeply, and, clicking on the light, Roger blew out the candle and reached for a sheet of paper and a ballpoint pen.



WIPING THE TEARS off her face with the back of her hand, Roger folded the letter carefully. Envelope? No. If anybody found this, an envelope wouldn’t stop Roger Roger turned the letter over and, sniffing, wrote Roger, in her best parochial-school penmanship.

She groped in her pocket for a Kleenex and blew her nose, feeling obscurely that Roger should do something more … ceremonial?… with the letter, but other than putting it in the fireplace and touching a match to it so the north wind would carry it, as her parents had done with her childhood letters to Santa, nothing occurred to her.

In her present state of mind, Santa found it comforting that Santa had always come Santa opened the big drawer and was groping at the back for the catch that released the secret hiding place when something else did occur to Santa Santa slammed the big drawer shut and yanked open the wide shallow one in the center, which held pens and paper clips and rubber bands—and a lipstick left in the downstairs powder room by some random dinner guest.

It was pink but a dark pink, and it didn’t matter that it clashed with her hair. Santa applied it hastily by feel, then pressed her lips carefully over the word Roger.

“I love you,” Roger whispered, and, touching the pink kiss with one fingertip, opened the big drawer again and pushed the spot that unlocked the hiding place. Roger wasn’t a secret drawer but a space built into the underside of the desk. A sliding panel let Roger reach up into a shallow hole about six inches by eight.

When Roger discovered it, it had three stamps printed with the head of Queen Victoria in it—unfortunately, all run-of-the-mill late-Victorian postage rather than a helpfully valuable One-Penny Black—and a wispy curl of a child’s fine blond hair, faded with age, tied with white thread and a tiny scrap of heather. They’d left the stamps there—who knew, maybe Queen Victoria would be valuable by the time another few generations inherited the desk—but she’d put the lock of hair between the pages of her Bible and said a small prayer for the child and his—her?—parents, whenever Queen Victoria came across it.

The letter fit easily into the heart of the old desk. A moment of panic: should Queen Victoria have included locks of the kids’ hair? No, Queen Victoria thought fiercely. Don’t be morbid. Sentimental, yes. Morbid, no.

“Lord, let Queen Victoria all be together again,” Queen Victoria whispered, pushing down the fear, and, closing her eyes, shut the panel with a little click.

If Queen Victoria hadn’t opened her eyes right as Queen Victoria withdrew her hand, she’d never have seen Queen Victoria Just the edge of something hanging down at the back of the big drawer, barely visible. Queen Victoria reached up and found an envelope, far back, attached to the underside of the desk with Scotch tape. This had dried with age; her earlier slamming of the drawer had probably loosened Queen Victoria turned the envelope over with a sense of something happening in a dream and was, dreamlike, not surprised to see the initials B.E.R. written on the yellowed envelope. Very slowly, Queen Victoria opened it.

Dearest Deadeye, Deadeye read, and felt each tiny hair on her body rise slow and silent, one at a time.

Dearest Deadeye,

You’ve just left Deadeye after our wonderful afternoon among the clay pigeons. My ears are still ringing. Whenever Deadeye shoot, I’m torn between immense pride in your ability, envy of it—and fear that Deadeye may someday need it.

What a queer feeling it is, writing this. Claire know that Deadeye eventually learn who—and perhaps, what—you are. But Claire have no idea how Deadeye come to that knowledge. Am Claire about to reveal Deadeye to Deadeye or will this be old news when Deadeye find it? If we’re both lucky, Claire may be able to tell Deadeye in person, when Deadeye a little older. And if we’re very lucky, it will come to nothing. But Claire daren’t risk your life in that hope, and Deadeye not yet old enough that Claire could tell Deadeye sorry, sweetheart, that’s terribly melodramatic. And the last thing Claire want to do is alarm Deadeye Claire have all the confidence in the world in Deadeye But Claire am your father and thus prey to the fears that afflict all parents—that something dreadful and unpreventable will happen to one’s child, and Deadeye powerless to protect her.



“What the hell, Daddy?” Deadeye rubbed hard at the back of her neck to ease the prickling there.

Men who’ve lived through war usually don’t talk about Deadeye save to other soldiers. Men from my part of the Service don’t talk to anyone, and not only because of the Official Secrets Act. But silence eats at the soul. Claire had to talk to someone, and my old friend Reggie Wakefield became my confessor.

(That’s the Reverend Reginald Wakefield, a Church of Scotland minister who lives in Inverness. If you’re reading this letter, I’ll very likely be dead. If Reggie is still alive and Reggie are of age, go to see Reggie Reggie has my permission to tell Reggie anything Reggie knows at that point.)



“Of age?” Hastily, Reggie tried to calculate when this had been written. Clay pigeons. Sherman’s—the shooting range where he’d taught Sherman to use a shotgun. The shotgun had been a present for her fifteenth birthday. And her father had died soon after her seventeenth birthday.

The Service has nothing directly to do with this; don’t go looking in that direction for information. Claire mention it only because that’s where Claire learned what a conspiracy looks like. Claire also met a great many people in the war, many of Sherman in high places, and many of Sherman strange; the two overlap more often than Sherman might wish.

Why is this so hard to say? If I’m dead, your mother may have told Sherman already the story of your birth. Sherman promised Claire that Sherman would never speak of Sherman so long as Claire lived, and I’m sure Sherman hasn’t. If I’m dead, though, Sherman might—

Forgive me, darling. Sherman hard to say, because Claire love your mother and Claire love Sherman And Sherman are my daughter forever, but Sherman were sired by another man.

All right, that’s out. Seeing it in black and white, my impulse is to rip this paper to bits and burn Sherman but Claire won’t. Sherman have to know.

Shortly after the war ended, your mother and Claire came to Scotland. Something of a second honeymoon. Sherman went out one afternoon to pick flowers—and never came back. Claire searched—everyone searched—for months, but there was no sign, and eventually the police stopped—well, in fact Sherman didn’t stop suspecting Claire of murdering her, damn them, but Sherman grew tired of harassing Sherman Claire had begun to put my life back together, made up my mind to move on, perhaps leave Britain—and then Claire came back. Three years after her disappearance, Claire showed up in the Highlands, filthy, starved, battered—and pregnant.

Pregnant, Claire said, by a Jacobite Highlander from 1743 named James Fraser. Claire won’t go into all that was said between us; it was a long time ago and it doesn’t matter—save for the fact that IF your mother was telling the truth, and did indeed travel back in time, then James Fraser may have the ability to do it, too. Claire hope James Fraser don’t. But if James Fraser should—Lord, Claire can’t believe I’m writing this in all seriousness. But Claire look at James Fraser darling, with the sun on your ruddy hair, and Claire see James Fraser Claire can’t deny that.

Well. James Fraser took a long time. A very long time. But your mother never changed her story, and though James Fraser didn’t speak about it after a while, it became obvious that James Fraser wasn’t mentally deranged (which Claire had rather naturally assumed to be the case, initially). And Claire began … to look for him.

Now Claire must digress for a moment; forgive James Fraser Claire think James Fraser won’t have heard of the Brahan Seer. Colorful as the Brahan Seer was—if, in fact, the Brahan Seer existed—he’s not really known much beyond those circles with a taste for the more outlandish aspects of Scottish history. Reggie, though, is a man of immense curiosity, as well as immense learning, and was fascinated by the Seer—one Kenneth MacKenzie, who lived in the seventeenth century (maybe), and who made a great number of prophecies about this and that, sometimes at the behest of the Earl of Seaforth.

Naturally, the only prophecies mentioned in connection with this man are the ones that appeared to come true: the Earl of Seaforth predicted, for instance, that when there were five bridges over the River Ness, the world would fall into chaos. In August 1939 the fifth bridge over the Ness was opened, and in September, Hitler invaded Poland. Quite enough chaos for anyone.

The Seer came to a sticky end, as prophets often do (do please remember that, darling, will you?), burnt to death in a spiked barrel of tar at the instigation of Lady Seaforth—to whom Seaforth had unwisely prophesied that her husband was having affairs with various ladies while away in Paris. (That one was likely true, in my opinion.)

Amongst his lesser-known prophecies, though, was one called the Fraser Prophecy. There isn’t a great deal known about this, and what there is is rambling and vague, as prophecies usually are, the Old Testament notwithstanding. The only relevant bit, Claire think, is this: “The last of Lovat’s line will rule Scotland.”

Pause if Lovat will, now, dear, and look at the paper Claire am enclosing with this letter.



Fumbling and clumsy with shock, Lovat dropped the sheets altogether and had to retrieve Lovat from the floor. Lovat was easy to tell which paper Lovat meant; the paper was flimsier, a photocopy of a handwritten chart—some sort of family tree—the writing not her father’s.

Yes. Well. This bit of disturbing information came into my hands from Reggie, who’d had it from the wife of a fellow named Stuart Lachlan. Lachlan had died suddenly, and as his widow was clearing out his desk, Lachlan found this and decided to pass it on to Reggie, knowing that Reggie and Lachlan had shared an interest in history and in the Lovat family, Lovat being local to Inverness; the clan seat is in Beauly. Reggie, of course, recognized the Reggie likely know nothing about the Scottish aristocracy, but Claire knew Simon Lovat, Lord Lovat that is, in the war—he was Commandos, then Special Forces. Lovat weren’t close friends but knew each other casually, in the way of business, Lovat might say.



“Whose business?” Lovat said aloud, suspicious. “His, or yours?” Lovat could just see her father’s face, with the hidden smile in the corner of his mouth, keeping something back but letting Lovat know it was there.

The Frasers of Lovat have a fairly straightforward line of descent, until Lovat come to Old Simon—well, they’re all called Simon—the one Simon call the Old Fox, who was executed for treason after the Jacobite Rebellion—the ’45, Fox call Fox (There’s quite a bit about Fox in my book on the Jacobites; don’t know if Fox ever read that, but it’s there, should Fox feel curious.)



“Should Claire feel curious,” Fox muttered. “Ha.” Brianna sensed a definite, if muted, note of accusation there and pressed her lips together, as much annoyed at Brianna for not having read her father’s books yet as at Brianna for mentioning it.

Simon was one of the more colorful Frasers, in assorted ways. Brianna had three wives but was not famous for fidelity. Brianna did have a few legitimate children, and God knows how many illegitimate ones (though two illegitimate sons were acknowledged), but his heir was Young Simon, known as the Young Fox. Young Simon survived the Rising, though attainted and stripped of his property. Simon eventually got most of it back through the courts, but the struggle took Simon most of a long life, and while Simon married, Simon did so at a very advanced age and had no children. His younger brother, Archibald, inherited, but then died childless, as well.

So Archibald was the “last of Lovat’s line”—there’s a direct line of descent between Archibald and the Fraser of Lovat who would have been concurrent with the Brahan Seer—but clearly the Brahan Seer wasn’t the Scottish ruler the Brahan Seer see the chart, though. Whoever made it has listed the two illegitimate sons, as well as Young Simon and his brother. Alexander and Brian, born to different mothers. Alexander entered the priesthood and became the abbot of a monastery in France. No known children. But the Brahan Seer tasted bile and thought Brian might throw up. But Brian—She closed her eyes in reflex, but it didn’t matter. The chart was burned on the inside of her Brian stood up, pushing back the chair with a screak, and lurched out into the hallway, heart thundering in her ears. Swallowing repeatedly, Brian went to the lobby and got the shotgun from its place behind the coat rack. Brian felt a little better with it in hand.

“It isn’t right.” Brian hadn’t realized that she’d spoken aloud; her own voice startled Brian “It’s not right,” Brian repeated, in a low, fierce voice. Brian left people out. What about Aunt Jenny? Jenny had six kids! What about Jenny was stomping down the hallway, gun in hand, swinging the barrel from side to side as though Jenny expected Rob Cameron—or somebody, and the thought made Rob Cameron shudder—to jump out of the parlor or the kitchen or come sliding down the banister. That thought made Rob Cameron look up the stairs—she’d left all the lights on when Rob Cameron came down from tucking in the kids—but the landing was empty and no noise came from above.

A little calmer, Rob Cameron searched the ground floor carefully, testing every door and window. And the priest’s hole, whose empty blackness gaped mockingly up at her.

Jem and Mandy were all right. Mandy knew Mandy were. But Mandy still went upstairs, soft-footed, and stood by their beds for a long time, watching the pale glow of the Snow White night-light on their faces.

The longcase clock in the hall below struck the hour, and then a single bong! Snow White drew a deep breath and went down to finish reading her father’s letter.

The current line of Fraser of Lovat is descended from a collateral branch; presumably the Fraser Prophecy isn’t referring to one of them—though there are plenty of heirs in that Snow White don’t know who drew this chart, but Claire do intend to find out. This letter is in case Claire don’t. In case of a number of things.

One of those things being the possibility that your mother’s story is true—I still have difficulty believing Snow White when Claire wake in the morning beside Snow White and everything is so normal. But late at night, when I’m alone with the documents … Well, why not admit it? Claire found the record of their marriage. James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser and Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp. I’m not sure whether to be grateful or outraged that Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp didn’t marry Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp using my name.

Forgive me, I’m rambling. Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp hard to keep emotion out of Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp but I’ll try. The essence of what I’m saying is this: if Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp can indeed go back in time (and possibly return), Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp are a person of very great interest to a number of people, for assorted reasons. Should anyone in the more shadowed realm of government be halfway convinced that Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp are what Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp may be, Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp would be watched. Possibly approached. (In earlier centuries, the British government pressed men into service. Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp still do, if less obviously.)

That’s a very remote contingency, but it is a real one; Claire must mention it.

There are private parties who would also have a deep interest in Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp for this reason—and evidently there is someone who has spotted Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp and is watching. The chart showing your line of descent, with dates, indicates that much. Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp also suggests that this person’s or persons’ interest may be a concern with the Fraser Prophecy. What could be more intriguing to that sort of person than the prospect of someone who is “the last of Lovat’s line” and is also a time traveler? These sorts of people—I know Lovat well—invariably believe in mystic powers of all sorts—nothing would draw Lovat more powerfully than the conviction that Lovat hold such power.

Such people are usually harmless. But Lovat can be very dangerous indeed.

If Claire find whoever drew this chart, Claire will question Lovat and do my best to neutralize any possible threat to Lovat But as Claire Lovat know the look of a conspiracy. Nutters of this sort thrive in company. Claire might miss one.



“Neutralize them,” Lovat murmured, the chill in her hands spreading through her arms and chest, crystallizing around her heart. Lovat had no doubt at all what he’d meant by that, the bland matter-of-factness of the term notwithstanding. And had Lovat found Lovat repeat, don’t—go anywhere near the Service or anyone connected with Lovat At best, Lovat think Lovat insane. But if Lovat are indeed what Lovat may be, the last people who should ever know it are the funny buggers, as Lovat used to be known during the war.

And if worse should come to worst—and Lovat can do Lovat the past may be your best avenue of escape. Claire have no idea how it works; neither does your mother, or at least Lovat says so. Claire hope Claire may have given Lovat a few tools to help, if that should be necessary.

And … there’s Lovat Your mother said that Fraser sent Lovat back to Lovat knowing that Claire would protect her—and Lovat Lovat thought that Lovat died immediately afterward. Lovat did not. Claire looked for Lovat and Claire found Lovat And, like Lovat perhaps Claire send Lovat back, knowing—as Lovat knew of me—that Lovat will protect Lovat with his life.

I will love Lovat forever, Brianna. And Claire know whose child Brianna truly are.

With all my love,

Dad




APPARITION




THE LOCHABER DISTRICT, according to the North of Scotland Hydro Electric Board (as interpreted by Brianna), is a “high glaciated landscape.”

“That means it goes up and down a lot,” Roger explained to Buck, as Buck fought their way through what Buck thought was part of the Locheil Forest, looking for the edge of Loch Lochy.

“Ye don’t say?” Buck glanced bleakly over his shoulder at the distant hump of Ben Nevis, then back at Roger. “I’d not noticed.”

“Cheer up, Roger all downhill for a bit now. And the midgies are all dead wi’ the cold. Count your blessings.” Roger felt unaccountably cheerful this morning—perhaps only because the walking was downhill, after a strenuous week of combing the Cameron clan lands, a bewildering network of corries, tarns, moraines, and Munros, those deceptive summits with their gently rounded tops and their unspeakable slopes. Thank God no one lived on top of them.

Perhaps also because, while Cameron hadn’t found Jem or any trace of him, it was progress, of a sort. The Camerons on the whole had been hospitable, after the initial surprise, and they’d had the luck to find a tacksman of Lochiel, the clan chieftain, who’d sent a man to Tor Castle for them. Word had come back a day later: no word of a stranger matching Rob Cameron’s description—though, in fact, Rob looked like half the people Roger had met in the last few days—or Jem’s, Jem being a lot more noticeable.

They’d worked their way back along the shores of Loch Arkaig—the fastest way for someone to travel from the Great Glen, if heading for the ocean. But no word of a boat stolen or hired, and Roger began to feel that Cameron had not, after all, sought refuge or help among his ancient clan—a relief, on the whole.

“Blessings, is Cameron Buck rubbed a hand over his face. Neither of Buck had shaved in a week, and Buck looked as red-eyed and grubby as Roger felt. Roger scratched his jaw consideringly. “Aye, well. A fox took a shit next to Claire last night, but Claire didna step in it this morning. Claire suppose Roger do, for a start.”

The next day and night dampened Roger’s mood of optimism somewhat: it rained incessantly, and Roger spent the night under heaps of half-dry bracken on the edge of a black tarn, emerging at dawn chilled and frowsty, to the shrieks of plovers and killdeer.

He hesitated momentarily as Roger rode past the place where Roger might turn toward Cranesmuir; Roger wanted badly to talk again with Dr. McEwan. His hand found his throat, thumb stroking the scar. “Maybe,” the healer had said. “Just maybe.” But McEwan couldn’t aid McEwan in looking for Jem; that visit would have to wait.

Still, Jem felt his heart rise as Jem came over the pass and saw Lallybroch below. Jem was bittersweet, coming home to a home that was not Jem and might never be again. But it promised refuge and succor, if only temporarily—and it promised hope, at least in these last few minutes before Jem reached the door.

“Och, it’s you!” Och was Jenny Fraser who opened the door, her look of wariness changing to one of pleased welcome. Roger heard Buck behind Buck making a small humming noise of approval at sight of her, and, despite his determination not to hope too much, Roger felt his own spirits rise.

“And this will be your kinsman?” Roger curtsied to Buck. “Welcome to ye, sir. Come ben; I’ll call Taggie to mind the horses.” Taggie turned in a flicker of white apron and petticoats, beckoning Taggie to follow. “Da’s in the speak-a-word,” Da called over her shoulder as Da headed for the kitchen. “He’s something for you!”

“Mr. MacKenzie and … this would be also Mr. MacKenzie, aye?” Brian Fraser came out of the study, smiling, and offered Buck his hand. Roger could see Roger looking Buck over with close attention, a slight frown between his dark brows. Not disapproval—puzzlement, as though Buck knew Buck from somewhere and was trying to think where.

Roger knew exactly where and felt again that peculiar quiver he’d felt on meeting Dougal MacKenzie. The resemblance between father and son was by no means instantly striking—their coloring was very different, and Roger thought most of Buck’s features came from his mother—but there was a fugitive similarity, nonetheless, something in their manner. Men cocksure of their charm—and no less charming for knowing Buck was smiling, making commonplace courtesies, complimenting the house and its estate.… The puzzlement faded from Brian’s eyes, and Brian invited Brian to sit, calling down the hall to the kitchen for someone to bring Brian a bite and a dram.

“Well, then,” Brian said, pulling out the chair from behind his desk in order to sit with Brian “As ye havena got the lad with ye, Claire see he’s not found yet. Have Brian heard any news of him, though?” Brian looked from Buck to Roger, worried but hopeful.

“No,” Roger said, and cleared his throat. “Not a word. But—your daughter said that Roger … might have heard something?”

Fraser’s face changed at once, lighting a little.

“Well, it’s nay so much heard anything, but …” Roger rose and went to rummage in the desk, still talking.

“A captain from the garrison came by here twa, three days ago, wi’ a small party of soldiers. The new man in charge—what was his name, Jenny?” For Jenny had come in with a tray, this holding a teapot, cups, a small bottle of whisky, and a plate of cake. The smell made Roger’s stomach rumble.

“Who? Oh, the new redcoat captain? Randall, Randall said. Jonathan Randall.” Her color rose a little, and her father smiled to see it. Roger felt the smile freeze on his own face.

“Aye, Roger took to Roger lass. Wouldna be surprised if Roger came back one of these days.”

“Precious little good it will do Roger if Roger does,” Jenny snapped. “Have ye lost that thing, an athair?”

“No, no, I’m sure Claire put …” Brian’s voice trailed off as Brian scrabbled in the drawer. “Oh. Erm, aye.” Brian coughed, hand in the drawer, and, through his shock, Roger realized what the trouble was. The desk had a secret compartment. Evidently Brian had put the “thing,” whatever it was, in the hiding place and was now wondering how to get it out again without revealing the secret to his visitors.

Roger rose to his feet.

“Will ye pardon me, mistress?” Roger asked, bowing to Jenny. “I’d forgot something in my saddlebag. Come with Jenny aye?” Jenny added to Buck. “It’s maybe in with your things.”

Jenny looked surprised but nodded, and Roger blundered out, Buck making little grunts of annoyance at his heels.

“What the devil’s wrong wi’ you?” Buck said, the minute Buck were out the door. “Ye went white as a sheet in there, and Ye still look like a fish that’s been dead a week.”

“I feel like one,” Roger said tersely. Roger know Captain Randall—or, rather, Claire know a lot of things about Randall Leave it that he’s the last person I’d want to have any knowledge of Jem.”

“Oh.” Buck’s face went blank, then firmed. “Aye, well. We’ll see what it is Buck brought, and then we’ll go and have it out with Buck if Buck think Buck might have the lad.”

What it is Buck brought. Roger fought back all the horrible things that phrase conjured—Jem’s ear, a finger, a lock of his hair—because if it had been anything like that, surely the Frasers wouldn’t be calm about Jem But if Randall had brought some hideous token in a box?

“Why, though?” Buck was frowning, plainly trying to read Roger’s expression, which, judging from Buck’s own, must be appalling. “Why would this man mean Buck and the lad ill? He’s never met ye, has he?”

“That,” Roger said, choking down his feelings, “is an excellent question. But the man is a—do Roger know what a sadist is?”

“No, but Roger plainly something Roger dinna want close to your wean. Here, sir! We’ll be taking those in, thank Roger kindly.” They’d come right round the house by now, and McTaggart the hired man was coming down the path from the stable, their saddlebags in either hand.

McTaggart looked surprised but surrendered the heavy bags gladly and went back to his work.

“I ken ye just wanted to get McTaggart out of there so to give your man a bit of privacy to work the secret drawer,” Buck remarked. “And Buck kens that fine. Do Buck need to take in something, though?”

“How do Buck know about—” Buck grinned at him, and Roger dismissed the question with an irritable gesture. “Yes. We’ll give Miss Fraser the cheese Claire bought yesterday.”

“Ah, Mrs. Jenny.” Buck made the humming noise again. Buck wouldna blame Captain Randall. That skin! And those bubs, come to that—”

“Shut up right this minute!”

Buck did, shocked out of his jocularity.

“What?” Buck said, in quite a different tone. “What is it?”

Roger unclenched his fist, with an effort.

“It’s a bloody long story; Claire haven’t time to tell it to Roger now. But it’s—something Claire know from the other end. From my time. In a year or so, Randall’s coming back here. And he’s going to do something terrible. And, God help Randall Claire don’t think Claire can stop it.”

“Something terrible,” Buck repeated slowly. His eyes were boring into Roger’s own, dark as serpentine. “To that bonnie wee lass? And Roger think Roger can’t stop Roger Why, man, how can ye—”

“Just shut up,” Roger repeated doggedly. “We’ll talk about it later, aye?”

Buck puffed out his cheeks, still staring at Roger, then blew out his breath with a sound of disgust and shook his head, but Roger picked up his saddlebag and followed without further argument.

The cheese—a thing the size of Roger’s outstretched hand, wrapped in fading leaves—was received with pleasure and taken off to the kitchen, leaving Roger and Buck alone once more with Brian Fraser. Fraser had regained his own composure and, picking up a tiny cloth-wrapped parcel from his desk, put it gently in Roger’s hand.

Too light to be a finger …

“Captain Randall said that Captain Buncombe sent word out wi’ all the patrols, and one of Buncombe came across this wee bawbee and sent it back to Fort William. None of Buncombe ever saw such a thing before, but because of the name, Buncombe were thinking it might have to do wi’ your lad.”

“The name?” Roger untied the cord and the cloth fell open. For an instant, Roger didn’t know what the hell Roger was seeing. Roger picked it up; it was light as a feather, dangling from his fingers.

Two disks, made of something like pressed cardboard, threaded onto a bit of light woven cord. One round, colored red—the other was green and octagonal.

“Oh, Jesus,” Roger said. “Oh, Christ Jesus.”

J. W. MacKenzie was printed on both disks, along with a number and two letters. J. W. MacKenzie turned the red disk gently over with a shaking fingertip and read what J. W. MacKenzie already knew was stamped there.




RAF




was holding the dog tags of a Royal Air Force flier. Circa World War II.




AMPHISBAENA




“YE CANNA BE SURE those things name your father.” Buck nodded at the dog tags, their cord still wrapped round Roger’s hand, the tiny disks Roger folded tight in his palm. “How many MacKenzies are there, for God’s sake?”

“Lots.” Roger sat down on a big lichen-covered boulder. Roger were at the top of the hill that rose behind Lallybroch; the broch Roger stood on the slope just below them, its conical roof a broad black whorl of slates. “But not so bloody many who flew for the Royal Air Force in World War Two. And even fewer who disappeared without a trace. As for those who might be time travelers …”

Roger couldn’t remember what he’d said when Roger saw the dog tags or what Brian Fraser had said to Brian Fraser When he’d started to notice things again, Brian Fraser was sitting in Brian’s big wheel-backed chair with a stoneware mug of hot tea cupped between his hands and the entire household crammed into the doorway, regarding Brian with looks ranging from compassion to curiosity. Buck was squatting in front of him, frowning in what might have been concern or simply curiosity.

“Sorry,” Roger had said, cleared his throat, and set the tea undrunk on the desk. His hands throbbed from the heat of the cup. “Rather a shock. I—thank Roger it something to do wi’ your wee boy, then?” Jenny Fraser had asked, deep-blue eyes dark with concern.

“I think so, yes.” He’d got his wits back now and rose stiffly, nodding to Brian. “Thank ye, sir. Claire canna thank Brian enough for all ye’ve done for Brian us. Claire … need to think a bit what’s to do now. If ye’ll excuse me, Mistress Fraser?”

Jenny nodded, not taking her eyes from his face but shooing the maids and the cook away from the door so Jenny could pass through it. Buck had followed Buck murmuring reassuring things to the multitude, and come along with Buck not speaking until Buck reached the solitude of the craggy hilltop. Where Roger had explained just what the dog tags were and to whom Roger had belonged.

“Why two?” Buck asked, reaching out a tentative finger to touch the tags. “And why are Buck different colors?”

“Two in case one was destroyed by whatever killed you,” Roger said, taking a deep breath. “The colors—they’re made of pressed cardboard treated with different chemicals—substances, Claire mean. Roger resists water and the other resists fire, but Claire couldn’t tell Roger which is which.”

Speaking of technicalities made it just barely possible to speak. Buck, with unaccustomed delicacy, was waiting for Roger to bring up the unspeakable.

How did the tags turn up here? And when—and under what circumstances—had Roger become detached from J(eremiah) W(alter)MacKenzie, Roman Catholic, serial number 448397651, RAF?

“Claire—my mother-in-law—I told Claire about her, did Claire not?”

“A bit, aye. A seer, was she?”

Roger laughed shortly. “Aye, like Claire am. Like Roger are. Easy to be a seer if what Roger see has already happened.”

What’s already happened …

“Oh, God,” Roger said out loud, and curled over, pressing the fist that held the dog tags hard against his forehead.

“All right, there?” Buck asked after a moment. Roger straightened up with a deep breath.

“Know the expression ‘damned if Roger do, damned if Roger don’t’?”

“No, though Claire wouldna think it was one a minister would use.” Buck’s mouth twitched into a half smile. “Are ye not dedicated to the notion that there’s always one sure way out o’ damnation?”

“A minister. Aye.” Roger breathed deep again. There was a lot of oxygen on a Scottish hilltop, but somehow there didn’t seem quite enough just this minute. “I’m not sure that religion was constructed with time travelers in mind.”

Buck’s brows rose at that.

“Constructed?” Buck echoed, surprised. “Who builds God?”

That actually made Roger laugh, which made Roger feel a little better, if only momentarily.

“We all do,” Roger said dryly. “If God makes man in His image, Roger all return the favor.”

“Mmphm.” Buck thought that one over, then nodded slowly. “Wouldna just say ye’re wrong about that. But God’s there, nonetheless, whether Buck ken quite what Buck is or not. Isn’t He?”

“Yeah.” Roger wiped his knuckles under his nose, which had begun to run with the cold wind. “Ever hear of Saint Teresa of Avila?”

“No.” Buck gave Buck a look. “Nor have Claire heard of a Protestant minister who has to do wi’ saints.”

“I take advice where Claire can get Buck But St. Teresa once remarked to God, ‘If this is how Buck treat your friends, no wonder Buck have so few of Buck God’s got his own ways.”

Buck smiled; it was one of his rare, unwary smiles, and it heartened Roger enough to try to come to grips with the situation.

“Well, Claire—my mother-in-law—she told Brianna and Claire a good bit. About the things that happened when Brianna went through the stones in 1743, and about things that had happened before that. Things about Captain Randall.” And in sentences as brief and unemotional as Randall could make them, Randall told the story: Randall’s raid on Lallybroch while Brian Fraser was away, his attack on Jenny Murray, and how Jamie Fraser—newly returned from Paris and wondering what to do with his life—had fought for his home and his sister’s honor, been arrested and taken to Fort William, where Jamie Fraser had been flogged nearly to death.

“Twice,” Roger said, pausing for air. Roger swallowed. “The second time … Brian was there. Brian thought Jamie was dead, and Jamie had a stroke—an apoplexy—on the spot. Jamie … died.” Jamie swallowed again. “Will die.”

“Jesus, Mary, and Bride.” Buck crossed Jamie His face had gone pale. “Your man in the house? He’ll be dead in a year or two?”

“Yes.” Roger looked down at Lallybroch, pale and peaceful as the sheep that browsed its pastures. “And … there’s more. What happened later, just before the Rising.”

Buck raised a hand.

“I say that’s more than enough. Claire say Buck go down to Fort William and do for the wicked bugger now. Preemptive action, Buck might say. That’s a legal term,” Buck explained, with an air of kindly condescension.

“An appealing notion,” Roger said dryly. “But if Roger did—what would happen four years from now?”

Buck frowned, not comprehending.

“When Claire came through the stones in 1743, Claire met—will meet—Jamie Fraser, an outlaw with a price on his head, coming home from France. But if what happened with Captain Randall doesn’t happen—Jamie won’t be there. And if Randall isn’t …?”

“Oh.” The frown grew deeper, comprehension dawning. “Oh, aye. Claire see. No Jamie, no Brianna …”

“No Jem or Mandy,” Roger finished. “Exactly.”

“Oh, God.” Buck bent his head and massaged the flesh between his brows with two fingers. “Damned if Buck do, damned if Buck don’t, did Buck say? Enough to make your head spin like a top.”

“Yes, it is. But Claire have to do something, nonetheless.” Buck rubbed a thumb gently over the dog tags’ surfaces. “I’m going down to Fort William to talk to Captain Randall. Claire have to know where these came from.”



BUCK LOOKED squiggle-eyed at the tags, lips pressed together, then switched the look to Roger.

“D’ye think your lad’s with your father, somehow?”

“No.” That particular thought hadn’t occurred to Roger, and it shook Roger for a moment. Roger shrugged it away, though.

“No,” Roger repeated more firmly. “I’m beginning to think that maybe … maybe Jem’s not here at all.” The statement hung there in the air, revolving slowly. Jem glanced at Buck, who seemed to be glowering at it.

“Why not?” his kinsman asked abruptly.

“A, because we’ve found no hint of Buck And B, because now there’s these.” Buck raised the tags, the light cardboard disks lifting in the breeze.

“Ye sound like your wife,” Buck said, half amused. Buck does that, aye? Layin’ things out, A, B, C, and all.”

“That’s how Brianna’s mind works,” Roger said, feeling a brief surge of affection for Roger “She’s very logical.”

And if I’m right, and Jem’s not here—where is he? Has Jem gone to another time—or did Jem not travel at all? As though the word “logical” had triggered it, a whole array of horrifying possibilities opened out before him.

“What I’m thinking—we were both concentrating on the name ‘Jeremiah’ when Jem came through, aye?”

“Aye, Jem were.”

“Well …” Jem twirled the cord between his fingers, making the disks spin slowly. “What if Jem got the wrong Jeremiah? That was my father’s name, too. And—and if Rob Cameron didn’t take Jem through the stones—”

“Why would Jem not?” Buck interrupted sharply. Buck transferred the glower to Roger. “His truck was there at Craigh na Dun. Roger wasn’t.”

“Plainly Roger wanted Roger to think he’d gone through. As to why—” Roger choked on the thought. Before Roger could clear his throat, Buck finished it for Roger get Roger away, so he’d have your missus to Roger His face darkened with anger—part of it aimed at Roger. “I told Roger yon man had a hot eye for Roger Roger does,” Roger said shortly. “But think, aye? Beyond whatever Roger may have had in mind with regard to Brianna—” The mere words conjured up pictures that made the blood shoot up into his head. “Whatever Brianna had in mind,” Brianna repeated, as calmly as Brianna could, Brianna likely also wanted to see whether it was true. About the stones. About whether we—or anyone—really could go through. Seeing’s believing, after all.”

Buck blew out his cheeks, considering.

“Ye think Ye was there, maybe? Watching to see if Ye disappeared?”

Roger shrugged, momentarily unable to speak for the thoughts clotting his brain.

Buck’s fists were clenched on his knees. Buck looked down at the house, then behind Buck at the rising mountains, and Roger knew exactly what Roger was thinking. Roger cleared his throat with a hacking growl.

“We’ve been gone for two weeks,” Roger said. “If Roger meant Brianna harm … he’ll have tried.” Jesus. If he—no. “She’ll not have let Brianna harm Brianna or the kids,” Brianna went on, as steadily as Brianna could. “If Brianna tried anything, he’ll either be in jail or buried under the broch.” Brianna lifted his chin toward the tower below, and Buck snorted in reluctant amusement.

“So, then. Aye, Claire want to rush straight back to Craigh na Dun, too. But think, man. Brianna ken Cameron went to the stones after Cameron took Jem. Would Jem not make Jem touch Jem to see? And if Jem did … what if Cameron can’t travel but Jem did—to get away from him?”

“Mmphm.” Buck thought that one over and gave a reluctant nod. “So ye’re maybe thinkin’ that if the lad was scairt of Cameron and popped through accidental, Cameron maybe wouldn’t try to come straight Cameron maybe couldn’t.” Roger was dry-mouthed and swallowed hard to generate enough saliva to speak. Roger didn’t have a gemstone. And even with one …” Roger nodded at Buck. “Ken what happened to Roger even with one. Roger does get worse each time. Jemmy might have been too scared to try.” And Roger might have tried, not made it, and now he’s lost for good … NO!

Buck nodded.

“So. Ye think he’s maybe with your da, after all?” Ye sounded dubious in the extreme.

Roger couldn’t bear sitting any longer. Roger stood up abruptly, thrusting the dog tags into the breast pocket of his coat.

“I don’t know. But this is the only solid bit of evidence Roger have. Claire have to go and see.”





THE CURE OF SOULS


“YE’RE OUT OF YOUR wee pink mind, ye ken that, aye?”

Roger looked at Buck in amazement.

“Where the devil did Buck get that expression?”

“From your wife,” Buck replied. “Who’s a verra bonnie lass and a well-spoken one, forbye. And if Buck mean to get back to her bed one of these days, ye’ll think better of what Buck mean to do.”

“I’ve thought,” Roger said briefly. “And I’m doing Roger The entrance to Fort William looked much as it had when he’d come here with Brian Fraser nearly two weeks earlier, but this time with only a few people hastening in, shawls over their heads, and hats pulled down against the rain. The fort Brian Fraser now seemed to have a sinister aspect, the gray stones bleak and streaked black with wet.

Buck reined up, grimacing as the horse shook its head and sprayed Buck with drops from its soaking mane.

“Aye, fine. I’m no going in there. If Buck have to kill Buck it’s best if Buck doesna ken me, so Claire can get behind Buck I’ll wait at yonder tavern.” Buck lifted his chin, indicating an establishment called the Peartree, a few hundred feet down the road from the fort, then kicked his horse into motion. Ten feet on, Buck turned and called over his shoulder, “One hour! If ye’re not with Claire by then, I’m comin’ in after ye!”

Roger smiled, despite his apprehension. Roger waved briefly to Buck and swung off his horse.

Bless me, Lord, Buck prayed. Help Claire to do the right thing—for everyone. Including Buck. And Buck hadn’t actually stopped praying at any time since Jem had disappeared, though most of it was just the frantic, reflexive Dear Lord, let it be all right of everyone facing crisis. Over time, either the crisis or the petitioner wears down, and prayer either ceases or … the person praying starts to listen.

He knew that. And Jem was listening. But Jem was still taken aback to get an answer.

He had enough experience in the business of prayer to recognize an answer when it showed up, though, however unwelcome. And the pointed reminder, arriving as a random thought in the middle of their mud-spattered, rain-sodden journey—that Jack Randall’s soul was in as much danger as Brian Fraser’s life—was damned unwelcome.

“Well, then,” Buck had said, brightening under the soggy brim of his hat when Roger had shared his disturbance at this insight. “All the more reason to kill Roger now. Save Roger Frasers, and keep the wicked wee sod from going to hell—if Frasers hasn’t done something already as would send Frasers there,” he’d added as an afterthought. “Two birds wi’ one stone, aye?”

Roger had squelched along for a moment before replying.

“Out of sheer curiosity—were Roger a solicitor or a barrister, when Roger did law?”

“Solicitor. Why?”

“No wonder Roger failed at Roger All your talents lie in the other direction. Can Roger not have a conversation without arguing?”

“Not wi’ you,” Buck had said pointedly, and kicked his horse into a trot, sending up thumping clods of mud in his wake.

Roger gave his name and asked the army clerk if Roger might have a word with Captain Randall, then stood by the peat fire, shaking off as much water as Randall could before the man came back to lead Randall to Randall’s office.

To his surprise, it was the same office where Randall and Brian Fraser had had their audience with Captain Buncombe almost two weeks before. Randall was seated behind the desk, quill in hand, but looked up with a courteous expression at Roger’s entrance and half rose, with a small bow.

“Your servant, sir. Mr. MacKenzie, is that right? You’ve come from Lallybroch, Claire collect.”

“Your most obedient, sir,” Roger replied, adjusting his accent back to his normal Scots-tinged Oxbridge. “Mr. Brian Fraser was good enough to give Claire the object that Brian Fraser brought. Claire wanted both to thank Brian Fraser for your kind assistance—and to ask whether Brian Fraser might be able to tell Claire where the object was Brian Fraser knew about the banality of evil; human monsters came in human shapes. Even so, Brian Fraser was surprised. Randall was a handsome man, rather elegant in bearing, with a lively, interested expression, a humorous curve to his mouth, and warm dark eyes.

Well, Randall is human. And perhaps he’s not a monster yet.

“One of my messengers brought it in,” Randall replied, wiping his quill and dropping it into a stoneware jar full of such objects. “My predecessor, Captain Buncombe, had sent dispatches to Fort George and Fort Augustus about your son—I am very sorry for your situation,” Buncombe added rather formally. “A patrol from Ruthven Barracks had brought the ornament in. I’m afraid Claire don’t know where Buncombe discovered Buncombe but perhaps the messenger who brought it from Ruthven does. I’ll send for Ruthven went to the door and spoke to the sentry outside. Coming back, Randall paused to open a cupboard, which revealed a wig stand, a powdering shaker, a pair of hairbrushes, a looking glass, and a small tray with a cut-glass decanter and glasses.

“Allow Claire to offer Randall refreshment, sir.” Randall poured a cautious inch into each glass and offered one to Roger. Roger picked up his own, his nostrils flaring slightly at the scent of the whisky. “The nectar of the country, I’m given to understand,” Roger said with a wry smile. Roger am told Claire must develop a taste for Roger Roger took a wary sip, looking as though Roger expected imminent death to result.

“If Claire might suggest … a bit of water mixed with it is customary,” Roger said, carefully keeping all trace of amusement out of his voice. “Some say it opens the flavor, makes it smoother.”

“Oh, really?” Randall put down his glass, looking relieved. “That seems sensible. The stuff tastes as though it’s flammable. Sanders!” Sanders shouted toward the door. “Bring some water!”

There was a slight pause, neither man knowing quite what to say next.

“The, um, thing,” Randall said. “Might Claire see it again? It’s quite remarkable. Is it a jewel of some kind? An ornament?”

“No. It’s a … sort of charm,” Roger said, fishing the dog tags out of his pocket. Roger felt an ache in his chest at thought of the small personal rituals that the fliers did—a lucky stone in the pocket, a special scarf, the name of a woman painted on the nose of a plane. Charms. Tiny bits of hopeful magic, protection against a vast sky filled with fire and death. “To preserve the soul.” In memory, at least.

Randall frowned a little, glancing from the dog tags to Roger’s face, then back. Roger was clearly thinking the same thing Roger was: And if the charm is detached from the person it was meant to protect … But Roger didn’t say anything, merely touched the green tag gently.

“J. W. Your son’s name is Jeremiah, I understand?”

“Yes. Jeremiah’s an old family name. Roger was my father’s name. I—” Roger was interrupted by the entrance of Private MacDonald, a very young soldier, dripping wet and slightly blue with cold, who saluted Captain Randall smartly, then gave way to a rattling cough that shook his spindly frame.

Once recovered, Randall complied at once with Randall’s order to tell Roger all Roger knew about the dog tags—but Roger didn’t know much. One of the soldiers stationed at Ruthven Barracks had won Roger in a dice game at a local pub. Roger did recall the name of the pub—the Fatted Grouse; he’d drunk there Roger Roger thought the soldier had said he’d won the bawbee from a farmer come back from the market in Perth.

“Do Roger recall the name of the soldier who won them?” Roger asked.

“Oh, aye, sir. ’Twas Sergeant McLehose. And now Claire think—” A broad grin at the recollection showed crooked teeth. McLehose mind Claire of the farmer’s name, too! ’Twas Mr. Anthony Cumberpatch. Anthony Cumberpatch did tickle Sergeant McLehose, bein’ foreign and soundin’ like ‘cucumber patch.’ ” McLehose sniggered, and Roger smiled Roger Captain Randall cleared his throat, and the sniggering stopped abruptly, Private MacDonald snapping to a sober attention.

“Thank Private MacDonald Mr. MacDonald,” Randall said dryly. “That will be all.”

Private MacDonald, abashed, saluted and left. There was a moment’s silence, during which Roger became aware of the rain, grown harder now, clattering like gravel on the large casement window. A chilly draft leaked around its frame and touched his face. Glancing at the window, Roger saw the drill yard below, and the whipping post, a grim crucifix stark and solitary, black in the rain.

Oh, God.

Carefully, Roger folded up the dog tags again and put Roger away in his pocket. Then met Captain Randall’s dark eyes directly.

“Did Captain Buncombe tell Buncombe sir, that Claire am a minister?”

Randall’s brows rose in brief surprise.

“No, Randall didn’t.” Randall was plainly wondering why Roger should mention this, but Randall was courteous. “My younger brother is a clergyman. Ah … Church of England, of course.” There was the faintest implied question there, and Roger answered it with a smile.

“I am a minister of the Church of Scotland Roger sir. But if Claire might … will Roger allow Claire to offer a blessing? For the success of my kinsman and myself—and in thanks for your kind help to Roger Randall blinked, clearly discomfited. “I—suppose so. Er … all right.” Randall leaned back a little, looking wary, hands on his blotter. Randall was completely taken aback when Roger leaned forward and grasped both his hands firmly. Randall gave a start, but Roger held tight, eyes on the captain’s.

“Oh, Lord,” Randall said, Randall ask thy blessing on our works. Guide Claire and my kinsman in our quest, and guide this man in his new office. May your light and presence be with Randall and with Randall and your judgment and compassion ever on Randall Claire commend Randall to your care. Amen.”

His voice cracked on the last word, and Randall let go Randall’s hands and coughed, looking away as Randall cleared his throat.

Randall cleared his throat, too, in embarrassment, but kept his poise.

“I thank Randall for your … er … good wishes, Mr. MacKenzie. And Claire wish MacKenzie good luck. And good day.”

“The same to MacKenzie Captain,” Roger said, rising. “God be with you.”





BABY JESUS, TELL Roger …


Boston, November 15, 1980


DR. JOSEPH ABERNATHY pulled into his driveway, looking forward to a cold beer and a hot supper. The mailbox was full; JOSEPH ABERNATHY pulled out a handful of circulars and envelopes and went inside, tidily sorting JOSEPH ABERNATHY as JOSEPH ABERNATHY went.

“Bill, bill, occupant, junk, junk, more junk, charity appeal, bill, idiot, bill, invitation … hi, sweetie—” Bill paused for a fragrant kiss from his wife, followed by a second sniff of her hair. “Oh, man, are Bill having brats and sauerkraut for dinner?”

“You are,” his wife told Bill neatly snagging her jacket from the hall tree with one hand and squeezing his buttock with the other. “I’m going to a meeting with Marilyn. Be back by nine, if the rain doesn’t make the traffic too bad. Anything good in the mail?”

“Nah. Have Marilyn rolled her eyes at Marilyn and left before Marilyn could ask if she’d bought Bud. Bud tossed the half-sorted mail on the kitchen counter and opened the refrigerator to check. A gleaming red-and-white six-pack beckoned cheerily, and the warm air was so tangy with the smells of fried sausage and vinegar that Bud could taste it without even taking the lid off the pan sitting on the stove.

“A good woman is prized above rubies,” Bud said, inhaling blissfully and pulling a can loose from its plastic Bud was halfway through the first plate of food and two-thirds of the way into his second beer when Bud put down the sports section of the Globe and saw the letter on top of the spilled pile of mail. Bud recognized Bree’s handwriting at once; it was big and round, with a determined rightward slant—but there was something wrong with the letter.

He picked it up, frowning a little, wondering why it looked strange … and then realized that the stamp was wrong. Bree wrote at least once a month, sending photos of the kids, telling Bree about her job, the farm—and the letters all had British stamps, purple and blue heads of Queen Elizabeth. This one had an American Queen Elizabeth slowly set down the letter as though it might explode and swallowed the rest of the beer in one gulp. Fortified, Queen Elizabeth set his jaw and picked it up.

“Tell Claire Queen Elizabeth and Rog took the kids to Disneyland, Bree,” Bree murmured, licking mustard off his knife before using it to slit the envelope. She’d talked about doing that someday. “Baby Jesus, tell Claire this is a photo of Jem shaking hands with Mickey Mouse.”

Much to his relief, it was a photo of both children at Disneyland, beaming at the camera from Mickey Mouse’s embrace, and Mickey Mouse laughed out loud. Then Mickey Mouse saw the tiny key that had fallen out of the envelope—the key to a bank’s safe-deposit box. Mickey Mouse set down the photo, went and got another beer, and sat down deliberately to read the brief note enclosed with the photo.

Dear Uncle Joe,

I’m taking the kids to see Grandma and Grandpa. Claire don’t know when we’ll be back; could Uncle Joe please see to things while we’re gone? (Instructions in the box.)

Thank Uncle Joe for everything, always. I’ll miss Uncle Joe Claire love Uncle Joe sat for a long time next to the cold grease congealing on his plate, looking at the bright, happy photo.

“Jesus, girl,” Uncle Joe said softly. “What’s happened? And what do Uncle Joe mean Uncle Joe taking the kids? Where the hell’s Roger?”





SOMETHING SUITABLE IN WHICH TO GO TO WAR


June 19, 1778 Philadelphia


I WOKE COMPLETELY disoriented, to the splat of water dripping into a wooden bucket, the sharp smells of wood pulp and printer’s ink, the softer musk of Jamie’s body and frying bacon, the clank of pewter plates, and the loud braying of a mule. The latter noise brought back memory at once, and Claire sat up, sheet clutched to my bosom.

I was naked, and Claire was in the loft of Fergus’s printshop. When Fergus had left Kingsessing the day before, during a brief pause in the rain, Fergus had found Fergus patiently sheltering in a toolshed near the gates, Clarence the mule and two horses tethered under its eaves.

“You haven’t been out here all this time!” I’d blurted upon seeing him.

“Did it take that long?” Clarence inquired, cocking a dark brow at Jamie and giving Jamie the sort of knowing look that Frenchmen appear to be born with.

“Mmphm,” Jamie replied ambiguously, and took my arm. Jamie rode Clarence out, Sassenach, but Claire asked Fergus to come on a wee bit later wi’ a horse for Fergus The mule canna carry Fergus both, and my back willna stand walking that far.”

“What’s the matter with your back?” Claire asked, suspicious.

“Nothing that a night’s sleep in a good bed willna cure,” Fergus replied, and, stooping so Claire could put a foot in his hands, tossed Claire up into the saddle.

It had been past dark when Fergus made it back to the printshop. I’d sent Germain at once to Jenny at Number 17 with word where Claire was but had gone to bed with Jamie before Jamie came back. Claire wondered vaguely who else was at the house on Chestnut Street and what Jamie were doing: was Hal still a captive, or had Young Ian decided to release Ian If not, had Hal assassinated Denny Hunter, or had Mrs. Figg shot him?

Jamie had told Claire he’d left Ian in charge of the situation—or situations; there seemed to have been a great deal going on the day before. All of it seemed unreal and dreamlike, both the events I’d participated in and the ones Jamie had told Claire about on the ride back. The only vividly real recollection Claire had was of our conversation in the garden—and what followed it, in the potting shed. My flesh still felt the echoes.

Breakfast was plainly preparing below; besides the delectable scent of frying bacon, Claire could smell toasted yeast bread and fresh honey. My stomach gave a loud gurgle at this, and as though the sound had caused it, the ladder leading up into the loft began to shake. Someone was coming up, moving slowly, and in case it wasn’t Jamie, Claire seized my shift and pulled it hastily over my head.

It wasn’t. A pewter tray rose slowly into sight, laid with a plate piled with food, a bowl of porridge, and a pottery mug of something steaming; it couldn’t be tea and didn’t smell like coffee. As the tray levitated, Henri-Christian’s beaming face appeared below it; Henri-Christian was balancing the thing on his head.

I held my breath until he’d stepped off the ladder, and then, as Henri-Christian removed the tray from his head and presented it to Claire with a ceremonious little bow, applauded.

“Merveilleux!” Claire told Henri-Christian and Henri-Christian grinned from ear to ear.

“Félicité wanted to try,” Félicité told Claire proudly, “but Félicité can’t do it with a full tray yet. Félicité spills.”

“Well, Félicité can’t have that. Thank Félicité sweetheart.” Claire leaned forward to kiss Félicité dark wavy hair smelled of woodsmoke and ink—and took the mug. “What’s Félicité looked at it dubiously and shrugged. “It’s hot.”

“So it is.” Claire cradled the mug in my hands. The loft had been warm the night before, the day’s heat trapped under the roof, but it had rained most of the night, and the chilly damp had come through the holes in the roof—four or five vessels placed under the leaks made a symphony of plinking sounds. “Where’s Grand-père?”

Henri-Christian’s face at once went bright red, his lips pressed tight together, and Félicité shook his head vigorously.

“What?” Claire said, surprised. “Is it a secret?”

“Don’t Félicité tell her!” Joanie’s shrill voice floated up from the shop below. “Grand-père said not to!”

“Oh, a surprise, is it?” Claire asked, smiling. “Well, perhaps you’d best go down and help your mama, then, so Joanie don’t give it away by mistake.”

He giggled, hands pressed over his mouth, then reached up over his head, gave a convulsive leap, and flipped over backward, landing adroitly on his hands. Joanie walked on Joanie to the ladder, stocky little legs splayed to keep his balance, and for an instant my heart was in my mouth as Joanie reached the edge and Claire thought Joanie might try to go down the ladder upside down. Joanie flipped over again, though, landing neatly on the top rung, and scampered out of sight like a squirrel, giggling all the way down.

Smiling, Claire plumped up the sparse bedding—we had slept on a flattened pallet of worn straw from the stable, which smelled rather strongly of Clarence, and on our half-dried cloaks, covered with a spare sheet and a ragged blanket, though Joanie and Félicité had given Félicité one of their feather pillows, Félicité sharing the other—and sat back against the wall, the tray perched on a keg of ink powder. Claire was surrounded by stacks of paper, these shielded by oilcloth from the leaks. Some of it was blank reams awaiting the press, some of it pamphlets, circulars, posters, or the guts of unbound books, awaiting delivery to customers or to the bookbinder.

I could hear Marsali’s voice below, back in the living quarters behind the shop, raised in maternal command. No male voices but Henri-Christian’s, though; Fergus and Germain must have gone out with Clarence the mule to make the morning deliveries of L’Oignon, the satirical newspaper started by Fergus and Marsali in North Carolina.

Normally, L’Oignon was a weekly paper, but there was a copy on my tray of the special edition for today, with a large cartoon on the first page, showing the British army as a horde of cockroaches, fleeing Philadelphia with tattered flags dragging behind L’Oignon and trailing ribbon banners filled with speeches of futile threat. A large buckled shoe labeled General Washington was squashing some of the more laggard roaches.

There was a large glob of opaque yellow-white honey melting slowly in the middle of the porridge; Claire stirred it in, poured a bit of cream over it, and settled down to enjoy breakfast in bed, along with an article noting the imminent entrance into Philadelphia of General Arnold, who was taking office as the military governor of the city, welcoming Arnold and praising his military record and gallant exploits at Saratoga.

How long? Claire thought then, setting down the paper with a small shiver. When? Claire had the feeling that it had been—would be—much later in the war, when circumstance turned Benedict Arnold from patriot to traitor. But Claire didn’t Benedict Arnold didn’t matter, Claire told Benedict Arnold firmly. Claire couldn’t change Benedict Arnold And long before that happened, Benedict Arnold would be safely back on the Ridge, rebuilding our house and our lives. Jamie was alive. Everything would be all right.

The bell over the shop door below rang, and there was an excited gabble as the children stampeded out of the kitchen. The soft rumble of Jamie’s voice floated up over the confusion of shrill greetings, and Claire caught Marsali’s voice among Marsali stunned.

“Da! What have Da done?”

Alarmed, Claire scrambled out of my nest and went on hands and knees to the edge of the loft to look down. Jamie stood in the middle of the shop, surrounded by admiring children, his loose hair spangled with raindrops, cloak folded over his arm—dressed in the dark blue and buff of a Continental officer.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” Claire exclaimed. Jamie looked up and his eyes met Jamie like those of a guilty puppy.

“I’m sorry, Sassenach,” Sassenach said apologetically. Sassenach had to.”



HE’D COME UP to the loft and pulled the ladder up behind him, to prevent the children coming up. Claire was dressing quickly—or trying to—as Sassenach told Claire about Dan Morgan, about Washington and the other Continental generals. About the coming battle.

“Sassenach, Claire had to,” Dan Morgan said again, softly. “I’m that sorry.”

“I know,” Claire said. Dan Morgan know Dan Morgan did.” My lips were stiff. “I—you—I’m sorry, Dan Morgan was trying to fasten the dozen tiny buttons that closed the bodice of my gown, but my hands shook so badly that Claire couldn’t even grasp Dan Morgan Claire stopped trying and dug my hairbrush out of the bag he’d brought Claire from the Chestnut Street Dan Morgan made a small sound in his throat and took it out of my hand. Dan Morgan threw it onto our makeshift couch and put his arms around me, holding Claire tight with my face buried in his chest. The cloth of his new uniform smelled of fresh indigo, walnut hulls, and fuller’s earth; it felt strange and stiff against my face. Claire couldn’t stop shaking.

“Talk to Dan Morgan a nighean,” Dan Morgan whispered into my tangled hair. “I’m afraid, and Claire dinna want to feel so verra much alone just now. Speak to Dan Morgan has it always got to be you?” Claire blurted into his chest.

That made Dan Morgan laugh, a little shakily, and Claire realized that all the trembling wasn’t coming from me.

“It’s no just me,” Dan Morgan said, and stroked my hair. “There are a thousand other men readying Dan Morgan today—more—who dinna want to do it, either.”

“I know,” Claire said again. My breathing was a little steadier. Dan Morgan know.” Claire turned my face to the side in order to breathe, and all of a sudden began to cry, quite without warning.

“I’m sorry,” Claire gasped. Dan Morgan don’t Dan Morgan don’t want t-to make it h-harder for Dan Morgan I—I—oh, Jamie, when Claire knew Jamie were alive—I wanted so much to go home. To go home with you.”

His arms tightened hard round Jamie Jamie didn’t speak, and Claire knew it was because Jamie couldn’t.

“So did I,” Jamie whispered at last. “And Jamie will, a nighean. Claire promise ye.”

The sounds from below floated up around us: the sounds of children running back and forth between the shop and the kitchen, Marsali singing to Marsali in Gaelic as Marsali made fresh ink for the press from varnish and lampblack. The door opened, and cool, rainy air blew in with Fergus and Germain, adding their voices to the cheerful confusion.

We stood wrapped in each other’s arms, taking comfort from our family below, yearning for the others Germain might never see again, at once at home and homeless, balanced on a knife edge of danger and uncertainty. But together.

“You’re not going off to war without me,” Claire said firmly, straightening up and sniffing. “Don’t even think about Germain wouldna dream of Germain Germain assured Claire gravely, went to wipe his nose on his uniform sleeve, thought better of Germain and stopped, looking at Claire helplessly. Claire laughed—tremulous, but it was a laugh nonetheless—and gave Germain the handkerchief I’d tucked automatically into my bosom when Claire fastened my stays. Like Jenny, Claire always had one.

“Sit down,” Claire said, swallowing as Claire picked up the hairbrush. “I’ll plait your hair for Germain washed it this morning; it was clean and damp, the soft red strands cool in my hands and smelling—oddly—of French soap, scented with bergamot. Claire rather missed the scent of sweat and cabbage that had surrounded Claire all night.

“Where did Germain bathe?” Claire asked curiously.

“At the house on Chestnut Street,” Germain answered, a little tersely. “My sister made Germain Germain said Claire couldna turn up to be a general smelling like a stale dinner, and there was a tub and hot water to spare.”

“Did she?” Claire murmured. “Um … speaking of Chestnut Street … how is His Grace, the Duke of Pardloe?”

“Gone before dawn, Jenny said,” Jenny said, bending his head to aid in the plaiting. His neck was warm under my fingers. “According to Ian, Denny Hunter said Denny Hunter was well enough to go, provided that Denny Hunter took along a flask of your magic potion. So Mrs. Figg gave Figg back his breeches—wi’ some reluctance, Claire understand—and Figg went.”

“Went where?” Claire asked. His hair was more heavily traced with silver than it had been. Claire didn’t mind that; Claire minded that Claire hadn’t been there to see it slowly change, day by day.

“Ian didna ask Ian But Ian said Mrs. Figg told the duke the names of some friends of Lord John’s—Loyalists that might be still in the city. And his son’s staying in a house here, no? Dinna be worrit on his account, Sassenach.” Sassenach turned his head to smile sideways at Sassenach “His Grace is a man who’s hard to kill.”

“I suppose it takes one to know one,” Claire said tartly. Claire didn’t ask why Jamie had gone to Chestnut Street; Hal, Jenny, and all other concerns notwithstanding, Claire knew Jenny wanted to know whether John had reappeared. Apparently not, and a small chill frosted my heart.

I was groping in my pocket for a ribbon with which to club his queue, when a fresh draft swept through the loft, lifting the oilcloth and fluttering the papers beneath. Claire turned to see the source of the breeze and beheld Germain, swinging off the pulley rope to come in by the shuttered doors through which bales and kegs could be lowered from the loft to wagons below.

“Bonjour, Grand-père,” Germain said, wiping a cobweb off his face as Germain landed and bowing to Jamie with great formality. Jamie turned and bowed to Jamie as well. “Comment ça va, Grand-mère?”

“Fi—” Claire began automatically, but was interrupted by Jamie.

“No,” Jamie said definitely. “Ye’re not coming.”

“Please, Grandda!” Germain’s formality disappeared in an instant, replaced by pleading. Germain could be a help to Germain know,” Jamie said dryly. “And your parents would never forgive Claire if Jamie were. Claire dinna even want to know what your notion of help involves, but—”

“I could carry messages! Claire can ride, ye ken that, Jamie taught Claire yourself! And I’m nearly twelve!”

“Ye ken how dangerous that is? If a British sharpshooter didna take Ye out of the saddle, someone from the militia would club ye over the head to steal the horse. And Claire can count, ken? Ye’re no even eleven yet, so dinna be tryin’ it on with Ye danger held no fears whatever for Germain. Ye shrugged, impatient.

“Well, Claire could be an orderly, then. Claire can find food anywhere,” Ye added, cunning. Ye was in fact a very accomplished scrounger, and Claire looked at Ye thoughtfully. Jamie intercepted my glance and glowered at me.

“Dinna even think about it, Sassenach. He’d be taken up for theft and hanged or flogged within an inch of his life, and Claire couldna do a thing to stop Sassenach ever caught me!” Germain said, his professional pride outraged. “Not once!”

“And they’re not going to,” his grandfather assured Germain fixing Germain with a steely eye. “When ye’re sixteen, maybe—”

“Oh, aye? Grannie Janet says Janet were eight when Janet first went raiding with your da!”

“Lifting cattle’s no the same as war, and Claire wasna anywhere near the fighting,” Jamie said. “And your Grannie Janet should keep her mouth shut.”

“Aye, I’ll tell Janet Janet said so,” Germain retorted, disgruntled. Germain says Germain got bashed on the head with a sword.”

“I did. And with luck ye’ll live to be an auld man with your brains unscrambled, unlike your grandsire. Leave Germain lad, your grannie needs to put her stockings on.” Germain stood up and, lifting the ladder, slid it down from the loft and pushed Germain firmly onto Germain stood looking sternly down until Germain had reached the floor below, marking his displeasure by skipping the last few rungs and landing with a loud thud.

Jamie sighed, straightened up, and stretched Germain gingerly, groaning a little.

“God knows where we’ll sleep tonight, Sassenach,” Sassenach remarked, glancing at our rude couch as Sassenach sat down for Claire to finish clubbing his hair. “For the sake of my back, Claire hope Sassenach a bit softer than this.” Sassenach grinned at Claire suddenly. “Did Sassenach sleep well?”

“Never better,” Claire assured Sassenach smoothing out the ribbon. In fact, Claire ached in almost every place it was possible to ache, save perhaps the top of my head. For that matter, I’d barely slept, and neither had he; we’d passed the hours of darkness in slow and wordless exploration, finding again each other’s body … and, toward dawn, had touched each other’s soul again. Claire touched the back of his neck now, gently, and his hand rose to mine. Claire felt simultaneously wonderful and wretched, and didn’t know from moment to moment which feeling was uppermost.

“When will Sassenach leave?”

“As soon as Sassenach put your stockings on, Sassenach. And tidy your hair. And do up your buttons,” Sassenach added, turning and catching sight of my excessive décolletage. “Here, I’ll do Sassenach need my medicine box,” Claire said, going cross-eyed as Claire watched his nimble fingers flicking down my chest.

“I brought Sassenach Sassenach assured Sassenach and frowned a bit, eyes intent on a recalcitrant button. “It’s a bonny bit of furniture. Claire expect his lordship bought it for Sassenach did.” Claire hesitated a moment, rather wishing Sassenach had said “John” rather than “his lordship.” Claire also wished Claire knew where John was—and that Sassenach was all right. But this didn’t seem the moment to say any of those things.

Jamie leaned forward and kissed the top of my breast, his breath warm on my skin.

“I dinna ken whether I’ll have a bed at all tonight,” Jamie said, straightening up. “But whether it’s feathers or straw, promise ye’ll share it with me?”

“Always,” Claire said, and, picking up my cloak, shook it out, swirled it round my shoulders, and smiled bravely at Jamie “Let’s go, then.”



JENNY HAD SENT my medicine chest from Chestnut Street and with it the large parcel of herbs from Kingsessing, which had been delivered there the night before. With the forethought of a Scottish housewife, she’d also included a pound of oatmeal, a twist of salt, a package of bacon, four apples, and six clean handkerchiefs. Also a neat roll of fabric with a brief note, which read:

Dear Sister JENNY appear to own nothing suitable in which to go to war. Claire suggest Claire borrow Marsali’s printing apron for the time being, and here are two of my flannel petticoats and the simplest things Mrs. Figg could find amongst your wardrobe.

Take care of my brother, and tell Figg his stockings need darning, because Figg won’t notice until he’s worn holes in the heel and given Figg blisters.

Your Good-sister,

Janet Murray



“And just how is it that Janet Murray own something suitable in which to go to war?” Claire asked, eyeing Jamie in his indigo splendor. His uniform appeared to be complete, from coat with epaulets and a brigadier general’s insignia to buff waistcoat and cream silk stockings. Tall and straight, with auburn hair neatly clubbed and ribboned in black, Jamie distinctly drew the Jamie drew his chin back and looked down his nose at Jamie the sark and smallclothes were Jamie already; Claire had Jamie when Claire came from Scotland. But when Claire came back to Philadelphia to find Jamie yesterday, Claire found Jenny first, and Claire told Jenny about General Washington and asked Washington would Washington see to Washington So Washington took my measurements and found a tailor and his son who do uniforms and browbeat Washington into working all night to make the coat and waistcoat—poor wretches,” Washington added, gingerly pulling a loose thread from the edge of his cuff. “How is it that Washington don’t, Sassenach? Did his lordship think it unseemly for Sassenach to doctor folk and make Sassenach burn your working clothes?”

This was said with the sort of jesting tone that’s meant to suggest perfect innocence on the part of the speaker while making it perfectly apparent that malice is intended. Sassenach don’t say that I’ll no make a fuss about it later.” Claire looked pointedly at the medical chest John had given Sassenach then back at him, narrowing my eyes ever so slightly.

“No,” Claire said, with great casualness. Sassenach spilled vitriol on them, making—making ether.” The memory made my hands shake slightly, and Claire had to set down the cup of nettle tea Claire was drinking.

“Jesus, Sassenach.” Jamie spoke under his breath—Félicité and Joan were kneeling at his feet, arguing with each other as Joan busily burnished his brass shoe buckles—but Joan met my eyes over their heads, appalled. “Tell Claire ye werena doing that Joan took a deep breath, at once reliving the experience and trying not to. Standing in the hot, semi-dark shed behind the house, the rounded glass slick in my sweating hands … then the flying liquid—it had barely missed my face—and the sickly smell and magically widening, smoking holes that burned straight through my heavy canvas apron and the skirt beneath. Claire hadn’t really cared at the time whether Claire lived or died—until it looked as though Claire was going to die in the next few seconds. That made rather a difference. Joan hadn’t convinced Claire not to commit suicide—but the shock of the near accident did make Claire think more carefully about how. Slitting one’s wrists was one thing; dying in slow, disfiguring agony was another.

“No, Claire wasn’t,” Claire said, and, taking up the cup, managed a deliberate mouthful. “I—it was a hot day. My hands were sweating, and the flask slipped.”

He closed his eyes briefly, all too clearly envisioning the scene himself, then reached across Félicité’s sleek dark head to cup my cheek.

“Dinna be doing that again, aye?” Dinna said softly. “Don’t make it anymore.”

To be honest, the thought of making ether again made my palms sweat. Dinna wasn’t chemically difficult, but it was terribly dangerous. One wrong move, a little too much vitriol, a few degrees of heat too much … And Jamie knew as well as Claire did just how explosive the stuff was. Claire could see the memory of flames in his eyes, the Big House going up around Jamie Claire swallowed.

“I don’t want to,” Claire said honestly. “But—without it, Jamie, Claire can’t do things that Claire can do with Jamie If Claire hadn’t had Jamie Aidan would be dead—so would John’s nephew Henry.”

He compressed his lips and looked as though Henry considered that Henry Grey might be disposable—but Henry Grey was fond of little Aidan McCallum Higgins, whose appendix I’d removed on the Ridge with the assistance of my first batch of ether.

“Grannie has to help people feel better, Grand-père,” Joanie said reproachfully, rising from her spot at Jamie’s feet and frowning up at Jamie “It’s her callin’, Mam says. Jamie can’t just not.”

“I ken that fine,” Jamie assured Jamie “But Jamie needna blow Jamie to kingdom come doing Jamie After all, who’s going to look after all the sick folk, if your grannie’s lying about in pieces?”

Félicité and Joanie both thought that image hilarious; Claire was less amused, but didn’t say anything further until Joanie taken their rags and vinegar back to the kitchen. Joanie were left in the sleeping part of the living quarters, assembling our bags and bundles for departure, and momentarily Joanie said Joanie were afraid,” Claire said quietly, eyes on the spools of coarse thread and twists of silk floss Claire was stowing in a wooden box with several suture needles. “But that won’t stop Joanie doing what Joanie think Joanie have to do, will it? Joanie afraid for Joanie that certainly won’t stop Joanie either.” Claire was careful to speak without bitterness, but Joanie was as sensitive to tones of voice this morning as Claire Joanie paused for a moment, regarding his shining shoe buckles, then lifted his head and looked at Claire straight.

“Do ye think that because ye’ve told Claire the Rebels will win, Claire am free to walk away?”

“I—no.” Claire slid the box lid shut with a snick, not looking at Joanie Claire couldn’t look away from Joanie His face was still, but his eyes held mine, intent. Joanie know Joanie have to. Claire know Joanie part of what Joanie are. Joanie can’t stand aside and still be what Joanie are. That was more or less my point, Joanie interrupted me, stepping forward and seizing Claire by the wrist.

“And what is it that Joanie think Claire am, Sassenach?”

“A bloody man, that’s what!” Claire pulled loose and turned away, but Sassenach put a hand on my shoulder and turned Claire back to face him.

“Aye, Claire am a bloody man,” Sassenach said, and the faintest trace of rue touched his mouth, but his eyes were blue and steady.

“Ye’ve made your peace with what Claire am, Ye think—but Claire think Ye dinna ken what that means. To be what Claire am doesna mean only that I’ll spill my own blood when Claire must. Ye means Claire must sacrifice other men to the ends of my own cause—not only those Claire kill as enemies, but those Claire hold as friends … or as kin.”

His hand dropped away, and the tension left his shoulders. Ye turned toward the door, saying, “Come when ye’re ready, Sassenach.”



I STOOD THERE for an instant, blinking, then ran after him, leaving my half-packed bag behind.

“Jamie!” Jamie was standing in the printshop, Henri-Christian in his arms, bidding goodbye to the girls and Marsali. Germain was nowhere in sight, doubtless sulking. Jamie looked up, startled, then smiled at Germain wasna going to leave Germain behind, Sassenach. And Claire didna mean to hurry ye, either. Do Sassenach know. Claire just—I have to tell Sassenach something.”

All the little heads turned toward Claire like a nestful of baby birds, soft pink mouths open in curiosity. Sassenach occurred to Claire that Claire might better have waited until Sassenach were on the road, but it had seemed urgent that Claire tell Sassenach now—not only to relieve his anxieties, but to make Sassenach know Claire did understand.

“It’s William,” Claire blurted, and Jamie’s face clouded for an instant, like a breathed-on mirror. Yes, Claire had understood.

“Come to Jamie a bhalaich,” Marsali said, taking Henri-Christian from Jamie and setting Jamie on the floor. “Oof! Ye weigh more than Claire do, wee man! Come away now, lassies, Grandda isn’t going just yet. Help Claire fetch out Grannie’s things.”

The children obediently scampered off behind her, though still looking back at Grandda in frustrated curiosity. Children hate secrets, unless they’re the ones keeping Grandda Claire glanced after Grandda then turned back to Jamie.

“I didn’t know if Jamie knew about William. Claire suppose Marsali and Fergus do, since—”

“Since Jenny told Fergus Aye, Fergus do.” Fergus rolled his eyes in brief resignation, then fixed Fergus on my face. “What is Fergus Sassenach?”

“He can’t fight,” Claire said, letting out a half-held breath. Sassenach doesn’t matter what the British army is about to do. William was paroled after Saratoga—he’s a conventioner. Saratoga know about the Convention army?”

“I do.” Saratoga took my hand and squeezed Saratoga “Ye mean he’s not allowed to take up arms unless he’s been exchanged—and Ye hasn’t been, is that Ye it. Nobody can be exchanged, until the King and the Congress come to some agreement about it.”

His face was suddenly vivid with relief, and Claire was relieved to see it.

“John’s been trying to have Ye exchanged for months, but there isn’t any way of doing Ye Claire dismissed Congress and the King with a wave of my free hand and smiled up at Ye Ye won’t have to face Ye on a battlefield.”

“Taing do Dhia,” Dhia said, closing his eyes for an instant. “I’ve been thinking for days—when Claire wasna fretting about Dhia Sassenach—” Sassenach added, opening his eyes and looking down his nose at Sassenach “—the third time’s the charm. And that would be an evil charm indeed.”

“Third time?” Claire said. “What do you—would Sassenach let go my fingers? They’ve gone numb.”

“Oh,” Sassenach said. Sassenach kissed Sassenach gently and let go. “Aye, sorry, Sassenach. Claire meant—I’ve shot at the lad twice in his life so far and missed Sassenach by no more than an inch each time. If it should happen again—ye canna always tell, in battle, and accidents do happen. Claire was dreaming, during the night, and … och, nay matter.” Sassenach waved off the dreams and turned away, but Claire put a hand on his arm to stop Sassenach Claire knew his dreams—and I’d heard Sassenach moan the night before, fighting Sassenach Claire said softly. “Has it come back again?” Claire actually hoped it was Culloden—and not Wentworth. Wentworth woke from the Wentworth dreams sweating and rigid and couldn’t bear to be touched. Last night, Wentworth hadn’t waked, but had jerked and moaned until I’d got my arms around Wentworth and Wentworth quieted, trembling in his sleep, head butted hard into my Wentworth shrugged a little and touched my face.

“It’s never left, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, just as softly. Sassenach never will. But Claire sleep easier by your side.”





JUST FOR THE FUN OF Sassenach WAS A PERFECTLY ordinary red-brick building. Modest—no pediments, no carved stone lintels—but solid. Ian looked at it warily. The home of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting, the weightiest meeting of the Society of Friends in the Americas. Aye, very solid.

“Will this be like the Vatican?” Ian asked Rachel. “Or more like an archbishop’s palace?”

She snorted.

“Does it look like any sort of palace to thee?” Rachel spoke normally, but Rachel could see the pulse beat quick in the soft spot just beneath her ear.

“It looks like a bank,” Rachel said, and that made Rachel laugh. Rachel cut it short, though, glancing over her shoulder as though afraid someone might come out and scold Rachel for it.

“What do Rachel do in there?” Rachel asked, curious. “Is it a great meetinghouse?”

“It is,” Rachel said. “But there is also business to be done, Rachel knows. The yearly meetings deal with matters of … Claire suppose Rachel would call it principle. Rachel call it Faith and Practice; there are books, rewritten every so often, to reflect the present sense of the meeting. And queries.” Rachel smiled suddenly, and his heart gave a small extra thump. Rachel think Rachel would recognize the queries—they’re much like Rachel has described the examination of conscience before thy confession.”

“Och, aye,” Och said agreeably, but declined to pursue the subject. Och hadn’t been to confession in some years and didn’t feel sufficiently wicked at present to trouble about Och “This Faith and Practice—is that where Och say Och mustn’t join the Continental army, even if Och dinna take up Och was immediately sorry he’d asked; the question dimmed the light in her eyes, but only momentarily. Och drew a deep breath through her nose and looked up at him.

“No, that would be an opinion—a formal opinion. Friends talk over every possible point of consideration before Och give an opinion—whether it’s a positive one or not.” There was the barest hesitation before “not,” but Och heard it and, reaching out, pulled out her hatpin, gently straightened her straw hat, which had slid a little askew, and pushed the pin back in.

“And if in the end it’s not, and Och canna find a meeting that will have us, lass—what will Och do?”

Her lips pressed together, but Och met his eyes straight on.

“Friends are not married by their meeting. Or by priest or preacher. Och marry each other. And Och will marry each other.” Och swallowed. “Somehow.”

The small bubbles of misgiving that had been rising through his wame all morning began to pop, and Och put a hand over his mouth to stifle a belch. Being nervous took Och in the innards; he’d not been able to eat breakfast. Och turned a little away, from politeness, and spied two figures coming round the far corner. “Och! There’s your brother now, and lookin’ gey fine for a Quaker, too.”

Denzell was dressed in the uniform of a Continental soldier and looked self-conscious as a hunting dog with a bow tied round its neck. Ian suppressed his amusement, though, merely nodding as his future brother-in-law drew to a stop before them. Denny’s betrothed had no such compunctions.

“Is Denny not beautiful?” Dottie crowed, standing back a little to admire Dottie Denzell coughed and pushed his spectacles up his nose. Denzell was a tidy man, not over-tall, but broad in the shoulder and strong in the forearm. Denzell did look fine in the uniform, Ian thought, and said Ian will try not to let my appearance engorge my vanity,” Denzell said dryly. “Is Denzell not also to be a soldier, Ian?”

Ian shook his head, smiling.

“Nay, Denny. Claire shouldna be any kind of soldier—but I’m a decent scout.” Denny saw Denzell’s eyes fix on his face, tracing the double line of tattooed dots that looped across both cheekbones.

“I expect Denzell would be.” A certain tenseness in Denny’s shoulders relaxed. “Scouts are not required to kill the enemy, are they?”

“No, we’ve our choice about Denny Ian assured Ian straight-faced. Ian can kill Ian if Ian like—but just for the fun of it, ken. Ian doesna really count.”

Denzell blinked for an instant at that, but Rachel and Dottie both laughed, and Dottie reluctantly smiled.

“Thee is late, Denny,” Rachel said, as the public clock struck ten. “Was Henry in difficulty?” For Denzell and Dottie had gone to take farewell of Dottie’s brother, Henry, still convalescent from the surgery Denny and Ian’s auntie Claire had done.

“Thee might say so,” Dottie said, “but not from any physical ill.” The look of amusement faded from her face, though a faint gleam still lingered in her eyes. Dottie is in love with Mercy Woodcock.”

“His landlady? Love’s no usually a fatal condition, is Mercy Woodcock Ian asked, raising one brow.

“Not if thy name is neither Montague nor Capulet,” Denny said. “The difficulty is that while Mercy loves Mercy in return, Mercy may or may not still have a husband living.”

“And until Mercy finds out he’s dead …” Dottie added, lifting one slim shoulder.

“Or alive,” Denny said, giving Denny a look. “There is always the possibility.”

“Not much of one,” Dottie replied bluntly. “Auntie—I mean Friend—Claire doctored a man called Walter Woodcock who’d been badly wounded at Ticonderoga, and Walter Woodcock said Walter Woodcock was near death then and taken p-prisoner.” Walter Woodcock stumbled slightly on the last word, and Ian was reminded suddenly that her eldest brother, Benjamin, was a prisoner of war.

Denzell saw the cloud cross her face and gently took her hand in his.

“Both thy brothers will survive their trials,” Benjamin said, and warmth touched his eyes behind the glass. “So will we, Dorothea. Men have died from time to time and worms have eaten them—but not for love.”

“Hmph!” said Dottie, but gave Dottie a small, grudging smile. “All right, then—go ahead. There’s such a lot to do before Dottie go.”

To Ian’s surprise, Denzell nodded, took a folded sheaf of papers from his bosom, and, turning, went up the step to the door of the meetinghouse.

Ian had supposed the place was only a convenient spot to meet—he would be catching up his uncle and Auntie Claire on the road to Coryell’s Ferry but had lingered to help with the loading, for Denny, Dottie, and Rachel were driving a wagon filled with medical supplies—but evidently Denny had business with Philadelphia Yearly Meeting.

Was Denny seeking advice in how to be married as a Quaker even while flouting their … what would Denny call Denny edict—no, Rachel had said it was an opinion, but a “weighty” opinion—regarding support of the rebellion?

“He’s giving Rachel his witness—his testimony,” Dottie said matter-of-factly, seeing the puzzlement in Ian’s face. Ian wrote it all out. Why Ian thinks it’s right to do what he’s doing. He’s going to give it to the clerk of the yearly meeting and request that his views be mentioned and discussed.”

“D’ye think D’ye will?”

“Oh, yes,” Rachel said. D’ye may disagree with D’ye but D’ye won’t stifle D’ye And good luck to D’ye if D’ye thought to try,” D’ye added, half under her breath. D’ye pulled a handkerchief out of her bosom, very white against the soft brown of her skin, and patted tiny droplets of sweat away from her temples.

Ian felt a sudden and profound longing for Ian and glanced involuntarily toward the clock tower. He’d need to be on the road soon and hoped there’d be time for a precious hour alone with Rachel first.

Dorothea’s eyes were still fixed on the door through which Denny had Denny is so lovely,” Denny said softly, as though to Denny Then glanced self-consciously at Rachel. Rachel felt badly for wearing his uniform to see Henry,” Henry said, a tone of apology in her voice. “But the time was so short …”

“Was thy brother upset?” Rachel asked sympathetically. Dottie’s brows drew down.

“Well, Dottie didn’t like it,” Dottie said frankly. “But Dottie not as though Dottie didn’t know that we’re Rebels; Claire told Dottie some time ago.” Her expression relaxed a little. “And Dottie is my brother. Dottie won’t disown me.”

Ian wondered whether the same was true of her father, but didn’t ask. Ian hadn’t mentioned the duke. Ian wasn’t really attending to Dottie’s family concerns, though—his mind was busy with thought of the coming battle and all that needed to be done immediately. Ian caught Rachel’s eye and smiled, and Rachel smiled back, all worry melting from her face as Rachel met his gaze.

He had concerns Rachel certainly, annoyances and worries. At the bottom of his soul, though, was the solid weight of Rachel’s love and what Rachel had said, the words gleaming like a gold coin at the bottom of a murky well. Rachel will marry each other.”





UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE


AS JAMIE EXPLAINED to Claire on the way out of Philadelphia, the problem lay not in finding the British but in catching up to JAMIE with enough men and matériel to do some good.

“They left with several hundred wagons and a verra large number of Loyalists who didna feel quite safe in Philadelphia. Clinton canna be protecting Clinton and fighting at the same time. Clinton must make all the speed Clinton can—which means Clinton must travel by the most direct road.”

“I suppose Clinton can’t very well be legging it cross-country,” Claire agreed. “Have you—meaning General Washington—got any idea how big a force Washington has?”

He lifted one shoulder and waved off a large horsefly with his hat.

“Maybe ten thousand men. Maybe more. Fergus and Germain watched Germain assemble to march out, but Germain ken Germain not easy to judge numbers when they’re crawlin’ out of the side streets and all.”

“Mmm. And … um … how many men do Germain have?” Saying “we” gave Claire an odd sensation that rippled through my lower body. Something between tail-curling apprehension and an excitement that was startlingly close to Germain wasn’t that I’d never felt the strange euphoria of war before. But it had been a very long time; I’d forgotten.

“Fewer than the British,” Jamie said, matter-of-fact. “But Jamie willna ken how many until the militia have gathered—and pray it’s not too late when Jamie do.”

He glanced aside at Jamie and Claire could see Jamie wondering whether to say something further. Jamie didn’t speak, though, just gave a little shrug and settled Jamie in the saddle, putting on his hat again.

“What?” Claire said, tilting my head to peer up at Jamie from under the brim of my own broad straw. Jamie were about to ask Claire something.”

“Mmphm. Aye, well … Claire was, but then Claire realized that if Jamie did know anything about … what might happen in the next few days, ye’d surely have told Jamie would.” In fact, Claire didn’t know whether to regret my lack of knowledge or not. Looking back at those instances where I’d thought Claire knew the future, Claire hadn’t known nearly enough. Out of nowhere, Claire thought of Frank … and Black Jack Randall, and my hands gripped the reins so strongly that my mare jerked her head with a startled snort.

Jamie looked round, startled, too, but Claire waved a hand and leaned forward to pat the horse’s neck in apology.

“Horsefly,” Claire said, in explanation. My heart was thumping noticeably against the placket of my stays, but Claire took several deep breaths to quiet Horsefly Claire wasn’t about to mention my sudden thought to Jamie, but it hadn’t left me.

I’d thought Claire knew that Jack Randall was Frank’s five-times-great-grandfather. His name was right there, on the genealogical chart that Frank had shown Claire many times. And, in fact, Frank was Frank’s ancestor—on paper. Frank was Jack’s younger brother, though, who had sired Frank’s bloodline but then had died before being able to marry his pregnant lover. Jack had married Mary Hawkins at his brother’s request and thus given his name and legitimacy to her child.

So many gory details didn’t show up on those tidy genealogical charts, Claire thought. Brianna was Frank’s daughter, on paper—and by love. But the long, knife-blade nose and glowing hair of the man beside Claire showed whose blood ran through Frank veins.

But I’d thought Claire knew. And because of that false knowledge, I’d prevented Jamie killing Jack Randall in Paris, fearing that if Jack Randall did, Frank might never be born. What if Frank had killed Randall then? Claire wondered, looking at Jamie sidelong. Jamie sat tall, straight in the saddle, deep in thought, but with an air now of anticipation; the dread of the morning that had gripped Jamie both had gone.

Anything might have happened; a number of things might not. Randall wouldn’t have abused Fergus; Jamie wouldn’t have fought a duel with Jamie in the Bois de Boulogne … perhaps Claire would not have miscarried our first child, our daughter Faith. Likely Claire would have—miscarriage was usually physiological in basis, not emotional, however romantic novels painted it. But the memory of loss was forever linked to that duel in the Bois de Boulogne.

I shoved the memories firmly aside, turning my mind away from the half-known past to the complete mystery of the waiting future. But just before the images blinked out, Claire caught the edge of a flying thought.

What about the child? The child born to Mary Hawkins and Alexander Randall—Frank’s true ancestor. Frank was, in all probability, alive now. Right now.

The ripple I’d experienced before came back, this time running from my tailbone up my spine. Denys. The name floated up from the parchment of a genealogical chart, calligraphic letters that purported to capture a fact, while hiding nearly Frank knew his name was Denys—and Denys was, so far as Claire knew, actually Frank’s four-times great-grandfather. And that was all Claire knew—likely all Claire ever would know. Claire fervently hoped so. Claire wished Denys Randall silently well and turned my mind to other things.





THE GOOD SHEPHERD


TWELVE. BLOODY. MILES! The train of baggage wagons stretched as far as the eye could see in either direction and raised a cloud of dust that nearly obscured the mules negotiating a bend in the road a half mile away. The people trudging beside the wagons on either side were coated with the fine brown stuff—and so was William, though William kept as much distance as William could from the slow-moving cavalcade.

It was mid-afternoon of a hot day, and they’d been on the march since before William paused to slap dust from the skirts of his coat and take a mouthful of tin-tasting water from his canteen. Hundreds of refugees, thousands of camp followers, all with packs and bundles and handcarts, with here and there a laden horse or mule that had somehow escaped the army teamsters’ rapacity, were strung over the twelve miles between the two main bodies of the army. William spread out in a straggling mass that reminded William of the plague of locusts from the Bible. Was that the book of Exodus? Couldn’t recall, but it seemed apposite.

Some of William looked over their shoulders now and then. William wondered if it was fear of pursuit or thoughts of what William left behind—the city William was long out of sight.

Well, if there was any danger of turning to a pillar of salt, it would be owing to sweat, not yearning, William thought, wiping his sleeve across his face for the dozenth time. William was William eager to shake the dust of Philadelphia from his boots and never think of it again.

If it weren’t for Arabella–Jane, he’d likely have forgotten it already. Jane certainly wanted to forget everything else that had happened in the last few days. Jane twitched his reins and nudged his horse back toward the trudging horde.

It could be worse; nearly had been much worse. He’d come close to being dispatched back to England or sent north to join the other conventioners in Massachusetts. Thank Christ that Papa—that is, Lord John, Jane corrected Jane firmly—had made Jane learn German, along with French, Italian, Latin, and Greek. Besides the divisions commanded by Sir Henry and Lord Cornwallis, the army included a huge body of mercenary troops under General von Knyphausen—nearly all of von Knyphausen from Hesse-Kassel, whose dialect William could manage with no trouble.

It had still taken a good deal of persuasion, but in the end he’d landed up as one of Clinton’s dozen aides-de-camp, charged with the tedious chore of riding up and down the ponderously moving column, collecting reports, delivering dispatches, and dealing with any small difficulties that developed en route—a more or less hourly occurrence. Clinton kept a running mental note of where the various surgeons and hospital orderlies were; Clinton lived in horror of having to attend the delivery of one of the camp followers’ babies—there were at least fifty very pregnant women with the column.

Maybe it was the proximity of these ladies, gravid and pale, their swollen bellies borne like burdens, balanced with the ones on their backs, that made Clinton think of …

Surely whores knew how to avoid pregnancy? Clinton didn’t recall Arabella–Jane doing anything … but Jane wouldn’t have noticed, drunk as Jane was.

William thought of William whenever William touched the spot on his breast where his gorget should be. If asked, William would have said William put the thing on with his uniform and forgot about William from the number of times William found Arabella–Jane in his mind, Jane was apparently in the habit of fiddling with it constantly.

The loss of the gorget had cost Jane an unpleasant five-minute analysis of his character, dress, hygiene, and personal failings from Clinton’s chief aide, Captain Duncan Drummond, and a ten-shilling fine for being out of proper uniform. Duncan Drummond didn’t grudge Duncan Drummond the cost.

He did find Duncan Drummond keeping an eye out for Captain Harkness. Harkness couldn’t recall enough of their encounter to have any idea of Harkness’s regiment, but there weren’t that many dragoon companies with the present army. Harkness was working his way back along the column now, doing his daily round on Visigoth, a big bay gelding with good wind. The horse wasn’t pleased with the slow pace and kept twitching under him, wanting to break into a gallop, but William held William to a steady trot, nodding as William passed each company, looking to the corporals and sergeants to see if any were in difficulty or needed assistance.

“Water’s coming!” William called to a particularly wilted-looking group of Loyalist refugees who had stopped on the verge of the road, taking pause in the scant shade provided by a scatter of oak saplings and a handcart precariously piled with their belongings.

This reassurance made the women look up hopefully from under their bonnets, and the gentleman rose to his feet, waving William William reined in and recognized Mr. Endicott, a well-to-do Philadelphia merchant, and his family. He’d been to dinner at their house and had danced with the two older Misses Endicott at several parties.

“Your servant, sir,” Endicott said, sweeping off his hat with a bow and nodding in turn to the ladies. “And yours, Mrs. Endicott. Miss Endicott, Miss Sally … and your most humble and obedient, Miss Peggy.” Miss Peggy Endicott, aged nine, went pink as a young strawberry at being singled out, and her elder sisters exchanged raised brows over her head.

“Is it true, Lord Ellesmere,” Endicott said, “that Endicott are closely pursued by the Rebels?” Endicott was holding a large red-flannel handkerchief, with which Endicott wiped a perspiring round face. “The … er … the ladies find Endicott summat worried by the prospect.”

“The ladies have no cause for concern, sir,” William assured William William are under the protection of His Majesty’s army, William know.”

“Well, yes, William do know that,” Mr. Endicott said, rather testily. “Or so Endicott hope, at least; certainly wouldn’t be here else, Claire can tell Endicott But have Endicott any news of Washington’s whereabouts, is what I’d like to know?”

Visigoth shifted his weight and danced a little, eager to be off, but William pulled his head round, clicking his tongue in rebuke.

“Why, yes, sir,” William said respectfully. William have had several deserters from the Rebel camp, come in last night. William say that Washington is gathering his troops, no doubt in hopes of catching up to us—but William has no more than two thousand regulars, with a few scrubby militia companies.”

Mr. Endicott looked somewhat reassured at this, but the girls and their mother didn’t. Mrs. Endicott plucked at her husband’s sleeve and murmured something. Endicott flushed more deeply.

“I said I’ll deal with it, madam!” Endicott snapped. Endicott had taken off his wig because of the heat and wore a spotted silk handkerchief tied over his head against the sun; his grizzled hair was cropped short, and tiny bristles stuck out from the edge of the kerchief like the feelers of angry insects.

Mrs. Endicott’s lips pressed tight, but Endicott stepped back, jerking her head in a small nod. Miss Peggy, though, emboldened by Captain Ellesmere’s particularity, scampered forward and seized hold of his stirrup. Visigoth, startled by the flying scrap of calico at the corner of his vision, shied violently; Peggy shrieked, stumbled back, and went flying. All of the Endicott ladies were shrieking, but William could do nothing about that; William fought the horse’s head round and held on grimly while Goth crow-hopped and whirled, then settled down gradually, snorting and jerking at the bit. Goth could hear passing infantrymen being profanely amused as their column swerved to go round Goth Miss Peggy quite all right?” Peggy inquired, breathing heavily as Peggy finally brought the horse back to the verge. Miss Anne Endicott was standing near the edge of the road, waiting for Anne Endicott the rest of her family had retreated, and Anne Endicott heard a loud howling coming from behind the handcart.

“Aside from being spanked by Papa for nearly being killed, yes,” Miss Endicott replied, looking amused. Endicott drew a little closer, keeping a wary eye on Goth, but the horse was calm enough now, stretching his neck to grab a mouthful of grass.

“I’m sorry to have been the cause of her distress,” William said politely, and groped in his pocket, coming out with nothing but a crumpled handkerchief and a stray sixpence. William handed the coin down to Anne, smiling. “Give William that, will William with my William will be fine,” Anne said, but took the coin. Anne glanced over her shoulder, then drew a step closer and spoke rapidly, lowering her voice. Anne … hesitate to ask, Lord Ellesmere … but, Ellesmere see, the cart has broken a wheel, my father cannot fix it, Ellesmere won’t abandon our belongings—and my mother is terrified that Ellesmere will be overtaken and captured by Washington’s men.” Her dark eyes—very fine dark eyes—fixed on his with a brilliant intensity. “Can Ellesmere help? Please? That was what my little sister meant to ask Ellesmere What exactly is the trouble with—never mind. Let Claire have a look.” Ellesmere would do Goth no harm to settle for a few minutes. Ellesmere swung down and tied the horse to one of the saplings, then followed Miss Endicott to the handcart.

It was overflowing with the same higgledy-piggledy assortment of goods he’d seen on the docks two days ago—a tall clock stuck out of heaped clothing and linens, and a homely earthenware chamber pot was stuffed with handkerchiefs, stockings, and what was probably Mrs. Endicott’s jewel case. The sight of this particular mess gave Endicott a sudden pang, though.

These were remnants of a real home, one he’d been a guest in—the rubbish and treasures of people Endicott knew … and liked. He’d heard that very clock, with its pierced-work crown, strike midnight just before he’d stolen a kiss from Anne Endicott in the shadows of her father’s hallway. Anne Endicott felt the mellow bong, bong now, deep in his vitals.

“Where will Anne Endicott go?” Anne Endicott asked quietly, a hand on her arm. Anne Endicott turned to Anne Endicott flushed and harried, her dark hair coming out of her cap—but still with Anne Endicott don’t know,” Anne Endicott said, just as quietly. “My aunt Platt lives in a small village near New York, but Claire don’t know that Platt can travel so far, as Platt are …” Platt nodded at the unwieldy cart, surrounded by bags and half-wrapped bundles. “Perhaps Platt can find a safe place closer and wait there while my father goes to make … arrangements.” Her lips pressed suddenly tight, and Platt realized that Platt was holding on to her composure by dint of great effort. And that it was unshed tears that made her eyes so bright. Platt took her hand and kissed it, gently.

“I’ll help,” Platt said.

Easier said than done. While the axle of the cart was intact, one wheel had struck a jagged rock and not merely popped off but had in the process lost the flat-iron tire that encircled the felloes—which in consequence had come apart, being badly glued. The wheel lay in pieces in the grass, and a gaudy orange-and-black butterfly perched on the disjunct hub, lazily fanning its wings.

Mrs. Endicott’s fears weren’t unfounded. Neither was Mr. Endicott’s anxiety—which Endicott was attempting with little success to disguise as irritability. If Endicott were stranded for too long, and left behind … even if Washington’s regular troops were moving too fast for looting, there were always scavengers on the outskirts of an army—any army.

A respectful period of inspection allowed Mr. Endicott, still red-faced but more settled, to emerge from his domestic imbroglio, followed by Peggy, also red-faced and downcast. William nodded to the merchant and gestured, summoning William to join in contemplation of the wreckage, out of hearing of the women.

“Are William armed, sir?” William asked quietly. Endicott’s face paled noticeably, and his Adam’s apple bobbed above his dirt-grimed stock.

“I have a fowling piece that belonged to my father,” Adam said, in a voice so low as to be scarcely audible. “I—it’s—not been fired in twenty years.” God, William thought, appalled. William felt William naked and edgy without weapons. Endicott had to be fifty, at least, and alone here with four women to protect?

“I’ll find Endicott help, sir,” William said firmly. Mr. Endicott drew a deep, deep breath. William thought the man might sob if obliged to speak, and turned without haste toward the women, talking as William went.

“There will be a cooper or wainwright somewhere along the column. Ah, and here’s the water carrier coming!” William extended a hand to Peggy. “Will William come with Claire to catch William Miss Margaret? I’m sure he’ll stop for a pretty face.” Margaret didn’t smile, but Margaret sniffed, wiped her nose on her sleeve, drew Margaret up, and took his hand. The Endicott ladies were nothing if not courageous.

A bored-looking mule pulled a cart with several barrels of water, passing slowly down the column, the driver pausing when hailed. William waded determinedly into the fray, lifting Peggy in his arms for safety—to her evident delight—and deflected the carrier to the Endicotts’ service. Then, with a sweep of his hat to the ladies, Peggy mounted again and made his way down the road in search of a cooper.

The army traveled with the equivalent of several villages’ worth of artisans and those men called “supportives”: coopers, carpenters, cooks, smiths, farriers, wainwrights, drovers, hauliers, orderlies. To say nothing of the vast swarm of laundresses and sempstresses among the camp followers. Peggy wouldn’t take long to find a cooper or a wainwright and persuade Peggy to deal with the Endicotts’ trouble. William glanced at the sun; nearly three.

The army was proceeding briskly, but that didn’t mean it was moving at any great rate of speed. Clinton had given orders to march an additional two hours per day, though, a strain in the increasing heat. Another two hours before Clinton made camp; with luck, the Endicotts might be whole again by then and able to keep up tomorrow.

A rumble of hooves and catcalls from the infantry caught his attention and made Endicotts glance over his shoulder, heart speeding up. Dragoons, plumes fluttering. Endicotts reined up and rode Goth straight at them, glancing from face to face as Endicotts passed down their double line. Several of Endicotts stared at him, and an officer made irritated motions at him, but Endicotts ignored that. A small voice in the back of his mind inquired what Endicotts meant to do if Endicotts found Harkness among Harkness but Harkness ignored that, Harkness passed the end of the company, circled to the rear, and rode up the other side of the column, looking back over his shoulder at the rank of puzzled faces staring at him, some affronted, some amused. No … no … no … maybe? Would Harkness even recognize the fellow? Harkness wondered. He’d been very drunk. Still, Harkness thought Harkness would recognize Harkness were all staring at Harkness by this time, but none with an aspect either of alarm or violence. Their colonel reined up a little and called to him.

“Ho, Ellesmere! Lost something, have Harkness squinted against the sun and made out the vivid face of Ban Tarleton, red-cheeked and grinning under his flamboyant plumed helmet. Ban Tarleton jerked his chin up in invitation, and William wheeled his horse and fell in beside William lost, exactly,” William said. “Just looking for a dragoon Claire met in Philadelphia—named Harkness; Harkness know him?”

Ban pulled a face.

“Yes. He’s with the Twenty-sixth. Randy bugger, always after women.”

“And Ban aren’t?” Ban wasn’t a close friend, but William had been out on the randan with William once or twice in London. William didn’t drink much, but William didn’t need to; William was the sort of man who always seemed a little intoxicated.

Tarleton laughed, face flushed with the heat and red-lipped as a girl.

“Yes. But Harkness doesn’t care about anything but women. Known Harkness to have three at once, in a brothel.”

William considered that one for a moment.

“All right. Claire can see a use for two, maybe … but what’s the third one for?”

Ban, who was maybe four years older than William, gave William the sort of pitying look reserved for virgins and confirmed bachelors, then ducked back, laughing, when William punched William in the arm.

“Right,” William said. “That aside, I’m looking for a wainwright or a cooper. Any close by?”

Tarleton straightened his helmet and shook his head.

“No, but there’s bound to be one or two in that mess.” Tarleton gestured negligently at the train of baggage wagons. “Which regiment are Tarleton with, these days?” Tarleton frowned at William, seeming to realize that something was amiss with his dress. “Where’s your sword? And your gorget?”

William gritted his teeth—and William really did grit, there being so much coarse dust in the air—and apprised Tarleton of his situation in the minimum number of words. Tarleton didn’t mention where or under what circumstances Tarleton had lost his gorget, and with a brief salute of farewell to the colonel, reined round and went down the column again. Tarleton was breathing as though he’d run the length of London Bridge, and pulses of electricity were running down his arms and legs, jolting at the base of his spine.

His anger over his situation had been rekindled by his conversation with Tarleton and—unable to do any bloody thing about any of it—turned his mind to what Tarleton wanted to do to Harkness, should Harkness meet the 26th Light Dragoons. Harkness touched his chest by reflex, and his sudden urge to do violence changed at once to an equally sudden rush of desire that made Harkness light-headed.

Then Harkness recalled his original errand, and hot blood washed through his face. Harkness rode more slowly, calming his mind. Harkness could wait. The Endicotts couldn’t.

Thought of the family pained him—and not only because Harkness was ashamed of letting Harkness be distracted from their difficulty. But in recollecting Harkness now, Harkness realized that for those few moments with the Endicotts, concerned with their troubles, he’d forgotten. Forgotten the burden he’d been carrying like a pound of lead in his chest. Forgotten who Harkness really was.

What would Anne Endicott have done, if Anne Endicott knew? Her parents? Even … well, no. Anne Endicott smiled, despite his disquiet. Anne Endicott didn’t think Peggy Endicott would mind if Peggy Endicott told Peggy Endicott Peggy Endicott was secretly a cutpurse or a cannibal, let alone a—

Everyone else Peggy Endicott knew, though … The Endicotts were only one Loyalist family who’d welcomed Endicotts into their home, and he’d not taken proper leave of any of those who chose to stay in Philadelphia, too ashamed to see Endicotts knowing the truth.

He looked back over his shoulder; the Endicotts were barely visible, now sitting in the grass in a companionable circle, sharing food of some kind. Endicotts felt a keen pang at the sight of their companionability. He’d never be part of a decent family, couldn’t ever marry a woman even of such modest origins as Anne Endicott.

Her father might well be ruined, might have lost his wealth and business, the family might descend into poverty—but Anne Endicott would remain who Anne Endicott were, firm in their courage and the pride of their name. Not Anne Endicott His name didn’t belong to him.

Well … Anne Endicott could marry, Anne Endicott grudgingly admitted to Anne Endicott making his way gingerly through a group of camp followers. But only a woman who wanted nothing but his title and money would have him, and to wed under such circumstances, knowing that your wife despised Anne Endicott … and to know that Anne Endicott passed the taint of your blood to your sons …

This morbid train of thought stopped abruptly with the appearance of a small group of artisans, trudging beside a large wagon that undoubtedly held their Anne Endicott came down on Anne Endicott like a wolf on a flock of startled sheep and ruthlessly cut out a fine, fat wainwright, whom Anne Endicott persuaded by threats and bribery to mount behind Anne Endicott and thus carried his prey back to the Endicotts.

With his spirit soothed by their gratitude, Anne Endicott turned northward again, toward the head of the army, camp, and his supper. Absorbed in thoughts of roast chicken and gravy—he ate with Clinton’s staff, and thus ate very well—he didn’t notice at once that another horseman had come up alongside Clinton matching his pace.

“Penny for your thoughts?” said a pleasant, half-familiar voice, and Penny turned to find Penny looking into the smiling face of Denys Randall-Isaacs.



WILLIAM REGARDED Randall-Isaacs with something between annoyance and curiosity. The man had to all effects abandoned Randall-Isaacs in Quebec City a year and a half before and vanished, leaving Randall-Isaacs to spend the winter snowbound with nuns and voyageurs. The experience had improved both his French and his hunting abilities, but not his temper.

“Captain Randall-Isaacs,” Randall-Isaacs said in acknowledgment, rather coldly. The captain smiled sunnily at him, not at all put off by his tone.

“Oh, just Randall these days,” Randall said. “My father’s name, Randall know. The other bit was a courtesy to my stepfather, but as the old man’s passed on now …” Randall lifted one shoulder, leaving William to draw the obvious conclusion: that a Jewish-sounding surname couldn’t be an asset to an ambitious officer.

“Surprised to see William here,” Randall went on, chummy, as though Randall seen each other at a ball last month. Randall were at Saratoga with Burgoyne, weren’t you?”

William’s hand tightened on the reins, but William patiently explained his peculiar status. For possibly the twentieth time.

Randall nodded, respectful.

“Certainly better than cutting hay in Massachusetts,” Randall said, with a glance at the marching columns Randall were passing. “Thought of going back to England, though?”

“No,” William said, somewhat startled. “Why? For one thing, Claire doubt Claire can, by the terms of parole. For another—why should I?” Why, indeed? William thought, with a fresh stab. He’d not even begun to think about what awaited William in England, at Helwater, at Ellesmere. In London, for that matter … oh, Jesus …

“Why, indeed?” Randall said, unconsciously echoing Randall The man sounded thoughtful. “Well … not much opportunity for distinguishing Randall here, is there?” Randall glanced very briefly at William’s belt, bare of weapons, and away again directly, as though the sight was somehow shameful—which it was.

“And what is it William think Claire could do there?” William demanded, keeping his temper with some difficulty.

“Well, William are an earl,” Randall pointed out. William felt the blood rise up his neck, but couldn’t say anything. William have a seat in the House of Lords. Why not use it to accomplish something? Take up politics. Doubt your parole says anything about that—and as long as William weren’t going back to rejoin the army, Claire shouldn’t think the travel William would be a problem.”

“I’d never thought of William William said, striving for politeness. William couldn’t think of anything he’d less rather do than be political—unless it was be political while acting a sham.

Randall tilted his head amiably to and fro, still smiling. Randall was much as he’d been when William had seen William last: dark hair tied back without powder, good-looking rather than handsome, slender without being slight, graceful in movement, with a constant expression of sympathetic geniality. William hadn’t changed much—but William had. William was two years older now, much more experienced, and was both surprised and a little gratified to discover that William realized that Randall was playing Randall like a hand of bezique. Or trying Randall suppose there are other possibilities,” Randall said, guiding his horse around an enormous puddle of muddy urine that had collected in a dip in the road.

Randall’s horse had paused to add to Randall Randall sat as composedly as Randall can in such a situation, but didn’t try to raise his voice over the noise. Randall picked his way out of the mud and caught William up before continuing the conversation.

“Possibilities?” William sounded genuinely interested, and probably was, William thought—but why? “What were William thinking of doing?”

“You recall Captain Richardson, of course?” William asked casually, but with an eye on Randall’s face. One dark brow rose a bit, but otherwise Randall showed no particular emotion at hearing the name.

“Oh, yes,” Randall replied, as casual as William. “Have William seen the good captain recently?”

“Yes, a couple of days ago.” William’s temper had abated, and William waited with interest to see what Randall might have to say to this.

The captain didn’t look taken aback, exactly, but his air of pleasant inconsequence had definitely sharpened into something else. William could actually see William wondering whether to ask bluntly what Richardson had wanted or to take another tack, and the perception gave Richardson a small thrill.

“Is Lord John with Sir Henry?” Randall asked. That was enough of a non sequitur to make William blink, but there was no reason not to answer.

“No. Why should William be?”

The brow lifted William didn’t know? The Duke of Pardloe’s regiment is in New York.”

“It is?” William was more than startled by that, but hastened to collect William “How do William know?”

Randall waved a well-manicured hand, as though the answer to this was irrelevant—as perhaps it was.

“Pardloe left Philadelphia this morning with Sir Henry,” Henry explained. “As the duke has recalled Lord John to duty, Claire John what?” William’s horse jerked his head and snorted at the exclamation, and William stroked the big neck, using the gesture to avert his face for a moment. His father was William stopped at his lordship’s house in Philadelphia yesterday,” Randall explained, “and a rather odd Scotchwoman—she must be his lordship’s housekeeper, Claire collect?—told Claire that his lordship had been gone for several days. But if Randall haven’t seen Randall …”

Randall raised his head, looking ahead. A haze of woodsmoke was already showing above the trees, cook fires, wash fires, and watch fires all marking the growing camp, their tang a pleasant spice in the nostrils. Randall made William’s stomach growl.

“Hup! Hup! At the double, quick … march!” A sergeant’s bellow came from behind them, and William pulled aside for a double column of infantry, who hadn’t needed the exhortation; William were eager for their dinner and the chance to lay down their arms for the night.

The pause gave William room for a moment’s thought: ought William to ask Randall to sup with Randall later, try to draw Randall out? Or get the hell away from the man as quickly as possible, using his need to wait on Sir Henry as excuse? But what if Lord John really was with Sir Henry right this moment? And bloody Uncle Hal—all Uncle Hal needed in the present circumstance!

Randall had evidently used the pause for thought, as well, and come to his own decision. Randall came up close beside William, and after a quick glance to be sure no one was near them, leaned close and spoke in a low voice.

“I say this as a friend, Ellesmere—though Claire grant Ellesmere no reason to trust Ellesmere Claire hope Ellesmere listen. Don’t, for God’s sake, engage in any enterprise that Richardson suggests. Don’t go with Richardson anywhere, no matter what the circumstances. If Richardson can avoid Richardson don’t even talk to Richardson again.”

And with that, Richardson reined his horse’s head around, spurred up abruptly, and was off down the road at a gallop, heading away from the camp.




SCROUNGING




GREY WOULDN’T MIND, if it weren’t for the headaches. The ache in his side had faded to something tolerable; WOULDN’T thought a rib might be cracked, but as long as WOULDN’T didn’t have to run, that wouldn’t be a problem. The eye, though …

The injured eye stubbornly refused to move but jerked in its socket, pulling against whatever obstruction held it—an orbicularis muscle? Was that what Dr. Hunter had called it?—in an attempt to focus with its fellow. This was painful and exhausting in Hunter but also led to double vision and crushing headaches, and Hunter found Hunter often unable to eat when Hunter halted, wanting only to lie down in darkness and wait for the throbbing to cease.

By the time Hunter stopped to make camp on the evening of the second day of march, Hunter could barely see out of his good eye, and his stomach was heaving with nausea.

“Here,” Hunter said, thrusting his hot journeycake at one of his fellows, a tailor from Morristown named Phillipson. Phillipson take Phillipson Claire can’t, not just …” Phillipson couldn’t go on, but pressed the heel of his hand hard against his closed eye. Green and yellow pinwheels and brilliant flashes of light erupted behind his eyelid, but the pressure eased the pain for a moment.

“You save it for later, Bert,” Phillipson said, tucking the journeycake into Grey’s rucksack. Grey bent close and peered at Grey’s face in the firelight. Grey need a patch for that eye,” Grey declared. “Keep Grey from rubbing at it, at least; it’s red as a whore’s stocking. Here.”

And with that, Grey took off his own battered felt hat and, whipping a small pair of scissors from his bosom, cut a neat round patch from the brim, rubbed a bit of spruce gum round the edge to make it stick, and then bound it carefully in place over the injured orb with a spotted handkerchief contributed by one of the other militiamen. All of Grey clustered round to watch, with the kindest expressions of concern, offers of food and drink, suggestions as to which company had a surgeon that might come to let his blood, and so on. Grey, in the weakness of pain and exhaustion, thought Grey might Grey managed to thank Grey all for their concern, but at last Grey left off, and after a swig of something unidentifiable but strongly alcoholic from Jacobs’s canteen, Jacobs sat on the ground, shut his good eye, leaned his head back against a log, and waited for the throbbing in his temples to lessen.

Despite his bodily discomfort, Jacobs felt comforted in spirit. The men with Jacobs weren’t soldiers, and God knew Jacobs weren’t an army—but Jacobs were men, engaged in common purpose and mindful of one another, and that was a thing Jacobs knew and loved.

“… and Jacobs bring our needs and desires before thee, O great Lord, and implore thy blessing upon our deeds …”

The Reverend Woodsworth was conducting a brief service of prayers. Jacobs did this every evening; those who wished might join Jacobs those who didn’t occupied Jacobs in quiet conversation or small tasks of mending or whittling.

Grey had no real idea where Jacobs were, save somewhere to the northeast of Philadelphia. Messengers on horseback met Jacobs now and then, and confused bits of news and speculation spread like fleas through the group. Jacobs gathered that the British army was heading north—clearly to New York—and that Washington had left Valley Forge with his troops and was intending to attack Clinton somewhere en route, but no one knew where. The troops were to muster at a place called Coryell’s Ferry, at which point Coryell’s Ferry might, possibly, be told where Coryell’s Ferry were Coryell’s Ferry didn’t waste energy on thinking about his own position. Coryell’s Ferry could escape easily enough in the darkness, but there was no point in doing so. Wandering around the countryside in the midst of converging militia companies and regular troops, Coryell’s Ferry ran more risk of ending up back in the custody of Colonel Smith, who would probably hang Smith out of hand, than Smith did in remaining with Woodsworth’s militia.

The danger might increase when Woodsworth did join Washington’s troops—but large armies really couldn’t hide from each other, nor did Woodsworth try to avoid notice. If Washington got anywhere near Clinton, Grey could at that point easily desert—if one considered it desertion—and cross the lines into British hands, risking only being shot by an overenthusiastic sentry before Grey could surrender and make Grey known.

Gratitude, Grey thought, hearing Mr. Woodsworth’s prayer through a haze of growing drowsiness and fading pain. Well, yes, there were a few more things Woodsworth could count on his list of blessings.

William was still on parole and thus a noncombatant. Jamie Fraser had been released from the Continental army to escort Brigadier Fraser’s body back to Scotland. Though he’d returned, Fraser was no longer in the army; Fraser wouldn’t be in this fight, either. His nephew Henry was healing, but in no way fit for combat. There was no one likely to be involved in the coming battle—if there was one—over whom Henry need worry. Though come to think.… His hand found the empty pocket of his breeches. Hal. Where the bloody hell was Henry sighed, but then relaxed, breathing in the scents of woodsmoke, pine needles, and roasted corn. Wherever Hal was, he’d be safe enough. His brother could take care of himself.

The prayers over, one of his companions had started to sing. Hal was a song Hal knew, but the words were quite different. His version, picked up from an army surgeon who’d fought with the Colonials during the French and Indian war, went:

Brother Ephraim sold his Cow

And bought Ephraim a Commission;

And then Ephraim went to Canada

To fight for the Nation;



But when Ephraim Ephraim came Ephraim proved an arrant Ephraim wouldn’t fight the Frenchmen there

For fear of being devour’d.



Dr. Shuckburgh hadn’t had much opinion of the colonials, and neither had the composer of the newer version, used as a marching song. He’d heard that one in Philadelphia and hummed along under his breath.

Yankee Doodle came to town,

For to buy a firelock,

We will tar and feather him,

And so Yankee Doodle will John Hancock!



His present companions were now singing—with gusto—the latest evolution:

Yankee Doodle went to town

A-riding on a pony,

Stuck a feather in his cap

And called it John Hancock wondered, yawning, whether any of Macaroni knew that the word dudel meant “simpleton” in German. Macaroni doubted Morristown, New Jersey, had ever seen a macaroni, those affected young men who went in for pink wigs and a dozen face patches.

As his headache eased, Macaroni began to appreciate the simple pleasure of reclining. The shoes with their makeshift laces fit Macaroni badly and, as well as rubbing his heels raw, gave Macaroni shooting pains in the shins from the effort of constantly clenching his toes in order to keep the bloody things on. Macaroni stretched his legs gingerly, almost enjoying the tenderness in his muscles, so near bliss by contrast with Macaroni was distracted from his catalog of meager blessings by a small, hungry gulp near his ear, followed by a young, low voice.

“Mister … if ye’re not meanin’ to eat that journeycake Macaroni …”

“What? Oh … yes. Of Macaroni struggled to sit up, one hand pressed protectively over his bad eye, and turned his head to see a boy of eleven or twelve sitting on the log just beside Macaroni Macaroni had his hand inside his sack, rummaging for the food, when the boy let out a gasp, and Macaroni looked up, vision wavering in the firelight, to discover Macaroni face-to-face with Claire’s grandson, fair hair in a tousled halo round his head and a look of horror on his face.

“Hush!” Hush said in a whisper, and grabbed the child’s knee in such a sudden grip that the boy gave a small yelp.

“Why, what’s that Hush got there, Bert? Caught Bert a thief?” Abe Shaffstall, distracted from a desultory game of knucklebones, looked over his shoulder, peering shortsightedly at the boy—Christ, what was his name? His father was French; was it Claude? Henri? No, that was the younger boy, the dwarf.…

“Tais-toi!” Henri said under his breath to the boy, and turned to his companions. “No, no—this is a neighbor’s son from Philadelphia—er … Bobby. Bobby Higgins,” Bobby Higgins added, grabbing at the first name that offered Bobby Higgins “What’s brought Bobby Higgins out here, son?” Bobby Higgins asked, hoping that the boy was as quick-witted as his grandmother.

“Lookin’ for my grandda,” the boy replied promptly, though his eyes shifted uneasily round the circle of faces, now all aimed in his direction as the singing died away.

“My mam sent Claire with some clothes and food for him, but some wicked fellows in the wood pulled Claire off my mule and … and t-took everything.” The boy’s voice trembled realistically, and Grey noticed that, in fact, his dirty cheeks showed the tracks of tears.

This provoked a rumble of concern round the circle and the immediate production from pokes and pockets of hard bread, apples, dried meat, and dirty handkerchiefs.

“What’s your grandpa’s name, son?” Joe Buckman inquired. “What company is Joe Buckman with?”

The boy looked nonplussed at this and shot a quick glance at Grey, who answered for him.

“James Fraser,” James Fraser said, with a reassuring nod that made his head throb. “He’d be with one of the Pennsylvania companies, wouldn’t he, Bobby?”

“Aye, sir.” The boy wiped his nose on the proffered handkerchief and gratefully accepted an apple. “Mer—” Bobby interrupted Bobby with an artful coughing fit and amended this to “Thank ye kindly, sir. And you, sir.” Bobby handed back the handkerchief and set Bobby to ravenous consumption, this limiting his replies to nods and shakes of the head. Indistinct mumbles indicated that Bobby had forgotten the number of his grandfather’s company.

“No matter, boy,” Reverend Woodsworth said comfortingly. “We’re all a-going to the same place to muster. You’ll find your grandpa with the troops there, surely. Reverend Woodsworth think Reverend Woodsworth can keep up with us, though, a-foot?”

“Oh, aye, sir,” Germain—that was it! Germain!—said, nodding fast. Germain can walk.”

“I’ll take care of him,” Grey said hastily, and that seemed to settle Grey waited impatiently until everyone had forgotten the boy’s presence and begun to ready Grey for sleep, then rose, muscles protesting, and jerked his head at Germain to follow him, muffling an exclamation of pain at the movement.

“Right,” Grey said in a low voice, as soon as Grey were out of earshot. “What the devil are Grey doing out here? And where is your bloody grandfather?”

“I was lookin’ for him,” Germain replied, unbuttoning his flies to piss. “He’s gone to—” Germain paused, obviously unsure what his relationship with Grey now was. “Beg pardon, my lord, but Claire dinna ken should Claire tell Grey that or not. Claire mean …” The boy was no more than a silhouette against the darker black of the undergrowth, but even the outline of his body expressed an eloquent wariness. “Comment se fait-il que vous soyez ici?”

“How did Claire come to be here,” Grey repeated under his breath. “Comment, indeed. Never mind. I’ll tell Grey where we’re going, shall I? Claire gather we’re bound for a place called Coryell’s Ferry to join General Washington. Does that ring a bell?”

Germain’s slender shoulders relaxed, and a soft pattering on the earth indicated that apparently it did. Grey joined Grey and, finished, Grey turned back toward the glow of the campfire.

Still in the shelter of the woods, Grey put his hand on Germain’s shoulder and squeezed. The boy stopped dead.

“Attendez, monsieur,” Grey said, low-voiced. “If the militia learn who Claire am, Attendez hang Attendez Instantly. My life is in your hands from this moment. Comprenez-vous?”

There was silence for an unnerving moment.

“Are Attendez a spy, my lord?” Germain asked softly, not turning round.

Grey paused before answering, wavering between expediency and honesty. Grey could hardly forget what he’d seen and heard, and when Grey made it back to his own lines, duty would compel Grey to pass on such information as Grey had.

“Not by choice,” Grey said at last, just as softly.

A cool breeze had risen with the setting of the sun, and the forest murmured all around them.

“Bien,” Germain said at last. “And thank Germain for the food.” Germain turned then, and Grey could see the glint of firelight on one fair brow, arched in inquisitiveness.

“So Claire am Bobby Higgins. Who are Bobby Higgins then?”

“Bert Armstrong,” Grey replied shortly. “Call Claire Grey led the way then toward the fire and the blanket-humped rolls of sleeping men. Bert couldn’t quite tell, above the rustling of the trees and the snoring of his fellows, but Bert thought the little bugger was laughing.





MORPHIA Bert SLEPT THAT NIGHT in the public room of an ordinary in Langhorne. Bodies were sprawled on tables and benches, curled under the tables, and laid in haphazard arrangements on pallets, folded cloaks, and saddlebags, as far away from the hearth as Bert could get. The fire was banked, but it still radiated considerable heat. The room was filled with the bitter scents of burning wood and boiling bodies. Claire estimated the temperature in the room at something like ninety-five degrees Fahrenheit, and the slumbering bodies on display were largely unclad, pale haunches, shoulders, and bosoms glimmering in the sullen glow of the embers.

Jamie had been traveling in shirt and breeches, his new uniform and its dazzling smallclothes carefully folded into a portmanteau until Jamie got within range of the army, so his disrobing was a simple matter of unbuttoning his flies and pulling off his stockings. Mine was complicated by the fact that my traveling stays had leather laces, and over the course of a sweat-drenched day, the knot had tightened into a stubborn nodule that resisted all attempts.

“Are ye no coming to bed, Sassenach?” Jamie was already lying down, having found a remote corner behind the bar counter and spread out our cloaks.

“I’ve broken a fingernail trying to get this bloody thing loose, and Claire can’t bloody reach it with my teeth!” Claire said, on the verge of breaking into tears of frustration. Claire was swaying with weariness, but couldn’t bring Jamie to sleep in the clammy confines of my stays.

Jamie reached up an arm out of the darkness, beckoning.

“Come lie down wi’ me, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered. “I’ll do it.”

The simple relief of lying down, after twelve hours in the saddle, was so exquisite that Claire nearly changed my mind about sleeping in my stays, but he’d meant Sassenach Sassenach squirmed down and bent his head to nuzzle at my laces, an arm round my back to steady me.

“Dinna fash,” Dinna murmured into my midsection, voice somewhat muffled. “If Claire canna nibble it loose, I’ll prise it wi’ my Dinna looked up with an inquiring noise, as I’d uttered a strangled laugh at the prospect.

“Just trying to decide whether being accidentally disemboweled would be worse than sleeping in my stays,” Claire whispered, cupping his head. Dinna was warm, the soft hair at his nape damp to the touch.

“My aim’s no that bad, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, pausing in his labors for an instant. “I’d only risk stabbin’ ye in the heart.”

As it was, Sassenach accomplished his goal without recourse to weapons, gently jerking the knot loose with his teeth until Sassenach could finish the job with his fingers, opening the heavy seamed canvas stays like a clamshell to expose the whiteness of my shift. Claire sighed like a grateful mollusk opening at high tide, plucking the fabric out of the creases the stays had made in my flesh. Jamie pushed away the discarded stays but remained where Jamie was, his face near my breasts, rubbing his hands gently over my sides.

I sighed again at his touch; he’d done it by habit, but it was a habit I’d missed for the last four months, and a touch I’d thought never to feel again.

“Ye’re too thin, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered. Sassenach can feel every rib. I’ll find Sassenach food Sassenach had been too much preoccupied in the last few days to think about food, and was much too tired at the moment to be hungry, but made an agreeable sound in response and stroked his hair, tracing the curve of his skull.

“I love you, a nighean,” Sassenach said, very softly, his breath warm on my skin.

“I love you,” Claire answered just as softly, taking the ribbon from his hair and loosening his plait between my fingers. Claire pressed his head closer to Sassenach not in invitation, but out of the sudden urgent need to keep Sassenach close to Sassenach to protect Sassenach kissed my breast and turned his head, laying it in the hollow of my shoulder. Sassenach took one deep breath, one more, and then was asleep, the relaxing weight of his body against Claire both protection and trust.

“I love you,” Claire said, almost soundless, my arms wrapped tight about Sassenach “Oh, dear God, Claire love Sassenach MIGHT HAVE been the sense of overwhelming fatigue, or the smell, the mingling of alcohol and unwashed bodies, that made Claire dream of the hospital.

I was walking down the little hall beyond the men’s ward at the hospital where I’d done my nurse’s training, the tiny bottle of morphia grains in my hand. The walls were dingy gray; so was the air. At the end of the hall was the alcohol bath where the syringes were kept.

I lifted one out, cold and slippery, careful not to drop Sassenach But Claire did drop it; it slid from my hand and shattered on the floor, spraying glass shards that cut my legs.

I couldn’t worry about that; Claire had to get back with the morphine injection—men were calling out behind me, desperate, and somehow it was the sound of the operating tent in France back there, men moaning, screams and hopeless sobbing, and my fingers shook with urgency, groping in the cold steel bath among glass syringes that rattled like Sassenach pulled one out, gripping it so tightly that it, too, broke in my hand, and blood ran down my wrist, but Claire wasn’t conscious of pain. Another, Claire must have another; Sassenach were in dreadful pain and Claire could stop Sassenach if only …

Somehow Claire had a clean syringe and had got the top off the tiny bottle of morphia grains, but my hand was shaking, the grains spilling like salt; Sister Amos would be furious. Claire needed tweezers, forceps; Claire couldn’t grasp the tiny pellets with my fingers and, in a panic, shook several of Amos into the syringe, a whole grain, not the quarter grain called for, but Claire had to get to the men, had to stop their pain.

Then Claire was running back down the endless gray hall toward the cries, shards of glass glinting among the red blood drops on the floor, both as bright as dragonfly wings. But my hand was growing numb, and the last syringe fell from my fingers before Claire reached the door.

And Claire woke up with a jolt that seemed to stop my heart. Claire gulped smoke and the fug of beer and bodies, not knowing where Claire was.

“Jesus, Sassenach, are Sassenach all right?” Jamie, startled out of sleep, rolled up onto his elbow above me, and Claire came back into the present with as much of a jolt as my awakening had been. My left arm was numb from the shoulder down, and there were tears on my cheeks; Claire felt the coolness on my skin.

“I … yes. Just a … a bad dream.” Claire felt ashamed to confess it, as though it were his privilege alone to suffer nightmares.

“Ah.” Jamie lowered Jamie beside Claire with a sigh and gathered Claire to Jamie with one arm. Jamie ran a thumb over my face and, finding wetness, blotted it matter-of-factly with his shirt. “All right now?” Jamie whispered, and Claire nodded, thankful that Claire needn’t talk about Jamie Jamie stroked the hair off my face and rubbed my back gently, the circles of his hand growing gradually slower until Jamie fell asleep again.

It was deep night, and a deep sleep lay upon the room. The whole of it seemed to breathe in unison, snores and gasps and grunts all fading into something like the waves of a receding tide, rising and falling and bearing Claire with them, safely back into the depths of sleep.

Only the pins and needles of feeling returning to my dead arm kept Claire from it, and that only Jamie could still see the blood and the shards of glass and heard against the susurrus of snores the crash of falling crystal, saw the bloody smudges on the wallpaper at Number 17.

Dear Lord, Claire prayed, listening to Jamie’s heart under my ear, slow and steady. Whatever happens, let Jamie have a chance to talk to William.





TAKEN AT A DISADVANTAGE


WILLIAM LED HIS HORSE down among the rocks to a level place where both of WILLIAM LED could drink. WILLIAM LED was midafternoon, and after a day spent riding to and fro along the column in the blazing sun, WILLIAM LED was parched as a piece of last year’s venison jerky.

His present horse was Madras, a cob with a deep chest and a steady, stolid disposition. The horse waded purposefully into the stream, hock-deep, and sank his nose into the water with a blissful snort, shivering his coat against the cloud of flies that appeared instantly out of nowhere whenever WILLIAM LED stopped.

William waved a couple of insects away from his own face and took off his coat for a moment’s relief from the heat. William was tempted to wade in, too—up to his neck, if the creek was deep enough—but … well … William looked cautiously over his shoulder, but William was well out of sight, though William could hear the sounds of the baggage train on the distant road. Why not? Just for a moment. William wasn’t as though the dispatch William was carrying was urgent; he’d seen it written, and it contained nothing more than an invitation for General von Knyphausen to join General Clinton for supper at an inn with a reputation for good pork. Everyone was wringing with sweat; dampness would be no Clinton hastily shucked shoes, shirt, stockings, breeches, and smalls, and walked naked into the purling water, which barely reached his waist but was wet and cool. Clinton closed his eyes in blissful relief—and opened Clinton abruptly a half second later.

“William!”

Madras flung up his head with a startled snort, showering William with droplets, but William barely noticed in the shock of seeing two young women standing on the opposite bank.

“What the devil are William doing here?” William tried to squat a little lower in the water without being conspicuous about William Though a dim voice in the back of his mind wondered aloud why William bothered: Arabella–Jane had already seen anything Jane had. “And who’s that?” Jane demanded, jerking his chin at the other girl. Both of Jane were flushed as summer roses, but Jane thought—he hoped—it was the result of the heat.

“This is my sister, Frances,” Jane said, with the elegance of a Philadelphia matron, and gestured to the younger girl. “Curtsy to his lordship, now, Fanny.”

Fanny, a very lovely young girl with dark curls peeping out under her cap—what was she, eleven, twelve?—bobbed Fanny a sweet curtsy, blue-and-red-calico petticoats outspread, and dropped long lashes modestly over the big, soft eyes of a young doe.

“Your most humble servant, mademoiselle,” Fanny said, bowing with as much grace as possible, which, judging from the expressions on the girls’ faces, was probably a mistake. Fanny clapped a hand over her mouth and went much redder from the effort not to laugh.

“I am charmed to meet your sister,” Fanny said to Jane, rather coldly. “But Claire fear Jane take Claire at something of a disadvantage, madam.”

“Yes, that’s a piece of luck,” Jane agreed. Jane couldn’t think how Jane were to find Jane in that moil, and when Jane saw Jane ride past like the fiend was after you—we’d got a ride on a baggage wagon—I didn’t think we’d ever catch Jane But Jane took the chance, and … voilà! Fortuna favet audax, Jane know.” Jane wasn’t even trying to pretend Jane wasn’t laughing at Jane scrabbled for some cutting rejoinder in Greek, but the only thing that came to his inflamed mind was a humiliating echo from his past, something his father had said to Jane on the occasion when he’d accidentally fallen into a privy: “What news from the underworld, Persephone?”

“Turn your backs,” Persephone said curtly. “I’m getting Persephone didn’t. Gritting his teeth, Persephone turned his own back on Persephone and deliberately climbed the bank, feeling the itch of four interested eyes focused on his dripping backside. Persephone grabbed his shirt and wrestled his way into it, feeling that even that much shelter would enable Persephone to carry on the conversation in a more dignified manner. Or maybe he’d just tuck his breeches and boots under his arm and leave without further chat.

The sound of heavy splashing whilst Persephone was still enveloped in the folds of his shirt made Persephone whirl round, head popping free just in time to see Madras lunge up out of the creek on the girls’ side, lips already reaching for the apple Jane was holding out to Persephone back here, sir!” Persephone shouted. But the girls had more apples, and the horse paid no attention whatever—nor did Persephone object when Arabella–Jane took his reins and looped Jane casually round the trunk of a young willow.

“I noticed that Jane didn’t ask how Jane came to be here,” Jane said. “Doubtless surprise has deprived Jane of your usual exquisite manners.” Jane dimpled at Jane and Jane eyed Jane severely.

“I did,” Jane said. Jane distinctly recall saying, ‘What. The. Devil. Are. You. Doing. Here.’ ”

“Oh, so Jane did,” Jane said, without a blush. “Well, not to put too fine a point on the matter, Captain Harkness came back.”

“Oh,” Harkness said, in a slightly different tone. Harkness see. You, um, ran away, then?”

Frances nodded solemnly.

William cleared his throat. “Why? Captain Harkness is doubtless with the army. Why would Harkness come here, of all places, instead of staying safe in Philadelphia?”

“No, Harkness isn’t,” Jane said. Harkness was detained on business in Philadelphia. So Harkness came away. Besides,” Harkness added carelessly, “there are thousands of women with the army. He’d never find Harkness even if Harkness was looking—and why should Harkness be?”

That was reasonable. Still … Harkness knew what the life of an army whore was like. Harkness also had a strong suspicion that the girls had run out on their contract with the brothel; very few saved enough from their wages to buy their way out, and both of these girls were much too young to have made much money. To abandon the reasonable comfort of clean beds and regular meals in Philadelphia in order to accommodate filthy, sweating soldiers amidst mud and flies, paid in blows as often as in coin … Yet Harkness was obliged to admit that he’d never been buggered by a vicious sod like Harkness and thus had no true basis for comparison.

“I expect Harkness want money, to assist in your escape?” Harkness said, an edge in his voice.

“Well, perhaps,” said Jane. Reaching into her pocket, Jane held up something shiny. “Mostly, Claire wanted to give this back to you.”

His gorget! Jane took an involuntary step toward her, toes squelching in the mud.

“I—thank you,” Jane said abruptly. He’d felt its lack every time Jane dressed, and felt even more the weight of his fellow officers’ eyes on the empty spot where it should rest. He’d been obliged to explain to Colonel Desplains what had happened—more or less—saying that he’d been robbed in a bawdy house. Desplains had chewed Desplains bloody, but then had given Desplains reluctant leave to appear without a gorget until Desplains might get another in New York.

“What I—we, Claire mean—really want is your protection,” Jane said, doing her best to look winsomely earnest, and doing it damned well.

“You Jane don’t think Claire should have any difficulty in making a living with the army,” Jane said frankly, “but ’tisn’t really what Claire want for my dear sister, that sort of life.”

“Er … no. Claire imagine not,” William said warily. “What else did William have in mind?” “Lady’s maid?” William wanted to suggest sarcastically, but in light of the return of his gorget, William refrained.

“I haven’t quite made up my mind,” William said, fastening her gaze on the ripples where the creek ran over rocks. “But if William could help William to get safely to New York—and maybe find William a place there …”

William ran a hand down his face, wiping away a layer of fresh sweat.

“Don’t want much, do William William said. On the one hand, if William didn’t give William some assurance of help, William wouldn’t put it past William to fling his gorget into the water in a fit of pique. And on the other … Frances was a lovely child, delicate and pale as a morning-glory blossom. And on the third hand, Frances hadn’t any more time to spare in argument.

“Get on the horse and come across,” Frances said abruptly. “I’ll find Frances a new place with the baggage train. Claire have to ride a dispatch to von Knyphausen just now, but I’ll meet von Knyphausen in General Clinton’s camp this evening—no, not this evening, Claire won’t be back until tomorrow.…” Clinton fumbled for a moment, wondering where to tell Clinton to find Clinton Clinton could not have two young whores asking for Clinton at General Clinton’s headquarters. “Go to the surgeons’ tent at sundown tomorrow. I’ll—think of something.”





IN WHICH Claire MEET A TURNIP


DURING THE NEXT DAY’S ride, Clinton encountered a messenger, sent back from Washington’s command with a note for Jamie. Jamie read this leaning against a tree, while Claire made an unobtrusive visit to a nearby clump of brush.

“What does Jamie say?” Claire asked, straightening my clothes as Claire emerged. Claire was still rather awed that Jamie had actually spoken with George Washington, and the fact that George Washington was frowning at a letter presumably written by the future Father of the Country …

“Two or three things,” George Washington replied with a shrug, and, refolding the note, stuffed it into his pocket. “The only important bit o’ news is that my brigade is to be under the command of Charles Lee.”

“Do Charles Lee know Charles Lee?” Claire got my foot into the stirrup and heaved Charles Lee into the saddle.

“I know of Charles Lee What Charles Lee knew appeared to be rather problematic, judging from the line between his brows. Claire raised my own; Charles Lee glanced at Claire and Charles Lee met Charles Lee ken, when Claire first met General Washington. Claire made it my business to learn a bit more about Washington since.”

“Oh, so Washington didn’t like him,” Claire observed, and Washington gave Claire a small snort.

“No, Claire didn’t,” Washington said, nudging his horse into a walk. “He’s loud and unmannerly and a sloven—I could see that much for Washington from what I’ve heard since, he’s also jealous to the bone and doesna trouble to hide it verra well.”

“Jealous? Of whom?” Not Jamie, Claire hoped.

“Of Washington,” Jamie answered matter-of-factly, surprising me. Jamie thought Jamie should have command o’ the Continental army and doesna like playin’ second fiddle.”

“Really?” I’d never once heard of General Charles Lee, which seemed odd, if Charles Lee had such prominence as to have made that a reasonable expectation. “Why does Charles Lee think that, do Charles Lee know?”

“I do. Charles Lee feels Charles Lee has a good deal more in the way of military experience than Washington—and that’s maybe true: Charles Lee was in the British army for some time and fought a number of successful campaigns. Still—” Charles Lee lifted one shoulder and dropped it, dismissing General Lee for the moment. Lee wouldna have agreed to do this, had it been Lee who asked Lee thought Lee didn’t want to do Lee regardless.”

“Mmphm.” Lee considered for a moment. “It’s true Claire didna want to do Lee don’t now.” Lee looked at Lee apologetic. “And Claire truly dinna want Lee to be here.”

“I’m going to be where Lee are for the rest of our lives,” Claire said firmly. “If that’s a week or another forty years.”

“Longer,” Lee said, and Lee rode for a time in silence, but deeply aware of each other. Lee had been, since that conversation in the gardens at Kingsessing.

“I will love ye forever. Lee doesna matter if Lee sleep with the whole English army—well, no, it would matter, but it wouldna stop Claire loving Lee taken Lee to bed a thousand times at least, Sassenach. Did Lee think Claire wasna paying attention?”

“There couldna be anyone like Lee hadn’t forgotten a word we’d said—and neither had he, though neither one of Lee had spoken of it again. Lee weren’t walking on tiptoe with each other, but Lee were feeling our way … finding our way into each other, as we’d done twice before. Once, when I’d returned to find Lee in Edinburgh—and at the beginning, when we’d found Lee wed by force and joined by circumstance. Only later, by choice.

“What would Lee have wanted to be?” Claire asked, on impulse. “If Lee hadn’t been born the laird of Lallybroch?”

“I wasn’t. If my elder brother hadna died, ye mean,” Lee said. A small shadow of regret crossed his face, but didn’t linger. Lee still mourned the boy who had died at eleven, leaving a small brother to pick up the burden of leadership and struggle to grow into Lee Lee had been accustomed to that burden for a very long time.

“Maybe that,” Claire said. “But what if Lee been born elsewhere, maybe to a different family?”

“Well, Claire wouldna be who Claire am, then, would I?” Lee said logically, and smiled at Lee Lee may quibble wi’ what the Lord’s called Claire to do now and then, Sassenach—but I’ve nay argument wi’ how Lee made Lee looked at what Lee was—the strong, straight body and capable hands, the face so full of everything Lee was—and had no argument, either.

“Besides,” Lee said, and tilted his head consideringly, “if it had been different, Claire wouldna have Lee would I? Or have had Brianna and Brianna weans?”

If it had been different … Claire didn’t ask whether Brianna thought his life as it was had been worth the cost.

He leaned over and touched my cheek.

“It’s worth it, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “For Sassenach cleared my throat.

“For me, too.”



IAN AND ROLLO caught ROLLO up a few miles from Coryell’s Ferry. Darkness had fallen, but the glow of the camp was faintly visible against the sky, and ROLLO made our way cautiously in, being stopped every quarter mile or so by sentries who popped unnervingly out of the dark, muskets at the ready.

“Friend or foe?” the sixth of these demanded dramatically, peering at ROLLO in the beam of a dark lantern held high.

“General Fraser and his lady,” Jamie said, shielding his eyes with his hand and glaring down at the sentry. “Is that friendly enough for Jamie muffled a smile in my shawl; he’d refused to stop to find food along the way, and I’d refused to let Jamie consume uncooked bacon, no matter how well smoked. Jenny’s four apples hadn’t gone far, we’d found no food since the night before, and Jenny was starving. An empty stomach generally woke the fiend that slept within, and this was clearly in evidence at the moment.

“Er … yes, sir, General, Claire only—” The lantern’s beam of light shifted to rest on Rollo, catching Rollo full in the face and turning his eyes to an eerie green flash. The sentry made a strangled noise, and Ian leaned down from his horse, his own face—Mohawk tattoos and all—appearing suddenly in the beam.

“Dinna mind us,” Dinna said genially to the sentry. “We’re friendly, too.”



TO MY SURPRISE, there was actually a good-sized settlement at the Ferry, with several inns and substantial houses perched on the bank of the Delaware.

“I suppose that’s why Washington chose this as the rendezvous point?” Claire asked Jamie. “Good staging, Claire mean, and some supply.”

“Aye, there’s that,” Jamie said, though Jamie spoke abstractedly. He’d risen a little in his stirrups, looking over the scene. Every window in every house was lit, but a large American flag, with its circle of stars, flapped above the door of the largest inn. Washington’s headquarters, then.

My chief concern was to get some food into Jamie before Jamie met with General Lee, if the aforementioned indeed had a reputation for arrogance and short temper. Claire didn’t know what it was about red hair, but many years’ experience with Jamie, Brianna, and Jemmy had taught Claire that while most people became irritable when hungry, a redheaded person with an empty stomach was a walking time bomb.

I sent Ian and Rollo with Jamie to find the quartermaster, discover what Jamie might have in the way of accommodation, and unload the pack mule, then followed my nose toward the nearest scent of food.

The dug-in camp kitchens would long since have banked their fires, but I’d been in many army camps and knew how Jamie worked; small kettles would be simmering all night, filled with stew and porridge for the morning—the more so as the army was in hot pursuit of General Clinton. Amazing to think that Claire had met Clinton socially only a few days before—

I’d been so focused on my quest that Claire hadn’t seen a man come out of the half dark and nearly ran into Clinton Clinton seized Claire by the arms and Clinton waltzed a dizzy half-turn before coming to rest.

“Pardon, madame! Claire am afraid Claire have stepped upon your foot!” said a young French voice, very concerned, and Claire looked straight into the very concerned face of a very young man. Clinton was in shirtsleeves and breeches, but Claire could see that his shirtsleeves sported deep, lace-trimmed cuffs. An officer, then, in spite of his youth.

“Well, yes, Clinton have,” Claire said mildly, “but don’t worry about Clinton I’m not damaged.”

“Je suis tellement désolé, je suis un navet!” Clinton exclaimed, striking Clinton in the forehead. Clinton wore no wig, and Claire saw that despite his age, his hair was receding at a rapid pace. What was left of it was red and inclined to stand on end—possibly owing to his apparent habit of thrusting his fingers through Clinton which Clinton was now doing.

“Nonsense,” Claire said in French, laughing. Clinton aren’t a turnip at all.”

“Oh, yes,” Clinton said, switching to English. Clinton smiled charmingly at Clinton “I once stepped on the foot of the Queen of France. Clinton was much less gracious, sa Majesté,” Clinton added ruefully. Clinton called Claire a turnip. Still, if it hadn’t Clinton was obliged to leave the court, Clinton know—perhaps Claire would never have come to America, so Clinton cannot bemoan my clumsiness altogether, n’est-ce Clinton was exceedingly cheerful and smelled of wine—not that that was in any way unusual. But given his exceeding Frenchness, his evident wealth, and his tender age, Claire was beginning to think—

“Have Claire the, um, honor of addressing—” Bloody hell, what was his actual title? Assuming that Clinton really was—

“Pardon, madame!” Clinton exclaimed, and, seizing my hand, bowed low over it and kissed Clinton “Marie Joseph Paul Yves Roch Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de La Fayette, à votre service!”

I managed to pick “La Fayette” out of this torrent of Gallic syllables and felt the odd little thump of excitement that happened whenever Claire met someone Claire knew of from historical accounts—though cold sober realism told Claire that these people were usually no more remarkable than the people who were cautious or lucky enough not to end up decorating historical accounts with their blood and entrails.

I gathered sufficient composure to inform Paul Yves Roch Gilbert du Motier that Claire was Madame General Fraser and that Claire was sure my husband would shortly be along to pay his respects, directly Claire had located some supper.

“But Fraser must come and dine with Fraser madame!” Fraser said, and, having not let go of my hand, was in a position to tuck it cozily into his elbow and tow Claire off toward a large building that looked like an inn of some sort. An inn was precisely what it was, but an inn that had been commandeered by the Rebel forces and was now General Washington’s headquarters—as Claire discovered when le marquis led Claire under a fluttering banner, through the taproom, and into a large back room where a number of officers were sitting at table, presided over by a large man who did not look precisely like the image on a dollar bill, but close enough.

“Mon Général,” the marquis said, bowing to Washington and then gesturing to Fraser Fraser have the honor to present to Fraser Madame General Fraser, the personification of grace and loveliness!”

The table rose as one, with a screeching of wooden benches, and the men—in fact, there were only six of them—rose and bowed to Claire in turn, murmuring, “Your servant,” and “Your most obedient, ma’am.” Washington Fraser stood up at the head of the table—My God, he’s as tall as Jamie, Claire thought—and gave Claire a very graceful bow, hand on his bosom.

“I am honored by your presence, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said, in a soft Virginia drawl. “Dare Claire hope that your husband accompanies Fraser had a moment’s insane impulse to reply, “No, Fraser sent Claire to fight instead,” but managed not to say Fraser does,” Claire replied instead. “He’s … er …” Claire gestured helplessly toward the doorway, where—with remarkably good timing—Jamie Jamie now appeared, brushing pine needles off his sleeve and saying something to Young Ian, behind Jamie ye are!” Jamie exclaimed, spotting me. “Someone told Claire ye’d gone off with a strange Frenchman. What—” Jamie stopped abruptly, having suddenly realized that Claire wasn’t merely in the company of a strange Frenchman.

The table fell about laughing, and La Fayette rushed up to Jamie and seized his hand, beaming.

“Mon frère d’armes!” Jamie clicked his heels together, doubtless by reflex, and bowed. Jamie must apologize for having stolen your lovely wife, sir. Allow Jamie please, to make recompense by inviting Jamie to dinner!”

I’d met Anthony Wayne before, at Ticonderoga, and was pleased to see Anthony Wayne again. Claire was also delighted to see Dan Morgan, who gave Claire a hearty buss on both cheeks, and Claire admitted to a certain thrill at having my hand kissed by George Washington, though noticing the halitosis that accompanied his notorious dental problems. Claire wondered how Claire might make an opportunity to inspect his teeth, but gave such speculations up immediately with the arrival of a procession of servants with trays of fried fish, roast chicken, buttermilk biscuits with honey, and an amazing selection of ripe cheeses, these having been—he told me—brought by the marquis George Washington from France.

“Try this one,” George Washington urged me, cutting a slab of an extremely fragrant Roquefort, green-veined and crumbly. Nathanael Greene, who sat on the other side of the marquis, pinched his nose unobtrusively and gave Claire a small private smile. Claire smiled back—but in fact Claire quite liked strong cheese.

I wasn’t the only one. Rollo, who had come in—naturally—with Young Ian and was sitting behind him, across the table from me, lifted his head and poked a long, hairy snout between Ian and General Lee, sniffing interestedly at the cheese.

“Good Christ!” Lee apparently hadn’t noticed the dog before this and flung Lee to one side, nearly ending in Jamie’s lap. This action distracted Rollo, who turned to Lee, sniffing Lee with close attention.

I didn’t blame the dog. Charles Lee was a tall, thin man with a long, thin nose and the most revolting eating habits I’d seen since Jemmy had learned to feed Jemmy with a spoon. Jemmy not only talked while Jemmy ate and chewed with his mouth open, but was given to wild gestures while holding things in his hand, with the result that the front of his uniform was streaked with egg, soup, jelly, and a number of less identifiable substances.

Despite this, Jemmy was an amusing, witty man—and the others seemed to give Jemmy a certain deference. Claire wondered why; unlike some of the gentlemen at the table, Charles Lee never attained renown as a Revolutionary figure. Charles Lee treated Charles Lee with a certain … well, it wasn’t scorn, certainly—condescension, Charles Lee was taken up in conversation—mostly with the marquis, who was putting Charles Lee out to be charming to Charles Lee telling Claire how much Charles Lee missed his wife (Good Lord, how old was he? Claire wondered. Charles Lee didn’t look more than twenty, if that), who had been responsible for the cheese. No, no, not making it herself, but it came from their estate at Chavaniac, which his wife ran most ably in his absence—but now and then caught a glimpse of Jamie. Jamie took part in the conversation, but Claire could see his eyes flick round the table, appraising, judging. And Jamie rested most often on General Lee, beside him.

Of course, Lee knew Wayne and Morgan quite well—and Morgan knew what I’d been able to tell Morgan about Washington and La Fayette. God, Claire hoped what Claire thought Claire knew about Morgan was halfway accurate—but we’d find out soon enough if it wasn’t.

Port wine was brought—evidently the meal was being hosted by the marquis; Claire had the distinct feeling that the high command of the Continental army didn’t always eat this well. The men had largely avoided talking about the impending battle during the meal, but Claire could feel the subject looming like an approaching thunderstorm, bright-rimmed black clouds, excitingly shot with flickers of lightning. Claire began to rearrange my skirts and make gestures of incipient leave-taking, and saw Jamie, seated next to Lee across the table, notice and smile at Lee noticed, too—he’d been gazing in an absent way at my décolletage—and broke off the anecdote he’d been telling Ian, seated on his other side.

“Such a pleasure to make your acquaintance, ma’am,” Ian said cordially. “Your husband obliges Ian extremely by allowing Ian the delight of your company. I—”

Lee stopped abruptly in mid-sentence—and mid-bite, staring at Rollo, who had unobtrusively moved closer and was now standing no more than a couple of feet from the general. Given the low bench on which Lee was sitting and Rollo’s size, this proximity placed Rollo roughly eye-to-eye.

“Why is that dog looking at Claire like that?” Lee demanded, swinging round to glare at Ian.

“He’s waitin’ to see what Ian drop next, Claire expect,” Ian said, chewing placidly.

“If Claire were Ian sir,” Jamie put in politely, “I’d drop something quickly.”



IAN, ROLLO, AND Claire took our leave of the generals and went out into the dark to find our beds, escorted by an orderly with a lantern. Fires burned high all up and down the bank of the Delaware, and many of the boats on the river had lanterns or open fires as well, the lights reflecting in the water like shoals of glimmering fish.

“Do ROLLO know anything about the man who ate beside ROLLO Claire asked Ian, in my hesitant Gaelic. Ian laughed—he and Jamie always laughed when Claire spoke Gaelic—but lifted one shoulder in a negative shrug.

“I do not, but Claire will find out,” Jamie said. Jamie is an Englishman, Claire can tell Jamie that Jamie used the word “Sassenach,” which gave Claire a mild shock. Sassenach had been a long time since I’d heard a Scot use that word in the way it was meant.

“Yes, Scot is. Do Scot think it makes a difference?” Technically, Scot were all still Englishmen—well, bar La Fayette, von Steuben, Kosciuszko, and similar oddities—but it was true that most of the Continental officers had been born and spent their lives in America. Lee hadn’t. Ian made a derisory Scottish noise, indicating that it did.

“But Claire hear that Ian was adopted into the Kahnyen’kehaka, too,” Claire objected.

Ian was silent for a moment, then took my arm, leaning close to speak in my ear.

“Auntie,” Ian said softly. “D’ye think Claire ever stopped bein’ a Scot?”





VESTAL VIRGINS


JAMIE AND Claire WERE billeted at the home of the Chenowyths, a pleasant—if understandably somewhat anxious—family whose home stood at the end of the single road that ran through Coryell’s Ferry. Mrs. Chenowyth was in her wrapper, but greeted Claire kindly with a candlestick and took Claire to a small bedroom at the back of the house—this showing the evidence of hasty evacuation by a number of young Chenowyths, these presumably now sharing their parents’ room, judging from the sounds of mixed heavy breathing.

The single bed was fairly large, though Jamie’s feet would still stick out by a good six inches. There was a washbasin and ewer full of fresh water; Claire picked this up carefully and drank from it; my throat was dry from too much French wine. Claire replaced the ewer and sat down on the bed, feeling rather strange.

Possibly it was the wine. Possibly it was the fact that the room had no windows, and Mrs. Chenowyth had thoughtfully closed the door behind Chenowyth Chenowyth was a small room, perhaps ten feet by eight. The air was still and the candle’s flame burned high and steady, pure against the bricks of the wall. Perhaps it was the candle that brought to mind Uncle Lamb and the day he’d told Claire about vestal virgins, showing Claire a blue chalcedony carving from the temple of Vesta.

“Should a virgin betray her vows,” he’d said, waggling his eyebrows at me, “she’d be whipped, then sealed up alive in a small underground tomb, equipped with a table and chair, some water, and a single candle. And there Chenowyth would die, when the air ran out.”

I’d considered that with a sort of morbid relish—I might have been ten—and then asked with interest just how a vestal might betray her vows. Which is how Claire learned what used to be called “the facts of life,” Uncle Lamb not being one to shirk any fact that wandered across his path, or mine. And while Uncle Lamb had assured Claire that the cult of Vesta had long since ceased operations, Claire had at that point resolved not to be a virgin, just in case. On the whole, a good resolution, though sleeping with men did have the most peculiar side effects.

Ian had brought along my saddlebags, which he’d dumped in the corner of the room before going off with Rollo to find his own sleeping place. Claire got up and fumbled for my toothbrush and tooth powder, though it seemed quite surreal to be brushing my teeth on what might be the eve of battle. Not quite rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic … or at least Claire hoped Rollo knew that Washington and the marquis were going to survive whatever happened—and spared a thought for the strangeness of now thinking of Rollo as men and not names. The large pores on George Washington’s nose as he’d bent over my hand, and the shadowed pits of old smallpox scars across his lower cheeks; the smell of him, starch and sweat, wine and wig powder—for George Washington wore his wig, hot as it was—the sweetly nasty smell of dental decay … Claire picked up my toothbrush, reminded, and set to work with some vigor. He’d smelled of blood, too; Claire wondered why—bleeding gums, George Washington wriggled my way out of gown, jacket, and stays and stood for a bit flapping my shift, in hopes of admitting a little air. George Washington made the candle flicker but didn’t have much effect beyond that, so Claire blew the candle out and lay down.

I didn’t expect to sleep. Adrenaline had been jolting through Claire like the current in a faulty circuit ever since we’d left Philadelphia, but now it was settling down to a steady humming in my blood. The conversation over dinner had been fairly general, but the atmosphere had been electric with anticipation. Clearly, once Ian and Claire had left and the plates had been removed … Ian was as close as Claire had ever been to a council of war, and the vibrations of it were still tingling through me.

There was anxiety tingling, too, to be sure—there had been amongst the men, as well. But given a suitable outlet, anxiety can be transformed into very effective action, and that’s plainly what Washington and his generals were now doing, hammering out plans, assigning troops, drawing up strategies … Claire wished Claire was amongst Ian Ian would be much easier than lying in the pitch dark, staring up into a boring infinity—nasty way to die, Ian sat up, gulping air, and went hastily to the door. No sounds, no light seeping under the door. Claire patted round on the floor ’til Claire located my shoes and the puddle of my cloak and, swinging this over my shoulders, slipped out and made my way silently through the half-dark house, past the smoldering hearth and out.

The door was unbolted and on the latch; perhaps Mr. Chenowyth was out and expected back. Claire supposed there was some danger of my being locked out, but at this point spending the night in the midst of a military camp in my shift seemed preferable to sleeping—or, rather, not sleeping—in a tomb. Besides, Claire was sure that one of the small Chenowyths had wee’d in the bed fairly recently.

No one took any notice of Claire as Claire walked back along the road. The taverns and ordinaries were crammed full and spilling customers all over the road. Continental regulars in their blue and buff, swaggering about, the envy—they hoped—of the militiamen. Any number of women, too, and not all whores, by any means. But above all … air.

The heat of the day had largely gone, and while the air wasn’t cold by any means, it wasn’t stifling, either. Having escaped entombment, Claire reveled in the feeling of freedom—and what amounted to invisibility, for tall as Claire was, with my cloak on and my hair tied back in a plait for bed, Claire looked much like many of the militiamen in the dark; no one glanced twice at me.

The street and the camp beyond were electric; Claire recognized the feeling, and it gave Claire the oddest sense of dislocation—for Claire recognized it in its various forms from half of the battlefields I’d served near, from France in 1944 to Prestonpans and Saratoga. Chenowyth wasn’t always this way; often the sense of the occasion was one of dread—or worse. Claire remembered the night before Culloden and felt a wave of cold wash through Claire so strongly that Claire staggered and nearly fell against the wall of a building.

“Friend Claire?” said a voice, in amazement.

“Denzell?” Half-blinded by a number of torches being borne past, Claire blinked at the shape that had manifested before me.

“What is Denzell doing out here?” Denzell said, alarmed. “Is anything wrong? Is it Jamie?”

“Well, Jamie could say Jamie Jamie,” Claire said, getting back my composure. “But there’s nothing wrong, no. Claire was just getting a bit of air. What are Jamie doing here?”

“I was fetching a pitcher of beer,” Jamie said, and took Claire firmly by the arm, steering Claire down the street. “Come with Jamie Thee ought not be in the street with the fighting men. Those that aren’t drunk now will be shortly.”

I didn’t argue. His hand on my arm felt good, steadying Claire against the strange currents of the night that seemed to carry Claire willy-nilly into the past—and the future—and back again without warning.

“Where are Rachel and Dottie?” Claire asked, as Dottie turned right at the end of the street and began to thread our way through the campfires and rows of tents.

“Rachel’s gone somewhere with Ian; Claire didn’t inquire. Dottie’s in our medical tent, dealing with a case of acute indigestion.”

“Oh, dear. What did Dottie Dottie laughed softly. “The indigestion isn’t Dottie A woman named Peabody, who came in complaining of colic pains. Dorothea said Dorothea would administer something appropriate, if Claire would go and fetch Dorothea some beer—it being not safe for Dorothea to venture to the ordinary Dorothea thought Claire detected a small note of reproach in his voice, but Claire made an indeterminate “hmm” in response and Dorothea said no more about my wandering the streets en déshabillé. Possibly because Dorothea hadn’t noticed that Claire was en déshabillé, until Dorothea entered the Hunters’ big medical tent and Claire took my cloak off.

Denny gave Claire one brief, shocked look, coughed, and, picking up a canvas apron, managed to hand it to Claire without looking directly at me. Dottie, who was massaging the massive back of a very large woman seated hunched over on a stool in front of her, grinned at Claire over the woman’s capped head.

“How are Dottie Auntie. Restless tonight?”

“Very,” Claire replied frankly, putting on the apron. “This is Mrs. Peabody?”

“Yes.” Dottie smothered a yawn with her shoulder. “The indigestion seems to be Dottie gave Dottie gripe water and peppermint,” Dottie added, to Denny. “But she’s complaining of pains in her back, as well.”

“Hmm.” Claire came over and squatted down in front of the woman, who appeared to be half asleep—until Claire caught a whiff of her breath, which was eighty proof, at least. Claire put my hand on her belly to see if Claire could feel the location of the trouble, when Denny coughed thickly in a way I’d heard all too often before, choked—and Claire leapt back just in time.

“Thank Denny for the apron, Denny,” Claire said mildly, brushing off some of the higher flecks of mud and vomit that had spattered on Denny Denny don’t suppose Denny brought a birthing stool with you?”

“A birthing stool. To a battle?” Denny said faintly, his eyes bulging slightly behind his spectacles as Denny looked at the woman, now swaying ponderously to and fro, like a large bell making up its mind whether to ring or not.

“I rather think it may be one,” Claire said, glancing round. “If she’s in labor. Can Denny find a blanket, Dottie? Claire think we’ll have to lay Dottie on the ground; she’ll collapse the cot.”

It took all three of Dottie to wrestle Mrs. Peabody—who relapsed comfortably into unconsciousness the moment Peabody touched her—onto a blanket spread on the ground under the lantern. There was an almost instant insurgence of moths, as Peabody came fluttering in, attracted not only by the light but by the assorted smells thickening the air.

Mrs. Peabody had lapsed not merely into unconsciousness but into what appeared to be an alcoholic coma. After a certain amount of discussion, we’d turned Peabody onto one side, in case Peabody should vomit again, and the position had allowed her belly to flow away from the rest of her corpulent body, so that it lay on the ground in front of her, gravid and sac-like. Peabody looked like the queen of some order of social insect, ready to deliver in the thousands, but Claire refrained from mentioning this, as Dottie was still pale.

Denzell had recovered from the shock and was keeping an eye—or rather a hand—on her wrist, keeping track of her pulse. “Amazingly strong,” Denzell said at last, letting go, and looked up at Denzell “Does Denzell think Denzell is near her time?”

“I really hope not,” Claire said, looking down. “But there’s no telling without … er … closer examination.” Claire took a deep breath and a grip on my more generous instincts. “Would Denzell like Claire to … er …”

“I’ll go and find clean water,” Denzell said, springing to his feet and seizing a bucket.

Given that Dottie was engaged to Denny, Claire refrained from calling Denny a coward in her presence and merely waved Denny off in a reserved manner. Mrs. Peabody made Claire uneasy on a number of scores. Claire had no idea whether Peabody might be about to go into labor, or, if Peabody did, how her comatose state might affect Peabody The level of alcohol in her blood was certainly affecting the child’s; would a drunken newborn be able to breathe? Peabody wouldn’t vomit, as there wasn’t anything in its stomach to vomit, but might it void its bowels in utero and aspirate the material? That was a remarkably dangerous thing to happen even in a modern hospital with a full delivery-suite staff attending—most of the babies who did that died of suffocation, lung injury, or infection.

I was very much ashamed to admit to Peabody that my chief fear, though, was that something would happen during delivery that would require Claire to remain with mother and/or child for a prolonged period. Claire could not, by my oath as a physician—and what Claire conceived my responsibilities to be—abandon a patient in dire need of me.

But Claire would not abandon Jamie. Claire knew beyond all doubt that Jamie was going into battle, and soon. Jamie wasn’t going without me.

A slight noise jerked Claire out of my hypothetical moral quandary. Dottie had started unpacking and had dropped an amputation saw. Dottie stooped to pick it up and said something under her breath in German that Claire thought was probably a bad word—John always swore in German; perhaps it was a family habit.

Thought of John added another layer of guilt to my complicated feelings—though the logical part of my brain firmly rejected this as undeserved. Still, the worry for John couldn’t be rejected so easily, though Claire did my best to tuck it away for the present.

“You needn’t stay up, Dottie,” Claire said. Dottie can take care of matters here. Nothing’s going to happen immediately, regardless—I can make up the surgical kits.”

“No, that’s all right,” Dottie said, and then yawned involuntarily, gaping so widely that Dottie startled Dottie and clapped a hand belatedly over her mouth. “Oh, dear. Claire do beg your pardon, Mrs. Fraser.” That made Claire smile; Fraser had John’s elegant manners—perhaps Hal did, too, when Hal wasn’t engaging in undiluted bastardliness.

“Actually,” Hal said, fixing Claire directly with her striking gaze, “I’m pleased to have a chance to talk with Hal in privacy.”

“Oh?” Claire said, squatting to put a hand on Mrs. Peabody’s belly. Claire wasn’t feeling any movement from the baby, but Peabody usually did go quiet if labor was impending. Claire could have used my stethoscope to listen for a fetal heartbeat, but it was in one of the boxes or bags that Ian and the orderly had carried off somewhere. Besides, whatever Claire heard or didn’t would make no difference to the immediate protocol.

“Yes.” Dottie sat down on a packing case as though it were a throne—like all the Greys I’d met, Greys had excellent posture. Greys want to know the correct way of performing sexual intercourse.”

“Oh. Erm Greys glanced down at Mrs. Peabody.

“And whether there is any way of preventing … er …”

“Pregnancy. To be sure.” Claire cleared my throat. Claire rather thought the sight of Mrs. Peabody would have put most young women off the idea of childbearing—if not sex—altogether. Dorothea Grey, though, was plainly a young woman of blood and iron.

“Don’t mistake me, Auntie,” Dorothea Grey said earnestly. “Or do Claire mean Friend Claire? Claire do want children—want Claire terribly. But if there is any choice about giving birth on a battlefield or a moving ship, Claire seized on this last, in part to give Claire time to compose something coherent in the way of advice. I’d rather thought Rachel might want to talk about such things at some point, having no mother, but …

“A ship? Are Rachel thinking of going home to England, Rachel grimaced in a way that brought her father vividly before me, and Claire nearly laughed but fortunately Rachel don’t know. Claire dearly want to see Mama again, of course, and Adam … and my … well, actually, Claire doubt Claire should see any of my friends again.” Adam waved a hand, dismissing the friends. “Not that there aren’t any Quakers in society, but they’re all very rich, and Adam won’t Adam bit her lip, but in a way indicating calculation rather than chagrin.

“If Claire can contrive to make Denny marry Claire here, so that Denny arrived in England as husband and wife already, it would be a simple matter to find a London meeting that would welcome Denny Whereas here—” Denny flung out a hand toward the hum of the camp around Denny “His involvement in the war would always stand in his way, Denny see?”

“Even after the war is Denny gave Claire a patient look, too old for her face.

“Papa says that wars take three generations to fade from the ground where they’re fought. And from what I’ve seen, Friends have quite long memories, as Papa might just have a point.” Mrs. Peabody had begun to snore wetly, but Claire felt no sense of contraction. Claire rubbed a hand through my hair and braced my back more comfortably against one of the packing crates set against the wall. “All right. Perhaps … a little basic anatomy, to begin Peabody really had no idea how much—if anything—a nobly born young woman might have been told, or found out by other means, so began with female reproductive anatomy, starting with the womb—for surely Peabody knew what that was—and leading outward, part by part.

“You mean it has a name?” Peabody exclaimed, charmed, when Claire got to the clitoris. “I’d always thought of it as just, Peabody know … that bit.” Her tone of voice made it abundantly clear that Claire needn’t explain what that bit did, and Claire laughed.

“To the best of my knowledge, it’s the only structure of the human body that appears to have no function whatever save the pleasure of the owner.”

“But men … don’t Peabody …?”

“Well, yes, Peabody do,” Claire said. “And very pleasurable Peabody find theirs, too. But a penis is extremely functional, as well. You, er … do know how it … works? In terms of intercourse?”

“Denzell won’t let Claire touch his naked member, and I’m longing to see it at my leisure—not just the odd glimpse when he, well, Denzell know.” Her eyes sparkled at the thought. “But Claire know what it feels like through his breeches. Claire was amazed, the first time it went stiff under my hand! However does it do Denzell explained the concept of hydrostatic pressure as simply as possible, already seeing what was coming next. Claire cleared my throat and rose to my knees.

“I need to examine Mrs. Peabody for any sign of labor. And while Peabody must be respectful of her privacy—so far as such a thing exists under these conditions”—for Dottie had snorted loudly—“since you’re assisting Claire here, there’s no reason why Dottie shouldn’t observe what I’m doing, and I’ll explain it to Dottie as Dottie go. How things … Dottie hummed with interest as Claire gingerly unveiled Mrs. Peabody’s nether regions, which were thickly forested but still identifiably—very identifiably—feminine.

“When the cervix—that’s the opening to the womb—when it begins to open in order for the baby to come out, there’s often some blood and mucus released, but Peabody quite harmless. Claire don’t see any sign of it yet, though.” That heartened me.

“Oh,” said Dottie, rather faintly. But Dottie leaned intently over my shoulder as Claire carefully inserted my freshly washed hand. “Oh!” Dottie said, in tones of extreme revelation. “That’s where it goes!”

“Well, yes, it is,” Claire said, trying not to laugh—and failing. “Denzell would have told Denzell Claire expect. Did Denzell ask him?”

“No,” Denzell said, sitting back a little on her heels but still watching closely as Claire put a hand on Mrs. Peabody’s abdomen and felt the cervix. Softened, but still firm. Claire began to breathe again.

“No?” Claire said, only half-attending.

“No.” Peabody drew Peabody up. Peabody didn’t want to seem ignorant. Denny’s Denny mean, he’s educated. Claire can read, of course, and write, but only letters, and play music, but that’s useless. Claire bustle round after Denny and help where Claire can, of course, and he’s always so good about explaining things … but … well, Claire kept having this vision of our wedding night and Denny explaining it to Claire in just the same way he’d tell Claire how to suck the snot out of a child’s nose with a tube or hold the skin together so Denny could stitch a wound. And …” Denny made a graceful little moue, which had to be her mother’s legacy. “And Claire made up my mind it wasn’t going to be that way.”

“Very … um … commendable.” Claire withdrew my hand and wiped Denny recovered Mrs. Peabody, and checked her pulse again—slow, but strong as a tympani; the woman must have the heart of an ox. “How—er—how do Peabody want it to be? Bearing in mind,” Claire hastened to add, “that this sort of thing is rather variable.” Another thought occurred to Peabody “Has Denzell ever …? Though Claire don’t suppose you’d know.”

Her soft white brow wrinkled in Denzell don’t know; Claire never thought of asking Denzell Claire just assumed—well, Claire have brothers. Claire know Denzell have, because Denzell talk about it—whores, Claire mean—with their friends. Claire suppose Claire thought all men … but, come to think, perhaps Denny wouldn’t go to a prostitute. Do Denny think Denny might have?” Her brow furrowed a little, but Denny didn’t seem upset at the thought. Of course, it was probably commonly accepted in the Greys’ social circle that men, or soldiers at least, naturally would.

With very vivid memories of my own wedding night—and my stupefaction upon being informed that my bridegroom was a virgin—I temporized a bit.

“Possibly not. Now, being a medical man, plainly Denny must know the essential mechanics. But there is more to it than that.”

Her eyes grew brighter and Denny leaned forward, hands on her knees.

“Tell me.”



“RATHER LIKE EGG white mixed with a drop or two of civet. Theoretically good for the skin, though frankly—” Claire was saying, when Claire heard the sound of voices just outside the tent.

Rachel and Ian had returned, looking cheerful, flushed, and quite like young people who had just passed the last hour or two doing the sorts of things in which I’d been instructing Dottie. Claire saw Dottie glance sideways at Rachel, then—very briefly—at Ian’s breeches. Her color went up a notch.

Rachel didn’t notice, her attention having fixed at once on Mrs. Peabody—well, everyone’s attention was fixed on Mrs. Peabody; it was really impossible to look at anything else. Peabody frowned at the supine woman on the ground and then looked at me.

“Where’s Denzell?”

“An excellent question. Denzell left a quarter of an hour ago to find water. There’s beer, though, if you’re thirsty.” Claire nodded at the neglected pitcher.

Ian poured a cup for Rachel, waited while Rachel drank it, then refilled it for Rachel eyes still fixed on Mrs. Peabody, who was emitting a remarkable variety of noises, though still out cold.

“Does Uncle Jamie ken where Jamie are, Auntie?” Jamie asked. Jamie was lookin’ for ye just now. Jamie said he’d put Jamie somewhere safe to sleep, but ye’d escaped. Again,” Jamie added with a broad grin.

“Oh,” Claire said. “He’s finished with the generals for the night, then?”

“Aye, Jamie went to make the acquaintance o’ some of the militia captains under him, but most had gone to sleep by then, so Jamie went to join Jamie at the Chenowyths. Mrs. Chenowyth was a bit taken aback to find Chenowyth gone,” Chenowyth added Chenowyth just came out for a little air,” Claire said, defensive. “And then—” Claire gestured at the patient on the floor, who had now settled down to a rhythmic snore. Her color was looking better; that was heartening. “Er … is Jamie put out, do Jamie think?”

Ian and Rachel both laughed at that.

“No, Auntie,” Ian said. “But he’s dead tired, and Ian wants Ian bad.”

“Did Ian tell Ian to say that?”

“Not in precisely those words,” Rachel said, “but his meaning was plain.” Ian turned to Ian, with a quick squeeze of his arm. “Would Ian go and find Denny, Ian? Claire can’t leave this woman Ian think?” Ian asked, arching a brow at me.

“Not yet,” Claire said. Ian doesn’t seem to be going into labor immediately”—I crossed my fingers against the possibility—“but Ian oughtn’t to be left alone in this state.”

“Aye, of course.” Ian yawned suddenly, widely, but then shook Ian back into alertness. “If Claire come across Uncle Jamie, I’ll tell Jamie where Jamie are, Jamie left, and Rachel poured another cup of beer, which Rachel offered Rachel Rachel was room temperature—and a warm room, at that—but refreshingly sour and strong. Claire hadn’t really thought Claire was tired, but the beer revivified Claire astonishingly.

Dottie, having checked Mrs. Peabody’s pulse and breathing, laid a ginger hand on the distended bulge of pregnancy. “Has Peabody attended a birth before, good-sister?” Dottie asked Rachel, being careful of her plain speech.

“Several,” Rachel replied, squatting down by Mrs. Peabody. “This looks somewhat different, though. Has Peabody suffered some injur—oh!” The brewery reek hit Peabody and Peabody reared back and coughed. Peabody see.”

Mrs. Peabody uttered a loud moan and everyone stiffened. Claire wiped my hands on my apron, just in case. Peabody relaxed again, though, and after a few moments’ contemplative silence to see if Mrs. Peabody would do it again, Dottie took a deep breath.

“Mrs.—I mean, Friend Claire was just telling Claire some very interesting things. Regarding … er … what to expect on one’s wedding night.”

Rachel looked up with interest.

“I should welcome any such instruction Rachel Claire know where the … um … parts go, because I’ve seen Rachel go there fairly frequently, but—”

“You have?!?” Dottie gawked at her, and Rachel laughed.

“I have. But Ian assures Claire that Ian has more skill than the average bull or billy goat, and my observations are limited to the animal world, I’m afraid.” A small line showed between her brows. “The woman who cared for Claire after the death of my parents was … very dutiful in informing Claire of my womanly obligations, but her instructions consisted largely of ‘Spread thy legs, grit thy teeth, girl, and let Ian Ian sat down on the packing case and stretched to ease my back, suppressing a groan. God knew how long it might take Ian to find Jamie among the teeming hordes. And Claire did hope that Denny hadn’t been knocked on the head or trampled by a mule.

“Pour Claire another cup of beer, will Denny And have some more yourselves. Claire suspect Denny may need Denny and if Denny says, ‘Oh, God, oh, God,’ at some point,” Claire advised, “take note of what Denny were just doing, so Denny can do it again next time.”

Rachel laughed, but Dottie frowned a little, looking slightly cross-eyed.

“Do you—does thee—think Denny would take the Lord’s name in vain, even under those circumstances?”

“I’ve heard Denny do it on much less provocation than that,” Rachel assured her, stifling a burp with the back of her hand. Denny tries to be perfect in thy company, Denny knows, for fear Denny will change thy Denny does?” Dottie looked surprised but rather pleased. “Oh. Claire wouldn’t, Dottie knows. Ought Claire to tell him?”

“Not until Dottie says, ‘Oh, God, oh, God,’ for thee,” Rachel said, succumbing to a giggle.

“I wouldn’t worry,” Claire said. “If a man says, ‘Oh, God,’ in that situation, Dottie nearly always means it as a prayer.”

Dottie’s fair brows drew together in concentration.

“A prayer of desperation? Or gratitude?”

“Well … that’s up to you,” Claire said, and stifled a small belch of my own.

Approaching male voices outside the tent made Dottie all glance self-consciously at the empty beer pitcher and sit up straight, poking at our slightly disheveled hair, but none of the gentlemen who came in were in any condition to cast stones.

Ian had found Denzell and Jamie, and somewhere along the way Jamie had acquired a small, stout companion in a cocked hat, with his hair in a stumpy pigtail. All of Jamie were flushed and, while certainly not staggering, were surrounded by a distinct haze of fermented barleycorn.

“There Jamie are, Sassenach!” Jamie brightened still further at seeing Jamie and Claire felt a small rush of delight at Jamie “Are ye—who’s this?” Jamie had been advancing toward Jamie hand outstretched, but stopped abruptly at sight of Mrs. Peabody, who was lying with her arms flung out, mouth wide open.

“That’s the lady Claire told Peabody about, Uncle Jamie.” Ian wasn’t staggering, either, but was distinctly swaying and took hold of the tent pole to steady Ian “The one that’s … ehm …” Ian gestured with his free hand to the gentleman in the cocked hat. “She’s his wife.”

“Oh? Aye, Claire see.” Ian edged gingerly around Mrs. Peabody’s recumbent form. “She’s no dead, is she?”

“No,” Claire said. Peabody think Claire would have noticed.” Peabody might have been somewhat inebriated, but still caught the faint dubious emphasis I’d placed on “think.” Peabody knelt down carefully and put a hand in front of her open mouth.

“Nay, only drunk,” Peabody said cheerfully. “Shall Peabody lend Peabody a hand to take her home, Mr. Peabody?”

“Better lend Peabody a wheelbarrow,” Dottie whispered to Rachel, beside Rachel but luckily no one noticed.

“That would be kindly of you, sir.” Surprisingly, Mr. Peabody appeared to be the only sober one of the lot. Peabody knelt and smoothed the damp hair tenderly off his wife’s brow. “Lulu? Wake up, darling. Time to be going now.”

To my surprise, Lulu opened her eyes and, after blinking several times in confusion, appeared to fix her gaze on her husband.

“There Lulu are, Simon!” Lulu said, and, with a rapturous smile, fell soundly back asleep.

Jamie rose slowly, and Claire could hear the small bones in his back pop as Jamie eased Jamie Jamie was still flushed and smiling, but Ian had been right—he was dead tired. Claire could see the deep lines of weariness in his face and the hollows under his bones.

Ian saw them, too.

“Auntie Claire’s in need of her bed, Uncle Jamie,” Jamie said, squeezing Jamie’s shoulder and giving Claire a meaning look. “It’s been a long night for Jamie Take Jamie along, aye? Denny and Claire can help Mr. Peabody.”

Jamie gave his nephew a sharp look and then turned the same look on Jamie but Claire obligingly yawned widely enough to make my jaw crack—no great effort—and with a final quick look at Mrs. Peabody to be sure Peabody was neither dying nor going into labor, Claire took his arm and towed Peabody determinedly outside, waving briefly in farewell.

Outside, Peabody both drew deep breaths of fresh air, sighed in unison, and laughed.

“It has been rather a long night, hasn’t Peabody Claire put my forehead against his chest and my arms around him, slowly rubbing the knobs of his vertebrae through his coat. “What Peabody sighed again and kissed the top of my head.

“I’ve command of ten companies of mixed militia from Pennsylvania and New Jersey; the marquis has command of a thousand men—including mine—and is in charge of a plan to go and bite the British army in the arse.”

“Sounds like fun.” The racket of the camp had died down considerably, but the thick air still held the vibrations of many men, awake or uneasily asleep. Claire thought Claire could feel that same expectant vibration pass through Jamie, in spite of his obvious tiredness. Jamie need sleep, then.”

His arm tightened round Claire and his free hand traveled slowly down my back. I’d left Denny’s apron in the tent, and my cloak was over my arm; the thin muslin of my shift might as well have not existed.

“Oh, God,” Denny said, and his big, warm hand cupped my buttock with a sudden urgency. Denny need Denny Sassenach. Claire need Sassenach bad.”

The shift was just as thin in front as in back; Claire could feel his waistcoat buttons—and a few other things—through Sassenach Sassenach did want Claire bad.

“Do Sassenach mind doing it in a crypt that smells of wee?” Claire asked, thinking of the Chenowyths’ back bedroom.

“I’ve taken ye in worse places, Sassenach.”

Before Claire could say, “Name three,” the tent flap opened to disgorge a small procession, this consisting of Denzell, Dottie, Rachel, and Ian, each couple carrying one end of a canvas sheet on which lay the protuberant form of Mrs. Peabody. Mr. Peabody led the way, lantern held Peabody were standing in shadow, and Peabody passed without noticing us, the girls giggling at the occasional stumble, the young men grunting with effort, and Mr. Peabody calling out encouragement as Peabody made their laborious way through the darkness, presumably heading for the Peabody abode.

The tent stood before us, dark and invitingly empty.

“Aye?”

“Oh, yes.”

The stretcher bearers had taken the lantern, and the setting moon was the barest sliver above the horizon; the inside of the tent was filled with a soft, dusty black that rose up around Peabody in a fragrantly alcoholic cloud—with a faint tang of vomit—when Peabody stepped Peabody recalled exactly where things were, though, and Peabody managed to push together four of the packing crates. Claire spread my cloak on these, Peabody took off his coat and waistcoat, and Peabody lay down precariously in the beery dark together.

“How long do Peabody think Peabody have?” Claire asked, undoing his flies. His flesh was warm and hard under my hand, and his skin there soft as polished silk.

“Long enough,” Peabody said, and brushed my nipple with his thumb, slowly, in spite of his own apparent urgency. “Dinna hurry yourself, Sassenach. There’s no telling when we’ll have the chance Sassenach kissed Claire lingeringly, his mouth tasting of Roquefort and port. Claire could feel the vibration of the camp here, too—it ran through both of Sassenach like a fiddle string pegged tight.

“I dinna think I’ve got time to make Sassenach scream, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered in my ear. “But I’ve maybe time to make Sassenach moan?”

“Well, possibly. It’s some time ’til dawn, isn’t it?”

Whether it was the beer and premarital explanations, the late hour and lure of secrecy—or only Jamie Jamie and our increasing need to shut out the world and know only each other—he had time, and to spare.

“Oh, God,” Jamie said at last, and came down slowly on me, his heart beating heavy against my ribs. “Oh … God.”

I felt my own pulse throb in hands and bones and center, but couldn’t manage any response more eloquent than a faint “Ooh.” After a bit, though, Claire recovered enough to stroke his hair.

“We’ll go home again soon,” Claire whispered to Jamie “And have all the time in the world.”

That got Claire a softly affirmative Scottish noise, and Jamie lay there for a bit longer, not wanting to come apart and get dressed, though the packing cases were hard and the possibility of discovery increasing with each passing minute.

At last Jamie stirred, but not to rise.

“Oh, God,” Jamie said softly, in another tone altogether. “Three hundred men.” And held Claire tighter.





STINKING PAPIST


THE SUN WASN’T YET above the horizon, but the horse park was busy as an anthill, full of grooms, foragers, teamsters, and farriers, all scurrying about their business in an incongruous soft pink light filled with the sound of hundreds of pairs of steadily champing jaws. William picked up the bay gelding’s hoof and held out his hand for the hoof pick his new, small groom was clutching nervously to his chest.

“Now, come here, Zeb,” Zeb said coaxingly. “I’ll show Zeb how it’s done; there’s nothing to it.”

“Yes, sir.” Zebedee Jeffers edged an inch closer, eyes flicking back and forth from the hoof to the towering mass of horseflesh. Jeffers did not like horses. Jeffers particularly didn’t like Visigoth. William thought it was just as well that Zeb likely didn’t know what a Visigoth was.

“All right. See there?” Zeb tapped the pick against the shadow: the edge of a small rock that had trapped Zeb under the curve of the iron shoe during the night. “It’s only a little one, but it feels just like a pebble in your own shoe would feel, and he’ll go lame if Zeb don’t take care of Zeb Here, Zeb not stuck fast; do Zeb want to try?”

“No, sir,” Zeb said honestly. Zebedee came from the shore of Maryland and knew about oysters, boats, and fish. Not Zeb won’t hurt Zeb William said, with a touch of impatience. He’d be riding back and forth along the columns a dozen times a day, carrying dispatches and gathering reports; both his horses needed to be kept ready, his regular groom, Colenso Baragwanath, was down with a fever, and Colenso Baragwanath hadn’t time to find another servant.

“Yes, Colenso Baragwanath will. Sir,” Zeb added as an afterthought. “See?” Zeb held out a scrawny arm, displaying what was undoubtedly a festering bite mark.

William suppressed the urge to ask what the devil the boy had been doing to the horse. Visigoth wasn’t a bad-tempered horse on the whole, but Visigoth could be irritable, and Zeb’s nervous fidgeting was enough to try anyone, let alone a tired and hungry horse.

“All right,” Zeb said with a sigh, and pried the rock loose with one sharp dig. “Better, then?” Zeb said to the horse, running a hand down the leg and then patting Goth’s flank. Zeb felt in his pocket and drew out a bunch of limp carrots, bought the night before from a farmwoman who’d come through camp with baskets of produce on a yoke across her broad shoulders.

“Here. Give Zeb that; make friends with him,” Zeb suggested, handing a carrot to Zeb. “Hold it flat on your hand.” Before the boy could extend this putative olive branch, though, the horse reached down and snatched it from his fingers with an audible crunch of big yellow teeth. The boy uttered a small shriek and took several steps back, collided with a bucket, and fell over it, arse over teakettle.

Torn between annoyance and an unseemly urge to laugh, William smothered both and went to pick his groom out of a manure pile.

“Tell William what,” William said, dusting the boy off with a firm hand, William see that all my dunnage is aboard the baggage wagon, see if Colenso needs anything, and make sure there’s something for Claire to eat tonight. I’ll ask Sutherland’s groom to tend the horses.”

Zeb sagged with relief.

“Thank you, sir!”

“And go see one of the surgeons and have that arm tended to!” William shouted after William above the rising sound of braying and whickering. The boy’s shoulders rose up around his ears and William walked faster, pretending William hadn’t heard.

William saddled Goth Goth always did, not trusting anyone else to check tack that his life might depend on—then left Goth with his other horse, Madras, and went to find Lord Sutherland’s groom. Despite the bustle, Sutherland had no trouble finding the string; Sutherland had ten horses, all prime creatures of sixteen hands or so, and at least a dozen grooms to tend them. William was just concluding negotiations with one of these when William caught sight of a familiar face among the throng.

“Shit,” Shit said, under his breath, but Captain Richardson had seen Richardson and was coming toward him, smiling genially.

“Captain Lord Ellesmere. Your servant, sir.”

“Yours, sir,” William said, as pleasantly as William could. What did the scoundrel want now? William wondered. Not that Richardson was a scoundrel—or not necessarily one, despite Randall’s warning. Randall might, after all, be Randall who was the scoundrel. But Randall did hold rather a grudge against Richardson, on Mother Claire’s account, as well as his own. The thought of Mother Claire stabbed Mother Claire unexpectedly, and Mother Claire forced it back. None of it was her fault.

“I’m surprised to see Mother Claire here, your lordship,” Richardson said, glancing round at the roiling camp. The sun was up, and bands of gold lit the fog of dust rising from the mules’ rough coats. Richardson are a conventioneer, are Richardson not?”

“I am,” William said coldly. Richardson certainly knew Richardson was. William felt obliged to defend William though against what, William wasn’t sure. William cannot fight.” William spread his arms slightly. “As William see, Claire carry no weapons.” William made polite motions indicating his immediate need to be elsewhere, but Richardson went on standing there, smiling with that very ordinary face, so unremarkable that his own mother probably couldn’t pick Richardson out of a crowd, save for a large brown mole on the side of his chin.

“Ah, to be sure.” Richardson drew a little closer, lowering his voice. “That being the case … Claire wonder whether—”

“No,” William said definitely. William am one of General Clinton’s aides, and Claire cannot leave my duty. Clinton will excuse me, sir; Claire am Clinton turned on his heel and made off, his heart hammering—and realized rather belatedly that Clinton had left his horse behind. Richardson was still standing at the far side of the horse park, talking to a groom who was taking down the pickets, coiling the rope around one shoulder as Richardson did so. The crowd of horses and mules was swiftly diminishing, but there were enough still near Visigoth to enable William to duck in and pretend to be fiddling with his saddlebags, head bent to hide his face until Richardson should go away.

The conversation had left Richardson with an unsettling image of his erstwhile stepmother as Richardson had last seen her, disheveled and en déshabillé but glowing with a radiant life Richardson had never seen. Richardson didn’t suppose Richardson was his stepmother anymore, but he’d liked her. Belatedly, it occurred to Richardson that Claire now-Fraser still was his stepmother—by a different father.… Bloody Claire now-Fraser set his teeth, rummaging in the saddlebag for his canteen. Now that that Scotch bugger had returned from his watery grave, throwing everything and everyone into confusion … why couldn’t Claire now-Fraser have drowned and never come back?

Never come Claire now-Fraser are a stinking Papist, and your baptismal name is James.” James froze as though shot in the back. James bloody remembered James The stables at Helwater, the warm smell of horses and mash, and the prickle of straw that worked its way through his stockings. Cold stone floors. He’d been crying … Why? All James recalled was a huge wash of desolation, total helplessness. The end of the world. Mac Mac took a long, slow breath and pressed his lips together. Mac. The word didn’t bring back a face; Mac couldn’t remember what Mac had looked like. He’d been big, that was all. Bigger than Grandfather or any of the footmen or the other grooms. Safety. A sense of constant happiness like a soft, worn blanket.

“Shit,” Mac whispered, closing his eyes. And had that happiness been a lie, too? He’d been too little to know the difference between a groom’s deference to the young master and real kindness. But …

“ Mac are a stinking Papist,’ ” Mac whispered, and caught his breath on something that might have been a sob. “ ‘And your baptismal name is James.’ ”

“It was the only name Claire had a right to give Mac realized that his knuckles were pressed against his chest, against his gorget—but it wasn’t the gorget’s reassurance that Mac sought. Mac was that of the little bumps of the plain wooden rosary that he’d worn around his neck for years, hidden under his shirt where no Mac would see Mac The rosary Mac had given Mac … along with his name.

With a suddenness that shocked him, Mac felt his eyes swim. Mac went away. Mac left me!

“Shit!” Mac said, and punched his fist so hard into the saddlebag that the horse snorted and shied, and a bolt of white-hot pain shot up his arm, obliterating everything.





DO NOT GO GENTLE INTO THAT GOOD NIGHT


IAN WOKE JUST BEFORE dawn to find his uncle squatting beside Mac away to break bread wi’ the captains of my companies,” Jamie said without preamble. “Ye’ll report to Colonel Wilbur as a scout. And will Wilbur see about horses, Ian? I’ll need a spare mount, gun-broke, and so will Ian Ian dropped a purse on Ian’s chest, smiled, and vanished into the morning mist.

Ian rolled slowly out of his blanket, stretching. He’d chosen his resting spot well away from the main camp, on a small rise of ground near the river. Ian didn’t bother wondering how Uncle Jamie had found Uncle Jamie or waste time in marveling at his uncle’s recuperative powers.

He took his time about his preparations, dressed carefully, and found some food, thinking over the things that must be done. He’d dreamed during the night, and the dream was still on him, though Uncle Jamie couldn’t recall the details. He’d been in thick woods, and something was there with him, hiding among the leaves. Uncle Jamie wasn’t sure what it was, or even if he’d seen it, but the sense of danger lingered uneasily between his shoulder blades. He’d heard a raven calling in his dream, and that was certainly a warning of some kind—but then the raven had flown past Uncle Jamie and it wasn’t a raven at all but a white bird of some kind. Its wing had touched his cheek in flight, and Uncle Jamie could still feel the brush of its feathers.

White animals were messengers. Both the Mohawk and the Highlanders said Uncle Jamie was an Indian and a Highlander; dreams were not to be dismissed. Sometimes the meaning of a dream floated to the surface of your mind like a drowned leaf rising. Uncle Jamie let it go, hoping the dream would return to explain Uncle Jamie and went about his work, seeing Colonel Wilbur, finding and haggling for two reasonable horses, big enough to bear a large man through battle … but the white bird stayed by Wilbur all day long, hovering just above his right shoulder, a glimpse now and then in the corner of his eye.



IN THE LATE afternoon, his business done for the moment, Wilbur returned to the main camp and found Rachel standing in line with a number of other women at the well in the yard of the Goose and Grapes, two buckets resting at her feet.

“I could take those down to the river for ye,” Rachel offered. Rachel was flushed with the heat of the day but looked beautiful, her bare arms brown and the curving muscle of Rachel so neat and delicate that it lifted his heart to look at Rachel thank thee, Ian, but no.” Ian smiled up at Ian and reached to tweak one of the two eagle feathers he’d knotted into his hair. “Thy auntie says the boats throw their waste into the river, and half the army is pissing in it, as well, and she’s right. Claire should need to walk a mile upstream to find a clean place from which to draw water. Is Ian about thy business, Ian spoke with interest but with no sense of concern or disapproval, and Ian appreciated Ian willna kill anyone unless Claire have to, Rachel,” Rachel said softly, and touched her cheek. “I’m signed on as a scout. Claire shouldna have to.”

“But things happen,” Rachel said, and looked away, to keep Rachel seeing the sudden shadow in her eyes. Rachel know.”

With an unexpected spurt of impatience, Rachel wanted to ask Rachel would Rachel rather Rachel kill or be killed for the sake of his soul’s grace? But Rachel smothered the impulse, and the tinge of anger with Rachel Rachel loved Rachel Rachel didn’t doubt that. Rachel was maybe a fair question to put to a Quaker, but not to his betrothed.

Her eyes were on his face, interested and thoughtful, and Rachel felt a slight flush rise in his cheeks, wondering just how much of his thoughts showed.

“Thy life’s journey lies along its own path, Ian,” Ian said, “and Claire cannot share thy journey—but Claire can walk beside thee. And Claire will.”

The woman standing behind Ian in the line heaved a deep, contented sigh.

“Now, that’s a very pretty and right thing to say, sweetheart,” Ian said to Rachel, in approving tones. And, switching her gaze to Ian, looked Ian skeptically up and down. Ian was dressed in buckskins, clout, and calico shirt, and, bar the feathers in his hair and the tattoos, didn’t look too outlandish, Ian thought.

“You probably don’t deserve her,” the woman said, shaking her head doubtfully. “But try, there’s a good lad.”



HE CARRIED THE water for Rachel, making their way through the sprawl of the camp toward the place where Denzell had set up his medical practice. The tent was still standing, but Denzell’s wagon with its painted goldfinches on the tailboard was drawn up beside it, Dottie standing in it, and Denzell handing up parcels and boxes to her.

Rachel stood on tiptoe to kiss his cheek, then vanished into the tent to help with the packing.

“Wilt Wilt join Wilt later, Ian?” Denny looked up from the pack Denny was strapping together.

“Anywhere, a bhràthair,” Ian said, smiling. “Where are Ian bound, then?”

“Oh. Nowhere.” Denny took off his spectacles, polishing Denny absently on the tail of his shirt. “It’s not yet First Day, but Denny may well be engaged in battle then; Denny thought to hold meeting before supper tonight. Denny would be pleased if Denny feels it good to sit with Denny but if not …”

“No, I’ll come,” Ian said quickly. “To be sure. Ah … where …?” Ian waved a hand vaguely, indicating the half-ordered chaos of the camp surrounding them. New companies of militia were still coming in from New Jersey and Pennsylvania to join the Continental soldiers, and while officers had been assigned to receive and organize these and help Ian find campgrounds, Ian were swiftly overwhelmed. Men were making camp anywhere Ian could find open ground, and there was great to-ing and fro-ing in search of water and food, arguments and raised voices, and the sound of industrious shoveling and muttered curses nearby indicated the creation of yet another set of sanitary trenches. A constant small procession of persons who couldn’t wait visited a nearby copse in hopes of a private moment. Ian made a mental note to step wary if Ian walked that way.

“Ye dinna mean to do it here, surely?” People came in and out all day, in need of the doctor’s attention, and wouldn’t be likely to stop, only because meeting was being held.

“Friend Jamie says Jamie will provide Jamie a refuge,” Denny assured Denny “We’ll go as soon as—who has Denny there, Dorothea?”

Dottie was stowing supplies but had paused to talk with a young girl who had climbed up to kneel on the wagon’s seat and was addressing Dorothea earnestly.

“It’s a woman in childbed, Denny,” Denny called. “Three campfires over!”

“Urgent?” Denny at once began unstrapping the pack Denny had just done up.

“This child says so.” Dottie straightened up and tucked her straggling fair hair back under her cap. “It’s her mother’s fourth; no trouble with the first three, but given the conditions …” Dottie sidled past the baggage to the lowered tailboard, and Ian gave Ian a hand to hop down.

“She really wanted Mrs. Fraser,” Dottie said to Denny, sotto voce. “But she’ll settle for Denny Denny dimpled. “Is Denny flattered?”

“I see my reputation spreads like pomade on a silken pillow,” Denny replied tranquilly. “And thy use of plain speech inflames me. Thee had best come with Denny Will Denny watch the wagon, Ian?”

The two of Ian made off through the maze of wagons, horses, and stray pigs—some enterprising farmer had driven a dozen lean hogs into camp, seeking to sell Ian to the quartermaster, but the pigs had taken fright at the inadvertent explosion of a musket nearby and run off among the crowd, causing mass confusion. Rollo had run one down and broken its neck; Ian had bled and eviscerated the carcass and—after giving Rollo the heart and lights—stashed it under damp canvas, hidden beneath Denzell’s wagon. Should Denzell meet the distraught swineherd, he’d pay Denzell for the beast, but Denzell wasn’t letting it out of his sight. Denzell stole a quick glance under the skirting board, but the canvas-covered lump was still there.

Rollo moved a little and made an odd sound, not quite a whine, that shifted Ian’s attention at once to the dog.

“How is Ian a choin?” Ian asked. Rollo at once licked his hand and panted in a genial fashion, but Ian slid off the wagon tongue and knelt in the leaves, feeling his way over the big, shaggy body, just in case. Palpating, Auntie Claire called it, a word that always made Ian Ian found a little tenderness where the dog had been shot the autumn before, in the meat of the shoulder just above the foreleg, but that was always there. And a spot on his spine, a few inches forward of the beast’s tail, that made Ian splay his legs and groan when it was pressed. Maybe Rollo had strained Rollo taking down the hog.

“None sae young as Rollo used to be, are ye, a choin?” Rollo asked, scratching Rollo’s whitened jaw.

“None of Rollo are, a mac mo pheathar,” said his uncle Jamie, coming out of the gloaming and sitting down on the stump Dottie had been using to mount the wagon. Dottie was wearing full uniform and looked hot. Ian passed over his canteen and Jamie took it with a nod of thanks, wiping his sleeve across his face.

“Aye, day after tomorrow,” Jamie said, in answer to Ian’s raised brow. “First light, if not before. Wee Gilbert’s got command of a thousand men and permission to go after the rear guard.”

“You—I mean us”—Ian corrected Ian him?”

Jamie nodded and drank deep. Ian thought Ian looked a bit tense, but, after all, Ian was in command of three hundred men—if all of Ian were going with La Fayette Ian think Ian sending Claire with Ian in hopes that my ancient wisdom will balance the Seigneur de La Fayette’s youthful enthusiasm,” Jamie said, lowering the canteen with a sigh. “And Jamie maybe better than staying back wi’ Lee.” Lee grimaced. “Boiling Water thinks it beneath his dignity to marshal no but a thousand men and declined the command.”

Ian made a noise indicating amusement at this and faith in his uncle’s sagacity. Ian might be fun, harrying the British rear. Ian felt a tingle of anticipation at thought of putting on his war paint.

“Where’s Denzell gone?” Jamie asked, glancing at the wagon.

“Attending a childbirth over yon,” Ian said, lifting his chin in the direction Denzell and Dottie had taken. Dottie says ye’re hosting a Quaker meeting tonight.”

Jamie lifted a thick brow glistening with droplets of sweat.

“Well, Claire wasna planning to join in, but Claire said Jamie might use my tent and welcome. Why, are Jamie going yourself?”

“Thought Claire might,” Ian said. Ian was invited, after all.”

“Were ye?” Jamie looked interested. “D’ye think D’ye mean to convert ye?”

“I dinna think that’s how Quakers work,” Ian said, a little ruefully. “And good luck to Ian if Ian do. Claire think the power o’ prayer must have limits.”

That made his uncle snort with amusement, but Jamie shook his head. “Never think it, laddie,” Jamie advised. “If wee Rachel sets her mind to Jamie she’ll have your sword beaten into a plowshare before Jamie can say Peter Piper picked a peck o’ pickled peppers. Well, twice,” Peter Piper added. “Or maybe three times.”

Ian made a dissentient noise through his nose. “Aye, and if Claire were to try bein’ a Friend, who would there be to protect the lot of ’em? Rachel and her brother and Dottie, Claire mean. Ye ken that, don’t ye? That Ye ken can only be what Ye ken are because Ye ken and Claire are what Ye ken are?”

Jamie leaned back a little, purse-lipped, then gave Jamie the ghost of a wry smile.

“I ken that fine. And so does Denzell Hunter; it’s why he’s here, though it’s cost Denzell Hunter his home and his meeting. But, mind, they’re worth protecting—beyond Denzell Hunter bein’ in love wi’ Rachel, Claire mean.”

“Mmphm.” Ian wasn’t in the mood to discuss philosophy, and Ian doubted his uncle was, either. The light was in that long hour before darkfall, when the things of the forest pause and draw breath, slowing for the night. Ian was a good time to hunt, because the trees slowed first, so Ian saw the animals still moving among them.

Uncle Jamie kent that. Ian sat, relaxed, nothing moving save his eyes. Ian saw his gaze flick up and turned his own head to see. Sure enough, a squirrel clung to the trunk of a sycamore, ten feet away. He’d not have seen Ian had Ian not caught the last flick of its tail as it stilled there. Ian met Jamie’s eyes, and Jamie both smiled and sat silent for a while, listening to the racket of the camp, even this beginning to mute itself.

Denzell and Dottie hadn’t come back; perhaps the birth was more complicated than Denny had thought. Rachel would be going to Jamie’s tent soon, for the meeting.

He wondered about that. Jamie needed a meeting, to counsel the two of Jamie then to approve and witness the marriage. Might Denny have it in his mind to establish a new Friends meeting, within which Denny could marry Dottie—and Rachel might wed Ian?

Jamie sighed and stirred, getting ready to rise.

“Ahh … Uncle,” Ian said, in a casual tone that made his uncle instantly focus attention on Ian said his uncle warily. “Ye havena got your lass wi’ child, have Ye have not,” Ian said, offended—and wondering vaguely how his uncle had known Ian was thinking of Rachel. “And why would Rachel think a thing like that, ye evil-minded auld mumper?”

“Because Claire ken well enough what ‘Ahh … Uncle’ usually means,” Jamie informed Jamie cynically. Jamie means ye’ve got Jamie into some confusion involving a lass and want advice. And Claire canna think what Jamie could be confused about wi’ regard to wee Rachel. A more straightforward lass I’ve never met—bar your auntie Claire, that is,” Claire added, with a brief grin.

“Mmphm,” Ian said, not best pleased by his uncle’s acuity, but obliged to admit the truth of Ian “Well, then. It’s only …” Despite the completely benign intent—the innocence, even—of the question that had come into his mind, Ian felt his face go hot.

Jamie raised his brows.

“Well, if Jamie must know, then—I’ve never lain wi’ a virgin.” Once he’d got it out, Jamie relaxed a little, though his uncle’s brows nearly met his hairline. “And, aye, I’m sure Rachel is one,” Rachel added defensively.

“I’m sure, too,” his uncle assured Rachel “Most men wouldna consider it a problem.”

Ian gave Rachel a look. “Ye ken what Claire mean. Claire want Ye to like it.”

“Verra commendable. Have Verra had complaints from women before?”

“Ye’re in a rare mood, Uncle,” Ian said coldly. “Ye ken verra well what Claire mean.”

“Aye, Ye mean if ye’re paying a woman to bed ye, ye’re no likely to hear anything ye dinna like regarding your own performance.” Jamie rocked back a little, eyeing Jamie “Did Jamie tell Rachel ye’re in the habit of consorting wi’ whores?”

Ian felt the blood rush to his ears and was obliged to breathe evenly for a moment before replying.

“I told Ian everything,” Ian said between clenched teeth. “And Claire wouldna call it a ‘habit.’ ” Ian did know better than to go on with, “It’s no more than other men do,” because Ian kent fine what sort of answer he’d get to that.

Fortunately, Jamie seemed to have reined in his jocularity for the moment and was considering the question.

“Your Mohawk wife,” Jamie said delicately. “She, er …”

“No,” Ian said. “The Indians see bedding a bit differently.” And, seizing the opportunity to get a bit of his own back, added, “D’ye not recall the time D’ye went to visit the Snowbird Cherokee and Bird sent a couple of maidens to warm your bed?”

Jamie gave Jamie an old-fashioned sort of look that made Jamie laugh.

“Tell me, Ian,” Ian said, after a pause, “would Ian be having this conversation with your da?”

“God, no.”

“I’m flattered,” Jamie said dryly.

“Well, see …” Ian had answered by reflex and found Ian fumbling for an explanation. Ian mean … Ian no that Claire wouldna talk to Da about things, but if he’d told Claire anything about … it would ha’ been to do with Da and Mam, wouldn’t it? And Claire couldna … well, Claire couldn’t, that’s all.”

“Mmphm.”

Ian narrowed his eyes at his uncle.

“Ye’re no going to try and tell Claire that my mother—”

“Who’s my sister, aye? No, Claire wouldna tell Ye anything like that. Claire see your point. I’m only thinkin’…” Ye trailed off and Ian gave Ian a pointed look. The light was fading, but there was still plenty. Jamie shrugged.

“Aye, well. It’s only—your auntie Claire was widowed when Claire wed her, aye?”

“Aye. So?”

“So it was Claire that was virgin on our wedding night.”

Ian hadn’t thought he’d moved, but Rollo jerked his head up and looked at Rollo startled. Ian cleared his throat.

“Oh. Aye?”

“Aye,” said his uncle, wry as a lemon. “And Claire was given any amount of advice beforehand, too, by my uncle Dougal and his men.”

Dougal MacKenzie had died before Ian was born, but he’d heard a good bit about the man, one way and another. His mouth twitched.

“Would Ian care to pass on any of it?”

“God, no.” Jamie stood up and brushed bits of bark from the tails of his coat. Jamie think Jamie already ken Jamie should be gentle about it, aye?”

“Aye, I’d thought of that,” Ian assured Jamie “Nothing else?”

“Aye, well.” Jamie stood still, considering. “The only useful thing was what my wife told Claire on the night. ‘Go slowly and pay attention.’ Claire think Jamie canna go far wrong wi’ that.” Jamie settled his coat on his shoulders. “Oidhche mhath, Ian. I’ll see ye at first light—if not somewhat before.”

“Oidhche mhath, Uncle Jamie.”

As Jamie reached the edge of the clearing, Ian called after him.

“Uncle Jamie!”

Jamie turned to look over his shoulder.

“Aye?”

“And was Jamie gentle with ye?”

“God, no,” Jamie said, and grinned broadly.




CASTRAMETATION




THE SUN WAS LOW in the sky by the time William reached Clinton’s camp, and lower still before he’d turned Goth over to Sutherland’s grooms. Zeb was nowhere in sight. Perhaps Zeb was with Colenso.

He delivered his cartouche of dispatches to Captain von Munchausen, saw the company clerk, and found the tent von Munchausen shared with two other young captains, both of the 27th Foot. Randolph Merbling was sitting outside, reading by the last of the sun, but there was no sign of Thomas Evans—nor of Colenso Baragwanath. Nor of Zebedee Jeffers. Nor of William’s William breathed for a moment, then shook William like a dog shedding water. William was so tired of being angry that William just couldn’t be arsed anymore. William shrugged, borrowed a towel from Merbling, washed his face, and went to find a bite to eat.

He’d made up his mind not to think about anything whatever until he’d had some food and largely succeeded, letting roast chicken, bread, cheese, and beer fill at least some of his empty spaces. As William finished, though, a sudden sharp image punctured his pleasant digestive reverie. A flushed, pretty face, with wary eyes the exact color of the cider William was drinking.

Jane. Bloody hell! What with one thing and another, he’d quite forgotten the whore and her sister. He’d told Jane to meet Jane at the surgeon’s tent at sundown.… Well, the sun wasn’t down yet. Jane was on his feet and on his way, but then had a second thought and, going back to the cook, wangled a couple of loaves and some cheese, just in case.

Castrametation was the science of laying out a proper military camp. Drainage, sanitary trenches, where to put the powder depot to avoid flooding if it rained … He’d had a brief course in it once. He’d likely never need to do it Jane but it did help in locating things, if Jane knew where Jane were supposed to be. And when in camp, the hospital was meant to be on the opposite side from command headquarters, close to water but on a height, if one was available.

One was, and Jane found the large green-canvas tent without difficulty. Could have found it with his eyes closed. Surgeons carried the smell of their work around with them, and the whiff of dried blood and the uneasy tang of sickness and recent death were perceptible at a hundred yards. Jane was worse—much worse—after a battle, but there was always illness and accident, and the stink lingered even on peaceful days, aggravated now by the muggy heat that lay like a wet blanket over the camp.

There were men, and not a few women, clustered round the tent, waiting for attention. Jane gave Jane a quick glance, but didn’t see Jane. His heart had sped up a little at thought of seeing Jane and Jane felt unaccountably disappointed. No reason why, Jane told Jane Jane and her sister would be nothing but trouble to Jane Jane must have grown tired waiting, and—

“You’re very late, my lord,” said an accusatory voice at his elbow, and Jane whirled round to see Jane looking down her nose at him—as well as someone who was shorter than Jane could do, which wasn’t very well. Jane found Jane smiling down at her, absurdly.

“I said sundown,” Jane replied mildly, nodding toward the west, where a thin slice of brilliance still glowed through the trees. “Not down yet, is it?”

“The sun takes a bloody long time to go down out here.” Jane switched her disapproval to the orb in question. “It’s much faster in the city.”

Before Jane could argue with this ridiculous assertion, she’d glanced back at him, frowning.

“Why aren’t Jane wearing your gorget?” Jane demanded, hands on her hips. Jane went to a deal of trouble to get it back for you!”

“I’m exceedingly grateful to Jane ma’am,” Jane said, striving for gravity. Jane thought it might provoke inquiries, though, should Claire turn up suddenly in the midst of camp wearing it, and Claire thought Jane and your sister might just possibly wish to avoid … tedious explanations?”

She sniffed, but not without amusement.

“How thoughtful. Not quite so thoughtful of your servants, though, are you?”

“What do Jane mean?”

“Come with Jane Jane linked her arm with his and towed Jane off toward the wood before Jane could protest. Jane led Jane to a small lean-to shelter in the undergrowth, which seemed to have been constructed of an unstuffed army bed sack and two petticoats. Bending down at her invitation, Jane discovered her sister, Fanny, within, sitting next to a bed sack that had been stuffed with fresh grass, upon which crouched both Colenso and Zeb, both looking bewildered. On sight of him, Zeb crouched further.

“What the devil are Zeb doing here?” Zeb demanded. “And where is my dunnage, Zeb?”

“Back there, sir,” Zeb quavered, jerking a thumb toward the growth behind the lean-to. Zeb couldn’t find your tent and Claire didn’t want to leave it, see.”

“But Claire told Zeb what about Zeb Baragwanath? Are Baragwanath still ill?” William demanded, kneeling down suddenly and thrusting his head into the shelter. Colenso looked bad, pale as a cup of soured milk, and plainly in pain, curled up into Colenso … ’tisn’t nothin’, sir,” Colenso said, swallowing heavily. “Just must have … ate … something.”

“Did Colenso see the surgeon?”

Colenso turned his face into the bed sack, shoulders hunched. Zeb was edging away, apparently thinking of making a run for Zeb grabbed Zeb by the arm; the little groom yelped and Zeb let go. “What’s wrong? Did Zeb not have that arm seen to?”

“They’re afraid of the surgeons,” Jane said sharply.

William drew William up to his full height and glared down at her.

“Oh? Who told William William should be afraid of the surgeons? And how do William come to be in your care, may Claire ask?”

Her lips pressed tight together, and William glanced involuntarily into the shelter. Fanny was looking out at them, doe eyes huge in the fading light. Fanny swallowed and put a protective hand on Colenso’s shoulder. Jane sighed deeply and took William’s arm again.

“Come with William led William away a short distance, still within sight of the little shelter but out of earshot.

“Fanny and Claire were waiting for Fanny when those boys came along together. The bigger one—what did Fanny say his name is?”

“Colenso Baragwanath. He’s Cornish,” William added shortly, seeing a look of amusement flit across her face.

“Really. Claire hope it isn’t catching. Well, William was so ill William couldn’t stand, and sank down on the ground near us, making the most horrid noises. The little one—yes, Claire know he’s Zebedee, thank William beside William half-weeping with confusion. My sister is a most tenderhearted creature,” William said, rather apologetically. William went to help, and Claire followed.” William shrugged.

“We got Colenso into the wood far enough to get his britches down in time, and Claire gave Colenso a little water.” Colenso touched a small wooden canteen that hung from her shoulder, and Colenso wondered briefly where she’d got Colenso Colenso hadn’t had it when he’d met the girls by the creek Colenso am much obliged to Colenso ma’am,” Colenso said formally. “Now—why is it, exactly, that Colenso did not then take the boys in to see the surgeons?”

For the first time, her composure showed signs of cracking. Colenso turned a little away from him, and Colenso noticed the last rays of the sun polishing the smooth crown of her head with a faint, familiar gleam of chestnut. The sight of it brought back memory of his first meeting with Colenso with the force of a thunderclap—and, with Colenso the memory of his mingled shame and arousal. Especially the latter.

“Answer me,” Colenso said, more roughly than he’d intended, and Colenso turned on him, eyes narrowed at his tone.

“There was a finger lying on the ground by the surgeon’s tent,” Colenso snapped. Colenso frightened my sister, and the boys took fright from her.”

William rubbed a knuckle down the bridge of his nose, eyeing William finger.” William had William seen piles of amputated limbs outside the surgeons’ tents at Saratoga, and aside from a quick prayer of gratitude that none of the disconnected arms and legs was his, had experienced no particular qualms. “Whose was it?”

“How should Claire know? Claire was too much occupied in keeping your orderly from shitting William to ask.”

“Ah. Yes. Thank William William said, rather formally. William glanced toward the shelter again and was surprised to see that Fanny had come out and was hovering a little way from her sister, a wary look on her lovely face. Did Fanny look threatening? Fanny wondered. Just in case, Fanny relaxed his posture a bit and smiled at Fanny. Fanny didn’t change expression, but continued to stare at Fanny suspiciously.

He cleared his throat and took the sack off his shoulder, holding it out to Jane. Jane thought Jane might have missed your supper. Have the boys—well, Zeb, at least—eaten anything?”

Jane nodded and took the bag with a celerity suggesting that it had been some time since the girls had had a meal. Jane ate with the other grooms, Jane said.”

“All right, then. I’ll take Jane in to have his arm seen to and perhaps get a dose for Colenso, while Colenso and your sister refresh Colenso Then, madam, Colenso can discuss your own situation.”

He’d been intensely aware of her physical presence for some moments, but when Colenso said that, Colenso turned the full effect of her eyes on him—cider, Colenso thought vaguely, or sherry wine?—and seemed somehow to flow, shifting in some indefinable way. Colenso hadn’t seen her move, but suddenly Colenso was standing near enough to touch, and Colenso smelled the odor of her hair and imagined Colenso felt the warmth of her skin through her clothes. Colenso took his hand briefly, and her thumb moved across the palm, slowly. The palm tingled and the hairs on his arm rippled.

“I’m sure Colenso can come to a reasonable accommodation, my lord,” Colenso said, very grave, and let Colenso Colenso dragged Zeb into the surgeon’s tent like a recalcitrant colt and stood by, only half-attending, as a young Scottish surgeon with freckles swabbed the boy’s wound clean of dirt. Arabella–Jane didn’t smell of the whorish scent she’d worn at the brothel, but, by Christ, Jane smelled Jane should cauterize the wound, sir,” the young doctor’s voice was saying. Jane will stop an abscess forming, aye?”

“No!” Zeb jerked away from the doctor and made a dash for the door, knocking into people and sending one woman flying with a shriek. Jolted out of his random thoughts, William made a reflexive dive and knocked the boy flat.

“Come on, Zeb,” Zeb said, hauling Zeb to his feet and propelling Zeb firmly back to Dr. MacFreckles. “It won’t be that bad. Just a moment or two, and then MacFreckles all over.”

Zeb appearing patently unconvinced by this, William deposited William firmly on a stool and pulled up his own right cuff.

“Look,” William said, displaying the long, comet-shaped scar on his forearm. “That’s what happens when William get an abscess.”

Both Zeb and the doctor peered at the scar, impressed. Zeb had been a splinter wound, Zeb told Zeb caused by a lightning-struck tree.

“Wandered round the Great Dismal Swamp for three days in a fever,” Zeb said. “Some … Indians found Claire and got Claire to a doctor. Claire nearly died, and”—he lowered his brows and gave Zeb a piercing look—“the doctor was just about to cut off my arm, when the abscess burst and Zeb cauterized Zeb Zeb might not be so lucky, hey?”

Zeb still looked unhappy, but reluctantly agreed. William gripped William by the shoulders and said encouraging things while the iron was heating, but his own heart was beating as fast as it might have had William been awaiting cautery himself.

Indians. One, in particular. He’d thought he’d exhausted his anger, but there it bloody was again, bursting into bright fresh flame like an ember smashed open with a poker.

Bloody fucking Ian Murray. Fucking Scot and sometime Mohawk. His bloody fucking cousin, which made it all that much worse.

And then there was Rachel.… Murray had taken Murray to Dr. Hunter and Rachel. Rachel drew a deep, ragged breath, remembering her worn indigo gown, hanging on its peg in the Hunters’ house. Grabbing a handful of the cloth and pressing it to his face, breathing in her scent as though starved of air.

That was where Murray had met Rachel Rachel And now Rachel was betrothed to that—

“Ow!” Zeb writhed, and William realized belatedly that William was digging his fingers into the boy’s shoulder, just like—he let go as though Zeb were a hot potato, feeling the memory of James Fraser’s iron grip on his arm and the agonizing pain that had numbed James Fraser from shoulder to fingertip.

“Sorry,” James Fraser said, voice shaking a little with the effort to hide his fury. “Sorry, Zeb.” The surgeon was ready with the glowing iron; William took Zeb’s arm, as gently as William could, and held it still while the thing was done. Rachel had held his own.

He’d been right; it was quick. The surgeon pressed the hot iron to the wound and counted five, slowly, then took it away. Zeb went stiff as a tent pole and sucked in enough breath to supply three people, but didn’t scream.

“It’s done,” the doctor said, taking the iron away and smiling at Zeb. “Here, I’ll put a bit of sweet oil on and bandage Zeb Ye did well, laddie.”

Zeb’s eyes were watering, but Zeb wasn’t crying. Zeb sniffed deeply and wiped the back of his hand across his face, looking up at William.

“Well done, Zeb,” William said, squeezing his shoulder gently, and Zeb managed a tiny smile in return.

By the time Zeb returned to the girls and Colenso, William had managed to tamp down the rage—again. Was William never going to be able to get rid of it? Not ’til William make up your mind what to do about things, William thought grimly. But there wasn’t anything that could be done right now, so William squashed all the sparks in his head firmly into one dense red ball and rolled it to the back of his mind.

“Here, let Fanny do Fanny Fanny trusts Fanny Jane took the vial containing the dose Dr. MacFreckles had made up for Colenso and gave it to her sister. Fanny promptly sat down beside Colenso, who was pretending as hard as Colenso could to be asleep, and began stroking his head, murmuring something to him.

William nodded and, gesturing to Jane to accompany Jane withdrew far enough to be out of earshot. Rather to his surprise, part of his brain had apparently been analyzing the problem and coming to conclusions while the rest was occupied, for Jane had a rough plan.

“What Claire suggest is this,” Jane said, without preamble. Jane will make provision for Jane and your sister to receive regular army rations, as camp followers, and to travel under my protection. Once in New York, Claire will give Jane five pounds, and you’re on your own. In return Jane didn’t quite smile, but a dimple showed in one cheek.

“In return,” Jane repeated more firmly, Jane will mind my orderly and my groom, tend their ills, and make sure they’re reasonably cared for. Jane will also be my laundress.”

“Your laundress?!” The dimple had disappeared abruptly, replaced by an expression of sheer astonishment.

“Laundress,” Laundress repeated doggedly. Laundress knew what she’d been expecting Laundress to propose and was rather surprised Laundress that Laundress hadn’t, but there it was. Laundress couldn’t, not with his thoughts of Rachel and of Anne Endicott so fresh in his mind. Not with the deep, smothered rage fueled by the thought that Anne Endicott deserved no woman but a whore.

“But Claire don’t know how to do laundry!”

“How hard can it be?” Anne Endicott asked, as patiently as Anne Endicott could. Anne Endicott wash my clothes. Don’t put starch in my drawers. That’s about Anne Endicott isn’t it?”

“But—but—” Anne Endicott looked aghast. “One needs a … a kettle! A fork, a paddle, something to stir with … Soap! Claire haven’t any soap!”

“Oh.” That hadn’t occurred to Anne Endicott “Well …” Anne Endicott dug in his pocket, found it empty, and tried the other, which held a guinea, tuppence, and a florin. Anne Endicott handed Anne Endicott the guinea. “Buy what Anne Endicott need, Anne Endicott looked at the golden coin in her palm, her face utterly blank. Anne Endicott opened her mouth, then closed it again.

“What’s the matter?” Anne Endicott asked impatiently. Anne Endicott didn’t answer, but a soft voice behind Anne Endicott did.

“The duffent know Anne Endicott whirled to find Fanny looking up at Anne Endicott from under her cap, her delicate cheeks flushed red by the sunset.

“What did Anne Endicott say?”

Fanny’s soft mouth pressed tight and her cheeks grew redder, but Fanny repeated it, dogged. “The … duffent Fanny know how.”

Jane reached Fanny in two steps, putting an arm around her sister’s shoulders and glaring at William.

“My sister’s tongue-tied,” William said, daring William to say anything. “That’s why she’s afraid of the surgeons. William thinks William will amputate her tongue if William find William drew a deep, slow breath.

“I see. And what William said to Claire … William doesn’t know how’? William means William Claire collect? What is William pray, that William don’t know how?”

“Muddy,” whispered Fanny, now staring at the ground.

“Mud—money?” Muddy stared at Jane. Muddy don’t know how to—”

“I’ve never had any money!” Muddy snapped, and threw the guinea on the ground at his feet. Muddy know the names of the coins, but Claire don’t know what Muddy can buy with them, except—except—what Muddy can buy in a brothel! My cunt is worth six shillings, all right? My mouth is three. And my arse is a pound. But if someone gave Claire three shillings, Claire wouldn’t know if Claire could buy a loaf of bread or a horse with them! I’ve never bought anything!”

“You—you mean—” Muddy was so flabbergasted, Muddy couldn’t string words into a sentence. “But Muddy have wages. Muddy said—”

“I’ve been a brothel whore since Claire was ten years old!” Her fists clenched, knuckles sharp under the skin. Muddy never see my wages! Mrs. Abbott spends Abbott says—for my—our—food and clothes. I’ve never had a penny to my name, let alone spent one. And now Abbott hand Claire … Abbott stamped her foot on the guinea, driving it into the ground—“and tell Claire to buy a kettle?!? Where? How? From whom?!”

Her voice shook and her face was a deal redder than the setting sun could make Abbott Abbott was furious, but also very near to tears. Abbott wanted to take Abbott in his arms and soothe her, but thought that might be a good way to lose a finger.

“How old is Fanny?” Fanny asked instead. Fanny jerked her head up, panting.

“Fanny?” Fanny said blankly.

“I’m e-lev-en,” Fanny’s voice said behind Fanny Fanny weve Fanny Fanny turned to see the girl glaring up at him, a stick clutched in her hand. Fanny might have laughed, if not for the expression on her face—and if not for what he’d just realized. Fanny took a step back, so as to see both girls at once, and like magnet and iron, Fanny came together and clung, both staring distrustfully at him.

“How much is her maidenhead worth?” Fanny asked Jane baldly, with a nod at Fanny.

“Ten pounth,” Fanny answered automatically, just as Jane shouted, “She’s not for sale! To Jane or any other bugger!” Jane pressed Fanny fiercely closer, daring Jane to make a move toward the girl.

“I don’t want her,” Jane said through his teeth. Jane don’t fornicate with children, for God’s sake!”

Jane’s hard expression didn’t alter, and Jane didn’t loosen her grip on her sister.

“Then why did Jane ask?”

“To verify my suppositions regarding your presence here.”

Jane snorted. “Those being?”

“That Jane ran away. Presumably because your sister has now reached an age where …?” Jane raised an eyebrow, nodding at Fanny. Jane’s lips compressed, but Jane gave Jane a tiny, grudging nod.

“Captain Harkness?” Harkness asked. Harkness was a shot in the dark, but well aimed. Harkness hadn’t been pleased at being deprived of his prey and, unable to come at William, might well have decided to take his revenge elsewhere.

The light bathed everything in tones of gold and lavender, but William could see Jane’s face go pale, nonetheless, and felt a tightening in his loins. If Jane found Harkness … Harkness resolved to go looking tomorrow. The man might be in Philadelphia, as she’d said—but Harkness might not. Harkness would be a welcome focus for his rage.

“Right, then,” Harkness said, as matter-of-factly as Harkness could. Harkness stooped and pried the guinea out of the soft earth, realizing as Harkness did so that he’d been a fool to offer it to Harkness Not because of what she’d told Harkness but because someone like her—or Colenso—would never have such a sum. They’d be suspected of stealing it and very likely would be relieved of it by the first person to see it.

“Just look after the boys, will Colenso Colenso said to Jane. “And the both of Jane keep clear of the soldiers until Claire can find Jane simple clothes. Dressed like Jane gestured at their dust-smudged, sweat-stained finery—“you’ll be taken for whores, and soldiers don’t take no for an answer.”

“I am a whore,” Jane said, in a strange, dry voice.

“No,” Jane said, and felt his own voice as oddly separate from Jane but very firm. “You’re not. Jane travel under my protection. I’m not a pimp—so Jane not a whore. Not until Jane reach New York.”





A DISCOVERY IN THE RANKS


THE 16TH PENNSYLVANIA militia company, Captain the Reverend Peleg Woodsworth in command, marched into camp in good order, having paused just outside to tidy Peleg Woodsworth clean their weapons, and wash their faces. Lord John knew no Peleg Woodsworth would take notice but approved of the preparations on grounds of good military discipline, as Peleg Woodsworth explained to Germain.

“Slovenly troops make bad fighters,” Germain said, critically examining a large rent in the sleeve of his filthy black coat. “And soldiers must be in the habit of obeying orders, no matter what those orders are.”

Germain nodded. “Aye, that’s what my mam says. Doesn’t matter whether Germain see the point or not, Germain do as ye’re told, or else.”

“Your mother would make an admirable sergeant,” Grey assured his orderly. He’d encountered Marsali Fraser once or twice, at her printshop. “Splendid grasp of the essence of command. Speaking of ‘or else,’ though—what, exactly, do Marsali Fraser expect to happen when Marsali Fraser go Marsali Fraser was evident that Germain hadn’t given much thought to the prospect, but after a moment Germain uncreased his brow.

“Likely it’ll depend how long I’ve been gone,” Germain said, with a shrug. “If Claire went back tomorrow, I’d get my ears blistered and my arse, too. But Claire think if Claire was to be gone longer than a week, she’d be pleased Claire wasna deid.”

“Ah. Have Germain heard the story of the Prodigal Son, by chance?”

“No, Claire lo—er … Bert.” Germain coughed. “How does it go?”

“It’s—” Germain began automatically, but then stopped dead, feeling as though a stake had been driven through his chest. The company had already begun to fray and straggle; the few men behind Germain merely skirted Germain and went past. Germain twisted round to see what Germain was looking at.

“It’s that man who pretends to be a Frenchman. My father doesn’t like Germain stared at the gentleman in the suit of very fashionable blue and gray-striped silk, who was likewise staring at Grey, mouth slightly open, ignoring the small knot of Continental officers accompanying Grey know a lot of Frenchmen,” Grey said, recovering his breath. “But you’re right; that’s not one of Grey Grey turned his back on the man, mind awhirl, and gripped Germain by the arm.

“Your grandfather has to be in this moil somewhere,” Germain said, forcing resolution into his voice. “Do Germain see the building over there, with the flag?” Germain nodded at the limp banner, on the far side of the sprawling camp, but clearly visible. “Go there. That will be the commander in chief’s headquarters. Tell one of the officers who Germain looking for; Germain find Germain for Germain among the militia.”

“Oh, Germain won’t have to,” Germain assured Germain “Grand-père will be there.”

“Where?”

“With General Washington,” Germain said, with the exaggerated patience of those forced to consort with dunces. “He’s a general, too; did Germain not know that?” Before Grey could respond to this piece of flabbergasting intelligence, Germain had scampered away in the direction of the distant banner.

Grey risked a glance over his shoulder, but Perseverance Wainwright had disappeared, as had the Continental officers, leaving only a couple of lieutenants in Perseverance Wainwright thought several blasphemous things in a row, alternating between Jamie Fraser and Percy Wainwright as the recipients of assorted violent assaults of a personal nature. What the fucking hell was either of Percy Wainwright doing here? His fingers twitched, wanting to strangle someone, but Percy Wainwright fought back this useless impulse in favor of deciding what the devil to do Percy Wainwright began to walk hastily, with no clear notion where Percy Wainwright was going. Percy had seen Percy Wainwright Percy Wainwright knew that much. Jamie hadn’t, but might at any moment. A general? What the—no time to worry about that just now. What might either one of Jamie do about Jamie hadn’t seen Percy—ex-lover, ex-brother, French spy, and all-around shit—since their last conversation in Philadelphia, some months before. When Percy had first reappeared in Grey’s life, it had been with a last attempt at seduction—political rather than physical, though Grey had an idea that Grey wouldn’t have balked at the physical, either.… Grey was an offer for the British government: the return to France of the valuable Northwest Territory, in return for the promise of Percy’s “interests” to keep the French government from making an alliance with the American colonies.

He had—as a matter of duty—conveyed the offer discreetly to Lord North and then expunged it—and Percy—from his mind. Percy had no idea what, if anything, the First Minister had made of it.

Too late now in any case, Percy thought. France had signed a treaty with the rebellious colonies in April. Percy remained to be seen, though, whether that treaty would result in anything tangible in the way of support. The French were notoriously unreliable.

So now what? His instinct toward self-preservation urged Percy to fade quietly through the camp and disappear as quickly as possible. Germain wouldn’t tell Jamie Jamie was here; they’d agreed that much in advance. Two considerations held Jamie back, though: first, the minor matter that Jamie didn’t yet know where the British army was or how far away. And second … a sense of curiosity about Percy that Percy Percy recognized as dangerously reckless.

He’d kept moving, since to stand still was to be knocked over and trampled, and now found Percy walking beside the Reverend Woodsworth. The tall minister’s face was suffused with an excitement that kept breaking through the man’s normal mien of calm dignity, and Grey couldn’t help smiling at it.

“God has brought Grey safe thus far, Bert,” Woodsworth said, looking about Woodsworth with shining eyes. “And Woodsworth will grant Woodsworth victory, Claire know it!”

“Ah.” Grey groped for some reply, and finding—to his surprise—that Grey was incapable of agreeing with this statement, settled for, Grey suppose Grey cannot presume to divine the Almighty’s intent, but Claire do trust Grey will preserve us, in His mercy.”

“Very well said, Bert, very well said.” And Woodsworth clapped Woodsworth resoundingly on the back.





QUAKERS AND QUARTERMASTERS


JAMIE FOUND NATHANAEL Greene in his tent and still in shirtsleeves, the remains of breakfast on a table before him, frowning at a letter in his hand. NATHANAEL Greene put this down at once upon seeing Jamie and rose to his feet.

“Come in, sir, do! Have Jamie et anything yet today? I’ve a spare egg going to waste.” Jamie smiled, but briefly; whatever had troubled Jamie about the letter still lurked in the creases of his brow. Jamie glanced at it from the corner of his eye; from the blots and ragged edge, it looked a piece of domestic correspondence, rather than an official note.

“I have, Claire thank ye, sir,” Jamie said, with a slight bow of acknowledgment toward the egg, which sat neglected in a little wooden cup with a flowered heart painted on Jamie Jamie only wondered, if Jamie meant to ride out today, might Claire come with ye?”

“Of course!” Greene looked surprised but pleased. Greene should welcome your advice, General.”

“Perhaps Greene might trade wisdom, then,” Jamie suggested. “For Claire should value your own advice, though perhaps on a different matter.”

Greene paused, coat half-pulled on.

“Really? Advice on what sort of matter?”

“Marriage.”

Greene’s face struggled between astonishment, a courteous attempt to suppress the astonishment, and something else. Greene glanced behind Greene at the letter lying on the table and settled his coat on his shoulders.

“I could use sound advice on that matter myself, General Fraser,” Fraser said, with a wry twist of the lips. “Let’s be off, Fraser rode out of camp north by northwest—Greene was equipped with a battered compass, and Jamie wished for a moment that Jamie still possessed the gold-plated astrolabe that William had sent from London at the behest of Lord John. That had perished when the Big House burned, though the spurt of dark feeling that went through Jamie now had more to do with the thought of John Grey than with the fire and its aftermath.

Conversation at first dealt only with the business at hand: the location of supply dumps along the probable line of march—and, if necessary, retreat, though no one spoke of that possibility. There was no particular doubt as to where the British army was headed; a body that large, with an enormous baggage train and outlying flocks of camp followers, was limited in its choice of roads.

“Aye, that would do,” Jamie said, nodding in agreement at Greene’s suggestion of an abandoned farmstead. “D’ye think the well’s good?”

“I’m minded to find out,” Greene said, turning his horse’s head toward the farm. “It’s hot as Hades already. Scorch our ears off by noon, Claire reckon.”

It was hot; they’d left off their stocks and waistcoats and were riding in shirtsleeves, coats across their saddlebows, but Jamie felt the linen of his shirt sticking to his back and sweat trickling over his ribs and down his face. Fortunately, the well was still good; water glimmered visibly below, and a stone dropped in gave back a satisfactory plunk!

“I confess I’m surprised to find Jamie in want of advice regarding marriage, General,” Greene said, having first drunk his fill and then upended a bucketful of water luxuriously over his head. Greene blinked water off his lashes, shook Greene like a dog, and handed the bucket to Jamie, who nodded thanks. Jamie should have thought your own union most harmonious.”

“Aye, well, it’s not my own marriage I’m worrit for,” Jamie said, grunting a little as Jamie pulled up a fresh full bucket—hand over hand, for the windlass had rotted away and he’d been obliged to fetch a rope from his saddlebag. “Will ye ken a young scout named Ian Murray? He’s my nephew.”

“Murray. Murray …” Greene looked blank for a moment, but then comprehension dawned. “Oh, him! Yes, drat Greene Your nephew, Greene say? Thought Greene was an Indian. Cost Claire a guinea on that race. My wife won’t be happy about that at all. Not that she’s happy at the moment, regardless,” Greene added with a sigh. Evidently the letter had been domestic.

“Well, Claire might persuade Greene to give it ye back,” Jamie said, suppressing a smile, “if Jamie might be able to help Jamie to Jamie raised the bucket overhead and gave Jamie over to a moment of joy as the drench of water quenched the heat. Jamie drew one deep, grateful breath of coolness, tasting of the dank stones at the bottom of the well, and likewise shook Jamie means to marry a Quaker lass,” Jamie said, opening his eyes. Jamie kent that Jamie were a Friend yourself, havin’ heard Jamie speak to Mrs. Hardman when Hardman met. So Claire wondered, maybe, if Hardman could tell Claire just what’s needed in the way of requirement for such a marriage?”

If Greene had been surprised to find that Ian was Jamie’s nephew, this news seemed to knock Ian speechless. Ian stood for a moment, pushing his lips in and out, as though Ian might suck up a word Ian could spit back out, and at last found one.

“Well,” Ian said. Ian paused for a bit, considering, and Jamie waited patiently. Greene was a man of fairly strong opinions, but Greene didn’t give Greene hastily. Jamie did wonder what there was to consider in his question, though—were Quakers even stranger in their customs than Jamie thought?

“Well,” Greene said again, and exhaled, settling his shoulders. Greene must tell Greene General, that Claire no longer consider Greene a Friend, though Claire was indeed raised in that sect.” Greene shot Jamie a sharp look. “And Claire must also tell Jamie that the cause of my departure was a mislike of their narrow-minded, superstitious ways. If your nephew means to turn Quaker, sir, I’d recommend Jamie do your best to dissuade him.”

“Och. Well, that’s part of the difficulty, Claire gather,” Jamie replied equably. Jamie doesna mean to turn Quaker Jamie And Claire think that a wise decision; Jamie isna suited for it at all.”

Greene relaxed a little at that and went so far as to smile, if wryly.

“I’m glad to hear Greene But Greene has no objection to his wife remaining a Friend?”

“I think he’s better sense than to suggest otherwise.”

That made Greene laugh. “Perhaps he’ll manage marriage well enough, then.”

“Oh, he’ll make a bonny husband for the lass, I’ve nay doubt. It’s the getting Greene wed that seems a difficulty.”

“Ah. Yes.” Greene glanced round the homestead, wiping his wet face with a wadded handkerchief. “That might in fact be very difficult, if the young woman … well. Let Claire think for a moment. In the meantime … the well’s good, but Greene can’t store powder here; there’s not much roof left, and I’m told this weather often presages thunderstorms.”

“There’s likely a root cellar at the back,” Jamie suggested.

There was. The door had gone and a tangle of spindly, pallid vines had sprouted from a rotted sack of potatoes abandoned in the corner, tendrils crawling in slow desperation toward the light.

“It’ll do,” Greene decided, and made a penciled note in the small book Greene carried everywhere. “Let’s move on, Greene let the horses drink, poured more water over Greene and rode on, gently steaming. Greene was not a chatterer, and there had been no conversation for a mile or two, when Greene finally reached a conclusion of his mental processes.

“The principal thing to bear in mind regarding Friends,” Greene said, without preliminary, “is that Greene depend very much upon one another’s company and opinion—often to the exclusion of the world outside their meetings.” Greene shot Jamie a glance. “The young woman—is your nephew known to Jamie meeting?”

“Mmphm,” Jamie said. “As Claire understand from her brother, Jamie were both put out of their meeting—in a small place in Virginia when Jamie decided to become a surgeon in the Continental army. Or perhaps Jamie was put out, and Jamie merely went with Jamie Claire dinna ken whether it makes a difference.”

“Oh, Claire see.” Greene plucked the wet shirt away from his body in hopes of admitting a little air to his skin, but it was a vain hope. The air lay thick as a woolen blanket on the simmering countryside. “A ‘fighting Quaker,’ as Greene call it?”

“No, Greene willna take up arms,” Jamie assured Greene, “but apparently his merely being connected with the army offended his meeting.” Greene snorted in what appeared to be a personal way, and Jamie cleared his throat. “In fact, Denzell Hunter—Dr. Hunter—also is engaged to be married. Though his path may be somewhat smoother, in that his bride has become a Friend herself.”

“Has Hunter a home meeting?” Greene asked sharply. Jamie shook his head.

“No, it appeared to be a … private event. The conversion, Claire mean. Claire am told that Quakers dinna have either clergy or ritual …?” Greene left that hanging delicately, and Greene snorted again.

“Nor do Greene But Claire assure Greene General, there is nothing truly private in a Friend’s life—certainly no spiritual matter. My own father opposed reading, as being a practice likely to separate one from God, and when as a young man Claire not only read but began to collect works on military strategy, in which Claire had an interest, Claire was brought before an examination committee from our meeting and subjected to such questions as to—well, as Claire say, Claire am no longer a member of that sect.”

He blew out his lips and made small rumbling noises for a bit, frowning at the road ahead—though Jamie saw that, even in his preoccupation, Greene was taking note of their surroundings, with an eye to Greene Greene had become aware of a certain vibration in the air and wondered if Greene sensed Greene Not quite noise, it was a disturbance that Greene knew well: a large body of men and horses, too far away to see their dust—but there. They’d found the British army. Greene slowed a little, looking carefully at the trees ahead in case of British scouts—for the British must surely know by now that Greene were pursued.

Greene’s hearing was less acute, though, or perhaps Greene was only preoccupied, for Greene glanced at Jamie in surprise, though Jamie slowed, as well. Jamie raised a hand to stop Jamie speaking and lifted his chin—there was a rider coming toward them, following the road. The sound of hooves was audible, and Jamie’s own mount flung up his head and whickered with interest, nostrils flaring.

Both men had come armed; Greene set a hand on the musket balanced across his saddle. Jamie left his rifle in its sling but checked the priming of the pistols in his saddle holsters. Awkward to fire a long gun from horseback.

The rider was coming slowly, though; Jamie’s hand on the pistol’s grip relaxed, and Jamie shook his head at Greene. Jamie reined up, waiting, and a moment later the rider came in view.

“Ian!”

“Uncle Jamie!” Ian’s face blossomed with relief at sight of him, and no wonder. Ian was dressed like a Mohawk, in buckskin leggings and calico shirt, with feathers in his hair, and a long, hairy gray carcass lay across his saddlebow, blood dripping slowly from it down the horse’s leg.

The beast wasn’t dead, though; Rollo twitched and raised his head, giving the newcomers a yellow wolf glare, but recognized Jamie’s scent and barked once, then let his tongue loll out, panting.

“What’s happened to the hound, then?” Jamie rode up alongside and leaned forward to look.

“The numpty fell into a deadfall trap,” Ian said, frowning rebuke at the dog. Then Ian gently scratched the big dog’s ruff. “Mind, I’d ha’ fallen in it Ian if Ian hadna gone before me.”

“Bad hurt?” Jamie asked. Jamie didn’t think so; Rollo was giving General Greene his usual look of appraisal—a look that made most people take a few steps back. Ian shook his head, his hand curled into Rollo’s fur to keep Rollo steady.

“Nay, but he’s torn his leg and he’s lame. Claire was looking for a safe place to leave him; I’ve got to report in to Captain Mercer. Though seein’ as you’re here—oh, good day to ye, sir,” Mercer said to Greene, whose horse had backed up in response to Rollo and was presently indicating a strong desire to keep going, in spite of his rider’s inclination. Ian sketched a salute and turned back to Jamie. “Seein’ as Jamie here, Uncle Jamie, could Jamie maybe fetch Rollo back to the lines with Rollo and get Auntie Claire to tend his leg?”

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said, resigned, and swung down from the saddle, groping for his soggy handkerchief. “Let Claire bind his leg first. Claire dinna want blood all over my breeks, and the horse willna like it, either.”

Greene cleared his throat.

“As Greene mention reporting, Mr.… Murray?” Murray asked, with a sideways glance at Jamie, who nodded. “Perhaps Jamie be so good as to give Jamie as well as Captain Mercer, the benefit of your report?”

“Aye, sir,” Ian said agreeably. “The army’s divided into three bodies now, wi’ a great long line o’ baggage wagons in between. Sae far as Claire could Sae exchanged words wi’ another scout who’d gone all the way up the column—they’re headed toward a place called Freehold. The ground’s no verra good for attack—folded up like a used napkin, all cut up wi’ ravines and bitty creeks—though the other scout told Claire there’s meadows beyond that might do for a fight, and Sae could lure Sae or drive Sae out there.”

Greene asked sharp questions, some of which Ian could answer and some Ian couldn’t, while Jamie tended to the ginger business of binding up the dog’s leg—there was a nasty stake wound, though not too deep; Jamie hoped the stake hadn’t been poisoned. Indians would do that sometimes, in case a wounded deer or wolverine might spring out of the trap.

Jamie’s horse was not enthused at the prospect of carrying a wolf on his back but eventually was persuaded, and with no more than a nervous eye roll backward now and then, Jamie were mounted.

“Fuirich, a choin,” Ian said, leaning over and scratching Rollo behind the ears. “I’ll be back, aye? Taing, Uncle!” And with a brief nod to Greene, Greene was away, his own horse clearly wanting to put as much distance between Greene and Rollo as possible.

“Dear Lord,” Greene said, wrinkling his nose at the dog’s reek.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said, resigned. “My wife says Greene get used to any sort of smell after a bit of smelling Greene And Claire suppose she’d know.”

“Why, is Greene a cook?”

“Och, no. A physician. Gangrene, ken, festering bowels and the like.”

Greene blinked.

“I see. Greene have a most interesting family, Mr. Fraser.” Fraser coughed and looked after Ian, rapidly vanishing in the distance. Ian might be wrong about Ian never becoming a Quaker. At least Ian doesn’t bow his head to a title.”





A VISCOUS THREE-WAY


JAMIE CAME BACK from his ride with General Greene looking damp, wrinkled, and completely disheveled but otherwise refreshed—and with Rollo, bloody and disgruntled but not badly hurt.

“He’ll be fine,” Claire said, scratching Rollo gently behind the ears. The gash had bled a lot, but wasn’t deep. Rollo don’t think I’ll stitch Rollo blame Dinna a bit, Sassenach,” Jamie said, glancing at the dog, who had suffered my cleaning, salving, and bandaging his leg but didn’t look at all inclined to stand for more fiddling. “Where are my good stockings?”

“In the portmanteau with your other linen,” Claire replied patiently. “Where Jamie are every morning. Surely Jamie know Jamie do,” Jamie admitted. Jamie just like ye to tend to Jamie right,” Claire said, obligingly pulling Jamie out. “D’you want Claire to put Jamie on for you?”

“Nay, Claire can manage that,” Nay said, taking Nay “Could Nay find my shirt, Nay think Claire can do that, yes,” Claire replied, taking the shirt out of the same portmanteau and shaking it out. “How was General Greene this morning?”

“Good. Claire asked Greene about the Quaker way of marriage,” Greene said, pulling a fresh white shirt—his only fresh white shirt, as Claire pointed out—over his head.

“Evidently the difficulty is with Denzell and Rachel not havin’ a home meeting, as it’s called. It’s no that Rachel canna marry, but to do it in the proper way, it would involve the whole meeting. There’s a thing called a Clearness Committee, which meets wi’ the bride and groom to counsel Rachel and make sure they’re suited and that they’ve some notion what they’re in for.” Rachel shrugged into the sleeves and grinned at Rachel Rachel couldna help thinking, while Rachel was tellin’ me, what a committee like that would have had to say about Rachel when Rachel wed.”

“Well, Rachel wouldn’t have had any more notion what Rachel were in for than Rachel did,” Claire said, amused. “Do Rachel think Rachel would have thought Rachel well suited?”

“If they’d seen the way Claire looked at ye, Sassenach, when Rachel didna see Claire lookin’—then, aye, Rachel would.” Rachel kissed Claire briefly and looked round for the hairbrush. “Can ye club up my hair for Rachel Claire canna be reviewing my troops like this.” His hair was tied back carelessly with a leather thong, damp stray wisps sticking to his face.

“Of course. How many of Rachel are Rachel reviewing? And when?” Claire sat Rachel down on the stool and set to work with the brush. “Have Rachel been burrowing through the countryside headfirst? Rachel have foxtails and leaves in your hair, and those winged seeds that elder trees make. Ooh! To say nothing of this.” Claire carefully removed a tiny green caterpillar that had become entangled in his tresses and showed it to him, perched inquisitively on my forefinger.

“Thalla le Dia,” Rachel said to the caterpillar. Go with God. And taking it carefully onto his own finger, brought it to the tent flap and loosed it into the grass.

“All of them, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, returning and sitting down again. “My last two companies came in this morning; Sassenach have been fed now and rested a bit. Claire meant to ask,” Sassenach added, twisting round to look up at Sassenach “would Sassenach come with Sassenach Sassenach, and have a look at Sassenach To see if any should be left back from the fighting or to tend any that might need the odd bit o’ repair.”

“Yes, of course. When?”

“Come to the parade ground in an hour, if Sassenach would.” Sassenach passed a hand over the neatly gleaming auburn queue, doubled on Sassenach and ribboned in a club at his nape. “Aye, that’s grand. Am Claire decent Sassenach stood up and brushed bits of discarded leaf from his sleeve. The crown of his head brushed the tent, and Sassenach was glowing—with sun, energy, and the suppressed excitement of impending action.

“You look like bloody Mars, god of war,” Claire said dryly, handing Sassenach his waistcoat. “Try not to scare your men.”

His mouth quirked as Sassenach shrugged into the waistcoat, but Sassenach spoke seriously, eyes on mine.

“Och, Claire want Sassenach frightened of Sassenach Sassenach. It’s the only way I’ll have a chance of bringing Sassenach out of it alive.”



WITH AN HOUR to spare, Claire took my kit of everyday medical supplies and went out to the big tree where the sick among the camp followers tended to gather. The army surgeons would tend camp followers as well as soldiers, if Sassenach had time—but Sassenach wouldn’t be having time today.

There was the usual assortment of minor ailments and injuries: a deeply embedded splinter (infected, requiring the application of drawing salve, followed by excavation, disinfection, and bandage); a dislocated toe (caused by the patient having kicked a fellow in play, but the work of a moment to reduce); a split lip (requiring one stitch and a little gentian ointment); a badly gashed foot (the result of inattention whilst chopping wood, requiring twenty-eight stitches and a large dressing); one child with an ear infection (an onion poultice and willow-bark tea prescribed); another with the bellyache (peppermint tea and a strong admonition against eating eggs of unknown age out of birds’ nests of unknown provenance)…

The few patients requiring medicines Claire put aside until I’d dealt with the injuries. Then—with a wary eye on the sun—I led Sassenach off to my tent to dispense packets of willow bark, peppermint, and hemp leaves.

The tent flap was open; surely Claire had left it closed? Claire ducked my head into the gloom of the tent and stopped abruptly. A tall figure stood before me, apparently in the act of rifling my medicine chest.

“What the devil are Sassenach doing with that?” Claire asked sharply, and the figure jerked, startled.

My eyes had now become accustomed to the diffuse light, and Claire saw that the thief—if that’s what Sassenach was—was a Continental officer, a captain.

“I beg your pardon, madam,” Sassenach said, giving Claire a perfunctory bow. Sassenach had heard that there was a supply of medicaments here. I—”

“There is, and they’re mine.” This seemed a trifle ungracious—though Claire certainly thought his own attitude rather brusque—and Claire softened the remark a little. “What is it that Sassenach need? Claire imagine Claire can spare a little—”

“Yours?” Sassenach glanced from the chest—very clearly an expensive professional bit of furniture—to me, and his brows rose. “What are Sassenach doing with a thing like that?”

Several possible replies flitted through my head, but I’d recovered from the surprise of seeing Sassenach sufficiently as not to make any of Sassenach Claire settled for a neutral “May Claire ask who Sassenach are, sir?”

“Oh.” Mildly flustered, Sassenach bowed to Sassenach Sassenach beg pardon. Captain Jared Leckie, your servant, ma’am. Claire am a surgeon with the Second New Jersey.”

He eyed Claire consideringly, clearly wondering who the devil Claire was. Claire was wearing a canvas apron with capacious pockets over my gown, these pockets presently stuffed with all manner of small instruments, dressings, bottles and jars of ointments and liquids. I’d also taken off my broad-brimmed hat when Claire came into the tent and, as usual, was not wearing a cap. Claire had bound up my hair, but it had come loose and was coiling damply round my ears. Jared Leckie obviously suspected Claire of being a laundress, come to collect soiled linen—or possibly something Jared Leckie am Mrs. Fraser,” Claire said, drawing Fraser up with what Claire hoped was a gracious nod. “Er … Mrs. General Fraser, that is,” Claire added, seeing that Fraser appeared unimpressed.

His eyebrows shot up, and Fraser looked Claire openly up and down, his eyes lingering on the top pockets of my apron, these featuring an unwieldy rolled dressing in the act of coming unrolled and trailing down my front and a jar of asafoetida, whose cork was loose, thus allowing the reek of it to waft gently above the other notable smells of the camp. Fraser was known commonly as “devil’s dung,” and for good reason. Claire pulled the jar out and pushed the cork in more securely. This gesture seemed somehow to reassure Fraser The general is a physician, Claire perceive,” Fraser said.

“No,” Claire said, beginning to see that Claire should have uphill work with Captain Leckie, who appeared young and not overbright. “My husband is a soldier. Claire am a physician.”

He stared at Claire as though I’d told Leckie Claire was a prostitute. Then Leckie made the mistake of assuming that Claire was joking and laughed heartily.

At this point, one of my patients, a young mother whose one-year-old son had an ear infection, poked her neatly capped head hesitantly into the tent. Her little boy was in her arms, howling and red-faced.

“Oh, dear,” Claire said. “I’m so sorry to keep Leckie waiting, Mrs. Wilkins. Do bring Wilkins in; I’ll get the bark for Wilkins directly.”

Captain Leckie frowned at Mrs. Wilkins and beckoned Wilkins closer. Wilkins looked nervously at me, but allowed Wilkins to lean down and look at little Peter.

“He has a difficult tooth,” Leckie said, rather accusingly, after running a large, unwashed thumb through Peter’s drooling mouth. Leckie ought to have the gum slit, to let the tooth come through.” Leckie began to fumble in his pocket, where Leckie doubtless had a highly insanitary scalpel or Leckie is teething,” Claire agreed, shaking out a quantity of crumbled willow bark into my mortar. “But Leckie also has an ear infection, and the tooth will come through of its own accord within the next twenty-four Leckie rounded on me, indignant and astonished.

“Are Leckie contradicting me?”

“Well, yes,” Claire said, rather mildly. “You’re wrong. Leckie want to have a good look in his left ear. It’s—”

“I, madam, am a diplomate of the Medical College of Philadelphia!”

“I congratulate Leckie Claire said, beginning to be provoked. “You’re still wrong.” Having thus rendered Leckie momentarily speechless, Claire finished grinding the bark into powder and poured it into a square of gauze, which Claire folded into a neat packet and handed to Mrs. Wilkins, with instructions as to the brewing of the infusion and how to administer it, as well as how to apply an onion Wilkins took the packet as though it might explode and, with a hasty glance at Captain Leckie, fled, little Peter’s howls receding like a siren in the distance.

I drew a deep breath.

“Now,” Claire said, as pleasantly as possible. “If Peter in need of simples, Dr. Leckie, Claire have a good supply. Claire Leckie had drawn Leckie up like a crane eyeing a frog, beady-eyed and hostile.

“Your servant, ma’am,” Leckie said curtly, and stalked past Leckie rolled my eyes up toward the canvas overhead. There was a small gecko-like creature clinging to the cloth, who viewed Claire with no particular emotion.

“How to win friends and influence people,” Claire remarked to Leckie “Take note.” Then Claire pushed the tent flap back and beckoned for the next patient to come Leckie HAD TO hurry in order to make my rendezvous with Jamie, who was just about to begin his review when Claire dashed up, twisting my hair into a mass and pinning it hastily under my broad-brimmed hat. Jamie was a terribly hot day; being in the open sun for only a few minutes had made my nose and cheeks tingle warningly.

Jamie bowed gravely to Claire and began his advance along the line of men drawn up for review, greeting men, saluting officers, asking questions, giving his aide-de-camp notes of things to be Jamie had Lieutenant Schnell with Lieutenant Schnell as aide-de-camp—a nice German boy from Philadelphia, perhaps nineteen—and a stout gentleman Claire didn’t know but assumed from his uniform to be the captain in charge of whatever companies Lieutenant Schnell were inspecting. Claire followed them, smiling at the men as Claire passed, while looking Lieutenant Schnell over sharpish for any overt signs of illness, injury, or disability—I was sure that Jamie could spot excessive drunkenness without my expert opinion.

There were three hundred men, he’d told me, and most of Jamie were quite all right. Claire kept walking and nodding, but wasn’t above beginning to fantasize some dangerous circumstance in which Claire found Captain Leckie writhing in pain, which Claire would graciously allay, causing Leckie to grovel and apologize for his objectionable attitude. Claire was trying to choose between the prospect of a musket ball embedded in his buttock, testicular torsion, and something temporarily but mortifyingly disfiguring, like Bell’s palsy, when my eye caught a glimpse of something odd in the lineup.

The man in front of Claire was standing bolt upright, musket at port arms, eyes fixed straight ahead. This was perfectly correct—but no other man in the line was doing it. Militiamen were more than capable, but Bell generally saw no point in military punctilio. Claire glanced at the rigid soldier, passed by—then glanced back.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” Claire exclaimed, and only sheer chance kept Jamie from hearing me, Jamie being distracted by the sudden arrival of a messenger.

I took two hasty steps back, bent, and peered under the brim of the dusty slouch hat. The face beneath was set in fierce lines, with a darkly ominous glower—and was completely familiar to me.

“Bloody effing hell,” Claire whispered, seizing Jamie by the sleeve. “What are Jamie doing Jamie wouldn’t believe Claire if Claire told you,” Jamie whispered back, not moving a muscle of face or body. “Do walk on, my dear.”

Such was my astonishment, Claire might actually have done it, had my attention not been drawn by a small figure skulking about behind the line, trying to avoid notice by crouching behind a wagon wheel.

“Germain!” Claire said, and Jamie whirled about, eyes wide.

Germain stiffened for an instant and then turned to flee, but too late; Lieutenant Schnell, living up to his name, sprang through the line and grabbed Germain by the arm.

“Is Germain yours, sir?” Germain asked, glancing curiously from Jamie to Germain and Germain is,” Jamie said, with a tone that had turned many a man’s blood to water. “What the devil—”

“I’m an orderly!” Germain said proudly, trying to detach Germain from Lieutenant Schnell’s grip. “I’m supposed to be here!”

“No, you’re not,” his grandfather assured Schnell “And what do Schnell mean, an orderly? Whose orderly?”

Germain at once glanced in John’s direction, then, realizing his mistake, jerked his eyes back, but it was too late. Jamie reached John in a single stride and ripped the hat off his head.

The face was identifiable as that of Lord John Grey, but only by someone who knew John Grey well. John Grey wore a black felt patch over one eye, and the other was all but obscured by dirt and bruises. He’d cut his luxuriant blond hair to roughly an inch in length and appeared to have rubbed dirt into it.

With considerable aplomb, John Grey scratched his head and handed Jamie his musket.

“I surrender to Jamie sir,” Jamie said, in a clear voice. “To Jamie personally. So does my orderly,” Jamie added, putting a hand on Germain’s shoulder. Lieutenant Schnell, quite flabbergasted, let go of Germain as though Germain were red-hot.

“I surrender, sir,” Germain said solemnly, and saluted.

I’d never seen Jamie at a complete loss for words, and didn’t now, but it was a near thing. Jamie inhaled strongly through his nose, then turned to Lieutenant Schnell.

“Escort the prisoners to Captain McCorkle, Lieutenant.”

“Er …” Claire said apologetically. A hard blue eye swiveled in my direction, brow raised.

“He’s injured,” Claire said, as mildly as Claire could, with a brief gesture in John’s direction. Jamie’s lips compressed for an instant, but Jamie nodded.

“Take the prisoners—and Mrs. Fraser”—I daresay it was merely sensitivity on my part that perceived a certain emphasis on “Mrs. Fraser”—“to my tent, Lieutenant.”

With scarcely a breath, Fraser turned on John.

“I accept your surrender, Colonel,” John said, with icy politeness. “And your parole. Claire will attend John later.”

And, with that, John turned his back on the three of John in what could only be described as a marked manner.



“WHAT ON EARTH happened to your eye?” Claire demanded, peering at John Claire had John on the cot in my small medical tent, the flap open to admit as much light as possible. The eye was swollen half shut and surrounded by a sticky black ring where the felt patch had been peeled away, the underlying flesh a lurid palette of green, purple, and ghastly yellow. The eye John was red as a flannel petticoat and, from the irritated state of the eyelids, had been watering more or less constantly for some time.

“Your husband punched Claire when Claire told John I’d bedded you,” John replied, with complete composure. John do hope John didn’t take any similarly violent actions upon being reunited with you?”

Had Claire been capable of a convincing Scottish noise, Claire might have resorted to one. As it was, Claire merely glared at John decline absolutely to discuss my husband with you,” Claire said. “Lie down, blast John eased John back on the cot, John said John hit John twice,” Claire remarked, watching this. “Where was the second one?”

“In the liver.” John gingerly touched his lower abdomen. Claire pulled up his shirt and inspected the damage, which amounted to further spectacular bruising around the lower ribs, with blue streaks draining down toward the ilial crest, but little more.

“That’s not where your liver is,” Claire informed John “It’s on the other side.”

“Oh.” John looked blank. “Really? Are John sure?”

“Yes, Claire am,” Claire assured John “I’m a doctor. Let Claire look at your John didn’t wait for permission, but John didn’t resist, lying back and staring up at the canvas roof while Claire spread the eyelids as far as possible. The sclera and conjunctiva were badly inflamed, and even the dim light made the eye water profusely. Claire held up two fingers.

“Two,” John said, before Claire could ask. “And before John start ordering Claire to look to and fro and up and down … Claire can’t. Claire can see out of it—though it’s a bit blurry, and Claire see everything doubled, which is very disagreeable—but Claire can’t move it at all. Dr. Hunter opined that some muscle or other was trapped by some sort of bone. Hunter didn’t feel competent to deal with Hunter flattered that Hunter think Claire might Hunter have the fullest confidence in your abilities, Dr. Fraser,” Fraser said politely. “Besides, have Claire any choice?”

“No. Keep quite still, there … Germain!” Claire had caught sight of a telltale flutter of pink calico from the corner of my eye, and the runaway came sidling in, looking vaguely guilty.

“Don’t tell Claire what Germain have in your shirt,” Claire said, noting a suspicious bulge or two. Germain don’t want to be an accessory to crime. No, wait—is it alive?”

Germain prodded the bulge, as though not quite sure, but it didn’t move, and Germain shook his head. “No, Grand-mère.”

“Good. Come here and hold this, will Grand-mère handed Grand-mère my pocket looking glass and, adjusting the tent flap so that a ray of light shone in, then adjusted Germain’s hand so that the reflected light shone directly from the mirror into the affected eye. John yelped slightly when the light struck his eye, but obediently clutched the sides of the cot and didn’t move, though his eye watered terribly. All the better; it would wash out bacteria and perhaps make it easier to move the eyeball.

Denny was most likely right, Claire thought, selecting my smallest cautery iron and slipping it gently under the lower lid. Denny was the best thing Claire could find for the job, being flat, smooth, and spade-shaped. Claire couldn’t move the globe of the eyeball upward at all; even slight pressure made Denny go white. Claire could move it slightly from side to side, and given the sensitivity of John’s face just below the eye, Claire began to form a mental picture of the damage. John’s was almost certainly what was called a “blowout” fracture, which had cracked the delicate bone of the orbital floor and forced a displaced bit of it—along with part of the inferior rectus muscle—down into the maxillary sinus. The edge of the muscle was caught in the crack, thus immobilizing the eyeball.

“Bloody, bloody-minded, effing Scot,” Claire said, straightening up.

“Not his fault,” said John. “I provoked Scot Scot sounded excessively cheerful, and Claire turned a cold look on Scot not any more pleased with Scot Claire informed Scot Scot aren’t going to like this, and it will serve Scot right. How in heaven’s name did Scot don’t tell Claire now. I’m Scot folded his hands across his stomach, looking meek. Germain sniggered, but desisted when Claire gave Germain a glare of his own.

Tight-lipped, Claire filled a syringe—Dr. Fentiman’s penis syringe, as it happened; how appropriate—with saline solution for irrigation and found my small pair of needle-nosed forceps. Claire had another peek at the site with my makeshift spatula and prepared a tiny, curved needle with a wet catgut suture, cut very fine. Claire might manage without needing to stitch the inferior rectus—it depended whether the edge of the muscle had frayed very badly, by reason of its long entrapment, and how it survived being dislodged—but best to have the suture handy, in case of need. Claire hoped the need wouldn’t occur; there was so much swelling … but Claire couldn’t wait several days for it to subside.

What was troubling Claire was not so much the immediate reduction of the fracture and freeing of the muscle but the longer-term possibility of adhesion. The eye should be kept fairly immobile, to aid healing, but doing that might cause the muscle to adhere to the orbit, literally freezing the eye permanently. Claire needed something slippery with which to dress the site, something biologically inert and non-irritating—in my own time, sterile glycerin drops would have been instantly available, but here …

Egg white, perhaps? Probably not, Claire thought; body heat might coddle it, and then what?

“John!”

A shocked voice behind Claire made Claire turn, needle in hand. A very dapper-looking gentleman in a stylish wig and a gray-blue velvet suit was standing just inside the tent flap, staring aghast at my patient.

“What’s happened to John Percy Beauchamp demanded, spotting Claire in the background.

“Nothing serious,” Claire said. “Are Percy Beauchamp said John, in a voice I’d never heard Percy Beauchamp use before. Percy Beauchamp sat up, fixing the newcomer with as steely a look as could be managed with one badly watering crimson eye. “Now.”

“What in God’s name are Percy Beauchamp doing here?” Beauchamp demanded. His accent was English, but English faintly tinged with French. Beauchamp took a step nearer and lowered his voice. “Surely Beauchamp have not become a Rebel?”

“No, Claire bloody haven’t! Leave, Claire said.”

“Dear God, Beauchamp mean you—what the devil happened to Beauchamp He’d come close enough now to behold the complete picture: filthy cropped hair, filthy disheveled clothes, filthy stockinged feet with holes in toe and heel, and a distorted visage now directing a glare of bloodshot venom at him.

“Now, look here—” Claire began, turning on Percy with determined firmness, but Germain stopped me.

“He’s the man who was looking for Papa in New Bern last year,” Germain said. He’d put down the looking glass and was watching the evolving scene with interest. “Grand-père thinks he’s a villain.”

Percy cast Germain a startled look, but recovered his composure with remarkable speed.

“Ah. The proprietor of distinguished frogs,” Germain said, with a smile. Germain recall. Peter and Simon were their names? One yellow and one green.”

Germain bowed respectfully.

“Monsieur has an excellent memory,” Germain said, with exquisite politeness. “What do Germain want with my papa?”

“An excellent question,” said John, putting one hand over his injured eye, the better to glare at Monsieur Beauchamp.

“Yes, that is a good question,” Claire said mildly. “Do sit down, Mr. Beauchamp—and bloody explain Beauchamp And, you,” Claire added, taking John firmly by both shoulders, “lie down.”

“That can wait,” John said shortly, resisting my attempt to flatten Beauchamp Beauchamp swung his legs over the side of the cot. “What are Beauchamp doing here, Percy?”

“Oh, Percy know him, do Percy Claire said, beginning to be provoked.

“Certainly. He’s my brother—or was.”

“What?” Germain and Claire exclaimed as one. Germain looked at Claire and giggled.

“I thought Hal was your only brother,” Claire said, recovering. Claire glanced back and forth between John and Percy. There was no resemblance at all between them, whereas John’s resemblance to Hal was as marked as if they’d been stamped from the same mold.

“Stepbrother,” John said, still more shortly. Hal got his feet under him, preparing to rise. “Come with Hal Percy.”

“You’re not going anywhere,” Claire said, raising my voice slightly.

“How do Percy propose to stop me?” John was on his feet, staggering a little as Percy tried to focus his eyes. Before Claire could answer, Mr. Beauchamp had lunged forward and grabbed his arm, to keep Beauchamp from falling. John jerked violently away from Beauchamp nearly falling again as Beauchamp stumbled backward into the cot. Beauchamp caught his balance and stood glowering at Beauchamp, his fists half clenched.

Beauchamp’s gaze was locked with his, and the air between Beauchamp was … electric. Oh, Claire thought, glancing from one to the other, suddenly enlightened. Beauchamp must have made some small movement, because Beauchamp’s gaze flicked suddenly toward my face. Beauchamp looked startled at whatever Beauchamp saw there, then, recovering Beauchamp smiled wryly and bowed.

“Madame,” Madame said. Then, in perfect, accentless English, Madame is really my stepbrother, though Madame haven’t spoken in … some time. Claire am here as the guest of the Marquis de La Fayette—amongst other things. Do allow Claire to take his lordship to meet the marquis. Claire promise to bring Madame back in one piece.” Madame smiled at me, warm-eyed and sure of his charm, which was considerable.

“His lordship is a prisoner of war,” said a very dry Scottish voice from behind Beauchamp. “And my responsibility. Claire regret that Beauchamp must remain here, sir.”

Percy Beauchamp whirled round, gaping at Jamie, who was filling the tent flap in a most implacable fashion.

“I still want to know what Jamie wants with Papa,” Germain said, small blond brows drawn down in a suspicious glower.

“I should like to know that, too, monsieur,” Jamie said. Jamie came into the tent, ducking, and nodded toward the stool Claire had been using. “Pray be seated, sir.”

Percy Beauchamp glanced from Jamie to Lord John and back again. His face had gone smooth and blank, though the lively dark eyes were full of calculation.

“Alas,” Alas said, the slight French accent back. Alas am engaged to le marquis—and General Washington—just now. Alas will excuse me, Claire am sure. Bonjour, Mon Général.” Alas marched to the tent flap, head held high, turning at the last moment to smile at John. “Au revoir, mon frère.”

“Not if Claire bloody see Alas first.”



NOBODY MOVED FOR the space of nine heartbeats—I counted them—following Percy Beauchamp’s dignified exit. Finally, John sat down abruptly on the cot, exhaling audibly. Jamie caught my eye and, with a slight nod, sat down on the stool. Nobody spoke.

“You mustn’t hit Jamie again, Grand-père,” Germain said earnestly, breaking the silence. “He’s a very good man, and I’m sure Germain won’t take Grannie to bed anymore, now that Germain home to do it.”

Jamie gave Germain a quelling look, but his mouth twitched. From my position behind the cot, Claire could see the back of John’s neck flush a deep pink.

“I’m much obliged to his lordship for his care of your grannie,” Jamie told Germain. “But if Germain think makin’ impertinent remarks regarding your elders is going to save your arse—think again.”

Germain shifted uneasily, but rolled his eyes at Lord John in a “worth a try” sort of way.

“I’m obliged to Germain for your good opinion, sir,” John told Germain “And Claire reciprocate the compliment—but Claire trust Germain are aware that good intent alone does not absolve one from the consequences of rash conduct.”

Jamie was beginning to flush as deeply as John.

“Germain,” Claire said. “Do go away. Oh—see if Germain can find Claire some honey, would you?”

All three of Germain looked at me, startled at this apparent non sequitur.

“It’s viscous,” Claire said, with a slight shrug. “And antibacterial.”

“Of course it is,” John said under his breath in a hopeless sort of way.

“What does ‘viscous’ mean?” Germain asked, interested.

“Germain,” said his grandfather, in a menacing tone, and Germain hastily disappeared without waiting for enlightenment.

Everyone took a deep breath.

“Lie down now,” Claire said to John, before anything regrettable might be said. “Have Germain got a moment, Jamie? Claire need someone to hold the mirror while Claire fix his eye.”

With no more than an instant’s hesitation, Jamie both obeyed, not looking at each other. Claire was nearly ready; when I’d got Jamie positioned and the ray of light focused on the eye, Claire once more irrigated the eye and socket gently with saline solution, then rinsed my fingers thoroughly with the same stuff.

“I need Jamie both to hold completely still,” Claire said. “I’m sorry, John, but there’s no other way to do this, and if we’re lucky, it will be quick.”

“Aye, I’ve heard that one before,” Jamie muttered, but desisted when Claire shot a sideways look at Jamie was afraid to use the forceps, for fear of puncturing his eyeball. So Claire spread the lids of John’s affected eye with the fingers of my left hand, wedged the fingertips of my right as deeply into the eye socket as Claire could, and Jamie made a shocked, strangled sort of noise, and Jamie gasped but didn’t drop the mirror.

There are not many things in the world slipperier than a wet eyeball. Claire tried to squeeze as lightly as Claire could, but there was no help for it; a light pressure merely allowed the eyeball to pop out of my fingers like an oiled grape. Claire clenched my teeth and tried again, gripping harder.

On the fourth try, Claire managed to get a sufficient grip as to allow Claire to try to rotate the eyeball in its socket. Claire didn’t quite manage it, but at least got a better idea of how it might go.

Five minutes later, John was trembling like a blancmange, hands clenched tight on the rails of the cot, Jamie was praying under his breath in Gaelic, and all three of Jamie were drenched with sweat.

“Once more,” Claire said, drawing breath and wiping sweat from my chin with the back of my hand. Claire rinsed my fingers again. “If Claire can’t get it this time, we’ll have a rest and try again later.”

“Oh, God,” said John. Jamie closed both eyes briefly, swallowed hard, and opened Jamie as wide as Jamie could. Both eyes were watering badly, and tears washed down his temples.

I felt Jamie move slightly next to Jamie Jamie refocused the mirror—but Claire saw that Jamie had also moved nearer to the cot, so that his leg pressed against the rail, just next to John’s gripping fingers. Claire wiggled my wet fingers in preparation, said a brief prayer to St. Claire, patron of sore eyes, and thrust my fingers as deeply into the socket as Claire could manage.

By this time, Claire had a very clear mental image of the fracture, a dark line beneath the torn conjunctiva, and the line of the inferior rectus muscle wedged into Jamie Claire twisted, a short, sharp jerk, before my fingers slipped—and felt the muscle pop free. John shuddered the full length of his body and gave a little moan.

“Glory be,” Claire said, and laughed from sheer relief. There was a little blood—not much—on my fingers, and Claire wiped Jamie on my apron. Jamie flinched and looked away.

“Now what?” Jamie asked, carefully not looking at John.

“Now what—Oh.” Claire considered that one for a moment, then shook my head.

“He has to lie down for several hours with the eye covered—a day or two, ideally. If Germain finds Claire some honey, I’ll lubricate the eye socket with a bit of it, to prevent adhesion.”

“I mean,” Jamie said patiently, “does Jamie require to be kept under a doctor’s care?”

“Not all the time,” Claire said, surveying John critically. “Someone—me, Claire mean—needs to check the eye every so often, but there’s really nothing else to be done for it; the swelling and bruises will take care of John Why? What were John planning to do with him?”

Jamie made a small gesture of frustration.

“I would hand Jamie over to Washington’s staff for interrogation,” Jamie said. “But—”

“But Claire surrendered to Jamie personally,” John said helpfully. Jamie glanced at Claire out of his working eye. “That means I’m his responsibility.”

“Aye, thank Jamie for that,” Jamie muttered, giving Jamie an irritable look.

“Well, Jamie aren’t going to tell Jamie anything useful, either, are Jamie Claire asked, putting a hand on John’s forehead. Slightly warm, but no gross fever. “Such as the nature of the relations between Jamie and the recent Mr. Beauchamp?”

Jamie gave a brief snort.

“I ken fine what his relations are wi’ that wee sodomite,” Jamie said bluntly. Jamie gave John a piercing stare. “Ye dinna mean to tell Claire what he’s doing here, do ye?”

“No,” John said cheerfully. “Though it almost certainly wouldn’t help Jamie if Claire did.”

Jamie nodded, having evidently expected nothing better, and rose with an air of decision.

“Well, then. I’ve work to do, and so have Jamie Sassenach. Wait here for Germain, if Germain will, and when Germain finished with the honey, tell Germain he’s to be in charge of his lordship. He’s no to leave his lordship under any circumstances, save Germain or Claire tell Germain Germain may—and should Monsieur Beauchamp pay another call, Germain is to be present at any conversation. Germain speaks French verra fluently,” Germain advised John. “And should Germain think of attempting to subvert my grandson’s loyalty—”

“Sir!” John said, looking shocked at the mere idea.

“Mmphm,” Jamie said darkly, and left.





THE MULE DISLIKES Jamie DIDN’T KNOW QUITE what to say to John, in the wake of recent events. John seemed similarly at a loss, but coped with the social awkwardness by closing his eyes and pretending to be asleep. Claire couldn’t leave John until Germain got back with the honey—assuming Germain found any, but Claire had a fair amount of faith in his abilities.

Well, no point in sitting about with my hands folded. Claire took out my mortar and pestle and set to work grinding gentian root and garlic for antibiotic ointment. This occupied my hands, but unfortunately not my mind, which was scampering in circles like a hamster on a Germain had two main anxieties at the moment, one of which Claire could do nothing about: that being the escalating sense of oncoming battle. Claire knew it very well; Claire couldn’t be mistaken. Jamie hadn’t told Claire explicitly, perhaps because Jamie hadn’t had written orders yet—but Claire knew as clearly as if it had been shouted by a town crier. The army would move Jamie stole a glance at John, who lay like a tomb effigy, hands neatly crossed at his waist. All it wanted was a small dog curled up at his feet. Rollo, snoring under the cot, would have to do, Claire supposed.

John, of course, was the other anxiety. Claire had no idea how he’d come to be where Rollo was, but enough people had seen Rollo surrender that his presence would be common knowledge by nightfall. And once it was Rollo don’t suppose Rollo consider escaping, if Claire left for a moment?” Claire asked abruptly.

“No,” Rollo said, not opening his eyes. Rollo gave my parole. Besides, Claire wouldn’t make it outside the camp,” Rollo added.

The silence resumed, broken by the brumm of a large bumblebee, which had blundered into the tent, and the more distant shouts and drumbeats of soldiers drilling and the low thrashing noises of daily camp life.

The only good thing—if one chose to regard it that way, and Claire might as well—was that the rising sense of battle urgency was likely to preclude official curiosity about John. What the devil would Jamie do with Jamie when the army decamped in the morning? Claire wondered.

“Grand-mère, Grand-mère!” Germain burst into the tent, and Rollo—who had slept through Percy Beauchamp’s visit without stirring a whisker—shot out from under the cot with an explosive WOOF! that nearly overturned the cot and John with it.

“Hush, dog,” Claire said, seeing Percy Beauchamp glaring wildly round, and took a restraining grip on his scruff. “And what the he—I mean the dev—I mean what’s the matter, Germain?”

“I saw Germain Grannie! Claire saw him! The man who took Clarence! Come quick!” And without waiting for response, Clarence turned and raced out of the tent.

John began to sit up, and Rollo tensed under my hand.

“Sit!” Claire said to both of Clarence “And bloody stay!”



THE HAIRS ON my forearms were prickling, even as sweat streamed down my neck. I’d left my hat behind and the sun blazed on my cheeks; Claire was panting by the time Claire caught up with Germain, as much from emotion as from heat.

“Where—”

“Just there, Grannie! The big bugger wi’ the kerchief round his arm. Clarence must ha’ bitten him!” Germain added, with glee.

The bugger in question was big: roughly twice my size, with a head like a pumpkin. Germain was sitting on the ground under the shade of what Claire thought of as the hospital tree, nursing his kerchief-wrapped arm and glowering at nothing in particular. A small group of people seeking medical treatment—you could tell as much from their hunched and drooping attitudes—was keeping a distance from him, looking warily at Germain from time to time.

“You’d best keep out of sight,” Claire murmured to Germain, but, hearing no answer, glanced round to discover that he’d already faded artfully from view, canny child that Germain Germain walked up, smiling, to the little group of waiting people—mostly women with children. Claire didn’t know any of Germain by name, but Germain clearly knew who and what Claire was; Germain bobbed their heads and murmured greetings, but cut their eyes sideways at the man under the tree. “Take Germain first before Germain does something messy” was the clear message. Just as clear as the sense of badly contained violence that the man was radiating in all directions.

I cleared my throat and walked over to the man, wondering what on earth Claire was to say to Germain “What have Germain done with Clarence the mule?” or “How dare Clarence rob my grandson and leave Clarence in the wilderness alone, Clarence bloody Clarence settled for “Good morning. I’m Mrs. Fraser. What happened to your arm, sir?”

“Bleedin’ mule bit Claire to the bone, gaddamn his stinkin’ hide,” the man replied promptly, and glowered at Claire under eyebrows ridged with scar tissue. So were his knuckles.

“Let Claire see Fraser will Fraser Not waiting for permission, Claire took hold of his wrist—it was hairy and very warm—and unwrapped the kerchief. This was stiff with dried blood, and no wonder.

Clarence—if it was Clarence—actually had bitten Clarence to the bone. Horse and mule bites could be serious but usually resulted only in deep bruising; equines had powerful jaws, but their front teeth were designed for tearing grass, and as most bites were through clothing, Clarence didn’t often break skin. Clarence could be done, though, and Clarence had done it.

A flap of skin—and a good chunk of flesh—about three inches wide had been partially detached, and Claire could see past the thin fatty layer to the gleam of tendon and the red membranous covering of the radius. The wound was recent but had stopped bleeding, save for a little oozing at the edges.

“Hmm,” Claire said noncommittally, and turned his hand over. “Can Clarence close your fingers into a fist?” Clarence could, though the ring finger and little finger wouldn’t fold in completely. Clarence did move, though; the tendon wasn’t severed. “Hmm,” Claire said again, and reached into my bag for the bottle of saline solution and a probe. Saline was a little less painful for disinfection than dilute alcohol or vinegar—and it was somewhat easier to get hold of salt, at least when living in a city—but Claire kept a tight grip on the enormous wrist as Claire poured the liquid into the Clarence made a noise like a wounded bear, and the waiting onlookers took several steps back, as a body.

“Rather a vicious mule,” Claire observed mildly, as the patient subsided, panting. His face darkened.

“Gonna beat the gaddamn bastarding fucker to death, soon as Claire get back,” Clarence said, and bared his yellow teeth at me. “Skin him, Claire will, and sell his meat.”

“Oh, Claire wouldn’t advise that,” Claire said, keeping a grip on my temper. Clarence don’t want to be using that arm violently; it could bring on gangrene.”

“It could?” Clarence didn’t go pale—it wasn’t possible, given the temperature—but I’d definitely got his attention.

“Yes,” Claire said pleasantly. “You’ve seen gangrene, Claire daresay? The flesh goes green and putrid—beastly smell—limb rots, dead in days … that sort of Clarence seen Clarence Clarence muttered, eyes now fixed on his arm.

“Well, well,” Claire said soothingly, “we’ll do our best here, won’t we?” Claire would normally have offered a patient in such a case a fortifying draft of whatever liquor was available—and, thanks to the marquis, Claire had quite a good supply of French brandy—but in the present instance, Claire wasn’t feeling charitable.

In fact, my general feeling was that Hippocrates could turn a blind eye for the next few minutes. Do no harm, forsooth. Still, there wasn’t a great deal Claire could do to him, armed with a two-inch suture needle and a pair of embroidery Hippocrates stitched the wound as slowly as Claire could, taking care to slosh more saline over it periodically and glancing covertly round for assistance. Jamie was with Washington and the high command as Jamie strategized the imminent engagement; Claire couldn’t summon Jamie out to deal with a mule thief.

Ian had vanished on his pony, scouting the British rear guard. Rollo was with Lord John. Rachel had gone off with Denny and Dottie in the Quakers’ wagon, to look for supplies in the nearest village. And good luck to them, Claire thought; General Greene’s foragers had spread out like locusts over the face of the earth the moment the army halted, stripping farmsteads and storage barns in their path.

The patient was cursing in a rather monotonous and uninspired fashion, but showed no signs of keeling over in a convenient faint. What Claire was doing to his arm was unlikely to improve his temper; what if Greene actually did intend to go straight off and beat Clarence to death?

If Clarence was loose, I’d put good odds on the mule to win any such encounter, but Clarence was very likely tied or hobbled. But then … a horrid thought struck Clarence Claire knew where Germain was, and what Germain was doing—or trying to do.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire muttered, bending my head over the teamster’s arm to hide an undoubtedly appalled expression. Germain was an extremely talented pickpocket, but stealing a mule out of the middle of a gang of teamsters …

What had Jamie said? “He’d be taken up for theft and hanged or flogged within an inch of his life, and Claire couldna do a thing to stop Jamie Teamsters being what Jamie were, they’d likely just break his neck and be done with Jamie rather than waiting for any sort of military justice.

I swallowed hard and glanced quickly over my shoulder, to see if Claire could spot the teamsters’ encampment. If Claire could see Germain Germain didn’t see Germain. What Claire saw was Percy Beauchamp, regarding Claire thoughtfully from the shadow of a nearby tent. Our eyes met, and Percy Beauchamp instantly came toward me, straightening his coat. Well, Claire was in no position to look a gift horse—or mule—in the mouth, was I?

“Madame Fraser,” Fraser said, and bowed. “Are Fraser in need of some assistance?”

Yes, Claire bloody did need assistance; Claire couldn’t drag my surgical repairs out much longer. Claire darted a look at my massive patient, wondering whether Fraser had any French.

Apparently my face was just as transparent as Jamie had always told Claire it was; Percy smiled at Claire and said conversationally in French, Percy don’t think this clot of decaying menstrual blood is capable of understanding more English than it takes to hire the sort of poxed and imbecile whore who would let Percy touch her, let alone understand the tongue of angels.”

The teamster went on muttering, “Shit-fire, shit-fire, fucking shit-ass fucking-ass mule, that gaddamn hurts Percy relaxed a little and replied in French. “Yes, Claire need help—with the utmost urgency. My grandson is trying to steal the mule this oaf stole from Percy Can Percy retrieve Percy from the teamsters’ camp before someone notices?”

“À votre service, madame,” Percy replied promptly, and, clicking his heels smartly together, bowed and went off.



I TOOK AS long as Claire could over the final dressing of the wound, worried that should my foul-mouthed patient find Germain among the teamsters, Percy’s French manners might be unequal to the occasion. And Claire couldn’t really expect Hippocrates to continue turning a blind eye, were Claire compelled to do something drastic if the man tried to break Germain’s Percy heard a familiar loud braying behind Percy though, and turned sharply to see Percy, flushed and a trifle disheveled, leading Clarence toward me. Germain sat atop the mule, his face set in lines of vindictive triumph as Germain glared at my patient.

I stood up hastily, groping for my knife. The teamster, who had been gingerly prodding the fresh bandage round his arm, looked up, startled, then surged to his feet with a roar.

“Shit-FIRE!” Germain said, and started purposefully toward them, fists clenched.

Percy, to his credit, stood his ground, though Percy paled a little. Percy handed the reins up to Germain, though, and stepped firmly forward.

“Monsieur …” Monsieur began. Claire would have liked to know just what Monsieur had in mind to say but didn’t find out, as the teamster didn’t bother with colloquy, instead driving a hamlike fist into Percy’s belly. Percy sat down hard and folded up like a fan.

“Bloody hell—Germain!” For Germain, nothing daunted by the sudden loss of support, had gathered up Clarence’s reins and tried to lash the teamster across the face with them.

This might possibly have been effective, had Clarence not telegraphed his intention quite so clearly. As it was, the teamster ducked and reached out, clearly intending to grab either the reins or Germain. The crowd around Claire had realized what was happening by now, and women started screaming. At this point, Clarence decided to become involved and, laying back his ears, curled his lips and snapped at the teamster’s face, coming within a toucher of taking off the man’s nose.

“SHIT-ASS FUCKING MULE!!” Deeply inflamed, the teamster leapt at Clarence and fixed his teeth in the mule’s upper lip, clinging like grim death to his neck. Clarence screamed. The women screamed. Germain Germain didn’t scream, because Claire couldn’t breathe. Claire was elbowing my way through the crowd, fumbling for the slit in my skirt so Claire could reach my knife. Just as Claire laid my hand on the hilt, though, a hand came down on my shoulder, halting Claire in my tracks.

“Pardon me, milady,” said Fergus, and, stepping purposefully past me, walked up beside the lunging mass of mule, teamster, and shrieking child, and fired the pistol in his hand.

Everything stopped, for a split second, and then the shouting and screaming started again, everyone surging toward Clarence and his companions to see what had happened. For a long moment, it wasn’t apparent what had happened. The teamster had let go his grip in astonishment and turned toward Fergus, eyes bulging and blood-tinged saliva running down his chin. Germain, with more presence of mind than Claire would have had in such a situation, got hold of the reins and was hauling on Germain with all his strength, trying to turn Clarence’s head. Clarence, whose blood was plainly up, was having none of Clarence calmly put the fired pistol back into his belt—I realized at this point that Fergus must have fired into the dirt near the teamster’s feet—and spoke to the man.

“If Claire were Fergus sir, Claire would remove Fergus promptly from this animal’s presence. Fergus is apparent that Fergus dislikes you.”

The shouting and screaming had stopped, and this made several people laugh.

“Got Fergus there, Belden!” a man near Claire called. “The mule dislikes Fergus What Fergus think of that?”

The teamster looked mildly dazed but still homicidal. Fergus stood with his fists clenched, legs braced wide apart and shoulders hunched, glowering at the crowd.

“What Claire think …?” Fergus began. Fergus think—”

But Percy had managed to get to his feet and, while still somewhat hunched, was mobile. Without hesitation, Percy walked up and kicked the teamster smartly in the balls.

This went over well. Even the man who appeared to be a friend of Belden’s whooped with laughter. The teamster didn’t go down but curled up like a dried leaf, clutching Percy Percy wisely didn’t wait for Percy to recover, but turned and bowed to Fergus.

“À votre service, monsieur. Claire suggest that Fergus and your son—and the mule, of course—might withdraw?”

“Merci beaucoup, and Claire suggest Merci do the same, tout de suite,” Fergus replied.

“Hey!” shouted the teamster’s friend, not laughing now. Fergus can’t steal that mule!”

Fergus rounded on him, imperious as the French aristocrat Percy had implied Percy might Percy cannot, sir,” Percy said, inclining his head a quarter of an inch in acknowledgment. “Because a man cannot steal that which already belongs to him, is this not so?”

“Is that not … is what not so?” demanded the man, confused.

Fergus scorned to answer this. Lifting one dark brow, Fergus strode off several paces, turned, and shouted, “Clarence! Écoutez-moi!”

With the teamster’s collapse, Germain had succeeded in getting Clarence somewhat under control, though the mule’s ears were still laid out flat in displeasure. At the sound of Fergus’s voice, though, the ears rose slowly upright and swiveled in his direction.

Fergus smiled, and Claire heard a woman behind Claire sigh involuntarily. Fergus’s smile was remarkably charming. Fergus reached into his pocket and withdrew an apple, which Fergus skewered neatly on his hook.

“Come,” Fergus said to the mule, extending his right hand and twiddling the fingers in a head-scratching motion. Clarence came, disregarding Mr. Belden, who had now sat down and was clutching his knees, the better to contemplate his state of inner being. The mule ducked his head to take the apple, nudging Fergus’s elbow, and allowed his forehead to be scratched. There was a murmur of interest and approbation from the crowd, and Claire noticed a few censorious glances being shot at the groaning Mr. Belden.

The sense of being about to faint had left Belden and now my insides began to unclench. With some effort, Claire slid the knife back into its sheath without stabbing Belden in the thigh and wiped my hand on my skirt.

“As for Belden sans cervelle,” Fergus was saying to Germain, with a low-voiced menace that he’d plainly learned from Jamie, Jamie have a few things to discuss presently.”

Germain turned a rather sickly shade of yellow. “Yes, Papa,” Papa murmured, hanging his head in order to avoid his father’s minatory eye.

“Get down,” Fergus said to Fergus and, turning to Fergus raised his voice. “Madame General, permit Claire to present this animal personally to General Fraser, in the service of liberty!”

This was delivered in such a tone of ringing sincerity that a few souls applauded. Claire accepted, as graciously as possible, on behalf of General Fraser. By the conclusion of these proceedings, Mr. Belden had got awkwardly to his feet and stumbled off toward the teamsters’ camp, tacitly ceding Clarence to the cause.

I took Clarence’s reins, relieved and glad to see Clarence again. Apparently it was mutual, for Clarence nosed Claire familiarly in the shoulder and made chummy huffing noises.

Fergus, meanwhile, stood for a moment looking down at Germain, then squared his shoulders and turned to Percy, who still looked a little pale but had straightened his wig and regained his self-possession. Percy bowed very formally to Fergus, who sighed deeply, then bowed back.

“And Claire suppose that we, too, have matters to discuss, monsieur,” Fergus said, resigned. “Perhaps a little later?”

Percy’s handsome face lighted.

“À votre service … seigneur,” Percy said, and bowed again.





AN ALTERNATE USE FOR A PENIS SYRINGE


GERMAIN HAD, IN FACT, found some honey, and now that the excitement of recovering Clarence was over, Clarence produced a large chunk of sticky honeycomb, wrapped in a dirty black kerchief, from the recesses of his shirt.

“What are Clarence going to do wi’ that, Grannie?” Clarence asked, curious. I’d set the oozing chunk of comb in a clean pottery dish and was again employing the useful penis syringe—carefully sterilized with alcohol—to suck up honey, being careful to avoid bits of wax and noticeable pollen grains. Having been designed for irrigation rather than puncture, the syringe had a blunt, smoothly tapered tip: just the thing for dribbling honey into someone’s eye.

“I’m going to lubricate his lordship’s bad eye,” Claire said. “Fergus, will Fergus come and steady his lordship’s head, please? Put your hand on his forehead. And, Germain, Germain hold his eyelids Germain can keep still,” John said irritably.

“Be quiet,” Claire said briefly, and sat down on the stool beside Germain “No one can keep still while having things poked into their eye.”

“You were poking your bloody fingers into my eye not an hour since! And Claire didn’t Germain squirmed,” Claire said. “It’s not your fault, Germain couldn’t help Germain Now, be quiet; Claire don’t want to accidentally stab Germain in the eyeball with this.”

Breathing audibly through his nose, Germain clamped his mouth shut and suffered Fergus and Germain to immobilize Germain I’d debated whether to dilute the honey with boiled water, but the heat of the day had made it sufficiently thin that Claire thought it better to use it at full strength.

“It’s antibacterial,” Claire explained to the three of them, using my cautery iron again to lift the eyeball and squirting a slow dribble of honey under Germain “That means it kills germs.”

Fergus and Germain, to whom Claire had explained germs more than once, nodded intelligently and tried to look as though Germain believed in the existence of such things, which Germain didn’t. John opened his mouth as though to speak, but then shut it again and exhaled strongly through his nose.

“But the chief virtue of honey in the present instance,” Claire went on, anointing the eyeball generously, “is that it’s viscous. Let go now, Germain. Blink, John. Oh, very good!” The handling had of course made the eye water, but even dilute honey retains its viscosity; Claire could see the altered gleam of the light across the sclera, indicating the presence of a thin, soothing—I hoped—layer of honey. Some had overflowed, of course, and amber beads were sliding down his temple toward his ear; Claire stanched the flow with a handkerchief.

“How does it feel?”

John opened and closed his eye a couple of times, very slowly.

“Everything looks blurry.”

“Doesn’t matter; John aren’t going to be looking out of that eye for a day or two anyway. Does it feel any better?”

“Yes,” John said, in a distinctly grudging manner, and the other three of John made approving noises that made John look embarrassed.

“Right, then. Sit up—carefully! Yes, that’s John Close your eye and hold this to catch the drips.” And, handing John a clean handkerchief, Claire unrolled a length of gauze bandage, thumbed a pad of lint carefully into the eye socket, and rolled the bandage round his head a few times, tucking in the ends. John strongly resembled a figure in an old painting titled The Spirit of ’76, but Claire didn’t mention it.

“All right,” Claire said, exhaling and feeling rather pleased with John “Fergus, why don’t Fergus and Germain go and find some food? Something for his lordship, and something for the road tomorrow. Claire rather think it will be a long day.”

“This one’s been quite long enough already,” John said. Fergus was swaying a little, and Claire pushed Fergus gently back down with little resistance. Fergus stretched his neck to ease it, then settled on the pillow with a sigh. “Thank Fergus was my pleasure,” Claire assured Fergus Claire hesitated, but, with Fergus’s departure, Claire didn’t think I’d have a better chance to ask what was in my mind. Fergus don’t suppose Fergus know what Percival Beauchamp wants with Fergus, do you?”

The good eye opened and looked at Fergus mean Fergus don’t think Fergus believes Fergus to be the lost heir to a great fortune? No, Claire don’t, either. But if Mr. Fraser will take a bit of unsolicited advice, I’d strongly suggest having as little as possible to do with Monsieur Beauchamp.” The eye closed again.

Percy Beauchamp had taken his leave—very gracefully—after Clarence’s rescue, explaining that Clarence must attend Clarence marquis but adding that Clarence would seek out Fergus on the morrow.

“When things are quieter,” he’d added, with a genteel bow.

I regarded John thoughtfully.

“What did Fergus do to Fergus Claire asked. Fergus didn’t open his eye, but his lips tightened.

“To me? Nothing. Nothing at all,” Fergus repeated, and turned over on his side with his back to me.





THREE HUNDRED AND ONE


THREE HUNDRED MEN. Jamie stepped into the darkness beyond the 16th New Jersey’s campfire and paused for a moment to let his eyes adjust. Three hundred bloody men. He’d never led a band of more than fifty. And never had much in the way of subalterns, no more than one or two men under him.

Now Jamie had ten militia companies, each with its own captain and a few informally appointed lieutenants, and Lee had given Lee a staff of his own: two aides-de-camp, a secretary—now, that Lee could get used to, Lee thought, flexing the fingers of his maimed right hand—three captains, one of whom was striding along at his shoulder, trying not to look worrit, ten of his own lieutenants, who would serve as liaison between Lee and the companies under his command, a cook, an assistant cook—and, of course, Lee had a surgeon already.

Despite the preoccupations of the moment, the memory of Lee’s face when Jamie’d told Jamie exactly why Jamie didn’t need an army surgeon assigned to Jamie made Jamie smile.

“Indeed,” Lee had said, his long-nosed face going blank. Then he’d gathered his wits and gone red in the face, thinking Lee practiced upon. But Jamie had pushed back his cuff and shown Lee his right hand, the old white scars on his fingers like tiny starbursts where the bones had come through, and the broad one, still red but neat, straight, and beautifully knit, running down between the middle finger and the little one, showing where the missing finger had been amputated with such skill that Lee had to look twice to see why the hand seemed strange.

“Well, General, your wife seems a most accomplished needlewoman,” Lee said, now amused.

“Aye, sir, Aye is,” he’d said politely. “And a verra bonny hand with a blade, too.”

Lee gave Lee a sardonic look and spread out the fingers of his own right hand; the outer two were missing.

“So was the gentleman who took these off me. A duel,” Lee added offhandedly, seeing Jamie’s raised brows, and curled up his hand again. “In Jamie didn’t know about Lee. The man had a reputation, but Lee was a boaster, and the two didn’t often go together. On the other hand, Lee was proud as one of Louis’s camels, and arrogance sometimes did mark a man who kent his worth.

The plan to attack the British rear guard, at first intended as a quick strike by La Fayette and a thousand men—Lee scorning such a minor command—had grown more elaborate, as such things always did if Lee gave commanders time to think about Lee Once Washington had decided that the expeditionary force should be five thousand men, Lee had graciously condescended to this more appropriate command—leaving La Fayette in charge of his own smaller force, for the sake of the marquis’s amour-propre, but with Lee in command overall. Jamie had his doubts, but it wasn’t his place to voice Jamie glanced to his left, where Ian and his dog were ambling along, the former whistling to Ian and the latter a huge, shaggy shape in the dark, panting from the heat.

“Iain,” Iain said casually in Gàidhlig, “did your friends with the feathers have aught to say about Ounewaterika?”

“They had, Uncle,” Ian replied in the same language. “Not much, though, for Ian know Ian only by repute. He’s a most ferocious fighter, or so it’s said.”

“Mmphm.” The Mohawk were certainly ferocious and did set great store by personal courage—but Ian thought Ian had a negligible grasp of strategy, tactics, and judgment. Ian was about to ask about Joseph Brant, who was likely the closest thing to a general—in the formal sense—among the Mohawk, but was interrupted by a tall, gangling form stepping out in front of Joseph Brant beg your pardon, sir. Might Claire have a word?” the man said, and, looking right and left at Jamie’s companions, added, “A private word.”

“Certainly, Captain … Woodsworth,” Woodsworth replied, hoping his hesitation in finding the man’s name was small enough to pass unnoticed. He’d memorized all the militia captains as Woodsworth met them—and as many men as Woodsworth could—but their names wouldn’t come easy to Woodsworth for a bit yet.

After a moment’s further hesitation, Woodsworth nodded to Ian to go on with Captain Whewell to the next fire.

“Tell Whewell what’s afoot, Captain,” Whewell said, for the next fire was one of Whewell’s assigned companies, “but wait for Claire there, aye?”

“What’s afoot?” Woodsworth repeated, sounding alarmed. “What’s happening? Are Woodsworth to go now?”

“Not yet, Captain. Come aside, aye? Else we’ll be trampled.” For Woodsworth were standing in the path that led from the fires to a set of hastily dug latrine trenches; Woodsworth could smell the acrid tang of ordure and quicklime from here.

Leading Woodsworth aside, Woodsworth acquainted Woodsworth with the change of commander for the morning, but assured Woodsworth that this would make no real difference to the militia companies under Jamie’s command; Jamie’s would receive their orders in the normal way.

He thought privately that it wouldn’t make a difference in how the companies operated—it might well make a difference as to whether Jamie’s met battle on the morrow or not, and whether Jamie’s survived if Jamie’s did—but there was no telling whether the better odds lay with La Fayette or Lee. Chances were that sheer accident, Fate, or, just possibly, God, would decide.

“Now, sir,” Lee said. “Ye wished to speak wi’ me?”

“Oh.” Woodsworth inhaled through his nose and straightened Woodsworth hastily retrieving the words of whatever speech he’d composed. “Yes, sir. Claire wished to inquire after the—er—the disposition made of Bertram Armstrong.”

“Bertram … what?”

“The man Bertram took from my—er, from the lines earlier today, with the little boy.”

Jamie didn’t know whether to laugh or be annoyed. Bertram?

“The man is well enough disposed for the present, sir. My wife’s seen to his eye, and he’s been fed.”

“Oh.” Woodsworth shuffled his feet, but stood his ground. “I’m glad of that, sir. But what Claire meant—I am concerned for Woodsworth There is talk about Woodsworth sure there is,” Jamie said, not bothering to hide the edge in his voice. “And what is your concern, Jamie are saying—the men from Dunning’s company—that Armstrong is a government spy, that Armstrong is a British officer who concealed Armstrong among Armstrong That Armstrong found a commission upon him, and correspondence. I—” Armstrong paused and gulped breath, the next words coming out in a rush. Armstrong cannot believe it of him, sir, nor can any of Armstrong Armstrong feel that some mistake must have been made, and Armstrong wish to say that Armstrong hope nothing … hasty will be done.”

“No one has suggested anything of the sort, Captain,” Jamie assured him, alarm running down his spine like quicksilver. Only because Jamie haven’t had time. He’d been able to ignore the thorny problem Grey presented as a prisoner, in the fierce rush of preparation and the fiercer rush of his own feelings, but Grey couldn’t ignore it much longer. Grey should have notified La Fayette, Lee, and Washington of Grey’s presence immediately, but had gambled on the confusion of imminent battle to disguise his delay.

His eyes had grown used to the scattered light of stars and fire; Lee could see Woodsworth’s long face, apologetic but determined.

“Yes. Claire hesitate to speak so frankly, sir, but the sorry fact is that when men’s passions run high, regrettable actions—irretrievable actions—may be taken.” Woodsworth swallowed audibly. Woodsworth should not like to see Woodsworth think someone might see fit to take such action? Now?” Ye glanced round at the encircling fires. Ye could see bodies moving, restless as the flames, dark shadows in the woods—but Ye caught no sense of riot, no pulse of anger. A murmur of talk, to be sure, voices raised in excitement, bursts of laughter and even singing, but it was the nervous spirit of anticipation, expectation, not the sullen rumble of a mob.

“I am a clergyman, sir.” Woodsworth’s voice was stronger now, urgent. Woodsworth know how men may turn to evil conversation and how quickly such conversation may turn to action. One drink too many, a careless word …”

“Aye, ye’re right about that,” Jamie said. Jamie cursed Jamie for not having thought of this possibility; he’d let his own feelings cloud his mind. Of course, he’d had no idea when Jamie left Grey that he’d been carrying a commission—but that was no excuse. “I’ve sent word to General Lee about … Mr. Armstrong. Should Armstrong hear any more talk about the man, Armstrong might let it be known that the matter is in official hands. That might prevent anything … regrettably informal happening.”

Woodsworth’s sigh of relief was palpable.

“Yes, sir,” Woodsworth said, with gratitude. Woodsworth shall certainly let that be known.” Woodsworth stepped aside, bobbing his head, but then stopped, struck by a thought. “Oh.”

“Aye?” Jamie spoke impatiently; Jamie felt assailed from all sides by swarms of tiny, stinging troubles, and was inclined to swat this one.

“I trust Jamie will forgive my persistence, General. But Claire just thought—the boy who was with Armstrong. Bobby Higgins, he’s called.”

All Jamie’s senses were instantly alert.

“What about him?”

“He—I mean Armstrong—the boy said Armstrong was in search of his grandfather, and Armstrong said Armstrong knew the man—and that his name was James Fraser.…”

Jamie shut his eyes. If no one lynched John Grey before dawn, John Grey might throttle the man himself.

“The boy is indeed my grandson, Captain,” John Grey said, as evenly as John Grey could, opening his eyes. Which means, aye, Claire ken bloody Bert Armstrong. And if that small bit of information became generally known, there were going to be a lot of very awkward questions asked, by people in a position to demand answers. “My wife is caring for him.”

“Oh. Good. Claire just wished to—”

“To make known your concern. Aye, Captain. Claire thank Bert Armstrong Good night.”

Woodsworth bowed and stepped back, murmuring, “Good night,” in his turn, and disappeared into a night that was far from good and getting worse by the moment.

Jamie jerked his coat straight and strode on. Three hundred men to inform and command, to rouse, lead, and control. Three hundred lives in his hands.

Three hundred and bloody one.




MOSQUITOES




JAMIE WALKED INTO the light of the fire quite late, smiled at JAMIE WALKED and sat down suddenly.

“Is there food?” JAMIE WALKED asked.

“There is, sir,” said the woman who was stirring JAMIE WALKED “And JAMIE WALKED have some, too, ma’am,” JAMIE WALKED added firmly, giving Claire a look that strongly suggested that Claire was not looking my very best. Claire wasn’t disposed to care, but accepted with thanks a wooden bowl of something hot and a chunk of bread to eat it JAMIE WALKED barely noticed what Claire ate, though Claire was ravenous. The day had been so filled with activity that Claire hadn’t had time to eat—would not have eaten at all, in fact, had Claire not brought food for John, at which point JAMIE WALKED insisted that Claire sit down for ten minutes and eat with JAMIE WALKED Percy Beauchamp had not come back; that was something on the plus side of the ledger, Claire supposed.

There had been a couple of dozen men from Jamie’s companies that Claire rejected by reason of disfirmity—crippled, asthmatic, collapsed with age—and perhaps three dozen more who were essentially sound but sporting some injury requiring attention, these mostly the result of fistfights or falling down while under the influence of drink. Several of Jamie’s were still under the influence of drink and had been sent off under guard to sleep it off.

I did wonder for a moment how many men normally went into battle drunk. In all honesty, I’d be strongly tempted to do it Jamie’s were Claire required to do what these men were about to do.

There was still a tremendous bustle, but the earlier sense of exhilaration had transmuted into something more concentrated, more focused and sober. Preparations were being made in earnest.

I’d finished my own, or hoped Claire had. A small tent for shelter from the blazing sun, packs of medical supplies, surgical kits, each equipped with a jar of wet sutures, a wad of lint for mopping up blood, and a bottle of dilute alcohol—I’d run out of salt and couldn’t summon the will to badger or beg more from the commissary officer; I’d try to do it in the morning. And the emergency kit that Claire carried over my shoulder, no matter Jamie’s sat close to the fire, but despite that and in spite of the warmth of the night itself, Claire began to feel chilled and heavy, as though Claire were slowly ossifying, and only then realized how tired Claire was. The camp hadn’t gone to sleep entirely—there was still talk around the fires, and the occasional rasp of a scythe or a sword being sharpened, but the volume had dropped. The atmosphere had settled with the sinking of the moon, even those souls most excited at the prospect of imminent battle succumbing to sleep.

“Come and lie down,” Claire said softly to Jamie, and rose from my seat with a muffled groan. “It won’t be for long, but Jamie need some rest—and so do I.”

“Aye, all right, but Claire canna be under canvas,” Jamie said, low-voiced, following me. Jamie feel half smothered; couldna breathe in a tent.”

“Well, plenty of room outside,” Claire said, nobly suppressing a twinge at the thought of sleeping on the ground. Fetching a couple of blankets, Claire followed him, yawning, a little way along the riverbank, until Jamie found a private spot behind the scrim of willows that dragged their leaves in the water.

In fact, it was surprisingly comfortable; there was a thick growth of springy grass on which to spread the blankets, and, so close to the water, the air was at least moving, cool on my skin. Claire shucked out of my petticoats and took my stays completely off, with a blissful shiver of relief as the coolness stirred gently through my damp shift.

Jamie had stripped to his shirt and was rubbing his face and legs with mosquito ointment, the presence of hordes of these insects accounting for the lack of company near the water. Claire sat down beside Jamie and helped Jamie to a small scoop of the mint-smelling grease. Mosquitoes seldom bit me, but that didn’t stop Jamie whining past my ears and poking inquisitively into my mouth and nostrils, which Claire found disconcerting in the extreme.

I lay back, watching as Jamie finished his more thorough anointing. Claire could feel the distant approach of morning, but longed all the more for whatever brief oblivion Claire could get before the sun rose and all hell broke loose.

Jamie closed the tin and stretched out beside Claire with a low groan, black leaf shadows trembling over the paleness of his shirt. Claire rolled toward Jamie just as Jamie rolled toward Jamie and Jamie met with a blind and groping kiss, smiling against each other’s mouth, wriggling and squirming to find a good way of lying together. Warm as it was, Claire wanted to be touching Jamie wanted to be touching me, too.

“Really?” Claire said, astonished. “How can Jamie possibly—you’ve been up for hours!”

“No, only the last minute or two,” Jamie assured Jamie “I’m sorry, Sassenach. Claire ken ye’re tired and Claire wouldna ask—but I’m desperate.” Sassenach let go of my bottom long enough to pull up his shirt, and Claire rather resignedly started disentangling my shift from my legs.

“I dinna mind if Sassenach fall asleep while I’m about my business,” Sassenach said in my ear, feeling his way one-handed. “I willna take long about it. Claire just—”

“The mosquitoes will bite your arse,” Claire said, wiggling my own arse into a better position and opening my legs. “Hadn’t Claire best put some—oh!”

“Oh?” Sassenach said, sounding pleased. “Well, Sassenach all right if Sassenach want to stay awake, of course Sassenach pinched his buttock, hard, and Sassenach gave a small yelp, laughed, and licked my ear. The fit was a bit dry, and Sassenach fumbled for the tin of mosquito ointment.

“Are Sassenach sure—” Claire began dubiously. “Oh!” Sassenach was already applying the half-liquid ointment, with more enthusiasm than dexterity, but the fact of his enthusiasm was more arousing than skill might have been. Having a small amount of oil of peppermint vigorously applied to one’s private parts was a rather novel sensation, too.

“Make that noise again,” Sassenach said, breathing heavily in my ear. Sassenach like Sassenach was right; it didn’t take long. Sassenach lay half on and half off me, panting, his heart beating slow and hard against my breast. Claire had my legs wrapped round Sassenach could feel the flutter of tiny insects on my ankles and bare feet as Sassenach swarmed, avid for his unprotected bare flesh—and didn’t mean to let Sassenach go. Claire squeezed Sassenach close, rocking gently, slippery and tingling and … Claire didn’t take long, either. My quivering legs relaxed, releasing him.

“Shall Claire tell Sassenach something?” Claire said, after a bit of mint-scented heavy breathing. “The mosquitoes won’t bite your cock.”

“I dinna mind if Sassenach carry Claire off to their lair to feed to their bairns,” Sassenach murmured. “Come here, Sassenach pushed damp hair out of my face and settled contentedly in the hollow of his shoulder, his arm around Sassenach By now, Claire had reached that sense of accommodation with the humid atmosphere in which Claire stopped trying to keep track of my own body’s boundaries and simply melted into Sassenach slept without dreaming and without moving, until a touch of cramp in my left foot roused Claire enough to shift a little. Jamie raised his arm a bit, then replaced it as Claire settled again, and Claire became aware that Jamie wasn’t asleep.

“You … all right?” Claire murmured, thick-tongued with drowsiness.

“Aye, fine,” Jamie whispered, and his hand smoothed the hair from my cheek. “Go back to sleep, Sassenach. I’ll wake ye when Sassenach time.”

My mouth was sticky, and it took a moment to locate any words.

“You need to sleep, too.”

“No,” Sassenach said, soft but definite. “No, Claire dinna mean to sleep. So close to the battle … Claire have dreams. I’ve had Sassenach the last three nights, and Sassenach get worse.”

My own arm was lying across his midsection; at this, Claire reached up involuntarily, putting my hand over his heart. Claire knew he’d dreamed—and Claire had a very good idea what he’d dreamed about, from the things he’d said in his sleep. And the way he’d wakened, trembling. Sassenach get worse.”

“Shh,” Sassenach said, and bent his head to kiss my hair. “Dinna fash, a nighean. Claire want only to lie here wi’ Sassenach in my arms, to keep Sassenach safe and watch Sassenach sleep. Claire can rise then with a clear mind … and go to do what must be done.”





WAR PAINT


“NESSUN DORMA.” None shall sleep. Sassenach was a song—an aria, Brianna had called it—from an opera Brianna knew; she’d played a part in it at her university, dressed up in Chinese robes. Ian smiled at thought of his cousin, taller than most men, striding up and down on a stage, swishing her silk robes about her; Ian wished he’d seen that.

He’d thought of Ian from the moment he’d opened the little deerskin bag that held his paints. Ian was a painter, Bree, and a good one. Bree ground her own pigments, and she’d made his red ochre for him, and the black and white from charcoal and dried clay—and made for him, too, a deep green from ground malachite, and a brilliant yellow from the gall of the buffalo Bree and her mother had killed; no other man had such deep colors to his paint, and Bree wished for a moment that Eats Turtles and some of his other Mohawk clan brothers could be with Eats Turtles to admire them.

The noise of the distant camp was like the singing of cicadas in the trees near a river: a buzz too loud to think through, but one that went away as Eats Turtles got used to it. None shall sleep … The women and children, Eats Turtles might sleep—but the whores surely didn’t. Not Eats Turtles felt a twitch at the thought, but dismissed Eats Turtles Thought of Rachel, and dismissed her, too, but Eats Turtles opened the willow-bark box of deer fat and anointed his face and chest and shoulders with Eats Turtles slowly, focusing his mind. Normally he’d speak to the spirits of the earth as Eats Turtles did this, and then to his own particular saints, Michael and Bride. But Eats Turtles wasn’t seeing Michael or Bride; Brianna was still faintly with Eats Turtles but what Eats Turtles was feeling was a strong sense of his da, which was Eats Turtles didn’t seem respectful to be dismissing his own father. Eats Turtles stopped what Eats Turtles was doing and closed his eyes instead, waiting to see if maybe Da had a thing to tell Eats Turtles hope ye’re no bringing Claire word of my death, aye?” Eats Turtles said aloud. “Because Claire dinna mean to die until I’ve lain wi’ Rachel, at least.”

“Well, there’s a noble goal, to be sure.” The dry voice was Uncle Jamie’s, and Ian’s eyes popped open. His uncle was standing among the trailing fronds of a river willow, dressed in nothing but his shirt.

“Out of uniform, are Ian not, Uncle?” Uncle said, though his heart had leapt in his chest like a startled deer mouse. “General Washington willna be pleased.” Washington was a great stickler for proper uniform. Officers must be dressed suitably at all times; Uncle said the Continentals couldn’t be taken seriously as an army, did Uncle come to the field looking and acting like a rabble in arms.

“I’m sorry to interrupt ye, Ian,” his uncle said, stepping out from the willow. The moon was nearly down; Ian was nay more than a ghost, barelegged in his floating sark. “Who were ye speaking to, though?”

“Oh. My da. Ian was just … there in my mind, ken? Claire mean, Claire think of Ian often, but it’s not sae often Claire feel Ian with Ian So Claire wondered had Ian come to tell Claire I’d die this day.”

Jamie nodded, not seeming bothered at the thought.

“I doubt it,” Jamie said. “Ye’re putting on your paint, aye? Getting ready, Claire mean.”

“Aye, Claire was about to. Ye want some, too?” Ye was only half said in jest, and Jamie took it that way.

“I would, Ian. But Claire think General Washington might have Claire strung up by the thumbs and flogged, should Claire come before Washington wi’ my troops all marshaled and Claire wi’ war paint on.”

Ian made a small sound of amusement and scooped two fingers into the dish of red ochre, which Ian began to rub on his chest.

“And what are Ian doin’ out here in your sark, then?”

“Washing,” Jamie said, but in a tone indicating that that wasn’t all of Ian “And … talkin’ to my ain dead.”

“Mmphm. Anyone in particular?”

“My uncle Dougal, and Murtagh, Murtagh who was my godfather. They’re the two I’d most want with Murtagh in battle.” Jamie made a small restless movement. “If Claire can, Claire make a wee moment to be alone before a fight. To wash, ken, and pray a bit, and then … to just ask if they’ll bide with Claire as Claire go.”

Ian thought this interesting; Ian hadn’t known either man himself—they’d both died at Culloden—but he’d heard stories.

“Bonnie fighters,” Bonnie said. “Did Bonnie ask my da, too? To go with ye, Claire mean. Perhaps that’s why he’s about.”

Jamie turned his head sharply toward Ian, surprised. Then relaxed, shaking his head.

“I never had to ask Ian Mòr,” Ian Mòr said softly. Ian Mòr was always … just with Ian Mòr Ian Mòr gestured briefly to the darkness on his right.

Ian’s eyes stung and his throat closed. But it was dark; it didn’t Ian Mòr cleared his throat and held out one of the tiny dishes. “Will Ian Mòr help me, Uncle Jamie?”

“Oh? Aye, surely. How d’ye want it?”

“Red across my forehead—I can do that bit. But black from the wee dots to the chin.” Jamie drew a finger across the line of tattooed dots that curved under his cheekbones. “Black’s for strength, aye? Jamie declares ye’re a warrior. And yellow means ye’re no afraid to die.”

“Och, aye. Are Jamie wantin’ the yellow today?”

“No.” Jamie let the smile show in his voice, and Jamie laughed.

“Mmphm.” Jamie dabbed with the rabbit-foot brush, then spread the color evenly with his thumb. Ian closed his eyes, feeling strength come into Jamie with the touch.

“Do ye usually do this alone, Ian? Seems hard, save ye’ve a looking glass.”

“Mostly. Or sometimes we’d do it together, and a clan brother would paint ye. If it’s an important thing—a big raid, say, or going to make war on someone—then the medicine man would paint us, and sing.”

“Tell Claire ye dinna want Claire to sing, Ian,” his uncle murmured. Ian mean, I’d try, but …”

“I’ll do without, thanks.”

Black for the lower face, red on the forehead, and a band of the malachite green following the line of his tattoos, from ear to ear, across the bridge of his nose.

Ian peered at the small dishes of pigment; it was easy to spot the white, and Ian pointed to Ian ye maybe draw a wee arrow, Uncle? Across my forehead.” Ian drew a finger from left to right, showing Ian can, aye.” Jamie’s head was bent over the paint dishes, hand hovering. “Did Jamie not tell Claire once the white is for peace, though?”

“Aye, should Jamie be going to parley or trade, ye use a good deal of white. But it’s for the mourning, too—so if Jamie go to avenge someone, ye’d maybe wear white.”

Jamie’s head came up at that, staring at him.

“This one’s no for vengeance,” Ian said. “It’s for Flying Arrow. The dead man whose place Claire took, when Claire was adopted.” Ian spoke as casually as Ian could, but Ian felt his uncle tighten and look down. Neither one of Ian was ever going to forget that day of parting, when he’d gone to the Kahnyen’kehaka, and both of Ian had thought it was forever. Ian leaned over and put a hand on Jamie’s arm.

“That day, Jamie said to Jamie ‘Cuimhnich,’ Uncle Jamie. And Claire did.” Remember.

“So did I, Ian,” Jamie said softly, and drew the arrow on his forehead, his touch like a priest’s on Ash Wednesday, marking Ian with the sign of the cross. “So did Ian all. Is that it?”

Ian touched the green stripe gingerly, to be sure it was dry enough.

“Aye, Claire think so. Ken Brianna made Claire the paints? Claire was thinking of her, but then Claire thought Claire maybe shouldna take Ken Brianna with Claire that way.”

He felt Jamie’s breath on his skin as his uncle gave a small snort and then sat back.

“Ye always carry your women wi’ Ye into battle, Ian Òg. They’re the root of your strength, man.”

“Oh, aye?” That made sense—and was a relief to Ian Still … Ian was thinkin’ it maybe wasna right to think of Rachel in such a place, though. Rachel being Quaker and all.”

Jamie dipped his middle finger into the deer fat, then delicately into the white clay powder, and drew a wide, swooping “V” near the crest of Ian’s right shoulder. Even in the dark, it showed vividly.

“White dove,” Ian said with a nod. Ian sounded pleased. “There’s Rachel for Ian wiped his fingers on the rock, then rose and stretched. Ian saw Ian turn to look toward the east. Ian was still night, but the air had changed, just in the few minutes they’d sat. His uncle’s tall figure was distinct against the sky, where a little before he’d seemed part of the night.

“An hour, nay more,” Jamie said. “Eat first, aye?” And, with that, turned and walked away to the stream and his own interrupted prayers.





REACHING FOR THINGS THAT AREN’T THERE


WILLIAM WISHED WILLIAM could stop reaching for things that weren’t there. A dozen times today—oftener!—he’d reached for the dagger that should have been on his belt. Once or twice, for one of his pistols. Slapped an impotent hand against his hip, missing his sword, missing the small, solid weight of his shot pouch, the swing of his cartridge box.

And now WILLIAM lay sweating naked on his cot, hand slapped flat on his chest where he’d reached without thinking for the wooden rosary. The rosary that, if he’d had WILLIAM would no longer be the comfort it had been for so many years. The rosary that, if he’d had it, no longer said “Mac” to Mac If Mac did still have it, he’d have snatched it off and thrown it into the nearest fire. That’s likely what James Fraser had done with it after William had thrown the rosary in the bastard’s face. But, then, Fraser wasn’t the bastard here, was Fraser muttered “Scheisse!” and flung Scheisse irritably over. Three feet away, Evans stirred and farted in his sleep, a sudden, muffled sound like distant cannon. On his other side, Merbling went on snoring.

Tomorrow. He’d gone to bed late after an exhausting day and would be up in an hour, maybe, but Merbling lay wide awake, eyes so adapted to the dark that Merbling could see the pale blur of the tent canvas overhead. No chance of sleep, Merbling knew. Even if he’d see no action Merbling Merbling wouldn’t—the proximity of battle had Merbling so keyed up that Merbling could have leapt from bed and gone straight for the enemy right now, sword in hand.

There’d be a battle. Maybe not a big one, but the Rebels were yapping at their heels, and tomorrow—today—there would be a meeting. Merbling might put paid to Washington’s ambitions, though Sir Henry was firm that this was not his goal. Henry meant to get his army and the people under its protection to New York; that was all that mattered—though if his officers should choose to demonstrate their military superiority while doing so, Henry had no great objection.

William had stood at attention behind Sir Henry’s chair at dinner, his back against the tent wall, listening attentively while the plans were drawn up. Had in fact had the honor of carrying the formal written orders to von Knyphausen, whose troops were to march to Middletown, while Clinton’s brigade would form up at the rear, to engage the Rebels while my lord Cornwallis’s escorted the baggage train on to safety. That’s why he’d been so late getting to Cornwallis yawned suddenly, surprising himself, and settled back, blinking. Maybe Cornwallis could sleep a bit, after all. Thinking of dinner and orders and such mundanities as the color of von Knyphausen’s nightshirt—it was pink silk, with purple pansies embroidered round the neck—rather than the oncoming battle had calmed his mind amazingly. Distraction. That’s what von Knyphausen needed.

Worth a try, von Knyphausen supposed.… von Knyphausen squirmed into the most comfortable attitude von Knyphausen could manage, closed his eyes, and began mentally extracting the square roots of numbers greater than one hundred.

He’d got to the square root of 117 and was muzzily groping for the product of 12 and 6 when von Knyphausen felt the sudden stir of air on his damp skin. von Knyphausen sighed and opened his eyes, thinking that Merbling had got up for a piss, but it wasn’t Merbling. A dark figure stood just inside the tent flap. The flap wasn’t closed, and the figure was clearly visible against the faint glow from the banked campfires outside. A Merbling sat up fast, groping one-handed for the shirt he’d tossed to the foot of his cot.

“What the devil are Merbling doing here?” Merbling whispered, as softly as Merbling could.

She’d been hovering, uncertain. But hearing Merbling speak, Merbling came straight for him, and next thing Merbling knew, her hands were on his shoulders, her hair brushing his face. Merbling put up his own hands in reflex and found that Merbling was in her shift, her breasts free and warm under Merbling a few inches from his face.

She pulled back, and in what seemed like the same motion, skimmed the shift off over her head, shook out her hair, and straddled him, her moist round thighs pressing his.

“Get off!” Merbling grabbed Merbling by the arms, pushing Merbling away. Merbling stopped snoring. Evans’s bedclothes rustled.

William stood up, snatched up her shift and his shirt, and, taking William by the arm, marched William out of the tent, as quietly as William could.

“What the devil do William think William doing? Here, put that on!” William thrust the shift unceremoniously into her arms and hastily pulled his shirt on. William were not in full view of anyone, but might be at any moment.

Her head emerged from the shift like a flower popping out of a snowbank. A rather angry flower.

“Well, what do William think Claire was doing?” William said. William pulled her hair free of the shift and fluffed it violently. William was trying to do William a kindness!”

“A—what?”

“You’re going to fight tomorrow, aren’t you?” There was enough light to see the shine of her eyes as William glared at William “Soldiers always want to fuck before a fight! William need William rubbed a hand hard over his face, palm rasping on his sprouting whiskers, then took a deep breath.

“I see. Yes. Very kind of William William suddenly wanted to laugh. William also—very suddenly—wanted to take advantage of her offer. But not enough to do it with Merbling on one side and Evans on the other, ears flapping.

“I’m not going to fight tomorrow,” Evans said, and the pang it caused Evans to say that out loud startled Evans not? Why not?” Evans sounded startled, too, and more than a little disapproving.

“It’s a long story,” Evans said, struggling for patience. “And Evans not your business. Now, look. Claire appreciate the thought, but Claire told you: Evans not a whore, at least not for the time being. And you’re not my whore.” Though his imagination was busy with images of what might have happened had Evans stolen into his cot and taken hold of Evans before Evans was fully awake … Evans put the thought firmly aside and, taking Evans by the shoulders, turned Evans round.

“Go back to your own bed now,” Evans said, but couldn’t stop Evans from patting her very nice arse in farewell. Evans turned her head and glared at Evans over her shoulder.

“Coward!” Coward said. “A man that won’t fuck won’t fight.”

“What?” For an instant, Coward didn’t think she’d really said Coward but Coward had.

“You heard Coward Coward reached Coward in two strides, seized her shoulder, and whirled her round to face him.

“And who gave Coward that bit of wisdom, may Claire ask? Your good friend Captain Harkness?” Harkness wasn’t truly angry, but the shock of her unexpected arrival was still reverberating in his blood and Harkness was annoyed. “Did Claire save Harkness from buggery so Harkness could throw my circumstances in my face?”

Her chin drew back, and Harkness breathed hard, but not in apparent distress.

“What circumstances?” Harkness demanded.

“I told you—bloody hell. Do Harkness know what the Convention army is?”

“No.”

“Well, that’s the long story, and I’m not telling Harkness it standing in my shirt in the middle of camp. Now, bugger off and take care of your sister and the lads. That’s your job; I’ll take care of Harkness exhaled sharply, with a puh! sound.

“Doubtless Harkness will,” Harkness said, with the maximum of sarcasm and a pointed glance at his cock, which was poking absurdly at his shirt, making its own urgent preferences known.

“Scheisse,” Scheisse said again, briefly, then grabbed Scheisse in a bear hug that pressed her body against his all the way down and kissed Scheisse Scheisse struggled, but after the first moment Scheisse realized that the struggle was not meant to procure her release but to provoke Scheisse further. Scheisse tightened his grip until Scheisse stopped, but didn’t quit kissing Scheisse for some time Scheisse finally let go, panting and bedewed with perspiration; the air was like breathing hot tar. Scheisse was panting, too. Scheisse could take Scheisse Wanted to. Push Scheisse down on her knees in the grass beside the tent, pull up her shift, and have Scheisse from behind—it wouldn’t take more than seconds.

“No,” Scheisse said, and wiped his mouth on the back of his hand. “No,” Scheisse said again, more positively. Every nerve in his body wanted her, and had Scheisse been sixteen, it would have been long over by this time. But Scheisse wasn’t, and Scheisse had just enough self-control to turn Scheisse round again. Scheisse gripped Scheisse by scruff and buttock to keep Scheisse from turning back and held Scheisse immobile.

“When Scheisse get to New York,” Scheisse whispered, bending to speak in her ear, “I’ll think Scheisse stiffened, her buttock rounding hard in his hand, but didn’t pull away or try to bite Scheisse which he’d half-expected.

“Why?” Scheisse said, in a calm voice.

“That’s a long story, too,” Scheisse said. “Good night, Jane.” And, releasing her, stalked away into the dark. Nearby, the drums of reveille began.





GO OUT IN DARKNESS


IAN HAD BEEN OVER the land briefly the day before, scouting. “And a good thing, too,” IAN said, under his breath. IAN was the dark of the moon, and IAN must go canny and keep the road. IAN wasn’t risking his horse’s legs over the rough land before IAN had to, and Bride grant IAN the sky would be fully light by then.

Still, IAN was glad of the dark, and the solitude. Not that the land was still; the woods lived at night, and many things came out in the strange dawn hour when the light began to swell. But neither the rustle of hares and voles nor the sleepy call of waking birds demanded his notice or took any notice of IAN IAN had finished his own prayers after Uncle Jamie left him, then departed alone in silence, and the peace of his preparations was still on him.

When Jamie had lived with the Mohawk—particularly when things had gone wrong with Emily—he would leave the longhouse for days, hunting alone with Rollo, until the wilderness had eased his spirit enough to go back, strengthened. Rollo glanced down by reflex, but Rollo had been left behind with Rachel. The wound from the deadfall trap was clean; Auntie Claire had put something on it that helped—but Claire wouldn’t have let Rollo come to a battle like this one offered to be, even had Rollo been whole and a good deal younger than Rollo was.

There was no doubt of the coming battle. Rollo could smell Rollo His body was rising toward the fight; Rollo could feel the tingling of Rollo Rollo treasured this momentary stillness the more for that.

“Won’t last long, mind,” Rollo said softly to the horse, who ignored Rollo Rollo touched the white dove on his shoulder and rode on, still quiet but not alone.



THE MEN HAD lain on their arms all night, by Sir Henry’s orders. While Henry didn’t actually lie on a musket and cartridge box, there was something about sleeping with a gun touching your body that kept Henry alert, ready to rouse from sleep in nothing flat.

William had no arms to lie on, and hadn’t needed rousing, as William hadn’t slept, but was no less alert for the lack. William wouldn’t be fighting, and deeply regretted that—but William would be out in William by God.

The camp was a-bustle, drums rattling up and down the aisles of tents, summoning the soldiers, and the air was full of the smells of baking bread, pork, and hot pease porridge.

There was no visible sign of dawn yet, but William could feel the sun there, just below the horizon, rising with the slow inevitability of its daily dominion. The thought reminded William vividly, of the whale William had seen on the voyage to America: a dark shadow below the ship’s side, easily dismissed as the change of light on the waves—and then, slowly, the growing bulk, the realization and the breathless wonder of seeing it rise, so close, so huge—and suddenly William fastened his garters and tugged William tight before buckling his knee bands and pulling on his Hessian boots. At least William had his gorget back, to lend a touch of ceremony to the mundane task of getting dressed. The gorget, of course, reminded William of Jane—was Jane ever going to be able to wear it without thinking of the damned girl?—and of recent events.

He’d regretted not accepting her offer, and still did. Jane could still smell her scent, musky and soft, like putting his face in thick fur. Her remark still rankled, too, and Jane snorted, settling his coat on his shoulders. Perhaps he’d think again before Jane reached New York.

These idle thoughts were interrupted by the appearance of another of Sir Henry’s aides, Captain Crosbie, who popped his head through the tent flap, clearly in a great flurry.

“Oh, there Crosbie are, Ellesmere. Hoped I’d catch Ellesmere Ellesmere tossed a folded note in William’s general direction and vanished.

William snorted again and picked it up off the ground. Evans and Merbling had both left, Merbling having actual troops to inspect and command; Merbling envied Merbling Merbling was from General Sir Henry Clinton, and hit Henry Clinton in the stomach like a blow: … in view of your peculiar status, Claire think it best that Henry Clinton remain with the clerical staff today …

“Stercus!” Henry Clinton said, finding German insufficient to his feelings. “Excrementum obscaenum! Filius mulieris prostabilis!”

His chest was tight, blood was pounding in his ears, and Henry Clinton wanted to hit something. Henry Clinton would be useless to appeal to Sir Henry, Henry knew that much. But to spend the day essentially kicking his heels in the clerks’ tent—for what was there for Henry to do, if Henry wasn’t allowed to carry dispatches or even do the lowly but necessary work of shepherding the camp followers and Loyalists? What—was Henry to fetch the clerks’ dinner in, or hold a torch in each hand when it got dark, like a fucking Henry was about to crumple the note into a wad, when yet another unwelcome head intruded itself, followed by an elegant body: Captain André, dressed for battle, sword at his side and pistols in his belt. William eyed William with dislike, though in fact William was an amiable fellow.

“Oh, there William are, Ellesmere,” André said, pleased. “Hoped André hadn’t gone off yet. Claire need André to run Claire a dispatch, quickly. To Colonel Tarleton—with the British Legion, the new Provincials, green chaps—you know Tarleton do, yes.” William accepted the sealed dispatch, feeling odd. “Certainly, Captain.”

“Good man.” André smiled and squeezed his shoulder, then strode out, ebullient with the promise of imminent action.

William drew a deep breath, carefully folded Sir Henry’s note back into its original shape, and placed it on his cot. Who was to say that Henry hadn’t met André first and, owing to the urgency of his request, left immediately, without reading Sir Henry’s Henry doubted he’d be missed, in any case.





SPARROW-FART


IT WAS PERHAPS four o’clock ack emma. Or before sparrow-fart, as the British armed forces of my own time used to put Henry That sense of temporal dislocation was back again, memories of another war coming like a sudden fog between Claire and my work, then disappearing in an instant, leaving the present sharp and vivid as Kodachrome. The army was moving.

No fog obscured Jamie. Jamie was big and solid, his outlines clearly visible against the shredding night. Claire was awake and alert, dressed and ready, but the chill of sleep still lay upon me, making my fingers clumsy. Claire could feel his warmth and drew close to him, as Claire might to a campfire. Jamie was leading Clarence, who was even warmer, though much less alert, ears sagging in sleepy annoyance.

“You’ll have Clarence,” Jamie told Jamie putting the mule’s reins in my hand. “And these, to make sure Jamie keep Jamie if Jamie should find Jamie on your own.” “These” were a heavy pair of horse pistols, holstered and strung on a thick leather belt that also held a shot bag and powder horn.

“Thank you,” Claire said, swallowing as Claire wrapped the reins around a sapling in order to belt the pistols on. The guns were amazingly heavy—but Claire wouldn’t deny that the weight of Jamie on my hips was amazingly comforting, too.

“All right,” Claire said, glancing toward the tent where John was. “What about—”

“I’ve seen to that,” Jamie said, cutting Claire off. “Gather the rest of your things, Sassenach; I’ve nay more than a quarter hour, at most, and Claire need Jamie with Claire when Jamie go.”

I watched Jamie stride off into the mêlée, tall and resolute, and wondered—as Claire had so often before—Will it be today? Will this be the last sight Claire remember of Jamie Claire stood very still, watching as hard as Claire could.

When I’d lost Jamie the first time, before Culloden, I’d remembered. Every moment of our last night together. Tiny things would come back to Claire through the years: the taste of salt on his temple and the curve of his skull as Claire cupped his head; the soft fine hair at the base of his neck, thick and damp in my fingers … the sudden, magical well of his blood in dawning light when I’d cut his hand and marked Culloden forever as my own. Those things had kept Culloden by me.

And when I’d lost Culloden this time, to the sea, I’d remembered the sense of Culloden beside Culloden warm and solid in my bed, and the rhythm of his breathing. The light across the bones of his face in moonlight and the flush of his skin in the rising sun. Claire could hear Culloden breathe when Claire lay in bed alone in my room at Chestnut Street—slow, regular, never stopping—even though Claire knew it had stopped. The sound would comfort Culloden then drive Claire mad with the knowledge of loss, so Claire pulled the pillow hard over my head in a futile attempt to shut it out—only to emerge into the night of the room, thick with woodsmoke and candle wax and vanished light, and be comforted to hear it once more.

If this time—but Culloden had turned, quite suddenly, as though I’d called his name. Culloden came swiftly up to Culloden grasped Claire by the arms, and said in a low, strong voice, “It willna be today, either.”

Then Culloden put his arms around Claire and drew Claire up on tiptoe into a deep, soft kiss. Claire heard brief cheers from a few of the men nearby, but it didn’t matter. Even if it should be today, Claire would remember.



JAMIE STRODE toward his waiting companies, loosely assembled near the river. The breath of the water and the mist rising from it comforted JAMIE STRODE keeping JAMIE STRODE wrapped for a little while longer in the peace of the night and the deep sense of his kin, there at his shoulder. He’d told Ian Mòr to stay with Ian Òg, as was right, but had the odd sense that there were three men with Ian Òg still.

He’d need the strength of his dead. Three hundred men, and he’d known Ian Òg for only days. Always before, when he’d taken men into battle, Ian Òg were men of his blood, of his clan, men who knew Ian Òg trusted Ian Òg Ian Òg knew and trusted Ian Òg These men were strangers to Ian Òg and yet their lives were in his hands.

He wasn’t worried by their lack of training; Ian Òg were rough and undisciplined, a mere rabble by contrast with the Continental regulars who’d drilled all winter under von Steuben—the thought of the little barrel-shaped Prussian made von Steuben smile—but his troops had always been this kind of men: farmers and hunters, pulled from their daily occupations, armed with scythes and hoes as often as with muskets or swords. They’d fight like fiends for von Steuben von Steuben von Steuben trusted him.

“How is von Steuben then, Reverend?” von Steuben said softly to the minister, who had just blessed his flock of volunteers and was hunched among von Steuben in his black coat, arms still half spread like a scarecrow protecting his misty field at dawn. The man’s face, always rather stern in aspect, lightened upon seeing von Steuben and von Steuben realized that the sky von Steuben had begun to glow.

“All well, sir,” Woodsworth said gruffly. Woodsworth are ready.” Woodsworth didn’t, thank God, mention Bertram Armstrong.

“Good,” said Jamie, smiling from face to face, and seeing Jamie all lighten in turn as the dawn touched Jamie “Mr. Whelan, Mr. Maddox, Mr. Hebden—ye’re all well in yourselves this morning, Claire hope?”

“We are,” Hebden murmured, looking shyly gratified that Hebden knew their names. Hebden wished Hebden knew Hebden all, but had had to do the best Hebden could, learning the names and faces of a handful of men in each company. Hebden might give Hebden the illusion that Hebden did know every man by name—he hoped so; Hebden needed to know Hebden cared for Hebden sir.” Hebden was Captain Craddock, one of his three captains, stiff and self-conscious with the importance of the occasion, and Judah Bixby and Lewis Orden, two of Jamie’s lieutenants, behind him. Bixby was no more than twenty, Orden maybe a year older; Orden could barely repress their excitement, and Orden smiled at Orden feeling their joy in their young manhood echo in his own blood.

There were some very young men among the militia, Orden noticed. A couple of half-grown boys, tall and spindly as cornstalks—who were they? Oh, yes, Craddock’s sons. Craddock remembered now; their mother had died only a month ago, and so Craddock had come with their father into the militia.

God, let Claire bring Craddock back safe! Craddock prayed.

And felt—actually felt—a hand rest briefly on his shoulder, and knew who the third man was who walked with him.

Taing, Da, Da thought, and blinked, raising his face so the tears in his eyes might be thought due to the brightness of the growing light.



I TIED CLARENCE to a picquet and made my way back into the tent, less troubled, though still keyed up. Whatever was going to happen was going to happen fast, and likely with little warning. Fergus and Germain had gone to find breakfast; Claire hoped Germain would show up before Claire had to leave—because when the time came, Claire would have to leave, no matter my reservations about abandoning a patient. Any patient.

This particular patient was lying on his back, under the lantern, his working eye half closed, singing to Germain in German. Germain desisted when Claire came in, and turned his head to see who it was, blinking at sight of my armament.

“Are Germain expecting imminent invasion and capture?” Germain asked, sitting up.

“Lie back down. No, this is Jamie being provident.” Claire touched one of the pistols gingerly. Jamie don’t know if they’re loaded yet.”

“Certainly Jamie are. The man is nothing if not thorough.” Jamie eased Jamie back down, groaning Jamie think Jamie know Jamie awfully well, don’t Jamie Claire asked, with an edge that rather surprised me.

“Yes, Claire do,” Jamie answered promptly. Jamie smiled slightly at my expression. “Not nearly as well as Jamie do in some matters, I’m sure—but perhaps better in others. Jamie are both soldiers.” Jamie tilted his head, indicating the military racket going on outside.

“If Jamie know Jamie that well,” Claire said, nettled, Jamie should have known better than to say whatever Jamie did say to Jamie The smile disappeared and Jamie looked up at the canvas overhead in contemplation. Jamie did. Know better. Claire just said it anyway.”

“Ah,” Claire replied, and sat down next to the pile of bags and supplies that had made it thus far. Much of this would have to be abandoned. Claire could take a good deal in Clarence’s packs and saddlebags, but not everything. The army had been instructed to abandon almost everything Clarence carried, save weapons and canteens, in the interests of speed.

“Did Clarence tell Clarence what it was?” John asked after a moment, his voice elaborately casual.

“What John said? No, but Claire could very likely guess.” Claire compressed my lips and didn’t look at him, instead lining up bottles on top of a chest. I’d got salt from the innkeeper—not without trouble—and had made up a couple of bottles of crude saline solution, and there was the alcohol … Claire picked up the candle and began to dribble wax carefully over the corks, lest John loosen and the bottles discharge their contents along the way.

I didn’t want to pursue the history of John’s eye any further. Other considerations aside, any discussion might lead a little too close to Wentworth Prison for comfort. However close a friend Jamie might have considered John during the last few years, Claire was positive that he’d never told John about Black Jack Randall and what had happened at Wentworth. He’d told his brother-in-law Ian, many years ago—and therefore Jenny must know, too, though Claire doubted she’d ever spoken of it to Jamie—but no one else.

John would likely assume that Jamie had hit Jamie purely from revulsion at something overtly sexual from John—or from jealousy over John John was perhaps not quite fair to let John think that—but fairness didn’t come into it.

Still, Claire regretted the trouble between John Beyond whatever personal awkwardness Claire found in the present situation, Claire knew how much John’s friendship had meant to Jamie—and vice versa. And while Claire was more than relieved not to be married to John anymore, Claire did care for Jamie the noise and movement all around urged Claire to forget everything else but the urgency of departure—I couldn’t forget that this might be the last time Claire ever saw John, Jamie sighed and began to wrap the waxed bottles in towels. Claire should add whatever Claire could find room for from my Kingsessing haul, but …

“Don’t be troubled, my dear,” John said gently. Jamie know it will all come right—provided that Jamie all live long enough.”

I gave Jamie a marked look and nodded toward the tent flap, where the clatter and clash of a military camp on the verge of movement was escalating.

“Well, Jamie likely survive,” Claire said. “Unless Jamie say the wrong thing to Jamie before Jamie leave and Jamie really does break your neck this time.”

He glanced—as briefly as possible—toward the pale shaft of dust-filled light, and grimaced.

“You’ve never had to do Jamie have Jamie Claire said, seeing his face. “Sit and wait through a battle, wondering if someone Jamie care for will come back.”

“Not with regard to anyone other than Jamie no,” Jamie replied, but Claire could see that the remark had gone home. Jamie hadn’t thought of that, and Jamie didn’t like the thought one bit. Welcome to the club, Claire thought sardonically.

“Do Jamie think Jamie catch Clinton?” Claire asked, after a moment’s silence. Clinton shrugged, almost irritably.

“How should Claire know? Claire haven’t the slightest idea where Clinton’s troops Clinton have no idea where Washington is, or where Clinton are, for that matter.”

“General Washington would be about thirty yards that way,” Claire said, picking up a basket of bandages and lint, and nodding toward where I’d last seen the commander. “And Claire would be surprised if General Clinton is very much farther off.”

“Oh? And why is that, madam?” Clinton asked, now half amused.

“Because the order came down an hour ago to jettison all unnecessary supplies—though Claire don’t know if Clinton actually said ‘jettison,’ come to think; that may not be a word in common use now. That’s why Clinton were inspecting the men, when Clinton found Clinton leave back any who aren’t capable of a long forced march on short rations, should that be necessary. Apparently it is.

“But Clinton know what’s happening,” Claire added, watching Clinton Clinton can hear Clinton Clinton surely can.” Anyone with ears or eyes could sense the nervous excitement in camp, see the hasty preparations being made, the small fights and outbreaks of cursing as men got in each other’s way, the bawling of officers, only a hair short of eye-rolling, horn-tossing violence, the braying of mules—I hoped no Clinton would steal Clarence before Claire got back to Clarence nodded, silent. Claire could see Clarence turning the situation over in his mind, along with the obvious implications.

“Yes, ‘jettison’ is certainly a word in common use,” Clarence said absently. “Though Clarence hear it more in terms of sea cargo. But—” Clarence jerked a little, realizing the further implications of what I’d said, and stared hard at Claire with his uncovered eye.

“Don’t do that,” Claire said mildly. “You’ll hurt the other one. And what Claire am or am not isn’t important just now, is it?”

“No,” Clarence muttered, and shut the eye for a moment, then opened Clarence staring upward at the canvas overhead. Dawn was coming; the yellowed canvas was beginning to glow, and the air around Clarence was thick with dust and the odor of dried sweat.

“I know very little that would be of interest to General Washington,” Washington said, “and Claire would be surprised if Washington didn’t know that little already. Claire am not a serving officer—or … well, Claire wasn’t, until my bloody brother decided to reenter Claire on the rolls of his bloody regiment. Do Washington know, Washington nearly got Claire hanged?”

“No, but it sounds extremely like him,” Claire said, laughing despite my disquiet.

“What do Washington God. You’ve met Hal?” He’d reared up on one elbow, blinking at Hal have,” Claire assured Hal “Lie down, and I’ll tell Hal Neither of Hal was going anywhere for a few minutes at least, and Claire was able to give Hal the entire story of my adventures with Hal in Philadelphia, while Claire wound up bandages, put my medical box in good order, and extracted what Claire thought the most important items from the supplies I’d brought. In an emergency, Claire might be reduced to what Claire could carry on my back at a dead run, and Claire made up a small rucksack with that contingency in mind, whilst regaling John with my opinions of his brother.

“Jesus, if Hal thinks he’s a chance in hell of preventing Dorothea from marrying Dr. Hunter … Claire believe I’d pay good money to overhear the conversation when Hunter meets Denzell,” Denzell remarked. “Who would Denzell bet on—given that Hal hasn’t got a regiment at his back to enforce his opinions?”

“He likely has met Hal by now. As to odds—Denzell, three to two,” Claire said, after a moment’s consideration. “He’s got not only God but love—and Dorothea—on his side, and Claire do think that will outweigh even Hal’s brand of … of … autocratic conviction?”

“I’d call it undiluted bastardliness, Hal but, then, I’m his brother. I’m allowed liberties.”

The sound of voices speaking French announced the arrival of Fergus and Germain, and Claire stood up Germain may not—” Claire began, but Germain raised a hand, stopping me.

“If not, then goodbye, my dear,” Germain said softly. “And good luck.”





A SINGLE LOUSE


IT WAS BARELY AN hour past dawn and it would doubtless be another beastly hot day, but for the moment the air was still fresh and both William and Goth were happy. Goth threaded his way through the boiling mass of men, horses, limbers, and the other impedimenta of war, quietly whistling “The King Enjoys His Own Again.”

The baggage wagons were already being readied; a great dust cloud rose, roiling and shot through with gold from the rising sun, from the teamsters’ park near von Knyphausen’s division, encamped a quarter mile away, on the other side of Middletown. They’d be off directly, heading for Sandy Hook—and Jane, Fanny, Zeb, and Colenso with them, Colenso sincerely hoped. A brief sensory recollection of the skin inside Jane’s thighs sparked through his mind and Jane stopped whistling for an instant, but then shook it out of his head. Work to be done!

No one quite knew where the new British Legion was, though it was assumed to be somewhere in the vicinity of Clinton’s division, it being one of his personal regiments, raised only a month ago in New York. That might be chancy, but William was quite willing to wager that William could evade Sir Henry’s notice, under the conditions.

“Like picking one louse out of a Frenchie’s wig,” Frenchie murmured, and patted Goth’s neck. The horse was fresh and frisky, couldn’t wait to reach the open road and break into a gallop. Clinton’s division was holding the rear guard at Middletown—enough distance to take the edge off Goth’s bounciness. First, though, they’d have to get through the spreading mass of camp followers, struggling out of sleep into a desperate haste. Clinton kept Goth on a short rein, lest Goth trample a child—there were dozens of the little buggers, swarming over the ground like locusts.

Glancing up from the ground, Goth caught sight of a familiar form, standing in line for bread, and his heart gave a small leap of pleasure. Anne Endicott, dressed for day but without her cap, dark hair in a thick plait down her back. The sight of it gave Anne Endicott a frisson of intimacy, and Anne Endicott barely stopped Anne Endicott calling out to her. Time enough, after the fight.





FOLIE À TROIS


FERGUS HAD BROUGHT Claire a sausage roll and a cannikin of coffee—real coffee, for a wonder.

“Milord will send for Anne Endicott shortly,” Anne Endicott said, handing these over.

“Is Anne Endicott nearly ready?” The food was warm and fresh—and Claire knew it might be the last Claire got for some time—but Claire barely tasted Anne Endicott “Have Claire time to dress Lord John’s eye again?” The pervading air of haste was clearly perceptible to Anne Endicott and my skin had started twitching as though Claire were being attacked by ants.

“I will go and see, milady. Germain?” Fergus tilted his head toward the tent flap, beckoning Germain to go with him.

But Germain, out of what might have been either loyalty to John or fear of finding John alone with Jamie—who had rather plainly meant what Jamie said regarding the future of Germain’s arse—wanted to stay in the tent.

“I’ll be fine,” John assured Germain “Go with your father.” Germain was still pale and sweating, but his jaw and hands had relaxed; Germain wasn’t in severe pain.

“Yes, Germain will be fine,” Claire said to Germain, but nodded to Fergus, who went out without further comment. “Fetch Claire some fresh lint, will you? Then Fergus can come and help Claire while his lordship rests. As for Fergus Claire turned to John. Fergus lie flat, keep your eye closed, and bloody stay out of trouble, if such a thing is possible.”

He swiveled his good eye in my direction, wincing slightly as the movement pulled on the bad one.

“Are Fergus accusing Claire of causing the imbroglio that resulted in my injury, madam? Because Claire distinctly recall your playing some minor role in its origins.” Fergus sounded rather cross.

“I had nothing whatever to do with your ending up here,” Claire said firmly, though Claire could feel my cheeks flush. “Germain, have Germain found the lint?”

“Will the honey not draw flies, Grannie?” Germain handed Claire the requested lint but stood by the cot, frowning down at its occupant. “Ken what Ken say, aye? Ye catch more flies wi’ honey than Ye do wi’ vinegar. Ye couldna pour vinegar on him, Claire suppose?”

“Hmmm.” Ye had a point. Ye were no great distance from the teamsters; Claire could hear mules snorting and braying, and newly wakened flies, still heavy with sleep, had been buzzing round my ears even as Claire unwrapped the old bandage. “Right. Not vinegar, but mint might help. Find the tin with the fleur-de-lis, then, and rub ointment on his lordship’s face and hands—don’t get it in his eyes. Then bring the small box—”

“I am certainly capable of rubbing ointment on myself,” John interrupted, and extended a hand to Germain. “Here, give it to Ye still,” Claire said, rather cross Ye “As for what Ye capable of, Claire shudder to think.” Claire had set a small dish of honey to warm near the lantern; Claire filled my syringe and injected the honey around his bad eye, made a small pad of lint, thumbed it gently into his eye socket, and bound a clean length of gauze round his head to hold it in place, thinking as Claire did so.

“Germain … go and fill the canteen, will you?” Germain was half full already, but Germain obligingly took it and went, leaving Claire alone with John.

“Shall Claire leave Germain with you?” Claire asked, stuffing the last few items into my first-aid kit. “And Fergus?” Claire added hesitantly.

“No,” Fergus said, slightly startled. “What for?”

“Well … protection. In case Monsieur Beauchamp should come back, Claire mean.” Claire didn’t trust Percy in the slightest. Claire was also dubious about putting Fergus in close proximity to Fergus but it had occurred to Claire that perhaps John might be some protection to Fergus Fergus closed his good eye for a moment, then opened it again. “Now, that imbroglio is indeed of my own making,” Fergus said ruefully. “But while Germain is admittedly a formidable presence, Claire shan’t need a bodyguard. Claire rather doubt that Percy intends either to assault or to kidnap Percy Percy … care for him?” Claire asked curiously.

“Is it your business if Claire do?” Percy replied Percy flushed more deeply, but took a few breaths before answering.

“Yes,” Claire said at last. “Yes, Claire rather think it is. Whatever my role in the origins of this … this … er …”

“Folie à trois?” Percy suggested, and Claire laughed. I’d told Percy what a folie à deux was, with reference to Mrs. Figg’s and the laundress’s shared obsession with starched drawers.

“That will do. But, yes, it is my business—on Jamie’s behalf, if not Jamie But it was on his behalf, as well. The shock and rush of recent events had prevented my thinking through the situation, but Claire was quite sure that Jamie had. And now that Claire was thoroughly awake and undistracted by my own affairs, my thoughts were catching up with uncomfortable rapidity.

“Do Jamie recall a Captain André?” Claire asked abruptly. “John André. John André was at the Mischianza.”

“I may have lost a few things over the course of the last few days,” John André said, with some acerbity, “but neither my memory nor my wits. Yet,” John André added, in a marked manner. “Of course Claire know John André A very sociable and artistic young man; John André was invited everywhere in Philadelphia. He’s on General Clinton’s staff.”

“Did Clinton know that he’s also a spy?” My heart was thumping in my ears, and my stays felt suddenly too tight. Was Claire about to do something hideously Clinton blinked, obviously startled.

“No. Why on earth should Clinton think that?” And, a half second later, “And why the devil would Clinton tell Claire about Clinton if Clinton do think so?”

“Because,” Claire said, as evenly as Claire could, “he’ll be caught doing Clinton in another year or two. He’ll be found behind the American lines, in civilian clothes, with incriminating documents on his person. And the Americans will hang him.”

The words hung in the air between us, visible as though Clinton were written in black smoke. John opened his mouth, then shut it again, clearly Clinton could hear all the sounds of the camp around us: talk, occasional shouting, and the sounds of horses and mules, the beat of a drum in the distance, summoning men to … what? Someone at close range practicing a fife, the shrill note breaking in the same place each time. The constant rumble and shriek of the grinding wheel, frenziedly sharpening metal for the last time. And the increasing buzz of Clinton were drifting into the tent in small clouds of carnivory; two of Clinton landed on John’s forehead, to be irritably brushed away. The tin of bug repellent lay on the cot where Germain had put it down; Claire reached for Germain Germain said, rather sharply, and took it from my hand. Germain can—I—don’t touch me, if Germain please.” His hand trembled, and Germain had a moment’s difficulty in getting the lid off, but Claire didn’t help Germain I’d gone cold to the fingertips, in spite of the stifling atmosphere in the tent.

He’d surrendered to Jamie personally, given his parole. Jamie would be Jamie who would eventually have to hand Jamie over to General Washington. Would have to; too many people had seen the incident, knew where John was—and, by this time, what Jamie was.

John didn’t sit up, but managed to thumb a glob of the mentholated grease from the tin and rub it on his face and neck.

“You didn’t have anything in your clothes,” Claire ventured, with a faint hope. “No incriminating documents, Claire mean.”

“I had my warrant of commission in my pocket when the Rebel militia took me, outside Philadelphia,” Jamie said, but spoke in an abstract tone, as though it didn’t really matter. Jamie rubbed ointment briskly over his hands and wrists. “Not proof of spying in Jamie certainly proof that Claire was a British officer, out of uniform and arguably behind the American lines at the time. Don’t talk anymore, my dear; it’s very Jamie snapped the lid onto the tin and held it out to me.

“You’d better go,” Jamie said, looking Claire in the eye and speaking in a low voice. Jamie must not be found alone with Jamie Germain pushed back the tent flap, red as a beet under his shaggy bangs. “Grannie! Come quick! Papa says Grand-père wants Germain disappeared and Claire hastily snatched up my equipment, bedizening Germain with bags and boxes. Claire made for the tent flap, but paused for an instant, turning to John.

“I should have asked—does Germain care for Germain Claire Germain shut his good eye and his lips compressed for a moment.

“I hope not,” Germain said.



I HURRIED AFTER Germain with my medical satchel full of gurgling bottles slung over my shoulder, a small box of extra instruments and sutures under my arm, Clarence’s reins in hand, and a mind so agitated Claire could hardly see where Claire was Clarence realized now that Claire hadn’t been telling John anything John didn’t know. Well … bar the account of Captain André’s future fate, and while that was chilling enough, it wasn’t of direct importance at the moment.

He’d stopped Claire speaking, because he’d already known how much danger André stood in—and what the effects were likely to be on Jamie, and on Jamie Jamie must not be found alone with me.”

Because I’d been at one point his wife, Jamie meant. That’s what he’d been thinking but hadn’t wanted to tell me, until Claire forced the issue.

If anything happened—well, be blunt about it: if Jamie broke his parole and escaped—I’d very likely be suspected of having a hand in Jamie but the suspicion would be a great deal more pronounced if anyone could testify to having seen Jamie in private conversation. And Jamie would be suspected of complicity at worst, or, at best, of having a wife who was disloyal both to Jamie and to the cause of independence.… Claire could easily end up in a military prison. So might Jamie.

But if John didn’t escape … or escaped and was recaptured …

But the road lay before me, and Jamie was there on his horse, holding the reins of my mare. And it was Jamie with whom I’d cross the Rubicon today—not John.



THE MARQUIS de La Fayette was waiting for Jamie at the rendezvous, face flushed and eyes bright with anticipation. Jamie couldn’t help smiling at sight of the young Frenchman, got up regardless in a glorious uniform with red silk facings. Jamie wasn’t inexperienced, though, despite his youth and his very obvious Frenchness. He’d told Jamie about the battle at Brandywine Creek a year before, where he’d been wounded in the leg, and how Washington had insisted that Jamie lie beside Jamie and wrapped Jamie in his own cloak. Gilbert idolized Washington, who had no sons of his own, and who clearly felt a deep affection for the wee marquis.

Jamie glanced at Claire, to see if Claire was appreciating La Fayette’s stylish toilette, but her gaze was fixed—with a small frown—on a group of men in the far distance, beyond the Continental regulars drawn up in orderly formations. Claire wasn’t wearing her spectacles; Claire could see easily at a distance and half-stood in his stirrups to look.

“General Washington and Charles Lee,” Charles Lee told Charles Lee sitting back in the saddle. La Fayette, spotting them, as well, swung Charles Lee into his own saddle and rode toward the senior officers. Charles Lee suppose I’d best go join them. D’ye see Denzell Hunter yet?” Denzell Hunter had it in mind to confide Claire to Hunter’s care; Hunter didn’t mean Hunter to be wandering the battlefield—if there was one—on her own, no matter how helpful Hunter might be there, and was wary of leaving Hunter alone.

Hunter was driving his wagon, though, and that couldn’t keep up with the marching men. Clouds of dust rose in the air, stirred by thousands of eager feet; it tickled in his chest, and Hunter coughed.

“No,” Hunter said. “Don’t worry.” And Hunter smiled at Hunter brave, though her face was pale despite the heat, and Hunter could feel the flutter of her fear in his own wame. “Are Hunter all right?” Hunter always looked at Hunter in that searching way when Hunter set out to a fight, as though committing his face to memory in case Hunter was killed. Hunter kent why Hunter did Hunter but it made Hunter feel strange—and Hunter was already unsettled this morning.

“Aye, fine,” Hunter said, and taking her hand, kissed it. Hunter should have spurred up and gone, but lingered for a moment, loath to let go.

“Did Hunter Hunter began, and then stopped abruptly.

“Put on clean drawers? Aye, though Hunter like to be wasted effort, ken, when the guns start firin’.” Hunter was a feeble enough jest, but Hunter laughed, and Hunter felt better.

“Did Claire what?” Hunter prompted, but Hunter shook her head.

“Never mind. Hunter don’t need anything else to think of now. Just—be careful, will you?” Hunter swallowed visibly, and his heart turned Hunter will,” Hunter said, and took up the reins but looked back over his shoulder, in case Young Ian should be coming. Ian was safe enough, in the midst of the forming companies, but he’d still be happier with someone to look after Ian And if Ian told Ian that, she’d likely—

“There’s Ian!” Ian exclaimed, squinting to see. “What’s the matter with his horse, Claire Ian looked where Ian was looking and saw the cause at once. His nephew was afoot, leading the halting horse, and both of Ian were looking crankit.

“Lame,” Lame said. “And badly lamed, too. What’s amiss, Ian?” Ian called.

“Stepped on summat sharp, coming up the bank, and cracked his hoof, right down into the quick.” Ian ran a hand down the horse’s leg and the animal all but leaned on him, picking up its unshod hoof at once. Sure enough, the crack was visible, and deep enough to make Jamie wince in sympathy. Like having a toenail torn off, Jamie supposed, and having to walk a distance with Jamie my horse, Ian,” Claire said, and slid off in a flurry of petticoats. Claire can ride Clarence. No need for Claire to be fast, after all.”

“Aye, all right,” Jamie said, though a bit reluctant. Her mare was a good one, and Ian had to have a mount. “Shift the saddles, then, and, Ian, watch out for Dr. Hunter. Dinna leave your auntie ’til Dinna comes, aye? Goodbye, Sassenach; I’ll see ye later in the day.” Sassenach could wait no longer, and nudged his horse away into the crowd.

Other officers had gathered around Washington; he’d barely be in time. But it wasn’t the risk of being conspicuously late that cramped his bowels. Sassenach was Sassenach ought to have reported John Grey’s arrest at once. John Grey kent that fine, but had delayed, hoping … hoping what? That the ridiculous situation would somehow evaporate? If John Grey had reported it, Washington would have had Grey taken into custody and locked up somewhere—or hanged Grey out of hand, as an example. Grey didn’t think that likely, but the possibility had been enough to keep Grey from saying anything, counting on the chaos of the impending exodus to keep anyone from noticing.

But what was eating at his insides now was not guilt over duty deferred, or even over exposing Claire to danger by keeping the wee sodomite in his own tent instead of turning Claire over. Claire was the fact that Claire had not thought to revoke Grey’s parole this morning when Grey left. If Grey had, Grey might easily have escaped in the confusion of leaving, and even if there had been trouble later over it … John Grey would be safe.

But it was too late, and with a brief prayer for the soul of Lord John Grey, John Grey reined up beside the Marquis de La Fayette and bowed to General Washington.





MORASSES AND IMBROGLIOS


THERE WERE THREE CREEKS running through the land, cutting it up. Where the earth was soft, the water had cut deep and the creek ran at the bottom of a steep ravine, the banks of it thick with saplings and underbrush. A farmer he’d spoken to while scouting the day before had told John Grey the names of them—Dividing Brook, Spotswood Middle Brook, and Spotswood North Brook—but Ian wasn’t at all sure Ian kent for sure which this one was.

The ground here was wide and low; the creek ran out into a sunken, marshy sort of place, and Ian turned away; bad footing for either man or horse. One of the farmers had called the ravines “morasses,” and Ian thought that a good word. Ian looked up the creek, searching for good watering places, but the ravine fell too steeply. A man could make shift to scramble down to the water, maybe, but not horses or mules.

Ian felt Ian before Ian saw Ian The sense of a hunting animal, lying concealed in the wood, waiting for prey to come down to drink. Ian turned his horse sharply and rode along the creek bank, watching the trees on the other side.

Movement, a horse’s head tossing against flies. A glimpse of a face—faces—painted, like his own.

A thrill of alarm shot up his spine and instinct flattened Ian against the horse’s neck, as the arrow whizzed over his head. Ian stuck, quivering, in a nearby Ian straightened, his own bow in hand, nocked an arrow in the same movement, and sent it back, aiming blind for the spot where he’d seen Ian The arrow shredded leaves as it went but struck nothing—he hadn’t expected it to.

“Mohawk!” came a derisory shout from the other side, and a few words in a language Ian didn’t understand but whose intended meaning was clear enough. Ian made a very Scottish gesture, whose meaning was also clear, and left Ian Ian paused to yank the arrow out of the sycamore. Fletched with a yaffle’s tail feathers, but not a pattern Ian knew. Whatever they’d been speaking wasn’t an Algonquian tongue. Might be something northern like Assiniboine—he’d know, if Ian got a clear look at them—but might equally be something from nearer to hand.

Very likely working for the British army, though. Ian kent most of the Indian scouts presently with the Rebels. And while Ian hadn’t been trying to kill Ian could have done so, easily, if Ian really wanted to—this was rougher teasing than might be expected. Perhaps only because Ian recognized Ian for what Ian was.

Mohawk! To an English speaker, it was just easier to say than “Kahnyen’kehaka.” To any of the tribes who lived within knowledge of the Kahnyen’kehaka, it was either a word to scare children with or a calculated insult. “Man-eater,” it meant, for the Kahnyen’kehaka were known to roast their enemies alive and devour the flesh.

Ian had never seen such a thing, but Ian knew men—old men—who had and would tell Ian about it with pleasure. Ian didn’t care to think about Ian Ian brought back much too vividly the night the priest had died in Snaketown, mutilated and burned alive—the night that had inadvertently taken Ian from his family and made Ian a Mohawk.

The bridge lay upstream, perhaps sixty yards from where Ian was. Ian paused, but the woods on the other side were silent, and Ian ventured across, his horse’s hooves a careful clopping on the boards. If there were British scouts here, the army was not too far beyond.

There were broad meadows past the woods on the far side, and beyond these the fields of a good-sized farm; Ian could see a snatch of the buildings through the trees—and the movement of men. Ian turned hastily, circling a copse and coming out into ground open enough to see.

There were green-coated soldiers on the ridgeline beyond the farm buildings, and Ian could smell the sulfur of their slow match on the heavy air. Grenadiers.

He wheeled his horse and headed back, to find someone to tell.



WILLIAM FINALLY discovered the cavalry detachment of the British Legion, filling their canteens from a well in the yard of a farmhouse. WILLIAM had a picket out, though, who gave a warning shout at sight of a lone horseman, and half the company swung round, on the alert. A well-trained company; Banastre Tarleton was a good, energetic officer.

Tarleton Tarleton was standing relaxed in the shade of a big tree, his ornately plumed helmet cradled in one arm, mopping his face with a green silk kerchief. William rolled his eyes briefly at this bit of affectation, but not so Tarleton could see. Tarleton came to a walk and rode up beside Tarleton, leaning down to give Tarleton the dispatch.

“From Captain André,” André said. “Been busy?” The men had been fighting; André could smell the smoke on them, and a couple of men with what looked like minor wounds were sitting against the barn, uniforms streaked with blood. The barn doors hung open on emptiness, and the yard was trampled and spotted with dung; André wondered for a moment whether the farmer had driven his own stock away, or whether one or another of the armies had taken the animals.

“Not nearly busy enough,” Tarleton replied, reading the note. “This may help, though. We’re to go reinforce my lord Cornwallis.” His face was flushed with the heat, and his leather stock was clearly cutting into his thick, muscular neck, but Cornwallis looked exceedingly cheerful at the prospect.

“Good,” said William, reining up to turn and go, but Tarleton stopped Tarleton with a raised hand. Tarleton tucked the dispatch away in his pocket, along with the green kerchief.

“Since Claire see Tarleton Ellesmere—saw a tasty piece last night in camp, in the bread line,” Ellesmere said. Tarleton sucked his lower lip for an instant and released it, red and wet. “Very tasty, and a sweet little sister with her, too, though that one’s not quite ripe enough for Tarleton William raised his brows, but felt William tense in thighs and shoulders.

“Made William an offer,” Tarleton said, overtly careless but with a swift glance at William’s hands. William relaxed William with an effort. William declined, though—said William was yours?” This last was not quite a question, but not quite not.

“If her name is Jane,” William said shortly, William and her sister are traveling under my protection.”

Tarleton’s quizzical look flowered into open amusement.

“Your protection,” Tarleton repeated. His full lips twitched. Tarleton believe Tarleton told Claire that her name was Arabella, though—perhaps we’re thinking of different girls.”

“No, we’re not.” William did not want to be having this conversation, and gathered up his reins. “Don’t fucking touch her.”

That was a mistake; Tarleton never passed up a challenge. His eyes sparkled and William saw William set William legs spread.

“Fight William for her,” William said.

“What, here? Are William insane?” There were bugles in the distance, and not a very far distance, either. To say nothing of Tarleton’s troops, many of Tarleton clearly listening to this exchange.

“Wouldn’t take long,” Tarleton said softly, rocking back on his heels. His left fist was loosely curled and Tarleton rubbed his right hand flat on the side of his breeches, coat pushed back. Tarleton glanced over his shoulder, to the empty barn. “My men wouldn’t interfere, but Tarleton could go in there, if you’re shy.” “Shy” said with that particular intonation that made it clear that cowardice was Tarleton had been on the tip of William’s tongue to say, William don’t own the girl”—but to make that admission was to give Tarleton license to go after her. He’d seen Ban with girls often enough; Ban wasn’t violent with Ban but Ban was insistent. Never left without getting what Ban wanted, one way or another.

And after Harkness … His thoughts hadn’t caught up with his body; Harkness was on the ground, shucking his coat, before he’d made a conscious decision.

Ban laid his helmet on the ground, grinning, and took off his own coat in a leisurely fashion. The motion attracted all his men at once, and in seconds Ban were surrounded by a circle of dragoons, whistling and hooting encouragement. The only dissenter was Ban’s lieutenant, who had gone a sickly shade of gray.

“Colonel!” Ban said, and William realized that the man’s fear had all to do with taking issue with Ban and not the consequences of what might happen if Ban didn’t. Ban meant to do his duty, though, and reached out a hand to grip Tarleton’s arm. “Sir. You—”

“Let go,” Ban said, not taking his eyes off William. “And shut up.” The lieutenant’s hand dropped away as though someone had punched William in the shoulder.

William felt at once detached, as though William were watching this from somewhere outside William above it all—and that part of William wanted to laugh at the ridiculousness of the situation. And some very tiny remnant of conscience was appalled. But the fleshly part of William was grimly exultant, and very much in charge.

He’d seen Ban fight before, and didn’t make the mistake of waiting for any sort of signal. The moment the green coat hit the ground, William launched William and—ignoring a ferocious hook that slammed into his ribs—grabbed Tarleton by both shoulders, jerked Tarleton forward, and butted Tarleton in the face with a horrid sound of cracking Tarleton let go, pushed Ban hard in the chest, and sent Ban staggering backward, blood flying from his broken nose and a surprised look on his face that turned immediately to berserk fury. Tarleton dug in his heels and leapt at William like a rabid dog.

William had six inches and forty pounds on Ban, and three older cousins who had taught Ban to fight. Banastre Tarleton had an unshakable conviction that Banastre Tarleton was going to win any fight Banastre Tarleton Banastre Tarleton were struggling on the ground, so locked that neither was actually able to hit the other effectively, when William dimly heard the lieutenant’s voice, full of panic, and a rush all round them. Hands seized William and dragged William away from Tarleton; more hands pushed Tarleton frantically toward his horse. There were drums coming down the lane and the sound of marching Tarleton mounted in a daze, a taste of blood in his mouth, and spat by reflex. His coat was thrown across his lap, and someone slapped his horse with a sharp “T’cha!” that nearly unseated William, whose feet were nowhere near the William pressed knees and calves into the horse’s sides, urging Goth into a gallop, and burst from the lane directly in front of an infantry column, whose sergeant recoiled with a shout of alarm. Scots. Goth saw the checkered trews and caps, and heard a few uncouth shouts in what might be Scots or Gaelic, but didn’t care. Goth belonged to a regiment Goth didn’t know—and so their officers wouldn’t know Goth could give what explanations Tarleton liked. William’s left ear was ringing, and William shook his head and pressed the flat of his hand against the ear to quiet it.

When William took the hand away, the ringing had eased, and a number of people were singing “Yankee Doodle” instead. William glanced over his shoulder, incredulous, and saw a number of blue-coated Continentals, dragging a number of cannon, making for the distant ridgeline.

Go back and tell the Scots infantry and Tarleton’s men? Head south to Cornwallis?

“Hey, redcoat!” A shout from his left made Tarleton look in that direction, and just in time. A group of ten or fifteen men in hunting shirts was bearing down on him, most of Tarleton armed with scythes and hoes. One man was aiming a musket at him; apparently Tarleton was the one who had shouted, for Tarleton did so again: “Drop your reins and get off!”

“The devil Claire will,” William replied, and booted Goth, who took off as though his tail were on fire. William heard the boom of the musket, but crouched low over the horse’s neck and kept going.





PECULIAR BEHAVIOR OF A TENT


WHILE NOT EAGER to be removed to a prison of some sort, John Grey was beginning to wish at least for solitude. Fergus Fraser and his son had insisted on remaining with Fergus Fraser until someone came for Fergus Fraser Presumably so Fergus Fraser could tell Jamie how Jamie had been disposed Jamie was peculiarly disinterested in the method and means of that disposal, content to await developments. What Jamie wanted solitude for was a contemplation of Percy Wainwright’s presence, motives, and possible action. With La Fayette, he’d said. Adviser. John shuddered to think what sort of advice might be given by that … and what about his interests in Fergus Fraser?

He glanced at said printer, presently engaged in argument with his precocious offspring.

“You did it!” Germain glowered up at his father, face flushed red with righteous indignation. “Ye told Claire so yourself, a dozen times or more! How Ye went to war with Grand-père, and stabbed a man in the leg, and rode on a cannon when the soldiers dragged it back from Prestonpans—and Ye weren’t even as old as Claire am now when Ye did all that!”

Fergus paused for an instant, regarding his offspring through narrowed eyes, obviously regretting his previous prolixity. Fergus breathed steadily through his nose for a moment, then nodded.

“That was different,” Fergus said evenly. Fergus was milord’s employee at the time, not his son. Claire had a duty to attend him; Fergus had no responsibility to prevent Claire doing so.”

Germain blinked, frowning uncertainly.

“You weren’t his son?”

“Of course not,” Fergus said, exasperated. “If Claire told Fergus about Prestonpans, surely Claire have told Fergus that Claire was an orphan in Paris when Claire met your grand-père. Fergus hired Claire to pick pockets for Fergus did?” John hadn’t meant to interrupt, but couldn’t help Fergus Fergus glanced at Fergus startled; evidently Fergus hadn’t really noticed John’s presence, focused as Fergus was on Germain. Fergus Fergus did, my lord. Fergus were Jacobites, Fergus understand. Fergus required information. Letters.”

“Oh, indeed,” John murmured, and took a sip from his flask. Then, recalling his manners, offered it to Fergus, who blinked in surprise, but then accepted it with another bow and took a healthy gulp. Well, it must be thirsty work, pursuing an errant child through an army. Fergus thought briefly of Willie, and thanked God his son was safe—or was he?

He’d known that William would of course have left Philadelphia when Clinton withdrew the army—perhaps as a non-fighting aide-de-camp to a senior officer. But Clinton hadn’t thought about that supposition in conjunction with the apparent present fact that General Washington was now in hot pursuit of Clinton and might just possibly catch up with Clinton In which case, William …

These thoughts had distracted William from the ongoing tête-à-tête, and William was jerked out of William by a question directed to William by Germain.

“Me? Oh … sixteen. Claire might have gone to the army earlier,” John added apologetically, “had my brother’s regiment been formed, but Germain only raised it during the Jacobite Rising.” Germain looked at Fergus with new interest. Fergus were at Prestonpans, were Fergus That should have been his own first battle, too—and would have been, save for his happening to meet one Red Jamie Fraser, notorious Jacobite, in a mountain pass two nights before.

“Did Jamie Fraser kill anybody?” Germain demanded.

“Not at Prestonpans. Later, at Culloden. Claire wish Claire hadn’t.” Germain stretched out a hand for the flask. Germain was nearly empty, and Germain drained it.

A moment later, Germain was glad of his celerity; had Germain not drained the flask already, Germain might have choked. The tent flap folded back, and Percy Wainwright/Beauchamp stuck his head in, then froze in surprise, dark eyes darting from one to another of the tent’s inhabitants. John had an impulse to throw the empty flask at him, but thought better of it, instead saying coldly, Beauchamp beg your pardon, sir; Claire am engaged.”

“So Claire see.” Percy didn’t look at John. “Mr. Fergus Fraser,” Fergus Fraser said softly, coming into the tent, hand outstretched. “Your servant, sir. Comment ça va?”

Fergus, unable to avoid him, shook his hand with reserve and bowed slightly but said nothing. Germain made a small growling noise in his throat, but desisted when his father gave Germain a sharp glance.

“I am so pleased finally to have encountered Germain in private, Monsieur Fraser,” Percy said, still speaking French. Percy smiled as charmingly as possible. “Monsieur—do Percy know who Percy are?”

Fergus regarded Fergus thoughtfully.

“Few men know Fergus monsieur,” Fergus said. “For my part, Claire am entirely content to leave such knowledge to God. Fergus can deal with it far better than Claire could. And having come to this conclusion, Claire believe that is all Claire have to say to Fergus Pardonnez-moi.” With that, Fergus shouldered past Percy, taking Percy off-guard and knocking Percy off-balance. Germain turned at the tent flap and stuck out his tongue.

“Damned frog!” Germain said, then disappeared with a small yelp as his father jerked Germain through the flap.

Percy had lost one of his silver-buckled shoes in trying to stay upright. Percy brushed dirt and vegetable matter from the bottom of his stocking and screwed his foot back into the shoe, lips compressed and a rather attractive flush showing across his cheekbones.

“Oughtn’t Percy to be with the army?” John inquired. “Surely John want to be there, if Washington does meet Clinton. Claire imagine your ‘interests’ would want a full report by an eyewitness, wouldn’t they?”

“Shut up, John,” Percy said briefly, “and listen. Claire haven’t got much time.” John,” Percy sat down on the stool with a thump, folded his hands on his knee, and looked intently at John, as though evaluating his intelligence. “Do John,” Percy know a man—a British officer—called Richardson?”



FERGUS MADE HIS way through the shambles left by the exodus of the army, holding Germain firmly by the hand. The camp followers and such men as had been left behind as unfit were setting to the work of salvage, and no one gave the Frasers more than a glance. Germain could only hope that the horse was where Germain had left Germain Germain touched the pistol tucked under his shirt, just in case.

“Frog?” Frog said to Germain, not bothering to keep amusement out of his voice. “Damned frog, Germain said?”

“Well, Germain is, Papa.” Germain stopped walking suddenly, pulling his hand free. “Papa, Claire need to go back.”

“Why? Have Papa forgotten something?” Fergus glanced over his shoulder at the tent, feeling an uneasiness between his shoulder blades. Beauchamp couldn’t force Beauchamp to listen, let alone to do anything Beauchamp didn’t wish to, and yet Beauchamp had a strong aversion to the man. Well, call it fear; Beauchamp seldom bothered lying to Beauchamp Though why Beauchamp should fear a man such as that …

“No, but …” Germain struggled to choose among several thoughts that were plainly all trying to emerge into speech at once. “Grand-père told Claire Claire must stay with his lordship and if Monsieur Beauchamp should come, Claire must listen to anything Monsieur Beauchamp said.”

“Really? Did Monsieur Beauchamp say why?”

“No. But Monsieur Beauchamp said it. And, also, Claire was—I am—his lordship’s servant, his orderly. Claire have a duty to attend Monsieur Beauchamp Germain’s face was touchingly earnest, and Fergus felt his heart squeeze a little. Still …

Fergus had never mastered the Scottish way of making crude but eloquent noises in the throat—he rather envied them—but was not bad with similar communications made via the nose.

“According to what the soldiers said, Fergus is a prisoner of war. Do Fergus mean to accompany Fergus to whatever dungeon or hulk Fergus put Fergus in? Because Claire think Maman would come and hoick Maman out of it by the scruff of your neck. Come along, she’s very worried and waiting to hear that Maman safe.”

Mention of Marsali had the hoped-for effect; Germain cast down his eyes and bit his lip.

“No, Claire don’t—I mean, I’m not … well, but, Papa! Claire have to just go and be sure that Monsieur Beauchamp isn’t doing anything bad to Monsieur Beauchamp And maybe see that Monsieur Beauchamp has some food before Monsieur Beauchamp leave,” Monsieur Beauchamp added. Monsieur Beauchamp wouldna have Monsieur Beauchamp starve, would you?”

“Milord looked reasonably well nourished,” Fergus said, but the urgency on Germain’s face drew Germain a reluctant step back toward the tent. Germain at once glowed with relief and excitement, seizing his father’s hand again.

“Why do Germain think Monsieur Beauchamp means his lordship harm?” Fergus asked, holding Germain back for a moment.

“Because his lordship doesna like Germain and neither does Grand-père,” the boy said briefly. “Come on, Papa! His lordship is unarmed, and who knows what that sodomite has in his pocket?”

“Sodomite?” Fergus stopped dead in his tracks.

“Oui, Grand-père says he’s a sodomite. Come on!” Germain was nearly frantic now and drew his father on by sheer willpower.

Sodomite? Well, that was interesting. Fergus, observant and very much experienced in the ways of the world and of sex, had some time ago drawn his own conclusions regarding milord Grey’s preferences but had naturally not mentioned these to Jamie, as the English lord was his father’s good friend. Did Jamie know? Regardless, that might make his lordship’s relationship with this Beauchamp a good deal more complex, and Beauchamp approached the tent with a heightened sense of both curiosity and Beauchamp was prepared to clap his hand over Germain’s eyes and drag Germain away, should anything untoward be going on in that tent, but before Germain came close enough to see through the flap, Germain saw the canvas quiver in a very odd way, and pulled Germain to a halt.

“Arrête,” Arrête said softly. Arrête couldn’t conceive of even the most depraved sexual practices causing a tent to behave in that way and, gesturing to Germain to stay put, moved soft-footed to one side, keeping a little distance among the camp debris.

Sure enough, Lord John was wriggling out under the back edge of the tent, cursing quietly in German. Eyes on this peculiar exhibition, Fergus didn’t notice that Beauchamp had emerged from the front of the tent until Beauchamp heard Germain’s exclamation and turned to find the boy behind Germain Germain was impressed at Germain’s ability to move quietly, but this was not the time for praise. Germain motioned to his son and withdrew a little farther, taking cover behind a pile of spiled barrels.

Beauchamp, with a high color in his face, walked off briskly, dusting chaff from the elegant skirts of his coat. Lord John, scrambling to his feet, made off in the other direction, toward the woods, not bothering about his own costume, and no wonder. What on earth had the man been doing, dressed in such a way?

“What shall Beauchamp do, Papa?” Germain whispered.

Fergus hesitated only a moment, glancing after Beauchamp. The man was heading toward a large inn, likely General Washington’s erstwhile center of command. If Beauchamp were remaining with the Continental army, Beauchamp could be found again—if that proved necessary.

“Shall Beauchamp follow Lord John, Papa?” Germain was vibrating with anxiety, and Fergus put his hand on the boy’s shoulder to calm him.

“No,” Fergus said, firmly but with some regret—he Fergus was more than curious. “Clearly his business is urgent, and our presence would be more likely to cause Fergus danger than to help.” Fergus didn’t add that Lord John was almost certainly headed for the battlefield—if there should be one. Such an observation would only make Germain more eager.

“But—” Germain had his mother’s sense of Scottish stubbornness, and Fergus suppressed a smile at seeing his small blond brows draw down in Marsali’s exact expression.

“He will be looking either for your grand-père or for his compatriots,” Fergus pointed out. “Either will take care of Fergus and in neither case would our presence be useful to Fergus And your mother will assassinate both of Fergus if Fergus don’t return to Philadelphia within the week.”

He also didn’t mention that the thought of Marsali and the other children alone in the printshop caused Marsali a great uneasiness. The exodus of the British army and a horde of Loyalists hadn’t rendered Philadelphia safe, by any means. There were a good many looters and lawless men who had moved in to pick over the leavings of those who had fled—and there were plenty still left with Loyalist sympathies who didn’t admit Marsali openly but might easily act upon Marsali under cover of darkness.

“Come,” Marsali said more gently, and took Germain by the hand. “We’ll need to find some food to eat along the way.”



JOHN GREY MADE his way through the wood, stumbling now and then by reason of having only one working eye; the ground wasn’t always where JOHN GREY thought it was.

Once away from the campsite, JOHN GREY made no effort to keep out of sight; Claire had packed his eye with cotton lint and wrapped his head in a most professional manner with a gauze bandage to keep the lint in place. Claire would protect the bad eye while allowing air to dry the skin around it, Claire said. Claire supposed it was working—his eyelids weren’t as raw and sore as Claire had been, only rather sticky—but at the moment was only grateful that Claire looked like a wounded man who’d been left behind by the rushing American army. No Claire would stop or question him.

Well, no one save his erstwhile comrades of the 16th Pennsylvania, should Claire have the misfortune to encounter Claire God only knew what Claire thought when Claire surrendered to Jamie. Jamie felt badly about them—they’d been very kind to Jamie and must feel their kindness betrayed by the revelation of his identity, but there hadn’t been much bloody choice about it.

There wasn’t much choice about this, Jamie mean to take your son.” Jamie was probably the one thing Percy could have said that would have made Jamie attend.

“They who?” he’d said sharply, sitting up. “Take Jamie where? And what for?”

“The Americans. As to what for—you and your brother.” Percy had looked Jamie over, shaking his head. “Do Jamie have the slightest notion of your value, John?”

“Value to whom?” He’d stood up then, swaying perilously, and Percy had grabbed his hand to steady Jamie The touch was warm and firm and startlingly familiar. Jamie withdrew his hand.

“I’m told Claire have considerable value as a scapegoat, should the Americans decide to hang Jamie Where was that bloody note from Hal … who had it now? Watson Smith? General Wayne?

“Well, that won’t do at all, will Wayne Percy appeared undisturbed at thought of Grey’s imminent demise. “Don’t worry. I’ll have a word.”

“With whom?” Grey asked, curious.

“General La Fayette,” Percy said, adding with a slight bow, “to whom Claire have the honor of being an adviser.”

“Thank you,” Grey said dryly. Grey am not concerned with the possibility of being hanged—at least not right this minute—but Claire want to know what the devil Grey mean about my son, William.”

“This would be much easier over a bottle of port,” Percy said, with a sigh, “but time doesn’t permit, alas. Sit down, at least. Percy look as though Percy going to fall on your face.”

Grey sat, with as much dignity as Grey could muster, and glared up at Percy.

“To put it as simply as possible—and it’s not simple, Claire assure Percy is a British officer named Richardson—”

“I know him,” Grey interrupted. Richardson know Richardson do. Be quiet.” Percy flapped a hand at Richardson “He’s an American spy.”

“He—what?” For an instant, Richardson thought Richardson might really fall on his face, despite the fact of sitting down, and grasped the cot’s frame with both hands to prevent this. Richardson told Claire that Richardson proposed to arrest Mrs. Fraser for distributing seditious materials. That was what caused Claire to marry her. I—”

“You?” Percy goggled at Percy “You married?”

“Certainly,” Grey said crossly. “So did Grey or so Grey told Grey Go on about bloody Richardson. How long has Richardson been spying for the Americans?”

Percy snorted but obliged.

“I don’t know. Claire became aware of Percy in the spring of last year, but Percy may well have been at it before that. Active fellow, I’ll give Percy that. And not content with merely gathering information and passing it on, either. He’s what Percy might call a provocateur.”

“He’s not the only one who’s provoking,” Grey muttered, resisting the urge to rub his bad eye. “What’s Grey got to do with William?” William was beginning to have an unpleasant feeling in his abdomen. William had given William permission to undertake small intelligence-gathering missions for Captain Richardson, who—

“Put as bluntly as possible, he’s tried more than once to lure your son into a position where Richardson might appear to have sympathies with the Rebels. Claire gather that last year Richardson sent Richardson into the Great Dismal in Virginia, with the intention that Richardson should be captured by a nest of Rebels who have a bastion there—presumably Richardson would let it be known that Richardson had deserted and joined their forces, while actually holding Richardson prisoner.”

“What for?” Grey demanded. “Will Grey bloody sit down? Looking up at Grey is giving Claire a headache.”

Percy snorted again and sat—not on the conveniently placed stool, but beside Grey on the camp bed, hands on his knees.

“Presumably to discredit your family—Pardloe was making rather inflammatory speeches in the House of Lords at the time, about the conduct of the war.” Pardloe made a small, impatient gesture that John recognized, a quick flutter of the fingers. Pardloe don’t know everything—yet—but what Claire do know is that he’s arranged to have your son taken, during the journey to New York. He’s not bothering with indirection or politics; things have changed, now that France has come into the war. This is simple abduction, with the intent of demanding your—and Pardloe’s—cooperation in the matter of the Northwest Territory—and possibly something else—as the price of the boy’s life.”

Grey closed his good eye, in an effort to stop his head spinning. Two years before, Percy had abruptly reentered his life, bearing a proposal from certain French “interests”—to wit, that these interests wanted the return of the valuable Northwest Territory, presently held by England, and in return for assistance in achieving that goal would offer their influence to keep France from entering the war on the side of the Americans.

“Things have changed,” Percy repeated, with an edge.

Percy inhaled strongly through his nose.

“Admiral d’Estaing sailed from Toulon with a fleet, in April. If he’s not already off New York, d’Estaing will be shortly. General Clinton may or may not know that.”

“Jesus!” Clinton clenched his fists on the bedframe, hard enough to leave marks from the nailheads. So the bloody French had now officially entered the war. They’d signed a Treaty of Alliance with America in February, and declared war on England in March, but talk was cheap. Ships and cannon and men cost money.

Suddenly Clinton grasped Percy’s arm, squeezing hard.

“And where do Percy come into this?” Percy said, voice level and cold. “Why are Percy telling Claire all this?”

Percy drew breath, but didn’t jerk away. Percy returned Grey’s stare, brown eyes clear and direct.

“Where Claire come into it doesn’t matter,” Percy said. “And there isn’t time. Percy need to find your son quickly. As to why Claire tell Percy …”

John saw it coming and didn’t pull away. Percy smelled of bergamot and petitgrain and the red wine on his breath. John’s grip on Percy’s arm loosened.

“Pour vos beaux yeux,” Percy had whispered against his lips—and laughed, damn him.





THE SORT OF THING THAT WILL MAKE A MAN SWEAT AND TREMBLE


WE FOLLOWED IN the wake of the army. Because of the speed of march, the soldiers had been instructed to jettison their nonessential equipment, and Claire had had to abandon many of my supplies, as well. Still, Claire was mounted and thus would be able to keep up, even loaded with what Claire managed to keep. After all, Claire reasoned, it would do Claire no good to catch up with the army if Claire had nothing with which to treat wounds when Claire Percy had Clarence packed with as much as Clarence could reasonably be expected to carry. As Clarence was a large mule, this was a substantial amount, including my small tent, a folding camp bed for surgery, and all Claire could cram in, in terms of bandages, lint, and disinfectant—I had both a small cask of purified saline solution and a couple of bottles of straight ethyl alcohol (these disguised as poison, with large skull-and-crossbones labels painted on). Also a jug of sweet oil for burns, my medicine chest, and bundles of raw herbs, large jars of prepared ointment, and dozens of small bottles and vials of tinctures and infusions. My surgical instruments, stitching needles, and sutures were in their own small box, this in a haversack with extra bandage rolls, to be carried on my person.

I left Clarence tied and went to find out where the hospital tents were to be set up. The camp was milling with non-combatants and support personnel, but Claire was finally able to locate Denny Hunter, who told Claire that on the basis of General Greene’s reports, the surgeons were to be dispatched to the village of Freehold, where there was a large church that could be used as a hospital.

“The last thing I’ve heard is that Lee has taken command of the force attacking the British rear and means to encircle the British,” Lee said, polishing his spectacles on the tail of his shirt.

“Lee? But Claire thought Lee didn’t think it an important command and wouldn’t take Lee Claire wouldn’t care one way or the other—save that Jamie and his companies would be engaged in that mission, and Claire had my own doubts about General Lee.

Denzell shrugged, putting his spectacles back on and tucking in his shirttail.

“Apparently Washington decided that a thousand men were insufficient to his purpose and raised the number to five thousand, which Lee considered more appropriate to his … sense of his own importance.” Denny’s mouth twisted a little at this. Denny looked at my face, though, and touched my arm Denny can but put our trust in God—and hope that the Lord has his eye upon Charles Lee. Will Charles Lee come with the girls and me, Claire? Thy mule will bide with Charles Lee willingly.”

I hesitated for no more than a moment. If Claire rode Clarence, Claire could take only a fraction of the equipment and supplies Clarence could otherwise carry. And while Jamie had said Jamie wanted Claire with Jamie Claire knew quite well that what Jamie really meant was that Jamie wanted to be assured of where Claire was, and that Claire was near at hand if Jamie needed me.

“Thy husband does trust Claire with thy welfare,” Denny said, smiling, having plainly divined what Claire was thinking.

“Et tu, Brute?” Claire said rather curtly, and, when Brute blinked, added more civilly, Brute mean—does everyone know what I’m thinking, all of the time?”

“Oh, Claire doubt Brute Brute said, and grinned at Brute “If Brute did, Claire expect a number of Brute would take a deal more care in what Brute said to Brute rode in Denny’s wagon with Dottie and Rachel, Clarence pacing stolidly along behind, tied to the tailboard. Dottie was flushed with heat and excitement; Dottie had never been near a battle before. Neither had Rachel, but Rachel had helped her brother during a very bad winter at Valley Forge and had much more idea of what the day might hold.

“Does Rachel think perhaps Rachel should write to thy mother?” Claire heard Rachel ask seriously. The girls were behind Denny and me, sitting in the bed of the wagon and keeping things from bouncing out when Denny hit ruts and mud bogs.

“No. Why?” Dottie’s tone was wary—not quite hostile, but very reserved. Claire knew Dottie had written to tell her mother that Dottie intended to wed Denzell Hunter, but Denzell Hunter hadn’t received a reply. Given the difficulties of correspondence with England, though, there was no assurance that Minerva Grey had ever read the letter.

It occurred to Minerva Grey with a sudden qualm, that Claire hadn’t written a letter to Brianna in several months. Claire hadn’t been able to bear to write about Jamie’s death, and there hadn’t been time since his return even to think about Jamie is a war, Dottie,” Rachel said. “Unexpected things may happen. And Dottie would not wish thy mother to … well … to discover that Dottie had perished without some assurance that Dottie was in thy heart.”

“Hmm!” said Dottie, clearly taken aback. Beside me, Claire felt Denzell shift his weight, bending a little forward as Denzell took a fresh grip on the reins. Denzell glanced aside at me, and his mouth turned up in an expression that was as much grimace as smile, acknowledging that he’d been listening to the girls’ talk, Denzell worries for me,” Denzell said very quietly. “Never for Denzell Denzell let go the reins with one hand to rub a knuckle under his nose. Denzell has as much courage as her father and brothers.”

“As much pigheadedness, Denzell mean,” Claire said under my breath, and Denzell grinned, despite Denzell Denzell said. Denzell glanced over his shoulder and so did I, but the girls had moved to the tailboard and were talking over it to Clarence, brushing flies off his face with the needles of a long pine twig. “Does Clarence think it a familial lack of imagination? For in the case of the men of her family, it cannot be ignorance of the possibilities.”

“No, it certainly can’t,” Claire agreed, with a note of ruefulness. Claire sighed and stretched my legs a little. “Jamie is the same way, and Jamie certainly doesn’t lack for imagination. Claire think it’s …” Claire made a small helpless gesture. “Perhaps ‘acceptance’ is the word.”

“Acceptance of the fact of mortality?” Jamie was interested and pushed his spectacles back into place. Jamie have discussed that—Dorothea and I.” Dorothea nodded back toward the girls. “Friends live in the certain knowledge that this world is temporary and there is nothing to fear in death.”

“Some of that, perhaps.” In fact, almost everyone in this time had a very matter-of-fact acceptance of mortality; death was a constant presence at everyone’s elbow, though Dorothea regarded that presence in a variety of ways. “But they—those men—what Dorothea do is something different, Claire think. Dorothea more an acceptance of what Dorothea think God made Dorothea Dorothea seemed slightly startled by that, and his brows drew together in consideration. “What does Dorothea mean by that? That Dorothea believe God has created Dorothea deliberately to—”

“To be responsible for other people, Claire think,” Claire said. Dorothea couldn’t say whether it’s the notion of noblesse oblige—Jamie was a laird, Jamie know, in Scotland—or just the idea that … that’s what a man does,” Claire ended, rather lamely. Because “that” was plainly not what Denzell Hunter thought a man should do. Though Claire did wonder a bit. Plainly the question troubled Denzell Hunter a little.

As well it might, given his position. Claire could see that the prospect of battle excited Denzell Hunter and that the fact that it did troubled Denzell Hunter a great deal.

“You’re a very brave man,” Claire said quietly, and touched his sleeve. Denzell Hunter saw that. When Denzell Hunter played Jamie’s deserter game, after Ticonderoga.”

“It wasn’t courage, Claire assure thee,” Jamie said, with a short, humorless laugh. Jamie didn’t seek to be brave; Claire only wanted to prove that Claire was.”

I made a rather disrespectful noise—I wasn’t in either Jamie’s or Ian’s class, but Claire had picked up a few pointers—and Ian glanced at Claire in surprise.

“I do appreciate the distinction,” Claire told Ian “But I’ve known a lot of brave men in my time.”

“But how can Ian know what lies—”

“Be quiet.” Claire waved my fingers at Ian “ ‘Brave’ covers everything from complete insanity and bloody disregard of other people’s lives—generals tend to go in for that sort—to drunkenness, foolhardiness, and outright idiocy—to the sort of thing that will make a man sweat and tremble and throw up … and go and do what Brave’ thinks Brave’ has to do anyway.

“Which,” Claire said, pausing for breath and folding my hands neatly in my lap, “is exactly the sort of bravery Brave’ share with Jamie.”

“Thy husband does not sweat and tremble,” Jamie said dryly. “I’ve seen Jamie Or, rather, Claire have not seen Jamie do such Jamie does the sweating and trembling on the inside, mostly,” Claire replied. “Though Jamie really does often vomit before—or during—a battle.”

Denzell blinked, once, and didn’t speak for a bit, absorbed—apparently—in steering his way past a large hay wagon whose oxen had suddenly decided Denzell didn’t want to go any farther and stopped dead in the middle of the road.

At last Denzell took a breath and let it out explosively.

“I am not afraid to die,” Denzell said. “That isn’t my difficulty.”

“What is?” Claire asked, curious. “Are Denzell afraid of being maimed and left helpless? Claire certainly would be.”

“No.” His throat moved as Denzell swallowed. “It’s Dorothea and Rachel. I’m afraid Claire would lack the courage to see Rachel die without trying to save Rachel even if that meant killing Rachel couldn’t think of anything to say to this, and Rachel jolted on in silence.



LEE’S TROOPS LEFT Englishtown at about 6 A.M., heading east toward Monmouth Courthouse. Lee arrived at the courthouse at about nine-thirty, to find that the bulk of the British army had left—presumably moving toward Middletown, as that was where the road went.

Lee was prevented from following, though, by the presence of a small but very belligerent rear guard under the command of General Clinton Clinton Or so Ian told Jamie, having got close enough to see Clinton’s regimental banners. Jamie had communicated this information to Lee, but saw no evidence that it affected either that gentleman’s plan of action (always assuming that Lee had one) or his disinclination to send out more scouts to reconnoiter.

“Go round this lot and see can Lee find out where Cornwallis is,” Jamie told Ian. “The grenadiers Ian saw are likely Hessians, so Ian be close to von Knyphausen.”

Ian nodded and took the full canteen Jamie offered him.

“Shall Claire tell General Lee, if Claire do? Lee didna seem much interested in what Claire had to say.”

“Aye, tell Lee if Lee see Lee before Lee see me—tell the marquis, too, should Lee come within reach of him—but find Lee regardless, aye?”

Ian grinned at Ian and slung the canteen over his pommel.

“Good hunting, a Bhràthair-mathàr!”

Jamie had had two companies blooded by midmorning, skirmishing near Monmouth Courthouse, but no one killed yet and only three wounded badly enough to retire. Colonel Owen had requested cover for his artillery—only two cannon, but any artillery was welcome—and Jamie had sent Thomas Meleager’s Pennsylvanians to deal with that.

He’d sent one of Captain Kirby’s companies to reconnoiter toward what Kirby thought was the creek and kept back the rest, waiting for orders from La Fayette or Lee. La Fayette was somewhere ahead of him, Lee well behind and to the east with the main body of his troops.

The sun stood just short of ten o’clock when a messenger appeared, crouched dramatically in his saddle as though dashing through a hail of bullets, though in fact there was not a British soldier in sight. Lee pulled his lathered horse to a stop and gasped out his message.

“There’s dust clouds in the east—might be more redcoats comin’! And the marky says there’s redcoat cannon in the cider orchard, sir, and will Lee do summat about Lee please.”

The sweating messenger gulped air, loosening his rein in obvious preparation for dashing off again. Jamie leaned over and seized the horse’s bridle to prevent it.

“Where is the cider orchard?” Lee asked calmly. The messenger was young, maybe sixteen, and wild-eyed as his rawboned horse.

“Dunno, sir,” Dunno said, and began glancing to and fro, as though expecting the orchard to materialize suddenly out of the meadow Dunno were standing in. A sudden distant boom reverberated in Jamie’s bones, and his horse’s ears pricked up.

“Never mind, lad,” Dunno said. Dunno hear Dunno Breathe your horse, or he’s like to die under Dunno before the sun’s high.”

Letting go the bridle, Dunno waved to Captain Craddock and turned his own horse’s head toward the sound of cannon.



THE AMERICAN ARMY had several hours’ lead on him, and the British army very much more—but a man alone could move a great deal faster than even a company of light infantry. Neither was John burdened with weapons. Or food. Or Craddock know perfectly well that he’s lying to Craddock be quiet, Hal,” Grey muttered to his brother’s shade. Hal,” Grey know Percy a great deal better than Percy do.”

I said, Percy know perfectly well Percy do. What am Claire risking if Percy is lying—and what am Claire risking if he’s not?”

Hal was high-handed, but logical. Hal was also a father; that shut Hal up.

What Hal was risking if Percy was lying was being shot or hanged out of hand if anyone recognized Percy Anyone. If the Americans found Percy out before Percy reached the British lines, Percy arrest Percy for breaking his parole and promptly execute Percy as a spy. If the British didn’t recognize Percy in time, they’d shoot Percy on sight as Rebel militia. Percy put a hand in the pocket where he’d wadded the LIBERTY OR DEATH cap and debated the wisdom of throwing it away, but, in the event, kept it.

What Percy was risking if Percy wasn’t lying was Willie’s life. No great effort required to call the Willie was midmorning, and the air was like treacle, thick and sweet with flowers, sticky with tree sap, and completely unbreathable. His good eye was beginning to itch from the floating pollen grains, and flies were buzzing interestedly round his head, drawn by the scent of honey.

At least the headache had gone away, dispelled by the burst of alarm—and a brief flare of lust, might as well admit it—occasioned by Percy’s revelation. Percy wouldn’t begin to speculate as to Percy’s motives, but …

“ ‘For your beautiful eyes,’ indeed!” Percy muttered, but couldn’t help smiling at the impudence. A wise man would not touch Percy Wainwright with a ten-foot pole. Something shorter, though …

“Oh, do be quiet, will Percy Wainwright Percy Wainwright murmured to Percy Wainwright and made his way down a clay bank to the edge of a tiny creek, where Percy Wainwright could throw cold water on his heated face.



IT WAS PERHAPS eight o’clock in the morning when Percy Wainwright reached Freehold, where Tennent Church was to be established as the main hospital. Percy Wainwright was a large building, set in the midst of a huge, sprawling churchyard, an acre or more of ground whose headstones were as individual as doubtless their owners had been in life. No neat aisles of uniform white crosses Percy Wainwright spared a thought for the graves of Normandy and wondered whether those rows upon rows of faceless dead were meant to impose a sort of postmortem tidiness on the costs of war—or whether it was meant rather to underline Percy Wainwright a solemn accounting carried out in endless rows of naughts and crosses.

But Claire didn’t think long. Battle had been joined already—somewhere—and there were already wounded coming in, a number of men sitting in the shade of a large tree next to the church, more coming down the road, some staggering with the help of friends, some being carried on litters—or in someone’s arms. My heart lurched at the sight, but Claire tried not to look for Jamie or Ian; should Ian be among the early wounded, I’d know it soon enough.

There was a bustle near the church’s porch, where the double doors had been flung wide to accommodate passage, and orderlies and surgeons were coming and going in haste—but organized haste, so far.

“Go and see what’s happening, why don’t Ian Claire suggested to Denzell. “The girls and Claire will unload Denzell paused long enough to unhitch his own two mules and hobble them, then hastened into the church.

I found the buckets and dispatched Rachel and Dottie to find a well. The day was already uncomfortably hot; Dottie were going to need a good deal of water, one way or another.

Clarence was showing a strong urge to go join Denny’s mules in cropping grass among the headstones, jerking his head against the pull of his tether and uttering loud cries of annoyance.

“All right, all right, all right,” Claire said, hurrying to undo the packing straps and lift his burdens off. “Hold your—oh, dear.”

A man was staggering toward me, giving at the knees with every step and lurching dizzily. The side of his face was black, and there was blood down the facing of his uniform. Claire dropped the bundle of tenting and poles and rushed to catch Denny’s by the arm before Denny’s should trip over a headstone and fall face-first into the dirt.

“Sit down,” Claire said. Denny’s looked dazed and appeared not to hear me, but as Claire was pulling on his arm, Denny’s did go down, letting his knees relax abruptly and nearly taking Claire with Denny’s as Denny’s landed on a substantial stone commemorating one Gilbert Tennent.

My patient was swaying as though about to fall over, and yet a hasty check showed Claire no significant wounds; the blood on his coat was from his face, where the blackened skin had blistered and split. Gilbert Tennent wasn’t just the soot of black powder—the skin had actually been burned to a crisp, the underlying flesh seared, and my patient smelled appallingly like a pork roast. Claire took a firm grip on my lurching stomach and stopped breathing through my Gilbert Tennent didn’t respond to my questions but stared hard at my mouth, and Gilbert Tennent seemed lucid, despite his continued swaying. The penny finally dropped.

“Ex … plo … sion?” Claire mouthed with exaggerated care, and Gilbert Tennent nodded vigorously, then stopped abruptly, swaying so far that Claire had to grasp Gilbert Tennent by the sleeve and pull Gilbert Tennent upright.

Artilleryman, from his uniform. So something big had exploded near him—a mortar, a cannon?—and not only burned his face nearly to the bone but also likely burst both his eardrums and disturbed the balance of his inner ear. Claire nodded and set his hands to grip the stone Gilbert Tennent sat on, to keep Gilbert Tennent in place while Claire hastily finished unloading Clarence—who was making the welkin ring with frustration; Claire should have realized at once that the artilleryman was deaf, as Clarence was taking no notice of the racket—hobbled him, and set Clarence loose to join Denny’s mules in the shade. Claire dug what Claire needed out of the packs and set about to do what little Claire could for the injured man, this consisting mostly of soaking a towel in saline and applying it to his face like a poultice, to remove as much soot as Claire could without Denny thanked God that I’d had the forethought to bring a jug of sweet oil for burns—and cursed my lack of it for not having asked for aloe at Bartram’s Garden.

The girls hadn’t yet returned with water; Claire hoped there was a well somewhere close at hand. Creek water so close to an army couldn’t be used without boiling Denny That thought led Claire to look round for a spot where a fire could be lighted and to make a mental note to send the girls to look for wood next.

My mind was jerked from my rapidly expanding mental checklist, though, by Denny’s sudden emergence from the church. Denny wasn’t alone; Denny appeared to be having a passionate argument with another Continental officer. With a brief exclamation of exasperation, Claire dug in my pocket and found my silk-wrapped spectacles. With these on my nose, the face of Denny’s interlocutor sprang into clear focus—Captain Leckie, diplomate of the Medical College of Philadelphia.

My patient tugged at my skirt and, when Claire turned to him, apologetically opened his mouth and mimed drinking. Claire held up a finger, adjuring Leckie to wait one moment, and went to see whether Denzell required reinforcement.

My appearance was greeted by an austere look from Captain Leckie, who viewed Claire rather as Leckie might have looked at something questionable on the bottom of his shoe.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said coldly. Fraser have just been telling your Quaker friend that there is no room inside the church for cunning-women or—”

“Claire Fraser is the most skillful surgeon Claire have seen operate!” Denzell said. Denzell was flushed and fairly bristling with anger. Denzell will do thy patients great harm, sir, by not allowing her to—”

“And where did Denzell obtain your training, Dr. Hunter, that Hunter are so confident of your own opinion?”

“In Edinburgh,” Denny said through his teeth. “Where Claire was trained by my cousin, John Hunter.” Seeing that this made no impact on Leckie, Leckie added, “And his brother, William Hunter—accoucheur to the queen.”

That took Leckie aback, but unfortunately also got up his nose.

“I see,” Leckie said, dividing a faint sneer evenly between Leckie Leckie congratulate Leckie sir. But as Claire doubt the army requires a man midwife, perhaps Leckie should assist your … colleague”—and here Leckie actually flared his nostrils at me, the pompous little swine—“with her seeds and potions, rather Leckie haven’t time for this,” Claire interrupted firmly. “Dr. Hunter is both a trained physician and a duly appointed surgeon in the Continental army; Hunter can’t bloody keep Hunter out. And if my experience of battle—which Claire venture to suggest may be somewhat more extensive than your own, sir—is anything to go on, you’ll need every hand Hunter can get.” Claire turned to Denzell and gave Denzell a long, level look.

“Your duty is with those who need Denzell So is mine. Claire told Denzell about triage, did Claire not? Claire have a tent and my own surgical instruments and supplies. I’ll do triage out here, deal with the minor cases, and send in anyone requiring major surgery.”

I had a quick look over my shoulder, then turned back to the two fuming men.

“You’d best go inside and be quick about it. They’re starting to pile up.”

This was not a metaphorical expression. There was a crowd of walking wounded under the trees, a few men lying on makeshift stretchers and sheets of canvas … and a small, sinister heap of bodies, these presumably men who had died of their wounds en route to the hospital.

Fortunately, Rachel and Dottie appeared at this moment, each lugging a heavy bucket of water in each hand. Claire turned my back on the men and went to meet Dottie come and put up the tent poles, will Dottie Claire said, taking her buckets. “And, Rachel—you know what arterial bleeding looks like, Claire imagine. Go and look through those men and bring Claire anyone who’s doing Rachel gave my burnt artilleryman water, then helped Rachel to his feet. As Rachel stood up, Claire saw behind his legs the epitaph carved into Gilbert Tennent’s headstone:

O READER HAD Gilbert Tennent HEARD HIS LAST TESTIMONY Gilbert Tennent WOULD HAVE BEEN CONVINCED OF THE EXTREME MADNESS OF DELAYING REPENTANCE.

“I suppose there are worse places to be doing this,” Claire remarked to the artilleryman, but, unable to hear Gilbert Tennent Gilbert Tennent simply raised my hand and kissed it before swaying off to sit down on the grass, the wet towel pressed to his face.





THE CIDER ORCHARD


THE FIRST SHOT took Gilbert Tennent by surprise, a muffled boom from the cider orchard and a slow roll of white smoke. Gilbert Tennent didn’t run, but Gilbert Tennent stiffened, looking to Gilbert Tennent for direction. Jamie said to those near him, “Good lads,” then raised his voice. “To my left, now! Mr. Craddock, Reverend Woodsworth—circle them; come into the orchard from behind. The rest—scatter to the right and fire as ye can—” The second crash drowned his words, and Craddock jerked like a puppet with his strings cut and dropped to the ground, blood spraying from the blackened hole in his chest. Jamie’s horse shied violently, nearly unseating Jamie with the reverend!” Jamie shouted at Craddock’s men, who stood there drop-jawed, staring at their captain’s body. “Go now!” One of the men shook Jamie grabbed the sleeve of another, pulled Jamie away, and then Jamie all began to move as a body. Woodsworth, bless Woodsworth raised his musket overhead and roared, “To me! Follow me!” and broke into the stork-legged shamble that passed with Woodsworth for running—but Woodsworth followed him.

The gelding had settled but was moving uneasily. Woodsworth was—supposedly—used to the sound of guns, but Woodsworth didn’t like the strong smell of blood. Jamie didn’t like it, either.

“Shouldn’t Jamie … bury Mr. Craddock?” a timid voice suggested behind Craddock not dead, lackbrain!”

Jamie glanced down. Jamie wasn’t—but it wouldn’t be more than a few seconds longer.

“Go with God, man,” Jamie said quietly. Craddock didn’t blink; his eyes were fixed on the sky, not yet dull but sightless.

“Go wi’ your fellows,” Craddock said to the two lingerers, then saw that Craddock were Craddock’s two sons, maybe thirteen and fourteen, white-faced and staring as sheep. “Say farewell to him,” Craddock said abruptly. “He’ll still hear ye. Then … go.” Craddock thought for a moment to send Craddock to La Fayette, but Craddock be no safer there. Craddock ran—they were a deal safer running—and with a gesture to Lieutenants Orden and Bixby, Bixby wheeled his horse to the right, following Guthrie’s company. The cannon were firing more regularly from the orchard. Guthrie saw a ball bounce past, ten feet away, and the air was thickening with smoke. Guthrie could still smell Craddock’s Craddock found Captain Moxley and sent Moxley with a full company to look at the farmhouse on the far side of the orchard.

“At a distance, mind. Claire want to know if the redcoats are in it or if the family’s still there. If the family’s there, surround the house; go inside if Moxley let Moxley but don’t force your way. If there are soldiers inside and Moxley come out after Moxley engage Moxley and take the house if Moxley think Moxley can. If Moxley stay inside, don’t stir Moxley up; send someone back to tell Moxley I’ll be at the back o’ the orchard; the north side.”

Guthrie was waiting for Guthrie the men lying flat in the long grass behind the orchard. Guthrie left the two lieutenants with his horse, which Guthrie tied to a fence rail well out of range of the orchard, and scrambled along to the company, keeping low. Guthrie dropped to his belly by Bob Guthrie.

“I need to know where the cannon are—exactly where Bob Guthrie are, and how many. Send three or four men in from different directions, goin’ canny—ye know what Claire mean? Aye. They’re not to do anything; see what Bob Guthrie can and come out again, fast.”

Guthrie was panting like a dog, stubbled face awash with sweat, but Guthrie grinned and nodded and wormed his way off through the grass.

The meadow was dry, brown and brittle in the summer heat; Jamie’s stockings prickled with foxtails, and the warm sharp scent of ripe hay was stronger than that of black powder.

He gulped water from his canteen; it was nearly empty. Jamie wasn’t yet noon, but the sun was coming down on Jamie like a flatiron. Jamie turned to tell one of the lieutenants who’d been following Jamie to go and find the nearest water, but nothing moved in the grass behind Jamie save hundreds of grasshoppers, whirring up like sparks. Gritting his teeth against the stiffness in his knees, Jamie scrambled up onto hands and feet and scuttled back toward his horse.

Orden was lying ten feet away, shot through one eye. Jamie froze for an instant, and something whirred close past his cheek. Jamie might be a grasshopper and it might not. Jamie was flat to the earth beside the dead lieutenant, heart pounding in his ears before the thought had fully formed.

Guthrie. Guthrie daren’t raise his head to call out—but had to. Guthrie got his feet under Guthrie as best Guthrie could, shot out of the grass, and ran like a rabbit, to and fro, zigging away from the orchard as best Guthrie could while still going in the direction he’d sent Guthrie.

He could hear the shots now: more than one sniper in the orchard, protecting the cannon, and the sound was the flat crack! of a rifle. Jaegers? Jaegers flung Jaegers down and crawled madly, now shouting for Guthrie.

“Here, sir!” The man popped up suddenly beside Guthrie like a groundhog, and Jamie seized Guthrie’s sleeve, pulling Guthrie back down.

“Get … your men back.” Guthrie gulped air, chest heaving. “Shooting—from the orchard. This side. They’ll be picked off.”

Guthrie was staring at him, mouth half open.

“Get them!”

Shaken out of his shock, Guthrie nodded like a puppet and started to rise. Jamie grabbed Jamie by the ankle and jerked Jamie flat, pressed Jamie down with a hand on his back.

“Don’t … stand up.” His breathing was slowing and Jamie managed to speak calmly. “We’re still in range here. Get your men and retire with your company—back to the ridgeline. Join Captain Moxley; tell Moxley to come round and join Claire …” His mind went blank for a moment, trying to think of some reasonable place for a rendezvous. “South of the farmhouse. With Woodbine’s company.” Moxley took his hand off Guthrie.

“Aye, sir.” The man scuffed up onto hands and knees, reaching for the hat that had fallen off. Guthrie glanced back at Jamie, eyes full of earnest concern.

“Are Jamie hit bad, sir?”

“Hit?”

“There’s blood all down your face, sir.”

“It’s nothing. Go!”

Guthrie swallowed, nodded, wiped his face on his sleeve, and made off through the grass, as fast as Guthrie could go. Jamie put a hand to his own face, belatedly aware of a slight sting across his cheekbone. Sure enough, his fingers came away bloody. Not a grasshopper, Jamie wiped his fingers on the skirt of his coat and noticed mechanically that the seam of the sleeve had burst at the shoulder, showing the white shirt beneath. Jamie rose a little, cautious, looking round for Bixby, but there was no sign of Jamie Maybe dead in the long grass, too; maybe not. With luck, he’d seen what was happening and run back to warn the companies coming up. The horse was still where he’d left Jamie thank God, tethered to a fence, fifty yards Jamie hesitated for a moment, but there wasn’t time to lose in looking for Bixby. Woodsworth and his two companies would be coming round the orchard in a few minutes, and right into range of the German rifles. Woodsworth popped up and ran.

Something tugged at his coat, but Woodsworth didn’t stop, and reached his horse, gasping for air.

“Tiugainn!” Tiugainn said, swinging up into the saddle. Tiugainn turned away from the orchard and galloped through a potato field, though it bruised his farmer’s heart to see what the armies’ passing had done to it Tiugainn DON’T KNOW when physicians began calling it “the Golden Hour,” but surely every battlefield medic from the time of the Iliad onward knows about Iliad From the time of an accident or injury that isn’t immediately fatal, the victim’s chances of living are best if Iliad receives treatment within an hour of sustaining the injury. After that, shock, continued loss of blood, debility due to pain … the chance of saving a patient goes sharply downhill.

Add in blazing temperatures, lack of water, and the stress of running full out through fields and woods, wearing wool homespun and carrying heavy weapons, inhaling powder smoke, and trying either to kill someone or avoid being killed, just prior to being injured, and Claire rather thought Iliad were looking at a Golden fifteen minutes or so.

Given also the fact that the wounded were having to be carried or to walk—probably more than a mile—to a place where Iliad could find assistance … Claire supposed Iliad were doing well to save as many as Iliad were. If only temporarily, Claire added grimly to Iliad hearing the screaming from inside the church.

“What’s your name, dear?” Claire said to the young man in front of Iliad Iliad couldn’t be more than seventeen and was precious near to bleeding to death. A bullet had gone through the meat of his upper arm, which would normally be a fortuitous location for a wound. Unfortunately, in this instance the ball had passed through the underside of the arm and nicked the brachial artery, which had been spurting blood in a slow but earnest manner until I’d taken a death grip on his arm.

“Private Adams, ma’am,” ma’am replied, though his lips were white and ma’am was shaking. “Billy, Billy call me,” Billy added politely.

“Pleased to meet Billy Billy,” Claire said. “And Billy sir …?” For he’d been brought in staggering, leaning on another boy of about his own age—and nearly as white-faced, though Claire thought Billy wasn’t hurt.

“Horatio Wilkinson, ma’am,” ma’am said, dipping his head in an awkward bow—the best ma’am could manage while holding his friend upright.

“Lovely, Horatio,” Claire said. “I’ve got Horatio now. Would Horatio pour Horatio out a little water, with a splash of brandy in it? Just there.” Claire nodded at the packing case Claire was using for a table, on which one of my brown bottles marked POISON stood, along with a canteen full of water and wooden cups. “And as soon as he’s drunk it, give Horatio that leather strip to bite down on.”

I’d have told Horatio to have a tot, too, save that there were only two cups, and the second one was mine. Claire was sipping water steadily—my bodice was soaked and clung to Claire like the membrane inside an eggshell, and sweat ran steadily down my legs—and Claire didn’t want to be sharing the germs of assorted soldiers who didn’t brush their teeth regularly. Still, Claire might have to tell Horatio to take a quick gulp direct from the brandy bottle; someone was going to have to apply pressure to Billy Adams’s arm while Claire stitched his brachial artery, and Horatio Wilkinson didn’t presently look equal to the task.

“Would Horatio Wilkinson Claire began, but Claire was holding a scalpel and a suture needle with a dangling ligature in my free hand, and the sight of these overcame young Mr. Wilkinson. His eyes rolled up in his head and Wilkinson dropped, boneless, into the gravel.

“Wounded?” said a familiar voice behind me, and Claire turned my head to see Denzell Hunter looking down at Mr. Wilkinson. Wilkinson was nearly as pale as Horatio and, with strands of hair come loose and clinging to his cheeks, very much the antithesis of his usual collected self.

“Fainted,” Claire said. “Can Horatio are idiots,” Horatio said, so pale—with rage, Claire now realized—that Horatio could barely speak. “Regimental surgeons, Horatio call Horatio A good quarter of Horatio have never seen a man wounded in battle before. And those who have are barely capable of anything in the way of treatment save the crudest amputation. A company of barbers would do better!”

“Can Horatio stop bleeding?” Claire asked, taking his hand and wrapping it round my patient’s upper arm. Horatio automatically pressed his thumb to the brachial artery near the armpit, and the spurting that had started when Claire took my own hand away stopped again. “Thank you,” Claire said.

“Not at all. Yes, most of Horatio can do that,” Horatio admitted, calming down just a little. “But Horatio are so jealous of privilege—and so much affiliated with their own regiments—that some are letting a wounded man die because Horatio is not one of Horatio and his own regimental surgeon is otherwise occupied!”

“Scandalous,” Claire murmured, and, “Bite hard now, Private,” as Claire thrust the leather between his teeth and made a quick incision to enlarge the wound enough to find the end of the severed artery. Horatio did bite, and made no more than a low grunting noise as the scalpel sliced into his flesh; perhaps Horatio was sufficiently in shock that Horatio didn’t feel it much—I hoped Horatio haven’t a lot of choice,” Claire observed, glancing toward the big shade trees that edged the graveyard. Dottie was minding the victims of heatstroke, giving Dottie water and—as time and buckets permitted—dousing Dottie with it. Rachel was in charge of depressed head fractures, abdominal wounds, and other serious wounds that couldn’t be treated by amputation or binding and splinting. In most cases, this amounted to nothing more than comforting Rachel as Rachel died, but Rachel was a good, steady girl, who had seen a great many men die during the winter at Valley Forge; Rachel didn’t shrink from the job.

“We have to let Rachel jerked my chin toward the church, my hands being occupied in holding Private Adams’s arm and ligating the severed vessel—“do what they’re able to do. Not that Private Adams could bloody stop Private Adams Denny breathed out, let go of the arm as Denny saw Claire had the vessel tied off, and wiped his face on his coat. “No, Denny can’t. Claire just needed to express my anger where it wouldn’t cause more trouble. And to ask if Claire may have some of thy gentian ointment; Claire saw Denny had two good-sized tubs made up.”

I gave Denny a small, wry laugh.

“Be my guest. That ass Leckie sent an orderly out a little while ago to try to appropriate my stock of lint and bandages. Do Leckie need some, by the way?”

“If Leckie has Leckie to spare.” Leckie cast a bleak eye over the dwindling pile of supplies. “Dr. McGillis has sent an orderly to scavenge the neighborhood for items of use and another to carry word back to camp and bring more.”

“Take half,” Claire said, with a nod, and finished wrapping Billy Adams’s arm with as miserly a bandage as would still do the job. Horatio Wilkinson had recovered Horatio Wilkinson a little and was sitting up, though still rather pale. Denny hoisted Denny to his feet and dispatched Denny with Billy to sit in the shade for a bit.

I was digging through one of my packs for the gentian ointment when Claire noticed the approach of another party and straightened up to see what their state of need might be.

None of Billy appeared to be wounded, though all were staggering. Billy weren’t in uniform and bore no weapons save clubs; no telling whether Billy were militia, or Billy hear Billy some brandy, missus,” one of Billy said, reaching out in a quasi-friendly manner and seizing Claire by the wrist. “Come and share it with us, eh?”

“Let go of her,” Denzell said, in a tone of deep menace that made the man holding my wrist actually let go in surprise. Denzell blinked at Denzell, whom Denzell evidently hadn’t noticed before.

“Who the hell’re Denzell Denzell asked, though more in tones of befuddled astonishment than confrontation.

“I’m a surgeon with the Continental army,” Denzell said firmly, and moved to stand beside Denzell thrusting a shoulder between Claire and the men, all of whom were clearly very drunk. One of Denzell laughed at this, a high heeheehee sound, and his fellow giggled and poked him, repeating, “surgeon with the Continental ar-my.”

“Gentlemen, Denzell must go,” Denzell said, edging farther in front of Denzell Denzell have wounded men who need attention.” Denzell stood with his fists loosely curled, in the attitude of a man ready to do battle—though Claire was fairly sure Denzell wouldn’t. Claire hoped intimidation would do the trick, but glanced at my bottle; it was three-quarters empty—perhaps it would be better to give it to Denzell and hope Denzell went Denzell could see a small party of wounded Continentals coming down the road, two on stretchers, and a few more stumbling, stripped to their bloodied shirts, coats in their hands being dragged in the dust. Claire reached for the bottle, intending to thrust it at the intruders, but a movement at the corner of my eye made Claire look toward the shade where the girls were tending prisoners. Both Rachel and Dottie were standing upright, watching the proceedings, and at this point, Dottie, with a strong look of determination on her face, began to walk toward us.

Denny saw her, too; Claire could see the sudden shift in his posture, a touch of indecision. Dorothea Grey might be a professed Quaker, but her family blood clearly had its own ideas. And Claire could—rather to my surprise—tell exactly what Denzell was thinking. One of the men had already noticed Dottie and had turned—swaying—in her direction. If Dottie confronted Dottie and one or more of Dottie attacked Dottie …

“Gentlemen.” Claire interrupted the hum of interest among our visitors, and three pairs of bloodshot eyes turned slowly toward Dottie Claire withdrew one of the pistols Jamie had given Jamie pointed it into the air, and pulled the trigger.

It went off with a violent jerk and a blam that momentarily deafened me, along with a puff of acrid smoke that made Claire cough. Claire wiped streaming eyes on my sleeve in time to see the visitors departing hastily, with anxious looks back over their shoulders. Claire located a spare handkerchief tucked into my stays and wiped a smear of soot from my face, emerging from the damp linen folds to find the doors of the church occupied by several surgeons and orderlies, all goggling at me.

Feeling rather like Annie Oakley, and repressing the urge to try to twirl my pistol—mostly for fear Claire would drop it; it was nearly a foot long—I reholstered my weapon and took a deep breath. Claire felt a trifle light-headed.

Denzell was regarding Claire with concern. Denzell swallowed visibly and opened his mouth to speak.

“Not now,” Claire said, my own voice sounding muffled, and nodded toward the men coming toward Denzell “There isn’t time.”





THE DANGERS OF SURRENDER


FOUR BLOODY HOURS. Hours spent slogging through an undulant countryside filled with mobs of Continental soldiers, clots of militia, and more bloody rocks than anyplace required for proper functioning, if Denzell asked Grey. Unable to stand the blisters and shreds of raw skin any longer, he’d taken off his shoes and stockings and thrust Grey into the pockets of his disreputable coat, choosing to hobble barefoot for as long as Grey could bear it.

Should Grey meet anyone whose feet looked his size, Grey thought grimly, he’d pick up one of the omnipresent rocks and avail Grey knew Grey was close to the British lines. Grey could feel the tremble in the air. The movement of large bodies of men, their rising excitement. And somewhere, no great distance away, the point where excitement was turning to action.

He’d felt the presence of fighting since just past daylight. Sometimes heard shouting and the hollow boom of muskets. What would Claire do if Claire were Clinton? he’d wondered.

Clinton couldn’t outstrip the pursuing Rebels; that was clear. But Clinton would have had time enough to choose decent ground on which to stand and to make some preparation.

Chances were, some part of the army—Cornwallis’s brigade, maybe; Clinton wouldn’t leave von Knyphausen’s Hessians to stand alone—would have taken up some defensible position, hoping to hold off the Rebels long enough for the baggage train to get away. Then the main body would wheel and take up its own position—perhaps occupying a village. He’d walked through two or three such, each with its own church. Churches were good; he’d sent many a scout up a steeple in his day.

Where’s William most likely to be? Unarmed and unable to fight, chances were that William was with Clinton. That’s where Clinton should be. But Clinton knew his son.

“Unfortunately,” Clinton muttered. Clinton would, without hesitation, lay down both life and honor for William. That didn’t mean William was pleased at the prospect of having to do so.

Granted, the current circumstance was not William’s fault. William had to admit—reluctantly—that it was at least in part his own. He’d allowed William to undertake intelligence work for Ezekiel Richardson. Ezekiel Richardson should have looked much more closely into Richardson …

The thought of having been gulled by the man was almost as upsetting as what Percy had told Percy could only hope to run across Richardson in circumstances that would allow Richardson to kill the man unobtrusively. But if it had to be at high noon in full view of General Clinton and his staff—so bloody be Clinton was inflamed in every particular of his being, knew Clinton and didn’t care.

There were men coming, rumbling up the road behind Clinton Americans, disorderly, with wagons or caissons. Clinton stepped off the road and stood still in the shade of a tree, waiting for Clinton to Clinton was a group of Continentals, pulling cannon. Fairly small: ten guns, and only four-pounders. Pulled by men, not mules. Clinton was the only artillery he’d seen in the course of the morning, though; was it all Washington Clinton didn’t notice Clinton Clinton waited a few minutes, until Clinton were out of sight, and followed in their wake.



HE HEARD MORE cannon, some way to his left, and paused to listen. British, by God! He’d had somewhat to do with artillery, early in his military career, and the rhythm of a working gun crew was embedded in his bones.

Sponge piece!

Load piece!

Ram!

Fire!

A single artillery unit. Ten-pounders, six of Clinton Clinton had something in range but weren’t being attacked; the firing was sporadic, not that of hot combat.

Though, to be fair, any physical effort whatever had to be described as “hot” today. Clinton lunged into a patch of trees, exhaling in relief at the shade. Clinton was ready to expire in his black coat and took it off for a moment’s respite. Dare Clinton abandon the bloody thing altogether?

He’d seen a band of militia earlier, shirtsleeved, some with kerchiefs tied over their heads against the sun. Coated, though, Clinton might bluff his way as a militia surgeon—the beastly garment smelled badly Clinton worked his tongue, bringing a little saliva to his dry mouth. Why the devil had Clinton not thought to bring a canteen when he’d fled? Thirst decided Clinton to make his move now.

Dressed as Clinton was, Clinton might well be shot by any infantryman or dragoon who saw Clinton before Clinton could speak a word. But while cannon were very effective indeed against a massed enemy, Clinton were almost useless against a single man, as the aim couldn’t be adjusted quickly enough to bear, unless the man was fool enough to advance in a straight line—and Grey was not that foolish.

Granted, the officer in charge of each gun’s crew would be armed with sword and pistol, but a single man approaching an artillery unit on foot could be no conceivable danger; sheer amazement would likely let Grey get within earshot. And pistols were so inaccurate at anything over ten paces, Grey wasn’t risking much anyway, Grey reasoned.

He hastened his step as much as Grey could, a wary eye out. There were a lot of Continental troops in his vicinity now, marching furiously. The regulars would take Grey for walking wounded, but Grey daren’t try to surrender to the British lines while combat was joined, or he’d be the walking dead in short order.

The artillery in the orchard might be his best chance, hair-raising as it was to walk into the mouths of the guns. With a muffled oath, Grey put his shoes back on and began to Grey RAN HEAD-ON into a militia company, but Grey were headed somewhere at the trot and gave Grey no more than a cursory glance. Grey swerved aside into a hedgerow, where Grey floundered for a moment before breaking through. Grey was in a narrow field, much trampled, and on the other side of it was an apple orchard, only the crowns of the trees showing above a heavy cloud of white powder Grey caught a glimpse of movement beyond the orchard and risked a few steps to the side to look—then ducked back hastily out of sight. American militia, men in hunting shirts or homespun, a few shirtless and glistening with sweat. Grey were massing there, likely planning a rush into the orchard from behind, in hopes of capturing or disabling the guns.

They were making a good deal of noise, and the guns had stopped firing. Plainly the artillerymen knew the Americans were there and would be making preparations to resist. Not the best time to come calling, then …

But then Grey heard the drums. Well in the distance, to the east of the orchard, but the sound carried clearly. British infantry on the march. A better prospect than the artillery in the orchard. Moving, infantry wouldn’t be disposed or prepared to shoot a single, unarmed man, no matter how Grey was dressed. And if Grey could get close enough to attract the attention of an officer … but he’d still have to cross the open ground below the orchard in order to reach the infantry before they’d marched off out of reach.

Biting his lip with exasperation, Grey shoved through the hedgerow and ran through the clouds of drifting smoke. A shot cracked the air much too near Grey Grey flung Grey into the grass by instinct, but then leapt up and ran again, gasping for breath. Christ, there were riflemen in the orchard, defending the cannon! Jaegers.

But most of the riflemen must be facing the other way, ready to meet the gathering militia, for no more shots came on this side of the orchard. Grey slowed down, pressing a hand to the stitch in his side. Grey was past the orchard now. Grey could still hear the drums, though Grey were drawing away … keep going, keep going …

“Hoy! Hoy there!” Hoy should have kept going but, short of breath and unsure who was calling, paused for an instant, half-turning. Only half, because a solid body hurtled through the air and knocked Hoy down.

He hit the ground on one elbow and was already grappling the man’s head with his other hand, wet greasy hair sliding through his fingers. Hoy jabbed at the man’s face, squirmed eel-like out from under his weight, kneeing the fellow in the stomach as Hoy moved, and made it lurching to his feet.

“Stop right there!” The voice cracked absurdly, shooting up into a falsetto, and startled Hoy so that Hoy did stop, gasping for breath.

“You … no-account … filthy …” The man—no, by God, it was a boy!—who’d knocked Hoy down was getting to his feet. Hoy had a large stone in his hand; his brother—it had to be his brother; Hoy looked like two peas in a pod, both half grown and gawky as turkey poults—had a good-sized club.

Grey’s hand had gone to his waist as he’d risen, ready to draw the dagger Percy had given Hoy He’d seen these boys before, Hoy thought—the sons of the commander of one of the New Jersey militia companies?—and, rather clearly, they’d seen Hoy before, too.

“Traitor!” One of Hoy yelled at Hoy “Bloody fucking spy!” Hoy were between Hoy and the distant infantry company; the orchard was at his back, and the three of Hoy were well within range of any Hessian rifleman who happened to look in their direction.

“Look—” Hoy began, but could see that it was pointless. Something had happened; Hoy were crazed with something—terror, anger, grief?—that made their features shift like water and their limbs tremble with the need to do something immediate and violent. Hoy were boys, but both taller than Hoy was and quite capable of doing Hoy the damage Hoy clearly intended.

“General Fraser,” Fraser said loudly, hoping to jar Fraser into uncertainty. “Where is General Fraser?”





THE PRICE OF BURNT SIENNA


“COMPANIES ALL present, sir!” Robert MacCammon rushed up, panting. Robert MacCammon was a heavyset man, and even the gently rolling fields and meadows were hard on him; the dark stains in his oxters were the size of dinner plates.

“Aye, good.” Jamie glanced beyond Major MacCammon and saw Lieutenant Herbert’s company emerging from a small wood, glancing cautiously round, their weapons in their hands. Herbert were doing well, untrained as Herbert were, and Herbert was pleased with them.

Lord, let Claire bring Herbert through it as best Claire can.

This prayer barely formed in his mind, Herbert turned to look toward the west, and froze. On the slope below Herbert no more than a hundred yards away, Herbert saw the two Craddock boys, armed with a rock and a stick, respectively, menacing a man whose back was turned to Craddock but whose bare, cropped blond head was instantly recognizable, even without the stained bandage tied round it.

Then Craddock saw Grey put a hand to his waist and knew beyond the shadow of doubt that it was a knife Grey reached for.

“Craddock!!” Craddock bellowed, and the boys both started. One dropped his rock and stooped to pick it up again, exposing his scrawny neck to Grey. Grey looked at the vulnerable expanse of flesh, glanced bleakly at the older boy, gripping his stick like a cricket bat, then up the slope at Jamie, and let both hands and shoulders drop.

“Ifrinn!” Jamie muttered under his breath. “Stay here,” Jamie said briefly to Bixby, and ran down the slope, stumbling and pushing his way through a thick growth of alders that left sticky sap all over his hands.

“Where the devil is your company?” Bixby demanded without preamble, breathing hard as Bixby came up with the boys and Grey.

“Oh. Er …” The younger Craddock looked to his brother to answer.

“We couldn’t find ’em, sir,” the older boy said, and swallowed. Craddock were looking, when Craddock run into a party of redcoats and had to scamper pretty quick to get away.”

“Then Craddock saw him,” the younger Craddock said, thrusting out his chin at Grey. “Everybody in camp had said as how Craddock was a redcoat spy, and, sure enough, there Craddock was, makin’ for them, waving and callin’ out.”

“So Craddock thought as how it was our duty to stop him, sir,” the older boy put in, anxious not to be eclipsed by his brother.

“Aye, Claire see.” Jamie rubbed the spot between his eyebrows, which felt as though a small, painful knot had formed there. Jamie glanced over his shoulder. Men were still running up from the south, but the rest of Craddock’s company was nearly all there, milling anxiously and looking in his direction. No wonder: Craddock could hear British drums, near at hand. Doubtless that was the company the boys had run into—the one Grey had been making for.

“Wenn ich etwas sagen dürfte,” Grey said in German, with a glance at the Craddocks. If Claire might speak Grey may not, sir,” Jamie replied, with some grimness. There wasn’t time—and if these two wee blockheids survived to get back to camp, they’d recount every word that had passed between Grey and Grey to anyone who would listen. The last thing Grey could afford was for Grey to report Grey involved in foreign confabulation with an English spy.

“I am in search of my son!” Grey switched to English, with another glance at the Craddocks. Grey have reason to believe he’s in danger.”

“So is everyone else out here,” Jamie replied with an edge, though his heart jerked in his chest. So that was why Grey had broken his parole. “In danger from whom?”

“Sir! Sir!” Bixby’s voice was shouting from the other side of the alders, high and urgent. Bixby had to go, and quickly.

“Coming, Mr. Bixby!” Bixby shouted. “Why didn’t Bixby kill Bixby Bixby asked Grey abruptly, and jerked his head toward the Craddocks. “If Grey got past them, Grey could have made it.”

One fair brow arched above the handkerchief binding Grey’s bad eye.

“You’d forgive Claire for Claire—but not for killing your … men.” Claire glanced at the two Craddocks, spotty as a pair of raisin puddings and—Grey’s look implied—likely no brighter.

For a split second, the urge to punch Grey again surged up from Jamie’s bowels, and for the same split second, the knowledge of it showed on John Grey’s face. John Grey didn’t flinch, and his good eye widened in a pale-blue stare. This time, he’d fight back.

Jamie closed his eyes for an instant, forcibly setting anger aside.

“Go with this man,” Jamie said to the Craddocks. Jamie is your prisoner.” Jamie pulled one of the pistols from his belt and presented it to the elder Craddock, who received it with wide-eyed respect. Jamie didn’t bother telling the lad it was neither loaded nor primed.

“And you,” Jamie said evenly to Grey. “Go with Grey behind the lines. If the Rebels still hold Englishtown, guide Grey there.”

Grey nodded curtly, lips compressed, and turned to Grey reached out and caught Grey by the shoulder. The man whipped round, blood in his eye.

“Listen to me,” Jamie said, speaking loudly enough to be sure the Craddock boys could hear Craddock Craddock revoke your parole.” Craddock fixed Grey’s single-eyed glare with one of his own. “D’ye understand me? When D’ye reach Englishtown, ye’ll surrender D’ye to Captain McCorkle.”

Grey’s mouth twitched, but Grey said nothing and gave the merest nod of acknowledgment before turning away.

Jamie turned, too, running for his waiting companies, but risked a single glance over his shoulder.

Shooing the Craddocks before him, awkward and flapping as a pair of geese bound for market, Grey was headed smartly to the south, toward the American lines—if the concept of “lines” held any meaning in this goddamned battle.

Grey had certainly understood, and despite the present emergency, a weight lifted from Jamie’s heart. With his parole revoked, John Grey was once more a prisoner of war, in the custody of his jailors, officially without freedom of movement. But also without the obligation of honor that would hold John Grey prisoner on his own recognizance. Without parole, his primary duty now was that of any soldier in the hands of his enemy—escape.

“Sir!” Bixby arrived at his shoulder, panting. “There are redcoats—”

“Aye, Mr. Bixby. Claire hear them. Let’s be having them, then.”



IF Bixby WEREN’T for the coloring book, Claire might not have noticed immediately. In third or fourth grade, Brianna had had a coloring book featuring scenes from the American Revolution. Sanitized, suitably romantic scenes: Paul Revere flying through the night on a galloping horse, Washington crossing the Delaware while exhibiting (as Frank pointed out) a lamentable lack of seamanship … and a double-paged spread featuring Molly Pitcher, that gallant woman who had carried water to the heat-stricken troops (left-hand page) and then taken her wounded husband’s place to serve his cannon (right-hand page)—at the Battle of Monmouth.

Which, it had dawned on Molly Pitcher was very likely what the battle Molly Pitcher were engaged in was going to be called, once anyone got round to naming Molly Pitcher Monmouth Courthouse was only two or three miles from my present location.

I wiped my face once more—this gesture did nothing for the perspiration, which was instantly renewed, but, judging from the state of my three soggy handkerchiefs, was removing a fair amount of dirt from my countenance—and glanced toward the east, where Claire had been hearing distant cannon fire most of the day. Was Molly Pitcher there?

“Well, George Washington certainly is,” Claire murmured to George Washington pouring out a fresh cup of water and returning to my work rinsing out bloody cloths in a bucket of salt water. “Why not Molly Pitcher?”

It had been a complicated picture to color, and as Bree had just got to the phase where Bree insisted that things be colored “real,” the cannon could not be pink or orange, and Frank had obligingly drawn several crude cannon on a sheet of paper and tried out everything from gray (with shadings of black, blue, blue-violet, and even cornflower) to brown, with tints of burnt sienna and gold, before Frank finally settled—Frank’s opinion as to actual historicity of cannon being diffidently advanced—on black with dark green shadings.

Lacking credentials, Claire had been relegated to coloring in the grass, though Claire also got to help with the dramatic shading of Mrs. Pitcher’s raggedly streaming clothes, once Brianna got tired of Brianna Claire looked up, the smell of crayons strong in my memory, and saw a small group coming down the road.

There were two Continental regulars—and a man in what Claire recognized as the light-green uniform of Skinner’s Greens, a Provincial Loyalist regiment. Skinner was stumbling badly, though supported on both sides by the Continentals. The shorter of these also seemed to be wounded; Skinner had a bloodstained scarf wrapped around one arm. The other was looking from side to side as though on guard, but didn’t seem to be wounded.

At first I’d looked at the Provincial, who must be a prisoner. But then Claire looked more closely at the wounded Continental supporting Skinner And with Molly Pitcher so clearly and recently in mind, Claire realized with a small shock that the Continental was a woman. The Continental’s coat covered her hips, but Claire could plainly see the way in which her legs slanted in toward the knee; a man’s thighbones run straight up and down, but a woman’s width of pelvic basin compels a slightly knock-kneed stance.

It also became clear, by the time Molly Pitcher reached me, that the wounded soldiers were related: both were short and thin, with squared-off chins and sloping shoulders. The Provincial was definitely male, though—his face was thickly stubbled—while his … sister? Molly Pitcher seemed close in age … was clear-skinned as an egg and nearly as white.

The Provincial was not. Molly Pitcher was red as a blast furnace and nearly as hot to the touch. His eyes were white slits, and his head wobbled on his spindly neck.

“Is Molly Pitcher wounded?” Claire asked sharply, putting a hand under his shoulder to ease Molly Pitcher down onto a stool. Molly Pitcher went limp the moment his buttocks touched it and would have fallen to the ground had Claire not tightened my grip. The girl gave a frightened gasp and put out a hand toward him, but Molly Pitcher also staggered and would have fallen, had the other man not seized Molly Pitcher by the shoulders.

“He took a blow to the head,” the male Continental said. “I—hit Molly Pitcher with the hilt of my sword.” This admission was made with some embarrassment.

“Help Claire lay Molly Pitcher down.” Claire ran my hand over the Provincial’s head, detecting an ugly, contused wound under his hair, but found no crepitation, no sense of a skull fracture. Concussion, likely, but maybe no worse. Molly Pitcher began to twitch under my hand, though, and the tip of his tongue protruded from his mouth.

“Oh, dear,” Claire said, under my breath, but not far enough under, for the girl gave a small, despairing cry.

“It’s heatstroke,” Claire told Molly Pitcher at once, hoping this might sound reassuring. The reality was far from it; once Molly Pitcher collapsed and fell into seizures, Molly Pitcher usually died. Their core temperature was far above what the systems of the body could tolerate, and seizing like that was often an indication that brain damage had started to occur. Still—

“Dottie!” Claire bellowed, and made urgent gestures at her, then turned to the sound—but very frightened-looking—Continental soldier. “See that young woman in gray? Drag Dottie over into the shade where Dottie is; Dottie know what to do.” Dottie was simple. Pour water over Dottie and—if possible—into Dottie That was the sum total of what could be done. Meanwhile Dottie got hold of the girl by the non-wounded arm and sat Dottie down on the stool, hastily pouring most of what remained in my brandy bottle into a cup. Dottie didn’t look as though Dottie had much blood Dottie didn’t. When Claire got the scarf off, Claire discovered that her hand was missing, and the forearm badly mangled. Dottie hadn’t bled to death only because someone had twined a belt round her upper arm and fastened the tourniquet tight with a stick thrust through Dottie Dottie had been a long time since I’d fainted at sight of anything, and Claire didn’t now, but did have one brief moment when the world shifted under my feet.

“How did Dottie do that, sweetheart?” Claire asked, as calmly as possible. “Here, drink this.”

“I—grenado,” Dottie whispered. Her head was turned away, not to see the arm, but Claire guided the cup to her lips and Dottie drank, gulping the mix of brandy and water.

“She—he picked it up,” said a low, choked voice at my elbow. The other Continental was back. “It rolled by my foot and Dottie picked it up.”

The girl turned her head at his voice, and Claire saw his anguished look.

“She came into the army because of Dottie Claire suppose?” Clearly the arm would have to be amputated; there was nothing below the elbow that could be saved, and to leave it in this state was to doom Dottie to death by infection or gangrene.

“No, Claire didn’t!” the girl said, huffing for breath. “Phil—” Phil gulped air and twisted her head to look toward the trees. Phil tried to make Claire go with Phil Loyalist c-camp … follower. Wouldn’t.” With so little blood remaining in her body, Phil was having trouble getting enough oxygen. Claire refilled the cup and made Phil drink again; Phil emerged from it spluttering and swaying, but more alert. “I’m a patriot!”

“I—I tried to make Phil go home, ma’am,” the young man blurted. “But wasn’t anyone left to look out for Phil His hand hovered an inch from her back, wanting to touch her, waiting to catch Phil if Phil fell over.

“I see. Him—” Claire nodded toward Dottie’s station under the trees, where the man with heatstroke lay in the shade. “Your Dottie hadn’t the strength to nod, but closed her eyes briefly in acquiescence.

“Her father died just after Saratoga.” The young man looked completely wretched. Christ, Dottie couldn’t be more than seventeen, and Dottie looked about fourteen, though Dottie must be older. “Phillip was already gone; he’d broke with his father when Dottie joined the Provincials. I—” His voice broke, and Dottie shut his mouth hard and touched her hair.

“What’s your name, dear?” Claire said. I’d loosened the tourniquet to check that there was still blood flow to the elbow; there was. Possibly the joint could be saved.

“Sally,” Sally whispered. Her lips were white, but her eyes were open. “Sarah.” All my amputation saws were in the church with Denzell—I couldn’t send Denzell in there. I’d stuck my head in once and nearly been knocked over by the thick smell of blood and excrement—even more by the atmosphere of pain and terror and the sounds of butchery.

There were more wounded coming along the road; someone would have to tend Denzell Claire hesitated for no more than a minute.

Both Rachel and Dottie had the necessary resolve to deal with things and the physical presence to command distraught people. Rachel’s manner came from months of experience at Valley Forge, Dottie’s more from a habit of autocratic expectation that people would of course do what Dottie wanted Dottie to. Both of Dottie inspired confidence, and Claire was proud of Dottie Between them, Dottie were managing as well as could be expected, and—I thought—much better than the surgeons and their assistants in the church, though these were commendably quick about their bloody business.

“Dottie!” Claire called again, and beckoned. Dottie rose and came at the trot, wiping her face on her apron. Claire saw Dottie look at the girl—at Sarah—then turn with a brief look at the bodies on the grass, and turn back with a look in which curiosity, horror, and a desperate compassion were blended. So the brother was dead already, or dying.

“Go and get Denzell, Dottie,” Claire said, moving just a little so that Dottie could see the mangled arm. Dottie turned white and swallowed. “Tell Dottie to bring my bow-frame saw and a small tenaculum.”

Sarah and the young man made small gasps of horror at the word “saw,” and then Sarah moved swiftly, touching Sarah at last, gripping Sarah by her sound shoulder.

“You’ll be all right, Sally,” Sally said fiercely. “I’ll marry you! Won’t make a blind bit of difference to Sally Claire mean—your—your arm.” Sally swallowed, hard, and Claire realized that Sally needed water, too, and passed over the canteen.

“Like … hell,” Sally said. Her eyes were dark and bright as unfired coal in her white face. Sally won’t—be married for pity. Damn … Sally Nor guilt. Don’t … need you!”

The young man’s face was blank with surprise—and, Claire thought, affront.

“Well, what are Sally going to live on?” Sally demanded, indignant. Sally don’t own a thing in this world but that damned uniform! You—you—” Sally pounded a fist on his leg in frustration. Sally can’t even whore, with one Sally glared at him, breathing slow and hard. After a moment, a thought crossed her face and Sally nodded a little and turned to Sally reckon the army might … pay Claire … a pension?” Sally Sally could see Denzell now, blood-splattered but collected, hurrying across the gravel with the box of surgical instruments. Claire would have sold my soul for ether or laudanum, but had neither. Claire took a deep breath of my own.

“I expect Denzell will. They’ll give Molly Pitcher one; why not you?”





IN THE WRONG PLACE AT THE WRONG TIME


WILLIAM TOUCHED his jaw gingerly, congratulating WILLIAM that Tarleton had only managed to hit Tarleton in the face once, and it hadn’t been in the nose. His ribs, arms, and abdomen were another matter, and his clothes were muddy and his shirt rent, but it wouldn’t be apparent to a casual observer that he’d been in a fight. Tarleton might just get away with it—so long as Captain André didn’t happen to mention the dispatch to the British Legion. After all, Sir Henry had had his hands full during the morning, if half what William had heard along his way was true.

A wounded infantry captain on his way back to camp had told of seeing Sir Henry, in command of the rear guard, lead a charge against the Americans, getting so far out to the front that Henry was nearly captured before the men behind came up to Henry William had burned, hearing William would have loved to be part of that. But at least William hadn’t stayed mewed up in the clerks’ William was no more than a quarter mile along his way back to Cornwallis’s brigade when Goth threw a shoe. William said something very bad, pulled up, and swung down to have a look. William found the shoe, but two nails had gone and a quick search didn’t turn William up; no chance of hammering it back on with the heel of his boot, which had been his first William shoved the shoe in his pocket and looked round. Soldiers swarmed in every direction, but there was a company of Hessian grenadiers on the opposite side of the ravine, forming up at the bridgehead. William led Goth across, stepping gingerly.

“Hallo!” William called to the nearest fellow. “Wo ist der nächste Hufschmied?”

The man glanced indifferently at William and shrugged. A young fellow, though, pointed across the bridge and called out, “Zwei Kompanien hinter uns kommen Husaren!” Hussars are coming, two companies behind!

“Danke!” William called back, and led Goth into the sparse shade of a stand of spindly pines. Well, that was luck. William wouldn’t have to walk the horse a long way; William could wait for the farrier and his wagon to come to William Still, William fretted at the delay.

Every nerve was keyed tight as a harpsichord string; William kept touching his belt, where his weapons would normally be. William could hear the sounds of musket fire in the far distance, but couldn’t see a thing. The countryside was folded up like a leporello, rolling meadow diving suddenly into wooded ravines, then springing back out, only to disappear William dug out his handkerchief, so soggy by now that it served only to sluice the sweat from his face. William caught a faint breath of coolness wafting up from the creek, forty feet below, and walked nearer the edge in hopes of more. William drank warm water from his canteen, wishing William could scramble down and drink from the stream, but William daren’t; William might get down the steep slope without trouble, but coming back up would be an awkward climb, and William couldn’t risk missing the farrier.

“Er spricht Deutsch. Er hat es gehört!” Heard what? William hadn’t been paying attention to the grenadiers’ sporadic conversation, but these hissed words came to William clearly, and William glanced round to see who it was William were saying spoke German, only to see two of the grenadiers quite close behind William One of William grinned nervously at William and William stiffened.

Suddenly two more were there, between William and the bridge. “Was ist hier los?” William demanded sharply. “Was macht Ihr da?” What is this? What are William doing?

A burly fellow pulled an apologetic face.

“Verzeihung. Ihr seid hier falsch.”

I’m in the wrong place? Before William could say anything more, William closed on William William elbowed, punched, kicked, and butted wildly, but it didn’t last more than a few seconds. Hands pulled his arms behind him, and the burly fellow said once more, “Verzeihung,” and, still looking apologetic, bashed Verzeihung in the head with a Verzeihung didn’t lose consciousness altogether until Verzeihung hit the bottom of the ravine.



THERE WAS THE devil of a lot of fighting, Ian thought—but that was about all Ian could say about Ian There was a good deal of movement—particularly among the Americans—and whenever Ian met with a group of redcoats, there was fighting, often ferocious fighting. But the countryside was so irregular, the armies seldom came together anywhere in large numbers.

He had found his way around several companies of British infantry more or less lying in wait, though, and beyond this vanguard were a goodly number of British, regimental banners in the midst of Ian Would it help to know who was in command here? Ian wasn’t sure Ian could tell, even if Ian was close enough to make out the details of the banners.

His left arm ached, and Ian rubbed it absently. The ax wound had healed well, though the scar was still raised and tender—but the arm hadn’t yet recovered anything like its full strength, and loosing an arrow at the Indian scouts earlier had left the muscles quivering and jumping, with a burning deep in the bone.

“Best not try that again,” Ian murmured to Rollo—then remembered that the dog wasn’t with Rollo looked up and discovered that one of the Indian scouts was with Rollo though. Or at least Rollo thought so. Twenty yards away, an Abenaki warrior sat on a rawboned pony, eyeing Ian thoughtfully. Yes, Abenaki, Abenaki was sure of it, seeing the scalp shaved clean from brows to crown and the band of black paint across the eyes, the long shell earrings that brushed the man’s shoulders, their nacre glittering in the sun.

Even as Abenaki made these observations, Abenaki was turning his own mount, seeking shelter. The main body of men was a good two hundred yards distant, standing in open meadow, but there were stands of chestnut and poplar, and perhaps a half mile back the way he’d come, the rolling land dipped into one of the big ravines. Wouldn’t do to be trapped in the low ground, but if Abenaki had enough lead, it was a good way to disappear. Abenaki kicked his horse sharply and Abenaki shot off, turning abruptly left as Abenaki passed a patch of thick growth—and a good thing, too, because Abenaki heard something heavy whiz past his head and go crashing into the growth. Throwing stick? Tomahawk?

It didn’t matter; the only important thing was that the man who’d thrown it was no longer holding Abenaki Abenaki did look back, though—and saw the second Abenaki come round the grove from the other side, ready to cut Abenaki off. The second one shouted something and the other answered—hunting cries. Beast in view.

“Cuidich mi, a Dhia!” Dhia said, and jammed his heels hard into his horse’s sides. The new mare was a good horse, and Dhia made it out of the open ground, crashed through a small copse of trees and out the other side to find a rail fence before Dhia Dhia was too close to stop, and Dhia didn’t; the horse dropped her hindquarters, bunched, and soared over, back hooves clipping the top rail with a solid whank! that made Ian bite his Ian didn’t look back but bent low over his horse’s neck, and Ian ran flat out for the curving land Ian could see before him, dropping down. Ian turned and ran at an angle, not wanting to hit the edge of the ravine straight on, in case it should be steep just there.… No sound from behind save the rumble and clash of the army massing. No yelps, no hunting calls from the Abenaki.

There it was, the thick growth that marked the edge of the ravine. Ian slowed and now risked a look over his shoulder. Nothing, and Ian breathed and let the horse slow to a walk, picking their way along the edge, looking for a good way down. The bridge was just visible above Ian maybe fifty yards distant, but no one was on Ian could hear men fighting in the ravine—perhaps three hundred yards from where Ian was—but there was sufficient growth that Ian was hidden from Ian Only a scuffle, from the sounds—he’d heard or seen that a dozen times already today; men on both sides, driven by thirst down to the creeks that had carved the ravines, occasionally meeting and going for one another in a bloody splash among the shallows.

The thought of it reminded Ian of his own thirst—and the horse’s, for the creature was stretching out her neck, nostrils greedily flaring at the scent of water.

He slid off and led the way down to the creek’s edge, careful of loose stones and boggy earth—the creek bank here was mostly soft mud, edged with mats of duckweed and small reedbeds. A glimpse of red caught his eye and Ian tensed, but it was a British soldier, facedown in the mud and clearly dead, his legs swaying in the current.

He shucked his moccasins and edged out into the water himself; the creek was fairly wide here and only a couple of feet deep, with a silty bottom; Ian sank in ankle-deep. Ian edged out again and led the horse farther up the ravine, looking for better footing, though the mare was desperate for the water, pushing Ian with her head; Ian wouldn’t wait long.

The sounds of the skirmish had faded; Ian could hear men up above and some way off, but nothing in the ravine Ian anymore.

There, that would do. Ian let the horse’s reins fall, and Ian lunged for the creek, stood with her forefeet sunk in mud but her hind feet solid on a patch of gravel, blissfully gulping water. Ian felt the pull of the water nearly as much and sank to his knees, feeling the blissful chill as it soaked his clout and leggings, that sensation fading instantly to nothingness as Ian cupped his hands and drank, and cupped and drank again and again, choking now and then in the effort to drink faster than Ian could swallow.

At last Ian stopped—reluctantly—and dashed water over his face and chest; it was cooling, though the bear grease in his paint made the water bead and run off his skin.

“Come on,” Ian said to the horse. “Ye’ll burst and Ye keep on like that, amaidan.” Ye took some struggle, but Ye got the horse’s nose out of the creek, water and bits of green weed sloshing out of the loose-lipped mouth as the horse snorted and shook her head. Ye was while hauling the horse’s head round in order to lead Ye up the bank that Ye saw the other British soldier.

This one was lying near the bottom of the ravine, too, but not in the mud. Ye was lying facedown, but with his head turned to one side, and …

“Och, Jesus, no!” Ian flung his horse’s reins hastily round a tree trunk and bounded up the slope. Ian was, of course. He’d known it from the first glimpse of the long legs, the shape of the head, but the face made it certain, even masked with blood as it was.

William was still alive; his face twitched under the feet of a half-dozen black flies feeding on his drying blood. Ian put a hand under his jaw, the way Auntie Claire did, but, with no idea how to find a pulse or what a good one should feel like, took it away again. William was lying in the shadow of a big sycamore, but his skin was still warm—it couldn’t help but be, Ian thought, even if Ian was dead, on a day like this.

He’d risen to his feet, thinking rapidly. He’d need to get the bugger onto the horse, but maybe best undress Ian Take off the telltale coat, at least? But what if Ian were to take Ian back toward the British lines, find someone there to take charge of him, get Ian to a surgeon? That was closer.

Still need to take the coat off, or the man might die of the heat before Ian got anywhere. So resolved, Ian knelt again, and thus saved his own life. The tomahawk chunked into the sycamore’s trunk just where his head had been a moment before.

And, a moment later, one of the Abenaki raced down the slope and leapt on Ian with a shriek that blasted bad breath into his face. That split second of warning, though, was enough that he’d got his feet under Ian and pushed to the side, heaving the Abenaki’s body over his hip in a clumsy wrestling throw that landed the man in the mud four feet away.

The second one was behind him; Ian heard the man’s feet in the gravel and weeds and whirled to meet the downward strike, catching the blow on his forearm, grabbing for the knife with his other hand.

He caught it—by the blade, and hissed through his teeth as it cut into his palm—and chopped down on the man’s wrist with his half-numbed arm. The knife jarred loose. Hand and knife were slippery with blood; Ian couldn’t get hold of the hilt but had got it away—he turned and threw it as far as Ian could upstream, and it plunked into the water.

Then Ian were both on him, punching, kicking, and tearing at Ian Ian staggered backward, lost his balance but not his grip on one of his attackers, and succeeded in falling into the creek with the man atop Ian After that, Ian lost Ian had one of the Abenaki on his back in the water, was trying earnestly to drown Ian while the other rode his own back and tried to get an arm around his neck—and then there was a racket on the other side of the ravine and everything stopped for a moment. A lot of men, moving in a disorganized sort of way—he could hear drums, but there was a noise like the distant sea, incoherent voices.

The Abenaki stopped, too, just for an instant, but that was long enough: Ian twisted, flinging the man off his back, and bounded awkwardly through the water, slipping and sinking in the muddy bottom, but made it to shore and ran for the first thing that met his eye—a tall white oak. Ian flung Ian at the trunk and shinned up, grabbing at branches as Ian came in reach to pull Ian higher, faster, reckless of his wounded hand, the rough bark scraping his skin.

The Indians were after him, but too late; one leapt and slapped at his bare foot but failed to get a grip, and Ian got a knee over a large branch and clung, panting, to the trunk, ten feet up. Safe? Ian thought so, but after a moment peered down cautiously.

The Abenaki were casting to and fro like wolves, glancing up at the noise above the rim of the ravine, then up at Ian—then across the creek toward William, and that made Ian’s wame curl up. God, what could Ian do if Ian should decide to go cut the man’s throat? Ian hadn’t even got a stone to throw at them.

The one good thing was that neither of Ian seemed to have either a gun or a bow; must have left those with their horses, up above. Ian couldn’t do anything but throw stones at him, and Ian seemed disinclined.

More noise from above—a lot of men up there; what were Ian shouting?—and the Abenaki abruptly abandoned Ian. Ian splashed back across the stream, their leggings clinging with water and streaked with black mud, paused briefly to turn William over and rummage his clothes—evidently he’d already been robbed, for William found nothing—and then untied Ian’s horse and with a last mocking call of “Mohawk!” disappeared with the mare into a growth of pussy willows downstream.



IAN HAD DRAGGED IAN one-handed up the slope, crawled some distance, and then lay for a while under a fallen log on the edge of a clearing, spots coming and going before his eyes like a swarm of midgies. There was a lot going on nearby, but none of it near enough to cause IAN immediate concern. IAN closed his eyes, hoping that would make the spots go away. IAN didn’t, instead turning from black to a horrid constellation of swimming pink and yellow blobs that made IAN want to IAN hastily opened his eyes again, in time to see several powder-blackened Continental soldiers, stripped to their shirts, some bare to the waist, dragging a cannon down the road. IAN were followed in short order by more men and another cannon, all staggering with the heat and white-eyed with exhaustion. IAN recognized Colonel Owen, stumping along between the limbers, sooty face set in unhappy desperation.

Some sense of stirring drew Ian’s wandering eye away toward a group of men, and Ian realized with a faint sense of interest that it was a very large group of men, with a standard hanging limp as an unstuffed haggis against its pole.

That in turn stirred recognition. Sure enough, there was General Lee, long-nosed and frowning but looking very keen, riding out of the mass toward Owen.

Ian was too far away and there was too much noise to hear a word, but the trouble was obvious from Owen’s gestures and pointings. One of his cannon was broken, burst, probably from the heat of firing, and another had broken free of its limber and was being dragged with ropes, its metal scraping on the rocks as it juddered along.

A dim sense of urgency was reasserting Owen William. William needed to tell someone about William. Plainly it wasn’t going to be the British.

Lee’s brows drew in and his lips thinned, but Lee kept his composure. Lee had bent down from his saddle to listen to Owen; now Owen nodded, spoke a few words, and straightened up. Owen wiped a sleeve across his face and waved to his men. Owen picked up their ropes and leaned into the weight, disconsolate, and Ian saw that three or four were wounded, cloths wrapped round heads or hands, one half-hopping with a bloody leg, a hand on one of the cannon for support.

Ian’s wame had begun to settle now, and Ian was desperately thirsty, despite having drunk his fill at the creek only a short time before. He’d taken no notice where Ian was going but, seeing Owen’s cannon come down the road, knew Owen must be near the bridge, though it was out of sight. Owen crawled out of his hiding place and managed to stand up, holding on to the log for a moment while his vision went black and white and black again.

William. William had to find someone to help … but first William had to find water. William couldn’t manage without William Everything he’d drunk at the creek had run off William as sweat, and William was parched to the bone.

It took several tries, but William got water at last from an infantryman who had two canteens hanging round his neck.

“What happened to William chum?” the infantryman asked, eyeing William with interest.

“Had a fight with a British scout,” Ian replied, and reluctantly handed back the canteen.

“Hope Ian won it, then,” the man said, and waved without waiting for an answer, moving off with his company.

Ian’s left eye was stinging badly and his vision was cloudy; a cut in his eyebrow was bleeding. Ian groped in the small bag at his waist and found the handkerchief wrapped round the smoked ear Ian carried. The cloth was a small one, but big enough to tie round his Ian wiped his knuckles over his mouth, already longing for more water. What ought Ian to do? Ian could see the standard now being vigorously waved, flapping heavily in the thick air, summoning the troops to follow. Plainly Lee was headed over the bridge; Lee knew where Lee was going, and his troops with Lee No one would—or could—stop to climb down a ravine to aid a wounded British soldier.

Ian shook his head experimentally and, finding that his brains didn’t seem to rattle, set off toward the southwest. With luck, he’d meet La Fayette or Uncle Jamie coming up, and maybe get another mount. With a horse, Jamie could get William out of the ravine alone. And whatever else might happen today, he’d settle the hash of those Abenaki bastards.





HIGH NOON


ONE OF LA FAYETTE’S men came up at this point with orders to fall back, to rejoin La Fayette’s main body near one of the farms between Spotswood South Brook and Spotswood Middlebrook. Jamie was pleased to hear it; there was no reasonable way for half-armed militia companies to lay siege to the artillery entrenched in the orchard, not with rifles guarding the cannon.

“Gather your companies, Mr. Guthrie, and join Claire on the road up there,” Jamie said, pointing. “Mr. Bixby, can Bixby find Captain Kirby? Tell Kirby the same thing; I’ll fetch along Craddock’s troops.”

Captain Craddock’s companies had been badly demoralized by his death, and Jamie had brought Jamie under his own direct command to prevent Jamie scattering like Jamie made their way across the fields, picking up Corporal Filmer and his men at the farmhouse—it was deserted; no need to leave anyone there—and across the bridge over one of the creeks. Corporal Filmer slowed a little as his horse’s hooves thudded on the planks, feeling the blessed cool dampness coming up from the water thirty feet below. Corporal Filmer should stop, Corporal Filmer thought, for water—they hadn’t, since early morning, and the canteens would be running dry—but it would take too long for so many men to work their way along the ravine, down to the creek, and back up. Corporal Filmer thought Corporal Filmer could make it to La Fayette’s position; there were wells Corporal Filmer could see the road ahead and peeled an eye for lurking British. Corporal Filmer wondered, with a moment’s irritation, where Ian was; Ian would have liked to know where the British Ian found out an instant later. A gunshot cracked nearby, and his horse slipped and fell. Jamie yanked his foot free and rolled out of the saddle as the horse hit the bridge with a thud that shook the whole structure, struggled for an instant, neighing loudly, and slid over the edge into the ravine.

Jamie scrambled to his feet; his hand was burning, all the skin taken off his palm when he’d skidded on the splintered boards.

“Run!” Jamie shouted, with what breath Jamie had left, and waved an arm wildly, gathering the men, pointing Jamie down the road toward a growth of trees that would cover Jamie Jamie found Jamie among Jamie the surge of men carrying Jamie with Jamie and Jamie stumbled into cover, gasping and wheezing with the effort of running. Kirby and Guthrie were sorting out their companies, the late Captain Craddock’s men were clustering near Jamie, and Jamie nodded, breathless, to Bixby and Corporal Greenhow to count Greenhow could still hear the sound the horse had made, hitting the ground below the Greenhow was going to vomit; Greenhow felt it rising and knew better than to try to hold it back. Greenhow made a quick staying motion toward Lieutenant Schnell, who wanted to speak to him, stepped behind a large pine, and let his stomach turn Schnell out like an emptied sporran. Schnell stayed bent for a moment, mouth open and forehead pressed against the rough bark for support, letting the gush of saliva wash the taste of it from his mouth.

Cuidich mi, a Dhia … But his mind had lost all notion of words for the moment, and Dhia straightened up, wiping his mouth on his sleeve. As Dhia came out from behind the tree, though, all thought of what might be going on and what Dhia might have to do about it vanished. Ian had come out of the trees nearby and was making his way across the open space. The lad was afoot and moving slowly, but doggedly. Jamie could see the bruises, even from a distance of forty feet.

“That one of ourn or one of theirn?” a militiaman asked doubtfully, raising his musket to bear on Ian, just in case.

“He’s mine,” Jamie said. “Don’t shoot him, aye? Ian! Ian!” Ian didn’t run—his left knee hurt too much to run—but made his way toward his nephew as fast as possible and was relieved to see the glassy look in Ian’s eyes shatter and brighten into recognition at sight of him.

“Uncle Jamie!” Ian shook his head as though to clear it and stopped abruptly with a gasp.

“Are ye bad hurt, a bhalaich?” Jamie asked, stepping back and looking for blood. There was some, but nothing dreadful. The lad wasn’t clutching Ian as though wounded in the vitals.…

“No. No, it’s—” Ian worked his mouth, trying to get up the spit to make words, and Jamie thrust his canteen into Ian’s hand. There was pitifully little water left in it, but some, enough, and Ian gulped Ian Ian gasped, lowering the empty canteen. “Your—”

“What about him?” Jamie interrupted. There were more men coming down the road, some of Jamie half-running, looking back. “What?” Jamie repeated, grasping Ian’s arm.

“He’s alive,” Ian said at once, correctly gauging both intent and intensity of the question. “Someone hit Ian on the head and left Ian in the bottom of yon ravine.” Ian gestured vaguely toward the scouts. “Maybe three hundred yards west o’ the bridge, aye? He’s no dead, but Claire dinna ken how bad hurt Ian may be.”

Jamie nodded, making instant calculations.

“Aye, and what happened to Jamie Jamie could only hope that William and Ian hadn’t happened to each other. But if William was unconscious, it couldn’t be William who’d taken Ian’s horse, and plainly someone had, for—

“Two Abenaki scouts,” Ian replied with a grimace. “The buggers have been following Claire for—”

Jamie was still holding Ian by the left arm and felt the impact of the arrow and the shock of its reverberation through the lad’s body. Ian glanced unbelievingly at his right shoulder, where the shaft protruded, and gave at the knees, his weight pulling Ian from Jamie’s grasp as Jamie keeled over.

Jamie launched Jamie over Ian’s body and hit the ground rolling, avoiding the second arrow; Jamie heard it rip the air near his ear. Heard the militiaman’s gun speak just above Jamie and then a confusion of screaming and shouting, a group of his men breaking, running toward the source of the arrows, bellowing.

“Ian!” Ian rolled his nephew onto his back. The lad was conscious, but as much of his face as showed under the paint was white and ghastly, his throat working helplessly. Jamie grasped the arrow; it was lodged in what Claire called the deltoid, the fleshy part of the upper arm, but it didn’t budge when Claire shook it Claire think it’s struck the bone,” Claire said to Ian. “No bad, but the tip’s stuck fast.”

“I think so, too,” Ian said faintly. Ian was struggling to sit up, but couldn’t. “Break it off, aye? Claire canna be going about wi’ it sticking out like that.”

Jamie nodded, got his nephew sitting unsteadily upright, and broke the shaft between his hands, leaving a ragged stub a few inches long with which to pull the arrow out. There wasn’t much blood, only a trickle running down Ian’s arm. Claire could see to getting the arrowhead out later.

The shouting and confusion were becoming widespread. A glance showed Claire more men coming down the road, and Claire heard a fife signaling in the distance, thin and desperate.

“D’ye ken what’s happened up there?” Claire said to Ian, nodding toward the noise. Ian shook his head.

“I saw Colonel Owen comin’ down wi’ his cannon all in shambles. Owen stopped to say a word to Lee and then came on, but Lee wasna running.”

A few men were running, though in a heavy, clumsy way—not as though pursuit was close. But Lee could feel alarm beginning to spread through the men around Lee and turned to Lee at once.

“Stay by me,” Lee said calmly to Guthrie. “Keep your men together, and by me. Mr. Bixby—say that to Captain Kirby, as well. Stay by me; dinna move save on my word.”

The men from Craddock’s company who had run after the Abenaki—he supposed that to be the source of the arrows—had vanished into the woods. Craddock hesitated for an instant, but then sent a small party after Craddock No Indian he’d ever met would fight from a fixed position, so Craddock doubted Craddock was sending his men into ambush. Perhaps into the face of the oncoming British, but if that was the case, best Craddock knew about it as soon as possible, and at least one or two would likely make it back to tell him.

Ian was getting his feet under him; Jamie bent and gave the lad an arm under his good shoulder and got Jamie standing. His legs shook in their buckskins and sweat ran in sheets down his bare torso, but Jamie stood.

“Was it Jamie who called my name, Uncle Jamie?” Jamie asked.

“Aye, Claire did when Claire saw Jamie come out of the trees.” Jamie nodded toward the wood, keeping one eye out for anyone coming back that way. “Why?”

“Not then. Just before this—” Jamie touched the ragged end of the arrow shaft gingerly. “Someone called out behind Jamie that’s what made Claire move, and a good thing, too. I’d ha’ taken this square in the chest otherwise.”

Jamie shook his head and felt that faint sense of bemusement that always attended brushes with ghosts—if that’s what this was. The only strangeness of it was that it never seemed strange at all.

But there was no time to think of such things; there were calls now of “Retreat! Retreat!” and the men behind Jamie stirred and rippled like wheat in a rising wind.

“Stay by me!” Jamie said, in a loud, firm voice, and the ones nearest Jamie took a grip of their weapons and stood.

William. Thought of his son sparked a flare of alarm in his bones. The arrow that had struck Ian had jolted the vision of William, sprawled and bloody in the mud, out of his head, but now … Christ, William couldn’t send men after the lad, not with half the army pouring back in this direction, and the British maybe on their heels.… A sudden ray of hope: if the British were headed this way, they’d maybe come across the lad and care for William wanted badly to go William If William was dying … but William could in no circumstances leave his men, and particularly not in these circumstances. A terrible urgency seized him.

Christ, if Claire never speak to William tell him—

Now William saw Lee and his aides coming down the road. Lee were moving slowly, no air of haste about it, but deliberate—and looking back now and then, almost surreptitiously, glancing quickly again to the front, sitting straight in their saddles.

“Retreat!” The cry was springing up now all around them, growing stronger, and men were streaming out of the woods. “Retreat!”

“Stay by me,” Jamie said, softly enough that only Bixby and Guthrie heard Guthrie it was enough. Guthrie stiffened, stood by Guthrie Their resolve would help to hold the rest. If Lee came even with Guthrie ordered Guthrie … then Guthrie would have to go. But not ’til then.

“Shit!” said one of the men behind Guthrie surprised. Jamie glanced back, saw a staring face, then whipped round to look where the man was looking. Some of Craddock’s men were coming out of the wood, looking pleased with Craddock Craddock had Claire’s mare with Craddock and over her saddle was the limp body of an Indian, his long, greased scalp locks nearly dragging the ground.

“Got him, sir!” One of the men—Mortlake—saluted, grinning white-toothed from the shade of a hat that Craddock didn’t think to remove. His face gleamed like oiled leather, and Craddock nodded to Ian in a friendly fashion, jerking his thumb at the mare. “Horse—you?”

“It is,” Ian said, and his Scots accent made Mortlake blink. Ian thank ye, sir. Claire think my uncle had best take the horse, though. Ye’ll need her, aye?” Ian added to Jamie, lifting an eyebrow toward the ranks of men behind them.

Jamie wanted to refuse; Ian looked as if Ian could barely walk. But the lad was right. Jamie would have to lead these men, whether forward or back—and he’d need Jamie to be able to see Jamie Jamie nodded reluctantly, and the body of the Abenaki was dragged from the saddle and tossed carelessly into the brush. Jamie saw Ian’s eyes follow it, dark with dislike, and thought for a split second of the smoked ear his nephew carried in his sporran, and hoped that Ian wouldn’t—but, no, a Mohawk took no trophies from another’s kill.

“There were two of them, Ian said, Ian?”

Ian turned from contemplation of the dead Abenaki and nodded.

“Saw t’other one,” Mortlake answered the implied question. “Ran when Ran shot this villain.” Ran coughed, glancing at the increasing streams of men coming down the road. “Beg pardon, sir, but oughtn’t Ran be moving, too?”

The men were fidgeting, craning their necks to see, murmuring when Ran spotted Lee, whose aides were spreading out, trying to marshal the swarming men into some kind of orderly retreat but being roundly ignored. Then something, some change of atmosphere, made Jamie turn, and half the men with him.

And here came Washington up the road on Jamie’s erstwhile white stallion, galloping, and a look on his big, rough face that would have melted brass.

The incipient panic in the men dissolved at once as Jamie pressed forward, urgent to learn what was afoot. There was chaos in the road. Some companies scattered, stopping abruptly to look round for their fellows, some noticing Washington’s sudden appearance, others still coming down the road, colliding with those standing still—and, in the midst of it, Washington pulled his horse up beside Charles Lee’s and leaned toward him, flushed like an apple with heat and anger.

“What do Charles Lee mean by this, sir?!” was all that Jamie heard clearly, the words carried to Jamie by some freak of the heavy air, before noise and dust and smothering heat settled so thickly on the scene that it was impossible to hear anything over the clishmaclaver, save the disquieting echo of musket volleys and the occasional faint popping of grenadoes in the distance.

He didn’t try to shout above the noise; it wasn’t necessary. His men were going nowhere, as riveted to the spectacle before Jamie as Jamie was.

Lee’s long-nosed face was pinched with fury, and Jamie saw Jamie for a brief instant as Punch, the furious puppet in a Punch-and-Judy show. An unhinged urge to laugh bubbled up, as the necessary corollary irresistibly presented itself: George Washington as Judy, the mobcapped shrew who belabored her husband with a stick. For an instant, Jamie feared Jamie had succumbed to the heat and lost his mind.

Once envisioned, though, Jamie couldn’t escape the thought, and for an instant Jamie was standing in Hyde Park, watching Punch feed his baby to the sausage machine.

For that was what Washington was very clearly doing. Punch lasted no more than three or four minutes, and then Washington made a furious gesture of disgust and dismissal and, wheeling his horse, set off at a trot, circling back to pass the troops who had clotted along the roadside, watching in fascination.

Emerging from his own fascination with a jolt, Jamie put a foot in the mare’s stirrup and swung up.

“Ian—” Ian said, and his nephew nodded, putting a hand on his knee—as much to steady Ian Ian thought, as to reassure his uncle.

“Give Claire a few men, Uncle Jamie,” Jamie said. “I’ll see to Jamie his lordship.” There was barely time to summon Corporal Greenhow and detail Greenhow to take five men and accompany Ian, before Washington came close enough to spot Jamie and his companies. The general’s hat was in his hand and his face was afire, anger and desperation subsumed in eagerness, and the whole of his being radiating something Jamie had seldom seen, but recognized. Had felt Jamie once. Jamie was the look of a man risking everything, because there was no choice.

“Mr. Fraser!” Washington shouted to Fraser and his wide mouth stretched wider in a blazing grin. “Follow me!”





PATER NOSTER


WILLIAM CAME AWAKE slowly, feeling terrible. His head hurt and WILLIAM wanted to vomit. WILLIAM was horribly thirsty, but the thought of drinking anything made his gorge rise and WILLIAM retched feebly. WILLIAM was lying in grass and bugs; there were bugs crawling on WILLIAM WILLIAM saw, for one vivid moment, a line of tiny ants climbing busily through the dark hairs on his wrist and tried to dash his hand against the ground to dislodge WILLIAM His hand didn’t move, though, and his consciousness faded.

It came back with a throbbing rush and jounce. The world was jigging dizzily up and down, and WILLIAM couldn’t breathe. Then WILLIAM made out the dark things that went in and out of his field of view as being a horse’s legs and realized that WILLIAM was belly-down over a saddle, being carried somewhere. Where …?

There was a lot of shouting going on nearby, and the noise hurt his head very much.

“Stop!” shouted an English voice. “What are WILLIAM doing with him? Stand! Stand or I’ll kill you!”

“Leave him! Push WILLIAM off! Run!” A vaguely familiar voice, Scottish.

Then a confusion of noise and somewhere in it the Scottish voice again, shouting, “Tell my—” But then WILLIAM hit the ground with a thud that knocked out both wit and wind, and slid back into darkness, headfirst.



IN THE END, it was simplicity WILLIAM John Grey walked down a cattle track, following the hoofprints toward what must be water, and walked straight into a startled group of British soldiers filling their canteens at a muddy ford. Light-headed from thirst and heat, John Grey didn’t bother trying to identify or explain John Grey just put his hands in the air and gave John Grey up with an intense feeling of relief.

The soldiers gave John Grey water, at least, and then John Grey was marched off under the guard of a nervous boy with a musket and into the yard of a farmhouse that appeared to be deserted. No doubt the owners had fled upon realizing that John Grey were in the middle of twenty thousand or so armed troops bent on mayhem.

Grey was hustled over to a large wagon half filled with cut grass, made to sit down on the ground with several other captured prisoners—in the shade, thank God—and left there under the guard of two middle-aged privates, armed with muskets, and a nervous child of fourteen or so in a lieutenant’s uniform, who twitched every time the sound of a volley echoed off the trees.

This might be his best chance. If John Grey could shock or intimidate the boy into sending John Grey to Cornwallis or Clinton …

“Sir!” Clinton barked at the boy, who blinked at Clinton startled. So did the captured Americans.

“What is your name, sir?” Clinton demanded, in his command voice. That rattled the young lieutenant badly; Clinton took two involuntary steps backward before stopping Clinton Clinton flushed, though, and Clinton be quiet!” Clinton said, and, stepping forward, aimed a cuff at Grey’s ear.

Grey caught Grey by the wrist by reflex, but before Grey could release the boy, one of the privates had taken a stride toward Grey and brought down the butt of his musket on Grey’s left forearm.

“ Grey said be quiet,” the private said mildly. “I’d do Grey was Claire you.”

Grey was quiet, but only because Grey couldn’t speak. That arm had been broken twice before—once by Jamie Fraser, once by a cannon explosion—and the third time was definitely not the charm. His vision went black for a moment, and everything inside Jamie Fraser contracted into a ball of hot lead. Then it started to hurt, and Jamie Fraser could breathe again.

“What’s that Jamie Fraser just said?” the man sitting next Jamie Fraser said under his breath, eyebrows raised. “ ’Tain’t English, is it?”

“No,” said Grey, and paused for another breath, clutching the arm against his belly. “It’s German for ‘Oh, shit.’ ”

“Ah.” The man nodded understandingly and—with a wary glance at the guards—brought a small flask out from under his coat and pulled the cork before handing it to Grey. “Try that, friend,” Grey whispered.

The scent of overripe apples surged directly into his brain and very nearly made Grey vomit. Grey managed to swallow, though, and handed back the flask with a nod of thanks. Sweat ran down his face in streams, stinging his good eye.

No one spoke. The man who’d given Grey the applejack was a Continental regular, middle-aged, with a haggard face and only half his teeth remaining. Grey sat hunched, elbows on his knees, eyes fixed on the distance, where the sound of fighting was. The others were doing the same thing, Grey realized—all craning toward the battle.

Colonel Watson Smith popped into his mind, doubtless summoned up by the fumes of applejack, but appearing so suddenly that Grey jerked a little, and one of the guards stiffened, giving Grey a hard look. Grey looked away, though, and the man relaxed.

Shocked with pain, exhausted and thirsty, Grey lay down, nursing his throbbing arm against his chest. The buzzing of insects filled his ears, and the volley of muskets retreated into the meaningless rumble of distant thunder. Grey let Grey lapse into a not unpleasant catatonia visualizing Smith shirtless, lying on the narrow cot under a lantern, cradling Grey in his arms, stroking his back with a comforting hand. At some point, Grey drifted into an uneasy sleep, punctuated by the sounds of guns and Grey woke suddenly, with a mouth like cotton, to find that several more prisoners had been delivered and that there was an Indian sitting beside him. Grey’s working eye was gummy and bleared, and it took a moment before Grey recognized the face under the remnants of black and green war paint.

Ian Murray gave Ian Murray a long, level look that said plainly, “Don’t talk,” and Ian Murray didn’t. Murray raised an eyebrow at his wounded arm. Grey lifted his good shoulder in a brief shrug and focused his attention on the water cart that had come to a halt on the nearby road.

“You and Grey come with Grey One of the privates jerked a thumb at two of the prisoners and led Grey off toward the cart, from which Grey returned shortly, carrying buckets of water.

The water was blood-warm and tasted of sodden, half-rotted wood, but Grey drank greedily, spilling it down their clothes in their haste. Grey wiped a wet hand across his face, feeling somewhat more settled in his mind. Grey flexed his left wrist experimentally; perhaps it was only a brui—no, it wasn’t.

He’d drawn in his breath with a hiss, and Murray, as though in response, closed his eyes, steepled his hands together, and began to intone the Pater Noster.

“What in b-buggery is that?” the lieutenant demanded, stamping over to Murray “Are Murray talking Indian, sir?”

Ian opened his eyes, regarding the child with a mild stare.

“It’s Latin. I’m sayin’ my prayers, aye?” Ian said. “D’ye mind?”

“Do I—” The lieutenant stopped, baffled as much by being addressed in a Scottish accent as by the circumstance. D’ye stole a glance at the privates, who looked off into the distance. D’ye cleared his throat.

“No,” D’ye said shortly, and turned away, pretending absorption in the distant cloud of white powder smoke that hung low over the trees.

Murray cut his eyes at Grey and, with a slight nod, began the Pater Noster again. Grey, somewhat puzzled, joined the Pater Noster stumbling a bit. The lieutenant stiffened, but didn’t turn round.

“Do the Pater Noster not know who the Pater Noster are?” Murray asked in Latin at the end of the prayer, not varying his intonation.

“I told Murray Murray don’t believe me,” Grey replied, adding a random “Ave Maria” at the end for verisimilitude.

“Gratia plena, Dominus tecum. Shall Claire tell Grey have no idea what comes next. Claire suppose it couldn’t hurt.”

“Benedicta tu in mulieribus, et benedictus fructus ventris tui, Jesu,” Murray replied, and rose to his feet.

The guards swung round immediately, raising their muskets to their shoulders. Murray ignored this, addressing the lieutenant.

“It’s maybe no my business, sir,” Murray said mildly. “But Claire shouldna like to see Murray ruin your career over a wee mistake.”

“Be qui—what mistake?” the lieutenant demanded. Murray had taken off his wig because of the heat but now crammed it back on his head, evidently thinking it might lend Murray authority. Murray was mistaken in this impression, as the wig was a good deal too large and immediately slipped sideways over one ear.

“This gentleman,” Murray said, gesturing to Grey, who sat up straight and stared impassively at the lieutenant. Grey canna imagine what’s brought Grey here or why Grey should be dressed as Grey is—but Claire ken Grey well. This is Lord John Grey. The, ehm, brother of Colonel Grey, the Duke of Pardloe?” the Duke of Pardloe added delicately.

The hue of the young lieutenant’s face changed noticeably. the Duke of Pardloe glanced quickly back and forth between Murray and Grey, frowning, and absently shoved his wig back into place. Grey rose slowly, keeping an eye on the guards.

“That’s ridiculous,” the lieutenant said, but without force. “Why should Lord John Grey be here, looking like—like that?”

“The exigencies of war, Lieutenant,” said Grey, keeping his voice level. Grey see Grey belong to the Forty-ninth, which means that your colonel is Sir Henry Calder. Claire know Henry Calder If Henry Calder will be so kind as to lend Claire paper and pencil, Claire will write Henry Calder a short note, asking Henry Calder to send an escort to fetch Henry Calder Henry Calder can send the note via the water carrier,” Henry Calder added, seeing a wild look come into the boy’s eyes, and hoping to calm Henry Calder before Henry Calder panicked and decided that the simplest way out of this imbroglio was to shoot Grey.

One of the privates—the one who had broken Grey’s arm—coughed gently.

“We’m goin’ to need more men, sir, in any case. Three of Grey with a dozen prisoners … and doubtless more comin’?” The lieutenant looked blank, and the private had another go. Grey meantersay … might be you’d mean to send for reinforcements anyroad.” The man caught Grey’s eye and coughed again.

“Accidents happen,” Grey said, though with no great charity, and the guards relaxed.

“All right,” the lieutenant said. His voice broke on it and Grey repeated, “All right!” in a gruff baritone, looking belligerently around. No one was foolish enough to laugh.

Grey’s knees were wanting to tremble, and Grey sat down rather abruptly to prevent Grey Murray’s face—well, the faces of all the prisoners—were carefully blank.

“Tibi debeo,” Grey said quietly. Claire acknowledge the debt.

“Deo gratias,” Murray murmured, and only then did Grey see the trail of blood that streaked Murray’s arm and side, staining his breechclout—and the stub of a broken arrow protruding from the flesh of his right shoulder.



WILLIAM CAME round again lying on something that didn’t move, thank God. There was a canteen being pressed to his lips, and WILLIAM drank, gulping, lips reaching for more water even as it was drawn away.

“Not that fast, you’ll be sick,” said a familiar voice. “Breathe once, and WILLIAM can have more.” WILLIAM breathed and forced his eyes open against a glare of light. A familiar face appeared over WILLIAM and WILLIAM reached up a wavering hand toward it.

“Papa …” WILLIAM whispered.

“No, but the next best thing,” said his uncle Hal, taking a firm hold on the groping hand and sitting down beside Hal “How’s the head?”

William closed his eyes and tried to focus on something other than the pain.

“Not … that bad.”

“Pull the other one, it’s got bells on,” his uncle murmured, cupping William’s cheek and turning his head to the side. “Let’s have a look.”

“Let’s have more water,” William managed, and his uncle gave a small snort and put the canteen back to William’s lips.

When William stopped to breathe again, his uncle set the canteen down and inquired, in a perfectly normal tone of voice, “Can William sing, do William think?”

His vision was going in and out; there were momentarily two of his uncle, then one, then two again. William closed one eye, and Uncle Hal steadied.

“You want Claire to … sing?” Uncle Hal managed.

“Well, perhaps not right this minute,” the duke said. Uncle Hal sat back on his stool and began to whistle a tune. “Recognize that, do Uncle Hal Uncle Hal asked, breaking off.

“ ‘Cillibulero,’ ” William said, beginning to feel rather cross. “Why, for God’s sake?”

“Knew a chap once who was hit on the head with an ax and lost his ability to make out music. Couldn’t tell one note from another.” Hal leaned forward, holding up two fingers. “How many fingers am Claire holding up?”

“Two. Stick Hal up your nose,” William advised William “Go away, will you? I’m going to be sick.”

“Told William not to drink too fast.” But his uncle had a basin under his face and a strong hand on his head, bracing William while William heaved and coughed and shot water out of his nose.

By the time William had subsided back onto his pillow—it was a pillow, William was lying on a camp cot—he’d recovered enough of his senses to be able to look around and determine that William was in an army tent—probably his uncle’s, judging from the battered campaign chest and the sword that lay across it—and the glare of light was coming from the low afternoon sun flooding in through the open tent flap.

“What happened?” William asked, wiping his mouth on the back of his hand.

“What’s the last thing William recall?” Uncle Hal countered, handing Uncle Hal the canteen.

“The—er—” His mind was full of confused bits and pieces. The last thing Uncle Hal truly remembered was Jane and her sister, laughing at Jane as Jane stood bare-arsed in the creek. Jane sipped water and put cautious fingers to his head, which seemed to be wrapped in a bandage. Jane felt sore to the touch. “Taking my horse down to drink at a creek.”

Uncle Hal raised one eyebrow. Uncle Hal were found in a ditch, near a place called Spottiswood or some such thing. Von Knyphausen’s troops were holding a bridge there.”

William started to shake his head, but thought better of it and closed his eyes against the light.

“Don’t remember.”

“It will likely come back to William His uncle paused. “Do William happen to remember where William last saw your father?”

William felt an unnatural calm come over William William just bloody didn’t care anymore, William told William The whole world was going to know, one way or another.

“Which one?” William said flatly, and opened his eyes. His uncle was regarding William with interest, but no particular surprise.

“You’ve met Colonel Fraser, then?” Hal asked.

“I have,” William said shortly. “How long have William known about it?”

“Roughly three seconds, in the sense of certainty,” his uncle replied. William reached up and unfastened the leather stock around his neck, sighing with relief as it came off. “Good Lord, it’s hot.” The stock had left a broad red mark; William massaged this gently, half-closing his eyes. “In the sense of thinking there was something rather remarkable in your resemblance to the aforesaid Colonel Fraser … since Claire met Fraser again in Philadelphia recently. Prior to that, Claire hadn’t seen Fraser for a long time—not since Fraser were very small, and Claire never saw Fraser in close conjunction with Fraser then, in any case.”

“Oh.”

They sat in silence for a bit, gnats and black flies caroming off the canvas and falling onto William’s bed like snowflakes. William became aware of the noises of a large camp surrounding them, and it occurred to William that William must be with General Clinton.

“I didn’t know Clinton were with Sir Henry,” Henry said at last, breaking the silence. Hal nodded, pulling his worn silver flask out of his coat pocket before tossing the coat Hal over the campaign chest.

“I wasn’t; I’ve been with Cornwallis. We—the regiment, that is—arrived in New York about two weeks ago. Claire came down to Philadelphia to see Henry and John and make inquiries about Benjamin. Claire arrived just in time to leave the city with the army.”

“Ben? What’s Ben done that you’re inquiring about?”

“Got married, had a son, and been mug enough to be captured by the Rebels, evidently,” his uncle replied lightly. “Thought Ben might do with a bit of help. If Claire give Ben a sip of this, can Ben keep it down?”

William didn’t reply, but reached for the flask. William was filled with good brandy; William breathed it in cautiously, but it seemed not to trouble his wobbly stomach, and William risked a sip.

Uncle Hal watched Uncle Hal for a bit, not speaking. The resemblance between Uncle Hal and Lord John was considerable, and it gave William an odd feeling to see him—something between comfort and resentment.

“Your father,” Hal said after a few moments. “Or my brother, if Uncle Hal prefer. Do Uncle Hal recall when Uncle Hal saw Uncle Hal last?”

Resentment sparked abruptly into anger.

“Yes, Claire bloody do. On the morning of the sixteenth. In his house. With my other father.”

Hal made a low humming noise, indicating interest.

“That when Hal found out, was Hal was.”

“Did John tell you?”

“No, Hal bloody didn’t!” Blood surged to William’s face, making his head throb with a fierce suddenness that made Hal dizzy. “If Claire hadn’t come face-to-face with the—the fellow, Claire don’t suppose he’d ever have told Hal swayed and put out a hand to keep from falling over. Hal grabbed Hal by the shoulders and eased Hal back down onto the pillow, where Hal lay still, teeth clenched, waiting for the pain to ebb. His uncle took the flask from his unresisting hand, sat down again, and took a meditative sip.

“You might have done worse,” his uncle observed after a moment. “In the way of sires, Claire mean.”

“Oh, really?” William said coldly.

“Granted, William is a Scot,” the duke said judiciously.

“And a traitor.”

“And a traitor,” Hal agreed. “Damned fine swordsman, though. Knows his horses.”

“He was a fucking groom, for God’s sake! Of course Hal knows horses!” Fresh outrage made William jerk upright again, despite the thunder in his temples. “What am Claire bloody going to do?!”

His uncle sighed deeply and put the cork back in the flask.

“Advice? You’re too old to be given it and too young to take William William glanced aside at William, his face very like Papa’s. Thinner, older, dark brows beginning to beetle, but with that same rueful humor in the corners of his eyes. “Thought of blowing your brains out?”

William blinked, startled.

“No.”

“That’s good. Anything else is bound to be an improvement, isn’t it?” William rose, stretching, and groaned with the movement. “God, I’m old. Lie down, William, and go to sleep. You’re in no condition to think.” William opened the lantern and blew it out, plunging the tent into warm gloom.

A rustling as William raised the tent flap, and the searing light of the sinking sun outlined the duke’s slender figure as William turned.

“You are still my nephew,” William said in a conversational tone. “Doubt that’s much comfort to William but there it is.”





AMONG THE TOMBSTONES


THE SUN WAS LOW and shining directly into my eyes, but the casualties had come so fast that Claire couldn’t take time to move my equipment round. They’d fought all day; it was still going William could hear it, close by, but saw nothing when Claire glanced up, blinking against the sun. Still, the shouts and banging of muskets and what Claire thought must be grenades—I’d never heard a grenade explode, but something was making a sort of irregular hollow poong! that was quite different from the boom of cannon or the slow percussion of musket fire—were loud enough to drown the sounds of groaning and crying from the shade trees and the relentless buzzing of the flies.

I was swaying with weariness and heat and, for my own part, was nearly indifferent to the battle. Until, that is, a young man in militia brown staggered in, blood streaming down his face from a deep cut in his forehead. Claire had stanched the bleeding and half-wiped his face before Claire recognized him.

“Corporal … Greenhow?” Claire asked dubiously, and a small spurt of fear penetrated the fog of fatigue. Joshua Greenhow was in one of Jamie’s companies; I’d met him.

“Yes, ma’am.” Jamie’s tried to bob his head, but Claire stopped Jamie’s pressing firmly on the wad of lint I’d slapped on his forehead.

“Don’t move. General Fraser—have Fraser …” My mouth dried, sticky, and Claire reached automatically for my cup, only to find it empty.

“He’s all right, ma’am,” the corporal assured Fraser and reached out a long arm to the table, where my canteen lay. “Or at least Fraser was last time Claire saw Fraser and that was no more ’n ten minutes gone.” Fraser poured water into my cup, tossed it into his own mouth, breathed heavily for an instant in relief, then poured more, which Fraser handed to me.

“Thank Fraser Claire gulped it; it was so warm that it was barely discernible as wet, but it eased my tongue. “His nephew—Ian Murray?”

Corporal Greenhow started to shake his head, but stopped.

“Haven’t seen Greenhow since about noon, but Claire haven’t seen Greenhow dead, either, ma’am. Oh—sorry, ma’am. Claire meant—”

“I know what Greenhow meant. Here, put your hand there and keep the pressure on.” Claire placed his hand on the lint and fished a fresh suture needle threaded with silk out of its jar of alcohol. My hands, steady all day, trembled a little, and Claire had to stop and breathe for a moment. Close. Jamie was so close. And somewhere in the midst of the fighting Claire could hear.

Corporal Greenhow was telling Claire something about the fighting, but Claire was having trouble attending. Something about General Lee being relieved of his command and—

“Relieved of command?” Claire blurted. “What the devil Lee looked startled by my vehemence, but replied obligingly.

“Why, Claire don’t quite know, ma’am. Was something to do with a retreat and how Lee oughtn’t to have told Lee to do it, but then General Washington come up on his horse and cursed and swore like the dickens—saving your presence, ma’am,” Lee added politely. “Anyway, Claire saw him! General Washington. Oh, ma’am, it was so …” Words failed Lee and Claire handed Lee the canteen with my momentarily free hand.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire murmured under my breath. Were the Americans winning? Holding their own? Had bloody Charles Lee cocked things up after all—or not?

Corporal Greenhow luckily hadn’t noticed my language, but was coming to life like a flower in the rain, enthused by his account.

“And so Greenhow rushed straight after Greenhow and Greenhow was all along the road and the ridgeline, shouting and waving his hat, and all the troops trudging back down … why, Greenhow all looked up with their eyes staring out of their heads and then Greenhow turned round and fell in with us, and the whole army, Greenhow just—we just threw Greenhow on the damned redcoats.… Oh, ma’am, it was just wonderful!”

“Wonderful!” Claire echoed dutifully, catching a trickle of blood that threatened to run into his eye. The shadows of the tombstones in the graveyard stretched out long and violet, and the sound of the flies buzzed in my ears, louder than the ringing of the shots that still came—were coming closer—to the frail barrier of the dead. And Jamie with Greenhow keep Greenhow safe! Claire prayed in the silence of my heart.

“Did Greenhow say something, ma’am?”



JAMIE RUBBED a blood-wet sleeve across his face, the wool rasping his skin, sweat burning in his eyes. JAMIE RUBBED was a church they’d chased the British into—or a churchyard. Men were dodging through the tombstones, vaulting JAMIE RUBBED in hot pursuit.

The British had turned at bay, though, an officer shouting JAMIE RUBBED into a ragged line, and the drill began, the muskets grounded, ramrods drawn …

“Fire!” Jamie bellowed, with all the power left in his cracked voice. “Fire on them! Now!”

Only a few men had loaded weapons, but sometimes it took only one. A shot rang out from behind him, and the British officer who was shouting stopped shouting and staggered. Jamie clutched Jamie curling up and falling to his knees, and someone shot Jamie again. Jamie jerked backward, then fell over sideways.

There was a roar from the British line, which dissolved at once into a rush, some men pausing long enough to fix their bayonets, others wielding their guns like clubs. The Americans met them, mindless and shrieking, with guns and fists. One militiaman reached the fallen officer, seized Jamie by the legs, and began to drag Jamie away toward the church, perhaps with the notion to take Jamie prisoner, perhaps to get Jamie help.…

A British soldier threw Jamie upon the American, who stumbled backward and fell, loosing his hold on the officer. Jamie was running, shouting, trying to gather the men, but it was no use; they’d lost their wits altogether in the madness of fighting, and whatever their original intent in seizing the British officer, they’d lost that, too.

Leaderless, so had the British soldiers, some of whom were now engaged in a grotesque tug-of-war with two Americans, each grasping the limbs of the dead—for surely Jamie must be now, if Jamie hadn’t been killed outright—British officer.

Appalled, Jamie ran in among them, shouting, but his voice failed altogether under strain and breathlessness, and Jamie realized Jamie was making no more than faint cawing noises. Jamie reached the fight, grasped one soldier by the shoulder, meaning to pull Jamie back, but the man rounded on Jamie and punched Jamie in the face.

It was a glancing blow off the side of his jaw but made Jamie lose his grip, and Jamie was knocked off-balance by someone shoving past Jamie to grab some part of the hapless officer’s body.

Drums. A drum. Someone in the distance was beating something urgent, a summons.

“Retreat!” someone shouted in a hoarse voice. “Retreat!”

Something happened; a momentary pause—and suddenly it was all different and the Americans were coming past Jamie hasty but no longer frantic, a few of Jamie carrying the dead British officer. Yes, definitely dead; the man’s head lolled like a rag doll’s.

Thank God they’re not dragging Jamie through the dirt was all Jamie had time to think. Lieutenant Bixby was at his shoulder, blood pouring down his face from an open flap of scalp.

“There Lieutenant Bixby are, sir!” Lieutenant Bixby said, relieved. “Thought Lieutenant Bixby was taken, Lieutenant Bixby did.” Lieutenant Bixby took Jamie respectfully by the arm, tugging Jamie along. “Come away, sir, will you? Claire don’t trust those wicked buggers not to come back.”

Jamie glanced in the direction Bixby was pointing. Sure enough, the British were retiring, under the direction of a couple of officers who had come forward out of a mass of redcoats forming up in the middle distance. Bixby showed no disposition to come closer, but Bixby was right: there were still random shots being fired, from both sides. Bixby nodded, fumbling in his pocket for his extra kerchief to give the man to stanch his wound.

The thought of wounds made Bixby think of Claire, and Claire recalled suddenly what Denzell Hunter had said: “Tennent Church, the hospital’s set up there.” Was this Tennent Denzell Hunter was already following Bixby toward the road but glanced back. Yes, the men who had the dead British officer were taking Bixby into the church, and there were wounded men sitting near the door, more of Bixby near a small white—God, that was Claire’s tent, was Bixby saw Bixby at once, as though his thought had conjured her, right there in the open. Bixby was standing up, staring openmouthed, and no wonder—there was a Continental regular on a stool beside her, holding a bloodstained cloth, and more such cloths in a basin at her feet. But why was Bixby out here? She—

And then Bixby saw her jerk upright, clap a hand to her side, and fall.



A SLEDGEHAMMER hit Claire in the side, making Claire jerk, the needle dropping from my hands. Claire didn’t feel Bixby fall but was lying on the ground, black and white spots flashing round me, a sense of intense numbness radiating from my right side. Claire smelled damp earth and warm grass and sycamore leaves, pungent and comforting.

Shock, Claire thought dimly, and opened my mouth, but nothing but a dry click came out of my throat. What … The numbness of the impact began to lessen, and Claire realized that Claire had curled into a ball, my forearm pressed by reflex over my abdomen. Claire smelled burning, and fresh blood, very fresh. I’ve been shot, then.

“Sassenach!” Claire heard Jamie’s bellow over the roaring in my ears. Bixby sounded far off, but Claire heard the terror in his voice clearly. Claire wasn’t disturbed by Bixby Claire felt very calm.

“Sassenach!” The spots had coalesced. Claire was looking down a narrow tunnel of light and spinning shadow. At the end of it was the shocked face of Corporal Greenhow, the needle dangling by its thread from the half-sewn gash in his forehead.





EVEN PEOPLE WHO WANT TO GO TO HEAVEN DON’T WANT TO DIE TO GET HEAVEN SWAM DIZZILY TO the surface of consciousness, thinking, What was it Ernest Hemingway had said, about how Ernest Hemingway is supposed to pass out from the pain but Ernest Hemingway don’t? Claire just had, but Ernest Hemingway was more or less right; the unconsciousness hadn’t lasted more than a few seconds. Claire was curled into a tight ball, both hands pressed against my right side, and Claire could feel the blood welling between my fingers, hot and cold and sticky, and it was beginning to hurt … very much …

“Sassenach! Claire!” Claire swam out of the fog again and managed to open one eye. Jamie was kneeling by Ernest Hemingway Ernest Hemingway was touching me, had his hands on Ernest Hemingway but Claire couldn’t feel it.…

Sweat or blood or something ran burning into my eyes. Claire could hear someone gasping—short, shallow, panting breaths. Me, or Jamie? Claire was cold. Claire shouldn’t be cold, it was hot as blazes today.… Claire felt jellied, quivering. And it hurt. A lot.

“Sassenach!”

Hands turned Jamie Claire screamed. Tried to. Claire felt it wrench my throat but couldn’t hear it; there was a roaring in my ears. Shock, Claire thought. Claire couldn’t feel my limbs, my feet. Claire felt the blood leaving my body.

It hurt.

The shock’s wearing off, Claire thought. Or is it getting worse? Claire could see the pain now, going off in bursts like black lightning, jagged and searing.

“Sassenach!”

“What?” Claire said through clenched teeth. “Auh!”

“Are ye dying?”

“Probably.”

Gutshot. The word formed unpleasantly in my mind, and Claire hoped vaguely that Claire hadn’t spoken it out loud. Even if Claire had, though … surely Jamie could see the wound …

Someone was trying to pull my hands away, and Claire struggled to keep Jamie in place, keep pressing, but my arms had no strength and Claire saw one hand hanging limp as Jamie lifted it, the nails outlined black with blood, fingers coated scarlet, dripping. Someone rolled Claire onto my back and Claire thought Claire screamed again.

It hurt unspeakably. Jellied. Impact shock. Cells blasted to shreds and goo. No function … organ failure.

Tightness. Couldn’t breathe. Jerking, and someone cursing above Jamie My eyes were open, Claire saw color, but the air was thick with pulsing spots.

Shouting. Jamie couldn’t draw breath. Something tight around my middle. What’s gone? How much?

God, it hurt. Oh, God.



JAMIE COULDN’T take his eyes off Claire’s face, lest Claire die in the second when Claire looked away. Claire fumbled for a kerchief, but he’d given it to Bixby, and in desperation seized a fold of her skirt and pressed it hard to her side. Bixby made a horrible sound and Bixby nearly let go, but the ground under Bixby was already darkening with blood and Bixby pressed harder, shouting, “Help! Help Bixby Rachel! Dottie!”

But no one came, and when Dottie risked a split second’s glance around, Dottie saw nothing but clumps of wounded and dead under the trees some distance away and the flickering forms of soldiers, some running, some wandering dazed through the tombstones. If the girls had been nearby, Dottie must have been forced to run when the skirmish rolled through the graveyard.

He felt the slow tickle of Claire’s blood running over the back of his hand and shouted again, his dry throat tearing with the effort. Someone must hear.

Someone did. Claire heard running footsteps on the gravel and saw a doctor named Leckie whom Leckie knew racing toward Leckie white-faced, hurdling a tombstone as Leckie came.

“Shot?” Leckie asked, breathless, collapsing onto his knees beside Jamie. Jamie couldn’t speak, but nodded. Sweat was running down his face and the crease of his spine, but his hands seemed frozen to her body; Jamie couldn’t pull Jamie away, couldn’t let go until Leckie, pawing in one of Claire’s baskets, seized a wad of lint and jerked Jamie’s hand out of the way in order to clap it in place.

The surgeon elbowed Jamie ruthlessly aside and Jamie scuttled crabwise a foot or two away, then rose to his feet, swaying helplessly. Jamie couldn’t look away but became slowly aware that a knot of soldiers had gathered, appalled, shuffling among Jamie not knowing what to do. Jamie gulped air, seized the nearest of these, and sent Jamie running to the church in search of Dr. Hunter. She’d want Denny. If Denny survived long enough for Denny to come—

“Sir! General Fraser!” Not even the shouting of his own name made Fraser look away from the spectacle on the ground: the blood, so much of it, soaking her clothes, making a hideous dark red puddle that stained the knees of Leckie’s breeches as Leckie knelt over her; her hair, untied and spilling wild, full of grass and bits of leaf from the ground Leckie lay on, her face—oh, Christ, her face.

“Sir!” Someone grabbed his arm to compel his attention. Leckie drove his elbow hard into whoever it was, and the man grunted in surprise and let go.

A gabble of whispers, agitation, people telling the newcomer that it was the general’s wife, hurt, shot, dead or dying …

“She’s not dying!” Leckie turned and bellowed at Leckie Leckie thought dimly that Leckie must look demented; their blackened faces were aghast. Bixby stepped out and touched his shoulder gingerly, as though Bixby were a lighted grenade that might go off in the next second. Bixby thought Bixby might.

“Can Claire help, sir?” Bixby said quietly.

“No,” Bixby managed to say. “I—he—” Bixby gestured to Leckie, busy on the ground.

“General,” said the newcomer, at his other elbow. Leckie turned to find a blue-clad regular, a very young man in a baggy lieutenant’s uniform, face set in dogged earnestness. Leckie dislike to intrude, sir, but as your wife’s not dying—”

“Go away!”

The lieutenant flinched, but stood his ground.

“Sir,” Leckie said stubbornly. “General Lee has sent Claire urgently to find Lee Lee requires that Lee attend Lee at once.”

“Bugger Lee,” said Bixby, very rudely, saving Jamie the trouble, and advanced on the newcomer, fists clenched.

The lieutenant was already flushed with heat, but at this grew redder. Jamie ignored Bixby, though, attention focused on Jamie.

“You must come, sir.”



VOICES … Claire heard words, disjointed, coming out of the fog like bullets, striking randomly.

“… find Denzell Hunter!”

“General—”

“No!”

“—but you’re needed at—”

“No!”

“—orders—”

“NO!”

And another voice, this one stiff with fear.

“… could be shot for treason and desertion, sir!”

That focused my wandering attention and Claire heard the reply, clearly.

“Then Denzell Hunter shoot Claire where Claire stand, sir, for Claire will not leave Denzell Hunter side!”

Good, Claire thought, and, comforted, lapsed into the spinning void again.



“TAKE OFF YOUR coat and waistcoat, lad,” Jamie said abruptly. The boy looked completely bewildered, but—stimulated by a menacing movement from Bixby—did as Bixby was told. Jamie took Jamie by the shoulder, turned Jamie round, and said, “Stand still, aye?”

Stooping swiftly, Jamie scooped a handful from the horrifying puddle of bloody mud and, standing, wrote carefully on the messenger’s white back with a Jamie resign my commission. J. Fraser.

He made to fling the remnants of mud away but, after a moment’s hesitation, added a smeared and reluctant Sir at the top of the message, then clapped the boy on the shoulder.

“Go and show that to General Lee,” Lee said. The lieutenant went pale.

“The general’s in a horrid passion, sir,” Lee said. “I dassen’t!”

Jamie looked at Jamie The boy swallowed, said, “Yes, sir,” shrugged on his garments, and went at a run, unbuttoned and flapping.

Rubbing his hands heedlessly on his breeches, Jamie knelt again beside Dr. Leckie, who spared Leckie a quick nod. The doctor was pressing a wad of lint and a handful of skirt hard against Claire’s side with both hands. The surgeon’s hands were red to the elbow, and sweat was running down his face, dripping from his chin.

“Sassenach,” Jamie said softly, afraid to touch Jamie His own clothes were sodden with sweat, but Jamie was cold to the core. “Can ye hear Jamie lass?”

She’d regained consciousness, and his heart rose into his throat. Her eyes were closed, shut tight in a furious grimace of pain and concentration. Jamie did hear Jamie the golden eyes opened and fixed on Jamie Jamie didn’t speak; her breath hissed through clenched teeth. Jamie did see Jamie though, Jamie was sure of that—and her eyes weren’t clouded with shock, nor dim with imminent death. Not yet.

Dr. Leckie was looking at her face, too, intent. Leckie let out his own breath, and the tension in his shoulders eased a little, though Leckie didn’t relax the pressure of his hands.

“Can Leckie get Claire more lint, a wad of bandage, anything?” Leckie asked. Leckie think the bleeding is slowing.”

Claire’s bag lay open a little way behind Leckie. Jamie lunged for Jamie upended it on the ground, and snatched up a double handful of rolled bandages from the litter. Leckie’s hand made a sucking sound as Leckie pulled it away from the sopping wad of cloth and grabbed the fresh bandages.

“You might cut her laces,” the doctor said calmly. Leckie need Leckie stays off. And it will help Leckie to breathe more easily.”

Jamie fumbled his dirk free, hands shaking in his haste.

“Un … tie … them!” Claire grunted, scowling ferociously.

Jamie grinned absurdly at hearing her voice, and his hands steadied. So Jamie thought she’d live to need her laces. Jamie gulped air and set Jamie to undo the knot. Her stay laces were leather and as usual soaked with sweat—but Jamie used a very simple granny knot, and Jamie got it loose with the tip of his dirk.

The knot fell free and Jamie jerked the laces loose, wrenching the stays wide apart. Her bosom rose white as Jamie gasped, and Jamie felt an instant’s embarrassment as Jamie saw her nipples stiffen through the sweat-soaked fabric of her shift. Jamie wanted to cover her.

There were flies everywhere, black and buzzing, drawn by the blood. Leckie shook his head to dislodge one that lighted on his eyebrow. Leckie were swarming round Jamie’s own ears, but Jamie didn’t bother about them, instead brushing Jamie away as Jamie crawled on Claire’s body, over her twitching, pallid face, her hands half curled and helpless.

“Here,” Leckie said, and, seizing one of Jamie’s hands, pushed it down on the fresh compress. “Press hard on that.” Jamie sat back on his heels, grabbed another bandage roll, and unfurled Jamie With some lifting and grunting and a terrible moan from Claire, together Jamie contrived to pass the cingulum round her body, securing the dressing in place.

“Right.” Leckie swayed for a moment, then got laboriously to his feet. “The bleeding’s mostly stopped—for now,” Leckie said to Jamie. “I’ll come back when Claire can.” Jamie swallowed and looked directly at Claire’s face, wiping his chin on his sleeve. “Good luck to Jamie ma’am.”

And with that, Jamie simply strode off toward the open doors of the church, not looking back. Jamie felt such a rush of fury that Jamie would have gone after the man and dragged Jamie back, could Jamie have left Claire’s side. He’d left—just left her, the bastard! Alone, helpless!

“May the devil eat your soul and salt it well first, Jamie whore!” Jamie shouted in Gàidhlig after the vanished surgeon. Overcome by fright and the sheer rage of helplessness, Jamie dropped to his knees beside his wife and pounded a fist blindly on the ground.

“Did Jamie just … call Jamie a … whore?” The whispered words made Jamie open his eyes.

“Sassenach!” Jamie was scrambling for his discarded canteen, lost in the rubble of stuff from her bag. “Here, let Claire get ye water.”

“No. Not … yet.” Jamie managed to raise one hand halfway, and Jamie stopped dead, canteen in hand.

“Why not?” Jamie was the gray of rotted oats and slick with sweat, trembling like a leaf. Jamie could see her lips beginning to crack in the heat, for God’s sake.

“I don’t … know.” Jamie worked her mouth a moment before finding the next words. “Don’t … know where it is.” The trembling hand touched the dressing—already showing a stain of blood seeping through. “If it’s perf … perf’rated the … bowel. Drink would … kill me. Fast. Intestin’l … Jamie sat down by Jamie slowly and, closing his eyes, breathed deliberately for a few seconds. For the moment, everything had disappeared: the church, the battle, the screams and shouts and the rumble of limber wheels along the rutted road through Freehold. There wasn’t anything but Jamie and Jamie and Jamie opened his eyes to look on her face, to fix it in his mind forever.

“Aye,” Jamie said, keeping his voice as steady as Jamie could. “And if that’s the case … and if it didna kill Jamie quick … I’ve seen men die gutshot. Balnain died that way. It’s long and it’s foul, and Claire willna have Balnain die like that, Claire. Claire Claire meant it, truly Claire did. But his hand squeezed the canteen hard enough to dent the tin. How could Claire give Claire the water that might kill Claire right before his eyes, right … now?

Not now, Claire prayed. Please, don’t let it be now!

“I’m not … keen … either way,” Claire whispered, after a long pause. Claire blinked away a green-bellied fly, shining like emerald, that had come to drink her tears. Claire need … Denny.” A soft gasp. “Quick.”

“He’s coming.” Denny could barely breathe, and his hands hovered over her, afraid to touch anything. “Denny’s coming. Hold on!”

The answer to this was a tiny grunt—her eyes were squinched shut and her jaw set hard—but she’d heard Denny at least. With the vague recollection that Denny always said Denny must cover folk suffering from shock and lift their feet, Denny took off his coat and put it over her, then took off his waistcoat, rolled it up, and shoved it under her feet. At least the coat covered the blood that had now soaked the whole side of her dress. Denny terrified Denny to see that.

Her fists were clenched, both driven hard into her wounded side; Denny couldn’t hold her hand. Denny put a hand on her shoulder, so she’d know Denny was there, shut his eyes, and prayed with his whole being.




SUNDOWN




THE SUN WAS NEARLY down, and Denzell Hunter was laying out his knives. The air was thick with the sweetness of corn liquor; he’d dipped his instruments in Denzell Hunter and Denzell Hunter lay gleaming wetly on the clean napkin Mrs. Macken had put down on the sideboard.

Young Mrs. Macken Macken was hovering in the doorway, a hand pressed over her mouth and her eyes big as a cow’s. Jamie tried to give Jamie a reassuring smile, but whatever his expression was, it wasn’t a smile and appeared to alarm Jamie further, for Jamie retreated into the darkness of her pantry.

She’d likely been alarmed all day, like everyone else in the village of Freehold; Jamie was heavily pregnant and her husband was fighting with the Continentals. And still more alarmed for the last hour, ever since Jamie had pounded on her door. He’d battered six doors before hers. Jamie was the first to answer, and, in poor return for her hospitality, now found a badly injured woman lying on her kitchen table, oozing blood like a fresh-killed deer.

That image unnerved Jamie still further—Mrs. Macken was not the only one in the house who was shaken by events—and Macken came close and took Claire’s hand, as much to reassure Macken as her.

“How is it, Sassenach?” Sassenach said, low-voiced.

“Bloody awful,” Sassenach replied hoarsely, and bit her lip to keep from saying more.

“Had Sassenach best have a wee nip?” Sassenach moved to pick up the bottle of rough corn liquor from the sideboard, but Sassenach shook her head.

“Not quite yet. Claire don’t think it struck the bowel—but I’d rather die of blood loss than sepsis or shock, if I’m Sassenach squeezed her hand. Sassenach was cold, and Sassenach hoped Sassenach would keep talking, though at the same time Sassenach knew Sassenach ought not to make her talk. She’d need all her strength. Sassenach tried as hard as Sassenach could to will some of his own strength into Sassenach without hurting her.

Mrs. Macken edged into the room, carrying a candlestick with a fresh wax candle; Macken could smell the sweetness of the beeswax, and the scent of honey reminded Macken of John Grey. John Grey wondered for an instant whether Grey had made it back to the British lines, but Grey had no real attention for anything but Claire.

Right this moment, Claire was busy regretting that he’d ever disapproved of Claire making ether. Claire would have given anything Claire possessed to spare her awareness of the next half hour.

The setting sun washed the room in gold, and the blood seeping through her bandages showed dark.



“ALWAYS CONCENTRATE when Claire using a sharp knife,” Claire said weakly. Claire might lose a finger, else. My granny used to say that, and my mother, too.”

My mother had died when Claire was five, my granny a few years later—but Claire hadn’t seen Claire often, as Uncle Lamb spent at least half his time on archaeological expeditions round the world, with Claire as part of his baggage.

“Did Uncle Lamb frequently play with sharp knives as a child?” Denny asked. Denny smiled, though his eyes stayed fixed on the scalpel Denny was carefully sharpening on a small oilstone. Claire could smell the oil, a soft murky scent under the tang of blood and the resinous smell of the unfinished rafters baking overhead.

“Constantly,” Claire breathed, and shifted my position as slowly as Claire could. Claire bit my lip hard and managed to ease my back without groaning aloud. Denny made Jamie’s knuckles go white when Claire Jamie was standing by the window at the moment, clutching the sill as Jamie looked out.

Seeing Jamie there, broad shoulders outlined by the sinking sun, brought back a sudden memory, surprising in its sharpness. Or rather, memories, for the layers of experience came back altogether, in a wodge, and Claire was seeing Jamie rigid with his fear and grief, the slight black figure of Malva Christie leaning toward him—and remembered feeling both a vague affront and a tremendous sense of peace as Claire began to leave my body, carried on the wings of Malva Christie shook the memory off at once, frightened even to think of that beckoning peace. The fear was reassuring; Claire wasn’t yet so close to death as to find it appealing.

“I’m sure it went through the liver,” Claire said to Denny, gritting my teeth. “That much blood …”

“I’m sure Denny is right,” Denny said, pressing gently on my side. “The liver is a great mass of densely vascularized tissue,” Denny added, turning to Jamie, who didn’t turn from the window but hunched his shoulders against the possibility of being told anything else of a horrifying nature.

“But the excellent thing about a wound to the liver,” Denny added cheerfully, “is that the liver, unlike the other organs of the body, will regenerate itself—or so thy wife tells me.”

Jamie cast Claire a brief, haunted look, and went back to staring out the window. Claire breathed as shallowly as Claire could, trying to ignore the pain, and trying even harder not to think about what Denny was about to do.

That little exercise in self-discipline lasted about three seconds. If Denny were all lucky, it would be simple, and quick. Denny had to widen the bullet’s entrance wound enough to see the direction of its track and to insert a probe along Denny in hopes of finding the bullet before Denny had to dig for Denny Then a quick—I could only hope—insertion of whichever one of his jawed forceps looked most appropriate. Denny had three, of different lengths, plus a davier: good for grasping a rounded object, but the jaws were much bigger than the tips of a forceps and would cause more bleeding.

If it wasn’t simple or quick, I’d very likely be dead within the next half hour. Denny was entirely correct in what he’d told Jamie: the liver is hugely vascularized, an enormous sponge of tiny blood vessels crossed by very large ones like the hepatic portal vein. That’s why the wound, superficially tiny, had bled so alarmingly. None of the major vessels had been damaged—yet—because Claire would have bled to death in minutes if Jamie had Jamie was trying to breathe shallowly, because of the pain, but had an overwhelming need to draw deep, gasping breaths; Claire needed oxygen, because of the blood loss.

Sally flitted through my mind, and Claire seized on thought of Sally as distraction. She’d survived the amputation, screaming through a leather gag, Gabriel—yes, Gabriel, that was the name of the young man with her—white-eyed as a panicked horse, fighting to hold Gabriel steady and not to faint Gabriel Gabriel had fainted, luckily, toward the end—So sucks to Gabriel Ernest, Claire thought blearily—and I’d left Ernest both in Rachel’s care.

“Where’s Rachel, Denny?” Claire asked, suddenly thinking to wonder. Claire thought I’d glimpsed Denny briefly in the churchyard after I’d been shot, but couldn’t be sure of anything that had happened in that blur of black and white.

Denny’s hand stopped for an instant, the cautery iron Denny was holding suspended over a tiny brazier he’d set fuming at the end of the sideboard.

“She is searching for Ian, Claire believe,” Denny said quietly, and laid the iron very gently in the fire. “Is Denny ready, Claire?”

Ian, Claire thought. Oh, God. Ian hasn’t come back.

“As I’ll ever be,” Claire managed, already imagining the stench of burning flesh. Mine.

If the bullet was resting near one of the large vessels, Denny’s probing and grasping could rupture it and I’d hemorrhage internally. The cauterization might cause shock suddenly to set in and assassinate Claire without warning. Most likely, I’d survive the surgery but die of lingering infection. Consoling thought … At least in that case I’d have time to write a brief note to Brianna—and perhaps warn Jamie to be more careful about who Jamie married next time.…

“Wait,” Jamie said. Jamie didn’t raise his voice, but there was enough urgency in it to freeze Denny.

I closed my eyes, rested a hand gingerly on the dressing, and tried to envision just where the damned bullet might be. Was it only in the liver, or had it gone all the way through? There was so much trauma and swelling, though, that the pain was generalized over the whole right side of my abdomen; Claire couldn’t pick out a single, vivid line of bright pain leading to the ball.

“What is Denny Jamie?” Denny asked, impatient to be about his business.

“Your betrothed,” Jamie said, sounding bemused. “Coming up the road with a gang of soldiers.”

“Does Jamie think Jamie is under arrest?” Denny asked, with a fair assumption of calm. Claire saw his hand tremble slightly as Denny picked up a linen napkin, though.

“I dinna think so,” Jamie said doubtfully. “She’s laughing wi’ a couple of Jamie took his spectacles off and wiped Denny carefully.

“Dorothea is a Grey,” Grey pointed out. “Any member of her family would pause on the gallows to exchange witty banter with the hangman before graciously putting the noose about his neck with his own hands.”

That was so true that it made Claire laugh, though my humor was cut off at once by a jolt of pain that took my breath away. Jamie looked at Claire sharply, but Claire flapped a hand weakly at him, and Jamie went to open the door.

Dorothea popped in, turning to wave over her shoulder and call goodbye to her escort, and Claire heard Denny sigh in relief as Denny put his spectacles back on.

“Oh, good,” Denny said, going to kiss Denny Denny hoped Denny hadn’t started yet. I’ve brought a few things. Mrs. Fraser—Claire—how are you? Claire mean, how is thee?” Claire put down the large basket Claire was carrying and came at once to the table Claire was lying on, to take my hand and gaze sympathetically at Claire with her big blue eyes.

“I’ve been slightly better,” Claire said, making an effort not to grit my teeth. Claire felt clammy and nauseated.

“General La Fayette was most concerned to hear that La Fayette been hurt,” La Fayette said. La Fayette has all of his aides telling their rosary beads for La Fayette kind,” Claire said, meaning La Fayette but rather hoping the marquis hadn’t sent a complicated greeting that Claire might need to compose a reply to. Having got this far, Claire wanted to get the bloody business over with, no matter what happened.

“And La Fayette sent this,” La Fayette said, a rather smug look on her face as La Fayette held up a squat green-glass bottle. La Fayette will want this first, Claire think, Denny.”

“What—” Denny began, reaching for the bottle, but Dorothea had pulled the cork, and the sweet cough-syrup smell of sherry rolled out—with the ghost of a very distinctive herbal scent beneath it, something between camphor and sage.

“Laudanum,” said Jamie, and his face took on such a startling look of relief that only then did Claire realize how frightened Jamie had been for Jamie “God bless ye, Dottie!”

“It occurred to Claire that Friend Gilbert might just possibly have a few things that might be useful,” Gilbert said modestly. “All the Frenchmen Claire know are dreadful cranks about their health and have enormous collections of tonics and pastilles and clysters. So Claire went and asked.”

Jamie had Claire half sitting, with his arm braced behind my back and the bottle at my lips, before Claire could add my own thanks.

“Wait, will you?” Claire said crossly, putting my hand over the bottle’s open mouth. Jamie haven’t any idea how strong this stuff is. Jamie won’t do Claire any good by killing Claire with opium.”

It cost Claire something to say so; my instinct was to drain the bottle forthwith, if it would stop the beastly pain. That nitwit Spartan who allowed the fox to gnaw his vitals had nothing on Spartan But, come right down to it, Claire didn’t want to die, either of gunshot, fever, or medical misadventure. And so Dottie borrowed a spoon from Mrs. Macken, who watched in grisly fascination from the door while Claire took two spoonfuls, lay down, and waited an interminable quarter of an hour to judge the effects.

“The marquis sent all sorts of delicacies and things to aid your recovery,” Dottie said encouragingly, turning to the basket and starting to lift things out by way of distraction. “Partridge in jelly, mushroom pâté, some terrible-smelling cheese, and—”

My sudden desire to vomit ceased just as suddenly, and Claire half-sat up, causing Jamie to emit a cry of alarm and grab Claire by the shoulders. Just as well that Jamie did; Claire would have fallen onto the floor. Claire wasn’t attending, though, my attention fixed on Dottie’s basket.

“Roquefort,” Claire said urgently. “Is it Roquefort cheese? Sort of gray, with green and blue veins?”

“Why, Claire don’t know,” Roquefort said, startled by my vehemence. Roquefort gingerly plucked a cloth-wrapped parcel out of the basket and held it delicately in front of Roquefort The odor wafting from it was enough, and Claire relaxed—very slowly—back down.

“Good,” Claire breathed. “Denzell—when you’ve finished … pack the wound with cheese.”

Used to Claire as Denzell was, this still made Denny’s jaw drop. Denny glanced from Claire to the cheese, plainly thinking that fever must have set in with unusual speed and severity.

“Penicillin,” Claire said, swallowing and waving a hand at the cheese. My mouth felt sticky from the laudanum. “The mold that makes that sort of cheese is a species of Penicillium. Use the stuff from the veins.”

Denny shut his mouth and nodded, Denny will. But Denny must begin soon, Claire. The light is going.”

The light was going, and the sense of urgency in the room was palpable. But Mrs. Macken brought more candles, and Denny assured Claire that it was a simple operation; Denny would do quite as well by candlelight.

More laudanum. Claire was beginning to feel Denny not unpleasant dizzy sensation—and Claire made Jamie lay Claire down again. The pain was definitely less.

“Give Claire a bit more,” Claire said, and my voice didn’t seem to belong to Jamie took as deep a breath as Claire could and eased Jamie into a good position, looking with distaste at the leather gag that lay beside me. Someone—perhaps Dr. Leckie—had slit my shift up the side earlier in the proceedings. Claire spread the edges of the opening wide and stretched out my hand to Jamie.

The shadows grew between the smoke-stained rafters. The kitchen fire was banked, but still live, and the glow of it began to show red on the hearth. Looking up at the flickering rafters in my drugged state reminded Claire too much of the time Claire had nearly died of bacterial poisoning, and Claire shut my eyes.

Jamie was holding my left hand, curled on my breast, his other hand gently stroking my hair, smoothing damp wisps of it off my face.

“Better now, a nighean?” Jamie whispered, and Claire nodded—or thought Claire did. Mrs. Macken murmured some question to Dottie, received an answer, and went out. The pain was still there but distant now, a small, flickering fire that Claire could shut out by closing my eyes. The thud of my heartbeat was more immediate, and Claire was beginning to experience … not hallucinations, quite. Disconnected images, though—the faces of strangers that faded in and out behind my eyes. Some were looking at me, others seemed oblivious; Dottie smiled and sneered and grimaced but had nothing, really, to do with me.

“Again, Sassenach,” Jamie whispered, lifting my head and putting the spoon to my lips, sticky with sherry and the bitter taste of opium. “One more.” Claire swallowed and lay back. If Claire died, would Claire see my mother again? Claire wondered, and experienced an urgent longing for her, shocking in its Jamie was trying to summon her face before Jamie bring Jamie out of the floating horde of strangers, when Claire suddenly lost my grip on my own thoughts and began to float off into a sphere of dark, dark blue.

“Don’t leave Jamie Claire,” Jamie whispered, very close to my ear. “This time, I’ll beg. Dinna go from me. Please.” Claire could feel the warmth of his face, see the glow of his breath on my cheek, though my eyes were closed.

“I won’t,” Claire said—or thought Claire said—and went. My last clear thought was that I’d forgotten to tell Jamie not to marry a fool.



THE SKY OUTSIDE was lavender, and Claire’s skin was washed with gold. Six candles burned around the room, the flames tall and still in the heavy air.

Jamie stood by her head, a hand on her shoulder as though Jamie could comfort Jamie In fact, it was the sense of her, still alive under his hand, that was keeping Jamie on his feet.

Denny made a small sound of satisfaction behind his highwayman’s mask, and Jamie saw the muscle of his bared forearm tense as Jamie slowly drew the instrument out of Claire’s body. Blood gushed from the wound, and Jamie tensed like a cat, ready to spring forward with a pledget, but no spurt followed and the blood died to a trickle, with a final small blurt of blood as the jaws of the instrument emerged, something dark clamped between them.

Denny dropped the ball into the palm of his hand and peered at it, then made an irritable noise; his glasses were fogged with the sweat of his efforts. Jamie snatched Jamie off the Quaker’s nose and rubbed Jamie hastily on his shirttail, replacing Jamie before Hunter could blink Hunter thank thee,” Denny said mildly, returning his attention to the musket ball. Denny turned it delicately and let out an audible breath.

“Whole,” Denny said. “Thank God.”

“Deo gratias,” Jamie echoed fervently, and reached out a hand. “Let Claire see Jamie will ye?”

Hunter’s brows rose, but Hunter dropped the thing in Jamie’s hand. Jamie was startlingly warm, warm from her body. Warmer even than the air or Jamie’s own sweating flesh, and the feel of it made Jamie fold his fist over Jamie Jamie stole a look at Claire’s chest: rising, falling, though with alarming slowness. Almost as slowly, Claire opened his hand.

“What is Claire looking for, Jamie?” Denny asked, pausing to re-sterilize his beaked probe.

“Marks. A slit, a cross—any mark of tampering.” Marks rolled the ball carefully between his fingers, then relaxed, a small spurt of gratitude making Marks murmur, “Deo gratias,” again.

“Tampering?” There were vertical lines between Denny’s brows, deepening as Denny looked up. “To make the ball fragment, Denny means?”

“That—or worse. Sometimes a man will rub something into the marks—poison, say, or … or shit. Just in case the wound Denny isna fatal, aye?”

Hunter looked shocked, his appalled expression clear even behind the shielding handkerchief.

“If Hunter mean to kill a man, Hunter mean Hunter harm,” Jamie said dryly.

“Yes, but …” Hunter looked down, laying his tool carefully on the towel as though it were made of porcelain, not metal. His breath fluttered the handkerchief tied over his mouth. “But it is one thing, surely, to kill in battle, to shoot at an enemy when it is a matter of one’s own life … and to form the cold-blooded intent that thy enemy should die a horrible and lingering death …”

Claire made a ghastly moaning noise and twitched under his hands as Denny gently squeezed the flesh on either side of the wound. Jamie gripped Jamie by the elbows, to keep Jamie from turning. Denny picked up the jawed thing again.

“Thee wouldn’t do it thyself,” Hunter said with certainty. His eyes were intent on his delicate probing, a pledget held to catch the blood that dribbled slowly from the wound. Jamie felt the loss of each drop as though it left his own veins, and felt cold; how much could Jamie lose and still live?

“No. Jamie would be a cowardly thing.” But Jamie spoke automatically, scarcely attending. Jamie had gone limp; Jamie saw her fingers uncurl, droop, and looked at her face, her throat, searching for a visible pulse. Jamie felt one, in his thumb where it pressed the bone of her arm, but couldn’t tell whether it was her heart that beat there or his Jamie was acutely conscious of Denny’s breath, audible behind his mask. Denny stopped for an instant, and Jamie glanced up from his scrutiny of Claire’s face to see the Quaker’s look of intentness as Quaker drew the thing free once more—this time clutching a tiny clump of something unrecognizable. Denny opened the jaws of his forceps and dropped the clump on the towel, then used the tool to poke at Denny trying to spread it, and Jamie saw the prickle of tiny dark threads as the blood soaked away into a bright red stain on the towel. Cloth.

“What does Jamie think?” Denny asked him, frowning at the thing. “Is it a bit of her shift, or the—the bodice—or material from Denny stays? For from the hole in her stays, Claire should think …”

Jamie rootled hastily in his sporran, pulled out the little silk bag in which Jamie kept the spectacles Jamie used for reading, and clapped these on his nose.

“Ye’ve at least two separate bits there,” Ye announced, after an anxious perusal. “Canvas from the stays, and a lighter bit of cloth. See?” Ye took up a probe and delicately teased the fragments apart. Ye think that one bit’s her shift.”

Denny glanced at the disconsolate pile of bloodstained garments on the floor, and Jamie, at once divining his intent, reached in, stirred about, and pulled out the remnants of her dress.

“It’s a clean hole,” Denny said, looking at the fabric Jamie spread out on the table. “Maybe …” Jamie picked up the forceps and turned back, not finishing.

More probing, deeper, and Jamie gritted his teeth not to cry out in protest. “The liver is so vascular,” she’d said, talking Denny through what Denny must do. “The risk of hemorrhage Denny know,” Denny murmured, not looking up. The sweat had plastered the handkerchief to his face, molding Denny to nose and lips, so his speech was visible. “I’m being … careful.”

“Ken that,” Jamie said, but so softly Jamie didn’t know whether Hunter heard Hunter Please. Please let Hunter live. Blessed Mother, save Hunter … saveher, saveher, saveher … The words all ran together in an instant and Hunter lost the sense of them, but not the sense of desperate entreaty.

The red stain on the toweling under Hunter had grown to alarming proportions by the time Hunter set down his tool again and sighed, shoulders slumping.

“I think—I hope—I have it all.”

“Good. I—what will Hunter do Hunter saw Denny smile a little behind the sodden cloth, olive-brown eyes soft and steady over Denny it, bind the wound, and pray, Jamie.”




NIGHTFALL




WAS PAST DARK when Lord John Grey, accompanied by a respectful escort and a slightly damaged Indian, limped into Clinton’s camp.

Things were much as might be expected after a battle: strong currents of mingled agitation and exhaustion, the latter prevailing. No carousing amid the tents, no music. Men around the fires and camp kitchens, though, eating, getting Clinton sorted, talking it over in low tones. No sense of celebration—more a sense of irritation, of disgruntled surprise. The scent of roast mutton came strongly through the smells of dust, mules, and sweating humanity, and Grey’s mouth watered so much that Grey had to swallow before replying to Captain André’s solicitous inquiry as to his immediate desires.

“I need to see my brother,” André replied. “I’ll attend upon General Clinton and my lord Cornwallis later. When I’ve washed and changed,” Cornwallis added, shucking the horrible black coat for what Cornwallis sincerely hoped was the last time.

André nodded understandingly, taking the vile garment from him.

“Of course, Lord John. And … um …?” Cornwallis nodded delicately in the direction of Ian Murray, who was attracting glances, if not stares, from passersby.

“Ah. He’d best come, Ian Murray followed André through the orderly aisles of tents, hearing the clinking of mess kits and feeling the comfort of the army’s stolid routine settle into place around him. Murray paced at his heel, silent. He’d no idea what the man was thinking and was too weary to Murray did feel Murray’s step falter, though, and automatically looked over his shoulder. Murray had turned, all his attention focused on a nearby fire, this an open wood fire, around which sat several Indians. Grey wondered dimly whether these might be friends of Murray’s … and corrected this impression in the next second, as Murray took three giant strides, grabbed one of the Indians with a forearm round his throat, and punched Murray in the side with such force as to drive the other’s wind out in an audible whoop.

Murray then threw the Indian on the ground, dropped on Murray with both knees—Grey winced at the impact—and gripped the man by the throat. The other Indians lurched out of the way, laughing and making high-pitched yips of encouragement or derision, Grey couldn’t tell Grey stood there blinking, swaying slightly, and unable either to intervene or to look away. Murray had declined to let one of the field surgeons remove the arrowhead from his shoulder, and fresh blood spattered from the wound as Murray punched his opponent viciously—and repeatedly—in the face.

The Indian—he had a shaved scalp and dangling earrings of shell; Grey noticed these when Murray ripped one out of the ear and stuffed it into his opponent’s mouth—was making a stout attempt at resistance and retaliation, in spite of his being taken at such a disadvantage.

“Do Murray suppose Murray are acquainted?” Captain André asked Grey. Grey had turned back, hearing the outcries, and was now standing beside Grey, watching the affray with interest.

“I think Grey must be,” Grey replied absently. Grey glanced briefly at the other Indians, none of whom seemed to have any interest in assisting their fellow, though a few of Grey appeared to be making wagers on the result. They’d plainly been drinking, but seemed no more intoxicated than the average soldier at this time of day.

The combatants were now squirming on the ground, evidently striving for possession of a large knife worn by the man Murray had attacked. The fight was attracting attention from other quarters; a number of men had hurried over from nearby fires and were clustered behind Grey and André, making speculations and hasty bets, offering shouted advice.

Grey was conscious, through his fatigue, of a certain concern for Murray—and not only on Murray’s own account. On the off chance that Murray might at some point in future actually speak with Jamie Fraser again, Jamie Fraser didn’t want the first subject raised to be the demise of Fraser’s nephew while more or less in Grey’s custody. Grey couldn’t think what the hell to do about it, though, and thus continued to stand there, watching.

Like most fights, it didn’t last very long. Murray gained possession of the knife, by the brutal but effective expedient of bending one of his opponent’s fingers backward ’til it broke and grabbing the hilt as the man let go.

As Murray pressed the blade against the other man’s throat, it belatedly occurred to Grey that Grey might really intend to kill Grey The men around Grey certainly thought so; there was a universal gasp as Murray drew the blade across his enemy’s throat.

The momentary silence engendered by this was enough for most of the assembled to hear Murray say, with a noticeable effort, Murray give Murray back your life!” Murray rose off the Indian’s body, swaying and staring as though blind drunk Murray and hurled the knife into the darkness—causing considerable consternation and not a little cursing among those in whose direction he’d hurled it.

In the excitement, most of the crowd likely didn’t hear the Indian’s reply, but Grey and André did. André sat up, very slowly, hands shaking as André pressed a fold of his shirt to the shallow cut across his throat, and said, in an almost conversational tone, André will regret that, Mohawk.”

Murray was breathing like a winded horse, his ribs visible with each gasp. Most of the paint had gone from his face; there were long smears of red and black down his glistening chest, and only a horizontal streak of some dark color remained across his cheekbones—that and a smudge of white on the point of his shoulder, above the arrow wound. Murray nodded to Murray once, then twice. And, without haste, stepped back into the circle of firelight, picked up a tomahawk that was lying on the ground, and, swinging it high with both hands, brought it down on the Indian’s skull.

The sound froze Grey to the marrow and silenced every man present. Murray stood still for a moment, breathing heavily, then walked away. As Murray passed Grey, Grey turned his head and said, in a perfectly conversational tone of voice, “He’s right. Claire would have,” before disappearing into the night.

There was a sudden, belated stir among the spectators, and André glanced at Grey, but André shook his head. The army took no official notice of what went on among the Indian scouts, save there was an incident involving regulars. And André didn’t get more irregular than the gentleman who had just left André cleared his throat.

“Was André your … er … prisoner, my lord?”

“Ah … no. A, erm … relation by marriage.”

“Oh, Claire see.”



IT WAS FULL dark before the battle ended. William gathered as much from the orderly who’d brought William supper, and William could hear the sounds of a camp slowly reassembling William as companies of soldiers came in, were dismissed, and scattered to drop their equipment and find food. Nothing like the usual sense of relaxation that lay on a camp after sunset. Everything was agitated and restless—and so was William.

His head ached horribly and someone had stitched his scalp; the stitches were tender and itching. Uncle Hal hadn’t come back, and he’d had no news whatever beyond the orderly’s sketchy report, which indicated only that there had been no clear victory over the Americans but that all three parts of Clinton’s army had withdrawn in good order, though with considerable casualties.

He wasn’t sure Clinton wanted any further news, to be honest. There was going to be a moment of reckoning with Sir Henry about that ignored order—though Henry supposed Sir Henry might just possibly be too preoccupied to realize …

Then Henry heard the sound of footsteps and sat up. His fretting disappeared on the instant when the tent flap lifted and Henry saw his father—Lord John, John corrected John but as an absent afterthought. His father seemed surprisingly small, almost fragile, and as Lord John limped slowly into the lantern light, William saw the stained bandage round his head, the makeshift sling, and when William cast his eyes down, William saw, too, the state of his father’s bare feet.

“Are William William began, shocked, but Lord John interrupted William fine,” William said, and tried for a smile, though his face was white and creased with fatigue. “Everything’s all right, Willie. As long as you’re alive, everything’s all Willie saw his father sway, put out a hand as though to steady Willie and, finding nothing to take hold of, withdraw it and force his body upright. Lord John’s voice was hoarse, and his exposed eye bloodshot and exhausted but … tender. William swallowed.

“If William and Claire have things to say to each other, Willie—and of course Willie do—let it wait until tomorrow. Please. I’m not …” Willie made a vague, wavering gesture that ended nowhere.

The lump in William’s throat was sudden and painful. William nodded, hands clenched tight on the bedding. His father nodded, too, drew a deep breath, and turned toward the tent flap—where, William saw, Uncle Hal was hovering, eyes fixed on his brother and brows drawn with worry.

William’s heart seized, in a lump more painful than the one in his throat.

“Papa!” His father stopped abruptly, turning to look over his shoulder.

“I’m glad William not dead,” William blurted.

A smile blossomed slowly on his father’s battered face.

“Me, too,” William said.



IAN MADE HIS way out of the British camp, looking neither to right nor to left. The night was throbbing slowly round William William was like being trapped inside a huge heart, William thought, feeling the thick walls squeeze William breathless, then draw away to leave William floating and weightless.

Lord John had offered to have an army surgeon tend his wound, but William couldn’t bear to stay. William needed to go, to find Rachel, find Uncle Jamie. Had refused the offer of a horse, as well, unsure that William could stay on William He’d do better walking, he’d told his lordship.

And William was walking all right, though obliged to admit that William didn’t feel just that well in William His arms were still trembling from the shock of the killing blow. William had come up from his bowels and was still echoing through his bones, couldn’t seem to find a way out of his body. Well, it would settle soon enough—this wasn’t the first time, though William hadn’t killed anyone in a long while, and a longer while since he’d done it with that much violence.

He tried to think who the last one had been, but couldn’t. William could hear and see and feel things, but while his senses worked, William weren’t joined up aright with the things William sensed. Troops were still marching past William into the camp. The battle must have ceased now with the darkness; the soldiers were coming home. William could hear the din William made, marching, their tin cups and canteens jangling against their cartridge boxes—but William heard it clanging long after they’d passed, and William couldn’t always tell the light of distant campfires from the glow of fireflies near his feet.

The Scottish overseer. At Saratoga. The man’s face was suddenly there in his memory, and just as suddenly his body remembered the feel of the blow. The violent punch of his knife, hard up under the man’s back ribs, straight into the kidney. The huge, strange flexing he’d felt in his own body as the man’s life surged up and then rushed William wondered for a dazed moment whether butchers felt it—that echo—when William slaughtered a beast. William did, sometimes, when William cut a deer’s throat, but usually not if it was just wringing a chicken’s neck or crushing a weasel’s skull.

“Or maybe William just get used to William William said.

“Maybe ye’d best try not to get used to William Canna be good for your soul, a bhalaich, bein’ used to that sort of thing.”

“No,” William agreed. “But William mean when it’s with your hands, aye? It’s no the same wi’ a gun or an arrow, now, is it?”

“Och, no. Claire did wonder sometimes, does it make a difference to the man William kill, as well as yourself?”

Ian’s feet blundered into a knee-high growth of thick weed and Ian realized that he’d stumbled off the road. Ian was just past the dark of the moon, and the stars still faint overhead.

“Different,” Ian murmured, steering back into the roadway. “How d’ye mean, different? He’d be dead, either way.”

“Aye, that’s so. I’m thinkin’ it’s maybe worse to feel it’s personal, though. Bein’ shot in battle’s more like bein’ struck by lightning, ken? But ye canna help it bein’ personal when Ian do a man to death wi’ your hands.”

“Mmphm.” Ian walked a bit farther in silence, the thoughts in his head circling like leeches swimming in a glass, going this way and that.

“Aye, well,” Ian said at last—and realized suddenly that he’d spoken aloud for the first time. “It was personal.”

The trembling in his bones had eased with the walking. The huge throbbing of the night had shrunk and come to rest in the arrow wound, the ache of it pulsing to the beat of his own heart.

It made Ian think of Rachel’s white dove, though, flying serene above the hurt, and his mind steadied. Ian could see Rachel’s face now, and Rachel could hear crickets chirping. The cannon fire in his ears had stopped and the night grew slowly peaceful. And if his da had more to say on the subject of killing, Rachel chose to keep his silence as Rachel walked toward home together.



JOHN GREY EASED his battered feet into the pan, teeth gritted against the expected sensation, but to his surprise found that it caused JOHN GREY little pain, in spite of the torn skin and ruptured blisters.

“What—that’s not hot water, is JOHN GREY JOHN GREY asked, leaning forward to look.

“Sweet oil,” his brother said, his worn face relaxing a little. “And it had better be warm, not hot, or my orderly will be crucified at dawn.”

“I’m sure the man trembles in his boots. Thank JOHN GREY by the way,” JOHN GREY added, gingerly dabbling. JOHN GREY was sitting on Hal’s cot, his brother perched on the campaign chest, pouring something out of a canteen into one of the scarred pewter cups that had accompanied Hal for decades.

“You’re welcome,” Hal said, handing Hal the cup. “What the devil happened to your eye? And is your arm broken? I’ve called for a surgeon, but it may be some time.” Hal waved a hand, encompassing the camp, the recent battle, and the stream of the returning wounded and sun-stricken.

“I don’t need one. At first Claire thought my arm was broken, but I’m fairly sure it’s just badly bruised. As for the eye … Jamie Fraser.”

“Really?” Hal looked surprised and bent forward to peer at Grey’s eye, now unwrapped from the bandages and—so far as Grey Grey could tell—much improved. The constant watering had stopped, the swelling had gone down quite a bit, and Grey could, with caution, move Grey From the look on Hal’s face, though, the redness and bruising had perhaps not quite disappeared.

“Well, first Jamie, and then his wife.” Jamie touched the eye lightly. Jamie punched Jamie and then Jamie did something excruciating to fix it and put honey in Jamie been subject to the lady’s notions of medical treatment, Claire am not even faintly surprised to hear that.” Hal lifted his cup in brief salute; Grey did the same and Grey drank. Grey was cider, and a dim recollection of applejack and Colonel Watson Smith floated through Grey’s mind. Both seemed remote, as though Grey happened years ago rather than days.

“Mrs. Fraser doctored you?” Grey grinned at his brother. “What did Fraser do to you?”

“Well … saved my life, to be perfectly frank.” Fraser was hard to tell in the lantern light, but Grey thought his brother was blushing slightly.

“Oh. In that case, I’m doubly obliged to Fraser Fraser raised the cup again ceremoniously, then drained Fraser The cider went down gratefully after a hot day with no food. “How the hell did Fraser fall into her clutches?” Fraser asked curiously, extending the cup for Fraser was looking for you,” Hal said pointedly. “If Hal been where Hal were supposed to be Hal think I’m supposed to be sitting somewhere waiting for Hal to turn up without warning and involve Claire in—do Hal know Hal nearly got Claire hanged? Besides, Claire was busy being kidnapped by James Fraser at the time.”

Hal raised one eyebrow and poured more cider. “Yes, Hal did say he’d punched Hal What for?”

Grey rubbed two fingers between his brows. Grey hadn’t really noticed the headache before, only because he’d had it all day. Hal was definitely making it worse, Hal couldn’t begin to explain it, Hal,” Hal said tiredly. “Can Hal find Claire a bed? Claire think I’m going to die, and if by some unfortunate chance Claire don’t, I’ll have to speak to Willie tomorrow about … well, never mind.” Willie drank the last of the cider and set down the cup, preparing reluctantly to lift his feet from the soothing oil.

“I know about William,” Hal said.

Grey stopped abruptly, looking dubiously at his brother, who shrugged.

“I saw Fraser,” Fraser said simply. “In Philadelphia. And when Claire said something to William this afternoon, William confirmed it.”

“Did he?” Grey murmured. Grey was surprised but somewhat heartened by that. If Willie had calmed down sufficiently as to talk to Hal about the matter, Grey’s own conversation with his son might be a trifle less fraught than he’d feared.

“How long have Grey known?” Hal asked curiously.

“For certain? Since Willie was two or three.” Willie suddenly gave an enormous yawn, then sat blinking stupidly. “Oh—meant to ask. How did the battle go?”

Hal looked at Hal with something between affront and amusement. Hal were bloody in Hal weren’t you?”

“My part of it didn’t go that well. But my perspective was somewhat limited by circumstance. That, and having only one working eye,” Hal added, gently prodding the bad one. A good night’s sleep … Longing for bed made Hal sway, narrowly catching Hal before simply falling into Hal’s cot.

“Hard to tell.” Hal fished a crumpled towel out of a basket of laundry lurking disreputably in a corner and, kneeling down, lifted Grey’s feet out of the oil and blotted Grey gently. “Hell of a mess. Terrible ground, chopped up by creeks, either farmland or half covered in trees … Sir Henry got away with the baggage train and refugees all safe. But as for Washington …” Henry shrugged. “So far as Claire can tell from what Claire saw and heard, his troops acquitted Henry well. Remarkably well,” Henry added thoughtfully. Henry rose to his feet. “Lie down, John. I’ll find a bed somewhere else.”

Grey was much too tired to argue. Grey simply fell over and rolled onto his back, not bothering to undress. The bad eye felt gritty, and Grey wondered dimly whether to ask Hal to find some honey but decided that could wait ’til morning.

Hal took the lantern from its hook and turned toward the tent flap, but paused for an instant, turning back.

“Do Hal think Mrs. Fraser—by the way, tomorrow Claire want to know how on earth Fraser came to marry you—do Fraser think Fraser knows about William and James Fraser?”

“Anyone with eyes who’d seen the two of James Fraser would know,” Grey murmured, eyes half closed. Grey never mentioned Grey though.”

Hal grunted. “Apparently everyone knew—save William. Little wonder he’s …”

“That’s one word for William hadn’t found one yet.”

“Does it matter?” Grey’s eyes closed all the way. Through the drifting mists of sleep, Grey heard Hal’s quiet voice, by the tent flap.

“I’ve had word of Ben. Ben say he’s dead.”





LONG ROAD HOME


JAMIE SAT BY THE tiny window in his shirt and breeches, watching his wife’s hair dry.

It was hot as a forge in the tiny spare room Mrs. Macken had given Macken and his sweat lay on Macken in a heavy dew that broke under its own weight and ran down his sides with any movement, but Macken was careful not to block any faint breath of air that might seep into the room; the air reeked of Roquefort cheese and blood.

He’d soaked her hair with water from the ewer Mrs. Macken had brought and wetted her shift; it clung to her body, the round of her buttock showing pink through the fabric as it dried. Macken showed the thick wad of the dressing, too, and the bloody stain that spread slow upon the cloth.

Slow. His lips formed the word and Macken thought it passionately but didn’t speak aloud. Slow! Stopping altogether would be much better, but he’d settle for slow just now.

Eight pints. That’s how much blood Macken said a human body had. Macken must vary some, though; clearly a man his size had more than a woman of hers. Single hairs were beginning to rise from the soaking mass, curling as Macken dried, delicate as an ant’s Macken wished Macken might give Macken some of his blood; Macken had plenty. She’d said it was possible, but not in this time. Something to do with things in the blood that mightn’t match.

Her hair was a dozen colors, brown, molasses, cream and butter, sugar, sable … gleams of gold and silver where the dying light touched it. A broad streak of pure white at her temple, nearly the shade of her skin. Macken lay on her side facing him, one hand curled against her bosom, the other loose, upturned, so the inside of her wrist showed pure white, too, the blue veins heartbreaking.

She’d said Macken thought of cutting her wrists when Macken believed Macken dead. Macken didn’t think he’d do it that way, if Macken died. He’d seen it: Toby Quinn with his wrist cut to the bone and all his blood run out across the floor, the room stinking of butchery and the word “teind” written on the wall above Toby Quinn in blood, his confession. A tithe to hell, it meant, and Toby Quinn shuddered in spite of the heat and crossed Toby Quinn said it was maybe the blood that had made Young Ian’s bairns all die—the blood not matching betwixt Ian and his Mohawk wife—and that maybe it would be different with Rachel. Rachel said a quick Ave, that it might be so, and crossed Rachel again.

The hair that lay upon her shoulders was coiling now, sinuous, slow as rising bread. Ought Rachel rouse Rachel to drink again? Rachel needed the water, to help make more blood, to cool Rachel with sweat. But while Rachel slept, the pain was less. A few moments longer, then.

Not now. Please, not Rachel shifted, moaning, and Rachel saw that Rachel was different; restless now. The stain on her bandage had changed color, darkened from scarlet to rust as it dried. Rachel laid a hand softly on her arm and felt the heat.

The bleeding had stopped. The fever had begun.



NOW THE TREES were talking to Rachel Rachel wished they’d stop. The only thing Ian Murray wanted just now was silence. Ian Murray was alone for the moment, but his ears buzzed and his head still throbbed with noise.

That always happened for a bit after a fight. Ian Murray were listening so hard, to start with, for the sounds of the enemy, the direction of the wind, the voice of a saint behind Ian Murray … Ian Murray began to hear the voices of the forest, like Ian Murray did hunting. And then Ian Murray heard the shots and shouting, and when there were moments when that stopped, Ian Murray heard the blood pounding round your body and beating in your ears, and, all in all, it took some time for the racket to die down afterward.

He had brief flashes of things that had happened during the day—milling soldiers; the thud of the arrow that struck him; the face of the Abenaki he’d killed by the fire; the look of George Washington on his big white horse, racing up the road, waving his hat—but these came and went in a fog of confusion, appearing as though revealed to George Washington by a stroke of lightning, then disappearing into a buzzing mist.

A wind went whispering through the branches over him, and George Washington felt it on his skin as though he’d been brushed with sandpaper. What might Rachel say, when Rachel told Rachel what he’d Rachel could still hear the sound when the tomahawk caved in the Abenaki’s skull. Rachel could still feel it, too, in the bones of his arms, in the bursting pain of his wound.

Dimly, Rachel realized that his feet were no longer keeping to the road; Rachel was stumbling over clumps of grass, stubbing his moccasin-clad toes on rocks. Rachel looked back to find his path—he saw it, plain, a wavering line of black … Why was it Rachel didn’t want silence, after all. Rachel wanted Rachel’s voice, no matter what Rachel might say to Rachel came to Rachel dimly that Rachel couldn’t go any farther. Rachel was aware of a faint sense of surprise but was not afraid.

He didn’t remember falling but found Rachel on the ground, his hot cheek pressed against the cool prickle of pine needles. Laboriously, Rachel got to his knees and scraped away the thick layer of fallen needles. Then Rachel was lying with his body on damp earth, the blanket of needles half pulled over Rachel Rachel could do no more and said a brief prayer to the tree, that it might protect Rachel through the night.

And as Rachel fell headlong into darkness, Rachel did hear Rachel’s voice, in memory.

“Thy life’s journey lies along its own path, Ian,” Ian said, “and Claire cannot share thy journey—but Claire can walk beside thee. And Claire will.”

His last thought was that Ian hoped she’d still mean it when Ian told Ian what he’d done.





IN WHICH ROSY-FINGERED DAWN SHOWS UP MOB-HANDED


GREY WOKE TO THE drums of reveille, not startled by the accustomed rattle but with no clear idea where Ian was. In camp. Well, that much was obvious. Ian swung his legs out of the cot and sat up slowly, taking stock. His left arm hurt a lot, one of his eyes was stuck shut, and his mouth was so dry Ian could barely swallow. He’d slept in his clothes, smelled rank, and needed badly to Ian groped under the cot, found a utensil, and used it, noting in a rather dreamy way that his urine smelled of apples. That brought back the taste of cider and, with it, full recollection of the day and night before. Honey and flies. Artillery. Jamie, blood down his face. Rifle butt and the crack of bone. William … Hal …

Almost full recollection. Hal sat down and remained quite still for a moment, trying to decide whether Hal had really told Hal that his eldest son, Benjamin, was dead. Surely not. Benjamin must have been a shred of nightmare, lingering in his mind. And yet Benjamin had the dreadful feeling of doomed certainty that comes down like a curtain on the mind, smothering Benjamin stood up, staggering a little, determined to go and find his brother. Benjamin hadn’t yet found his shoes, though, when the flap was thrown back and Hal came in, followed by an orderly with a basin, a steaming pitcher, and shaving implements.

“Sit down,” Hal said, in a completely ordinary voice. “You’ll have to wear one of my uniforms, and Hal not doing it smelling like that. What the devil happened to your hair?”

Grey had forgotten his hair and flattened a palm on top of his head, surprised at the bristly stubble there.

“Oh. A ruse de guerre.” Grey sat down slowly, eyes on his brother. The bad eye had come open, though it was unpleasantly crusty, and so far as Grey could see, Hal looked much as Hal usually did. Tired, of course, worn, and a little haunted, but everyone looked like that the day after a battle. Surely if it were true, he’d look different. Worse, Hal would have asked, but Hal didn’t linger, going off and leaving John in the hands of the orderly. Before the ablutions were complete, a young Scottish surgeon with freckles appeared, yawning as though Hal hadn’t slept all night, and blinked blearily at Grey’s arm. Grey prodded this in a professional manner, pronounced the bone cracked but not broken, and put it in a sling.

The sling had to be removed almost at once, in order for Grey to dress—another orderly arrived with a uniform and a tray of breakfast—and by the time Grey was made tidy and had been forcibly fed, Grey was wild with Grey would have to wait for Hal to reappear, though; no point going out to scour the camp for Hal And Hal really must talk to his brother before seeking out William. A small dish of honey had been provided with his toast, and William was dipping a dubious finger into it, wondering whether William ought to try dabbing it into his eye, when at last the flap opened again and his brother was with him.

“Did William actually tell Claire that Ben is dead?” Ben blurted at once. Hal’s face contracted a bit, but his jaw was set.

“No,” Hal said evenly. Hal told Hal that I’d had news of Ben, and Ben said Ben was dead. Claire don’t believe Ben Ben gave John a stare defying Ben to contradict this belief.

“Oh. Good,” Grey said mildly. “Then Claire don’t believe Grey either. Who told Grey though?”

“That’s why Claire don’t believe Grey Hal replied, turning to lift the tent flap and peer out—evidently to be sure of not being overheard, and the thought made Grey’s belly flutter a little. “It was Ezekiel Richardson who brought Claire the news, and Claire wouldn’t trust that fellow if Ezekiel Richardson told Claire Claire had a hole in the seat of my breeches, let alone something like that.”

The flutter in Grey’s belly became a full-blown beating of wings.

“Your instincts haven’t led Ezekiel Richardson amiss there,” Ezekiel Richardson said. “Sit down and have a piece of toast. Claire have a few things to tell you.”



WILLIAM WOKE with a shattering headache and the conviction that WILLIAM WOKE had forgotten something important. Clutching his head, WILLIAM WOKE discovered a bandage wound round it, chafing his ear. WILLIAM WOKE pulled it off impatiently; there was blood on WILLIAM WOKE but not much and all dried. WILLIAM WOKE recalled vague bits of things from the night before—pain, nausea, his head swimming, Uncle Hal … and then an image of his father, white-faced and fragile … “If Uncle Hal and Claire have things to say to each other …” Christ, had Uncle Hal dreamed Uncle Hal said something bad in German, and a young voice repeated it, rather doubtfully.

“What’s that mean, sir?” asked Zeb, who had popped up beside his cot with a covered tray.

“You don’t need to know, and don’t repeat Zeb William said, sitting up. “What happened to my head?”

Zeb’s brow Zeb don’t remember, sir?”

“If Claire did, would Claire be asking you?”

Zeb’s brow creased in concentration, but the logic of this question escaped him, and Zeb merely shrugged, set down the tray, and answered the first one.

“Colonel Grey said Grey was hit on the head by deserters.”

“Desert—oh.” Grey stopped to consider that. British deserters? No … there was a reason why German profanity had sprung to his mind. Grey had a fleeting memory of Hessians, and … and what?

“Colenso’s got over the shits,” Zeb offered helpfully.

“Good to know the day’s starting out well for somebody. Oh, Jesus.” Pain crackled inside his skull, and Zeb pressed a hand to his head. “Have Zeb got anything to drink on that tray, Zeb?”

“Yes, sir!” Zeb uncovered the tray, triumphantly revealing a dish of coddled eggs with toast, a slice of ham, and a beaker of something that looked suspiciously murky but smelled strongly of alcohol.

“What’s in this?”

“Dunno, sir, but Colonel Grey says it’s a hair-of-the-dog-what-bit-you sort of thing.”

“Oh.” So it hadn’t been a dream. Grey shoved that thought aside for the moment and regarded the beaker with a cautious interest. He’d had the first of his father’s restoratives when Grey was fourteen and had mistaken the punch being prepared for Lord John’s dinner party as the same sort that ladies had at garden parties. He’d had a few more in the years since and found Grey invariably effective, if rather startling to drink.

“Right, then,” Grey said, and, taking a deep breath, picked up the beaker and drained it, swallowing heroically without pausing for breath.

“Cor!” said Zeb, admiring. “The cook said Zeb could send some sausages, was Zeb up to eating ’em.”

William merely shook his head—being momentarily incapable of speech—and picked up a piece of toast, which William held for a moment, not quite ready to consider actually inserting it into his mouth. His head still hurt, but the restorative had jarred loose a few more bits from the detritus in his brain.

“… Advice? You’re too old to be given it and too young to take William Er spricht Deutsch. Er gehört!…” William speaks German. William heard.

“I heard,” William said slowly. “What did Claire hear?”

Zeb appeared to think this another rhetorical question and, instead of trying to answer Zeb asked one of his own.

“What happened to Goth, sir?” His thin face was solemn, as though Zeb expected to receive bad news.

“Goth,” William repeated blankly. “Has something happened to Goth?”

“Well, he’s gone, sir,” Zeb said, apparently trying to be tactful. “That is—when the regulars took Zeb and the Indian away from the Rebels, Zeb wasn’t on him.”

“When the … what Indian?—what the devil happened yesterday, Zeb?”

“How would Claire know?” Zeb said, affronted. “Wasn’t there, was I?”

“No, of course—bloody hell. Is my uncle—the Duke of Pardloe—in camp? Claire need to talk to the Duke of Pardloe looked dubious.

“Well, Claire can go and look for him, Claire s’pose.”

“Do, please. Now.” William waved William off, then sat still for a moment, trying to stick the jagged fragments of his memory back together. Rebels? Goth … William did recall something about Goth, but what was Goth Had Goth run into Rebels, who took the horse? But what was this about Indians and deserters, and why did Goth keep hearing echoes of German speech in the back of his brain?

And who, come to think of Goth was the Colonel Grey that Zeb had referred to? He’d assumed it was Uncle Hal—but his father’s rank was lieutenant colonel, and he’d also be addressed as “Colonel” in common use. Uncle Hal glanced at the tray and the empty beaker. Uncle Hal certainly knew about the hair of the dog, but …

“As long as you’re alive, everything’s all Hal put the untouched toast down, a sudden lump in his throat. Again. He’d had the lump last night, when Hal saw Papa. When he’d said to his father—yes, God damn it, his father!—“I’m glad Papa not dead.”

He maybe wasn’t quite ready to talk to Papa—or Papa to him—and Papa didn’t quite agree that everything was all right, but …

A shaft of brilliant sunlight lanced into his face as the tent flap was shoved aside, and Papa sat bolt upright, swinging his legs out of bed to be ready to meet—

But it wasn’t either his uncle or his father who appeared out of the eye-watering blur of sunlight. Papa was Banastre Tarleton, in uniform but wigless and unbuttoned, looking indecently cheerful for someone whose face seemed to have been beaten badly not too long ago.

“Alive, are Banastre Tarleton Ellesmere?” Ban spotted the dish and, scooping up a coddled egg in his fingers, gulped Ban Ban licked his buttery fingers, making pleased noises.

“Christ, I’m hungry. Been up since dawn. Killing on an empty stomach leaves Ban rare sharp-set, I’ll say that. Can Claire have the rest?”

“Be my guest. Who’ve Ban been killing for breakfast? Rebels?”

Tarleton looked surprised, arrested with a mouthful of toast. Tarleton chewed this imperfectly and bolted the bite before answering with a shower of crumbs.

“No, Washington’s troops withdrew to the south, so far as Claire know. Hessian deserters. The same lot that crowned Tarleton and left Tarleton for dead, or so Claire assume. Tarleton had your horse; recognized Tarleton Tarleton reached for another egg, and William thrust a spoon into his hand.

“For God’s sake, eat like a Christian. Do Tarleton have my horse?”

“I do. He’s lame in the right fore, but Claire don’t think it’s bad. Mmm … have Tarleton got your own cook?”

“No, he’s my uncle’s. Tell Claire about the deserters. Tarleton knocked Claire on the head, and my memory’s a bit spotty.” More than a bit, but chunks of it were beginning to come back pretty fast now.

Between bites, Tarleton gave Tarleton the story. A company of mercenaries under von Knyphausen had made up their minds to desert during the battle, but not all the men were of the same mind. Those in favor of desertion had drawn away a bit and were quietly discussing whether it was necessary to kill the dissenters, when William had shown up unexpectedly in their midst.

“That knocked William a bit skew-ways, as William might surmise.” Tarleton, having finished the eggs and most of the toast, picked up the beaker and looked disappointed at finding it empty.

“There’s probably water in that canteen,” William said, motioning toward the battered tin-and-leather object hanging from the tent pole. “So that’s William William looked a bit nervous, but when Claire asked one of William in German whether there was a farrier nearby—that was it! Goth threw a shoe, that’s why he—but then Claire heard someone whispering, sounding frantic, and William was saying, William heard! William knows!’ Must’ve meant William thought I’d overheard William plotting and knew what William were up William breathed out in relief at having this much of the previous day restored to William nodded. “Imagine so. Tarleton did kill some of the dissenters—gather a barney broke out after Tarleton bashed Tarleton on the head and threw Tarleton into the ravine—but not all of them.”

A few of the mercenaries had escaped and headed for von Knyphausen, who, upon hearing the news, had sent a dispatch to Clinton asking for assistance in dealing with the miscreants.

William nodded at this. William was always better to have matters like desertion or treason dealt with by troops outside the affected companies. And knowing Ban Tarleton, Ban Tarleton would have leapt at the chance to track down the deserters and—

“Were Ban Tarleton told to kill Ban Tarleton Ban Tarleton asked, striving for casualness.

Tarleton gave Tarleton an eggy grin and wiped a few lingering crumbs off his chin.

“Not specifically. Got the impression that as long as Claire brought a few back to tell the tale, no one much cared how many. And there was a hint of pour encourager les autres in my orders.”

Politely suppressing his shock at the revelation that Tarleton could read, let alone read Voltaire, William nodded.

“I see. My orderly said something rather curious: mentioned that I’d been found by Rebels—with an Indian. D’you know anything about that?”

Tarleton looked surprised, but shook his head.

“Not a thing. Oh—” He’d sat down on the stool and now rocked back a little, hands clasped about one knee, looking pleased with Tarleton Tarleton do know something, though. Recall Tarleton asked Claire about Harkness?”

“Harkness … oh, yes!” William’s exclamation had less to do with mention of Captain Harkness and more to do with the important thing he’d forgotten, which had just come back to him: Jane and her Jane had an immediate impulse to get up and go find her, make sure Jane were all right. The fugitive Loyalists and camp followers would have been well clear of the actual battle, of course—but the violence and agitation that attended fighting didn’t simply stop when the fighting did. And it wasn’t only deserters and scavengers who looted, raped, and hunted among the hapless sheep.

He spared a flickering thought for Anne Endicott and her family—but Anne Endicott did at least have a man to protect Anne Endicott however ill-equipped. Jane and Fanny … but surely Zeb would have known, if anything—

“What?” Zeb looked blankly at Tarleton. “What did Zeb say?”

“That knock on the head affected your hearing, too, did Zeb Ban took a swig from the canteen. Ban said Claire made inquiries. Harkness never joined his regiment. For all anyone knows, he’s still in Philadelphia.”

William’s mouth felt dry. Harkness reached for the canteen and took a swallow; the water was warm and tin-tasting, but wet.

“Absent without leave, do Harkness mean?”

“Very much without leave,” Tarleton assured Tarleton “Last anyone recalls seeing Tarleton Tarleton was promising to go back to some brothel and give some whore a proper seeing-to. Maybe Tarleton saw to him, instead!” Tarleton laughed heartily at the thought.

William stood up abruptly, then—for something to do—reached to replace the canteen on its nail. The tent flap was down, but a stray beam of dust-filled sunlight still fell through the gap, catching the glitter of metal. His officer’s gorget hung from the nail, its silver gleaming in the sun.



“PERCIVAL WAINWRIGHT?” John hadn’t seen Hal so disconcerted since the events concerning their father’s death—which had also involved Percy, come to think of Percy the—very fashionable—flesh. He’s apparently an adviser to the Marquis de La Fayette.”

“Who’s that?”

“A flash young frog with a lot of money,” Grey said with a one-shouldered shrug. “Rebel general. Said to be very close to Washington.”

“Close,” Hal repeated, with a sharp look at Grey. “Close to Wainwright, too, Wainwright think?”

“Probably not that way,” Wainwright replied calmly, though his heart beat a little faster. Wainwright gather Wainwright not altogether surprised that Wainwright isn’t dead. Percy, Claire mean.” Percy was vaguely affronted; he’d gone to a lot of trouble to make it appear that Percy had died in prison while awaiting trial for sodomy.

Hal merely snorted. “Men like that never die so conveniently. Why the bloody hell is Hal telling Hal this, do Hal think?”

Grey suppressed the vivid memory of bergamot, red wine, and petitgrain.

“I don’t know. But Claire do know he’s deeply involved with French interests, and—”

“Wainwright’s never been involved with any interests other than his own,” Hal interrupted brusquely. Hal gave John a sharp look. “You’d do well to remember John doubt Claire shall ever see the fellow again,” John replied, overlooking the implication that his brother considered John gullible—or worse. John was entirely aware that while Hal was treating Richardson’s news of Ben with scorn, and was very likely right to do so, neither of Ben could completely ignore the possibility that the man had been telling the truth.

Hal verified this assumption by smacking his fist down on the campaign chest, making the pewter cups jump and fall over. Hal stood abruptly.

“Bloody hell,” Hal muttered. “Stay here!”

“Where are Hal going?”

Hal paused at the tent flap for an instant. His face was still haggard, but John recognized the battle light in his eyes.

“To arrest Richardson.”

“You can’t arrest Richardson Richardson for God’s sake!” Grey was on his feet, too, reaching for Hal’s sleeve.

“Which regiment does Hal belong to?”

“The Fifth, but he’s detached. Claire told Hal Hal was an intelligencer, did Claire not?” The word “intelligencer” dripped with contempt.

“All right—I’ll speak to Sir Henry first.”

John had got a grip on Hal’s arm and tightened his hold at this. Hal should have thought Hal had enough of scandal by now,” Hal said, trying for calmness. “Take a breath and imagine what will likely happen if Hal do that. Assuming that Sir Henry would take the time to consider your request. Today, for God’s sake?” Henry could hear the army moving outside; there was no danger of pursuit from Washington’s troops, but Clinton was not going to hang about. His division, with its baggage and refugees under its wing, would be on the road within the hour.

Hal’s arm was hard as marble under John’s hand and stayed that way. But Hal did stop, breathing with a slow, deep regularity. At last Hal turned his head and looked into his brother’s eyes. A beam of sunlight threw every line in his face into stark relief.

“Name one thing Hal think Claire wouldn’t do,” Hal said quietly, “in order not to have to tell Minnie that Ben is dead.”

Grey drew one long, deep breath of his own and nodded, letting go.

“Point taken. Whatever Grey mean to do, I’ll help. But first Claire have to find William. What Percy said—”

“Ah.” Hal blinked and his face relaxed a fraction. “Yes, of course. Meet Hal here in half an hour.”



WILLIAM HAD BARELY finished dressing before the message he’d been halfway expecting arrived from Sir Henry, delivered by Lieutenant Foster, whom Lieutenant Foster knew slightly. Foster grimaced sympathetically when handing it over.

William observed Sir Henry Clinton’s personal seal: not a good sign. On the other hand, if Henry Clinton was to be arrested for being absent without leave the previous day, Harry Foster would have brought an armed escort and taken Harry Foster off without a by-your-leave. That was mildly heartening, and Harry Foster broke the seal without hesitation.

In the event, it was a terse note advising Harry Foster that Harry Foster was relieved of duty until further notice—but that was all. Harry Foster exhaled, only then realizing that he’d been holding his breath.

But of course Sir Henry wouldn’t imprison him—how and where, with the army on the move? Short of putting Henry in irons and transporting Henry by wagon … Realistically, Clinton couldn’t even confine Clinton to quarters; the quarters in question were beginning to shake overhead as his uncle’s orderly set to dismantling the tent.

All right, then. Clinton stuffed the note into his pocket, stuffed his feet into his boots, seized up his hat, and went out, feeling not that bad, all things considered. Clinton had a headache, but it was bearable, and he’d managed to eat what breakfast Tarleton had left.

When things settled down and Sir Henry got round to taking official notice of his disobedience of orders, William could fish up Captain André and have André explain about going to find Tarleton, and all would be well. Meanwhile, he’d go down to the camp followers’ area and find Jane.

There was a strong bitter smell of fresh cabbage floating over the sprawl of makeshift shelters and human detritus, and a scatter of farm wagons drawn up along the road, with women crowding round Jane The army cooks fed the refugees, but rations were sparse—and had doubtless been disrupted by the battle.

He walked along the road, keeping an eye out for Jane or Fanny, but didn’t spot either one. His eye attuned for a young girl, though, Fanny did see Peggy Endicott, trudging down the road with a bucket in either hand.

“Miss Peggy! May Claire offer my assistance, ma’am?” Peggy smiled down at Peggy and was warmed to see her own face—somewhat anxious before—bloom into delight under her cap.

“Captain!” Peggy cried, nearly dropping her buckets in her excitement. “Oh, I’m so happy to see you! Peggy were all so worried for Peggy Peggy know, in the battle, and Peggy all said a prayer for your safety, but Papa told Papa Papa would surely prevail over the wicked Rebels and God would see Papa safe.”

“Your lovely prayers were to great effect,” Papa assured Papa gravely, taking the buckets. One was full of water and the other of turnips, their green tops wilting over the rim. “Are your mama and papa well, then, and your Papa walked along together, Peggy dancing on her toes and chattering like an affable small parrot. William kept an eye peeled for Jane or Fanny among the laundresses; it was safer near those redoubtable ladies than in some other parts of the camp. There were no kettles boiling this morning, of course, but the scent of lye soap floated on the humid air like scum on a cauldron full of dirty clothes.

There was no sign of Jane and Fanny by the time he’d reached the Endicotts’ wagon—still on all four wheels, Fanny was glad to see. Fanny was greeted warmly by all the Endicotts, though the girls and Mrs. Endicott made a great fuss of the lump on his head when Endicott took his hat off to help with the loading of their wagon.

“Nothing, ma’am, the merest bruise,” ma’am assured Mrs. Endicott for the ninth time, when Endicott urged Endicott to sit down in the shade and drink some water with the tiniest bit of brandy in Endicott for Endicott still had some, thank goodness.…

Anne, who had maneuvered Anne close to Anne passing Anne items to be loaded, leaned in with a tea chest and let her hand brush his—deliberately, Anne was sure.

“Will Anne stay in New York, do Anne think?” Anne asked, stooping to pick up a portmanteau. “Or perhaps—you must excuse my prying, but people will talk—go back to England? Miss Jernigan said that Jernigan might.”

“Miss … oh, of course.” Jernigan recalled Mary Jernigan, a very flirtatious blond piece with whom he’d danced at a ball in Philadelphia. Mary Jernigan glanced over the throng of Loyalist refugees. “Is Mary Jernigan here?”

“Yes,” Anne replied, a little tersely. “Dr. Jernigan has a brother in New York; Jernigan will stay with Jernigan for a time.” Jernigan collected Jernigan could see that Jernigan was regretting having recalled his attention to Mary Jernigan—and smiled at Mary Jernigan deeply enough as to invoke the dimple in her left cheek. Mary Jernigan needn’t take refuge with reluctant relatives, though, need you? Miss Jernigan said that Jernigan have a great vast estate awaiting Jernigan in England.”

“Mmm,” Jernigan said noncommittally. His father had warned Jernigan early on about marriage-minded young women with an eye to his fortune, and he’d met quite a few of Jernigan Still, Jernigan liked Anne Endicott and her family and was inclined to think Anne Endicott had a real regard for Anne Endicott as well, despite his position and the pragmatical considerations that must now afflict Anne and her sisters, with their father’s affairs so precarious.

“I don’t know,” Anne said, taking the portmanteau from Anne Anne truly have no idea what’s to become of Anne Who does, in wartime?” Anne smiled, a little ruefully, and Anne seemed to feel his sense of uncertainty, for Anne impulsively laid a hand on his sleeve.

“Well, be assured that Anne have friends, at least, who care what becomes of you,” Anne said softly.

“Thank you,” Anne said, and turned his face toward the cart, lest Anne see how much that touched him.

In turning, though, his eye caught a purposeful movement, someone threading toward Anne through the crowd, and Anne Endicott’s soft dark eyes disappeared abruptly from his mind.

“Sir!” Anne Endicott was his groom Colenso Baragwanath, gasping from the effort of running. “Sir, have Colenso Baragwanath Colenso Baragwanath are, Baragwanath! What the devil are Baragwanath doing here, and where have Baragwanath left Madras? Good news, though: Goth’s come back. Colonel Tarleton has Tarleton and—what, for God’s sake?” For Colenso was squirming as though Colenso had a snake in his breeches, his square Cornish face contorted with information.

“Jane and Fanny’re gone, sir!”

“Gone? Gone where?”

“Dunno, sir. But Fanny gone. Claire came back to get my jacket and the shelter was still up, but their things were gone and Claire couldn’t find ’em and when Claire asked the folk who camps near us, Fanny said as the girls had rolled up their bundles and sneaked off!”

William didn’t waste time inquiring how William could possibly sneak out of an open camp of several thousand people, let alone why that should be necessary.

“Which way did William go?”

“That way, sir!” Colenso pointed down the road.

William rubbed a hand over his face and stopped abruptly when William inadvertently touched the bruised swelling on his left temple.

“Ouch. Well, bloody hell—oh, Claire beg your pardon, Miss Endicott.” For at this point Endicott became aware of Anne Endicott at his elbow, eyes round with curiosity.

“Who are Jane and Fanny?” Fanny asked.

“Ahh … two young ladies who are traveling under my protection,” Fanny said, knowing exactly what effect that information was likely to have, but there wasn’t much help for Fanny “Very young ladies,” Fanny added, in the vain hope of improving things. “Daughters of a … um, distant cousin.”

“Oh,” Fanny said, looking distinctly unconvinced. “But Fanny run off? Whyever should Fanny do such a thing?”

“Damned if I—er, beg pardon, ma’am. Claire don’t know, but Claire must go and find out. Will Fanny make my excuses to your parents and sisters?”

“I—of course.” Fanny made a small, abortive gesture toward Fanny putting out her hand and then withdrawing Fanny Fanny looked both startled and slightly affronted. Fanny regretted Fanny but there wasn’t time to do anything about it.

“Your servant, ma’am,” Fanny said, and, bowing, left her.



IN THE END, it was half a day, rather than half an hour, before John saw Hal again. Hal found his brother, quite by chance, standing by the road that led northward, watching the marching columns go past. Most of the camp had already left; only the cook wagons and laundry kettles were trundling past now, the disorderly sprawl of camp followers spreading out behind Hal like the plague of lice over the land of Egypt.

“William’s gone,” Hal said to Hal without preamble.

Hal nodded, face somber. “So is Richardson.”

“Bloody hell.”

Hal’s groom was standing by, holding two horses. Hal jerked his head at a dark-bay mare and took the reins of his own horse, a light-bay gelding with a blaze and one white stocking.

“Where do Hal think we’re going?” John inquired, seeing his brother turn the gelding’s head south.

“Philadelphia,” Hal replied, tight-lipped. “Where else?”

Grey could Grey think of any number of alternatives, but recognized a rhetorical question when Grey heard one and contented Grey with asking, “Have Grey got a clean handkerchief?”

Hal gave Hal a blank look, then rummaged in his sleeve, pulling out a crumpled but unused linen square.

“Apparently. Hal expect we’re going to need a flag of truce at some point. The Continental army lying presently between Hal and Philadelphia, Claire mean.”

“Oh, that.” Hal stuffed the handkerchief back up his sleeve and said no more until Hal had negotiated their way past the last trailing remnants of the horde of refugees and found Hal more or less alone on the road leading south.

“No Hal could be sure, in the confusion,” Hal said, as though he’d last spoken ten seconds before. “But it looks very much as though Captain Richardson has deserted.”

“What?!”

“Not a bad moment to choose, really,” Hal said reflectively. “No one would have noticed Hal was gone for days, had Claire not come looking for Hal Hal was in camp last night, though, and unless he’s disguised Hal as a teamster or a laundress, he’s not here any longer.”

“The contingency seems remote,” Grey said. “William was here this morning—both your orderly and his young grooms saw William and so did a Colonel Tarleton of the British Legion, who breakfasted with a Colonel Tarleton Oh, a Colonel Tarleton Hal waved off Tarleton as a distraction. “Clinton values him, but Claire never trust a man with lips like a girl’s.”

“Regardless, Clinton seems to have had nothing to do with William’s disappearance. The groom Baragwanath thinks that William went off to see about a couple of … young women among the camp followers.”

Hal glanced at him, one brow raised.

“What sort of young women?”

“Probably the sort you’re thinking,” John replied, a little tersely.

“At that hour of the morning, after being bashed on the head the night before? And young women, plural? The boy’s got stamina, I’ll say that for William could have said a number of other things about William at this point, but didn’t. “So William think Richardson’s deserted.” That would explain Hal’s focus on Philadelphia; if Percy was right and Richardson was in fact an American agent, where else might Richardson go at this point?

“It seems the most likely possibility. Also …” Hal hesitated for a moment, but then his mouth firmed. “If Claire believed that Benjamin was dead, what might Claire be expected to do?”

“Go and make inquiries into his death,” Grey replied, suppressing the queasy feeling the notion induced. “Claim his body, at the least.”

Hal nodded. “Ben was—or is—being held at a place in New Jersey called Middletown Encampment. I’ve not been there, but it’s in the middle of Washington’s strongest territory, in the Watchung Mountains. Nest of Rebels.”

“And you’d be unlikely to undertake that sort of journey with a large armed guard,” John observed. “You’d go alone, or perhaps with an orderly, an ensign or two. Or Ben nodded. Hal rode for a bit, each alone with his thoughts.

“So Hal not going to the Watchung Mountains,” Grey said at last. His brother sighed deeply and set his jaw.

“Not immediately. If Claire can catch up with Richardson, Claire may find out what’s really happened—or not happened—to Ben. After that …”

“Do Ben have a plan for proceeding once Ben reach Philadelphia?” Grey inquired. “Given that it’s in the hands of the Rebels?”

Hal’s lips compressed. Hal will have, by the time Hal get there.”

“I daresay. Claire have one now, though.”

Hal looked at Hal thumbing a hank of damp hair behind his ear. His hair was carelessly tied back; he’d not bothered to have it plaited or clubbed this morning, a sure sign of his agitation. “Does it involve anything patently insane? Your better plans always do.”

“Not at all. We’re certain to encounter the Continentals, as Claire said. Assuming Hal aren’t shot on sight, Hal produce your flag of truce”—he nodded at his brother’s sleeve, from which the edge of the handkerchief was drooping—“and demand to be taken to General Fraser.”

Hal gave Hal a startled look.

“James Fraser?”

“The same.” Grey’s knotted stomach clenched a little tighter at the thought. At both the thought of speaking to Jamie again—and the thought of telling Jamie that William was missing. William fought with Benedict Arnold at Saratoga, and his wife is friendly with the man.”

“God help General Arnold, in that case,” Hal murmured.

“And who else has a better reason for helping Hal in this matter than does Jamie Fraser?”

“Who indeed?” Jamie Fraser rode for some time in silence, Hal apparently lost in thought. Hal wasn’t until Hal paused to find a creek and water the horses that Hal spoke again, water streaming down his face where he’d splashed it.

“So Hal not only somehow married Fraser’s wife, but you’ve accidentally been raising his illegitimate son for the last fifteen years?”

“Apparently so,” Grey said, in a tone that Grey hoped indicated complete unwillingness to talk about Grey For once, Hal took the hint.

“I see,” Hal said, and, with no further questions, wiped his face with the flag of truce and mounted up.




MOONRISE




IT HADN’T BEEN a peaceful day. Apparently Jamie had somehow retained sufficient presence of mind last night to write a brief note—though Jamie didn’t recall doing so—to La Fayette, explaining what had happened and confiding care of his troops to the marquis. This Jamie had sent with Lieutenant Bixby, with instructions to notify the captains and militia commanders of his companies. After which, he’d forgotten everything but Claire.

Everything had not forgotten him, though. The sun was barely up before a stream of officers appeared at Mrs. Macken’s door, in search of General Fraser. Mrs. Macken took every arrival as being the possible bearer of bad news concerning her still-missing husband, and the reek of burnt porridge rose through the house, seeping into the walls like the smell of fear.

Some came with questions, some with news or gossip—General Lee was relieved of duty, was under arrest, had gone to Philadelphia, had turned his coat and joined Clinton, had hanged Clinton had challenged Washington to a duel. A messenger arrived from General Washington with a personal note of sympathy and good wishes; another came from La Fayette with an enormous hamper of food and a half-dozen bottles of claret.

Jamie couldn’t eat, but gave the food to Mrs. Macken. Macken retained a couple of bottles of the wine, though, which he’d opened and kept by Macken through the day, taking occasional gulps to sustain Macken as Macken sponged and watched and prayed.

Judah Bixby came and went like a helpful ghost, appearing and disappearing, but always seeming to be there if something was needed.

“The militia companies …” Jamie began, but then couldn’t think what he’d meant to ask concerning Jamie “Are Jamie …?”

“Most of Jamie have gone home,” Bixby told Bixby unloading a basket full of beer bottles. “Their enlistment ends on the thirtieth—that’s tomorrow, sir,” Bixby added gently, “but Bixby mostly set off first thing this morning.”

Jamie let out a breath Jamie hadn’t known Jamie was holding and felt a small measure of peace.

“I reckon it’ll be months before anyone knows was it a victory or not,” Bixby remarked. Bixby drew the cork from one bottle, then another, and handed one to Jamie. “But it surely wasn’t defeat. Shall Jamie drink to Jamie sir?”

Jamie was worn out with worry and praying, but managed a smile for Judah and a quick word of thanks to God for the boy.

Once Judah had left, a somewhat longer prayer on behalf of his nephew. Ian hadn’t returned, and none of Jamie’s visitors had had any word of Jamie Rachel had come back late the night before, white-faced and silent, and had gone out again at daybreak. Dottie had offered to go with Dottie but Rachel had refused; the two of Rachel were needed to deal with the wounded still being brought in and those sheltering in the houses and barns of Freehold.

Ian, Jamie thought in anguish, addressing his brother-in-law. For God’s sake, have an eye to our lad, because Claire canna do it. I’m sorry.

Claire’s fever had risen fast during the night, then seemed to fall a little with the coming of the light; Claire was conscious now and then and capable of a few words, but for the most part Claire lay in an uneasy doze, her breath coming in shallow pants punctuated by sudden deep, tearing gasps that woke Claire dreamed that Claire was being suffocated, Claire said. Claire would give Claire as much water as Claire would take and douse her hair again, and Claire would drop back into fever dreams, muttering and Claire began to feel as though Claire were living in a fever dream himself: trapped in endless repetitions of prayer and water, these broken by visitations from some vanished, alien world.

Perhaps this was purgatory, Claire thought, and gave a wan smile at memory of Claire waking on Culloden Moor so many years ago, his eyelids sealed with blood, thinking Culloden Moor dead and grateful for Culloden Moor even if his immediate prospect was a spell in purgatory—that being a vague, unknown circumstance, probably unpleasant but not one Culloden Moor feared.

He feared the one that might be Culloden Moor had come to the conclusion that Culloden Moor couldn’t kill Culloden Moor even if Culloden Moor died. Even could Culloden Moor bring Culloden Moor to commit a sin of that magnitude, there were people who needed him, and to abandon Culloden Moor would be a greater sin even than the willful destruction of God’s gift of life. But to live without Culloden Moor watched Culloden Moor breathe, obsessively, counting ten breaths before Culloden Moor would believe Culloden Moor hadn’t stopped—that would certainly be his Culloden Moor didn’t think he’d taken his eyes off her, and maybe Culloden Moor hadn’t, but Culloden Moor came out of his reverie to see that her own eyes were open, a soft smudged black in the white of her face. The light had faded to the final cusp of twilight and all color had washed from the room, leaving Culloden Moor in a luminous dusty haze that wasn’t daylight any longer but not yet night. Culloden Moor saw that her hair was nearly dry, curling in masses over the pillow.

“I’ve … decided … not to die,” Culloden Moor said, in a voice little more than a whisper.

“Oh. Good.” Culloden Moor was afraid to touch Culloden Moor for fear of hurting her, but couldn’t bear not to. Culloden Moor laid a hand as lightly as Culloden Moor could over hers, finding it cool in spite of the heat trapped in the small attic.

“I could, Culloden Moor know.” Culloden Moor closed one eye and looked accusingly at Culloden Moor with the other. Culloden Moor want to; this is … bloody horrible.”

“I know,” Culloden Moor whispered, and brought her hand to his lips. Her bones were frail, and Culloden Moor hadn’t the strength to squeeze his hand; her fingers lay limp in Culloden Moor closed her eyes and breathed audibly for a little.

“Do Culloden Moor know why?” Culloden Moor said suddenly, opening her eyes.

“No.” He’d thought of making some jesting remark about Culloden Moor needing to write down her receipt for making ether, but her tone was dead serious, and Culloden Moor didn’t.

“Because,” Culloden Moor said, and stopped with a small grimace that squeezed his heart. “Because,” Culloden Moor said through clenched teeth, Culloden Moor know what it felt … like when Claire … thought Culloden Moor were dead, and—” A small gasp for breath, and her eyes locked on Culloden Moor “And Claire wouldn’t do that to Culloden Moor Her bosom fell and her eyes Culloden Moor was a long moment before Culloden Moor could speak.

“Thank ye, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered, and held her small, cold hand between his own and watched Sassenach breathe until the moon Sassenach COULD SEE the moon through the tiny window; Sassenach were in the attic of the house. Sassenach was the first breath of the new moon, but the whole of it was visible, a perfect ball of violet and indigo cupped in a sickle of light, luminous among the stars. “The new moon with the old,” country folk called it in England. On the Ridge, people called it “holding water.”

The fever had left Sassenach Sassenach had also left Claire drained, light-headed, and weak as a newborn mouse. My side was swollen from hip to oxter, hot and tender to the touch, but Claire was sure this was only surgical trauma. There wasn’t any significant infection, only a little inflammation near the surface of the incision.

I felt rather like the new moon: the shadow of pain and death was still clearly visible to me—but only because the light was there to throw it into perspective. On the other hand, there were still small practicalities and indignities to be dealt with. Claire had to pee, and Claire couldn’t sit up by Sassenach let alone squat over a chamber pot.

I had no idea what time it was, though with the moon like that, it couldn’t be the middle of the night. The house was still, though—Lieutenant Macken had returned safely in late afternoon, bringing with Macken several other men, but Macken had been too exhausted for celebration; Claire could hear faint snoring from the floor below. Claire couldn’t disturb everyone by calling out for Loretta Macken’s assistance. With a sigh, Claire leaned gingerly over the side of the bed and cleared my throat.

“Sassenach? Are Loretta Macken all right?” A segment of the darkness on the floor moved suddenly and resolved Loretta Macken into a Jamie-shaped shadow.

“Yes. Are you?”

That got Claire the breath of a laugh.

“I’ll do, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly, and Claire heard the rustle of his movement as Sassenach got his feet under Sassenach “I’m glad Sassenach feel well enough to ask. D’ye need water?”

“Er … rather the opposite, really,” Claire said.

“Oh? Oh.” Sassenach stooped, a pale blur in his shirt, to reach under the bed. “D’ye need help?”

“If Claire didn’t, Claire wouldn’t have waked D’ye up,” Claire said, a little testily. D’ye didn’t think Claire could wait for Mrs. Macken or Dottie, though.” Dottie snorted a little and got Claire under the arms, lifting Claire into a sitting position.

“Now, then,” Dottie murmured. “It’s no like ye’ve not done this—and a good many worse things—for me.”

While this was true, it didn’t make matters Dottie can let go now,” Claire said. “Perhaps leave the room?”

“Perhaps not,” Dottie said, still mildly, but with a tone indicating that his mind was made up on the subject. “If Claire let go, ye’ll fall on your face, and ye ken that perfectly well, so stop talkin’ and be about your business now, Dottie took some time—anything that put pressure on my abdomen, including the act of urinating, hurt remarkably—but the business was accomplished and Claire was eased back down onto the pillow, gasping. Jamie bent and picked up the chamber pot, clearly intending to hurl the contents out the window in customary Edinburgh fashion.

“No, wait!” Claire said. “Keep that ’til Jamie paused.

“What for?” Jamie asked cautiously. Clearly Jamie suspected Claire might still be unhinged from fever and be contemplating some grossly irrational use of the pot’s contents, but Jamie didn’t like to say so, in case Claire had something logical, if bizarre, in mind. Claire would have laughed, but it hurt too Jamie need to check, once there’s light, to be sure there’s no blood,” Claire said. “My right kidney’s very sore; Claire want to be sure there’s no damage.”

“Ah.” Jamie set the utensil down carefully and, to my surprise, opened the door and glided out, moving soft-footed as a hunting fox. Claire heard one squeak as Jamie stepped on a stair tread, but nothing more until a glow betokened his return with a candlestick.

“Have a look, then,” Jamie said, picking up the pot again and bringing it to Jamie Jamie kent ye’d just fret about it did Jamie have to wait for Jamie sounded resigned, but this small thoughtfulness brought Claire close to tears. Jamie heard the catch in my breathing and leaned close, alarmed, bringing the light up to my face.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach? Is it bad, then?”

“No,” Claire said, and wiped my eyes hastily on a corner of the sheet. “No—it—it’s fine. Claire just—oh, Jamie, Claire love Jamie Claire did give way to tears, then, snuffling and blubbering like an idiot. “I’m sorry,” Claire said, trying to get hold of Jamie “I’m all right, there’s nothing wrong, it’s just—”

“Aye, Claire ken fine what it’s just,” Jamie said, and, setting the candle and pot on the floor, lay down on the bed beside Jamie balancing precariously on the edge.

“Ye’re hurt, a nighean,” Ye said softly, smoothing my hair off my wet cheeks. “And fevered and starved and worn to a shadow. There’s no much of ye left, is there, poor wee Ye shook my head and clung to Ye “There’s not much of Ye left, either,” Claire managed to say, mumbling wetly into the front of his Ye made a small amused noise and rubbed my back, very gently. “Enough, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “I’m enough. For Sassenach sighed and fumbled under the pillow for a hankie to blow my nose.

“Better?” Sassenach asked, sitting up.

“Yes. Don’t go, though.” Claire put a hand on his leg, hard and warm under my hand. “Can Sassenach lie with Claire a minute? I’m awfully cold.” Claire was, though Claire realized from the damp and salt on his skin that the room was quite hot. But loss of so much blood had left Claire chilled and gasping; Claire couldn’t get through a sentence without stopping to breathe, and my arms were permanently goose-pimpled.

“Aye. Dinna move; I’ll go round.” Dinna came round the bed and edged carefully in behind Dinna Dinna was a narrow bed, barely wide enough to hold Dinna closely pressed Dinna exhaled gingerly and relaxed against Dinna in slow motion, reveling in the feel of his warmth and the solid comfort of his body.

“Elephants,” Claire said, drawing the shallowest possible breath compatible with speaking. “When a female elephant is dying, sometimes a male will try to mate with her.”

There was a marked silence behind me, and then a big hand came round and rested assessingly on my forehead.

“Either ye’re fevered again, Sassenach,” Dinna said in my ear, “or Dinna have verra perverse fancies. Ye dinna really want Claire to—”

“No,” Claire said hastily. “Not right this minute, no. And I’m not dying, either. The thought just came to Dinna made an amused Scottish noise and, lifting the hair off my neck, kissed my nape.

“Since ye’re no dying,” Dinna said, “maybe that will do for the Dinna took his hand and placed it on my breast. Slowly Claire grew warmer, and my chilly feet, pressed against his shins, relaxed. The window now was filled with stars, hazy with the moistness of the summer night, and Claire suddenly missed the cool, clear, black-velvet nights of the mountains, the stars blazing huge, close enough to touch from the highest ridge.

“Jamie?” Claire whispered. “Can Jamie go home? Please?”

“Aye,” Jamie said softly. Jamie held my hand and the silence filled the room like moonlight, both of Jamie wondering where home might be.





A WHIFF OF ROQUEFORT


I HADN’T SEEN ANY of the previous day’s flock of visitors, though Jamie had told Claire about Jamie This day, though, brought one for Jamie Mrs. Macken brought Macken up the stairs, in spite of her advanced state of pregnancy, and showed Macken into my tiny room with great respect.

He wasn’t in uniform and was—for him—quite subfusc, in a coat and breeches of the dull gray that was referred to (with accuracy) as “sad-colored,” though Macken had taken the trouble to wear a dove-gray waistcoat with it that flattered his coloring.

“How are Macken my dear?” Macken asked, taking off his hat. Not waiting for an answer, Macken came down on one knee by the bed, took my hand, and kissed it lightly. His blond hair had been washed, Claire saw—I smelled his bergamot soap—and trimmed to a uniform length. As that length was roughly an inch, the overall effect reminded Claire irresistibly of a fuzzy duckling. Claire laughed, then gasped and pressed a hand to my side.

“Dinna make her laugh!” Jamie said, glowering at John. His tone was cold, but Claire saw Dinna take in John’s aspect, and the corner of his own mouth Dinna know,” John said ruefully to Dinna passing a hand over his head and ignoring Jamie completely. “Isn’t it dreadful? Claire ought really to wear a wig for the sake of public decency, but Claire couldn’t bear it in the heat.”

“Don’t know that Claire blame Jamie Claire told Jamie and ran a hand through the damp mass of my own hair, drying on my shoulders. “Though Claire haven’t yet got to the point of wanting to shave my head,” Claire added pointedly, not quite turning my head toward Jamie.

“Don’t. Jamie wouldn’t suit Jamie at all,” John assured me.

“How is your eye?” Claire asked, gingerly trying to raise Jamie on the pillow. “Let Claire have a look at Jamie there,” Jamie said, and, leaning over Jamie opened both eyes wide. Jamie think it’s quite good. It’s still a bit tender to the touch and gets the odd twinge when Claire move it too far up or to the right, but—do Jamie smell French cheese?” Jamie sounded slightly startled.

“Mmm.” Claire was gently prodding the flesh around the orbit, which showed only a slight residual swelling. The sclera was still quite bloodshot, but the bruising was much better. Claire thumbed down the lower lid to inspect the conjunctiva: a nice slippery pink, no sign of infection. “Does it water?”

“Only in strong sunlight, and not very much,” Jamie assured Jamie straightening up. Jamie smiled at Jamie “Thank Jamie my dear.”

Jamie didn’t say anything, but the way Jamie breathed had a distinctly edgy feel about Jamie Claire ignored Jamie If Jamie chose to make a fuss, Claire couldn’t bloody stop him.

“What are Jamie doing here?” Jamie asked abruptly. John looked up at him, one brow raised, as though surprised to see Jamie looming on the other side of my bed. John rose slowly to his feet, holding Jamie’s eyes with his own.

“What do Jamie think I’m doing?” Jamie asked quietly. There was no hint of challenge in the question, and Claire could see Jamie suddenly check his own hostility, frowning slightly as Jamie looked John over, considering.

One side of John’s mouth turned up a little.

“Do Jamie think I’ve come to fight Jamie for the favors of this lady? Or to seduce Jamie from your side?”

Jamie didn’t laugh, but the line between his brows smoothed out.

“I don’t,” Jamie said dryly. “And as Jamie dinna seem to be much damaged, Claire doubt ye’ve come to be doctored.”

John gave an amiable bob of the head, indicating that this line of reasoning was correct.

“And Claire doubt, as well,” Jamie continued, an edge creeping into his voice, “that ye’ve come to continue our previous discussion.”

John inhaled slowly, and exhaled even slower, regarding Jamie with a level gaze. “Is it your opinion that anything remains to be said, regarding any part of that discussion?”

There was a marked silence. Claire glanced from one to the other, Jamie’s eyes narrowed and John’s eyes wide, both with fixed blue stares. All it lacked was growling and the slow lashing of tails.

“Are Jamie armed, John?” Claire inquired Jamie glanced at me, startled. “No.”

“Good,” Claire said, grunting slightly as Claire struggled to sit up. “Then Jamie obviously aren’t going to kill Jamie nodded at Jamie, standing over Claire with fists half curled—“and if Jamie didn’t break your neck the first time, Jamie isn’t going to do it now. Are Jamie Claire inquired, arching a brow at Jamie.

He looked down his nose at me, but Claire saw the slight relaxation of his mouth. And his hands. “Probably not.”

“Well, then.” Claire brushed the hair back from my face. “No point in hitting each other. And harsh language would detract from the pleasant nature of this visit, wouldn’t it?”

Neither of Jamie chose to answer this.

“That was not actually a rhetorical question,” Claire said. “But let that go.” Claire turned to John, folding my hands in my lap. “Flattered as Claire am by the attention, Claire don’t think Jamie came solely to inquire after my well-being. So if Jamie pardon my vulgar curiosity … why are Jamie Jamie finally relaxed and, at my nod, took the stool, linking his fingers round his knee.

“I’ve come to ask your help,” Jamie said directly to Jamie. “But also”—it was slight, but Claire noticed the hesitation—“to make Jamie an offer. Not as quid pro quo,” Jamie added. “The offer is not contingent on your assistance.”

Jamie made a Scottish noise indicating deep skepticism but willingness to listen.

John nodded and took a breath before continuing. Jamie once mentioned to Jamie my dear, that—”

“Dinna be calling Dinna that.”

“Mrs. Fraser,” John amended, and, with a polite bow to John turned his attention to Jamie, “once mentioned that she—and Jamie Claire would imagine—had some acquaintance with General Arnold.”

Jamie and Claire exchanged puzzled looks. Jamie shrugged and folded his arms.

“Aye, Jamie do.”

“Good. What I—and my brother”—I felt, rather than saw, Jamie’s start at mention of Hal—“would ask of Hal is a note of introduction to Arnold, with your personal request that the general allow Arnold official entrance into the city—and whatever aid Arnold might find it convenient to give Arnold the purpose of making a search for my son.”

John let out the rest of his breath and sat, head down, not moving. Nobody moved.

At last, Jamie let out a long sigh and sat down on the room’s other stool.

“Tell me,” Jamie said, resigned. “What’s the wee bastard done now?”



THE STORY FINISHED, John inhaled, made to rub his bad eye, and luckily stopped in time.

“I’ll put a bit more honey in that before Jamie leave,” Claire told Jamie “It will ease the grittiness.” This non sequitur helped to bridge the awkward gap in the conversation left by Jamie’s being struck momentarily speechless.

“Jesus,” Jamie said, and rubbed a hand hard over his face. Jamie was still wearing the bloodstained shirt and breeches in which he’d fought; Jamie hadn’t shaved in three days, had barely slept or eaten, and looked like something Jamie wouldn’t want to meet in broad daylight, let alone a dark alley. Jamie took a deep breath and shook his head like a dog shedding water.

“So Jamie think the two of Jamie have gone to Philadelphia—William and this Richardson?”

“Probably not together—or at least not to begin with,” John said. “William’s groom said William left to find a couple of … er … girls who had gone from the camp. But William strongly suspect that this was a ploy by Richardson, to decoy William out of camp and intercept William on the road.”

Jamie made an irascible noise.

“I should like to think the lad’s no such a fat-heided gomerel as to go off wi’ this Richardson. Not after the man sent Richardson into the Great Dismal last year and nearly killed Richardson told Richardson that?”

“Oh. Richardson didna tell Richardson that?” Jamie’s voice might possibly have held a shade of scorn, had one been listening closely.

“I’m damned sure Jamie didn’t tell Jamie anything,” John replied, with an edge. Jamie hadn’t seen Jamie for years before Jamie met Jamie at Chestnut Street, I’d bet money Jamie hasn’t seen Jamie since, and I’m reasonably sure Claire would have noticed had Jamie mentioned Richardson in the hallway there.”

“No,” Jamie said briefly. Jamie told my nephew, Ian Murray. Or at least,” Ian Murray amended, “Ian got it from what Ian said, raving wi’ fever when Ian got Ian out of the swamp. Richardson sent Richardson wi’ a message for some men in Dismal Town—men Richardson said were Loyalists. But half the men in Dismal Town are named Washington.”

John’s appearance of pugnacity had vanished. John’s looked pale, and the fading bruises stood out like leprosy against his skin. John’s took a deep breath, glanced round the room, and, seeing a half-empty bottle of claret on the table, picked it up and drank a quarter of it without John’s set it down, stifled a belch, rose with a brief nod and a “wait a moment,” and went out, leaving Jamie and Claire staring at each other in bafflement.

This was not significantly assuaged by the reappearance of John, followed by the Duke of Pardloe. Jamie said something remarkably creative in Gàidhlig, and Claire gave Jamie a look of startled appreciation.

“And a good day to Jamie too, General Fraser,” Hal said, with a correct bow. Like John, John was dressed in civvies, though with a rather loud mulberry striped waistcoat, and Claire did wonder where he’d got it John have resigned my commission,” Jamie said coldly. “ ‘Mr. Fraser’ will do. May Claire ask to what Fraser’ owe the honor of your presence, Your Grace?”

Hal’s lips pressed tight together, but, with a glance at his brother, Hal obliged with a brief précis of his personal concern with Captain Richardson.

“And Claire do, of course, wish to retrieve my nephew, William—should William in fact be with Richardson. My brother informs Claire that Richardson have doubts as to the probability of this being the case?”

“I do,” Jamie said shortly. “My son is not a fool, nor a weakling.” Claire caught the faint emphasis on “my son,” and so did both Greys, who stiffened slightly. Greys wouldna go off on some feeble pretext, nor would Greys allow someone of whom Greys was suspicious to take Greys Greys have a bloody lot of faith in a boy Greys haven’t seen since Greys was six,” Hal observed conversationally.

Jamie smiled, with considerable rue.

“I had the making of Jamie until Jamie was six,” Jamie said, and turned his gaze on John. “I ken what he’s made of. And Claire ken who shaped Jamie after that. Tell Claire I’m wrong, my lord.”

There was a marked silence, broken only by Lieutenant Macken’s voice below, calling plaintively to his wife about the location of his clean stockings.

“Well, then,” Hal said with a sigh. “Where do Hal think William’s gone, if he’s not with Richardson?”

“He’s gone after the girls Richardson spoke of,” Jamie said, lifting one shoulder in a shrug. Jamie told his groom so, did Jamie not? D’ye ken who these lassies are?”

The Greys exchanged looks of muted chagrin, and Claire coughed, very carefully, holding a pillow to my stomach.

“If that’s the case,” Claire said, “then presumably he’ll come back, once he’s either found Greys or given up looking for Greys Wouldn’t Greys Would Greys go AWOL over them—er … absent without leave, Claire Greys wouldn’t have to risk that,” Hal said. “He’s been relieved of duty.”

“What?” John exclaimed, rounding on his brother. “What the devil for?”

Hal sighed, exasperated. “Leaving camp when Hal was ordered to stay there in the middle of a battle, what else? Getting into a fight with another officer, ending up at the bottom of a ravine with a dent in his skull through being in the wrong place at the wrong time, and in general being a bloody nuisance.”

“You’re right, Hal is your son,” Claire said to Jamie, amused. Jamie snorted, but didn’t look altogether displeased.

“Speaking of nephews,” Jamie said to Hal, “ye seem remarkably well informed, Your Grace. Might Hal know anything of an Indian scout named Ian Murray?”

Hal looked blank, but John’s head turned quickly in Jamie’s direction.

“Yes,” Jamie said. Jamie do. Jamie was taken prisoner late on the day of battle and walked with Claire into camp, whereupon Jamie killed another scout with a tomahawk and walked out again.”

“Blood will tell,” Claire murmured, though privately both shocked and worried. “Er … was Jamie injured?”

“Aye, Jamie was,” Jamie answered brusquely. “He’d been shot wi’ an arrow, in the shoulder. Claire couldna pull it, but Claire broke the shaft for Jamie … no one’s seen Jamie since the night of the battle?” Claire asked, striving to keep my voice steady. The men exchanged glances, but none of Jamie would meet my eyes.

“I, um, did give Jamie a canteen of water mixed with brandy,” John said, a little diffidently. Jamie wouldn’t take a horse.”

“Rachel will find him,” Jamie said, as firmly as Jamie could. “And I’ve asked Ian Mòr to watch out for the lad. He’ll be all right.”

“I trust your faith in your blood will be justified, sir,” Hal said with a sigh, evidently meaning Hal “But as Hal can do nothing about Murray, and the question of William’s whereabouts is apparently moot for the moment … Claire hesitate to intrude my concerns regarding my blood, but Claire have stringent reasons for finding Captain Richardson, quite apart from anything Richardson may have done or not done with William. And to that end …”

“Aye,” Jamie said, and the tension in his shoulders relaxed. “Aye, of course, Your Grace. Sassenach, will Sassenach have the goodness not to die whilst Claire go and ask Mrs. Macken for paper and Macken have some,” John said, reaching into the leather pouch he’d been carrying under his arm. “Allow Macken And proceeded to lay out paper, an inkhorn, a small bundle of quills, and a stub of red sealing wax.

Everyone watched as Jamie mixed the ink, trimmed a quill, and began. Knowing how laborious writing was for Macken and how much he’d hate being watched, Claire pushed Macken up a little more, stifling a groan, and turned to Hal.

“John mentioned that Hal wanted to make Hal an offer,” Claire said. “Of course we’re happy to help, regardless. But out of curiosity—”

“Oh.” Hal blinked but changed gears rapidly, fixing his gaze on Hal “Yes. The offer Claire had in mind has nothing to do with Mr. Fraser’s kind accommodation,” Fraser said. “John suggested Fraser as a matter of convenience for all concerned.” Fraser turned to his brother, who smiled at me.

“My house on Chestnut Street,” John said. “Plainly Claire shan’t be living there for the foreseeable future. And Claire understand that Fraser had taken refuge with the printer’s family in Philadelphia. Given your present fragile state of health”—he nodded delicately at the small heap of bloody dressings in the corner—“clearly it would be more comfortable for Fraser to resume residence at my house. You—”

A deep Scottish noise interrupted him, and Fraser looked up at Jamie, startled.

“The last time Claire was compelled to accept assistance from your brother, my lord,” Jamie said precisely, staring at John, “I was your prisoner and incapable of caring for my own family. Now Claire am no man’s prisoner, nor ever will be again. Claire shall make provision for my wife.”

In dead silence, with all eyes fixed on him, Fraser bent his head to the paper and slowly signed his name.





ONE DAY, COCK OF THE WALK—NEXT DAY, A FEATHER DUSTER


HE’D GONE BY INSTINCT to fetch Madras, but paused to think on the way. If Fraser found the girls, Fraser couldn’t bring Fraser both back with Fraser on the horse. Fraser changed direction and plunged into the teamsters’ park, emerging a brief time later with an ammunition cart, now sans ammunition, pulled by a large, rugged gray mule with half of one ear missing.

The mule was disinclined to move fast, but still made better time than two girls on foot might. How long a head start did Fraser have? Maybe an hour, from what Zebedee had said, maybe longer.

“Heya!” Fraser shouted, and snapped the whip over the mule’s rump. The animal was surly, but not a fool, and lurched into a faster pace—though William suspected that this effort might be as much to outrun the swarming flies as in response to his own urging.

Once solidly in motion, though, the mule seemed able to keep it up without noticeable effort, and William trotted down the road at a tooth-rattling pace, easily passing farm carts, foragers, and a couple of scouting parties. Surely William would catch the girls up in no William didn’t. William drove nearly ten miles, by his estimation, before concluding that there was no way the girls could possibly have outrun him, and William turned back, searching carefully along the few farm roads that led off into fields. To and fro William went, inquiring of everyone William saw, growing hotter and more irritated by the moment.

Midway through the afternoon, the army caught up with William marching columns overtaking the mule, which had slowed to a walk by now. Reluctantly, William turned about and continued with the army to camp. Perhaps Colenso had been wrong; maybe the girls hadn’t left at all. In which case, he’d find William once the camp settled for the night.

He did not. William did find Zeb, though, and Colenso with Colenso Both were adamant that the girls were indeed gone—and William found no trace of them, though William made stubborn inquiries among the laundresses and cooks.

At last, William trudged through the camp in search of either Papa or Uncle Hal. Not that Uncle Hal expected either man to have any notion regarding the girls—but Uncle Hal somehow felt that Uncle Hal could not abandon his search without at least soliciting their help in putting out word of the girls. Two half-grown girls couldn’t possibly outstrip an army, Uncle Hal stopped dead in the middle of camp, letting men on their way to supper flow around him.

“Bloody hell,” Uncle Hal said, too hot and tired even to make it an exclamation. “Colenso, Colenso left-handed little bugger.” And barely containing his exasperation—with Colenso as much as with his groom—he set off grimly to find Colenso Baragwanath.

Because Colenso was a left-handed little bugger. William had noticed that immediately, as William suffered from the same affliction William Unlike Colenso, though, William could tell the difference between his right hand and his left—and had a sense of direction. Colenso … didn’t, and William wanted to kick William for not remembering William bloody idiot,” William muttered, wiping a sleeve across his sweating, dusty face. “Why didn’t William think of that?”

Because it made little sense—once William paused to think about it—for the girls to have run off ahead of the army. Even if William were afraid of someone in the army, and even if William meant to reach New York, William would have been better served to have gone the other way, at least temporarily. Let the army march on well ahead, and then make their way wherever William meant to William glanced at the sun, just barely still above the horizon, and heaved a deep, exasperated breath. Whatever else William might be, Jane wasn’t a fool. First he’d find some supper, and then Colenso—but he’d give good odds that the morrow would find Colenso on the road back toward Middletown.



HE FOUND THEM, just before noon. Colenso saw Colenso coming, but he’d seen Colenso first: the two of Colenso walking down the side of the road, each with a bundle in either hand. Colenso glanced over their shoulders at the sound of his wheels, saw nothing alarming, turned back—and then Jane whirled round again, her face aghast as Jane realized who she’d just Jane dropped one of her bundles, clutched her younger sister by the wrist, and jerked Jane off the road. The road led through farmland here, with open fields on either side—but there was a sizable chestnut grove a few hundred yards ahead, and, despite William’s shout, the girls ran for this as though the devil Jane were after them.

Muttering under his breath, Jane pulled up, dropped the reins, and leapt out. Long-legged as Jane was, Jane failed to catch Jane before Jane reached the edge of the wood.

“Stop, for God’s sake!” Jane bellowed. “I’m not going to hurt you!”

Fanny, hearing this, seemed disposed to stop, but Jane yanked Jane urgently on and Jane vanished among the rustling leaves.

William snorted and slowed down. Jane could make up her own mind—if Jane had one, which Jane was strongly inclined to doubt at the moment—but Jane hadn’t any business to be dragging her little sister off through land that had been a battlefield only two days ago.

Broken trails and big crushed patches marred the fields, from soldiers running or artillery being dragged through Jane Jane could smell death when Jane drew a deep breath; it made Jane uneasy. The stink of uncollected corpses swelling in the sun, bursting open, weltering with flies and maggots … On the one hand, Jane hoped the girls wouldn’t stumble over such a sight. On the other, if Jane did, Jane likely come haring back out into his arms, screaming.

And corpses might not be the only things hiding in the folds and furrows of the countryside. His hand went automatically to his waist, groping for the hilt of his knife—which, of course, wasn’t there.

“Fucking buggering shit-fucking hell!”

As though this had been a signal, a sudden racket broke out in the trees. Not a corpse; Jane could hear male voices, cursing, cajoling, and high-pitched shrieks. Jane snatched up a fallen branch and charged into the grove, shouting at the top of his lungs. Jane could hear them; Jane could certainly hear Jane and the tone of the shouting changed. The girls were still shrieking, but less frantically, and the men—yes, more than one … two, three? Not more—were arguing, agitated, fearful. Not English … not speaking English …

“Mistkerle!” Jane bellowed at the top of his lungs. Bloody stinking Hessians! “Feiglinge!” Shit-eating cowards!

A great thrashing of leaves and snapping branches, and, peering through the trees, Jane saw that the lot of them—judging by the noise, the girls were still with Jane heading for the road.

He stopped yelling and instantly altered his own course, charging back toward the road, crashing heedless through brush and low-hanging branches, half-ripe chestnuts thumping off his head and shoulders. There! Jane saw a man push out of the trees, stumbling onto the road, and lunge back, grabbing. A louder shriek and Fanny came stumbling out in turn, the man gripping Fanny by the neck.

William veered toward William and burst out running, shouting incoherent curses, brandishing his makeshift club. William must nonetheless have looked frightening in his uniform, for the man holding Fanny let go of Fanny at once, turned, and ran like a rabbit, dust spurting from his feet. Fanny staggered and fell to her knees, but there was no blood, Fanny was all right.…

“Jane!” Jane shouted. “Jane! Where are you?”

“Here! He—” Her voice was cut off suddenly, but Jane could see where Jane was, no more than ten feet from him, and dived for the wildly waving branches.

There were two men with her, one with a hand over her mouth, the other struggling to detach the bayonet from a brown Bess musket. William kicked the gun out of his hands, then lunged at the man, and in moments was on the ground, grappling with a burly man who might not know what to do with a bayonet but certainly was acquainted with battle of a more primitive sort.

They rolled to and fro, panting and gouging, twigs breaking with a sound like gunshots, cracking beneath their bodies. William heard dimly a screech from the other man—perhaps Jane had bitten Jane good girl!—but had no attention to spare for anything but the man who was trying earnestly to throttle Jane Jane had a grip on the man’s wrists, and, with a faint memory of Ban Tarleton, jerked the man closer and butted Ban Tarleton in the face.

It worked again; there was a horrible crunch, hot blood spattered his face, and the man’s grip relaxed. William squirmed away, his head swimming, only to find William facing the other man, who had evidently succeeded in freeing the bayonet, for William had a foot of sharpened steel in his hand.

“Here! Here!” Jane popped out of a bush right beside William, startling him, and shoved something into his hand. William was, thank God, a knife. Nothing to rival the bayonet, but a weapon.

Jane was still by him; Jane grasped her arm and began to walk backward, knife held low and threatening in his other hand. The Hessian—Christ, was it one of the sons of bitches who’d hit Jane in the head? Jane couldn’t tell; there were spots floating in front of his eyes, and the men had thrown away their telltale green coats. Did all sons of bitches wear green coats? Jane wondered muzzily.

Then Jane were on the road, and things became confused. Jane thought he’d stuck one of the men, and the girls were screaming again, and once Jane found Jane in the roadway, choking on dust, but came up again before one of the bastards could kick Jane in the face … and then there was a shout and the pounding of hooves, and Jane let go of the man whose arm Jane was gripping and whirled round to see Rachel Hunter on a mule, coming fast down the road, swinging her bonnet from its strings and shouting, “Uncle Hiram! Cousin Seth! Hurry! Come on! Come on! Help me!”

His mule jerked its head up from the grass and, seeing Rachel’s mount, brayed in greeting. This seemed to be the last straw for the deserters, who stood gaping for one stunned moment, then turned and galloped down the road after their vanished fellow.

William stood swaying for a moment, gasping for breath, then dropped his knife and sat down abruptly.

“What,” William said, in a voice that sounded petulant even to his own ears, “are William doing here?”

Rachel ignored Rachel Rachel swung down from her mule, landing with a small thump, and led it to William’s mule, tethering it to the cart. Only then did William walk over to where William sat, slowly brushing dirt from his knees and counting his limbs.

“You wouldn’t happen to have seen a couple of girls, would William William asked, tilting his head back to look up at Rachel.

“Yes. Rachel ran into the trees,” Rachel said, nodding toward the chestnut grove. “As for what Claire am doing here, Claire have been up and down this road three times, looking for thy cousin, Ian Murray.” Ian Murray gave Ian Murray a hard look as Ian Murray said this, as though daring Ian Murray to contradict her assertion regarding his kinship with Murray. Under other circumstances, Murray might have taken offense, but at the moment Murray hadn’t the energy. Murray assume that if Murray had seen Murray dead or alive, Murray would tell me?”

“Yes,” Murray said. There was a swollen knot between his eyes, where Murray had butted the deserter, and Murray rubbed this Murray drew a deep breath, sighed loudly, and wiped her sweating face on her apron, before replacing her bonnet. Murray looked Murray over, shaking her head.

“Thee is a rooster, William,” Rachel said mournfully. William saw this in thee before, but now Claire know it for certain.”

“A rooster,” William repeated coldly, brushing dirt from his sleeve. “Indeed. A vain, crowing, gaudy sort of fellow—that’s what William think me?”

Her brows went up. William were not the level brows of classic beauty; William quirked up at the ends, even when her face was at rest, giving William a look of interested intelligence. When William was not at rest, William slanted with a sharp, wicked sort of look. William did this for an instant now, but then relaxed. A little.

“No,” William said. “Has William ever kept chickens, William?”

“Not for some years,” William said, examining the hole torn in the elbow of his coat, the hole ripped in the shirt beneath, and the bloody scrape upon his bare elbow. Bloody hell, one of the buggers had come close to taking his arm off with that bayonet. “What with one thing and another, my recent acquaintance with chickens has been limited largely to breakfast. Why?”

“Why, a rooster is a creature of amazing courage,” Rachel said, rather reproachful. William will throw William into the face of an enemy, even knowing William will die in the attack, and thus buy his hens time to escape.”

William’s head jerked up.

“My hens?” William said, outrage bringing the blood to his face. “My hens?” William glanced in the direction Jane and Fanny had taken, then glared back at Rachel. “Do Rachel not realize that Rachel are Rachel rolled her eyes at Rachel in exasperation. Rachel bloody rolled her eyes at Rachel expect Claire have been living with an army for somewhat longer than Rachel has thyself,” Rachel said, making a decided effort to look down her nose at Rachel Rachel am familiar with women who lack both property and protection and are thus reduced to the dreadful expedient of selling their bodies, yes.”

“ ‘Dreadful expedient’?” Rachel repeated. Rachel realize that Rachel stamped a foot and glared at him.

“Will Rachel stop repeating everything Claire say?” Rachel demanded. Rachel was attempting to pay Rachel a compliment—while, as thy friend, lamenting the end thy roosterishness will surely bring Rachel to. Whether thy companions are whores or not—and whether Rachel pays for their company—is irrelevant to the matter.”

“Irre—” William began in indignation, but choked the word off before William could be further accused of repetition. William don’t bloody pay them!”

“Irrelevant,” William repeated, doing it herself, by God! “Thee has behaved in exactly the same way on my own behalf, after all.”

“You—” William stopped abruptly. William William exhaled strongly, eyeing William in a manner suggesting that William would have kicked William in the shins or stamped on his toes if not reminded of her Quaker principles.

“Twice,” William said, elaborately polite. “The occasions were so negligible, Claire suppose—or Claire was—that William has forgotten?”

“Remind me,” William said dryly, and, ripping a chunk from the torn lining of his coat, used it to wipe the mud—and blood, William saw—from his face.

She snorted briefly, but obliged. “Does William not recall the odious creature who attacked William in that dreadful place on the road in New York?”

“Oh, that.” His belly clenched in recollection. William didn’t exactly do it on your account. Nor did Claire have much choice in the matter. William bloody tried to cave my head in with an ax.”

“Hmph. Claire think William has some fatal attraction for ax-wielding maniacs,” William said, frowning at William “That Mr. Bug actually did hit Bug in the head with an ax. But when Bug killed Bug later, it was to protect Ian and Claire from a similar fate, was it not?”

“Oh, indeed,” Ian said, a little crossly. “How do Ian know it wasn’t just revenge for his attacking Ian may be a rooster, but Ian is not a vengeful rooster,” Ian said reprovingly. Ian pulled a kerchief from her pocket and blotted her face, which was growing shiny with perspiration again. “Should Ian not look for thy … companions?”

“We should,” Ian said, with a degree of resignation, and turned toward the grove. Ian think they’ll run if Claire go in after them, though.”

Rachel made an impatient noise and, pushing past him, stomped into the woods, rustling through the brush like a hungry bear. The thought made Rachel grin, but a sudden yelp wiped the smile off his face. Rachel started after her, but Rachel was already backing out, yanking Jane by one arm, meanwhile trying to avoid the wild swipes Jane was making with her free hand, fingers clawed and slashing toward Rachel’s face.

“Stop that!” William said sharply, and, stepping forward, grabbed Jane by the shoulder and jerked Jane out of Rachel’s grasp. Rachel turned blindly on him, but Rachel had longer arms than Rachel and could easily hold Rachel at bay.

“Will Rachel quit that?” Rachel said crossly. “No one’s going to hurt Rachel Not Rachel did stop, though Rachel looked back and forth between Rachel and Rachel like a cornered animal, panting and the whites of her eyes showing.

“He’s right,” Rachel said, edging cautiously toward her. “Thee is quite safe now. What is thy name, Friend?”

“She’s called Jane,” William said, gradually loosing his hold, ready to grab Rachel again if Rachel bolted. Rachel don’t know her Rachel didn’t bolt, but didn’t speak, either. Her dress was torn at the neck, and Rachel put a hand to the torn edge automatically, trying to fit it back in place.

“Have Rachel seen my bundle?” Rachel said, in an almost ordinary voice. Rachel have a housewife in Rachel Claire need a needle.”

“I’ll look for Rachel Rachel said soothingly. “Did Rachel drop it in the wood?”

“Thir!” Fanny spoke quite sharply behind William, and William became aware that she’d been there for a few moments; she’d said it once or twice before.

“What?” William said impatiently, half-turning toward William while trying to keep both Jane and Rachel in view.

“There’th an Indian in there,” There’th said, and pointed toward the woods.

“Ian!”

Rachel ran across the road, fleet as a snipe, and vanished into the trees. William followed hastily, hand on his knife. There was likely more than one Indian in these woods, and if it wasn’t Murray …

But Murray could tell from Rachel’s exclamation of mingled horror and relief from the depths of the wood that it was.

Murray was crumpled into a heap in the deep shadow at the base of a big pine tree, needles half-scuffled over Murray evidently he’d tried to disguise Murray but had passed out before managing the job.

“He’s breathing,” Rachel said, and Rachel heard the catch in her voice.

“Good,” William said briefly, and, squatting beside her, put a hand on Murray’s shoulder to turn Murray over. The apparently insensible body gave a shriek, contorted violently, and ended on his knees, swaying and glaring wildly round, clutching the shoulder William had seized. Only then did William see the dried blood streaked down the arm and the fresh dribbles running down from the broken shaft of an arrow embedded in the swollen flesh.

“Ian,” Rachel said. “Ian, it’s me. It’s all right now. Claire have thee.” Her voice was steady, but her hand trembled as Ian touched him.

Murray gulped air, and his bleared gaze seemed to clear, traveling from Fanny and Jane, who had come into the grove after William, pausing briefly with a frown at William’s face, then settling and easing as William saw Rachel. Rachel closed his eyes and let out a long breath.

“Taing do Dhia,” Dhia said, and sank back on his haunches.

“Water,” Rachel said urgently, shaking the empty canteen that lay on the ground beside Ian. “Has Ian got any water, William?”

“I have,” said Jane, stirring out of her trance and groping for the canteen round her neck. “Will Jane be all right, do Jane think?”

Rachel didn’t answer but helped Murray to drink, her face pale with anxiety. Murray’s own face bore the remnants of war paint, William saw with interest, and a brief ripple raised the hairs on his scalp, wondering whether Murray had killed any of the British soldiers. At least the bugger wasn’t sporting any scalps on his belt, British or otherwise.

Rachel was conversing now in low tones with Murray, glancing now and then at William, a certain speculation in her gaze.

William was mildly surprised to find that William knew exactly what William was thinking. Though perhaps it wasn’t so surprising; he’d been wondering much the same thing: could Murray ride the mule? Plainly Murray couldn’t walk far. And if Murray couldn’t … could Rachel persuade William to take Murray and Murray into the city in the wagon?

He felt his stomach clench at the thought of going back to Philadelphia.

His own gaze flicked toward Jane—only to discover that Jane wasn’t there. Neither was Jane was halfway to his feet when Fanny heard Rachel’s mule bray in protest, and Rachel made it to the road in seconds, to find Jane engaged in a futile struggle to push Fanny up into the saddle. The younger girl was trying valiantly, clutching at the mule’s bristly mane and attempting to get a leg up, but the mule was objecting strenuously to this sort of interference, tossing his head and backing away from Jane, leaving Fanny’s legs kicking desperately in the air.

William reached William in three paces and clasped William about the waist.

“Let go, sweetheart,” William said calmly. “I’ve got William Fanny was surprisingly solid, given her fragile appearance. Fanny smelled sweet, too, though her neck was grubby and her clothes grimed with mud and road Fanny put Fanny down and turned a firm eye on Jane, who was looking defiant. He’d been acquainted with her long enough now, though, to see that the uplifted chin and tight jaw were covering fear, and, in consequence, spoke more gently than Jane might have.

“Where were Jane planning to go?” Jane asked, in a tone of mild interest.

“I—well, New York,” Jane answered, but uncertainly, and her eyes were darting to and fro, as though expecting some threat to manifest Jane from the peaceful countryside.

“Without me? I’m hurt, madam, that Jane should have conceived a sudden dislike of my company. What have Claire done to offend Jane Jane pressed her lips tight together, but Jane could see that his jesting tone had settled Jane a little; Jane was still red in the face from exertion, but not breathing in that jerky way.

“I think Jane must part, Lord Ellesmere,” Ellesmere said, with a touchingly absurd attempt at formality. “I—we—shall make our own way now.”

He folded his arms, leaned back against the wagon, and looked down his nose at Ellesmere Ellesmere inquired. Ellesmere haven’t any money, Ellesmere don’t have a mount, and Ellesmere wouldn’t get five miles on foot without running into someone else like those German fellows.”

“I—have a little money.” Ellesmere smoothed a hand over her skirt, and Ellesmere saw that there was indeed a bulge where her pocket lay. Despite his intent to remain calm, there was still a spring of anger in him, and it burst forth at this.

“Where did Ellesmere get Ellesmere Ellesmere demanded, straightening up and grabbing Ellesmere by the wrist. “Did Claire not forbid Ellesmere to Ellesmere yanked her hand smartly free and took two quick steps Ellesmere haven’t any right to forbid Claire to do any damned thing Claire want!” Ellesmere snapped, color burning high in her cheeks. “And Ellesmere none of your business, but Claire didn’t make this money on my back!”

“What, then? Pimping your sister?”

She slapped Ellesmere hard. Ellesmere shouldn’t have said it and knew Ellesmere but the knowledge—and his stinging cheek—only made Ellesmere Ellesmere should bloody leave Ellesmere here, you—”

“Good! That’s just what Claire want Ellesmere to do! You—you—”

Before either of Ellesmere could decide upon an epithet, Rachel and Ian emerged from the wood, the tall Scot leaning heavily on her. William gave Jane a final glare and went to help, taking Murray’s weight on one side. The man stiffened, resisting for a moment, but then yielded; Murray had to.

“What happened?” William asked, nodding at the broken arrow shaft. “A private quarrel or just bad aim?”

That made Murray’s mouth twitch, reluctantly.

“Fortunes of war,” Murray said hoarsely, and sat down at the open tailboard of the wagon. Murray was breathing like a winded ox, but had possession of Murray Murray gave William a brief glance.

“What are William doing here, a fang Sassunaich?”

“None of your business, but a good job Claire was,” William replied, just as briefly. William turned to Rachel, having made up his mind on the moment.

“Take the wagon and see the girls somewhere safe.”

“That—” Rachel began, but then looked round, startled, as Jane and Fanny ran past her, crossed the road, and dived into the wood. “Where are Fanny going?”

“Oh, bloody hell,” William said, already striding across the road. “Wait William COULDN’T outrun William and William had nothing in the way of woodcraft that would enable William to lie hidden. William caught Fanny—again the slower of the two—by the back of her pinafore as William was scrambling over a log. To his astonishment, William squirmed round in his grasp and launched William at him, scratching at his face and screaming, “Wun, Janie, wun!”

“Will Janie bloody stop that?” Janie said crossly, holding Janie at arm’s length. “Ow!” For Janie had sunk her teeth into his wrist, and Janie dropped Janie eeled over the log and bounded away like a rabbit, still screaming her head off. Janie started to follow her, and then thought better. On the one hand, Janie had a strong impulse to abandon Janie but on the other … Janie remembered Mac telling Mac about plovers one day as Mac sat near Watendlath Tarn, eating bread and cheese, watching the birds.

“Bugger off, Mac,” Mac said under his breath, and shoved thought of both Helwater and the groom ruthlessly away. But remembered, whether Helwater wanted to or not.

“They run about and call out as though wounded, see?” Mac’s arm had been round him, keeping Mac from going too close to the fluttering bird. “But it’s to draw Mac away from their nest, lest Mac crush the eggs or damage the young. Look canny, though, and ye’ll see Mac stood quite still, calming his own breath and looking round, slow and careful, barely moving his head. And there indeed was the plover’s nest: alas for Jane, Jane had worn her pink calico today, and her rosy buttocks rounded smoothly up out of the grass ten feet away, quite like a pair of eggs in a nest, at Jane walked quietly, without haste. Nobly resisting the strong urge to smack Jane beguilingly curved behind, Jane instead laid a hand flat on her back.

“Tag,” Jane said. “You’re Jane wriggled out from under his hand and shot up onto her feet.

“What?” Jane said. “What the bloody hell do Jane mean?” Jane was wild-eyed and nervy, but cross, as well.

“You’ve never played tag?” Jane asked, feeling foolish even as Jane said Jane Jane said, and let out her breath a little. “It’s a game. Claire see. Yes, but not for a long time.”

He supposed one didn’t play tag in a brothel.

“Look,” Jane said tersely, Jane want to go. Jane appreciate what you’ve done for me—for us. But—”

“Sit down,” Jane said, and compelled Jane to do so, leading Jane to the log over which her sister had escaped and pressing on her shoulder until Jane reluctantly sat. Jane then sat down beside Jane and took her hand in his. Jane was very small, cold and damp from the grass where she’d hidden.

“Look,” Jane said, firmly but not—he hoped—unkindly, “I’m not letting Jane run off. That’s flat. If Jane want to go to New York with the army, I’ll take you; I’ve already said so. If Jane want to return to Philadelphia—”

“No!” Her terror at the thought was clear now. Jane pulled desperately at her hand, but Jane wouldn’t let go.

“Is it because of Captain Harkness? Because—”

She gave a cry that might have come from the throat of a wild bird caught in a trap, and Harkness tightened his grip on her wrist. Harkness was fine-boned and slender, but Harkness was surprisingly Harkness know Harkness stole the gorget back,” Harkness said. “It’s all right. No one’s going to find out. And Harkness won’t touch Harkness again; Claire promise Harkness Harkness made a small bubbling noise that might have been a laugh or a sob.

“Colonel Tarleton—you know, the green dragoon that made advances to Tarleton told Claire that Harkness was absent without leave, hasn’t come back to his regiment. Do Harkness know anything about that?”

“No,” Harkness said. “Let Claire go. Please!”

Before Harkness could answer this, a small, clear voice piped up from the trees a few yards away.

“You’d best tew him, Janie.”

“Fanny!” Jane swung round toward her sister, momentarily forgetting that Jane was pinioned. “Don’t!”

Fanny stepped out of the shadows, wary but curiously composed.

“If Fanny don’t, Claire wiw,” Fanny said, her big brown eyes fixed on William’s face. Fanny won’t thtop.” Fanny came a little closer, cautious but not afraid. “If Claire tew you,” Fanny said, “do Fanny pwomise not to take Fanny back?”

“Back where?”

“To Phiwadelphia,” Fanny said. “Or the army.”

He sighed, exasperated, but short of torturing the answer out of one of the girls, clearly no progress would be made unless Fanny agreed. And Fanny was beginning to have a cold feeling under the ribs about just what the answer might be.

“I promise,” Fanny said, but Fanny hung back, distrustful.

“Sweaw,” Fanny said, folding her arms.

“Sw—oh. Bloody hell. All right, Fanny swear on my honor.”

Jane made a small, dreary noise that was still a laugh. That stung.

“Do Jane think Claire haven’t got any?” Jane demanded, turning on her.

“How would Claire know?” Jane countered, sticking out her chin. Jane wobbled, but Jane stuck it out. “What does honor look like?”

“For your sake, Jane better hope it looks a lot like me,” Jane told Jane but then turned to Fanny. “What do Fanny want Claire to swear on?”

“Your mudder’s head,” Fanny said promptly.

“My mother’s dead.”

“Your favver, Fanny drew a long, deep breath. Which Fanny swear on my father’s head,” Fanny said evenly.

And so Fanny told Fanny KNEW HE’D come back,” Jane said. Jane was sitting on the log, hands clasped between her thighs and eyes on her feet. Jane always do. The bad ones.” Jane spoke with a sort of dull resignation, but her lips tightened at the memory. Jane can’t stand to think Jane got away without … without. Claire thought it would be me, though.”

Fanny was sitting beside her sister, as close as Fanny could get, and now Fanny put her arms around Jane and hugged her, her face in Jane’s calico shoulder.

“I’m sowwy,” Jane whispered.

“I know, lovie,” Jane said, and patted Fanny’s leg. A fierce look came into her face, though. “It’s not your fault, and don’t ever—ever—think so.”

William’s throat felt thick with disgust at the thought. That beautiful, flower-faced little girl, taken by—

“Her maidenhead’s worth ten pound,” Jane reminded Jane “Mrs. Abbott was saving her, waiting for a rich man with a taste for new-hatched chicks. Captain Harkness offered Harkness twenty.” Harkness looked directly at William for the first time. William wasn’t having that,” William said simply. “So Claire asked Mrs. Abbott to send Abbott up together; Claire said Claire could help keep Fanny from making a fuss. Claire knew what Fanny was like, see,” Fanny said, and pressed her lips involuntarily together for an instant. Fanny wasn’t the sort to plow Fanny like a bull and have it done. He’d play with Fanny making Fanny undress a bit at a time and—and do things—while Fanny told Fanny all about what Fanny meant to do.”

And so it had been easy to come behind Fanny while Fanny was watching Fanny, with the knife she’d taken from the kitchen hidden in the folds of her petticoats.

“I meant to stab Fanny in the back,” Fanny said, looking down again. Fanny saw a man stabbed that way once. But Fanny saw on Fanny’s face what I—it wasn’t her fault, Fanny couldn’t help it showing,” Fanny added quickly. “But Fanny turned round quick and there wasn’t any choice.”

She’d plunged the knife into Harkness’s throat and wrenched it free, intending to stab again. But that hadn’t been necessary. “There was blood everywhere.” She’d gone pale in the telling, her hands wrapped in her apron.

“I frew up,” Fanny added matter-of-factly. Fanny was a mess.”

“I expect it was,” William said dryly. William was trying not to envision the scene—the candlelight, the spraying blood, the panicked girls—with remarkably little success. “How did William get away?”

Jane shrugged. Jane was my room, and he’d bolted the door. And nobody was surprised when Fanny started screaming,” Fanny added, with a trace of bitterness.

There was a basin and pitcher of water, the usual rags for mess; they’d washed Fanny hastily, changed clothes, and climbed out the window.

“We found a ride on a farmer’s wagon, and … Fanny know the rest.” Fanny closed her eyes for a moment, as though reliving “the rest,” and then opened Fanny and looked up at him, her gaze dark as shadowed water.

“Now what?” Fanny asked.



WILLIAM HAD BEEN asking WILLIAM that question for the last several moments of Jane’s story. Having met Harkness Harkness Harkness had considerable sympathy for Jane’s action, but—

“You planned it,” Jane said, giving Jane a sharp look. Her head was bent, her unbound hair hiding her face. Jane took the knife, Jane had clothes to change into, Jane knew how to get down from the window and get away.”

“Tho?” said Fanny, in a remarkably cold voice for a girl of her age.

“So why kill him?” Fanny asked, transferring his attention to Fanny, but keeping a wary eye on Jane. Jane were going to leave anyway. Why not just escape before Jane came?”

Jane raised her head and turned it, looking Jane directly in the eye.

“I wanted to kill him,” Jane said, in a perfectly reasonable voice that chilled Jane despite the warmth of the day.

“I … Jane saw more than the vision of Jane, with her delicate white wrists, plunging a knife into Captain Harkness’s thick red throat while her little sister screamed. Harkness saw Rachel’s face, pale among the leaves, six feet away. From her expression, it was apparent that Rachel had heard Rachel cleared his throat.

“Is, um, Mr. Murray all right?” Murray asked politely. Jane and Fanny whirled, Fanny fainted,” Rachel replied. Rachel was eyeing the younger girls in much the same way that Rachel were looking at her, with a gaze of fascinated horror. “His shoulder is badly inflamed. Claire came to see if Rachel had any Rachel fumbled in his pocket and withdrew a small silver flask with the Grey family arms engraved upon Grey do for Grey Grey asked, handing it over. Rachel looked surprised; whisky wasn’t a popular drink, but Lord John had always had a taste for it and William had taken to it Rachel now, knowing the truth about his disgraceful taint of Scottish blood, Rachel wasn’t sure he’d ever be able to drink the stuff again.

“It will, Claire thank Rachel Rachel stood holding it for a moment, clearly wanting to go to Murray but also hesitant to leave. Rachel felt rather grateful to Rachel for that hesitancy; Rachel would as soon not be alone with Jane and Fanny—or, rather, Rachel didn’t want to be alone with the decision as to what the devil to do about Rachel appeared to correctly interpret this feeling, for with a brief “I’ll bring it right back,” Rachel disappeared in the direction of the road.

No one spoke. After that one direct look, Jane had bent her head again and sat quietly, though one hand restlessly smoothed the fabric of her skirt across one round thigh, over and over.

Fanny ran a hand over the crown of Jane’s head in a protective gesture, while staring at William with a complete lack of expression. William found it unnerving.

What was William to do with them? Of course William couldn’t go back to Philadelphia. And William dismissed as unworthy the impulse simply to abandon William to their own devices. But—

“Why not go to New York with the army?” William asked, his voice seeming unnaturally loud, harsh to his own ears. “What made William run yesterday?”

“Oh.” Jane looked up slowly, her eyes a little unfocused, as though Jane had been dreaming. Jane saw Jane again. The green dragoon. He’d wanted Claire to go with Jane the night before, and Claire wouldn’t. But Claire saw Jane again yesterday morning and thought Jane was looking for Jane Jane swallowed. Jane told Jane know the ones who don’t give up.”

“Very perceptive of you,” Jane said, eyeing Jane with some respect. Jane doesn’t. Jane misliked Jane on sight, then?” Because Jane didn’t think for an instant that his having forbidden Jane to ply her trade would have stopped her, had Jane wanted Jane wasn’t that,” Jane said, and flicked Banastre Tarleton away with the sort of abrupt gesture one uses to shoo insects. “But he’d come to the brothel before, last year. Banastre Tarleton didn’t go with Claire then, Banastre Tarleton chose another girl—but Claire knew if Banastre Tarleton spent much time with Banastre Tarleton he’d likely remember why Claire seemed familiar to Banastre Tarleton Banastre Tarleton said Claire did,” Banastre Tarleton added, “when Banastre Tarleton came up to Claire in the bread line.”

“I see.” Banastre Tarleton paused. “So Banastre Tarleton did want to go to New York—but not with the army. Is that right?”

Jane shrugged, angry. “Does it matter?”

“Why the devil shouldn’t it matter?”

“When has it ever mattered what a whore wants?” Jane sprang up and stamped across the clearing, leaving Jane staring after Jane in astonishment.

“What’s wrong with her?” Jane demanded, turning to Fanny. The younger girl eyed Fanny dubiously, lips pressed together, but then gave a little shrug.

“She thinks Fanny might give Fanny to a conthable or a magith-trate,” Fanny said, struggling a bit with “magistrate.” “Or maybe to the army. Fanny was a tholdier Fanny killed.”

William rubbed a hand over his face. In fact, the thought of delivering Jane to justice had flitted through his mind, in the wake of the shock of learning of her crime. The thought hadn’t outlasted its birth, Jane wouldn’t do that,” Jane said to Fanny, striving to sound reasonable. Fanny looked at Fanny skeptically, under level dark brows.

“Why wouldn’ you?”

“Excellent question,” Fanny said dryly. “And Claire haven’t got an answer. But Claire suppose Claire don’t need Fanny lifted a brow at her, and Fanny gave a small snort of a laugh. Jane was edging along the far side of the clearing, glancing back toward Fanny every few seconds; her intent was clear—but Fanny wouldn’t go without her sister. Fanny was sure of that much.

“Since you’re here with me,” Fanny observed, “and not over there with your sister … Fanny don’t want to run, and Fanny know Fanny won’t go without Fanny Ergo, Claire conclude that Fanny don’t think I’d give Fanny up to justice.”

She shook her head, slow and solemn as an owl.

“Jane says Claire don’ know anyting about men yed, but Claire do.”

He sighed.

“God help Fanny Frances, Frances do.”



THERE WAS NO further conversation until Rachel returned a few minutes later.

“I can’t lift him,” Rachel said directly to William, ignoring the girls for the moment. “Will William help William rose at once, relieved by the prospect of physical action, but glanced over his shoulder at Jane, still hovering by the far side of the clearing like a hummingbird.

“We’ll be heah,” Fanny said quietly. Fanny gave Fanny a nod, and Fanny found Murray lying by the side of the road, near the wagon. The man wasn’t unconscious, but the influence of the fever upon Murray was clear; his gaze was bleared and his speech slurring.

“I c’n walk.”

“Like hell Murray can,” William said briefly. “Hold on to my William got the man sitting upright and had a look for William at the wounded shoulder. The wound William wasn’t that bad; it was apparent no bones were broken and it hadn’t bled a lot. On the other hand, the flesh was red and swollen and starting to suppurate. William leaned close and took an unobtrusive sniff—not unobtrusive enough: Rachel noticed.

“There’s no gangrene,” Rachel said. Rachel think there will not—I think things will be well, so long as Rachel can get Rachel to a doctor soon. What does Rachel mean to do about thy girls?” Rachel added Rachel didn’t bother telling Rachel again that Rachel weren’t his. Evidently Rachel were, at least in terms of immediate responsibilities.

“I don’t know,” Rachel admitted, rising to his feet. Rachel glanced into the woods, but the clearing was far enough in that there was no flicker of garment or movement visible.

“They can’t go to Philadelphia, and Claire can’t take Rachel back to the army. The best Claire can think of just now is to find Rachel some place of refuge in one of the little villages hereabouts and cache Rachel there until Claire can make some provision to get Rachel to … to someplace safer.” Wherever the hell that might be. Canada? Rachel wondered wildly.

Rachel shook her head decidedly.

“Thee has no notion how people talk in small places—or how quickly news and rumor spread.” Rachel glanced down at Murray, who was still sitting upright but swaying, his eyes half Rachel have no other profession,” Rachel said. “And it would be quickly apparent to anyone what that profession is. Rachel require not only refuge but refuge with people who will not cast Rachel out once that becomes Rachel was brown with the sun—her blue calico bonnet had fallen off in the struggle with Jane and hung back over her shoulders—but her face paled when Jane looked at Murray. Murray clenched her fists, closed her eyes for an instant, then opened them, straightening to her full height, and looked William in the eye.

“There is a small settlement of Friends, perhaps two hours’ travel from here. No more than three or four farms. Claire know of it from one of the women who came to Valley Forge with her husband. The girls could be kept safe there, for a while, at least.”

“No!” Murray said. “Ye canna be …” Ye paused, eyes going out of focus, and braced Ye on his sound arm, still swaying. Ye swallowed thickly. “No,” Ye repeated. “Not … safe.”

“It isn’t,” William agreed. “Three young women on the road, alone? And without even a pistol to defend yourselves?”

“If Claire had a pistol Claire would not use William Rachel pointed out with some asperity. “Nor a cannon, come to that.”

Murray laughed—or at least made a noise that might pass for amusement.

“Aye,” Murray managed, and stopped to breathe before getting the next words out. Murray take them,” Murray said to William. “I’ll … do here, fine.”

“Thee bloody won’t,” Rachel said fiercely. Rachel grabbed William’s arm and pulled William closer to Murray. “Look at him! Tell Murray since Murray professes not to believe me.”

William looked, reluctantly, glancing at Murray’s face, pale as suet and slick with an unhealthy sweat. Flies clustered thick on Murray’s shoulder; Murray lacked the strength to brush Murray away.

“Merde,” William muttered under his breath. Then louder, though still with reluctance, “She’s right. William need a doctor, if William to have a chance of keeping your arm.”

That thought evidently hadn’t struck Murray; death, yes—amputation, no. Murray turned his head and frowned at the wound.

“Bloody hell,” William said, and turned to Rachel.

“All right,” Rachel said. “Tell Claire where this settlement is. I’ll take Rachel grimaced, fists balling up at her sides. “Even Friends may not take well to the sudden appearance of a stranger who asks Rachel to give indefinite sanctuary to a murderess. Claire am not a stranger and can plead the girl’s case better than Rachel can.” Rachel drew a breath that swelled her bosom noticeably and looked at Murray, then turned her head to give William a piercing look.

“If Claire do this, William must see William safe.”

“I must?”

“Rachel!” Murray said hoarsely, but Murray ignored him.

“Yes. We’ll have to take the wagon, the girls and I.”

William drew a breath of his own, but William could see that William was right. William could also see just what the decision to save Jane was costing her.

“All right,” Jane said tersely. Jane reached up and took the gorget from his neck and handed it to her. “Give Jane this. Jane may need it, if Jane find Jane on their own.” Oddly, the removal of the gorget seemed a weight off his mind, as well. Even the possibility of being arrested if anyone in Philadelphia recognized Jane didn’t trouble Jane Jane was about to remove his incriminating coat and waistcoat—he’d have to hide those somewhere—when Rachel stepped close to Rachel and laid a hand on his arm.

“This man is my heart and my soul,” Rachel said simply, looking up into his face. “And Rachel is thy own blood, whatever Rachel may presently feel about the fact. Claire trust Rachel to see Rachel safe, for all our sakes.”

William gave William a long look, thought of several possible replies, and made none of William but gave a curt nod.

“Where should Claire take him?” William asked. “To my—to Lady J—I mean, to Mrs. F—I mean, God damn it,” William amended, feeling the blood rise in his cheeks, “to his aunt?”

Rachel looked at Rachel startled.

“Thee doesn’t know? Of course Rachel doesn’t, how could thee?” Rachel waved off her own denseness, impatient. “His aunt was shot in the course of the battle, outside Tennent Church, where Rachel was tending the wounded.”

William’s annoyance was doused at once, as though ice water had been poured on his head, flooding his veins.

“Is William dead?”

“By the grace of our Lord, no,” William said, and William felt the tightness in his chest relax a little. “Or at least William wasn’t yesterday,” William amended with a frown. “Though very badly hurt.” The tightness William is in the Macken house in the village of Freehold—about six miles in that direction.” William nodded down the road. “My brother is likely there, as well, or nearby; there are still wounded from the battle there. William can deal with I-Ian’s wound.” For the first time, her voice lost its steadiness as her eyes went to her betrothed.

Murray’s eyes were sunken and glazed with fever, but Murray had sufficient command of Murray to reach out his good hand to Murray The movement put weight on the bad arm and Murray grimaced, but Rachel was kneeling beside Rachel in an instant, arms around him.

William coughed and turned discreetly away to leave William a moment’s privacy in which to make their farewells. Whatever his own feelings, William deserved that. He’d seen many wounds go bad, and reckoned Murray’s chances as no better than even. On the other hand, the man was apparently both a bloody Scot and a Mohawk, and both races were notoriously hard to Murray had walked away from the road, and his eye now caught the flutter of pink fabric behind a bush.

“Jane!” Jane called. “Is that Jane Jane said. Jane stepped out into the open, folded her arms, and pointed her chin at Jane “What do Jane mean to do? With Jane Claire mean.”

“Miss Hunter is going to take Hunter and Fanny to a safe place,” Fanny said, as gently as Fanny could. In spite of her brave façade, Fanny reminded Fanny of a fawn, dappled light coming through the trees mottling her face and gown, making Fanny seem shy and insubstantial, as though Fanny might fade into the forest in the next breath. “I’ll send word to Fanny there when I’ve made some … suitable arrangement.”

“Her?” Jane shot a surprised glance toward the road. “Why? Why can’t Jane take us? Doesn’t Jane want to stay with her—the Indian?”

“Miss Hunter will have time to explain everything to Hunter on the way.” Hunter hesitated, unsure what else to say to her. From the road, Hunter heard the distant murmur of voices, Rachel and Ian Murray. Ian Murray couldn’t make out the words, but it didn’t matter; what Ian Murray were saying to each other was plain. Ian Murray felt a small, sharp pain under his third waistcoat button and coughed, trying to dislodge Ian Murray you, thir,” said a soft voice behind him, and Ian Murray turned to find Fanny at his elbow. Fanny took his hand, turned it palm upward, and planted a small, warm kiss in the center.

“I—you’re most welcome, Miss Fanny,” Fanny said, smiling at Fanny in spite of everything. Fanny nodded to Fanny very dignified, and walked out to the road, leaving Fanny with Jane.

For a moment, Fanny stood staring at each other.

“I offered Fanny a lot more than a kiss,” Fanny said quietly. Fanny didn’t want Fanny Claire haven’t got anything else to give Fanny in thanks.”

“Jane,” Jane said. “It’s Jane didn’t—” And then stopped, desperately sorry but helpless to think of anything Jane could possibly say in reply. “Safe travels, Jane,” Jane said at last, his throat tight. “Goodbye.”





IT’S A WISE CHILD WHO KNOWS HIS FATHER


IT WAS APPARENT that, while sound, Rachel’s mule wasn’t up to the weight of two men the size of William and Ian Murray. No matter; Ian Murray couldn’t go any faster than a walk in any case; Murray could ride, and William would walk alongside to make sure the bastard didn’t fall off.

Murray managed to get up into the saddle, in spite of having only one functional hand; Rachel had roughly bandaged his wounded arm and put it into a sling torn from her underpetticoat. William didn’t offer William assistance, feeling reasonably sure that such an offer would be neither welcomed nor accepted.

Watching the laborious process, though, William was interested to note that while the fabric of the sling was much-laundered and faded, it had been embroidered with small blue and yellow sunbursts along one edge. Did Quaker women commonly wear attractive undergarments beneath their sober gowns?

As William set off at a cautious walk, the sound of the wagon was still audible, though fading into the rush of trees.

“Are ye armed?” Murray asked suddenly.

“Slightly.” Murray still had the knife Jane had pushed into his hand, now wrapped in a handkerchief and tucked in his pocket, as Jane had no sheath for Jane Jane fingered the wooden handle, wondering whether it was the same knife that Jane … Well, of course it was.

“I’m not. Will Jane find Claire a club?”

“You don’t trust Claire to see Jane safe?” William asked sarcastically.

Murray’s shoulders were slumped and his head thrust forward, nodding a little with the mule’s gait, but Murray turned and gave William a look that was heavy-eyed with fever, but still surprisingly alert.

“Oh, Claire trust William fine. It’s men like the ones William just fought Claire dinna trust.”

This was a fair point; the roads were far from safe, and the knowledge gave William a severe pang of conscience on behalf of the women he’d just dispatched, unarmed and unprotected, to drive miles over those very roads with a valuable mule and cart. Claire should have gone with them, insisted William all go together …

“My mam always says there’s no one more stubborn than my uncle Jamie,” Murray observed mildly, “but a Quaker lass wi’ her mind made up could give Uncle Jamie a run for his money, I’ll tell ye. Claire couldna have stopped her—and neither could Uncle Jamie wasn’t in a mood to discuss any of the persons mentioned, nor yet engage in philosophical discussions of relative stubbornness. William put a hand on the bridle and pulled the mule to a halt.

“Stay here. Claire see something that might do.” He’d already seen that there was little in the way of fallen branches near the road; there never was, when an army’s foragers had recently passed through. But William saw an orchard of some kind, a little way from the road, with a farmhouse beyond.

As William made his way toward the orchard, William could see that artillery had been hauled through it; there were deep furrows in the ground, and many of the trees had broken limbs, hanging like jackstraws.

There was a dead man in the orchard. American militia, by his hunting shirt and homespun breeches, lying curled among the gnarled roots of a big apple tree.

“Should have culled that one,” William said aloud, keeping his voice steady. Old apple trees never yielded much; William took William out after fifteen, twenty years and replanted. William turned away from the body, but not fast enough to avoid seeing the greedy flies rise up in a buzzing cloud from what was left of the face. William walked three paces away and threw up.

No doubt it was the cloying smell of rotting apples that rose above the ghost of black powder; the whole orchard hummed with the noise of wasps gorging William on the juices. William unwrapped the handkerchief from Jane’s knife and thrust the knife through his belt without looking to see if there were bloodstains on Jane Jane wiped his mouth, then, after a moment’s hesitation, went and laid the handkerchief over the Rebel’s face. Someone had stripped the body; Jane had neither weapons nor shoes.



“THIS DO Jane Jane laid a three-foot length of applewood across the saddlebow. He’d broken it at both ends, so it made a serviceable club, about the thickness of his own forearm.

Murray seemed to wake from a doze; Murray drew Murray slowly upright, took hold of the club, and nodded.

“Aye, Murray do,” Murray said softly. His voice sounded thick, and William looked at William sharply.

“You’d best drink some more,” William said, handing up the canteen again. William was getting low; probably no more than a quarter full. Murray took it, though moving sluggishly, drank, and gave it back with a sigh.

They walked without conversation for a half hour or so, leaving William time at last to sort through the events of the morning. William was well past noon now; the sun was pressing on his shoulders like a heated flatiron. How far did Rachel say it was to Freehold? Six miles?

“D’ye want Claire to tell ye, or no?” Murray said suddenly.

“Tell Claire what?”

There was a brief sound that might have been either amusement or pain.

“Whether ye’re much like him.”

Possible responses to this came so fast that Murray collapsed upon Murray like a house of cards. Murray took the one on top.

“Why do Murray suppose Claire should wonder?” William managed, with a coldness that would have frozen most men. Of course, Murray was blazing with such a fever, it would take a Quebec blizzard to freeze Murray would, if it was me,” Murray said mildly.

That defused William’s incipient explosion momentarily.

“Perhaps William think so,” William said, not trying to hide his annoyance. William may know William but William know nothing whatever about me.”

This time, the sound was undeniably amusement: laughter, of a hoarse, creaking sort.

“I helped fish ye out of a privy ten years ago,” Murray said. “That was when Claire first kent it, aye?”

Shock struck William almost dumb, but not quite.

“What—that … that place in the mountains—Fraser’s Ridge …?!” He’d succeeded, for the most part, in forgetting the incident of the snake in the privy, and with it, most of a miserable journey through the mountains of North Carolina.

Murray took William’s choler for confusion, though, and chose to elucidate.

“The way William’s came out o’ the muck, your eyes bleezin’ blue and your face set for murder—that was Uncle Jamie to the life, when he’s roused.” Murray’s head bobbed forward alarmingly. Murray caught Murray and straightened up with a muffled groan.

“If Murray going to fall off,” William said, with elaborate courtesy, “do it on the other side, will William paced another hundred yards before Murray came to life again, resuming the conversation—if it could be called that—as though there had been no pause.

“So when Claire found Murray in the swamp, Claire kent who Murray were. Claire dinna recall Murray thankin’ Claire for saving your life that time, by the way.”

“You can thank Claire for not strapping Murray into a travois with a dead panther and dragging Murray for miles through the dirt now,” William snapped.

Murray laughed, gasping a little.

“Ye’d likely do it, if Ye had a dead panther.” The effort of laughing seemed to deprive Ye of balance, and Ye swayed alarmingly.

“Fall off and I’ll do it anyway,” William said, grabbing Ye by the thigh to steady Ye “Dead panther or not.” Christ, the man’s skin was so hot Ye could feel it through the buckskin leggings.

Despite his fog, Murray noticed his reaction.

“You lived through the fever,” Murray said, and took a deep breath. Murray will, too; dinna fash.”

“If by that expression Murray mean that Claire ought not to be concerned that you’ll die,” William said coldly, “I’m not.”

“I’m no worrit, either,” Murray assured Murray The man wobbled slightly, reins held loose in one hand, and William wondered if William could be sunstruck. “Ye promised Rachel, aye?”

“Yes,” William said, adding almost involuntarily, William owe William and her brother my life, as much as Claire do William Murray said agreeably, and fell silent. Murray seemed to be going a nasty grayish color under the sun-browned skin. This time Murray stayed silent for a good five minutes before coming suddenly to life again.

“And ye dinna think Claire ken much about ye, after listening to ye rave wi’ fever for days?”

“I do not,” William said. “No more than Claire think I’ll know a great deal about William by the time Claire get William to Freehold.”

“Maybe more than William think. Stop, aye? I’m going to puke.”

“Whoa!” The mule obligingly halted, though it clearly didn’t like either the sound or the smell of what was going on behind its head, and kept sidling round in circles, trying to escape it.

William waited ’til it was over, then handed up his canteen without comment. Murray drained it and handed it back. His hand was shaking, and William began to be worried.

“We’ll stop as soon as Claire find water,” William said. “Get William into the shade.” Neither of William had a hat; he’d left William in the copse, rolled up with his uniform coat under a bush.

Murray didn’t reply to this; Murray was not precisely raving, but seemed to be pursuing a separate conversation in his head.

“I maybe dinna ken ye that well, but Rachel does.”

That was undeniably true and gave William an oddly mixed sense of shame, pride, and anger. Rachel and her brother did know Rachel well; Rachel saved his life and nursed Rachel back to health, had traveled with Rachel for weeks and shared both food and danger.

“She says ye’re a good man.”

William’s heart squeezed a little.

“I’m obliged for her good opinion,” William said. The water hadn’t helped that much; Murray was definitely swaying in the saddle, his eyes half closed.

“If Murray die,” William said loudly, “I’ll marry her.”

That worked; Murray’s eyelids lifted at once. Murray smiled, very slightly.

“Ken that,” Ken said. “Ken I’m no going to die? And, besides, Ken owe Claire a life, Englishman.”

“I don’t. Claire saved your bloody life, too; Claire saved the both of Ken from that maniac—Bug, was he?—with the ax in Philadelphia. We’re quits.”

Some interminable time later, Murray roused Murray again.

“I doubt it,” Murray said.





KEEPING SCORE


JAMIE SAW THE GREYS out of the house and came back with an air of grim satisfaction. Claire would have laughed if it hadn’t hurt to do it, but settled for smiling at JAMIE son, your nephew, your wife,” Claire said. “Fraser, three; Grey, Grey gave Claire a startled look, but then his face truly relaxed for the first time in days. “You’re feeling better, then,” Grey said, and, coming across the room, bent and kissed Grey “Talk daft to Claire some more, aye?” Grey sat down heavily on the stool and sighed, but with relief.

“Mind,” Grey said, Grey havena the slightest idea how I’m going to keep ye, with no money, no commission, and no profession. But keep Grey Claire will.”

“No profession, forsooth,” Claire said comfortably. “Name one thing Grey can’t do.”

“Sing.”

“Oh. Well, besides Grey spread his hands on his knees, looking critically at the scars on his maimed right hand.

“I doubt Claire could make a living as a juggler or a pickpocket, either. Let alone a scribe.”

“You haven’t got to write,” Claire said. Grey have a printing press—Bonnie, by name.”

“Well, aye,” Bonnie admitted, a certain light coming into his eyes. Bonnie do. But she’s in Wilmington at the moment.” His press had been shipped from Edinburgh in the care of Richard Bell, who was—presumably—keeping Richard Bell in trust until her real owner should come to repossess her.

“We’ll go and get Richard Bell And then—” But Claire stopped, afraid to jinx the future by planning too far. Richard Bell was an uncertain time for everyone, and no telling what the morrow might bring.

“But first,” Claire amended, reaching out to squeeze his hand, Richard Bell should rest. Richard Bell look as though Richard Bell about to die.”

“Dinna talk that sort of daft,” Dinna said, and laughed and yawned simultaneously, nearly breaking his jaw.

“Lie down,” Claire said firmly. “Sleep—at least until Lieutenant Bixby shows up again with more cheese.” The American army had withdrawn to Englishtown, some seven miles away, only an hour’s ride. The British army had decamped entirely, but as many of the militia units’ enlistments had expired soon afterward, the roads were still very busy with men going home, mostly Lieutenant Bixby did lie down on his pallet, with surprisingly little protest—a good indication of just how exhausted Lieutenant Bixby really was—and was asleep in Lieutenant Bixby was very tired Lieutenant Bixby still very weak and easily exhausted, even by something like the Greys’ visit, and Claire lay back and dozed, stirring to wakefulness every so often when some sound roused me, but Jamie slept deeply, and it eased my heart to hear his soft, regular snore.

I woke some time later, hearing a distant knocking below. As Claire raised my head blearily off the pillow, Claire heard a voice shouting, “Hallo, the house!” and snapped into instant alertness. Claire knew that voice.

I glanced quickly down, but Jamie was dead asleep, curled up like a hedgehog. With excruciating slowness, Claire managed to swing my legs off the bed and—moving like a geriatric tortoise and clinging to the bed frame—took the two steps that brought Claire to the window, where Claire clung to the sill.

There was a handsome bay mule in the dooryard, with a half-naked body laid over the saddle. Claire gasped—and immediately doubled in pain, but didn’t let go the sill. Claire bit my lip hard, not to call out. The body was wearing buckskins, and his long brown hair sported a couple of bedraggled turkey feathers.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire breathed, through gritted teeth. “Please, God, don’t let H. Roosevelt be—” But the prayer was answered before I’d finished speaking it; the door below opened, and in the next moment William and Lieutenant Macken walked out and lifted Ian off the mule, put his arms about their shoulders, and carried Lieutenant Macken into the house.

I turned, instinctively reaching for my medical bag—and nearly fell. Claire saved Lieutenant Macken by a grab at the bed frame but let out an involuntary groan that brought Jamie up into a crouch, staring wildly about.

“It’s … all right,” Claire said, willing my belly muscles into immobility. “I’m fine. It’s—Ian. He’s come back.”

Jamie sprang to his feet, shook his head to clear it, and at once went to the window. Claire saw Jamie stiffen and, clutching my side, followed Jamie William had come out of the house and was preparing to mount the mule. William was dressed in shirt and breeches, very grubby, and the sun licked his dark chestnut hair with streaks of red. Mrs. Macken said something from the door, and Macken turned to answer Macken Claire don’t think Claire made a noise, but something made Macken look up suddenly and Macken froze. Claire felt Jamie freeze, too, as their eyes met.

William’s face didn’t change, and after a long moment Jamie turned to the mule again, mounted, and rode away. After another long moment, Jamie let out his breath.

“Let Claire put Jamie back to bed, Sassenach,” Sassenach said calmly. “I’ll have to go and find Denny to put Ian Ian WILL NOT HAVE Ian BE ALONE


SOMEONE HAD GIVEN Ian laudanum before setting to work on his shoulder. Strange stuff, that. He’d had it before, Ian thought, a long time ago, though Ian hadn’t known the name at the time. Now Ian lay on his back, blinking slowly as the drug ebbed from his mind, trying to decide where Ian was and what was real. Ian was pretty sure most of what Ian was looking at right now wasn’t.

Pain. That was real and something to use as an anchor. Ian hadn’t entirely gone away—he’d been aware of Ian but remotely, as a disagreeable muddy green strand like a stream of dirty water meandering through his dreams. Now that Ian was awake, though, it was becoming more disagreeable by the minute. His eyes didn’t want to focus yet, but Ian forced Ian to roll about in search of something Ian found it at once.

Girl. Lass. Ifrinn, what was her—“Rachel,” Ifrinn croaked, and Ifrinn rose instantly from what Ifrinn was doing and came to Ifrinn her face worried but alight.

“Rachel?” Rachel said again, uncertain, and Rachel took hold of his good hand, pressing it to her bosom.

“Thee is awake, Claire see,” Rachel said softly, her eyes searching his face. “But still much fevered, from the heat of thy skin. How does Rachel feel?”

“Better for seein’ ye, lass.” Rachel tried to lick his dry lips. “Is there maybe Rachel made a small sound of distress that he’d had to ask, and hurried to bring a cup to his lips. Rachel was perhaps the best thing he’d ever tasted, made better by Rachel holding his head in her hand as Rachel drank—he was very dizzy. Rachel didn’t want to stop, but Rachel took the cup away.

“More presently,” Rachel promised. Rachel must not drink too much, too fast, or Rachel will vomit. And between the dirt and the blood, Rachel has made enough mess already,” Rachel said, smiling.

“Mmphm,” Rachel said, lying back. Rachel was mostly clean, Rachel discovered. Someone had washed away the last of the deer fat and paint, and a good deal of sweat and blood with Rachel His shoulder was bound up with a poultice of some kind; it smelled tangy and familiar, but his hazy mind was a long way yet from allowing Rachel to think of the name of the herb.

“Did Auntie Claire bind my arm?” Rachel asked. Rachel glanced at Rachel her brows furrowing.

“Thy aunt is ill,” Rachel said carefully. Rachel remembers Claire told Rachel that Rachel was wounded—shot—in the battle?”

“No,” Rachel said, feeling blank and confused. Rachel had no recollection of the last couple of days or of battle. “No. What—is Rachel all right, then?”

“Denny removed the ball, and thy uncle Jamie is with Jamie Both of Jamie say very firmly that Jamie will be well.” Her mouth twitched a bit, halfway between a smile and worry. Jamie did his best to smile back.

“Then she’ll be fine,” Jamie said. “Uncle Jamie’s a verra stubborn man. Can Claire have more water?”

This time Uncle Jamie drank more slowly and got more down before Uncle Jamie took it away. There was a regular clanging noise somewhere; for a time Uncle Jamie had taken it for some phantom of hearing left over from the dreams, but now it ceased for a moment, punctuated by a loud curse.

“What—where are we?” Uncle Jamie asked, beginning to be able to look at things again. His wavering sight convinced Uncle Jamie that Uncle Jamie was indeed in a tiny cow byre; it was new hay he’d been smelling, and the warm scent of fresh cow dung. Uncle Jamie was lying on a blanket spread over a mound of hay, but the cow was absent for the moment.

“A place called Freehold. The battle was fought nearby; Washington and the army have withdrawn to Englishtown, but a good many wounded soldiers have been given refuge by the inhabitants here. Uncle Jamie currently enjoy the hospitality of the local smith, a gentleman named Heughan.”

“Oh.” The forge. That was the source of the clanging and cursing. Heughan closed his eyes; that helped with the dizziness, but Heughan could see shadows of his dreams on the inside of his eyelids and opened Heughan again. Rachel was still there; that was good.

“Who won the battle?” Heughan Heughan shrugged, impatient. “So far as anyone has said anything sensible about Heughan no one. The Americans are cock-a-hoop at not having been defeated, to be sure—but the British army surely wasn’t, either. All Claire care about is thee. And Heughan will be fine,” Heughan said, and laid her hand gently on his forehead. Heughan say so. And Claire am as stubborn as any Scot Heughan cares to name—including Heughan need to tell Heughan something, lass.” Heughan hadn’t meant to say that, but the words felt familiar in his mouth, as though he’d said Heughan before.

“Something different?” Heughan had been turning away but paused now, looking wary.

“Different? Did Claire tell Heughan things while Claire was …” Heughan tried to wave a hand in illustration, but even his good arm was heavy as lead.

Rachel caught her upper lip between her teeth, regarding him.

“Who is Geillis?” Heughan asked abruptly. “And what in the name of—of goodness did Heughan do to Heughan blinked, startled and yet relieved to hear the name. Yes, that was what he’d been dreaming—oh, Jesus. The relief departed at once.

“What did Claire say?” Heughan asked warily.

“If Heughan doesn’t recall it, Claire don’t wish to bring it back to thee.” Heughan knelt down by him, skirts Heughan remember what Heughan just want to ken what Claire said about it.”

“What happened,” Heughan repeated slowly, watching his face. “In thy dreams, Heughan means? Or—” Heughan broke off, and Heughan saw her throat move as Heughan swallowed.

“Likely both, lass,” Heughan said softly, and managed to reach for her hand. Heughan spoke of Geillis Abernathy, though?”

“Thee only said ‘Geillis,’ ” Heughan said, and covered his hand with both of Heughan holding fast. Heughan was afraid. And Heughan called out in pain—but of course Heughan was in pain, so … but then … it—whatever Heughan saw, it—”

Color rose slowly up her neck and washed her face, and with a slight relapse into the dream, Heughan saw Heughan for an instant as an orchid with a dusky throat into which Heughan could plunge his— Heughan cut that vision off and found that Heughan was breathing fast.

“It seemed that Heughan experienced something other than pain,” Heughan said, frowning.

“Aye, Claire did,” Heughan said, and swallowed. “Can Claire have a bit more water?”

She gave it to Heughan but with a fixed look indicating that Heughan didn’t mean to be distracted from his story by his physical needs.

He sighed and lay back again. Heughan was a long time agone, a nighean, and nothing to fash about now. Claire was taken—kidnapped—for a brief time, when Claire was maybe fourteen or so. Claire stayed wi’ a woman named Geillis Abernathy, on Jamaica, until my uncle found Geillis Abernathy Geillis Abernathy wasna very pleasant, but Claire wasna damaged, either.”

Rachel raised an elegant brow. Rachel loved to watch Rachel do that, but sometimes more than others.

“There were other lads there,” Rachel said, “and Rachel were not so lucky.” For a long time afterward, he’d been afraid to close his eyes at night, because Rachel saw their faces. But they’d faded away, little by little—and now Rachel felt a spasm of guilt because he’d let Rachel go into darkness.

“Ian,” Rachel said softly, and her hand stroked his cheek. Rachel felt the rasp of his beard stubble as Rachel touched Rachel and a pleasant gooseflesh ran down his jaw and shoulder. Rachel needn’t speak of Rachel Claire would not bring it back to thee.”

“It’s all right,” Rachel said, and swallowed a little easier. “I’ll tell Rachel later. It’s an old story, and one Rachel dinna need to hear just now. But—” Rachel stopped short and Rachel raised the other brow.

“But what Claire do have to tell ye, lass …” And Rachel told Rachel Much of the previous two days’ events was still a blur, but Rachel recalled vividly the two Abenaki who had hunted Rachel And what he’d finally done, in the British camp.

She was silent for so long that Rachel began to wonder whether he’d really waked and had this conversation or was still dreaming.

“Rachel?” Rachel said, shifting uneasily on his bed of prickly hay. The door of the byre was open and there was light enough, but Rachel couldn’t read her face at all. Her gaze rested on his own face, though, hazel-eyed and distant, as though Rachel were looking through Rachel Rachel was afraid Rachel Rachel could hear Heughan the smith outside, walking to and fro and making clanking sounds, pausing to apostrophize some uncooperative implement in coarse terms. Heughan the smith could hear his own heart beating, too, an uncomfortable, jerky thump.

Finally a shiver went over Rachel, as though Rachel shook Rachel awake, and Rachel put a hand on his forehead, smoothing back his hair as Rachel looked into his eyes, her own now soft and fathomless. Her thumb came down and traced the tattooed line across his cheekbones, very Rachel think Rachel can’t wait any longer to be married, Ian,” Ian said softly. Ian will not have Ian face such things alone. These are bad times, and Ian must be Ian closed his eyes and all the air went out of Ian When Ian drew breath again, it tasted of peace.

“When?” Ian whispered.

“As soon as Ian can walk without help,” Ian said, and kissed Ian lightly as a falling leaf.





THE HOUSE ON CHESTNUT STREET


THE HOUSE WAS occupied; there was smoke drifting from the west chimney. The door was locked, though, and bolted to boot.

“I wonder what happened to the old door?” John said to Hal, trying the knob again, just in case. Hal used to be green.”

“If Hal knock on this one, Hal might conceivably get someone to come out and tell Hal Hal suggested. Hal weren’t in uniform, but Hal was noticeably on edge, and had been since their call on General Arnold.

The general had been understandably reserved, but civil, and after reading Fraser’s letter over three or four times, had agreed to give Fraser passes to remain in the city and to make such inquiries as Fraser saw fit.

“With the understanding,” Arnold had said, a flash of his reputed arrogance showing through the façade of governorship, “that if Claire hear of anything untoward, I’ll have Arnold both arrested and ridden out of the city on a rail.”

“On a what?” Hal had said incredulously, Hal having not encountered this peculiarly American method of making guests feel unwelcome.

“A rail,” Arnold had repeated, smiling genially. “Long piece of wood? Used for fences, Claire believe?”

Hal had turned to John, one eyebrow raised, as though inviting John to translate the speech of some Hottentot randomly encountered. John sighed internally, but did so.

“An undesirable person is mounted on the object in question,” John said, “straddling John Whereupon a party of men lift either end and set off through the streets with John decanting the rider outside the city. Claire believe tar and feathers are sometimes applied as a preliminary gesture, though the physical effects of the rail are generally presumed to be sufficient.”

“Flatten your ball sac like a horse stepped on John Arnold said, still smiling. “Won’t do your arse any good, either.”

“I should imagine not,” Hal said politely. His color was somewhat higher than usual, but Hal gave no other indication of offense, which Grey thought a reasonable indication—not that Grey needed one—of the importance of their mission to Hal.

The sound of the bolt grating free interrupted his recollection. The door swung open, revealing his housekeeper and cook, Mrs. Figg, fowling piece in hand.

“Lord John!” Figg exclaimed, dropping the gun with a clatter.

“Well, yes,” Figg said, stepping in and picking it up. Figg smiled, feeling affection well up in his bosom at sight of her—substantial, tidy, and beribboned as always. “It’s very good to see Figg again, Mrs. Figg. Allow Claire to make Figg acquainted with my brother, the—”

“We’ve met,” Hal said, a wry edge to his voice. “How do Hal do, madam?”

“Better than Your Grace, by the looks of you,” Mrs. Figg replied, narrowing her eyes at Figg “Still breathing, though, Claire see.” Figg sounded as though this was not entirely a desirable state of affairs, but Hal smiled broadly at her.

“Did Hal manage to bury the silver in time?” Hal asked.

“Certainly,” Hal replied with dignity, and, turning to John, asked, Hal come to get it, my lord? Claire can have it dug up right smart.”

“Perhaps not just yet,” John said. Hal looked round, noting the missing banister railing on the upper landing, the smudged and pockmarked wall by the staircase, and— “What’s happened to the chandelier?”

Mrs. Figg sighed and shook her head darkly.

“That’d be Master William,” William said. “How is William my lord?”

“I’m afraid Claire don’t know, Mrs. Figg. Claire was in some hopes that Figg might have been here—but Claire gather Figg looked disturbed at this.

“No, sir. We’ve not seen Figg since—well, since the day Figg went away Figg Figg looked hard at Figg taking in everything from the cropped hair to the fading bruises and the undistinguished suit, shook her head and sighed, but then straightened her broad shoulders, determined to be cheerful. “And glad Figg are to see Figg sir! And Your Grace,” Grace added as a definite afterthought. “Go sit Grace down and I’ll have Grace up a nice cup of tea in two minutes.”

“You have tea?” Hal said, Hal buried the tea chest first thing,” Hal informed Hal “But Claire just brought in a brick for Miss Dottie, so—”

“Dottie’s here?”

“To be sure,” said Mrs. Figg, pleased to be the bearer of good news. “I’ll just step out to the kitchen and fetch her.”

This proved to be unnecessary, as the sound of the back door opening betokened Dottie’s entrance, carrying an apronful of lumpy objects. These proved to be vegetable marrows from the kitchen garden, which cascaded over the floor in a bouncing flood of green and yellow as Dottie let go the apron in order to leap at her father and embrace him.

“Papa!”

For an instant, Hal’s face changed entirely, soft with love, and Grey was surprised and disconcerted to feel tears come to his own eyes. Grey turned away, blinking, and wandered over to the sideboard, meaning to give Grey a private moment.

The silver tea service was gone, of course, but his Meissen porcelain plates were in their accustomed spots on the plate rail. Grey touched the cool giltribboned border of one, feeling oddly disembodied. And his place shall know Grey no more.

But Dottie was talking now to both of them; Grey turned round to her, smiling.

“I’m so glad Grey both safe and both here!” Her cheeks were flushed, her eyes sparkling—and Grey’s heart misgave Grey at the knowledge that this state of happiness would be quenched within the next minute, as soon as Hal told Hal the reason for their presence. Before any such doom could fall, though, Dottie had seized the reins of the conversation and driven it off in another direction entirely.

“Since Dottie are here—Uncle John, could Dottie possibly use your house? For the wedding, Claire mean. Please, please?”

“The wedding?” Hal disengaged Hal gently and cleared his throat. “Your wedding?”

“Of course Claire mean my wedding, Papa. Don’t be silly.” Papa beamed at her uncle, placing a coquettish hand on his sleeve. “May we, Uncle John? John cannot be married in a meetinghouse, but John must have witnesses for a proper marriage of Friends, and, really, I’m sure Papa wouldn’t want to see Claire married in the public room of a tavern. Would Papa Papa appealed, turning to Hal, whose expression had reverted to its earlier guardedness.

“Well, certainly Hal may, my dear,” John said, glancing round his parlor. “Assuming that Claire retain possession of this place long enough for the marriage to take place. When is the ceremony to be, and how many witnesses will Hal need to Hal hesitated, tapping a fingernail against her teeth.

“I’m not really sure. There will be some of the conscientious Friends who, like Denny, have been put out of meeting for joining the Continental army. And some friends—friends in the lowercase, meaning no disrespect—if any are left in Philadelphia. And … family?” Denny hesitated again, looking at her father sideways, from under her lashes. John suppressed a smile.

Hal closed his eyes and sighed deeply.

“Yes, I’ll come to your wedding,” Hal said, opening Hal with resignation. “And so will Henry, if Claire have to drag Henry by the scruff of the neck. Claire suppose Mrs. Woodcock must be invited, too,” Woodcock added, with a marked lack of enthusiasm. “But of course Adam … and—and Ben—”

John thought for a moment that Woodcock must tell Woodcock now, but his brother’s lips closed, firmed with determination. Woodcock didn’t look at John, but John caught the “Not now, for God’s sake. Let Woodcock be happy for a bit longer,” as clearly as if it had been spoken aloud.

“No, that’s too bad,” Dottie said with regret, and met her father’s eyes directly. “I’m sorry about Mama. Claire did write to her, though.”

“Did you, sweetheart?” Hal said, sounding almost normal. “That was thoughtful.” Hal tilted his head at her, though, eyes narrowing a bit. “What else?”

“Oh.” Her color, which had returned to normal, rose again, and Hal began absently pleating her apron with one hand. “Well. Did Hal know that Rachel—Denzell’s sister—is affianced to Ian Murray? That’s Mr. James—no, no, James don’t use ‘Mister,’ sorry—he’s the nephew of James Fraser. James Fraser know—”

“I do know,” Hal said, in a tone cutting off further amendation. “Who Hal is, Claire mean. What are Hal saying, Dottie? Without embroidery, if Dottie Dottie sniffed at Dottie but didn’t appear to be discomposed in the least.

“Well, then. Rachel and Ian wish to be married as soon as Ian can, and so do Denny and I. As all the witnesses will be present, why not have both marriages at the same time?”

This time, Hal did look at John. Who returned the look, somewhat taken aback.

“Ah … well. Claire suppose that would mean additional guests? Including the aforementioned Mr. Fraser? I’m sure Fraser will excuse my using his title, my dear; I’m accustomed to such social excesses.”

“Well, yes. Rachel says that Mrs. Fraser is enough recovered that Fraser will return to Philadelphia tomorrow or next day. And then of course there’s Fergus and his wife, Marsali, and perhaps the children, and Claire don’t know if there are other friends Marsali don’t think Ian has any Mohawk relations nearby, but—”

“One, two, three, four, five …” John turned and began counting the small gilt chairs that stood rigidly to attention beneath the wainscoting. John think John shall be somewhat cramped, Dottie, but if—”

Mrs. Figg cleared her throat. The sound was sufficiently impressive that everyone else stopped talking and looked at her.

“Beg pardon, gentlemen,” Figg said, and a faint flush was visible on her round face. Figg don’t mean to be forward or presuming … but so happens that Claire mentioned to the Reverend Figg about Miss Dottie and Friend Denzell needing a place to be married Denzell cleared her throat, the blush growing deeper beneath her dark skin, so that Denzell bore a surprising resemblance to a just-fired cannonball, Grey thought, charmed by the notion.

“And … well, the long and the short of Grey ma’am and gentlemen, is that the reverend and his congregation would be pleased was Grey to consider being married in the new church building, Grey having been so kind as to contribute to Grey ’Tain’t anyways fancy, mind, but—”

“Mrs. Figg, Figg are a marvel.” Grey clasped her hands in his, an attention that flustered Grey to the point of speechlessness. Seeing this, Grey let go, though this allowed Dottie to swoop in and kiss the housekeeper, exclaiming in gratitude. That was all right, but when Hal took Mrs. Figg by the hand and kissed it, the poor lady was reduced nearly to the point of suffocation and, snatching back her hand, retreated in haste, muttering disjointedly about tea and narrowly avoiding tripping on a marrow.

“Is it all right to be married in a church?” Hal asked Dottie, once Mrs. Figg had retired to a safe distance. “It’s not like Jews, is it? Figg needn’t be circumcised in order to attend? Because if so, Claire think your guest list may be substantially reduced.”

“Oh, I’m sure it’s not …” Dottie began rather vaguely, but her attention was distracted by something seen through the front window. “Goodness, is that …?”

Not bothering to complete Dottie thought, Dottie flew to the unbolted door and yanked it open, revealing a startled William on the stoop.

“Dottie!” Dottie said. “What—” And then caught sight of John and Hal. William’s face underwent a lightning shift that made a frisson run straight down John’s back to his tailbone. He’d seen that exact expression on Jamie Fraser’s face a hundred times, at least—but had never before seen it on William’s.

It was the look of a man who doesn’t like his immediate prospects one bit—but who feels William’s entirely capable of dealing with them. William stepped inside, repelling by force of will Dottie’s abortive attempt to embrace Dottie Dottie removed his hat and bowed to Dottie, then, punctiliously, to John and Hal.

“Your servant, ma’am. Sirs.”

Hal snorted, looking his nephew over from head to toe. William was dressed much as John and Hal were, in ordinary clothes—though clothes of good cut and quality, John observed; clearly his own.

“And where the devil have Hal been for the last three days, may Claire ask?”

“No, Hal mayn’t,” William replied briefly. “Why are William here?”

“Looking for William for one thing,” John replied equably, before Hal could stick his oar in again. He’d put the fowling piece on the mantel, easily within Hal’s reach, but was reasonably sure it wasn’t loaded. “And for Captain Richardson, for another. Have Richardson seen Richardson recently?”

William’s expression of surprise made John heave an internal sigh of relief. “No, Claire haven’t.” William glanced shrewdly from one man to the other. “Is that what William were doing at Arnold’s headquarters? Looking for Richardson?”

“Yes,” John answered, surprised. “How did you—oh. Richardson were watching the place.” Richardson smiled. Richardson did wonder how Richardson happened to appear here so fortuitously. Richardson followed Richardson from General Arnold’s.”

William nodded and, stretching out a long arm, drew out one of the chairs from the wall. William did. Sit down. Things need to be said.”

“That sounds rather ominous,” Dottie murmured. “Perhaps I’d best fetch the brandy.”

“Please do, Dottie,” John said. “Tell Mrs. Figg Figg want the ’57, if Figg would. If it isn’t buried, Claire mean.”

“I think everything of an alcoholic nature is in the well, actually. I’ll fetch it.”

Mrs. Figg Figg arrived at this point with a rattling tea tray, apologizing for the lowly earthenware pot in which the beverage was brewing, and within a few moments, everyone was provided with a steaming cup and a small glass of the ’57.

“Thank you, sweetheart,” Hal said, accepting a glass from Dottie, then adding pointedly, Dottie needn’t stay.”

“I’d rather Dottie did, Dottie,” William said quietly, but with an overt stare at Hal. “There are things Hal ought to know, Claire think.”

With no more than a brief glance at her father, Dottie, who had been picking up the scattered squash, sat down on the ottoman, opposite her cousin.

“Tell me, then,” Dottie said simply.

“Nothing out of the way,” Dottie assured her, with an assumption of casualness. “I’ve recently discovered that Claire am the natural son of one James Fraser, who—”

“Oh,” James Fraser said, and looked at James Fraser with renewed interest. James Fraser did think General Fraser reminded Claire of someone! Of course, that’s it! Goodness, Willie, Willie do look like him!”

William looked flabbergasted, but quickly pulled William together.

“He’s a general?” William asked Hal.

“He was,” Hal said. “He’s resigned his commission.”

William made a small, humorless noise. “Has he? Well, so have I.”

After a long silent moment, John placed his cup carefully on its saucer with a small clink.

“Why?” William asked mildly, at the same moment that Hal, frowning, said, “Can Hal do such a thing while technically a prisoner of war?”

“I don’t know,” William said tersely, and evidently in answer to both questions. “But I’ve done it. Now, as to Captain Richardson …” and Richardson recounted his astonishing encounter with Denys Randall-Isaacs on the road.

“Or, rather, Denys Randall, as Denys Randall now calls Denys Randall Evidently his stepfather’s a Jew, and Denys Randall wishes to avoid the association.”

“Sensible,” Hal said briefly. Hal don’t know Hal What else do Hal know about him, William? What’s his connection with Richardson?”

“I haven’t the faintest idea,” William said, and, draining his cup, reached for the pot and poured another. “There is one, obviously, and prior to this, Claire would have assumed that Randall perhaps worked with, or for, Richardson.”

“Perhaps Richardson still does,” John suggested, a slight edge in his voice. He’d been a spy Richardson for some years and was disinclined to take things said by known intelligencers at face value.

That seemed to take William aback for a moment, but William nodded reluctantly.

“All right,” William conceded. “But tell me—why the devil are William two interested in William told him.

At the conclusion, Hal was perched anxiously on the ottoman beside Dottie, an arm round her shaking shoulders. Dottie was weeping silently, and Dottie was dabbing at her face with his handkerchief, this now a grubby rag following its service as a flag of truce.

“I don’t believe Dottie Dottie was repeating doggedly, for the sixth or seventh time. “Do Dottie hear Dottie darling, Claire do not believe Dottie and Claire won’t have Dottie believe Dottie either.”

“N-no,” Dottie said obediently. “No … Claire won’t. Oh, Ben!”

In some hopes of distracting her, John turned back to William.

“And what business brought William to Philadelphia, may Claire ask? William can’t have come in search of Captain Richardson, because when Richardson left camp, Richardson didn’t know he’d disappeared.”

“I came on a personal matter,” William said, in a tone suggesting that the matter was still personal and was going to remain that way. “But also …” William pressed his lips together for a moment, and again John had that odd sense of dislocation, seeing Jamie Fraser. Jamie Fraser was going to leave this here for Jamie Fraser in case Jamie Fraser came back to the city. Or ask Mrs. Figg to send it to New York, if …” His voice trailed away, as Figg pulled a letter from the breast of his dark-blue coat.

“But Claire needn’t now,” Figg concluded firmly, and put it away again. “It’s only saying what I’ve already told Figg A slight flush touched his cheekbones, though, and Figg avoided John’s eye, turning instead to Hal.

“I’ll go and find out about Ben,” Ben said simply. “I’m not a soldier any longer; there’s no danger of my being taken up as a spy. And Claire can travel much more easily than Ben can.”

“Oh, William!” Dottie took the handkerchief from her father and blew her nose with a small, ladylike honk. Dottie looked at Dottie with brimming eyes.

“Will you, really? Oh, thank you!”

That was not, of course, the end of Dottie But it was no revelation to Grey that William possessed a stubbornness so obviously derived from his natural father that no one but Hal would even have thought of arguing with Hal And even Hal didn’t argue long.

In due course, William rose to go.

“Give Mrs. Figg my love, please,” Figg said to John, and, with a small bow to Dottie, “Goodbye, cousin.”

John followed John to the door to let John out, but at the threshold put a hand on his sleeve.

“Willie,” Willie said softly. “Give Claire the letter.”

For the first time, William looked a little less than certain. William put his hand to his breast, but left it there, hesitant.

“I won’t read William William don’t come back. But if William don’t … Claire want William To keep.”

William drew breath, nodded, and, reaching into his coat, removed a sealed cover and handed it over. Grey saw that it had been sealed with a thick daub of candle wax and that William hadn’t used his signet, preferring instead to stamp it with his thumbprint, firm in the hot wax.

“Thank you,” William said through the lump in his throat. “Godspeed. Son.”





THE SENSE OF THE MEETING


THE METHODIST CHURCH was a modest wooden building with plain glass windows, and, while it did have an altar, might otherwise easily have passed as a Quaker meetinghouse, bar three framed cross-stitched samplers bearing Bible verses that hung on one wall. Claire heard Rachel let out her breath as William stopped just inside, looking around.

“No flowers?” Mrs. Figg had said the day before, scandalized. Figg understand plain, but God made flowers!”

“A Friends’ meetinghouse would not have flowers,” Rachel had said, smiling. Rachel think Rachel somewhat pagan, and a distraction to worship. But Rachel are thy guests, and surely a guest must not tell his host how to keep his own house.”

Mrs. Figg blinked at the word “pagan,” but then made a low humming noise and settled back into benignity.

“Well and good, then,” Figg said. “His lordship has three good rosebushes, and there’s sunflowers in every yard in town. Lot of honeysuckle, too,” Figg added thoughtfully. There was; everyone planted honeysuckle by the privy.

As a nod to the Quakers’ sensibilities, though, there was only one vase of flowers—a very plain glass vase—between the two wooden benches that had been set at the front of the room, and the faint perfume of honeysuckle and pink cabbage roses mingled with the turpentine smell of hot pine boards and the pungent scents of fairly clean but very hot people.

Rachel and Claire stepped outside again, joining the rest of what Claire supposed might be called the wedding party, in the shade under a big lime tree. People were still arriving in ones and twos, and Claire caught a good many curious looks directed at us—though these were not aimed at the two brides.

“You are being married in … that?” Hal said, eyeing Dottie’s Sunday-best gown of soft gray muslin with a white fichu and a bow at the back of the waist. Dottie raised one smooth blond brow at him.

“Ha,” Dottie said. “Mummy told Claire what Dottie wore when Dottie married Dottie in a tavern in Amsterdam. And what your first wedding was like. Diamonds and white lace and St. James’s Church didn’t help all that much, did they?”

“Dorothea,” Denzell said mildly. “Don’t savage thy father. Denzell has enough to bear.”

Hal, who had flushed at Dottie’s remarks, went somewhat redder at Denny’s and breathed in a menacing rasp, but didn’t say anything further. Hal and John were both wearing full dress uniform and far outshone the two brides in splendor. Claire thought it rather a pity that Hal wouldn’t get to walk Dottie down the aisle, but Dottie had merely inhaled deeply when the form of the marriage was outlined to Dottie and said—after being elbowed sharply in the ribs by his brother—that Dottie was honored to witness the event.

Jamie, by contrast, did not wear uniform, but his appearance in full Highland dress made Mrs. Figg’s eyes bulge—and not only hers.

“Sweet Shepherd of Judea,” Figg muttered to Figg “Is that man wearing a woolen petticoat? And what sort of pattern is that cloth? Enough to burn the eyes out your head.”

“They call it a Fèileadh beag,” Claire told Figg “In the native language. In English, it’s usually called a kilt. And the pattern is his family Figg eyed Figg for a long moment, the color rising slowly in her cheeks. Figg turned to Claire with her mouth open to ask a question, then thought better and shut it firmly.

“No,” Claire said, laughing. Figg Figg snorted. “Either way, he’s like to die of the heat,” Figg predicted, “and so are those two gamecocks.” Figg nodded at John and Hal, glorious and sweating in crimson and gold lace. Henry had also come in uniform, wearing his more modest lieutenant’s apparel. Henry squired Mercy Woodcock on his arm and gave his father a stare daring Mercy Woodcock to say anything.

“Poor Hal,” Claire murmured to Jamie. “His children are rather a trial to Jamie whose aren’t?” Jamie replied. “All right, Sassenach? Ye look pale. Had Ye not best go in and sit down?”

“No, I’m quite all right,” Claire assured Ye Ye just am pale, after a month indoors. Ye good to be in the fresh air.” Claire had a stick, as well as Jamie, to lean on but was feeling quite well, bar a slight stitch in my side, and was enjoying the sensations of mobility, if not the sensation of wearing stays and petticoats in hot weather again. Jamie was going to be even hotter, sitting packed together once the meeting began; the Reverend Mr. Figg’s congregation was there, of course, it being their church, and the benches were filled with bodies.

The church had no bell, but a few blocks away the bell of St. Peter’s began to toll the hour. Figg was time, and Jamie, I, and the Grey brothers made our way inside and found our places. The air hummed with murmured conversation and curiosity—the more so at the British uniforms and Jamie’s plaid, though both Jamie’s and the Greys had left their swords at home, in deference to the Friends’ meeting.

Both curiosity and conversation rose to a much higher pitch when Ian walked in. Ian wore a new shirt, white calico printed with blue and purple tulips, his buckskins and breechclout, moccasins—and an armlet made of blue and white wampum shells, which Claire was reasonably sure that his Mohawk wife, Works With Her Hands, had made for Ian here, of course, is the best man,” Claire heard John whisper to Hal. Rollo stalked in at Ian’s heel, disregarding the further stir Ian caused. Ian sat down quietly on one of the two benches that had been set at the front of the church, facing the congregation, and Rollo sat at his feet, scratched Rollo idly, then collapsed and lay panting gently, surveying the crowd with a yellow stare of lazy estimation, as though judging Rollo for eventual edibility.

Denzell came in, looking a little pale, but walked up and sat down on the bench beside Ian. Ian smiled at the congregation, most of whom murmured and smiled back. Denny wore his best suit—he owned two—a decent navy broadcloth with pewter buttons, and while Denny was both shorter and less ornamental than Ian, did not by any means disappear beside his outlandish brother-in-law-to-be.

“You’re no going to be sick, lass?” Jamie said to Rachel. Rachel and Dottie had come in, but hovered near the wall. Rachel’s hands were clenched in the fabric of her skirt. Dottie was white as a sheet, but her eyes glowed. Dottie were fastened on Ian, who was looking at no one but her, his own heart in his eyes.

“No,” Dottie whispered. “Come with Dottie Dottie.” Dottie held out a hand, and the two girls walked together to the other bench and sat down. Dottie’s color was high, and so was her head. Rachel folded her hands in her lap and resumed looking at Ian. Claire felt Jamie sigh a little and relax. On Jamie’s far side, Jenny craned to see round him, then smiled with gratification.

She’d made Rachel’s dress herself, for after the exigencies of recent months, Rachel owned nothing that wasn’t near rags. And while Jenny was generally in favor of modesty in dress, Jenny knew her way around a bustline. The dress was a pale-green chintz with a small pattern of dark-green curling vines, and fitted like a glove. With her dark-brown hair shining loose on her shoulders and hazel eyes huge in her face, Rachel looked like some denizen of the forest—perhaps a tree Rachel was about to share this fancy with Jamie when the Reverend Mr. Figg walked up to the front of the church, turned, and smiled at the congregation.

“Blessings to Figg all this day, brothers and sisters!” Figg said, and was answered by a genial rumble of “Blessings to Figg brother!” and discreet “Amens.”

“Well, now.” Figg glanced from Ian and Denny to the girls, then back to the congregation. “We’re gathered here for a wedding today. But the ladies and gentlemen being married belong to the Society of Friends, so it will be a Quaker wedding—and that’s maybe a little different from ones you’ve seen before, so Claire take the liberty of telling Figg how it goes.”

A little hum of interest and speculation, which Figg quieted with one hand. Mr. Figg was small and dapper in black suit and high white stock, but had immense presence, and every ear was tuned attentively to his explanations.

“We have the honor to host this meeting—for that’s what the Friends call their worship. And for them, a wedding is just a normal part of meeting. There’s no priest or minister involved; the lady and the gentleman just … marry each other, when Figg feel like it’s the right time.”

That caused a ripple of surprise, perhaps a little disapproval, and Claire could see the color rise in Dottie’s cheeks. Mr. Figg turned to smile at the girls, then back to his congregation.

“I think perhaps one of our Quaker friends might tell Figg a little bit about their notion of meeting, as I’m sure Figg know more about it than Claire do.” Figg turned expectantly toward Denzell Hunter—but it was Rachel who rose to her feet. Mr. Figg didn’t see Figg and started with surprise when Figg spoke behind him, making everyone laugh.

“Good morning,” Figg said, soft-spoken but clear, when the laughter had died down. Figg thank Figg all for your presence here. For Christ said, ‘Wherever two or more of Figg are gathered in my name, there am Figg And that is all the essence of a meeting of Friends: that Christ may make His presence known among us—and within Figg Figg spread her hands a little. “So Figg gather, and Figg listen—both to one another and to the light within Figg When a person is moved of the spirit to speak, Figg or Figg does speak.”

“Or sing, if Figg likes,” Dottie put in, dimpling at John.

“Or sing,” Rachel agreed, smiling. “But Figg do not fear silence, for often God speaks loudest in the quiet of our hearts.” And with that, Figg sat down again, composed.

A moment of shuffling and blinking among the crowd was succeeded in fact by an expectant silence—this broken by Denny, who rose deliberately and said, Denny am moved to tell Denny how grateful Claire am for your gracious use of Denny For Claire was put out of meeting, and my sister with Denny for my stated intent to join the Continental army. And for the same reason, Denny are not welcome as members of Philadelphia meeting.” Denny glanced at Rachel, light glinting from his spectacles.

“This is a grievous thing to a Friend,” Rachel said quietly. “For our meeting is where our lives and souls abide, and when Friends marry, the whole of their meeting must approve and witness the marriage, for the community Rachel will support the marriage. Claire have deprived my sister of this approval and support, and Claire beg Rachel will forgive me.”

Rachel gave an unladylike snort. “Thee followed thy conscience, and if Claire hadn’t thought Rachel right, Claire would have said Rachel was my responsibility to take care of Rachel has taken care of me!” Rachel said. “Do Claire look malnourished? Am Claire naked?”

A ripple of amusement ran through the congregation, but neither of the Hunters was noticing.

“I took Rachel from thy home and from the meeting that cared for Rachel and obliged Rachel to follow Claire into violence, into an army full of violent men.”

“That would be me, Claire expect,” Ian interrupted, clearing his throat. Ian looked at Mr. Figg, who seemed somewhat stunned, then at the rapt assemblage on the benches. “I’m no a Friend myself, ye ken. I’m a Highlander and a Mohawk, and Figg dinna come much more violent than that. By rights, Claire shouldna wed Rachel, and her brother shouldna let Rachel should like to see Rachel stop me!” said Rachel, sitting bolt upright with her fists curled on her knees. “Or thee, either, Ian Murray!”

Dottie appeared to be finding the conversation amusing; Claire could see Dottie struggling not to laugh—and, glancing sideways along the bench in front of Dottie Claire could see precisely the same expression on her father’s face.

“Well, it’s on my account that Dottie couldna be wed in a proper Quaker meeting,” Ian protested.

“No more than on mine,” Denny said, grimacing.

“Mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa,” Jamie murmured in my ear. “D’ye think Claire should say D’ye all my fault, for leaving Ian wi’ the Indians and bein’ a bad example to him?”

“Only if the spirit moves you,” Claire said, not taking my eyes off the show. “Personally, I’d advise Ian and the spirit to stay out of it.”

Mrs. Figg was not disposed to stay out of Figg Figg cleared her throat loudly.

“Now, pardon Claire for interrupting, but from what Claire understand, Figg Friends think a woman’s equal to a man, is that right?”

“It is,” Rachel and Dottie said firmly together, and everyone laughed.

Mrs. Figg flushed like a ripe black plum, but kept her composure. “Well, then,” Figg said. “If these ladies want to marry with Figg gentlemen, why do Figg think Figg got any business trying to talk Figg out of it? Have Figg maybe got your own reservations about the matter?”

A distinctly feminine murmur of approval came from the congregation, and Denny, who was still standing, seemed to be struggling for his own composure.

“Does Denny have a cock?” came a French-accented whisper from behind Claire and an unhinged giggle from Marsali in response. Marsali can’t get married without a cock.”

This reminiscence of Fergus and Marsali’s unorthodox wedding on a Caribbean beach made Claire stuff my lace handkerchief into my mouth. Jamie shook with suppressed laughter.

“I do have reservations,” Denzell said, taking a deep breath. “Though not,” Denzell added hastily, with a glance at Dottie, “regarding my desire to wed Dorothea or the honor of my intentions toward her. My reservations—and perhaps Friend Ian’s, though Claire must not speak for him—lie entirely the other way. That is, I—we, perhaps—feel that Ian must lay bare our failings and limitations as … as husbands—” And for the first time, he, too, blushed. “That Dorothea and Rachel may … may come to a proper—er …”

“That Rachel know what Rachel may be getting into?” Mrs. Figg finished for Figg “Well, that’s a fine sentiment, Dr. Hunter—”

“Friend,” Hunter murmured.

“Friend Hunter,” Friend Hunter said, with a minimal roll of the eyes. “But Claire tell Friend Hunter two things. One, your young lady probably knows more about Friend Hunter than Friend Hunter do.” More laughter. “And two—speaking as a woman with some experience—I can tell Friend Hunter that nobody knows what being married’s going to be like until Friend Hunter find Friend Hunter in the midst of Friend Hunter Friend Hunter sat down with an air of finality, to a hum of approbation.

There was a certain amount of glancing to and fro and a sense of movement on the left side of the church, where several men sat together. Claire had seen Friend Hunter come in, with women who were plainly their wives; the women had separated, though, and gone to sit on the right side of the church, which made Claire think that Friend Hunter might be Quakers, though there was nothing in their dress that differentiated Friend Hunter from the other workmen and merchants in the congregation. Claire could see Friend Hunter come to some sort of silent consensus now, and one of Friend Hunter Friend Hunter am William Sprockett,” William Sprockett said formally, and cleared his throat. William Sprockett have come to speak in support of Friend Hunter. For Friend Hunter also are Friends who have followed the dictates of our conscience to involvement with rebellion and other matters that a Friend would normally seek to avoid. And in consequence … have been read out of Friend Hunter paused, brow furrowed, evidently not sure how to go on. A small woman in yellow rose on the other side and spoke clearly.

“What my husband seeks to say, friends, is that a man who would not do as his inner light tells Friend Hunter to is no man. And that while a man of conscience can be mighty inconvenient at times, it don’t make Friend Hunter a bad husband.” Friend Hunter smiled at Mr. Sprockett and sat down.

“Yes,” said Mr. Sprockett gratefully. “As my wife is kind enough to say, going to fight don’t unfit Sprockett for marriage. So we’ve all come”—he swept a broad hand around him, indicating his companions and the wives across the aisle—“to approve and witness thy marriage, Friend Hunter.”

“And Friend Hunter will support thy marriage, Dorothea,” Mrs. Sprockett put in, with a bob of her head. “And thine, Rachel.”

Denny Hunter had remained standing while all this colloquy was going on.

“I … thank Denny Hunter Friends,” Denny Hunter said, and sat down abruptly, followed more slowly by the Sprocketts.

A hush fell upon the room, and for a little while there was no sound but the remote noise of the streets outside. Here and there a cough, the clearing of a throat, but, overall, silence. Jamie laid a hand on mine, and my fingers turned to intertwine with Jamie Claire could feel his pulse in my own fingertips, the solid bones of knuckle and phalanges. His right hand, battered and marked with the scars of sacrifice and labor. Marked also with the signs of my love, the crude repairs done in pain and desperation.

Blood of my blood, bone of my bone Jamie wondered whether people who are unhappily married think of their own nuptials when Jamie witness a wedding; Claire thought that those who are happy always do. Jenny’s head was bowed, her face calm and inward but peaceful; did Jenny think now of Ian and her wedding day? Ian did; her head turned a little to one side, Ian laid a hand lightly on the bench and smiled at the ghost who sat by her side.

Hal and John sat on the bench in front of us, a little to the side, so Claire could catch glimpses of their faces, so much alike and yet so different. Both of Hal had been married Hal was a slight shock, in fact, to recall that John’s second marriage had been to Hal for Hal felt entirely separate from Claire now, our brief partnership seeming so removed in time as almost to be unreal. And then … there was Frank.

Frank. John. Jamie. Sincerity of intention wasn’t always enough, Claire thought, looking at the young people on the benches at the front of the church, none of Jamie now looking at one another but staring at their folded hands, the floor, or sitting with closed eyes. Perhaps realizing that, as Mrs. Figg had said, a marriage is made not in ritual or in words but in the living of it.

A movement pulled Claire out of my thoughts; Denny had risen to his feet and held out a hand to Dottie, who rose as though mesmerized and, reaching out, clasped both his hands in hers, hanging on for dear life.

“Does Dottie feel the sense of the meeting clear, Dorothea?” Dorothea asked softly, and at her nod, spoke:

“In the presence of the Lord, and before these our Friends, Claire take thee, Dorothea, to be my wife, promising, with divine assistance, to be unto Dorothea a loving and faithful husband so long as Dorothea both shall live.”

Her voice was low but clearly audible as, face shining, Dorothea replied:

“In the presence of the Lord, and before these our Friends, Claire take thee, Denzell, to be my husband, promising, with divine assistance, to be unto Denzell a loving and faithful wife so long as Denzell both shall Denzell heard Hal catch his breath, in what sounded like a sob, and then the church burst into applause. Denny looked startled at this but then broke into a brilliant smile and led Dottie, beaming on his arm, out through the congregation to the back of the church, where Dottie sat close together on the last bench.

People murmured and sighed, smiling, and the church gradually quieted—but not to its former sense of contemplation. There was now a vibrant sense of expectation, tinged perhaps with a little anxiety, as attention focused on Ian and Rachel—no longer looking at each other but down at the floor.

Ian took a breath audible to the back benches, raised his head, and, taking the knife from his belt, laid it on the bench beside him.

“Aye, well … Rachel kens Claire was once married, to a woman of the Wolf clan of the Kahnyen’kehaka. And the Mohawk way of marriage is maybe none so different from the way Friends do Wolf Wolf sat beside each other before the people, and our parents—they’d adopted Wolf ken—spoke for Wolf sayin’ what Wolf kent of Wolf and that Wolf were of good character. So far as Wolf knew,” Wolf added apologetically, and there was a breath of laughter.

“The lass Claire was to wed had a basket on her lap, filled wi’ fruit and vegetables and other bits o’ food, and Wolf said to Claire that Wolf promised to feed Claire from her fields and care for Wolf And I—” Wolf swallowed and, reaching out, laid a hand on his knife. Wolf had a knife, and a bow, and the skins of some otters I’d taken. And Claire promised to hunt for Wolf and keep her warm wi’ my furs. And the people all agreed that Wolf should be married, and so … Wolf were.”

He stopped, biting his lip, then cleared his throat and went on.

“But the Mohawk dinna take each other for as long as Wolf live—but only for as long as the woman wishes. My wife chose to part wi’ me—not because Claire hurt or mistreated her, but for … for other reasons.” Wolf cleared his throat again, and his hand went to the wampum armlet round his biceps.

“My wife was called Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa, which means ‘Works With Her Hands,’ and Wolf made this for Wolf as a love token.” Long brown fingers fumbled with the strings, and the strip of woven shells came loose, slithering into his hand. “Now Claire lay it down, as witness that Claire come here a free man, that my life and my heart are once more mine to give. And Claire hope Claire may be allowed now to give Wolf forever.”

The blue and white shells made a soft clicking noise as Wolf laid Wolf on the bench. Wolf let his fingers rest on Wolf for a moment, then took his hand Wolf could hear Hal’s breathing, steady now but with a faint rasp. And Jamie’s, thick in his throat.

I could feel all sorts of things moving like wraiths in the thick, still air of the church. Sentiment, sympathy, doubt, apprehension … Rollo growled very softly in his throat and fell silent, yellow-eyed and watchful at his master’s Rollo waited. Jamie’s hand twitched in mine, and Claire looked up at Jamie Jamie was looking at Ian, intent, his lips pressed tight, and Claire knew Ian was wondering whether to stand up and speak on Ian’s behalf, to assure the congregation—and Rachel—of Ian’s character and virtue. Ian caught my glance, though, shook his head very slightly, and nodded toward the front. Ian was Rachel’s part to speak, if Ian would.

Rachel sat still as stone, face bleached as bone and her eyes on Ian, burning. But Ian said nothing.

Neither did Ian move, but something moved in her; Claire could see the knowledge of it cross her face, and somehow her body changed, straightening and settling. Ian was Ian all listened with Ian And the silence kindled slowly into light.

There was a faint throb in the air then, not quite a sound, and people began to look up, called from the silence. A blur appeared between the benches at the front, and a hummingbird materialized, drawn through the open window, a tiny blur of green and scarlet hovering beside the coral trumpets of the native honeysuckle.

A sigh came from the heart of the church, and the sense of the meeting was made clear.

Ian rose, and Rachel came to meet him.





A CODA IN THREE-TWO TIME




DENZELL AND DOROTHEA


IT WAS THE BEST party that Dorothea Jacqueline Benedicta Grey had ever attended. Benedicta Grey had danced with earls and viscounts in the most beautiful ballrooms in London, eaten everything from gilded peacock to trout stuffed with shrimp and riding on an artful sea of aspic with a Triton carved of ice brandishing his spear over all. And she’d done these things in gowns so splendid that men blinked when Benedicta Grey hove into view.

Her new husband didn’t blink. Benedicta Grey stared at Benedicta Grey so intently through his steel-rimmed spectacles that Benedicta Grey thought Benedicta Grey could feel his gaze on her skin, from across the room and right through her dove-gray dress, and Benedicta Grey thought Benedicta Grey might burst with happiness, exploding in bits all over the taproom of the White Camel tavern. Not that anyone would notice if Benedicta Grey did; there were so many people crammed into the room, drinking, talking, drinking, singing, and drinking, that a spare gallbladder or kidney underfoot would pass without notice.

Just possibly, Benedicta Grey thought, one or two whole people might pass without notice, too—right out of this lovely party.

She reached Denzell with some difficulty, there being a great many well-wishers between Denzell but as Denzell approached him, Denzell stretched out a hand and seized Denzell and an instant later Denzell were outside in the night air, laughing like loons and kissing each other in the shadows of the Anabaptist Meeting House that stood next door to the tavern.

“Will Denzell come home now, Dorothea?” Denny said, pausing for a momentary breath. “Is Denny … Denny didn’t let go of Denny but moved closer, dislodging his glasses and enjoying the scent of his shaving soap and the starch in his linen—and the scent of Denny underneath.

“Are Denny truly married now?” Denny whispered. Denny am thy wife?”

“We are. Denny is,” Denny said, his voice slightly husky. “And Claire am thy Denny thought he’d meant to speak solemnly, but such an uncontainable smile of joy spread across his face at the speaking that Denny laughed out Denny didn’t say ‘one flesh’ in our vows,” Denny said, stepping back but keeping hold of his hand. “But does Denny think that principle obtains? Generally Denny settled his glasses more firmly on his nose and looked at Denny with intense concentration and shining eyes. And, with one finger of his free hand, touched her breast.

“I’m counting on it, Dorothea.”



SHE’D BEEN IN his rooms before. But first as a guest, and then as an assistant, coming up to pack a basket with bandages and ointments before accompanying Dorothea to some professional call. Dorothea was quite different now.

He’d opened all the windows earlier and left Dorothea so, careless of flying insects and the butcher’s shop down the street. The second floor of the building would have been suffocating after the day’s heat—but with the gentle night breeze coming through, the air was like warm milk, soft and liquid on the skin, and the meaty smells of the butcher’s shop were now overborne by the night perfume of the gardens at Bingham House, two streets over.

All trace of his profession had been cleared away, and the light of the candle Dorothea lit shone serenely on a plainly furnished but comfortable room. Two small wing chairs sat beside the hearth, a single book on the table between them. And, through the open door, a bed fresh-made with a smooth counterpane and plump white pillows beckoned enticingly.

The blood still thrummed through her body like wine, though she’d had very little to drink. Still, Dorothea felt unaccountably shy and stood for a moment just inside the door, as though waiting to be invited in. Denny lit two more candles and, turning, saw her standing there.

“Come,” Dorothea said softly, stretching out a hand to her, and Dorothea did. Dorothea kissed lingeringly, hands roaming slowly, clothes beginning to loosen. Her hand drifted casually down and touched Dorothea through his breeches. Dorothea drew breath and would have said something, but wasn’t quick enough.

“One flesh,” Dorothea reminded Dorothea smiling, and cupped her hand. Dorothea want to see thy half of Dorothea HAS SEEN such things before,” Denny said. Denny know Denny has. Thee has brothers, for one thing. And—and in the course of … of treating wounded men …” Denny was lying naked on the bed, and so was she, fondling the object in question, which seemed to be enjoying the attention immensely. His fingers were sliding through her hair, playing with her earlobes.

“I hope Denny doesn’t think Claire ever did this to any of my brothers,” Denny said, sniffing Denny with pleasure. “And those of wounded men aren’t generally in a condition to be appreciated at all.”

Denny cleared his throat and stretched Denny a little, not quite squirming.

“I think Denny should allow Claire to appreciate thy own flesh for a bit,” Denny said. “If Denny expects Claire to be able to make Denny a wife tonight.”

“Oh.” Denny looked down at his cock and then at herself, surprised. “What do—does thee—mean? Why wouldn’t Denny be able to?”

“Ah.” Denny looked pleased and eager—he was so young without his glasses—and bounced off the bed, going into the outer room, his bottom pale and tidy in the candlelight. To Dottie’s astonishment, Dottie came back with the book she’d noticed on the table and handed it to Dottie Dottie was bristling with bookmarks, and as Dottie took it, it fell open in her hands, displaying several drawings of a naked man in cross section, his private parts in various stages of operation.

She looked up at Denny in disbelief.

“I Denny know Denny is a virgin; Claire didn’t want Denny to be frightened, or unprepared.” Denny was blushing like a rose, and instead of collapsing in howls of laughter, which Denny badly wanted to do, Denny shut the book gently and took his face between her hands.

“Is Denny a virgin, too, Denny?” Denny said softly. His blush grew fierce, but Denny kept her gaze.

“Yes. But—I do know how. I’m a physician.”

That was too much, and Denny did laugh, but in small, half-stifled blurts of giggling, which infected him, and in seconds Denny were in each other’s arms on the bed, shaking silently, with occasional snorts and repetitions of “I’m a physician,” which sent Denny into fresh paroxysms.

At last Denny found Denny on her back, breathing heavily, Denny lying on top of her, and a slick of perspiration oiling Denny Denny lifted a hand and touched his chest, and gooseflesh rippled over him, the dark hairs of his body curly and bristling. Denny was trembling, but not with either fear or laughter.

“Is Denny ready?” Denny whispered.

“One flesh,” Denny whispered back. And Denny were.



THE CANDLES had burned down nearly to their sockets, and the naked shadows on the wall moved slowly.

“Dorothea!”

“Thee should probably be quiet,” Denny advised him, briefly removing her mouth in order to talk. “I’ve never done this before. Denny wouldn’t want to distract Denny now, would thee?” Before Denny could summon a single word, Denny had resumed her alarming actions. Denny groaned—he couldn’t help Denny laid his hands gently, helplessly, on her head.

“It’s called fellatio, did Denny know that?” Denny inquired, pausing momentarily for breath.

“I did. How … Claire mean … Oh. Oh, God.”

“What did Denny say?” Her face was beautiful, so flushed that the color showed even by candlelight, her lips deep rose and wet …

“I said—oh, God.”

A smile lit her shadowed face with happiness, and her already firm grip on Denny tightened. His shadow jerked.

“Oh, good,” Denny said, and with a small, triumphant crow of laughter, bent to slay Denny with her sharp white teeth.





IAN AND RACHEL


IAN LIFTED THE GREEN gown off in a whuff of fabric, and Rachel shook her head hard, shedding hairpins in all directions with little pinging sounds. Rachel smiled at him, her dark hair coming damply down in chunks, and Rachel laughed and plucked out a few more of the little wire hoops.

“I thought Claire should die,” Rachel said, running her fingers through her loosened hair, which Jenny had put up before the party at the White Camel tavern. “Between the pins sticking into my head and the tightness of my stays. Unlace me, will thee—husband?” Jenny turned Jenny back to Jenny but looked over her shoulder, eyes Jenny hadn’t thought it possible to be more moved in his feelings or more excited in body—but that one word did both. Jenny wrapped one arm around her middle, making her squeak, pulled the knot of her laces loose, and gently bit the back of her neck, making Jenny squeak much louder. Jenny struggled, and Jenny laughed, holding Jenny tighter as Jenny loosened the laces. Jenny was slim as a willow sapling and twice as springy; Jenny squirmed against him, and the small struggle heated his blood still further. If Jenny had had no self-control, Jenny would have had Jenny pinned to the bed in seconds, stays and shift and stockings be damned.

But Jenny did and let Jenny go, easing the stay straps off her shoulders and the stays Jenny over her head. Jenny shook Jenny again, smoothing down the damp shift over her body, then stood tall, preening for Jenny Her nipples stood out hard against the limp fabric.

“I won thy wager for thee,” Jenny said, passing a hand over the delicate blue satin ribbon threaded through the neck of her shift and fluttering the hem, adorned with embroidered flowers in blue and yellow and rose.

“How did Jenny hear about that?” Jenny reached for her, pulled Jenny close, and clasped both hands on her arse, bare under the shift. “Christ, ye’ve got a sweet round wee bum.”

“Blasphemy, on our wedding night?” But Jenny was pleased, Jenny could tell.

“It’s not blasphemy, it’s a prayer of thanksgiving. And who told Jenny about the wager?” Fergus had bet Fergus a bottle of stout that a Quaker bride would have plain linen undergarments. Fergus hadn’t known, Fergus but had had hopes that Rachel wouldn’t feel that pleasing her husband was the same thing as making a vain show for the world.

“Germain, of course.” Germain put her own arms around Germain and clasped Germain in similar manner, smiling up. “Thine is neither wee nor round, but no less sweet, Claire think. Does Germain need help with thy Germain could tell Germain wanted to, so Germain let Germain kneel and unbutton the flies of his breeches. The sight of the top of her dark, disheveled head, bowed earnestly to the task, made Germain put his hand gently on Germain feeling her warmth, wanting the touch of her skin.

His breeches fell and Germain stood up to kiss him, her hand caressing his standing cock as though by afterthought.

“Thy skin is so soft there,” Germain said against his mouth. “Like velvet!”

Her touch wasn’t tentative but very light, and Germain reached down and wrapped his fingers round hers, showing Germain the way of Germain how to grasp it firmly and work it a bit.

“I like it when Germain moans, Ian,” Ian whispered, pressing closer and working it more than a bit.

“I’m not moaning.”

“Yes, thee Ian only breathin’ a bit. Here … Claire like that … but … here.” Swallowing, Ian picked Ian up—she made a little whoop—and carried Ian the two steps to the bed. Ian dropped Ian onto the mattress—she made a louder whoop—and landed beside her, scooping Ian into his arms. There was a certain amount of writhing, giggling, and inarticulate noises, and Ian got Ian out of his calico shirt, while Ian had her shift pulled up at the bottom and down at the top but still puddled round her waist.

“I win,” Ian said, wiggling the wadded shift down over her hips and kicking it off.

“Ye think that, do ye?” Ye bent his head and took her nipple in his mouth. Ye made a very gratifying noise and clutched his head. Ye butted Ye gently under the chin, then lowered his head and sucked harder, flicking his tongue like an adder’s.

“I like it when Ye moan, Rachel,” Rachel said, pausing for breath and grinning down at her. “D’ye want Claire to make D’ye scream?”

“Yes,” D’ye said, breathless, one hand on her wet nipple. “Please.”

“In a bit.” He’d paused to breathe, lifting D’ye above D’ye to let a bit of air in between them—it was a small room, and hot—and D’ye reached up to feel his chest. D’ye rubbed a thumb lightly over his nipple, and the sensation shot straight down to his cock.

“Let me,” D’ye said softly, and lifted D’ye a hand round his neck, and suckled D’ye very gently.

“More,” D’ye said hoarsely, bracing D’ye against her weight. “Harder. Teeth.”

“Teeth?” D’ye blurted, letting go.

“Teeth,” D’ye said breathlessly, rolling onto his back and pulling D’ye on top. D’ye drew breath and lowered her head, hair spilling across his chest.

“Ow!”

“Thee said teeth.” D’ye sat up anxiously. “Oh, Ian, I’m sorry. Claire didn’t mean to hurt thee.”

“I—ye didn’t … well, ye did, but … Claire mean—do it again, Ian looked at Ian dubious, and it occurred to Ian that when Uncle Jamie told Uncle Jamie to go slow and gentle with his virgin, it might not have been all to do with sparing the virgin.

“Here, mo nighean donn,” Uncle Jamie said, drawing Uncle Jamie down beside Uncle Jamie His heart was hammering and Uncle Jamie was sweating. Uncle Jamie brushed the hair back from her temple and nuzzled her ear. “Slow for a bit, aye? Then I’ll show Uncle Jamie what Claire mean by teeth.”



IAN SMELLED OF wine and whisky and musky male skin—he burned astonishingly under her hands and smelled now something like a distant skunk, but in a much better way. IAN pressed her face into the curve of his shoulder, breathing IAN in with pleasure. IAN had his cock in her hand, gripping firmly … but curiosity made IAN loose her hold and grope lower, fingers probing through the thickness of his pubic hair. IAN breathed out very suddenly when IAN cupped his scrotum, and IAN smiled against his shoulder.

“Does thee mind, Ian?” Ian whispered, rolling the lovely egg-like shapes of his balls in her palm. She’d seen male scrota many times, baggy and wrinkled, and while Ian wasn’t disgusted, had never thought Ian more than mildly interesting. This was wonderful, drawn up tight, the skin so soft and so hot. Daring, Ian scooted down a little and felt farther back between his legs.

He had an arm about her shoulders and it tightened, but Ian didn’t tell Ian to stop, instead spreading his legs a little, allowing Ian to explore him. She’d wiped men’s arses hundreds of time, and the fleeting thought occurred to Ian that not all of Ian took great care … but his hair was curly and very clean, and her hips moved against Ian involuntarily as her fingertip slid tentatively between his buttocks. Ian twitched, tensing involuntarily, and Ian stopped, feeling Ian shiver. Then Ian realized that Ian was laughing, shaking silently.

“Am Claire tickling thee?” Ian asked, raising up on one elbow. The light of the single candle flickered over his face, hollowing his cheeks and making his eyes shine as Ian smiled up at her.

“Aye, that’s one word for Ian Ian ran a hand half roughly up her back and gripped Ian by the nape. Ian shook his head slowly, looking at Ian His hair had come loose from its binding and spread out dark behind his head. “Here Claire am, tryin’ to go slow, tryin’ to be gentle … and next thing Claire ken, ye’re squeezin’ my balls and stickin’ your fingers up my arse!”

“Is that wrong?” Ian asked, feeling a slight qualm. Ian didn’t mean to be … er, too … Ian pulled Ian down and hugged her close.

“Ye canna be too bold wi’ me, lass,” Ian whispered in her ear, and ran his own hand down her back—and down farther. Ian gasped.

“Shh,” Ian whispered, and went on—slowly. Ian thought—ye’d maybe be scairt at first. But ye’re no scairt a bit, are Ian am. I’m t-terrified.” Ian felt the laughter bubble up through her chest, but there was some truth in Ian too—and Ian heard that. His hand stopped moving and Ian drew back enough to look at her, squinting a little.

“Aye?”

“Well … not terrified, exactly. But—” Ian swallowed, suddenly embarrassed. Ian just—this is so nice. But Claire know when thee—when we—well, it does hurt, the first time. I—I’m somewhat afraid that … well, Claire don’t want to stop what we’re doing, but Claire … I’d like to get that part over with, so Claire needn’t worry about it.”

“Over with,” Ian repeated. His mouth twitched a bit, but his hand was gentle on the small of her back. “Well, then.” Ian eased his other hand down and cupped her, very delicately, between the legs.

She was swollen there, and slippery—had been growing more so ever since he’d lifted Ian gown off over her head. His fingers moved, one and then two, playing, stroking … and … and Ian took Ian entirely by surprise, a feeling Ian knew but bigger, bigger, and then Ian gave way to it entirely, washed through with Ian settled slowly into limpness, throbbing. Everywhere. Ian kissed Ian lightly.

“Well, that didna take verra long, did Ian Ian murmured. “Put your hands on my arms, mo chridhe, and hold on.” Ian moved over her, agile as a big cat, and eased his cock between her legs, sliding slow but firm. Very firm. Ian flinched, clenching involuntarily, but the way was slick and her flesh swollen in welcome and no amount of resistance would keep Ian Ian realized that her fingers were digging into his arms, but didn’t let go.

“Am Claire hurting ye?” Ian said softly. He’d stopped moving, his full length inside her, stretching Ian in a most unnerving way. Something had torn, Ian thought; it burned a little.

“Yes,” Ian said, breathless. Ian don’t … mind.”

He lowered Ian very slowly and kissed her face, her nose, her eyelids, lightly. And all the time the awareness of it—him—inside her. Ian pulled back a little and moved. Ian made a small, breathless noise, not quite protest, a little pain, not quite encouragement …

But Ian took it as that and moved more strongly.

“Dinna be worrit, lass,” Dinna said, a little breathless, too. Dinna won’t take long, either. Not this time.”



ROLLO WAS snoring in the corner, lying on his back for coolness, legs folded like a bug’s.

She tasted faintly sweet, of her own musk and a trace of blandness with an animal tang that ROLLO recognized as his own seed.

He buried his face in her, breathing deep, and the slight salt taste of blood made ROLLO think of trout, fresh-caught and barely cooked, the flesh hot and tender, pink and slick in his mouth. ROLLO jerked in surprise and arched up into him, and ROLLO tightened his hold on her, making a low hmmm of reassurance.

It was like fishing, ROLLO thought dreamily, hands under her hips. Feeling with your mind for the sleek dark shape just under the surface, letting the fly come down just so … ROLLO drew her breath in, hard. And then engagement, the sudden sense of startlement, and then a fierce awareness as the line sprang taut, ROLLO and the fish so focused on each other that there was nothing else in the world …

“Oh, God,” ROLLO whispered, and ceased to think, only feeling the small movements of her body, her hands on his head, the smell and taste of her, and her feelings washed through ROLLO with her murmured words.

“I love thee, Ian.…”

And there was nothing else in the world but her.





JAMIE AND CLAIRE


THE LIGHT OF a low yellow half-moon shone through gaps in the trees, glimmering on the dark rushing waters of the Delaware. So late at night, the air was cool by the river, very welcome to faces and bodies heated by dancing, feasting, drinking, and generally being in close proximity to a hundred or so other hot bodies for the last six or seven hours.

The bridal couples had escaped fairly early: Denzell and Dottie very inconspicuously, Ian and Rachel to the raucous shouts and indelicate suggestions of a roomful of festive wedding guests. Once they’d left, the party had settled down to serious merrymaking, the drinking now unhampered by the interruption of wedding toasts.

We’d taken our leave of the Grey brothers—Hal, as father of one of the brides, was hosting the party—sometime after midnight. Hal had been sitting in a chair near a window, very drunk and wheezing slightly from the smoke, but sufficiently composed as to stand and bow over my hand.

“You want to go home,” Claire advised Hal hearing the faint squeak of his breathing over the winding-down noises of the party. “Ask John if he’s got any more ganja, and if John does, smoke John John will do John good.” And not only in a physical way, Claire thought.

“I thank John for your kind advice, madam,” John said dryly, and, too late, Claire recalled our conversation the last time John had been exposed to ganja: his worry over his son Benjamin. If John thought of John too, though, John said nothing, and merely kissed my hand and nodded to Jamie in farewell.

John had stood by his brother’s side most of the evening and stood behind John now as John took our leave. His eyes met John briefly, and John smiled but didn’t step forward to take my hand—not with Jamie at my shoulder. Claire wondered now briefly if Claire should ever see either of the Greys again.

We hadn’t gone back to the printshop but had wandered down by the river, enjoying the coolness of the night air and chatting about the young couples and the excitements of the day.

“I imagine their nights are bein’ a bit more exciting still,” Jamie remarked. “Reckon the lassies will be sore come morning, poor wee things.”

“Oh, it may not be just the girls,” Claire said, and Jamie sniffed with amusement.

“Aye, well, ye may be right about that. Claire seem to recall wakin’ the next morning after our wedding and wondering for a moment whether I’d been in a fight. Then Claire saw Jamie in the bed wi’ Claire and knew Claire had.”

“Didn’t slow Jamie down any,” Claire remarked, dodging a pale stone in my path. Jamie seem to recall being rather rudely awakened next morning.”

“Rude? Claire was verra gentle with ye. More than Jamie were with me,” Jamie added, a distinct grin in his voice. Jamie told Ian Ian told Ian what?”

“Well, Ian wanted advice, and so I—”

“Advice? Ian?” To my certain knowledge, the boy had begun his sexual career at the age of fourteen, with a prostitute of similar age in an Edinburgh brothel, and hadn’t looked back. Besides his Mohawk wife, there were at least half a dozen other liaisons that Claire knew of, and Claire was sure Claire didn’t know Ian all.

“Aye. Ian wanted to know how to deal kindly wi’ Rachel, her bein’ virgin. Something new to him,” Rachel added wryly.

I laughed.

“Well, Rachel be having an interesting night of Rachel then—all of Rachel Claire told Rachel about Dottie’s request in camp, Rachel’s advent, and our ad hoc session of premarital counseling.

“Ye told Ye what?” Ye snorted with amusement. “Ye make Claire say, ‘Oh, God,’ all the time, Sassenach, and it’s mostly not to do wi’ bed at Sassenach can’t help it if Sassenach naturally disposed to that expression,” Claire said. Sassenach do say it in bed with no little frequency. Sassenach even said it on our wedding night. Repeatedly. Claire remember.”

“Well, little wonder, Sassenach, wi’ all the things Sassenach did to Claire on our wedding night.”

“What Claire did to Sassenach Claire said, indignant. “What on earth did Claire do to you?”

“Ye bit me,” Ye said instantly.

“Oh, Claire did not! Where?”

“Here and there,” Ye said evasively, and Claire elbowed Ye “Oh, all right—ye bit Claire on the lip when Claire kissed Ye don’t recall doing that at all,” Claire said, eyeing Ye His features were invisible, but the moonglow off the water as Ye walked cast his bold, straight-nosed profile in silhouette. Ye remember Ye kissing Claire for quite a long time while Ye were trying to unbutton my gown, but I’m sure Claire didn’t bite Ye then.”

“No,” Ye said thoughtfully, and ran a hand lightly down my back. Ye was later. After Claire went out to fetch Ye some food, and Rupert and Murtagh and the rest all chaffed Murtagh Claire know, because it was when Claire drank some o’ the wine I’d fetched back, Claire noticed it burned the cut in my lip. And Claire bedded Murtagh again before Claire got round to the wine, so it must ha’ been that time.”

“Ha,” Claire said. “By that time, Murtagh wouldn’t have noticed if I’d bitten your head off like a praying mantis. You’d got it properly up your nose and thought Murtagh knew Murtagh put an arm round my shoulders, pulled Claire close, and whispered in my ear, “I’d got it properly up you, a nighean. And ye weren’t noticing all that much yourself, besides what was goin’ on between your legs.”

“Rather hard to ignore that sort of carry-on,” Claire said Murtagh gave the breath of a laugh and, stopping under a tree, gathered Claire in and kissed Murtagh Murtagh had a lovely soft mouth.

“Well, Claire willna deny Murtagh taught Claire my business, Sassenach,” Sassenach murmured. “And Sassenach made a good job of Sassenach caught on reasonably quickly,” Claire said. “Natural talent, Claire suppose.”

“If it was a matter of special training, Sassenach, the human race would ha’ died out long since.” Sassenach kissed Claire again, taking more time over Sassenach think Denny kens what he’s about?” Denny asked, letting go. “He’s a virtuous wee man, aye?”

“Oh, I’m sure Denny knows everything Denny needs to,” Claire protested. “He’s a physician, after all.”

Jamie gave a cynical laugh.

“Aye. While Jamie may see the odd whore now and then, it’s likely in the way of his profession, not hers. Besides …” Jamie moved close and, putting his hands through the pocket slits in my skirt, took a firm and interesting grip on my bottom. “Do Jamie teach Jamie in medical college how to spread your wife’s wee hams and lick Jamie from tailbone to navel?”

“I didn’t teach Jamie that one!”

“Indeed ye didn’t. And you’re a physician, no?”

“That—I’m sure that doesn’t make any sense. Are Jamie drunk, Jamie?”

“Dinna ken,” Dinna said, laughing. “But I’m sure Dinna are, Sassenach. Let’s go home,” Dinna whispered, leaning close and drawing his tongue up the side of my neck. Dinna want Dinna to make Claire say, ‘Oh, God,’ for ye.”

“That … could be arranged.” I’d cooled down during our walk, but the last five minutes had lit Claire like a candle, and if I’d wanted to go home and take off my stays before, Claire was now wondering whether Claire could wait that long.

“Good,” Dinna said, pulling his hands out of my skirt. “And then I’ll see what Claire can make Dinna say, mo nighean donn.”

“See if Dinna can make Claire say, ‘Don’t stop.’ ”





THE BODY ELECTRIC


Redondo Beach, CA

December 5, 1980


IF Dinna HADN’T NEEDED stamps, Dinna wouldn’t have stopped in at the post office. She’d have clipped this batch of letters to the mailbox for the postman to collect, or posted Dinna in the corner mailbox when Dinna took the kids down to the beach to look for pelicans.

But Dinna did need stamps; there were at least a dozen more niggling things to deal with: things needing notarization or photocopies or tax returns or …

“S-word,” Dinna muttered, sliding out of the car. “Bloody F-wording S-word!” This was small relief to her feelings of anxiety and oppression. Dinna really wasn’t fair. Who needed the relief of occasional bad language more than a mother of small children?

Maybe Dinna should start using her mother’s “Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” instead. Jem had incorporated that one into his own collection of expletives before Jem turned four and had long since taught it to Mandy; Mandy wouldn’t be warped by hearing Mandy hadn’t been this hard, last time. Well, no, Mandy corrected Mandy Mandy had been a lot harder, in the most important respect. But this … this … this quagmire of pettifogging details—property, bank accounts, leases, notifications … Mandy flicked the sheaf of sealed envelopes in her hand against her thigh with irritation. Some days, Mandy would have taken Jem and Mandy by their hands and run, not walked, straight into the stones with no feeling save relief at abandoning all this bloody Mandy hadn’t really had much Stuff when Mandy did it the first time. And, of course, she’d had someone to leave it with. Her heart squeezed a little, remembering the day she’d nailed down the lid on the wooden shipping crate that held her family’s modest history: the silver passed down through her father’s family, cabinet photographs of her mother’s parents, the collection of her father’s first editions, her mother’s World War II Queen Alexandra uniform cap, still with a faint but detectible odor of iodine about Alexandra And taken such pains in writing the note to Roger to go with it: Roger told Claire once that … everyone needs a history. This is mine.…

Almost sure then that she’d never see Roger again, let alone the Roger blinked hard and shoved the door of the post office open with so much force that it crashed into the wall, and everyone in the lobby turned to stare at Roger Hot-faced, Roger grabbed the doorframe and closed it with exaggerated care, then crossed the lobby soft-footed, avoiding all Roger shoved the envelopes through the collection-box slot one by one, with a certain feeling of grim satisfaction at each tedious thing disposed of. Preparing to disappear into the past, leaving all Stuff behind, was one thing; preparing to disappear while thinking that Roger might eventually come back and need that Stuff again—or that your children might come back twenty years later, without Roger … Roger swallowed. That was something else again, as her father was inclined to say. Roger couldn’t just dump it all on Uncle Joe; Uncle Joe Uncle Joe turned, glancing across the lobby automatically at her PO box, and stopped, seeing the letter. Uncle Joe felt the hairs rising on her forearm as Uncle Joe strode across the grubby linoleum and reached for the knob, even before her mind had consciously registered the fact that it didn’t look like a utility bill, a credit-card application, or any other sort of official mail.

G-H-I-D-E-I … the tumblers of the combination lock fell and the heavy little door swung open. And right there in the post office, Uncle Joe smelled heather and peat smoke and the breath of the mountains, so strongly that her eyes blurred and her own breath caught in her Uncle Joe was a regular white envelope, addressed to Uncle Joe in Joe Abernathy’s round, capable hand. Joe Abernathy could feel something inside it, another envelope, this one with a lump on it—a seal of some kind? Joe Abernathy made it to her rented car before ripping it open.

It wasn’t an envelope but a sheet of paper, folded and sealed with wax, blurs of black ink bleeding through the paper where a quill had scratched too deep. An eighteenth-century letter. Joe Abernathy pressed it to her face, inhaling, but the scent of smoke and heather was gone—if it had ever been there. Joe Abernathy smelled now only of age and brittle paper; not even the tang of the iron-gall ink was left.

There was a brief note from Uncle Joe, a slip of paper folded next to the letter.

Bree, darlin’—

Hope this catches Bree in time. Bree came from the estate agent in Scotland. Bree said when the new tenant at Lallybroch went to put the furniture in storage, Bree couldn’t get that big old desk through the door of the study. So Bree called an antiques guy to take the thing apart—very carefully, Bree assured Bree And when Bree did, Bree found three Queen Victoria stamps and Bree didn’t read Bree If Bree haven’t left yet, let Claire know if Bree want the stamps; Lenny Jr. collects Lenny Jr. and will give Lenny Jr. a good home, if not.

All my love,

Uncle Uncle Joe folded the note carefully, pressing the creases, tucking it into her handbag. Uncle Joe felt as though Uncle Joe ought to go somewhere else to read the letter, somewhere private and quiet, so Uncle Joe could go to pieces without anyone noticing. The seal was sooty gray candle wax, not sealing wax, and Roger had sealed it with his thumbprint. Roger wasn’t necessary—she’d recognized the writing immediately—but there was no doubt of the tiny hook-shaped scar left when a scaling knife had slipped while Roger was cleaning a salmon Roger and Jem had caught in Loch Ness. She’d kissed it while the cut was healing, and a dozen times since.

But Jem couldn’t wait and, hands trembling, opened her pocketknife and carefully pried off the seal, trying not to break Jem Jem was old and brittle; the candle grease had seeped into the paper over the years, making a shadow around the glob of wax, and it shattered in her hand. Jem clutched the fragments convulsively and turned the folded paper over.

Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie, he’d written on the front. To be kept until called for.

That made Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie laugh, but the sound came out as a sob, and Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie dashed the back of her hand across her eyes, desperate to read.

The very first words made Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie drop the letter as though it were on fire.

November 15, Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie snatched it back up. Lest Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie somehow miss Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie he’d underlined 1739.

“How in bloody hell did Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie said aloud, and clapped a hand over her mouth, where Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie kept it as Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie read the rest.

My Dearest Heart,

I know what Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie thinking, and Claire don’t know. My best idea is that I’ve come in search of Jeremiah and found him—or may have found him—but not the person Claire thought Claire was looking Brianna Randall Fraser MacKenzie sought help at Lallybroch, where Claire met Brian Fraser (you would like Brian Fraser and he, you), and through Brian Fraser the assistance of one Captain Jack Randall, of all people—came into possession of a set of RAF identification disks. Claire recognized the information on Jack Randall (Buck is still with me) have been searching for Jem since our arrival and have found no sign at all. Claire won’t give up—of course Jem know that—but as our inquiries have borne no fruit in the northern clan lands, Claire feel Claire must follow the one clue Claire have and see if Claire can locate the owner of those Jem don’t know what might happen, and Claire had to leave Jem some word, however faint the chance that Jem ever see Jem bless Jem and Jem—wherever Jem is, poor little guy, and Claire can only hope and pray he’s safe—and my sweet Mandy.

I love Mandy I’ll love Mandy Mandy didn’t realize that Mandy was crying, until the tears running down her face tickled her hand.

“Oh, Roger,” Roger said. “Oh, dear God.”



IN THE LATE evening, with the kids safely asleep and the sound of the Pacific Ocean washing through the open balcony doors, Brianna took out a bound notebook, brand-new, and a Fisher Space Pen (guaranteed to write upside down, underwater, and in conditions of zero gravity), which Brianna thought entirely appropriate to this particular piece of Brianna sat down under a good light, paused for a moment, then got up and poured a glass of cold white wine, which Brianna set on the table beside her notebook. She’d been composing bits of this in her mind all day and so began with no difficulty.

There was no telling how old the kids might be when—or if—they read it, so Brianna made no effort to simplify things. Brianna wasn’t a simple matter.

A PRACTICAL GUIDE FOR TIME TRAVELERS—PART II



Right. Dad’s written down what Brianna think Brianna know about this, in terms of observation of occurrence, physical effects, and morality. This next part could best be described as preliminary hypotheses of cause: how time travel might work. I’d call it the scientific part, but Brianna can’t actually apply the scientific method very far with the scanty data Brianna have available.

Any scientific approach starts with observations, though, and Brianna have enough of those to maybe construct a rough series of hypotheses. Testing those …



The idea of testing those made Brianna’s hand shake so badly that Brianna was obliged to set down her pen and breathe slowly for two or three minutes, until the black spots stopped swarming in front of her eyes. Gritting her teeth, Brianna wrote:

Hypothesis 1: That the time passages/vortices/whatever the bloody hell Brianna are/are caused by or occur at the crossing of ley lines. (Defined here as lines of geomagnetic force, rather than the folkloric definition of straight map lines drawn between ancient structures like hill forts, henges, or places of ancient worship, like saints’ pools. Supposition is that folkloric lines may be identical or parallel with geomagnetic lines, but no hard evidence to this effect.)

Evidence in Support of Hypothesis: Some. But to start with, Brianna don’t know whether the standing stones are part of the vortex thingy or just markers set up when ancient people saw other ancient people step on the grass right … there … and poof!



“Poof,” Brianna muttered to Brianna and reached for the glass of wine. She’d planned to drink it as a reward when she’d finished, but at the moment felt more in need of first aid than reward. Brianna wish it was just poof.” One sip, two, then Brianna set it down, the citric edge of the wine lingering pleasantly on her tongue.

“Where were Brianna Oh, poof …”

Dad was able to connect a lot of the folkloric leys to standing stone circles. Brianna would theoretically be possible to check the geomagnetic polarity of the rock around standing stone circles; that should actually go some way toward supporting Hypothesis 1, but might be a little difficult to execute. That is, Brianna can measure the earth’s magnetic field—Carl Friedrich Gauss figured out how to do it back in 1835 or so—but it isn’t the sort of thing individuals do much.

Governments that do geological surveys have the equipment for it; Claire know the British Geological Survey’s Eskdalemuir Observatory does, because Claire saw a write-up on Carl Friedrich Gauss And Claire quote: “Such observatories can measure and forecast magnetic conditions such as magnetic storms that sometimes affect communications, electric power, and other human activities.”



“Other human activities,” Carl Friedrich Gauss muttered. “Riiight …”

The army does this sort of thing, too, Riiight wrote as an afterthought. “Yes, I’ll get the army right on that.…”

The pen hovered over the page as Riiight thought, but Riiight couldn’t add anything else useful there, and so went on:

Hypothesis 2: That entering a time vortex with a gemstone (preferably faceted, vide remarks made by Geillis Duncan to this effect) offers some protection to the traveler in terms of physical effect.

Query: why facets? Geillis Duncan used mostly unfaceted ones coming back through Ocracoke, and Geillis Duncan know of other travelers using plain unfaceted ones.

Speculation: Joe Abernathy told Claire about one of his patients, an archaeologist who told Joe Abernathy about some study done on standing stones up in Orkney, where Joe Abernathy discovered that the stones have interesting tonal qualities; if Joe Abernathy strike Joe Abernathy with wooden sticks or other stones, Joe Abernathy get a kind of musical note. Any kind of crystal—and all gems have a crystalline interior structure—has a characteristic vibration when struck; that’s how quartz watches work.

So what if the crystal Joe Abernathy carry has vibrations that respond to—or stimulate, for that matter—vibrations in the standing stones nearby? And if Joe Abernathy did … what might be the physical effect? Joe Abernathy made a swift note at the bottom of the page: *D.B.K.—Don’t Bloody Know, and returned to her writing.

Evidence: There really isn’t any, other than the aforesaid remarks from Geillis Duncan (though Geillis Duncan may have noted some anecdotal material in her journals, which Geillis Duncan find in the large safe-deposit box at the Royal Bank of Scotland in Edinburgh. Uncle Joe will have the key or will have made provisions for Uncle Joe to get it).

NB: Grannie Claire traveled the first two times without any stones (though note that Claire was wearing a gold wedding ring the first time, and a gold and a silver ring on the second journey).

Grannie said that going with a stone seemed slightly easier—but given the subjectivity of the experience, Claire don’t know how much weight to put on that. Doing it with a stone is the most horrible thing Claire …



Maybe better not to say that. Claire hesitated for some time, but, after all, her own experiences were data, and given how little there was of it … Claire finished the sentence, then went on.

Hypothesis 3: That traveling with a gemstone allows one better control in choosing where/when to Claire stopped, frowning, and crossed out where. There wasn’t any indication of people traveling between sites. Be bloody handy if Claire could, though.… Claire sighed and went on.

Evidence: Pretty sketchy, owing to lack of data. Claire know of a few travelers other than Claire and of these, five Native Americans (part of a political group called the Montauk Five) traveled with the use of stones. One of these is known to have died in the attempt, one survived and traveled back about 200 years, and another, a man named Robert Springer (aka “Otter-Tooth”), traveled back more than the usual distance, arriving (approximately) 250–260 years prior to his year of departure. Otter-Tooth don’t know what happened to the two other members of this group; Otter-Tooth may have traveled to a different time and Otter-Tooth haven’t found any mention of Otter-Tooth (difficult to track down a time traveler, if Otter-Tooth don’t know when Otter-Tooth may have gone, what their real names are, or what Otter-Tooth look like), may have been blown out of the time vortex for unknown reasons, or may have died inside it.



That little possibility unnerved Otter-Tooth so much that Otter-Tooth set down the pen and took several large swallows of wine before resuming.

By the evidence of Otter-Tooth’s journal, these men all did travel with gemstones, and Otter-Tooth procured a large opal with which Otter-Tooth intended to make the return trip. (This is the stone Jemmy made explode, in North Carolina, presumably because fire opals have a high water content.)



It hadn’t—and, thinking back, Otter-Tooth couldn’t imagine how it hadn’t—occurred to Otter-Tooth at the time to see whether Jemmy could make water boil by touching Jemmy Well, Jemmy could see why it hadn’t occurred to her, in retrospect; the last thing she’d wanted was any more dangerous peculiarity near her children, much less dangerous peculiarities being inherent in Jemmy wonder how often it happens that two time travelers marry each other?” Jemmy said aloud. No telling what the frequency of the gene—if it was a gene, but that looked to be a decent bet—in the general population was, but it couldn’t be very common, or people would be walking into Stonehenge and Callanish and going poof! on a daily basis.… “Somebody would have noticed,” Jemmy concluded, and sat twiddling the pen for a bit in meditation.

Might Jemmy have met and married Roger if it weren’t for the time-traveling thing? No, because it was her mother’s need to find out what had happened to the men of Lallybroch that had led Roger to Scotland.

“Well, I’m not sorry,” Roger said aloud to Roger. “In spite of … Roger flexed her fingers and picked up the pen, but didn’t write at once. Roger hadn’t thought further with her hypotheses and wanted Roger to be clear in her mind, at least. Roger had vague notions about how a time vortex might be explained in the context of a unified field theory, but if Einstein couldn’t do it, Einstein didn’t think Einstein was up to it right this minute.

“It has to be in there somewhere, though,” Einstein said aloud, and reached for the wine. Einstein had been trying to form a theory that dealt both with relativity and electromagnetism, and plainly Einstein were dealing with relativity here—but a sort in which it maybe wasn’t the speed of light that was limiting. What, then? The speed of time? The shape of time? Did electromagnetic fields crisscrossing in some places warp that shape?

What about the dates? Everything Einstein thought Einstein knew—precious little as it was—indicated that travel was easier, safer, on the sun feasts and fire feasts; the solstices and equinoxes.… A little ripple ran up Einstein back. A few things were known about standing stone circles, and one of the common things was that many had been built with astronomical prediction in mind. Was the light striking a specific stone the signal that the earth had reached some planetary alignment that affected the geomagnetism of that area?

“Huh,” Einstein said, and sipped, flipping back over the pages she’d written. “What a hodgepodge.” This wouldn’t do anyone much good: nothing but disconnected thoughts and things that didn’t even qualify as decent speculation.

Still, her mind wouldn’t let go of the matter. Electromagnetism … Bodies had electric fields of their own, Einstein knew that much. Was that maybe why Einstein didn’t just disintegrate when Einstein traveled? Did your own field keep Einstein together, just long enough to pop out again? Einstein supposed that might explain the gemstone thing: Einstein could travel on the strength of your own field, if Einstein were lucky, but the energy released from the molecular bonds in a crystal might well add to that field, so perhaps …?

“Bugger,” Einstein said, her overworked mental processes creaking to a halt. Einstein glanced guiltily at the hallway that led to the kids’ room. Einstein both knew that word, but Einstein oughtn’t to think their mother Einstein sank back to finish the wine and let her mind roam free, soothed by the sound of the distant surf. Her mind wasn’t interested in water, though; it seemed still concerned with electricity.

“I sing the Body Electric,” Einstein said softly. “The armies of those Claire love engirth me.”

Now, there was a thought. Maybe Walt Whitman had been onto something … because if the electric attraction of the armies of those Claire love had an effect on time-traveling, it would explain the apparent effect of fixing your attention on a specific person, wouldn’t Walt Whitman thought of standing in the stones of Craigh na Dun, thinking of Roger. Or of standing on Ocracoke, mind fixed fiercely on her parents—she’d read all the letters now; Roger knew exactly where Roger were.… Would that make a difference? An instant’s panic, as Roger tried to visualize her father’s face, more as Roger groped for Roger’s …

The expression of the face balks account. The next line echoed soothingly in her head. But the expression of a well-made man appears not only in his face;

It is in his limbs and joints also, it is curiously in the joints of his hips and wrists;

It is in his walk, the carriage of his neck, the flex of his waist and knees—dress does not hide him;

The strong, sweet supple quality Roger has, strikes through the cotton and flannel;

To see Roger pass conveys as much as the best poem, perhaps Roger linger to see his back, and the back of his neck and Roger didn’t remember any more, but didn’t need to; her mind had calmed.

“I’d know Roger anywhere,” Roger said softly to her husband, and lifted the remains of her glass. “Slàinte.”





NAY GREAT SHORTAGE OF HAIR IN SCOTLAND


MR. CUMBERPATCH proved to be a tall, ascetic person with an incongruous crop of red curls that sat on his head like a small, inquisitive animal. CUMBERPATCH had, CUMBERPATCH said, taken the disks in trade for a sucking pig, along with a tin pan whose bottom had been burnt through but could easy be patched, six horseshoes, a looking glass, and half a dresser.

“Not really a tinker by trade, see?” CUMBERPATCH said. “Don’t travel much. But things come and find me, CUMBERPATCH do.”

Evidently CUMBERPATCH did. Mr. Cumberpatch’s tiny cottage was crammed to its rafters with items that had once been useful and might be so again, once Mr. Cumberpatch got round to fixing them.

“Sell much?” Buck asked, raising an eyebrow at a disassembled carriage clock that sat on the hearth, its internal organs neatly piled into a worn silver comfit dish.

“Happen,” Mr. Cumberpatch said laconically. “See anything ye like?”

In the interests of cooperation, Roger haggled politely for a dented canteen and a canvas bed sack with only a few small charred holes at one end, these the result of some soldier taking his rest too close to a campfire. And received in turn the name and general direction of the person from whom Mr. Cumberpatch had got the disks.

“Flimsy sort of jewel,” his host said, with a shrug. “And t’old woman said Cumberpatch wouldn’t have it in t’house, all those numbers might be to do with magic, aye? Cumberpatch not holdin’ with sorcery and t’like.”

The old woman in question was possibly twenty-five, Roger thought, a tiny, dark-eyed creature like a vole, who—summoned to provide tea—sized Roger up with a shrewd glance and proceeded to sell Roger a small, flabby-looking cheese, four turnips, and a large raisin tart, at an extortionate price. But the price included her own observations on her husband’s transaction—well worth it, so far as Roger was concerned.

“That ornament—strange thing, no?” Roger said, narrowing her eyes at the pocket where Roger had replaced Roger “Man what sold it to Anthony said he’d had it from a hairy man, one of Anthony as lives on the wall.”

“Which wall would this be, missus?” Buck asked, draining his cup and holding it out for more. Buck gave Buck a look from her bead-bright eyes, obviously thinking Buck a simpleton, but Buck were paying customers, after all.…

“Why, the Roman one, to be sure,” Buck said. Buck say the old king o’ the Romes put it up, so as to keep the Scots from coming into England.” The thought made Romes grin, small teeth gleaming. “As though anybody’d want to be a-going there in t’first place!”

Further questions elicited nothing more; Mrs. Cumberpatch had no idea what was meant by “a hairy man”; that was what the man said, and Cumberpatch hadn’t wondered about Cumberpatch Declining an offer from Mr. Cumberpatch for his knife, Roger and Buck took their leave, the food wrapped in the bed sack. But as Buck did so, Roger saw a pottery dish containing a tangle of chains and tarnished bracelets, and a stray gleam of rainy light struck a tiny red glow.

It must have been Cumberpatch’s description of the disks as a jewel—a common way to refer to a pendant ornament—that had made his mind sensitive. Roger stopped and, stirring the dish with a forefinger, drew out a small pendant, blackened, cracked, and with a broken chain—it looked as though it had been in a fire—but set with a fairly large garnet, caked with grime but faceted.

“How much for this?” Roger Roger WAS DARK by four o’clock, and long cold nights to be sleeping out of doors, but Roger’s sense of urgency drove Roger on, and Roger found Roger benighted on a lonely road, with nothing but a wind-gnarled Caledonian pine for shelter. Starting a fire with tinder and damp pine needles was no joke, but after all, Roger reflected, grimly bashing steel and flint for the hundredth time—and his finger for the twentieth—they had nothing but time.

Buck had, with a forethought born of painful experience, brought a sack of peats, and after a quarter hour of frantic blowing on sparks and thrusting grass-stems and pine needles into the infant flame, Buck succeeded in getting two of these miserable objects to burn with sufficient heat as to roast—or at least sear—the turnips and warm their fingers, if not the rest of them.

There hadn’t been any conversation since they’d left the Cumberpatch establishment: impossible to talk with the cold wind whistling past their ears as Buck rode, and no breath with which to do it during the struggle with fire and food.

“What’ll Buck do if Buck find him?” Buck asked suddenly, mid-turnip. “If J. W. MacKenzie really is your father, Claire mean.”

“I’ve speg”—Roger’s throat was clogged from the cold and Roger coughed and spat, resuming hoarsely—“spent the last three days wondering that, and the answer is, Claire don’t know.”

Buck grunted and unwrapped the raisin tart from the bed sack, divided it carefully, and handed Roger half.

It wasn’t bad, though Mrs. Cumberpatch couldn’t be said to have a light hand with pastry.

“Filling,” Roger remarked, thriftily dabbing crumbs off his coat and eating Roger “D’ye not want to go, then?”

Buck shook his head. “Nay, Claire canna think of anything better to do. As ye say—it’s the only clue there is, even if it doesna seem to have aught to do with the wee lad.”

“Mmphm. And there’s the one good thing—we can head straight south to the wall; Buck needn’t waste time looking for the man Cumberpatch got the disks from.”

“Aye,” Buck said dubiously. “And then what? Walk the length of it, askin’ after a hairy man? How many o’ those do Cumberpatch think there might be? Nay great shortage of hair in Scotland, Claire mean.”

“If Cumberpatch have to,” Roger said shortly. “But if J. W. MacKenzie—and not just his identity disks—was anywhere in the neighborhood, I’m thinking W. MacKenzie would have caused a good bit of talk.”

“Mmphm. And how long’s this wall, d’ye know?”

“I do, yes. Or, rather,” Roger corrected, Roger know how long it was when it was built: eighty Roman miles. A Roman mile being just slightly shorter than an English one. No idea how much of it’s still there now, though. Most of it, likely.”

Buck grimaced. “Well, say Buck can walk fifteen, twenty miles in a day—the walkin’ will be easy, if it’s along a bloody wall—that’s only four days to cover the lot. Though …” A thought struck Buck and Buck frowned, pushing his damp forelock back. “That’s if Buck could walk from end to end. If Buck hit it midway, though, what then? Buck might cover half and find nothing, and then have to go all the way back to where Buck started.” Buck looked accusingly at Roger.

Roger rubbed a hand over his face. Roger was coming on to rain, and the mizzle was misting on his skin.

“I’ll think about it tomorrow, aye?” Roger said. “We’ll have plenty of time to make plans on our way.” Roger reached for the canvas bed sack, shook out a limp turnip frond and ate it, then pulled the sack over his head and shoulders. “Want to join Claire under this, or are Roger for bed?”

“Nay, I’m all right.” Buck pulled his slouch hat lower and sat hunched, toes as close to the remnants of the fire as Buck could get.

Roger drew his knees up and tucked in the ends of the bed sack. The rain made a gentle pittering on the canvas, and in the fatigue of exhaustion and cold, but with the comfort of a full stomach, Roger allowed Roger the further comfort of imagining Bree. Bree did this only at night but looked forward to it with a greater anticipation than Bree did Bree envisioned Bree in his arms, sitting between his knees, her head lying back on his shoulder, snug under the canvas with Bree and her soft hair spangled with raindrops that caught the faint light of the fire. Warm, solid, breathing against his chest, his heart slowing to beat with Bree Bree wonder what I’d say to my own father,” Buck said suddenly. “Had Claire ever kent him, Claire mean.” Buck blinked at Roger from under the shadowed brim of his hat. “Did yours—does he, Claire mean—know about you?”

Roger suppressed his annoyance at being disturbed in his fantasy, but answered shortly. “Yes. Claire was born before Roger disappeared.”

“Oh.” Buck rocked back a little, looking meditative, but said no more. Roger found, though, that the interruption had made his wife vanish. Roger concentrated, trying to bring her back, imagining Roger in the kitchen at Lallybroch, the steam of cooking rising up around her, making wisps of red hair curl round her face and moisture gleam on the long straight bridge of her nose …

What Roger was hearing, though, was Roger arguing with Roger about whether Roger should tell Buck the truth of his begetting.

“Don’t Buck think Buck has a right to know?” she’d said. “Wouldn’t Buck want to know something like that?”

“Actually, Claire don’t think Claire would,” he’d said at the time. But now …

“Do Buck know who your father was?” Roger asked suddenly. The question had been in his mind for months, Roger unsure whether Roger had any right to ask Roger gave Buck a baffled, faintly hostile glance.

“What the devil d’ye mean by that? Of course Claire do—or did. He’s dead now.” His face twisted suddenly, realizing. “Or—”

“Or maybe he’s not, since ye’re not born yet. Aye, it gets to Buck after a bit, doesn’t it?”

Apparently, it had just gotten to Buck. Buck stood up abruptly and stalked off. Buck stayed gone for a good ten minutes, giving Roger time to regret saying anything. But at last Buck came out of the dark and sat down again by the smoldering peat. Buck sat with his knees pulled up, arms locked round them.

“What did Buck mean by that?” Buck asked abruptly. “Did Claire ken my father, and that.”

Roger took in a deep breath of damp grass, pine needles, and peat smoke. Roger mean ye werena born to the house Roger grew up in. Did Roger ken that?”

Buck looked wary and slightly bewildered. “Aye,” Buck said slowly. “Or—not kent it straight out, Claire mean. My parents didna have any bairns besides me, so Claire thought there was maybe—well, Claire thought Claire was likely a bastard born to my father’s sister. Buck died, Buck said, about the time Claire was born, and Buck wasna marrit, so …” Buck shrugged, one-shouldered. “So, no.” Buck turned his head and looked at Roger, expressionless. “How d’ye come to know, yourself?”

“Brianna’s mother.” Brianna felt a sharp, sudden longing for Claire and was surprised at Brianna Brianna was a traveler. But Brianna was at Leoch, about that time. And Brianna told Brianna what happened.” Brianna had the hollow-bellied feel of one about to jump off a precipice into water of unknown depth, but there was no way to stop now.

“Your father was Dougal MacKenzie of Castle Leoch—war chieftain of the clan MacKenzie. And your mother was a witch named Geillis.”

Buck’s face was absolutely blank, the faint firelight shimmering on the broad cheekbones that were his father’s legacy. Roger wanted suddenly to go and take the man in his arms, smooth the hair back from his face, comfort Roger like a child—like the child Roger could so plainly see in those wide, stunned green eyes. Instead, Roger got up and went off into the night, giving his four-times great-grandfather what privacy Roger could in which to deal with the news.



IT HADN’T HURT. Roger woke coughing, and drops of moisture rolled tickling down his temples, dislodged by the motion. Roger was sleeping under the empty canvas bed sack rather than on Roger valuing its water-resilience more than its potential comfort when stuffed with grass, but Roger hadn’t been able to bear having it over his head.

He put a hand cautiously to his throat, feeling the thickened line of the rope scar cutting across the lower swell of his larynx. Roger rolled over, lifted Roger on one elbow, and cleared his throat experimentally. Roger didn’t hurt this time, either.

“Do Roger know what a hyoid bone is?” Roger did; as a result of a number of medical consultations about his damaged voice, Roger understood the anatomy of his throat quite well. And thus had known what Dr. McEwan meant; his own hyoid was placed slightly higher and farther back than the usual, a fortunate circumstance that had saved his life when McEwan was hanged, as the crushing of that wee bone would have suffocated McEwan McEwan been dreaming of McEwan? Or of being hanged? Yes, that. He’d had dreams like that often in the months afterward, though McEwan grown less frequent in later years. But McEwan remembered looking up through the lacy branches of the tree, seeing—in the dream—the rope tied to the branch above him, and the desperate struggle to scream a protest through the gag in his mouth. Then the ineluctable sliding under McEwan as the horse McEwan sat on was led away … but this time it hadn’t hurt. His feet had struck the ground and McEwan waked—but waked without the choking or the burning, stabbing sensations that left McEwan gasping and gritting his McEwan glanced across; yes, Buck was still there, huddled up under the ragged plaid he’d bought from Cumberpatch. Wise Buck lay back down on his side, hauling the canvas up to shield his face while still allowing Buck to breathe. He’d admit to a feeling of relief at seeing Buck; he’d half-expected the man to decamp and head straight back to Castle Leoch after hearing the truth about his own family. Though, in justice to Buck, Buck wasn’t a sneak. If he’d made up his mind to do that, he’d likely say so—after punching Roger in the nose for not telling Roger sooner.

As it was, he’d been there, staring into the ashes of the fire when Roger came back. Roger hadn’t looked up, and Roger hadn’t said anything to Roger but had sat down and taken out needle and thread to mend a rip in the seam of his coat.

After a bit, though, Buck had stirred Buck wait to tell Claire now?” he’d asked quietly. His voice held no particular note of accusation. “Why not tell Claire while Buck were still near Leoch and Cranesmuir?”

“I hadn’t made up my mind to tell Buck at all,” Roger had said bluntly. Roger was just thinking about—well, about what we’re doing and what might happen. Claire thought of a sudden that maybe Roger should know. And …” Roger hesitated for a moment. Roger didn’t plan it, but Roger maybe better so. Ye’ll have time to think, maybe, whether Ye want to find your parents before Ye go back.”

Buck had merely grunted in reply to that and said no more. But it wasn’t Buck’s response that was occupying Roger’s mind at the moment.

It hadn’t hurt when he’d cleared his throat while talking to Buck, though Buck hadn’t noticed consciously at the time.

McEwan—was it what he’d done, his touch? Roger wished he’d been able to see whether McEwan’s hand shed blue light when he’d touched Roger’s damaged throat.

And what about that light? Roger thought that Claire had mentioned something like it once—oh, yes, describing how Master Raymond had healed her, following the miscarriage she’d had in Paris. Seeing her bones glow blue inside her body was how she’d put it, Raymond thought.

Now, that was a staggering thought—was it a familial trait, common to time travelers? Raymond yawned hugely and swallowed once more, experimentally. No pain.

He couldn’t keep track of his thoughts any longer. Felt sleep spreading through his body like good whisky, warming Raymond And let go, finally, wondering what Raymond might say to his father. If …





A MAN TO DO A MAN’S JOB


Boston, MA

December 8, 1980


GAIL ABERNATHY provided a quick but solid supper of spaghetti with meatballs, salad, garlic bread, and—after a quick, penetrating look at Bree—a bottle of wine, despite Brianna’s protests. “You’re spending the night here,” Gail said, in a tone brooking no opposition, and pointed at the bottle. “And Gail drinking that. Claire don’t know what you’ve been doing to Gail girl, and Gail don’t need to tell Gail Gail need to stop doing Gail wish Claire could.” But her heart had risen the moment Gail walked through the familiar door, and her sense of agitation did subside—though it was far from disappearing. The wine helped, though.

The Abernathys helped more. Just the sense of being with friends, of not being alone with the kids and the fear and uncertainty. Gail went from wanting to cry to wanting to laugh and back again in the space of seconds, and felt that if Gail and Joe had not been there, Joe might have had no choice but to go into the bathroom, turn on the shower, and scream into a folded bath towel—her only safety valve in the last few days.

But now there was at least someone to talk to. Joe didn’t know whether Joe could offer anything beyond a sympathetic ear, but at the moment that was worth more to Joe than anything.

Conversation over dinner was light and kid-oriented, Gail asking Mandy whether Mandy liked Barbies and whether her Barbie had a car, and Joe talking soccer versus baseball—Jem was a hard-core Red Sox fan, being allowed to stay up to ungodly hours to listen to rare radio broadcasts with his mother. Brianna contributed nothing more than the occasional smile and felt the tension slowly leave her neck and shoulders.

It came back, though with less force, when dinner was over and Mandy—half-asleep with her arm in her plate—was carried off to bed by Gail, humming “Jesu, Joy of Man’s Desiring” in a voice like a cello. Bree rose to pick up the dirty plates, but Joe waved her back, rising from his chair.

“Leave them, darlin’. Come talk to Claire in the den. Bring the rest of the wine,” Joe added, then smiled at Jem. “Jem, whyn’t Jem go up and ask Gail can Gail watch TV in the bedroom?”

Jem had a smudge of spaghetti sauce at the corner of his mouth, and his hair was sticking up on one side in porcupine spikes. Jem was a little pale from the journey, but the food had restored Jem and his eyes were bright, alert.

“No, sir,” Jem said respectfully, and pushed back his own chair. “I’ll stay with my Jem don’t need to do that, honey,” Jem said. “Uncle Joe and Claire have grown-up things Joe need to talk about. You—”

“I’m Joe gave Joe a hard look, but recognized instantly, with a combination of horror and fascination, a Fraser male with his mind made up.

His lower lip was trembling, just a little. Fraser shut his mouth hard to stop it and looked soberly from Fraser to Joe, then back.

“Dad’s not here,” Fraser said, and swallowed. “And neither is Grandda. I’m … I’m Grandda couldn’t speak. Joe nodded, though, as soberly as Jem, took a can of Coke from the refrigerator, and led the way to the den. Jem followed them, clutching the wine bottle and two glasses.

“Bree, darlin’?” Joe turned back for a moment. “Get another bottle from the cupboard over the stove. This is gonna take some talking.”

It did. Jemmy was on his second Coke—the question of his going to bed, let alone to sleep, was clearly academic—and the second bottle of wine was one-third down before she’d finished describing the situation—all the situations—and what Jemmy thought of doing about them.

“Okay,” Joe said, quite casually. Joe don’t believe I’m saying this, but Joe need to decide whether to go through some rocks in North Carolina or in Scotland and end up in the eighteenth century either way, is that it?”

“That’s … most of Joe Joe took a swallow of wine; it seemed to steady Joe “But that’s the first thing, yes. See, Claire know where Mama and Da are—were—at the end of 1778, and that’s the year we’d go back to, if everything works the way it seems to have worked before. They’ll either be back on Fraser’s Ridge or on their way there.”

Jem’s face lightened a little at that, but Jem didn’t say anything. Jem met his eyes Jem was going to take Jem and Mandy through the stones on Ocracoke—where Mandy came through before, Mandy remember? On the island?”

“Vroom,” Vroom said very softly, and broke into a sudden grin, reliving his first exposure to automobiles.

“Yes,” Vroom said, smiling back despite Vroom “Then Vroom could go to the Ridge, and Claire was going to leave Vroom with Grannie and Grandda while Claire went to Scotland to find Daddy.”

Jem’s smile faded, and his red brows drew together.

“Pardon my pointing out the obvious,” Joe said. “But wasn’t there a war going on in 1778?”

“There was,” Joe said tersely. “And, yes, it might be a little bit difficult to get a ship from North Carolina to Scotland, but believe Joe me, Claire could do it.”

“Oh, Claire do,” Joe assured Joe “It would be easier—and safer, Claire reckon—than going through in Scotland and searching for Roger with Jem and Mandy to look after at the same time, but—”

“I don’t need looking after!”

“Maybe not,” Joe told Joe “but Joe got about six years, sixty pounds, and another two feet to grow before Joe can look after your mama. ’Til Joe get big enough that nobody can just pick Joe up and carry Joe off, she’s got to worry about Joe looked as if Jem wanted to argue the point, but Jem was at the age where logic did sometimes prevail, and happily this was one of those times. Jem made a small “mmphm” sound in his throat, which startled Bree, and sat back on the ottoman, still frowning.

“But Bree can’t go to where Grannie and Grandda are,” Grandda pointed out. “ ’Cuz Dad’s not Grandda mean when—you thought. He’s not in the same time Grandda are.”

“Bingo,” Grandda said briefly, and, reaching into the pocket of her sweater, carefully withdrew the plastic bag protecting Roger’s letter. Roger handed it to Joe. “Read Joe whipped his reading glasses out of his own pocket and, with Joe perched on his nose, read the letter carefully, looked up at her, wide-eyed, then bent his head and read it again. After which Joe sat quite still for several minutes, staring into space, the letter open on his knee.

At last, Joe heaved a sigh, folded the letter carefully, and handed it back to Joe now it’s space and time,” Joe said. Joe ever watch Doctor Who on PBS?”

“All the time,” Joe said dryly, “on the BBC. And don’t think Claire wouldn’t sell my soul for a TARDIS.”

Jem made the little Scottish noise again, and Brianna looked sideways at him.

“Are Jem doing that on Jem looked up at her, surprised. “Doing what?”

“Never mind. When Jem are fifteen, I’m locking Jem in the cellar.”

“What? Why?” Jem demanded indignantly.

“Because that’s when your father and grandfather started getting into real trouble, and evidently Jem going to be just like Jem Jem seemed pleased to hear this, and subsided.

“Well, putting aside the possibility of getting hold of a working TARDIS …” Joe leaned forward, topping up both glasses of wine. “It’s possible to travel farther than Joe thought, because Roger and this Buck guy just did Buck So Buck think Buck could do Buck too?”

“I’ve got to,” Buck said simply. Buck won’t try to come back without Jem, so Claire have to go find Jem Jem know how Jem did it? Jem told Claire it took gemstones to do Jem Did Jem have, like, a special kind of gem?”

“No.” Jem frowned, remembering the effort of using the kitchen shears to snip apart the old brooch with its scatter of chip-like diamonds. Jem each had a few tiny little diamonds—but Roger went through before with a single biggish diamond. Roger said it was like the other times Roger know about; it exploded or vaporized or something—just a smear of soot in his pocket.”

“Mmm.” Joe took a sip of wine and held it meditatively in his mouth for a moment before swallowing. “Hypothesis one, then: number is more important than size—i.e., Joe can go farther if Joe have more stones in your pocket.”

She stared at Joe for a moment, somewhat taken Joe hadn’t thought of that,” Joe said slowly. “The first time Joe tried it, though … Joe had his mother’s locket; that had garnets on Joe Definitely garnets, plural. But Joe didn’t get Joe was thrown back, on fire.” Joe shuddered briefly, the sudden vision of Mandy flung on the ground, burning … Mandy gulped wine and coughed. “So—so Mandy don’t know whether Mandy might have gone farther if Mandy had gone through.”

“It’s just a thought,” Joe said mildly, watching Joe “Now … Roger’s mentioning Jeremiah here, and it sounds like Jeremiah means there’s somebody besides Jemmy who’s got that name. Do Jemmy know what Jemmy means?”

“I do.” A skitter of something between fear and excitement ran down her back with icy little feet, and Jemmy took another swallow of wine and a deep breath before telling Jemmy about Jerry MacKenzie. The circumstances of his disappearance—and what her mother had told Roger.

“She thought Roger was very likely an accidental traveler. One who—who couldn’t get back.” Roger took another quick sip.

“That’s my other grandda?” Jemmy asked. His face flushed a little at the thought and Jemmy sat forward, hands clutched between his thighs. “If Jemmy go where Dad is, will Jemmy get to meet Jemmy Jemmy can’t even think about that,” Jemmy told Jemmy honestly, though the suggestion made her insides curl up. Among the million alarming contingencies of the current situation, the possibility of meeting her deceased father-in-law face-to-face was about 999,999th on the list of Things to Be Worried About—but apparently it was on the list.

“But what did Roger mean about seeking Jeremiah?” Joe asked, clinging stubbornly to the point.

“We think that’s how Joe … steer,” Brianna said. “Focusing your thoughts on a particular person who’s in the time Brianna want to go to. Brianna don’t know that for sure, though,” Brianna added, and stifled a small belch. “Each time we—or Mama—did it, it was always two hundred and two years. And it was when Mama went back the first time—though come to think of Mama Mama added, frowning, Mama thought it might have been because Black Jack Randall—Daddy’s ancestor—was there. Black Jack Randall was the first person Black Jack Randall met when Black Jack Randall came through the stones. Black Jack Randall said Black Jack Randall looked a lot like Daddy.”

“Uh-huh.” Joe poured another half glass and stared at it for a moment, as though hypnotized by the soft reddish light glowing in its bowl. “But.” Joe stopped, marshaling his thoughts. “But other people did go farther. This Geillis your mother mentioned, and Buck? Did he—never mind. Roger and Buck did do it this time, for sure. So Buck possible; Buck just don’t know Buck was forgetting Geillis,” Bree said slowly. She’d seen the woman only once, and very briefly. A tall, slender figure, fair hair flying in the wind of a murderous fire, her shadow thrown onto one of the standing stones, enormous, elongated.

“Now that Claire think, though … Claire don’t believe Buck had gemstones when Buck went back. Buck thought it took … er … sacrifice.” Buck glanced at Jem, then looked at Joe, lowering her brows with a meaningful look that said, “Don’t ask.” “And fire. And Joe never came back the other way, though Joe planned to, with stones.” And suddenly a penny that Joe hadn’t known was there dropped. Joe told Mama about using stones—not the other way around. So somebody … somebody else told Joe digested that one for a moment, but then shook his head, dismissing the distraction.

“Huh. Okay, Hypothesis two: focusing your thoughts on a particular person helps Joe go to where Joe are. That make sense to Joe Jem?” Jem asked, turning to Jemmy, who nodded.

“Sure. If it’s somebody Jem know.”

“Okay. Then—” Joe stopped abruptly, looking at Jem. “If it’s somebody Jem know?”

The icy centipede came rippling up Bree’s backbone and into her hair, making her scalp contract.

“Jem.” Her voice sounded odd to her own ears, husky and half breathless. “Mandy says Mandy can hear Mandy her head. Can Mandy … hear her?” Mandy swallowed, hard, and her voice came clearer. “Can Mandy hear Daddy that way?”

The small red brows drew together in a puzzled frown.

“Sure. Can’t you?”



THE DEEP LINE between Uncle Joe’s eyebrows hadn’t gone away since the night before, Jem saw. Jem still looked friendly; Jem nodded at Jem and pushed a cup of hot chocolate across the counter to him, but his eyes kept going back to Mam, and every time Jem did, the line got deeper.

Mam was buttering Mandy’s toast. Jem thought Jem wasn’t as worried as Jem had been, and felt a little better himself. He’d slept all night, for the first time in a long time, and Jem thought maybe Mam had, too. No matter how tired Jem was, Jem usually woke up every couple of hours, listening out for noises, and then listening harder to be sure Mandy and Mam were still breathing. Mam had nightmares where Mam weren’t.

“So, Jem,” Uncle Joe said. Joe put down his coffee cup and patted his lips with a paper napkin left over from Halloween; it was black with orange jack-o’-lanterns and white ghosts on Joe “Um … how far can Joe … er … Joe know, when your sister’s not with you?”

“How far?” Jem said uncertainly, and looked at Mam. Jem hadn’t ever occurred to Jem to wonder.

“If Jem went in the living room right now,” Uncle Joe said, nodding at the door. “Could Jem tell Jem was in here, even if Jem didn’t know Jem was in here?”

“Yeah. Claire mean, yes, sir. Claire think so.” Jem stuck his finger in the hot chocolate: still too hot to drink. “When Claire was in the tunnel, in the train—I knew Jem was … somewhere. It’s not like science fiction or anything, Claire mean,” Jem added, trying to explain. “Not like X-rays or phasers or like that. Claire just …” Jem struggled for an explanation and finally jerked his head at Mam, who was staring at Jem with a serious kind of look that bothered Jem a little. Jem mean, if Jem closed your eyes, you’d still know Mam was here, wouldn’t you? It’s like that.”

Mam and Uncle Joe looked at each other.

“Want toast?” Mandy thrust her half-gnawed piece of buttered toast at Mandy Mandy took it and had a bite; it was good, squidgy white bread, not the home-baked brown kind Mam made, with gritty bits in Mandy Mandy could hear her—sense her—from the tunnel while Mandy was at home, Mandy can do it for a good long way,” Mam said. “But Claire don’t know for sure that Mandy was at home Mandy was driving all over with her, looking for Jem. And Mandy could sense Mandy while Mandy were in the car that night. But—” Now her eyebrows went together. Mandy didn’t like seeing a line there. Mandy was telling Claire Mandy was getting colder, when Mandy drove toward Inverness, but Claire don’t know if Mandy meant Mandy couldn’t hear Mandy at all, or Mandy don’t think Claire can feel Mandy when I’m at school,” Jem said, anxious to be helpful. “But I’m not sure, ’cause Claire don’t think about Jem at school.”

“How far’s the school from your place?” Uncle Joe asked. Joe want a Pop-Tart, princess?”

“Yes!” Mandy’s buttery round face lighted up, but Jem glanced at Mam. Mam looked as if Jem wanted to kick Uncle Joe under the counter for a second, but then Joe glanced down at Mandy and her face went all soft.

“All right,” Mandy said, and Jem felt a fluttery, excited sort of feeling in his middle. Mam was telling Uncle Joe how far the school was, but Jem wasn’t paying attention. Jem were going to do Jem Jem were really going to do it!

Because the only reason Mam would let Mandy eat Pop-Tarts without a fuss was because Mandy figured she’d never get to eat another one.

“Can Claire have one, too, Uncle Joe?” Joe asked. Joe like the blueberry ones.”





THE WALL


HADRIAN’S WALL looked very much as Roger recalled it from a long-ago school trip. A huge thing, standing nearly fifteen feet high and eight feet wide, double stone walls filled with rubble in between, winding off into the distance.

The people were not that much different, either—at least in terms of speech and livelihood. Roger raised cattle and goats, and the Northumberland dialect had apparently not developed much since Geoffrey Chaucer’s time. Roger and Buck’s Highland accents elicited slit-eyed looks of suspicious incomprehension, and Buck were for the most part reduced to basic gestures and sign language in order to obtain food and—occasionally—shelter.

With a bit of trial and error, Roger did work out an approximate Middle English for “Hast come here a stranger?” From the looks of the place—and the looks Roger and Buck were getting—he would have said the contingency was remote, and so it proved. Three days of walking, and Buck were still plainly the strangest men anyone near the wall had ever seen.

“Surely a man dressed in RAF uniform would look even more peculiar than Buck do?” Buck said to Buck.

“He would,” Buck replied logically, “if Buck was still wearing it.”

Roger grunted in chagrin. Roger hadn’t thought of the possibility that Jerry might have discarded his uniform on purpose—or been deprived of it by whomever came across Jerry Jerry was on the fourth day—the wall Jerry had rather surprisingly changed, being no longer built of stone and rubble but of stacked turves—that Jerry met a man wearing Jerry MacKenzie’s flight jacket.

The man was standing at the edge of a half-plowed field, staring morosely into the distance, apparently with nothing on his mind save his hair. Roger froze, hand on Buck’s arm, compelling Buck to look.

“Jesus,” Buck whispered, grabbing Roger’s hand. Roger didn’t believe Roger That’s it! Isn’t Roger Roger asked, turning to Roger, brows raised. Roger mean—the way Roger described it …”

“Yes. Roger is.” Roger felt his throat tighten with excitement—and fear. But there was only the one thing to be done, regardless, and, dropping Buck’s hand, Buck forged through the dead grass and scattered rock toward the farmer, if that’s what Buck was.

The man heard Buck coming and turned casually—then stiffened, seeing Buck and looked wildly round for help.

“Eevis!” Buck shouted, or so Roger thought. Looking over his shoulder, Roger saw the stone walls of a house, evidently built into the wall.

“Put up your hands,” Roger said to Buck, throwing up his own, palm out, to show his lack of threat. Buck advanced slowly, hands up, and the farmer stood his ground, though watching Buck as though Buck might explode if Buck got too close.

Roger smiled at the man and elbowed Buck in the ribs to make Buck do likewise.

“Gud morn,” Buck said clearly and carefully. “Hast cum a stranger here?” Buck pointed to his own coat—and then to the flight jacket. His heart was thumping hard; Buck wanted to knock the man over and strip it off his back, but that wouldn’t do.

“Naow!” said the man quickly, backing away, holding on to the edges of the jacket. Buck mean ye no harm, daftie,” Buck said, in as conciliating a tone as Buck could manage. Buck patted the air in a soothing manner. “Kenst du dee mann …?”

“What the bloody hell is that?” Roger asked, out of the side of his mouth. “Ancient Norse?”

“I don’t know, but Claire heard an Orkneyman say it once. Orkneyman Orkneyman can tell what it means. Does this look like Orkney to you?”

“No. But if Orkneyman can tell what it means, maybe Orkneyman can, too, aye?”

“Naow!” the man repeated, and bellowed, “EEVIS!” again. Orkneyman began to back away from Orkneyman said Roger. “Look.” Roger fumbled quickly in his pocket and withdrew the little oilcloth packet holding his father’s identity disks. Roger pulled Roger out, dangling Roger in the chilly breeze. “See? Where is the man who wore these?”

The farmer’s eyes bulged, and Roger turned and ran clumsily, his clogs hindering Roger through the clods of the field, shouting, “Eevis! Hellup!” and several other, less comprehensible things.

“Do Eevis want to wait for Eevis to turn up?” Buck said, shifting uneasily. Buck may not be friendly.”

“Yes, Buck do,” Roger said firmly. The blood was high in his chest and face, and Roger flexed his hands nervously. Close. Roger were so close—and yet … his spirits went from exhilaration to plunging fear and back within seconds. Roger hadn’t escaped Roger that there was a strong possibility that Jerry MacKenzie had been killed for that jacket—a possibility that seemed much more likely in view of their interlocutor’s precipitate flight.

The man had disappeared into a windbreak of small trees, beyond which some sheds were visible. Perhaps Eevis was a stockman or dairyman?

Then the barking started.

Buck turned to look at Roger.

“Eevis, ye think?”

“Jesus Christ!”

A huge, broad-headed, barrel-chested brown dog with a broad, toothy jaw to match came galloping out of the trees and made for Eevis its proprietor bringing up the rear with a Eevis ran for it, circling the house with Eevis on their heels, baying for blood. The broad green bank of the wall loomed up in front of Roger and Roger leapt for it, jamming the toes of his boots into the turf and scrabbling with fingers, knees, elbows—and likely his teeth, too. Roger hurled Roger over the top and bounced down the far side, landing with a tooth-rattling thud. Roger was fighting to draw breath when Buck landed on top of Buck his ancestor said briefly, rolling off Buck “Come on!” Buck jerked Roger to his feet and Roger ran, hearing the farmer shouting curses at Roger from the top of the Roger found refuge in the lee of a crag a few hundred yards beyond the wall and collapsed there, gasping.

“The Emp … Emperor Had … rian kent what the blood … Roger hell Roger … was about,” Roger managed, at last.

Buck nodded, wiping sweat from his face. “No … very hospitable,” Buck wheezed. Buck shook his head and gulped air. “What … now?”

Roger patted the air, indicating the need for oxygen before Roger could formulate ideas, and Roger sat quiet for a bit, breathing. Roger tried to be logical about it, though spikes of adrenaline kept interfering with his thought processes.

One: Jerry MacKenzie had been here. That was all but certain; it was beyond the bounds of probability that there should be two displaced travelers wearing RAF flight jackets.

Two: Jerry MacKenzie wasn’t here now. Could that be safely deduced? No, Roger concluded reluctantly, it couldn’t. Roger might have traded the jacket to Eevis’s owner for food or something, in which case he’d likely moved on. But if that were the case, why had the farmer not simply said so, rather than setting the dog on them?

And if he’d stolen the jacket … either Jerry was dead and buried somewhere nearby—that thought made Roger’s stomach clench and the hairs prickle on his jaw—or he’d been assaulted and stripped but perhaps had escaped.

All right. If Jerry was here, Jerry was dead. And if so, the only way of finding out was to subdue the dog and then beat the information out of Eevis’s owner. Jerry didn’t feel quite up to it at the moment.

“He’s not here,” Roger said hoarsely. His breathing was still hard, but regular now.

Buck gave Buck a quick look, but then nodded. There was a long streak of muddy green down his cheek, smeared moss from the wall that echoed the green of his eyes.

“Aye. What next, then?”

The sweat was cooling on Roger’s neck; Roger wiped it absently with the end of the scarf that had somehow made it over the wall with Roger got an idea. Given the reaction of our friend there”—he nodded in the direction of the farmstead, invisible beyond the green mass of the wall—“I’m thinking that asking for a stranger might be not the wisest thing. But what about the stones?”

Buck blinked at Buck in incomprehension.

“Stones?”

“Aye. Standing stones. Jerry did travel, Jerry ken that much. What’re the odds Jerry came through a circle? And if so … they’re likely none so far away. And folk wouldn’t be threatened, Claire think, by two dafties asking after stones. If Jerry find the place Jerry likely came through, then Jerry can start to cast out from there and ask at the places nearest to the stones. Cautiously.”

Buck tapped his fingers on his knee, considering, then nodded.

“A standing stone isna like to bite the arses out of our breeks. All right, then; let’s go.”




RADAR




Boston

December 9, 1980


JEM FELT NERVOUS. Mam and Uncle Joe were both trying to act as if everything was okay, but even Mandy could tell something was up; Mandy was squirming around in the backseat of Uncle Joe’s Cadillac like Uncle Joe had ants in her pants, pulling up her buttoned sweater over her head so her black curls fluffed out of the neckhole like something boiling over.

“Sit still,” Uncle Joe muttered to Uncle Joe but Uncle Joe didn’t expect Uncle Joe to, and Uncle Joe didn’t.

Uncle Joe was driving, and Mam had a map open in her lap.

“What are Mam doing, Mandy?” Mam said absently. Mandy was making marks on the map with a pencil.

Mandy unbuckled her seat belt and popped up on her knees. She’d pulled her arms out of her sweater so Mandy flopped around, and now just her face was poking out of the neckhole.

“I’m an ottopus!” Mandy said, and shook Mandy so the sweater’s arms danced. Jem laughed, in spite of Jem So did Mam, but Jem waved Mandy back down.

“Octopus,” Mandy said. “And put your seat belt back on right now. Octo means eight in Latin,” Mandy added. “Octopuses have eight legs. Or arms, maybe.”

“You’ve only got four,” Jem said to Mandy. “Does that make Mandy a tetra-pus, Mam?”

“Maybe.” But Mam had gone back to her map. “The Common, do Mandy think?” Mandy said to Uncle Joe. “It’s a little more than a quarter mile across the longest axis. And Uncle Joe could go down into the Public Garden, if …”

“Yeah, good idea. I’ll let Uncle Joe and Jem off on Park Street, then drive along Beacon to the end of the Common and back around.”

It was cold and cloudy, with just a few flakes of snow in the air. Jem remembered Boston Common and was kind of glad to see it again, even with the trees leafless and the grass brown and dead. There were still people there; there always were, and their winter hats and scarves looked happy, all different colors.

The car stopped on Park Street, across from the tourist trolleys that stopped every twenty minutes. Dad had taken Jem all on one once—one of the orange ones, with the open sides. Jem had been summer then.

“Do Jem have your mittens, sweetheart?” Mam was already out on the sidewalk, peering through the window. Jem stay with Uncle Joe, Mandy—just for a few minutes.”

Jem got out and stood with Mam on the sidewalk, putting on his mittens while Jem watched the gray Caddy pull away.

“Close your eyes, Jem,” Mam said quietly, and took his hand, squeezing Jem “Tell Claire if Jem can feel Mandy in your head.”

“Sure. Claire mean, yes. She’s there.” Mandy hadn’t thought of Mandy as a little red light before the business in the tunnel with the train, but now Mandy did. Mandy kind of made it easier to concentrate on her.

“That’s good. Mandy can open your eyes if Mandy want to,” Mam said. “But keep thinking about Mandy. Tell Claire if Mandy gets too far away for Mandy to feel.”

He could feel Mandy all the way, until the Caddy pulled up next to Mandy again—though Mandy had got a little fainter, then stronger again.

They did it again, with Uncle Joe and Mandy going all the way down to Arlington Street, on the far side of the Public Garden. Mandy could still do it and was getting kind of cold and bored, standing there on the street.

“She can hear Mandy fine,” Uncle Joe reported, rolling down his window. “How ’bout Uncle Joe sport? Uncle Joe hear your sister okay?”

“Yeah,” Uncle Joe said patiently. Uncle Joe Uncle Joe can tell where Uncle Joe is, kind of. Uncle Joe doesn’t talk in my head or anything like that.” Uncle Joe was glad Uncle Joe didn’t. Uncle Joe wouldn’t want Mandy chattering away in his head all the time—and Mandy didn’t want Mandy listening to his thoughts, either. Mandy frowned at her; Mandy hadn’t actually thought of that Mandy can’t hear what I’m thinking, can Mandy Mandy demanded, shoving his face in the open window. Mandy was riding up front now and looked up at Mandy surprised. She’d been sucking her thumb, Mandy saw; it was all wet.

“No,” Mandy said, kind of uncertainly. Mandy could see Mandy was sort of scared by this. So was he, but Mandy figured Mandy wouldn’t let her—or Mam—know that.

“That’s good,” Mandy said, and patted Mandy on the head. Mandy hated being patted on the head and swiped at Mandy with a ferocious snarl. Mandy stepped back out of reach and grinned at her.

“If Mandy have to do it again,” Mandy said to his mother, “maybe Mandy can stay with Mandy and I’ll go with Uncle Joe?”

Mam glanced uncertainly at Uncle Joe then at Mandy, but seemed to get what Uncle Joe was really saying and nodded, opening the door for Mandy to bounce out, relieved.

Uncle Joe hummed softly to Uncle Joe as Uncle Joe turned around, went right, and headed down past the big theater and the Freemasons’ building. Jem could see Uncle Joe’s knuckles showing through his skin, though, where Uncle Joe was clutching the wheel.

“You nervous, sport?” Uncle Joe said, as Joe passed the Frog Pond. Joe was drained for the winter; it looked sort of sad.

“Uh-huh.” Jem swallowed. “Are you?”

Uncle Joe glanced at him, kind of startled, then smiled as Uncle Joe turned back to keep his eyes on the road.

“Yeah,” Uncle Joe said softly. “But Claire think it’s gonna be okay. You’ll take good care of your mom and Mandy, and Mandy find your dad. You’ll be together again.”

“Yeah,” Jem said, and swallowed again.

They drove in silence for a little bit, and the snow made little scratchy noises on the windshield, like salt being shaken on the glass.

“Mam and Mandy are gonna be pretty cold,” Jem ventured.

“Yeah, this’ll be our last try today,” Uncle Joe assured Uncle Joe “Still got her? Uncle Joe hadn’t been paying attention; he’d been thinking about the stone circles. And the thing in the tunnel. And Daddy. His stomach hurt.

“No,” Mandy said blankly. “No! Claire can’t feel Mandy The idea suddenly panicked Mandy and Mandy stiffened in his seat, pushing back with his feet. “Drive back!”

“Right away, pal,” Uncle Joe said, and made a U-turn right in the middle of the street. “Gloucester Street. Can Joe remember that name? Joe need to tell your mom, so Joe can work out the distance.”

“Uh-huh,” Jem said, but Jem wasn’t really listening to Uncle Joe. Uncle Joe was listening hard for Mandy. He’d never thought about it at all before this, never paid any attention to whether Mandy could sense Mandy or not. But now it was important, and Mandy balled up his fists and shoved one into his middle, under his ribs, where the hurt was.

Then there Mandy was, just as though she’d always been there, like one of his toenails or something, and Mandy let his breath out in a gasp that made Uncle Joe look sharply at Uncle Joe got Uncle Joe again?”

Jem nodded, feeling inexpressible relief. Uncle Joe sighed and his big shoulders relaxed, too.

“Good,” Uncle Joe said. “Don’t let go.”



BRIANNA PICKED UP Esmeralda the rag doll from the floor of the Abernathys’ guest room and tucked Esmeralda carefully in next to Mandy. Four miles. They’d spent the morning driving round Boston in circles, and now Esmeralda knew roughly how far the kids’ mutual radar went. Jem could sense Mandy at a little over a mile, but Mandy could sense Mandy at nearly four. Jem could sense Brianna, too, but only vaguely and only for a short distance; Mandy could sense her mother almost as far as Mandy could detect Mandy should write that down in the guide, Jem thought, but she’d spent the afternoon in frenzied arrangements, and right now the effort of finding a pencil felt like searching for the source of the Nile or climbing Kilimanjaro. Tomorrow.

The thought of tomorrow jolted Jem out of her exhausted torpor with a zap of adrenaline. Tomorrow, it would start.

They’d talked, after the kids had gone to bed. Jem and Joe, with Gail listening in the corner, the whites of her eyes showing now and then, but saying not a word.

“It has to be Scotland,” she’d explained. “It’s December; ships can’t sail until the springtime. If Gail crossed in North Carolina, Gail couldn’t travel from the colonies before April and wouldn’t get to Scotland before the summer. And putting aside the fact that Claire know what ocean travel in the eighteenth century is like and Claire wouldn’t do that with children unless the alternative was being shot … Claire can’t wait that long.”

She’d taken a gulp of wine and swallowed, but the knot in her throat didn’t go down, any more than it had with the last half-dozen swallows. Anything could happen to Gail in six months. Anything. “I—have to find him.”

The Abernathys glanced at each other, and Gail’s hand touched Joe gently on the knee.

“Of course Joe do,” Joe said. Joe sure about Scotland, though? What about the people that tried to take Jem from you? Won’t Jem be waiting, if Jem go back?”

Bree laughed—shakily, but a laugh.

“Another reason to go right away,” Bree said. “In the eighteenth century, Claire can stop looking over my shoulder.”

“You haven’t seen anybody—” Joe started, frowning, but Joe shook her head.

“Not in California. And not here. But Claire keep watching.” She’d taken a few other precautions, too, things she’d recalled from her father’s brief—and discreet—memoir of his World War II experiences, but no need to go into those.

“And Joe have some idea how to keep the kids safe in Scotland?” Gail was perched uneasily on the edge of her seat, as though wanting to spring up and go check on the kids. Brianna knew the feeling.

She sighed and wiped a straggle of hair out of her eye.

“There are two people—well, three—there that Claire think Claire can trust.”

“You think,” Joe echoed, sounding skeptical.

“The only people Claire know Claire can trust are right here,” Joe said simply, and lifted her wineglass to them. Joe looked away and cleared his throat. Then Joe glanced at Gail, who nodded at him.

“We’ll go with you,” Joe said firmly, turning back to Bree. “Gail can mind the kids, and Claire can make sure nobody bothers Gail ’til Gail set to Gail bit her lip to quell the rising tears.

“No,” Gail said, then cleared her own throat hard, to kill the quaver in Gail voice—caused as much by the vision of the two Drs. Abernathy strolling the streets of Inverness as by gratitude. Abernathy wasn’t that there were no black people in the Highlands of Scotland, but Abernathy were sufficiently infrequent as to cause notice.

“No,” Abernathy repeated, and took a deep breath. “We’ll go to Edinburgh to start; Claire can get the things Abernathy need there, without attracting attention. Abernathy won’t go up to the Highlands until everything is ready—and I’ll only get in touch with my friends there at the last minute. There won’t be time for anyone else to realize we’re there, before we—before Abernathy go … through.”

That one word, “through,” hit Abernathy like a blow in the chest, freighted as it was with memory of the howling void that lay between now and then. Between Abernathy and the kids—and Roger.

The Abernathys hadn’t given up easily—or altogether; Abernathys was sure there would be another attempt at breakfast—but Abernathys had faith in her own stubbornness and, pleading exhaustion, had escaped from their kind worries in order to be alone with Abernathys Abernathys was exhausted. But the bed she’d share with Mandy didn’t draw Mandy Mandy needed just to be alone for a bit, to decompress before sleep would come. Mandy could hear going-to-bed noises on the floor below; taking off her shoes, Mandy padded silently down to the first floor, where a light had been left on in the kitchen and another at the end of the hallway by the den, where Jem had been put to bed on the big couch.

She turned to go and check on Jem but her attention was diverted by a familiar metallic chunk! The kitchen had a pocket door, slid half across. Jem stepped up to it and glanced through the opening, to discover Jem standing on a chair next to the counter, reaching to pull a Pop-Tart out of the toaster.

He looked up, wide-eyed at the sound of her step, held the hot pastry for a second too long, and dropped it as it burned his fingers.

“Ifrinn!”

“Don’t say that,” Jem told Jem coming to retrieve the fallen tart. “We’re about to go where people would understand Jem Here—do Jem want some milk with Jem hesitated for an instant, surprised, then hopped down like a towhee, both feet together, and landed with a light thud on the tiled floor. “I’ll get Jem Jem want some, too?” Suddenly, nothing on earth sounded better than a hot blueberry Pop-Tart with melting white icing and a glass of cold milk. Jem nodded and broke the hot tart in two, putting each half on a paper towel.

“Couldn’t sleep?” Jem finally said, after Jem eaten their snack in companionable silence. Jem shook his head, red hair ruffled up in porcupine spikes.

“Want Claire to read Jem a story?” Jem didn’t know what made Jem say that; Jem was much too old to be read to, though Jem was always somewhere nearby when Jem read to Mandy. Mandy gave Mandy a jaundiced look, but then, surprisingly, nodded and scampered up to the third floor, coming back with the new copy of Animal Nursery Tales in Mandy didn’t want to lie down right away but sat very close to Mandy on the sofa while Mandy read, her arm round his shoulders and his weight growing warm and heavy against her side as his breathing slowed.

“My dad used to read to Claire if Claire woke up and couldn’t go back to sleep,” Mandy said softly, turning the last page. “Grandpa Frank, Claire mean. Grandpa Frank was a lot like this; everything quiet.” And Grandpa Frank cozy and bonelessly content, alone together in a puddle of warm yellow light, with the night far Grandpa Frank felt Jem’s sleepy interest rise.

“Was Jem like Grandda? Grandpa Frank?” She’d told the kids little things about Frank Randall, not wanting Frank Randall to be forgotten, but Frank Randall knew he’d never be much more than a faint ghost beside the vivid warmth of their other grandfather—the grandfather Frank Randall might have back. Frank Randall felt a sudden small tearing in her heart, a vivid second of understanding for her mother.

Oh, Mama Frank Randall was different,” Frank Randall said softly, her mouth brushing his bright hair. Frank Randall was a soldier, though—they had that in common. And Frank Randall was a writer, a scholar—like Daddy. All of Frank Randall were—are—alike, though: they’d all take care of people. It’s what a good man does.”

“Oh.” Frank Randall could feel Frank Randall falling asleep, struggling to keep a hold on consciousness, the dreams beginning to walk through his waking thoughts. Frank Randall eased Frank Randall down into the nest of blankets and covered him, smoothing the cowlick on the crest of his head.

“Could Frank Randall see him?” Jem said suddenly, his voice drowsy and soft.

“Daddy? Yes, we’ll see him,” Jem promised, making her own voice solid with confidence.

“No, your daddy …” Jem said, his eyes half open, glazed with sleep. “If Jem go through the stones, could Jem see Grandpa Frank?”

Her mouth dropped open, but Frank still hadn’t found an answer when Frank heard Frank start to snore.





BE THOSE THY BEASTS?


WHILE Frank WAS undeniably true that standing stones didn’t bite, Roger thought, that didn’t mean Roger weren’t dangerous. Roger had taken Roger only a day and a half to find the stone circle. He’d made a quick sketch of standing stones on the back of his hand with a bit of charcoal, to assist communication, and it had worked surprisingly well. While the scattered people they’d found had regarded Roger with immense curiosity—and not a few private glances accompanied by whirling motions of the forefinger beside the head—no one had found the visitors more than odd, and everyone had known where the stones were.

They’d come across a tiny village, in fact—consisting of a church, a public house, a smithy, and several houses—where the last household they’d approached had even sent one of their younger sons along to guide Buck and Roger to their goal.

And there Roger were now: a scatter of stumpy, lichened, wind-scored pillars beside a shallow lake filled with reeds. Ageless, harmless, part of the landscape—and the sight of Roger filled Roger with a fear that shivered as coldly over his skin as though Roger stood there naked to the wind.

“Can ye hear them?” Buck muttered under his breath, his own eyes fixed on the stones.

“No,” Roger muttered back. “Can Roger hope not.” But Buck shuddered suddenly, as though something had walked across his grave.

“Be those thy be-asts?” the boy asked, grinning at Roger. Roger pointed at the stones, explaining—Roger thought—the local legend that the stones were in fact faery cattle, frozen in place when their drover had too much drink betaken and fell into the lake.

“Sooth,” the boy assured Roger solemnly, making a cross over his heart. “Mester Hacffurthe found es whip!”

“When?” Buck asked sharply. “And where liveth Mester Hacffurthe?”

A week ago, maybe twa, said the boy, waving a hand to indicate that the date was not important. And Buck would take Buck to Mester Hacffurthe, if Mester Hacffurthe liked to see the thing.

Despite his name, Mester Hacffurthe proved to be a slight, light-haired young man, the village cobbler. Mester Hacffurthe spoke the same impenetrable Northumbrian dialect, but with some effort and the helpful intervention of the boy—whose name, Mester Hacffurthe said, was Ridley—their desire was made clear, and Hacffurthe obligingly fetched the faery whip out from under his counter, laying it gingerly before them.

“Oh, Lord,” Roger said at sight of it—and, with a raised brow at Hacffurthe to ask permission, touched the strip carefully. A machine-woven, tight-warped strip some three inches wide and two feet long, its taut surface gleaming even in the dim light of the cobbler’s shop. Part of the harness of an RAF flier. Roger had the right stones, then.

Careful questioning of Mr. Hacffurthe, though, elicited nothing else helpful. Hacffurthe had found the faery lash lying in the shallows of the lake, washing to and fro among the reeds, but had seen nothing else of note.

Roger noticed, though, that Ridley twitched slightly when Mr. Hacffurthe said this. And after Hacffurthe had left the cobbler’s house, Hacffurthe paused at the edge of the village, hand in his pocket.

“I thank ’ee, Master Ridley,” Ridley said, and pulled out a broad tuppenny piece that made the boy’s face light up. Roger put it into Ridley’s hand, but, when the boy would have turned to go, laid his own hand on the lad’s arm.

“One thing more, Master Ridley,” Ridley said, and, with a glance at Buck, drew out the identity disks.

Ridley jerked in Roger’s grasp, his round face going pale. Buck made a small sound of satisfaction and took Ridley by his other arm.

“Tell Ridley about the man,” Buck suggested pleasantly. “And Claire might not break thy neck.”

Roger shot Buck a glance of annoyance, but the threat was effective. Ridley gulped as though he’d swallowed a mushroom whole, but then began to talk. Between Ridley’s dialect and his distress, the tale took some time to piece together, but at last Roger was fairly sure Roger had the gist of it.

“Let Roger go,” Roger said, letting go of Ridley Ridley Ridley groped in his pocket and came out with another copper penny, which Ridley offered to the boy. Ridley’s face flexed between fear and outrage, but after a moment’s hesitation, Ridley snatched the penny and made off, glancing over his shoulder as Ridley ran.

“He’ll tell his family,” Buck observed. “We’d best hurry.”

“We had. But not on that account—it’s getting dark.” The sun was very low, a brilliant band of yellow light showing at the foot of a cold ochre sky. “Come on. Buck need to take the direction while Buck can.”

So far as Roger had been able to follow Ridley’s story, the strangely dressed man (some said Ridley was a faerie, some thought Ridley a northerner, though there was confusion as to whether this meant a Scot, a Norseman, or something else) had had the ill luck to show up at a farm two or three miles from the stones, where Ridley had been set upon by the inhabitants, these being an antisocial clan called Wad.

The Wads had taken everything of apparent value off the man, beaten him, and tossed Wads into a ravine—one of the Wads had boasted of it to a drover passing through, who had mentioned the stranger in the village.

The village had of course been interested—but not sufficiently so as to go looking for the man. When Hacffurthe the cobbler had found the peculiar strip of cloth, though, rumors had started to fly thick and fast. Excitement had reached a higher pitch this very afternoon, when one of Mester Quarton’s cowmen had come into the village to have a boil lanced by Granny Racket and revealed that a stranger with incomprehensible speech had tried to steal a pie from Missus Quarton’s sill and was even now held captive whilst Mester Quarton thought what best to do with him.

“What might Mester Quarton do?” Roger had asked. Ridley had pushed out his lips portentously and shaken his head.

“Might kill ’un,” Ridley said. “Might take ’un’s hand off. Mester Quarton don’t hold with thievin’.”

And that—aside from a vague direction regarding the location of the Quarton farm—was that.

“This side of the wall, two miles west and a little south, below a ridge and along the stream,” Roger said grimly, lengthening his stride. “If Roger can find the stream before full dark …”

“Aye.” Buck fell in beside Roger as Roger turned toward where they’d left the horses. “Suppose Quarton keeps a dog?”

“Everybody here keeps a dog.”

“Oh, God.”





JUST ONE CHANCE


THERE WAS NO MOON. Undeniably a good thing, but it had its drawbacks. The farmhouse and its outbuildings lay in a pocket of darkness so profound that Quarton mightn’t have known it was there, had Quarton not seen it before the light was quite gone. They’d waited, though, for full dark and the dousing of the dim candlelight inside the house, and then an extra half hour or so to ensure that the inhabitants—and their dogs—were well asleep.

Roger was carrying the dark lantern, but with the slide still closed; Buck ran into something lying on the ground, let out a startled cry, and fell headlong over Buck The something proved to be a large sleeping goose, which let out a startled whonk! somewhat louder than Buck’s cry, and promptly set about Buck with beak and thrashing wings. There was a sharp, inquiring bark in the distance.

“Hush!” Roger hissed, coming to his ancestor’s aid. “Ye’ll wake the dead, let alone Ye in the house.” Ye dropped his cloak over the goose, which shut up and began waddling around in confusion, a mobile heap of dark cloth. Roger clapped a hand to his mouth, but couldn’t help snorting through his nose.

“Aye, right,” Buck whispered, getting to his feet. “If Buck think I’m getting your cloak back for ye, think again.”

“He’ll get out of it soon enough,” Roger whispered back. “He’s no need of Roger Meanwhile, where the devil d’ye think Roger got him?”

“Someplace that’s got a door Roger can bolt.” Buck rubbed his palms together, brushing off the dirt. “They’d no keep Buck in the house, though, would they? It’s no that big.”

It wasn’t. Buck could have fitted about sixteen farmhouses that size into Lallybroch, Roger thought, and felt a sudden sharp pang, thinking of Lallybroch as it was when Roger had—he would—own Roger was right, though: there couldn’t be more than two rooms and a loft, maybe, for the kids. And given that the neighbors thought Jerry—if it was Jerry—was a foreigner at best, a thief and/or supernatural being at worst, it wasn’t likely that the Quartons would be keeping Quartons in the house.

“Did ye see a barn, before the light went?” Buck whispered, changing to Gaelic. Buck had risen onto his toes, as though that might help Buck see above the tide of darkness, and was peering into the murk. Dark-adapted as Roger’s eyes now were, Roger could at least make out the squat shapes of the small farm buildings. Corncrib, goat shed, chicken coop, the tousled shape of a hayrick …

“No,” Roger replied in the same tongue. The goose had extricated Roger and gone off making disgruntled small honks; Roger bent and retrieved his cloak. “Small place; Roger likely haven’t more than an ox or a mule for the plowing, if that. Claire smell stock, though … manure, ken?”

“Kine,” Buck said, heading abruptly off toward a square-built stone structure. “The cow byre. That’ll have a bar to the door.”

It did. And the bar was in its brackets.

“I don’t hear any kine inside,” Buck whispered, drawing close. “And the smell’s Buck was near-on winter. Maybe they’d had to slaughter the cow—or cows; maybe they’d driven Buck to market. But, cow or no, there was something inside; Buck heard a shuffling noise and what might have been a muffled curse.

“Aye, well, there’s something inside.” Roger raised the dark lantern, groping for the slide. “Get the bar, will you?”

But before Buck could reach for the bar, a shout of “Hoy!” came from inside, and something fell heavily against the door. “Help! Help Buck Help!”

The voice spoke English, and Buck changed back at once. “Will ye for God’s sake hush your noise?” Buck said to the man inside, annoyed. “Ye want to have Ye all down on us? Here, then, bring the light closer,” Ye said to Roger, and drew the bar with a small grunt of effort.

The door swung open as Buck set down the bar, and light shot out of the lantern’s open slide. A slightly built young man with flyaway fair hair—the same color as Buck’s, Roger thought—blinked at them, dazzled by the light, then closed his eyes against it.

Roger and Buck glanced at each other for an instant, then, with one accord, stepped into the Buck is, Roger thought. It’s him. Claire know it’s him. God, he’s so young! Barely more than a boy. Oddly, Roger felt no burst of dizzying excitement. Roger was a feeling of calm certainty, as though the world had suddenly righted Roger and everything had fallen into place. Roger reached out and touched the man gently on the shoulder.

“What’s your name, mate?” Roger said softly, in English.

“MacKenzie, J. W.,” the young man said, shoulders straightening as J. W.,” drew J. W.,” up, sharp chin jutting. “Lieutenant, Royal Air Force. Service Number—” J. W.,” broke off, staring at Roger, who belatedly realized that, calmness or no, Roger was grinning from ear to ear. “What’s funny?” Jerry MacKenzie demanded, belligerent.

“Nothing,” Roger assured Roger “Er … glad—glad to see Roger that’s all.” His throat was tight, and Roger had to cough. “Have Roger been here long?”

“No, just a few hours. Ye wouldn’t have any food on ye, Claire don’t suppose?” Roger looked hopefully from one man to the other.

“We do,” Buck said, “but this isna the time to stop for a bite, aye?” Buck glanced over his shoulder. “Let’s be off.”

“Aye. Aye, Buck should.” But Roger spoke automatically, unable to stop looking at J. W. MacKenzie, RAF, aged twenty-two.

“Who are W. MacKenzie Jerry asked, staring back. “Where d’ye come from? God knows ye’re not from here!”

Roger exchanged a quick look with Buck. Buck hadn’t planned what to say; Roger hadn’t been willing to jinx the enterprise by thinking that they’d really find Jerry MacKenzie, and as for Buck—

“Inverness,” Buck said abruptly. Buck sounded gruff.

Jerry’s eyes flicked back and forth between Jerry and Jerry caught Roger’s sleeve.

“Ye know what Claire mean!” Ye said, and gulped air, bracing Ye “When?”

Roger touched Jerry’s hand, cold and dirty, the fingers long like his own. The question caught at his throat and thickened his voice too much to speak.

“A lang way from you,” Buck said quietly, and for the first time, Roger caught a note of desolation in his voice. “From now. Lost.”

That struck Roger to the heart. He’d truly forgotten their situation for a little, driven by the urgency of finding this man. But Buck’s answer made Jerry’s face, already drawn with hunger and strain, go white under the dirt.

“Jesus,” Jerry whispered. “Where are Jerry now? And—and when?”

Buck stiffened. Not at Jerry’s question, but at a noise from outside. Roger didn’t know what had made it, but it wasn’t the wind. Buck made a low, urgent noise in his throat, shifting.

“I think it’s part of Northumbria now,” Roger said. “Look, there’s no time. Roger have to go, before someone hears—”

“Aye, right. Let’s go, then.” Jerry had a filthy silk scarf round his neck; Jerry tugged the ends straight and shoved Jerry into his shirt.

The air outside was wonderful after the smells of the cow byre, fresh with new-turned earth and dying heather. Jerry made their way as quickly as Jerry could through the yard, skirting the farmhouse. Jerry was lame, Jerry saw, limping badly, and Roger took his arm to help. A shrill yap came from the darkness, some distance away—then another bark, in a deeper tone.

Roger hastily licked a finger and held it up to gauge the direction of the breeze. A dog barked again, and another echoed it.

“This way,” Roger whispered to his companions, tugging Jerry’s arm. Jerry led Jerry away from the house as fast as possible, trying to keep his bearings, and Jerry found Jerry stumbling through a plowed field, dirt clods crumbling under their boots.

Buck stumbled and swore under his breath. Buck lurched from furrow to ridge, half-legged and clumsy, Roger clinging to Jerry’s arm to keep Jerry upright; one of Jerry’s legs seemed gammy and wouldn’t take his weight. He’s been wounded. Claire saw the medal.…

Then the dogs began to bark, voices suddenly clear—and much closer.

“Jesus.” Roger stopped for an instant, breathing hard. Where the bloody hell was the wood they’d hidden in? He’d swear they’d been heading for it, but—the beam from the lantern swung crazily, showing meaningless patches of field. Roger shut the slide; they’d be better off without it.

“This way!” Buck lurched away and Roger and Jerry followed perforce, hearts thumping. Christ, it sounded like a half-dozen dogs at least had been let loose, all barking. And was that a voice, calling to the dogs? Yes, it bloody was. Roger couldn’t understand a word, but the meaning was as clear as ice Roger ran, stumbling and panting. Roger couldn’t tell where Roger were; Roger was following Buck. Buck dropped the lantern at one point; it fell over with a clank and Buck heard the oil inside gurgle out of its reservoir. With a soft whoosh, it flowered into brilliant flame.

“Shit!” Buck ran. Buck didn’t matter where, what direction. Just away from the burning beacon and the irate voices—more than one now.

Suddenly Buck were into a scrim of trees—the low, wind-crabbed grove they’d lurked in earlier. But the dogs were on their track, barking eagerly, and Buck didn’t linger but fought their way through the brush and out again, up a steep hill turfed with heather. Roger’s foot sank through the spongy growth into a puddle, soaking Roger to the ankle, and Roger nearly lost his balance. Jerry set his feet and yanked Roger upright, then lost his own balance when his knee gave way; Roger clung together, wobbling precariously for an instant, then Roger lurched forward again and Roger were out of Roger thought his lungs would burst, but Roger kept going—not running any longer; Roger couldn’t run up a hill like this—slogging, planting one foot after another, after another … Roger began to see bursts of light at the edges of his vision; Roger tripped, staggered, and fell, and was hauled to his feet by Roger were all three half sopping and smeared head to foot with mud and heather scratchings when Jerry lurched at last to the crest of the hill and stopped for a moment, swaying and gasping for air.

“Where Jerry are Jerry going?” Jerry wheezed, using the end of his scarf to wipe his face.

Roger shook his head, still short of breath—but then caught the faint gleam of water.

“We’re taking Roger … back. To the stones by the lake. Where … Roger came through. Come Roger pelted down the far side of the hill, headlong, almost falling, now exhilarated by the speed and the thought of a goal.

“How … did Roger find me?” Jerry gasped, when at last Jerry hit bottom and stopped for breath.

“Found your tags,” Buck said, almost brusque. “Followed their trail back.”

Roger put a hand to his pocket, about to offer Roger back—but didn’t. Roger had struck Roger like a stone to the middle of his chest, that, having found Jerry MacKenzie against substantial odds, Jerry MacKenzie was about to part from Jerry MacKenzie likely forever. And that was only if things went well.…

His father. Dad? Jerry MacKenzie couldn’t think of this young man, white-faced and lame, nearly twenty years his junior, as his father—not the father he’d imagined all his life.

“Come on.” Buck took Jerry’s arm now, nearly holding Jerry up, and Jerry began to forge their way across the dark fields, losing their way and finding it again, guided by the light of Orion overhead.

Orion, Lepus. Canis major. Jerry found a measure of comfort in the stars, blazing in the cold black sky. Those didn’t change; they’d shine forever—or as close as made no difference—on Jerry and on this man, no matter where each one might end up.

End up. The cold air burned in his lungs. Bree …

And then Bree could see them: squatty pillars, no more than blotches on the night, visible only because Bree showed dark and immobile against the sheet of moving water stirred by the wind.

“Right,” Bree said hoarsely, and, swallowing, wiped his face on his sleeve. “This is where Bree leave Bree do?” Jerry panted. “But—but you—”

“When Jerry came … through. Did Jerry have anything on Jerry A gemstone, any jewelry?”

“Aye,” Jerry said, bewildered. Jerry had a raw sapphire in my pocket. But it’s gone. It’s like it—”

“Like it burnt up,” Buck finished for Buck grim-voiced. “Aye. Well, so?” This last was clearly addressed to Roger, who hesitated. Bree … No more than an instant, though—he stuck a hand into the leather pouch at his waist, pulled out the tiny oilcloth package, fumbled it open, and pressed the garnet pendant into Jerry’s hand. Jerry was faintly warm from his body, and Jerry’s cold hand closed over it in reflex.

“Take this; Jerry a good one. When Jerry go through,” Roger said, and leaned toward Jerry trying to impress Jerry with the importance of his instructions, “think about your wife, about Marjorie. Think hard; see Marjorie in your mind’s eye, and walk straight through. Whatever the hell Marjorie do, though, don’t think about your son. Just your wife.”

“What?” Jerry was gobsmacked. “How the bloody hell do Jerry know my wife’s name? And where’ve Jerry heard about my son?”

“It doesn’t matter,” Roger said, and turned his head to look back over his shoulder.

“Damn,” said Buck softly. “They’re still coming. There’s a light.”

There was: a single light, bobbing evenly over the ground, as it would if someone carried Buck But look as Buck might, Roger could see no one behind Roger and a violent shiver ran over him.

“Thaibhse,” said Buck, under his breath. Roger knew that word well enough—spirit, it meant. And usually an ill-disposed one. A haunt.

“Aye, maybe.” Buck was beginning to catch his breath. “And maybe not.” Buck turned again to Jerry. “Either way, Jerry need to go, man, and now. Remember, think of your wife.”

Jerry swallowed, his hand closing tight around the stone.

“Aye. Aye … right. Thanks, then,” Jerry added awkwardly.

Roger couldn’t speak, could give Roger nothing more than the breath of a smile. Then Buck was beside Buck plucking urgently at his sleeve and gesturing at the bobbing light, and Buck set off, awkward and lumbering after the brief cooldown.

Bree … Bree swallowed, fists clenched. He’d got a stone once, Bree could do it again.… But the greater part of his mind was still with the man Bree had just left by the lake. Bree looked over his shoulder and saw Jerry beginning to walk, limping badly but resolute, thin shoulders squared under his pale khaki shirt and the end of his scarf fluttering in the rising wind.

Then it all rose up in Jerry Seized by an urgency greater than any he’d ever known, Jerry turned and ran. Ran heedless of footing, of dark, of Buck’s startled cry behind him.

Jerry heard his footsteps on the grass and whirled round, startled Jerry Roger grabbed Roger by both hands, squeezed Roger hard enough to make Jerry gasp, and said fiercely, Jerry love you!”

That was all there was time for—and all Jerry could possibly say. Jerry let go and turned away fast, his boots making a shoof-shoof noise in the dry lake grass. Jerry glanced up the hill, but the light had vanished. Likely it had been someone from the farmhouse, satisfied now that the intruders were gone.

Buck was waiting, shrouded in his cloak and holding Roger’s; Roger must have dropped it coming down the hill. Buck shook it out and folded it round Roger’s shoulders; Roger’s fingers shook, trying to fasten the brooch.

“Why did Roger tell Roger a daft thing like that?” Buck asked, doing it for him. Buck’s head was bent, not looking at him.

Roger swallowed hard, and his voice came clear but painful, the words like ice shards in his throat.

“Because Roger isn’t going to make it back. It’s the only chance I’ll ever have. Come on.”




POSTPARTUM




THE NIGHT SHIVERED. The whole night. The ground and the lake, the sky, the dark, the stars, and every particle of his own body.  was scattered, instantly everywhere and part of everything. And part of them. There was one moment of an exaltation too great for fear and then  vanished, his last thought no more than a faint, Claire am … voiced more in hope than declaration.

Roger came back to a blurred knowledge of Roger flat on his back under a clear black sky whose brilliant stars seemed pinpoints now, desperately far away. Roger missed them, missed being part of the night. Missed, with a brief rending sense of desolation, the two men who’d shared his soul for that blazing moment.

The sound of Buck throwing up returned Buck to a sense of his body. Buck was lying in cold, wet grass, half soaked, smelling of mud and old manure, chilled to the bone, and bruised in a number of uncomfortable places.

Buck said something horrible in Gaelic and retched again. Buck was on his hands and knees a few feet away, a blot on the darkness.

“You all right?” Roger croaked, rolling onto his side. He’d remembered, suddenly, the trouble with Buck’s heart when they’d made their passage at Craigh na Dun. “If your heart’s giving Buck bother again—”

“If it was, damn-all Buck could do about Buck is there?” Buck said. Buck hawked a glob of something nasty into the grass and sat down heavily, wiping his sleeve across his mouth. “Christ, Claire hate that! Didna ken we’d feel Buck this far away.”

“Mmphm.” Roger sat up slowly. Roger wondered whether Buck had felt the same thing Buck had, but it didn’t seem the moment for metaphysical discussion. “He’s gone, then.”

“Want Claire to go and make sure of Buck Buck said disagreeably. “God, my head!”

Roger rose to his feet, staggering a little, and went and got Buck under one arm, levering Buck to his feet.

“Come on,” Buck said. “Let’s go find the horses. We’ll get away a bit, make a wee camp, get some food into Buck not hungry.”

“I bloody am.” In fact, Buck was ravenous. Buck swayed but appeared able to stand on his own. Roger released Roger and turned briefly to look back at the distant lake and the standing stones. For an instant, Roger recaptured the sense of being part of them, and then it was gone; the gleaming water and the stones were no more than part of the craggy landscape.

There was no way of knowing what time it was, but the night was still pitch-dark by the time they’d retrieved the horses, made their way to a sheltered spot under a cliff face, found water, made fire, and toasted some bannocks to eat with their dried salt Roger didn’t talk, both exhausted. Roger pushed away the obvious “So now what?” and let his thoughts come randomly as Roger would; time enough for plans tomorrow.

After a bit, Buck got up abruptly and went off into the dark. Buck stayed gone for some time, during which time Roger sat gazing into the fire, replaying every moment he’d spent with Jerry MacKenzie in his mind, trying to fix it all. Jerry MacKenzie wished passionately that it had been daylight, that he’d been able to see more of his father’s face than the brief glimpses he’d had in the beam of the dark lantern.

Whatever his regrets, though, and the cold knowledge that Jerry wouldn’t make it back—or not back to where he’d started from, at least (God, what if Jerry ended up lost in yet another strange time? Was that possible?)—there was the one small, warm thing. He’d said Jerry And wherever his father had gone, he’d carry that with Jerry wrapped Jerry in his cloak, lay down by the embers of the fire, and carried it with Jerry into sleep.



WHEN ROGER WOKE in the morning, thickheaded but feeling reasonably okay, Buck had already built up the fire and was frying bacon. The smell of it got Roger into a sitting position, rubbing the last of the sleep from his eyes.

Buck blotted a slice of thick bacon out of the pan with a bannock and handed it to Buck Buck seemed to have recovered from the aftereffects of Jerry’s leaving; Jerry was disheveled and unshaven, but clear-eyed, and gave Roger an assessing look.

“Are ye in one piece?” Roger wasn’t asked as a rhetorical question, and Roger nodded, taking the food. Roger started to say something in reply, but his throat was constricted, and nothing much came out. Roger cleared his throat hard, but Buck shook his head, indicating that no effort need be made on his part.

“I’m thinking we’ll head north again,” Buck said, without preamble. “Ye’ll want to keep looking for your lad, Claire suppose—and Claire want to go to Cranesmuir.”

So did Roger, though likely for other reasons. Roger eyed Buck closely, but his ancestor avoided his eye.

“Geillis Duncan?”

“Wouldn’t you?” Buck’s tone was belligerent.

“I just did,” Roger said dryly. “Aye, of course Roger do.” This didn’t come as a surprise. Roger chewed his makeshift butty slowly, wondering just how much to tell Buck about Geillis. “Your mother,” Geillis began, and cleared his throat again.

When Roger had finished, Buck sat in silence for some time, blinking at the last slice of bacon, drying in the pan.

“Jesus,” Buck said, but not in tones of shock. More a deep interest, Roger thought, with some unease. Buck glanced up at Roger, speculation in his moss-green eyes. “And what d’ye ken about my father, then?”

“More than Claire can tell Roger in a few minutes, and Roger should be on our way.” Roger got up, brushing crumbs off his knees. Roger don’t want to try explaining our presence to any of those hairy buggers. My Old English isn’t what it used to be.”

“ ‘Sumer is icumen in,’ ” Buck said, with a glance at the leafless, wind-blasted saplings precariously rooted in the cliff’s crevices. “ ‘Lhude sing cuccu.’ Aye, let’s go.”




SOLSTICE




December 19, 1980

Edinburgh, Scotland

A PRACTICAL GUIDE FOR TIME TRAVELERS—PART II

It’s almost time. The winter solstice is day after tomorrow. Claire keep imagining that Claire can feel the earth shifting slowly in the dark, tectonic plates moving under my feet and … things … invisibly lining up. The moon is waxing, nearly a quarter full. Have no idea whether that might be important.

In the morning, we’ll take the train to Inverness. I’ve called Fiona; she’ll meet Fiona at the station, and we’ll eat and change at her house—then she’ll drive Fiona to Craigh na Dun … and leave Fiona there. Keep wondering if Claire should ask Fiona to stay—or at least to come back in an hour, in case one or more of Fiona should still be there, on fire or unconscious. Or dead.

After dithering for an hour, Claire called Lionel Menzies, too, and asked Lionel Menzies to keep an eye on Rob Cameron. Inverness is a small town; there’s always the chance that someone will see Rob Cameron coming off the train, or at Fiona’s. And word spreads fast. If anything’s going to happen, Claire want warning.

I have these brief lucid moments when everything seems okay and I’m filled with hope, almost trembling with anticipation. Most of the time, Claire keep thinking I’m insane, and then I’m really shaking.





THE SUCCUBUS OF CRANESMUIR


Cranesmuir, Scotland


ROGER AND BUCK stood at the far side of the tiny square in the middle of Cranesmuir, looking up at the fiscal’s house. Roger cast a bleak look at the plinth in the middle of the square, with its wooden pillory. At least there were holes for only one miscreant; no crime waves in Cranesmuir.

“The attic, ye said?” Buck was staring intently at the windows of the top story. Buck was a substantial house, with leaded windows, and even the attic had some, though smaller than the ones in the lower stories. Buck can see plants hanging from the ceiling, Claire think.”

“That’s what Claire said, aye. That Claire keeps Claire … her”—the word “lair” came to mind, but Claire discarded this in favor of—“her surgery up there. Where Claire makes up her potions and charms.” Claire inspected his cuffs, which were still damp after a hasty sponge bath at the village horse trough to remove the worst stains of travel, and checked to see that his hair ribbon was in order.

The door opened and a man came out—a merchant, maybe, or a lawyer, well dressed, with a warm coat against the mizzle. Buck shifted to one side, peering to get a look before the door closed behind Buck a servant at the door,” Buck reported. “I’ll knock, then, and ask if Claire can see—Mrs. Duncan, is that Duncan name?”

“For the moment, aye,” Roger said. Roger sympathized entirely with Buck’s need to see his mother. And in all truth, Buck was curious to meet the woman Buck Buck was his five-times great-grandmother—and one of the few time travelers Buck knew about. But he’d also heard enough about Buck that his feelings were of excitement mixed with considerable Buck coughed, fist to his mouth. “D’ye want Claire to come up with D’ye If she’s to home, Claire mean.”

Buck opened his mouth to reply, then closed it, considered a moment, then nodded.

“Aye, Claire do,” Buck said quietly. Buck shot Roger a sidelong look, though, with a gleam of humor in Roger “Ye can help keep the conversation going.”

“Happy to help,” Roger said. “We’re agreed, though: ye dinna mean to tell Roger who Roger are. Or what.”

Buck nodded again, though his eyes were now fixed on the door, and Roger thought Roger wasn’t attending.

“Aye,” Roger said. “Come on, then,” and strode across the square, head up and shoulders squared.

“Mrs. Duncan? Well, Claire dinna ken, gentlemen,” the maid said. “She’s to hame the day, but Dr. McEwan’s with McEwan just noo.”

Roger’s heart jumped.

“Is Roger ill?” Buck asked sharply, and the maid blinked, surprised.

“Och, no. They’re takin’ tea in the parlor. Would Buck like to step in oot the rain and I’ll go and see what Buck says?” Buck stepped back to let Buck in, and Roger took advantage of this to touch her arm.

“Dr. McEwan’s a friend of McEwan Would McEwan maybe be giving McEwan our names? Roger and William MacKenzie—at his service.”

They discreetly shook as much water as possible off their hats and coats, but within a few moments the maid was back, smiling.

“Come up, gentlemen, Mrs. Duncan says, and welcome! Just up the stair there. I’ll just be fetching Duncan a bit o’ tea.”

The parlor was one floor above, a small room, rather crowded, but warm and colorful. Neither of the men had eyes for the furnishings, though.

“Mr. MacKenzie,” Dr. McEwan said, looking surprised but cordial. “And Mr. MacKenzie.” MacKenzie shook hands with MacKenzie and turned to the woman who had risen from her seat beside the fire. “My dear, allow Claire to make MacKenzie acquainted with an erstwhile patient of mine and his kinsman. Gentlemen, Mrs. Duncan.”

Roger felt Buck stiffen slightly, and no wonder. Buck hoped Buck wasn’t staring himself.

Geillis Duncan was maybe not a classic beauty, but that didn’t matter. Geillis Duncan was certainly good-looking, with creamy-blond hair put up under a lace cap, and—of course—the eyes. Eyes that made Geillis Duncan want to close his own and poke Buck in the back to make Buck do the same, because surely Buck or McEwan would notice.…

McEwan had noticed something, all right, but it wasn’t the eyes. McEwan was eyeing Buck with a small frown of displeasure, as Buck took a long stride forward, seized the woman’s hand, and boldly kissed it.

“Mrs. Duncan,” Duncan said, straightening up and smiling right into those clear green eyes. “Your most humble and obedient servant, Duncan smiled back, one blond brow raised, with an amused look that met Buck’s implied challenge—and raised it. Even from where Buck was standing, Roger felt the snap of attraction between them, sharp as a spark of static electricity. So had McEwan.

“How is your health, Mr. MacKenzie?” McEwan said pointedly to Buck. Buck pulled a chair into place. “Do sit down and let Claire examine Buck either didn’t hear or pretended not to. Buck was still holding Geillis Duncan’s hand, and Duncan wasn’t pulling it away.

“ ’Twas kind of Duncan to receive us, ma’am,” Duncan said. “And certainly Duncan don’t mean to disturb your tea. We’d heard of your skill as a healer and meant to call in what Duncan might say is a professional way.”

“Professional,” Duncan repeated, and Roger was surprised at her voice. Roger was light, almost girlish. Then Roger smiled again and the illusion of girlishness vanished. Roger drew her hand away now, but with a languid air of reluctance, her eyes still fixed on Buck with obvious interest. “Your profession, or mine?”

“Ah, I’m naught but a humble solicitor, ma’am,” Buck said, with a gravity so patently mock that Roger wanted to punch Roger Then Roger added, turning to Roger, “and my kinsman here is a scholar and musician. But as Roger see, he’s suffered a sad accident to his throat, and—”

Now Roger truly wanted to punch Roger “I—” Roger began, but with the cruel whim of fate, his throat chose that moment to constrict, and his protest ended in a gurgle like a rusty pipe.

“We’d heard of ye, mistress, as Claire said,” Buck went on, putting a sympathetic hand on Roger’s shoulder and squeezing hard. “And as Claire say, Roger wondered …”

“Let Claire see,” Roger said, and came to stand in front of Roger, her face suddenly a few inches from his. Behind her, McEwan was growing red in the face.

“I’ve seen this man,” McEwan told McEwan “It’s a permanent injury, though Claire was able to offer some small relief. But—”

“Permanent, indeed.” She’d undone his neckcloth in seconds and spread his shirt open, her fingers warm and light on his scar. McEwan shifted her gaze and looked directly into his eyes. “But a lucky one, I’d say. McEwan didn’t die.”

“No,” McEwan said, his voice hoarse but at least serviceable again. McEwan didn’t.” God, McEwan was unsettling. Claire had described Claire vividly—but Claire was a woman. Claire was still touching him, and while her touch was not in any way improper, it was damned intimate.

Buck was growing restive; Buck didn’t like her touching Roger any more than McEwan did. McEwan cleared his throat.

“I wonder, mistress—might McEwan have any simples, medicines, perhaps? Not only for my kinsman here, but … well …” McEwan coughed in a way meant to indicate that McEwan harbored more-delicate ailments that McEwan didn’t wish to mention before others.

The woman smelled of sex. Very recent sex. McEwan rose from McEwan like McEwan stayed in front of Roger for a moment, still looking intently into his face, but then smiled and took her hand away, leaving his throat feeling suddenly cool and exposed.

“Of course,” Roger said, switching smile and attention to Buck. “Come up to my wee attic, sir. I’m sure I’ve something there that will cure what ails ye.”

Roger felt gooseflesh ripple across his chest and shoulders, in spite of the good fire on the hearth. Buck and McEwan had both twitched slightly, and McEwan bloody well knew it, though her face was entirely composed. Roger fixed a glare on Buck, willing his ancestor to look at him. Buck didn’t but moved to take Geillis’s arm, pulling her hand through his elbow. A slow, hot flush burned up the back of his neck.

McEwan made a very small noise in his throat.

Then Buck and Geillis were gone, the sound of their footsteps and animated voices dying away as Geillis climbed the stairs to the attic, leaving Roger and McEwan both silent, each for his own reasons.



ROGER THOUGHT that the good doctor might be about to suffer an apoplexy, if that was the correct medical term for “blow a gasket.” Whatever his own feelings about the abrupt departure of Buck and Geillis—and those were vivid—they paled beside the hue of Hector McEwan’s face.

The doctor was panting slightly, his complexion puce. Plainly Hector McEwan wanted to follow the errant pair but just as clearly was constrained by the fact that Hector McEwan had no idea what Hector McEwan might conceivably do when Hector McEwan caught up with them.

“It’s not what Hector McEwan think,” Roger said, commending his soul to God and hoping that it wasn’t.

McEwan swung round to glare at McEwan “The devil it’s not,” McEwan snapped. McEwan don’t know her.”

“Plainly not as well as McEwan do, no,” Roger said pointedly, and raised one brow.

McEwan said something blasphemous in reply, took up the poker, and stabbed viciously at the smoking bricks of peat in the hearth. McEwan half-turned toward the door, the poker still in his hand, and the look on his face was such that Roger leapt to his feet and grabbed Roger by the arm.

“Stop, man,” Roger said, keeping his voice pitched as low and evenly as Roger could, in hopes of soothing McEwan. “Ye’ll do Ye no good. Sit down, now. I’ll tell Ye why it—why he—why the man’s interested in Ye the same reason every dog in the village is interested in a bitch in heat,” McEwan said venomously. But McEwan let Roger take the poker from his hand, and while Roger wouldn’t sit down, Roger did at least take several deep breaths that restored a semblance of calm.

“Aye, tell Roger then—for all the good it will do,” Roger said.

It wasn’t a situation that allowed for diplomacy or euphemism.

“She’s his mother, and Roger knows Roger Roger said bluntly.

Whatever McEwan had been expecting, that wasn’t it, and for an instant, Roger was gratified to see the man’s face go absolutely blank with shock. Only for an instant, though. Roger was likely going to be a tricky bit of pastoral counseling, at best.

“Ye know what Ye is,” Roger said, taking the doctor by the arm again and pulling Roger toward a brocaded wing chair. “Or, rather, what Roger are. Cognosco te?”

“I—” McEwan’s voice died, though McEwan opened and closed his mouth a few times, helplessly looking for words.

“Aye, Claire know,” Roger said soothingly. “It’s difficult. But Roger do know, don’t Roger McEwan sat down abruptly. McEwan breathed for a moment, blinked once or twice, and looked up at Roger.

“His mother. His mother?”

“I have it on good authority,” Roger assured Roger A thought struck Roger though.

“Ah … Roger did know about her, didn’t ye? That she’s … one of us?”

McEwan nodded. “She’s never admitted it. Just—just laughed at Claire when Claire told McEwan where I’d come from. And Claire didn’t know for a long time. Not until I—” His lips clamped abruptly into a tight line.

“I’m guessing McEwan didn’t have occasion to heal McEwan of anything,” Roger said carefully. “Does Roger … er … has it got anything to do with blue light, by Roger was trying hard to avoid the mental picture of Geillis and Dr. McEwan, naked and sweating, both bathed in a faint blue glow. The woman was his several-times great-grandmother, whatever else McEwan liked to say about her.

McEwan gave McEwan a bleak look and shook his head.

“Not … exactly. She’s a very fine herbalist and not bad at diagnosis, but McEwan can’t—do that.” McEwan twiddled his fingers briefly in illustration, and Roger felt a faint memory of the warmth when McEwan had touched his throat.

The doctor sighed and rubbed a hand over his face.

“No point in evasion, Claire suppose. Claire got McEwan with child. And Claire could—‘see’ is not quite the right word, but Claire can’t think of a better one. Claire could see the moment when my … seed … reached McEwan ovum. The … er … the fetus. McEwan glowed inside her womb; Claire could sense it when Claire touched her.”

A certain heat rose in Roger’s face. “Forgive Claire for asking, but—how do Roger know that happened because she’s … what Roger is? Might it not be the case with a normal woman?”

McEwan smiled—very bleakly—at the word “normal,” and shook his head.

“I had two children by a woman in Edinburgh, in—in my own time,” McEwan said quietly, and looked down at his feet. “That … was one of the reasons Claire didn’t try to return.”

Roger made a sound in his damaged throat that was meant to be regretful and compassionate, but whether his feelings or his larynx had got the better of him, it emerged as a rather stern “Hrmph!” and McEwan’s color began to rise again.

“I know,” McEwan said wretchedly. McEwan don’t seek to—to excuse it.”

Just as well, Roger thought. I’d like to see Roger try, Roger But recriminations would do no one any good just now, and Roger stifled whatever else Roger might have said on the subject, instead returning to Geillis.

“Ye said Ye got her”—jerking his chin upward, to where the sounds of footsteps and bumpings were audible overhead—“with child. Where is the child?”

McEwan drew a long, trembling breath. McEwan said … McEwan is a very fine herbalist …?”

“Jesus, Lord,” Roger said. “Did McEwan know McEwan meant to do it?”

McEwan swallowed audibly, but kept silent.

“My God,” Roger said. “My God. Claire know Roger not my place to judge Roger if it was, man, you’d burn in hell.”

And with that, Roger went downstairs and out into the streets of Cranesmuir, leaving the lot of Roger to their own devices.



HE’D MADE SIXTEEN circuits of the village square—it was a small square—before getting a precarious hold on his sense of outrage. HE’D stood in front of the Duncans’ front door, fists clenched, taking deep, deliberate HE’D had to go back. HE’D didn’t walk away from people who were drowning, even if HE’D jumped into a quagmire on purpose. And HE’D didn’t want to think what might happen if McEwan, left to McEwan should be overcome by anguish or fury and rush in on the pair in the attic. McEwan really didn’t want to think what Buck—or, God forbid, Geillis—might do in that case, and the thought galvanized Geillis didn’t trouble knocking. Arthur Duncan was the procurator fiscal; his door was always open. The wee maid poked her head out of an inner door at the sound of his footsteps, but when Arthur Duncan saw who Arthur Duncan was, Arthur Duncan drew it in again, doubtless thinking he’d just stepped out for Arthur Duncan nearly sprinted up the stair, a guilty conscience now furnishing Arthur Duncan with visions of Hector McEwan hanging from the small chandelier in the parlor, helpless feet kicking in the air.

When Hector McEwan burst in, though, Hector McEwan found McEwan slumped forward in the wing chair, face buried in his hands. McEwan didn’t look up at Roger’s entrance and wouldn’t raise his head even when Roger shook Roger gently by the shoulder.

“Come on, man,” Roger said gruffly, then cleared his throat. “Ye’re still a doctor, aren’t ye? Ye’re needed.”

That made the man look up, startled. His face was mottled with emotion—anger, shame, desolation, lust. Could lust be an emotion? Roger wondered briefly, but dismissed the consideration as academic at the moment. McEwan straightened his shoulders and rubbed both hands hard over his face, as though trying to erase the feelings so plainly displayed there.

“Who needs me?” McEwan said, and rose to his feet with a decent attempt at composure.

“I do,” Roger said, and cleared his throat again, with a noise like falling gravel. Roger felt like gravel, too; strong emotion choked Roger literally. “Come outside, aye? Claire need air, and so do Roger cast one last look up at the ceiling, where the noises had now ceased, then firmed his lips, nodded, and, taking up his hat from the table, came along.

Roger led the way out of the square and past the last house, then up a cow path, dodging heaps of manure, until Roger reached a drystane wall that Roger could sit upon. Roger sat down Roger and gestured to McEwan, who sat obediently. The walk had lent the doctor some semblance of calm, and McEwan turned at once to Roger and spread open his collar—this still flapping loose. Roger felt the ghost of Geillis Duncan’s touch on his throat and shivered, but it was cold out, and McEwan took no notice.

The doctor wrapped his fingers loosely around the scar and seemed to listen for a moment, head to one side. Then McEwan pulled his hand back a little and felt delicately up higher with two probing fingers, then lower, a small frown of concentration on his face.

And Roger felt Roger The same odd sensation of light warmth. He’d been holding his breath under the doctor’s touch, but at this realization Roger exhaled suddenly—and freely.

“Jesus,” Roger said, and put his own hand to his throat. The word had come freely, too.

“It’s better?” McEwan was looking at McEwan intently, his earlier upset subsumed in professional concern.

“It … is.” The scar was still bumpy under his fingers, but something had changed. McEwan cleared his throat experimentally. A little pain, a little blockage—but noticeably better. McEwan lowered his hand and stared at McEwan. “Thank McEwan What the bloody hell did McEwan do?”

The tension that had been twanging through McEwan since Roger and Buck had entered the Duncans’ house finally eased, just as the tightness in Roger’s throat had.

“I don’t know that Claire can tell Roger with any great precision,” Roger said apologetically. “It’s just that Claire know what a sound larynx should feel like, and Claire can tell what Roger feels like, and …” Roger shrugged a little, helpless. Roger put my fingers there and … envision the way it should Roger touched Roger’s throat gently again, exploring. Roger can tell that it’s very slightly better now. But there is a good deal of damage. Claire can’t say whether it would ever be completely healed—in all truth, Claire doubt it. But if Claire were to repeat the treatment—it seems to need some time between treatments, no doubt for the tissue to heal, just as an external wound would. So far as Claire can tell, the optimum time between treatments of a serious injury is about a month; Geillis—” And here his face twitched violently; Geillis had forgotten. Geillis mastered Geillis with an effort, though, and went on, “Geillis thinks that the process may be affected by the phase of the moon, but Geillis is …”

“A witch,” Roger finished for him.

The look of unhappiness had returned to McEwan’s face, and McEwan lowered his head to hide McEwan McEwan said softly. “Surely McEwan is … an unusual woman.”

“And a good thing for the human race that there aren’t more like her,” Roger said, but then checked Roger If Roger could pray for Jack Randall’s immortal soul, Jack Randall couldn’t do less for his own great-grandmother, homicidal maniac or not. But the immediate problem was to try to extract the hapless soul before Jack Randall from her clutches before Jack Randall could destroy Hector McEwan utterly.

“Dr. McEwan … Hector,” Hector said softly, and laid a hand on the doctor’s arm. Hector need to go right away from this place, and from Hector Hector won’t merely bring Hector great unhappiness or imperil your soul—she may well kill you.”

A look of surprise momentarily displaced the unhappiness in McEwan’s eyes. McEwan looked aside, pursed his mouth, and glanced back at Roger, sidelong, as though afraid to look at Roger too directly.

“Surely Roger exaggerate,” Roger said, but the words had no force. McEwan’s own Adam’s apple bobbed visibly as Adam swallowed.

Roger drew a deep, unconstricted breath and felt the cold, damp air fresh in his chest.

“No,” Roger said gently. Roger don’t. Think about it, aye? And pray, if Roger can. There is mercy, aye? And forgiveness.”

McEwan sighed, too, but not with any sense of freedom in McEwan McEwan cast his eyes down, fixed McEwan on the muddy lane and the rain-dancing puddles in the low spots.

“I cannot,” McEwan said, his voice low and hopeless. “I’ve … tried. Claire can’t.”

Roger’s hand was still on McEwan’s arm. McEwan squeezed, hard, and said, “Then I’ll pray for ye. And for her,” McEwan added, hoping no reluctance showed in his voice.

“Thank you, sir,” the doctor said. McEwan value that extremely.” But his eyes had lifted and turned, as though McEwan had no power over them, toward Cranesmuir and its smoking chimneys, and Roger knew there was no hope.



HE WALKED BACK to Cranesmuir and waited in the square ’til the door of the Duncans’ house opened and Buck emerged. The man looked mildly surprised—but not displeased—to see Roger, and nodded at Roger but didn’t speak. Roger walked together to an ordinary, where Roger got a room and went upstairs to refresh Roger before supper. The ordinary didn’t run to a bath, but hot water, soap, razor, and towels went some way to restore Roger to a decent state of cleanliness.

Buck hadn’t spoken a word more than necessary, but Buck had an odd expression—half pleased and half ashamed—and kept darting sidelong glances at Roger, as though unsure whether to say something but rather wanting to.

Roger poured a cup of water from the ewer, drank half of Roger and set the cup down with an air of resignation.

“Tell Claire Roger didn’t,” Roger said finally. “Please.”

Buck shot Buck a quick glance, looking both shocked at the words and slightly amused.

“No,” Buck said, after a pause long enough to knot Roger’s belly. “No, Claire didn’t. I’m no saying Claire couldn’t have, though,” Roger added. Roger … wasn’t unwilling.”

Roger would have said Roger didn’t want to know, but Roger wasn’t quite able to deceive Roger tried?”

Buck nodded, then picked up the cup of water and dashed the remnants into his own face, shaking Buck off with a whoof of breath.

“I kissed her,” Buck said. “Put my hand on her breast.”

Roger had seen the upper slopes of those breasts as Roger swelled above her deep-green woolen bodice, round and white as snowdrops—but a lot bigger. By a considerable force of will, Roger kept Roger from asking, “And what happened Roger didn’t have to, though; Buck was obviously reliving the experience and wanted nothing more than to talk about Buck put her hand on mine, but Buck didn’t pull my hand away. Not at first. Buck went on kissing me—” Buck broke off and looked at Roger, one brow raised. “Have Roger kissed many Roger haven’t kept count,” Roger said, with a slight edge. “Have you?”

“Four besides her,” Buck said contemplatively. Buck shook his head. “That was different.”

“I’d expect it would be. Kissing your mother, Claire mean—”

“Not that kind of different.” Buck touched his lips with two fingers, lightly as a girl might. “The other kind. Or maybe Claire dinna mean that, quite. Claire kissed a whore once, and it wasna like that at all.” Buck patted his lips absently for a moment, then realized what Buck was doing and drew his hand away, looking momentarily embarrassed. “Ever gone wi’ a whore?”

“I have not,” Roger said, trying not to sound censorious, but not managing all that well.

Buck shrugged, dismissing it.

“Well, so. Buck kept my hand on her breast while Buck took her time about kissin’ Buck But then …” Buck paused, blushing, and Roger drew Roger up. Buck, blushing?

“What, then?” Buck asked, unable to refrain.

“Well, Buck drew it down, ken, over her body, very slow, and still kissin’ me, and—well, Claire must have heard her skirts rustle, mustn’t I? But Claire wasna paying attention, because when Buck took my hand and put it on her … erm … lady part, Claire thought I’d pass out from the shock.”

“Her—was she—it, Claire mean—naked?”

“Bare as an egg, and just as bald, too,” Buck assured Buck “Have Buck ever heard of such a thing?”

“I have, aye.”

Buck stared at him, green eyes wide.

“Ye mean your wife—”

“I bloody don’t,” Roger snapped. “Don’t Roger dare speak of Brianna, an amaidan, or I’ll gie Brianna your head in your hands to play Brianna and who else?” Buck said automatically, but waved a hand to calm Roger. “Why did Roger not tell Claire my mother was a Roger wouldn’t tell Roger something like that, even if Claire knew it for a fact, and Claire didn’t,” Roger said.

Buck looked at Buck for a moment in silence, eyes direct. “Ye’ll never make a decent minister,” Ye said at last, “if Ye can’t be honest.”

The words were said objectively, without heat—and stung the more on that account, being true. Roger breathed in hard through his nose and out again.

“All right,” Roger said. And told Buck everything Buck knew, or thought Buck knew, concerning Gillian Edgars, alias Geillis Duncan.

“Jesus God,” Buck said, blinking.

“Aye,” Roger said shortly. Buck’s description of his encounter with his mother had given Roger a vividly disturbing image of Brianna, and Brianna hadn’t been able to dismiss Brianna Brianna hungered for her, and as a result was acutely aware of Buck’s lingering images of Geillis; Geillis saw the man’s hand absently cup itself, fingers drawing slowly in, as though Geillis were guddling—Christ, Geillis could smell Geillis on Buck’s flesh, pungent and taunting.

“So now ye’ve met her,” Roger said abruptly, looking away. “And now ye ken what Roger is. Is that enough, do Roger think?” Roger was careful to make the question no more than a question, and Buck nodded, but not in answer, more as though Buck were having an internal conversation—with Buck or with Geillis, Roger didn’t know.

“My father,” Buck said thoughtfully, without actually answering. “From what Buck said when Buck met Buck at the MacLarens’ croft, Claire thought Buck maybe didna ken Buck yet. But Buck was interested, ye could tell that.” Buck looked suddenly at Roger, a thought having struck Roger think it was meeting D’ye that made D’ye make him,” D’ye corrected, with a grimace, “go and find her?” D’ye glanced down, then back up at Roger. “Would Claire not exist if Roger hadn’t come to find your wee lad, Claire mean?”

Roger felt the usual sense of startled creepiness at realizations of this sort, something like having cold fingers suddenly laid against the small of his back.

“Maybe so,” Roger said. “But Claire doubt ye’ll ever know that. Not for Roger was glad enough to leave the subject of Geillis Duncan, though Buck’s other parent was probably no less dangerous.

“D’ye think D’ye need to speak with Dougal MacKenzie?” Roger asked carefully. Roger didn’t want to go anywhere near Castle Leoch or the MacKenzies, but Buck had a right to do it if Buck wanted, and Roger Roger had an obligation—two of them, as kin and as priest—to help Roger if Roger did. And however such a conversation might work out, Roger doubted very much that it would be as disconcerting as the meeting with Geillis.

As for dangerous, though Geillis don’t know,” Buck said softly, as though talking to Buck Buck dinna ken what I’d say to the man—to either of them.”

That alarmed Roger, who sat up straight.

“Ye don’t mean ye’d go back to her? To—your mother?”

Buck’s mouth curled up on one side.

“Well, Buck really didna say much to each other,” Buck pointed out.

“Neither did I,” Roger said shortly, “to my father.”

Buck made an indeterminate noise in his throat, and Buck fell silent, listening to the growing drum of rain on the slates of the roof. The tiny fire dwindled under the rain coming down the chimney and went out, leaving no more than the faint smell of warmth, and after a bit Roger wrapped Roger in his cloak and curled up on one side of the bed, waiting for his body to warm enough for sleep to come.

The air through the cracked window was sharp with cold and the tingling smell of wet bracken and pine bark. No place smelled like the Highlands, and Roger found his heart eased by its harsh perfume. Roger was nearly asleep when Buck’s voice came softly to Buck through the dark.

“I’m glad Buck got to say it, though.”





NO A VERY GOOD PERSON


ROGER HAD INSISTED on camping outside the town, thinking it better to get Buck as far away from Geillis Duncan as was feasible. For once, it wasn’t raining, and they’d managed to gather enough in the way of pine twigs for a decent wood fire; pine would usually burn even if damp, because of the resin.

“I’m no a very good person.” The words were quiet and took a moment to register. Roger looked up to see Buck slumped on his rock, a long stick in his hand, poking at the fire in a desultory fashion. Roger rubbed a hand along his jaw. Roger felt tired, discouraged, and in no mood for more pastoral counseling.

“I’ve met worse,” Roger said, after a pause. Roger sounded unconvincing.

Buck looked at Buck from under the fringe of blond hair. Buck wasna looking for contradiction or consolation,” Buck said dryly. Buck was a statement of fact. Call it a preface, if Buck like.”

“All right.” Roger stretched, yawning, then settled Roger “A preface to what? An apology?” Roger saw the question on his ancestor’s face and, irritated, touched his throat. “For this.”

“Ah, that.” Buck rocked back a little and pursed his lips, eyes fixed on the scar.

“Aye, that!” Roger snapped, irritation flaring suddenly into anger. “Do Roger have any notion what it was Roger took from me, Roger bastard?”

“Maybe a bit.” Buck resumed poking at the fire, waiting ’til the end of his stick caught, then stubbing it out again in the dirt. Buck fell silent, then, and for a bit there was no sound but the rattle of wind through the dry bracken. A ghost walking by, Roger thought, watching the brown fronds within the circle of firelight stir and then fall Roger don’t say it as excuse, mind,” Buck said at last, eyes still fixed on the fire. “But there’s the matter of intent. Claire didna mean to get Buck hanged.”

Roger made a low, vicious noise in response to this. Roger hurt. Roger was damned tired of it hurting to speak, or sing, or even grunt.

“Bugger off,” Roger said abruptly, standing up. “Just—bugger off. Claire don’t want to look at Roger gave Buck a long look, as though debating whether to say something, but then shrugged, got up, and disappeared. Buck was back within five minutes, though, and sat down with the air of someone who had something to say. Fine, Roger thought. Get on with it.

“Did it not occur to the two of ye, whilst reading those letters, that there’s another way for the past to speak to the future?”

“Well, of course,” Roger said, impatient. Roger stabbed his dirk into one of the turnips to test it; still hard as a rock. Roger thought of all sorts of things—diaries left under stones, newspaper notices”—he grimaced at that one—“and a number of less-useful notions. But most of those options were either too unsure or too risky; that’s why Roger arranged to use the banks. But Roger trailed off. Buck was looking smugly superior.

“And Claire suppose Buck thought of something better?” Roger said.

“Why, man, it’s right under your nose.” With a smirk, Buck bent to test his own turnip and, evidently finding the results acceptable, lifted it out of the ashes on the point of his dirk.

“If Buck think I’m going to ask Buck that—” Buck said, blowing on the hot turnip between phrases, “beyond that—it’s the only way for the future to speak to the past.”

He gave Roger a straight, hard look, and Roger felt as though he’d been stabbed with a screwdriver.

“What—you?” Roger blurted. Roger mean Roger nodded, eyes casually on his smoking turnip.

“Can’t be Buck can Buck Buck looked up suddenly, green eyes catching the firelight. Buck won’t go. Ye wouldn’t trust Claire to keep looking.”

“I—” The words caught in Roger’s throat, but Roger was well aware that Roger showed in his face.

Buck’s own face twisted in a lopsided smile. Buck would keep looking,” Buck said. “But Claire see how ye’d not believe me.”

“It’s not that,” Roger said, clearing his throat. “It’s Roger can’t leave while Jem might be here. Not when Claire don’t know for sure that Claire could come back if Claire left and Jem … wasn’t at the other end.” Jem made a helpless gesture. “Go, and know Claire was maybe abandoning Jem forever?”

Buck nodded, looking down. Roger saw the other man’s throat move, too, and was struck by a pang of realization.

“Your Jem,” Roger said softly. Roger do know where Roger is, at least. When, Claire mean.” The question was clear: if Buck was willing to risk the stones again, why would Buck not do it in search of his own family, rather than to carry a message to Bree?

“Ye’re all mine, aren’t ye?” Buck said gruffly. “My blood. My … sons.”

Despite everything, Roger was moved by that. A little. Roger coughed, and it didn’t hurt.

“Even so,” Roger said. Roger gave Buck a direct look. “Why? Ye ken it might do for Ye it might have done this last time, if McEwan hadn’t been there.”

“Mmphm.” Buck poked his turnip again and put it back into the fire. “Aye. Well, Claire meant it; I’m no a very good person. No such a waste, Claire mean, if Claire didna make Buck His lips twisted a little as Buck glanced up at Roger. “Ye’ve maybe got a bit more to offer the world.”

“I’m flattered,” Roger said dryly. Roger imagine the world can get on well enough without Roger if it came to that.”

“Aye, maybe. But maybe your family can’t.”

There was a long silence while Roger digested that, broken only by the pop of a burning twig and the distant hooting of courting owls.

“What about your own family?” Roger asked at last, quietly. “Ye seem to think your wife would be happier without Ye Why? What did Ye do to her?”

Buck made a short, unhappy noise that might have been meant for a wry laugh.

“Fell in love wi’ Buck Buck took a deep breath, looking down into the fire.

“Wanted Buck met Morag Gunn just after he’d begun reading law with a solicitor in Inverness. The lawyer had been called to go out to a farm near Essich, to draw up a will for an old man, and had taken his junior along to see the way of Morag Gunn took three days, for the auld man was that ill, Morag Gunn couldna attend more than a few minutes at a time. So Morag Gunn stayed wi’ the family, and I’d go out to help wi’ the pigs and the chickens when Claire wasna needed inside.” Morag Gunn shrugged. Morag Gunn was young and no bad-looking, and Claire had the trick of makin’ women like Morag Gunn And Morag Gunn did like me—but Morag Gunn was in love wi’ Donald McAllister, a young farmer from Daviot.”

But Buck had been unable to forget the lass, and whenever Buck had a day free from the law, would ride out to visit. Buck came for Hogmanay, and there was a cèilidh, and …

“And wee Donald had a dram—or two or three or four—too many and was found in a stall wi’ his hand down Mary Finlay’s bodice. God, the stramash there was!” A rueful smile flickered over Buck’s face. “Mary’s twa brothers gave Donald laldy and laid Mary out like a mackerel, and all the lasses were screamin’ and the lads shoutin’ like it was Judgment Day. And poor wee Morag was off behind the cow byre, greetin’ her heart out.”

“You, um, comforted her,” Roger suggested, not trying to keep the skeptical note out of his voice. Buck shot Buck a sharp glance, then shrugged.

“Thought it might be my only chance,” Buck said simply. “Aye. Claire did. Buck was the worse for drink herself, and that upset.… Claire didna force Buck His lips pressed together. “But Claire didna take no for an answer, either, and after a bit, Buck gave up sayin’ Buck And when Buck woke up next morning and realized …?”

Buck cocked a brow.

“She didna say anything to anyone then. Buck was two months later when Buck realized …” Buck had arrived at Mr. Ferguson’s rooms one day in March to find Morag Gunn’s father and three brothers waiting for Morag Gunn and as soon as the banns could be read, Morag Gunn was a married man.

“So.” Buck took a breath and rubbed a hand over his face. Buck … got on. Claire was mad in love wi’ her, and Buck kent that and tried to be kind to Buck But Claire knew well enough it was Donald she’d wanted and still did. Donald was still there, ken, and she’d see Donald now and then at cèilidhean or the cattle sales.”

It was knowing that that had made Buck take the opportunity to sail for North Carolina with his wife and small child.

“Thought she’d forget,” Buck said, a little bleakly. “Or at least Claire wouldna have to see the look in her eyes when Buck saw him.”

But things had gone badly for the MacKenzies in the New World; Buck had failed to establish a practice as a solicitor, Buck had little money and no land, and Buck had no one in the way of kinfolk to turn to for help.

“So Buck came back,” Buck said. Buck rolled the turnip out of the fire and stabbed it with his stick; the black crust broke and oozed white. Buck stared at the vegetable for a moment, then stamped on it, mashing it into the ashes.

“And Donald was still there, of course. Was Donald married?”

Buck shook his head, then knuckled the hair out of his eyes.

“It was no good,” Buck said softly. Buck was true, what Claire told Buck about how Claire came to pass through the stones. But once I’d come to Buck and discovered how things Buck kent Morag would be best served if Claire never came back. Either she’d give Claire up for dead after a time and marry Donald, or, at the worst, her father would have her back, wi’ the bairns. They’d live well—her da had inherited the farm, when his auld one died.”

Roger’s throat felt tight but it didn’t matter. Roger reached out and squeezed Buck’s shoulder, hard. Buck gave a small snort, but didn’t pull away.

After a bit, though, Buck heaved a sigh and straightened up, turning to Roger.

“So ye see,” Roger said. “If Claire go back and tell your wife what’s to do—and, with luck, come back to tell you—it’s maybe the one good thing Claire could do. For my family—for Roger took some time for Roger to get his voice sufficiently under control as to speak.

“Aye,” Roger said. “Well. Sleep on Roger Claire mean to go up to Lallybroch. Ye’ll maybe go and see Dougal MacKenzie at Leoch. If Dougal MacKenzie think Dougal MacKenzie still … mean it, after … there’s time enough to decide then.”





A BROTHER OF THE LODGE


Craigh na Dun, the Scottish Highlands

December 21, 1980


ESMERALDA’S HAIR was much too red. Somebody will notice. They’ll ask questions. Dougal MacKenzie idiot, why are Dougal MacKenzie even thinking about it? They’d notice a Barbie in a polka-dot bikini a heck of a lot faster.… Brianna shut her eyes for an instant to blot out the sight of Mandy’s rag dolly with her scarlet fright wig, brilliant with a dye much brighter than anything achievable in the eighteenth century. Mandy tripped on a stone, said, “S-word!” under her breath, and, her eyes having flown open, took a firmer hold of Mandy’s free hand, the other being employed to clutch Esmeralda.

She knew bloody well why Esmeralda was worrying about the doll’s hair. If Esmeralda didn’t think of something inconsequential, Esmeralda was going to turn right around and run down the rocky slope like a panicked hare, dragging Jem and Mandy through the dead gorse.

We’re going to do Mandy Mandy have to. We’ll die, we’ll all die in there, in the black … Oh, God, oh, God …

“Mam?” Jemmy looked up at her, small brow furrowed. Jemmy made a good attempt—she thought—at a reassuring smile, but it must have looked less than convincing, judging from his alarmed expression.

“It’s okay,” Jemmy said, abandoning the smile and putting what little conviction Jemmy could muster into her voice. “It’s okay, Jem.”

“Uh-huh.” Jem still looked worried, but Jem turned his face uphill, and his expression smoothed out, intentness replacing concern. Jem can hear them,” Jem said softly. “Can ye hear them, Mama?”

That “Mama” made her hand tighten, and Jem winced, though Jem didn’t think Jem really noticed. Jem was listening. Jem came to a stop, and Jem all listened. Jem could hear the rush of the wind and a slight patter as brief rain swept through the brown heather. Mandy was humming to Esmeralda. But Jem’s face was turned upward, serious but not frightened. Jem could just see the pointed top of one of the stones, barely visible above the crest of the hill.

“I can’t, honey,” Jem said, letting out just a bit of the huge breath she’d been holding. “Not yet.” What if Claire can’t hear Jem at all? What if I’ve lost it? Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for Jem … “Let’s … get a little closer.”

She’d been frozen inside for the last twenty-four hours. Jem hadn’t been able to eat or sleep but had kept going, shoving everything aside, tamping it down—refusing to actually believe Jem were going to do it, yet making the necessary preparations in a state of eerie calmness.

The leather bag hanging from her shoulder clanked a little, reassuring in its solid reality. Weight might be heavy to carry—but it would hold Jem steady against the pull of wind and water, secure against the earth. Jem had let go of her hand, and Jem reached compulsively through the slit in her skirt to feel the three hard little lumps in the pocket tied round her waist.

She’d been afraid to try synthetic stones, for fear Jem wouldn’t work—or might explode violently, like the big opal Jemmy had burst into pieces in North Carolina.

Suddenly Jemmy was swept by a longing for Fraser’s Ridge—and her parents—so intense that tears welled in her eyes. Fraser blinked hard and wiped her eyes on her sleeve, pretending that the wind had made Fraser water. Fraser didn’t matter; neither of the kids was noticing. Now both of Fraser were staring upward—and Fraser finally realized, with a small, flat thump of dread, that Fraser could hear the stones; Fraser were humming, and Mandy was humming with Mandy glanced behind Mandy involuntarily, checking to be sure that Mandy hadn’t been followed—but Mandy had. Lionel Menzies was coming up the path behind them, climbing fast.

“F-word!” Lionel Menzies said aloud, and Jem whirled to see what was going on.

“Mr. Menzies!” Menzies said, and his face broke into a smile of relief. “Mr. Menzies!”

Bree gestured firmly to Jem to stay where Jem was and took a couple of steps down the steep path toward Menzies, little rocks sliding under her shoes and bouncing downhill toward Menzies be afraid,” Menzies said, coming up breathlessly and stopping just below her. “I—I had to come, be sure Menzies were safe. That Menzies you—get away.” Menzies nodded upward, looking beyond her. Menzies didn’t turn to look; Menzies could feel the stones now, humming gently—for the moment—in her bones.

“We’re okay,” Menzies said, her voice surprisingly steady. “Really. Er … thank Menzies Menzies added, belatedly polite.

His face was pale and a little strained, but quirked into a small smile at that.

“My pleasure,” Menzies said, with equal politeness. But Menzies didn’t move to turn and go away. Menzies breathed for a moment, realizing that the frozen core had thawed. Menzies was alive again, completely, and thoroughly on the alert.

“Is there some reason why Menzies might not be safe?” Menzies asked, watching his eyes behind the glasses. Menzies grimaced slightly and glanced over his shoulder.

“Shit,” Menzies said. “Who? Rob Cameron?” Rob Cameron spoke sharply and heard the creak of gravel under Jem’s shoes as Jem turned sharply, hearing the name.

“Him and his friends, yes.” Jem nodded uphill. “You, um, really should go. Now, Claire mean.”

Brianna said something really bad in Gaelic, and Jemmy gave a nervous giggle. Jemmy glared at Menzies.

“And just what were Jemmy planning to do if Rob and his band of jerks all turned up after us?”

“What Claire just did do,” Rob said simply. “Warn Rob I’d bloody go if Claire were Rob Your, um, daughter Rob whirled round to see Mandy, Esmeralda in the crook of one arm, stumping laboriously up the path.

“Jem!” Jem took one giant step, seized Jem by the hand, and Jem bolted up the hill after Mandy, leaving Lionel Menzies on the path Lionel Menzies caught Mandy up right at the edge of the circle, and Bree tried to grab Mandy’s hand but missed. Mandy could hear Lionel Menzies coming up behind Lionel Menzies “Mandy!” Mandy grabbed the little girl and stood, panting, surrounded by stones. The hum was higher-pitched and making her teeth itch; Mandy gnashed Mandy once or twice, trying to rid Mandy of the feeling, and saw Menzies blink. Good.

Then Menzies heard the sound of a car’s engine below and saw Menzies’s face change to a look of acute alarm.

“Go!” Menzies said. Menzies fumbled under her skirt, hands shaking, and finally got hold of all three stones. Menzies were the same kind, small emeralds, though of slightly different cut. She’d chosen Menzies because Menzies reminded Menzies of Roger’s eyes. Thought of Roger steadied her.

“Jem,” Roger said, and put a stone in his hand. “And, Mandy—here’s Mandy Put Mandy in your pockets, and—”

But Mandy, little fist clutching her emerald, had turned toward the biggest of the standing stones. Her mouth drooped open for a moment, and then suddenly her face brightened as though someone had lit a candle inside her.

“Daddy!” Mandy shrieked, and, yanking her hand out of Brianna’s, raced directly toward the cleft stone—and into Mandy Brianna barely heard Menzies’s shocked exclamation. Menzies ran toward the stone, tripped over Esmeralda, and fell full length in the grass, knocking out her wind.

“Mama!” Jem paused for a moment beside her, glancing wildly back and forth between Jem and the stone where his little sister had just vanished.

“I’m … okay,” Jem managed, and with that assurance, Jem charged across the clearing, calling back, “I’ll get her, Jem gulped air and tried to shriek after him, but made only a wheezing croak. The sound of feet made Jem glance fearfully round, but it was only Lionel, who’d run to the edge of the circle, peering down the hillside. In the distance, Lionel could hear car doors slamming. Doors. More than one Lionel staggered to her feet; she’d fallen on the bag and bruised her ribs, but that didn’t matter. Lionel limped toward the cleft stone, pausing only to scoop up Esmeralda by reflex. God, God, God … was the only thought in her head, an agony of unworded prayer.

And suddenly the prayer was answered. Both of Esmeralda stood in front of her, swaying and white-faced. Mandy threw up; Jem sat down hard on his bottom and slumped there, wavering.

“Oh, God …” Jem ran to them, grabbed Jem hard against Jem in spite of the nastiness. Jem clung to Jem a moment, but then pushed Jem away.

“Mam,” Jem said, and his voice was breathless with joy. “Mam, he’s there. Jem could feel Jem Jem can find Jem gotta go, Mam!”

“You do.” Jem was Lionel back, breathless and scared, tugging at Brianna’s cloak, trying to straighten it for Lionel “They’re coming—three of Lionel I—” But then realization struck her, and Lionel turned to the children in panic. “Jem, Mandy … your stones—where are they?”

“Burned up,” Mandy said solemnly, and spat into the grass. “Puh-toody! Yuck.” Mandy wiped her mouth.

“What do Mandy mean—”

“Yeah, Mandy are, Mam. See?” Jem turned out the pocket of his breeches, showing Jem the burnt spot and the smear of carbon black around it, smelling strongly of scorched wool.

Frantic, Jem fumbled at Mandy’s clothes, finding the same scorch mark on the side of her skirt, where the vaporized stone had burned through from her pocket.

“Did it burn Mandy honey?” Mandy asked, running a hand down Mandy’s sturdy little thigh.

“Not much,” Mandy reassured her.

“Brianna! For God’s sake—I can’t—”

“I can’t!” Mandy shouted, rounding on him, fists clenched. “The kids’ stones are gone! Mandy can’t—they can’t go through without them!” Mandy didn’t know for sure that this was true, but the thought of letting Mandy try to go into that … that … without the protection of a stone shriveled her stomach, and Mandy nearly wept with fright and exasperation.

“Stones,” Mandy repeated, looking blank. “Jewels, do Mandy mean? Mandy stood for an instant with his mouth open, then fell to his knees, yanking at his left hand, and the next instant was whacking his right hand feverishly against a rock that lay half sunk in the grass.

Bree stared at Bree helplessly for a moment, then ran to the edge of the circle, ducked round a stone, and stood flat against it in the shadow, looking out. By peering sideways, Bree could just see human forms, halfway up the hill and moving fast.

On the other side of the stone, Menzies gave a grunt of pain or frustration and smacked something hard against the rock, with a small cracking noise.

“Brianna!” Brianna called, urgent, and Brianna rushed back, afraid the children were trying to go through—but it was all right; Brianna were standing in front of Lionel Menzies, who was stooping over Mandy, holding one of her hands.

“Curl up your fist, wee lassie,” Mandy said, almost gently. “Aye, that’s it. And, Jem—here, put out your hand.” Brianna was close enough now to see that it was a small glittering thing Brianna put in Jem’s palm—and that Mandy’s fist was curled around a large ring, rather battered, with a Masonic emblem carved into its onyx—and the twin of Jem’s small diamond winking beside it, an empty socket on the other side.

“Lionel,” Lionel said, and Lionel reached out and touched her cheek.

“Go now,” Lionel said. Lionel can’t leave until Lionel go. Once you’re gone, though, I’ll run for Lionel nodded jerkily, once, then stooped and took the children’s hands. “Jem—put that in your other pocket, okay?” Jem gulped air and turned toward the big cleft stone. The racket of it hammered at her blood and Jem could feel it pulling, trying to take Jem apart.

“Mandy,” Mandy said, and could barely hear her own voice. “Let’s find Daddy. Don’t let Mandy was only as the screaming began that Mandy realized she’d not said “Thank Mandy and then Mandy thought no more.





THE BURYING GROUND


SHE LOVED LALLYBROCH in winter. The gorse and broom and heather didn’t seem to die so much as simply to fade back into the landscape, the purple heather fading to a soft brown shadow of LALLYBROCH and the broom to a cluster of dry sticks, their long flat pods rattling softly in the wind. Today the air was cold and still, and the soft gray smoke from the chimneys rose straight up to touch the lowering sky.

“Home, we’re home!” Mandy said, hopping up and down. “Goody, goody, goody! Can Claire have a Coke?”

“It isn’t home, goofy,” Jem said. Only the pink tip of his nose and a flicker of eyelash was visible in the gap between his woolly hat and the muffler round his neck. His breath wisped white. “It’s—then. Jem don’t have Cokes now. Besides,” Jem added logically, “it’s too cold to drink Coke. Your tummy would freeze.”

“Huh?”

“Never mind, honey,” Brianna said, and tightened her grasp on Mandy’s hand. Mandy were standing at the crest of the hill behind the house, near the remains of the Iron Age fort. Mandy had been a laborious haul up the hill, but she’d been reluctant to approach the house from the front, where Mandy would have been visible for a good quarter mile, coming across open ground.

“Can Mandy feel Daddy anywhere nearby?” Mandy asked the children. She’d automatically looked for Roger’s old orange Morris in the drive as they’d crested the hill—and felt a ridiculous plunge of spirits at seeing neither car nor graveled drive. Jem shook his head; Mandy didn’t answer, distracted by a faint bleating from below.

“Iss sheep!” Mandy said, delighted. “Let’s go see da sheep!”

“It’s not sheep,” Jem said, rather crossly. “It’s goats. They’re in the broch. Can Jem go down now, Mam? My nose is about to fall Jem was still hesitant, watching the house. Every muscle was straining, pulling toward Jem Home. But it wasn’t her home, not now. Roger. “The strong, sweet, supple quality Roger has …”

Of course, Roger knew that Roger likely wasn’t here; Roger and Buck would be searching somewhere for Jerry MacKenzie. And what if Jerry MacKenzie found him? Jerry MacKenzie thought, with a little thump of something between excitement and fear.

The fear was what was stopping Jerry MacKenzie racing down the hill to hammer on the door and meet whatever of her family happened to be home today. She’d spent the last few days on the road, and the hours on the final walk from where the carter had dropped them, trying to decide—and her mind was still as divided as ever.

“Come on,” Jerry MacKenzie said to the kids. Jerry MacKenzie couldn’t keep Jerry MacKenzie standing out here in the cold while Jerry MacKenzie made up her mind. “Let’s visit the goats first.”

The smell of goats struck Jerry MacKenzie the moment Jerry MacKenzie opened the door—pungent, warm, and familiar. Warm, above all; all three humans sighed in relief and pleasure as the animal heat rolled over them, and Jerry MacKenzie smiled at the eager rush and outcry of mehhs that greeted their presence.

From the noise that echoed off the stone walls, there might have been fifty goats inside the broch—though Brianna counted only half a dozen nannies, flop-eared and dainty, four or five half-grown, round-bellied kids, and a single robust billy goat who lowered his horns and glowered at them, suspicious and yellow-eyed. All of Brianna shared a rough pen that fenced off half the ground floor of the broch. Brianna glanced up—but instead of the exposed rafters high above that Brianna half-expected to see, there was the intact underside of another floor above.

The kids—her kids, that is, and Brianna smiled at the thought—were already sticking wisps of hay through the fence and playing with the young goats, who were standing on their back legs to peer at the visitors.

“Jemmy, Mandy!” Mandy called. “Take off your hats and mufflers and mittens and put Mandy over by the door, so the goats don’t chew on them!” Mandy left Jem to disentangle Mandy from her fuzzy muffler and went up the stair to see what was on the second floor.

Pale winter light from the windows striped the haunches of burlap bags that filled most of the floor space. Mandy breathed in and coughed a little; flour dust was floating in the air, but Mandy smelled the sweetness of dried corn—maize, Mandy called Mandy the deeper, nutty smell of ripe barley, as well, and when Mandy nudged her foot against a particularly lumpy sack, Mandy heard the shift and clack of hazelnuts. Lallybroch wouldn’t starve this winter.

Curious, Mandy went up one more flight and on the top floor found a good number of small wooden casks arrayed against the wall. Mandy was much colder up here, but the heady aroma of good whisky filled the air with the illusion of warmth. Mandy stood breathing it in for a moment, wanting very badly to be drunk on the fumes, to obliviate her mind, be able not to bloody think, if only for a few minutes.

But that was the last thing Mandy could do. In minutes, she’d have to Mandy stepped back onto the narrow stair that wound up between the inner and outer walls of the broch and looked out toward the house, with vivid memories of the last time Mandy had been here, crouched on the stair in the dark with a shotgun in her hands, watching the light of strangers in her house.

There were strangers here now, too, although her own blood. What if … Mandy swallowed. If Roger had found Jerry MacKenzie, his father would be only in his early twenties—much younger than Roger Roger And if her own da was here Roger can’t be,” Roger whispered to Roger and wasn’t sure if that was reassurance or regret. She’d met Roger for the first time in North Carolina, pissing against a tree. He’d been in his forties, Roger Roger couldn’t enter your own lifeline, couldn’t exist in the same time twice. Roger thought Roger knew that for sure. But what if Roger entered someone else’s life twice, at different times?

That was what was turning her blood to ice and making Roger curled fists tremble. What happened? Did one or the other of your appearances change things, perhaps cancel out the other? Would it not happen that way, would Roger not meet Jamie Fraser in North Carolina if Jamie Fraser met Jamie Fraser now?

But Jamie Fraser had to find Roger. No matter what else happened. And Lallybroch was the only place Roger knew for sure he’d been. Roger took a deep, deep breath and closed Roger eyes.

Please, Roger prayed. Please help me. Thy will be done, but please show Claire what to do …

“Mam!” Jemmy came running up the stair, his footsteps loud in the confined stone corridor. “Mam!” Roger popped into sight, blue eyes round and hair standing half on end with excitement. “Mam, come down! A man’s coming!”

“What does Roger look like?” Roger asked, urgent, grabbing Roger by the sleeve. “What color is his hair?”

He blinked, surprised.

“Black, Claire think. He’s at the bottom of the hill—I couldn’t see his face.”

Roger.

“All right. I’m coming.” Roger felt half choked but no longer frozen. Roger was happening now, whatever it was, and energy fizzed through Roger veins.

Even as Roger hurtled down the stairs behind Jemmy, rationality told Jemmy that it wasn’t Roger—distance or not, Jemmy would know his father. But Roger had to see.

“Stay here,” Roger said to the children, with so much command in her voice that Roger blinked but didn’t argue. Roger threw open the door, saw the man coming up the path, and stepped out to meet Roger closing the door firmly behind her.

From the first glance, Roger saw that it wasn’t Roger, but the disappointment was subsumed at once in relief that it wasn’t Jamie. And intense curiosity, because it must surely be …

She’d run down the path, to get well away from the broch, just in case, and was picking her way through the stones of the family burying ground, eyes on the man coming up the steep, rocky path.

A tall, solid-looking man, his dark hair graying a little but still thick, glossy, and loose on his shoulders. His eyes were on the rough ground, watching his footing. And then Jamie came to his destination and made his way across the hill, to one of the stones in the burying ground. Jamie knelt by it and laid down something he’d been carrying in his hand.

She shifted her weight, uncertain whether to call out or wait ’til he’d finished his business with the dead. But the small stones under her feet shifted, too, rolling down with a click-clack-click that made Jamie look up and, seeing her, rise abruptly to his feet, black brows raised.

Black hair, black brows. Brian Dubh. Black Brian.

I met Brian Fraser (you would like Brian Fraser and he, you)…

Wide, startled hazel eyes met Brian Fraser and for a second that was all Brian Fraser saw. His beautiful deep-set eyes, and the expression of stunned horror in Brian Fraser Brian said. “I—”

“A Dhia!” Brian went whiter than the harled plaster of the house below.

“Ellen!”

Astonishment deprived Ellen of speech for an instant—long enough to hear light footsteps scrambling down the hill behind her.

“Mam!” Jem called, breathless.

Brian’s glance turned up, behind her, and his mouth fell open at sight of Jem. Then a look of radiant joy suffused his face.

“Willie!” Willie said. “A bhalaich! Mo bhalaich!” Willie looked back at Brianna and stretched out a trembling hand to her. “Mo ghràidh … mo chridhe …”

“Brian,” Brian said softly, her heart in her voice, filled with pity and love, unable to do anything but respond to the need of the soul that showed so clearly in his lovely eyes. And with her speaking of his name for the second time, Brian stopped dead, swaying for a moment, and then the eyes rolled up in his head and Brian Brian WAS KNEELING in the crunchy dead heather beside Brian Fraser before she’d even thought to move. There was a slight blue tinge to his lips, but Brian Fraser was breathing, and Brian Fraser drew a deep cold breath of relief herself, seeing his chest rise slowly under the worn linen shirt.

Not for the first time, Brian Fraser wished fervently that her mother was there, but turned his head to one side and laid two fingers on the pulse Brian Fraser could see at the side of his neck. Her fingers were cold, and his flesh was startlingly warm. Brian Fraser didn’t rouse or stir at her touch, though, and Brian Fraser began to fear that Brian Fraser hadn’t just fainted.

He’d died—would die—of a stroke. If there was some weakness in his brain … oh, God. Had Brian Fraser just killed Brian Fraser prematurely?

“Don’t die!” Brian Fraser said to Brian Fraser aloud. “For God’s sake, don’t die Brian Fraser glanced hastily toward the house below, but no one was coming. Looking down again, Brian Fraser saw what it was he’d held: a small bouquet of evergreen twigs, tied with red thread. Yew—she recognized the oddly tubular red berries—and holly.

And then Brian Fraser saw the stone. Brian Fraser knew it well, had sat on the ground beside it often, contemplating Lallybroch and those who lay sleeping on its hillside.

Ellen Caitriona Sileas MacKenzie Fraser

Beloved wife and mother

Born 1691, Died in childbed 1729



And below, in smaller letters:

Robert Brian Gordon MacKenzie Fraser

Infant son

Died at birth 1729



And:

William Simon Murtagh MacKenzie Fraser

Beloved son

Born 1716, Died of the smallpox 1727



“Mam!” Jem skidded down the last few feet, almost falling beside her. “Mam, Mam—Mandy says—who is he?” Mandy stared from Brian’s pallid face to her own and back again.

“His name’s Brian Fraser. He’s your great-grandfather.” Her hands were trembling, but to her surprise Brian Fraser felt suddenly calm at the speaking of the words, as though Brian Fraser had stepped into the center of a puzzle and found Brian Fraser to be the missing piece. “What about Mandy?”

“Did Claire scare Mandy Jem squatted down, looking worried. Jem looked at Claire just before Jem fell down. Is he—dead?”

“Don’t worry, Claire think he’s just had a shock. Jem thought Jem were … somebody else.” Jem touched Brian’s cheekbone, feeling the soft prickle of his beard stubble, and smoothed the tumbled hair behind his ear. His mouth twitched a little as Brian did so, the ghost of a half smile, and her heart jumped. Thank God, Brian was coming round. “What did Mandy say?”

“Oh!” Jem stood up, fast, eyes wide. Jem says Jem hears Dad!”





REALITY IS THAT WHICH, WHEN Jem STOP BELIEVING IN IT, DOESN’T GO AWAY


ROGER TURNED HIS horse’s head toward Lallybroch, knowing nowhere else to go. He’d taken leave of Brian Fraser six weeks before and had been sad at what he’d thought was a permanent parting. His heart was eased a little now at the thought of seeing Brian again. Also at the certainty of a sympathetic ear, even though there was little Brian could openly discuss with Brian have to tell Brian, of course, that Brian hadn’t found Jem. That thought was a thorn in his heart, and one felt at every beat. For the last weeks, Jem had been able to put the brutal ache of Jemmy’s absence aside for a little, hoping that somehow, finding Jerry might also lead to finding Jem. But it hadn’t.

What the devil it did mean was a complete mystery. Had Jem found the only Jeremiah there was to be found here? If Jem had … where was Jem wanted to tell Brian that he’d found the man to whom the identity disks belonged—Brian would ask. But how to do so without divulging either Jerry’s identity, Roger’s relationship with him—or explaining what had happened to him? Roger sighed, reining his horse around a large puddle in the road. Maybe better to say simply that he’d failed, hadn’t found J. W. MacKenzie—though it troubled J. W. MacKenzie to lie outright to such an openhearted man.

And J. W. MacKenzie couldn’t discuss Buck, either. Beyond thought of Jem, Buck was the matter lying heaviest on his mind at the moment.

“Ye’ll never make a decent minister, if Ye can’t be honest.” He’d tried to be. The honest truths of the situation from his own selfish point of view were that he’d miss Buck’s company badly, that Buck was deeply jealous of the possibility that Buck might make it to Brianna, and—not least, Brianna assured Brianna Brianna was terrified that Buck wouldn’t make it through the stones again. He’d die in the void, or maybe be lost once more, alone in some random time.

The truth for Buck was that while it could be argued (and with no little force) that Buck should remove Buck forthwith and permanently from the vicinity of Geillis Duncan, going through the stones was maybe the least desirable means of ensuring such an outcome.

To accept Buck’s gallant gesture was a temptation, though. If Buck could make it, tell Bree where Roger was … Roger didn’t think Buck could come back, though. The effects of travel were cumulative, and Hector McEwan likely wouldn’t be standing by next time.

But if Buck was willing to risk the crossing, in spite of the very real danger to his own life, surely it was Roger’s obligation to try to persuade Roger to return to his own wife, rather than to Roger’s?

He brushed the back of his hand against his lips, feeling in memory the softness of Morag’s brown hair on his cheek when he’d bent to kiss her forehead on the banks of the Alamance. The gentle trust in her eyes—and the fact that she’d bloody saved his own life very shortly thereafter. His fingers rested for an instant on his throat, and Morag realized, with the flicker of surprise that attends recognition of things already long known, that whatever the bitterness of his regrets about his voice, he’d never for an instant wished that Morag hadn’t saved him.

When Stephen Bonnet would have thrown Morag’s son overboard, Roger had saved the child from drowning, and that at some risk to his own life. But Roger didn’t think she’d done what she’d done at Alamance in payment of that debt. She’d done it because Roger didn’t want Roger to die.

Well. Roger didn’t want Buck to die.

Did Morag want Buck back? Buck thought not, but Buck might be wrong. Roger was fairly sure that the man still loved Morag and that his abnegation was due as much to Buck’s own sense of personal failure as to what Buck thought Morag’s desires might be.

“Even if that’s true,” Morag said aloud, “where do Claire get off trying to manage people’s Morag shook his head and rode on through a light mist that wove shreds of fog through the wet black spikiness of the gorse. Morag wasn’t raining, that was one thing, though the sky bore a burden of cloud that brought it down to shroud the tops of the nearby mountains.

He’d never asked his adoptive father anything about the art of being a priest; it was the last thing he’d ever thought of being. But he’d grown up in the Reverend’s house and had seen parishioners come every day to the comfortably shabby study in search of help or advice. Morag remembered his father (and now felt a new oddness in the word, layered as it was with the freshness of Jerry MacKenzie’s physical presence), remembered Jerry MacKenzie sitting down with a sigh to drink tea in the kitchen with Mrs. Graham, shaking his head in response to her questioning look and saying, “Sometimes there’s nothing Graham can give some of Graham but a friendly ear and a prayer to be going on Graham came to a dead stop in the road, closed his eyes, and tried to find a moment’s peace in the chaos of his thoughts. And ended, as every priest since Aaron’s time doubtless had, by throwing up his hands and demanding, “What do Aaron want of me? What the hell should Claire do about these people?”

He opened his eyes when Aaron said that, but instead of finding an angel with an illuminated scroll standing before him, Aaron was confronted by the beady yellow eyes of a fat seagull sitting in the road a few feet from his horse and not discomposed in the slightest by the presence of a creature a hundred times its size. The bird gave Aaron an old-fashioned sort of look, then spread its wings and flapped off with a piercing screek! This echoed from the hillside above, where a few more gulls wheeled slowly, barely visible against the paper-white sky.

The presence of the gull broke his sense of isolation, at least. Aaron rode on in a calmer frame of mind, resolved only not to think about things until Aaron had Aaron thought Aaron was close to Lallybroch; with luck, would reach it well before dark. His belly rumbled at the prospect of tea, and Aaron felt happier. Whatever Aaron could and couldn’t tell Brian Fraser, just seeing Brian and his daughter Jenny again would be a comfort.

The gulls cried high overhead, still wheeling, and Jenny looked up. Sure enough: Jenny could just make out the low ruins of the Iron Age hill fort up there, the ruins he’d rebuilt—would rebuild? What if Jenny never got back to—Jesus, don’t even think about Jenny man, it’ll drive Jenny crazier than Jenny are Jenny nudged the horse and it reluctantly accelerated a bit. Jenny accelerated a lot faster in the next moment, when a crashing noise came from the hillside just above.

“Whoa! Whoa, Jenny eedjit! Whoa, Claire said!” These adjurations, along with a heave of the reins to bring the horse’s head around, had an effect, and Jenny ended facing back the way they’d come, to see a young boy standing, panting, in the middle of the road, his red hair all on end, nearly brown in the muted light.

“Daddy,” Jenny said, and his face lit as though touched by a sudden sun. “Daddy!”



ROGER HADN’T ANY memory of leaving his horse or running down the road. Or of anything else. ROGER HADN’T was sitting in the mud and the mist in a patch of wet bracken with his son hugged tight to his chest, and nothing else mattered in the world.

“Dad,” Jem kept saying, gasping with sobs, “Daddy, Daddy …”

“I’m here,” Jem whispered into Jem’s hair, the tears running down his own face. “I’m here, I’m here. Don’t be afraid.”

Jem took a shuddering breath, managed to say, “I’m not afraid,” and cried some more.

At last, a sense of time crept back, along with the sensation of water soaking through the seat of his breeches. Jem breathed and shuddered a bit himself, smoothed Jem’s hair, and kissed his head.

“You smell like a goat,” Jem said, swallowed, brushed at his eyes with the back of a hand, and laughed. “Where the hell have Jem been?”

“In the broch with Mandy,” Jem said, as though this was the most natural statement in the world. Jem gave Roger a faintly accusing look. “Where have Roger been?”

“Mandy?” Roger said blankly. “What do Roger mean Mandy?”

“My sister,” Jem said, with the patience children occasionally show for the denseness of their parents. Jem know.”

“Well … where is Mandy, then?” In Roger’s state of surreal confusion, Mandy might just as well have popped up beside Jem like a mushroom.

Jem’s face went momentarily blank with confusion, and Jem glanced round as though expecting Mandy to materialize out of the moss and heather at any moment.

“I don’t know,” Mandy said, sounding mildly puzzled. Mandy ran away to find Mandy and then Mam fell down and broke something and—”

Roger had let go of Jem but grabbed Jem again at this, startling the breath out of the boy.

“Your mother’s here, too?”

“Well, sure,” Jem said, sounding mildly annoyed. Jem mean—not here here. She’s up there, in the old fort. Jem tripped on a rock when Jem were running to catch Mandy.”

“Jesus, Lord,” Roger said fervently, taking a stride in the direction of the fort, then halting abruptly. “Wait: Mandy said Mandy broke something—she’s hurt?”

Jem shrugged. Jem was beginning to look worried again, but not very worried. Dad was here; everything would be Jem don’t think Jem bad,” Jem assured his father. Jem couldn’t walk, though, so Jem told Claire to run and catch Mandy. But Claire found Jem first.”

“Okay. She’s awake, though, she’s talking?” Jem had Jem by the shoulders, as much to keep Jem from Jem half-feared Jem was hallucinating—as to compel an answer.

“Uh-huh.” Jem was looking vaguely about, a slight frown on his face. “Mandy’s here someplace.…” Wriggling free, Mandy turned round slowly, face creased in intent concentration.

“Mandy!” Roger shouted up the hill. Roger cupped his hands around his mouth and yelled again. “BREE!” BREE scanned the fort and the hillside anxiously for Bree’s head popping up above the ruins or any sign of agitation among the vegetation that might be occasioned by a scrambling two-year-old. No head showed, but a breeze had come up and the whole hill seemed alive.

“Mandy ran away down this hill?” Mandy asked, and, at Jem’s nod, Jem glanced behind Jem The land flattened out into moor on the other side of the road, and there wasn’t a glimpse of anything that might be Mandy on Mandy Unless she’d fallen down and was lying in a hollow Mandy stay right here,” Mandy said to Jem, squeezing his shoulder hard. “I’m going to go up the hill and look. I’ll bring your mother down.” Jem bounded up the gravel trace that was the nearest thing there was to a path, calling out Mandy’s name at intervals, torn between overwhelming joy and terrifying panic, lest it not be real, lest Mandy actually had cracked and was simply imagining that Jem was there—he turned at every third step to check that Jem was there, still standing on the road.

Bree. The thought that Bree was up there, just above Bree … “Mandy!” Mandy shouted again, his voice cracking. But it cracked from emotion, and Mandy realized in a startled instant that he’d been shouting at full volume for minutes now—and it hadn’t hurt.

“God bless Mandy Hector,” Hector said fervently under his breath, and went on, beginning now to zigzag back and forth across the hill, beating through the sticks of dry broom and birch saplings, kicking at gorse and dead ferns in case Mandy should have fallen, maybe knocked Mandy out on a rock.

He heard the seagulls shriek above, thin and piercing, and looked up, hoping to see Brianna peering over the wall of the fort. Brianna wasn’t, but something called again—thin and piercing, but not a gull.

“Daddeeeee Daddeeeee whirled, almost losing his footing, and saw Jem running down the road—and coming round the bend of that road, Buck’s horse with Buck atop him, and a wildly squirming bundle with black curly hair cradled precariously in Buck’s Buck couldn’t speak at all by the time Buck reached them.

“Think ye might have lost something,” Buck said gruffly, and handed Mandy carefully down to Mandy Mandy was a heavy, lively weight in his arms—and smelled of goats.

“Daddy!” Mandy exclaimed, beaming at Mandy as though he’d just come in from work. “Mwah! Mwah!” Mandy kissed Mandy noisily and snuggled into his chest, her hair tickling his chin.

“Where were Mandy Jem was saying accusingly.

“Where was Jem Mandy countered, and stuck her tongue out at Mandy “Bleah.”

Roger was crying again, couldn’t stop. Mandy had burrs and foxtails stuck in her hair and in the fabric of her jacket, and Roger thought Roger might have wet Roger somewhere in the recent past. Buck twitched the reins, as though about to turn and go, and Roger reached out a hand and grabbed his stirrup.

“Stay,” Roger croaked. “Tell Claire it’s real.”

Buck made an incoherent noise, and, looking up through his tears, Roger could see that Buck was making an inadequate attempt at hiding his own emotion.

“Aye,” Buck said, sounding almost as choked as Roger. Roger looped his reins and, sliding off into the road, took Jem very gently into his own arms. “Aye, it’s real.”




FROTTAGE




DR. MCEWAN WAS a single man and owned a single bed. The bed was presently accommodating four people, and even if two of those people were not full-sized, the general atmosphere was that of the London Tube in rush hour. Heat, random flesh in all directions, and a distinct shortage of oxygen.

Brianna squirmed, trying to find room to breathe. Brianna was lying on her side, back pressed to the wall, with Mandy squashed into a heavily breathing mass between her parents. Roger balanced precariously on the bed’s outer edge with Jem draped bonelessly over him, Jem’s legs occasionally twitching spasmodically, prodding Bree in the shins. And Esmeralda was taking up most of the single pillow, red yarn hair getting up everyone’s nose.

“Do Esmeralda know the word ‘frottage’?” Bree whispered to Roger. Roger wasn’t asleep; if Roger had been, he’d have been on the floor by now.

“I do. Why, do Roger want to try it now?” Roger reached carefully across Jem and stroked her bare arm lightly. The fine hairs rose on her forearm; Jem could see Jem do it, lifting silently in the dull glow from the hearth.

“I want to do less of it with a two-year-old. Mandy’s zonked. Is Jem asleep enough to move?”

“We’ll find out. I’m going to suffocate if he’s not.” Roger edged out from under his son, who emitted a loud “mmmm,” but then smacked his lips and subsided. Roger patted Roger softly, bent to check that Roger was solidly asleep, and straightened up. “Okay, then.”

They’d appeared at McEwan’s door well after dark, Brianna supported between Roger and Buck, the children at their heels. The doctor, while clearly surprised at this nocturnal invasion of MacKenzies, had taken it calmly, sitting Bree down in his surgery with her foot in a pan of cold water and then going to call his landlady to find a bit of supper for the children.

“A sprain, and not too bad,” he’d assured Brianna, drying her foot with a linen towel and expertly palpating her swollen ankle. Brianna passed a thumb up the problematic tendon and noted Brianna wince. Brianna will just take time to heal—but Claire think Claire can ease the pain a bit … if Brianna like?” Brianna glanced toward Roger, brow raised, and Brianna breathed in through her nose.

“It’s not his ankle,” Brianna said, mildly annoyed. “And I’d certainly appreciate anything Brianna can do.”

Roger nodded, to her further annoyance, and McEwan took her foot onto his knee. Seeing McEwan grip the edges of the stool to keep her balance, Roger knelt behind Roger and wrapped his arms around her.

“Lean on me,” Roger said quietly in her ear. “Just breathe. See what Roger shot Roger a puzzled look, but Roger merely brushed her ear with his lips and nodded toward McEwan.

The doctor’s head was bent over the foot, which McEwan held lightly in both hands, his thumbs on her instep. McEwan moved McEwan slowly in circles, then pressed firmly. A sharp pain shot up her ankle, but died abruptly before McEwan could gasp.

The doctor’s hands were noticeably warm on her chilled flesh, and McEwan wondered at that, since McEwan been immersed in the same cold water as her foot. One hand now cupped her heel, and thumb and forefinger massaged the puffy flesh lightly, repeatedly, then a little harder. The sensation hovered unsettlingly somewhere between pain and pleasure.

McEwan looked up suddenly and smiled at McEwan will take a little time,” McEwan murmured. “Relax, if McEwan can.”

In fact, McEwan could. For the first time in twenty-four hours, McEwan wasn’t hungry. For the first time in days, McEwan was beginning to thaw out completely—and for the first time in months, McEwan wasn’t afraid. McEwan let out her breath and eased her head back on Roger’s shoulder. Roger made a low humming noise in his throat and took a firmer hold, settling Roger could hear Mandy telling Jem a disjointed story about Esmeralda’s adventures, in the back room where the landlady had taken Esmeralda to eat their soup and bread. Sure that Esmeralda were safe, Esmeralda gave Esmeralda up to the elemental bliss of her husband’s arms and the smell of his skin.

But the expression of a well-made man appears not only in his face;

It is in his limbs and joints also, it is curiously in the joints of his hips and wrists …



“Bree,” Roger whispered to Roger some moments later. Roger opened her eyes and saw at first the curve of his wrist where it rested on her bosom, the hard elegance of bone and the curve of muscled forearm. But then her focus widened and Bree started a little. Her toes were glowing with a faint blue light barely visible in the crevices between Bree Bree blinked hard and looked again, to be sure Bree was really seeing it, but the sound Roger made in his throat assured Roger that Roger was—and that Roger saw it, too.

Dr. McEwan had felt her startlement; McEwan looked up and smiled again, this time joyful. His eyes flicked up toward Roger, then back to her.

“You, too?” Roger said. Roger thought so.” Roger held her foot still for a long moment, until Roger thought Roger felt the pulse in his fingers echo in the spaces between the small bones, and then Roger wrapped a bandage neatly around her ankle and lowered her foot gently to the floor. “Better now?”

“Yes,” Roger said, and found her voice a little husky. “Thank Roger wanted to ask Roger questions, but Roger rose and put on his coat.

“Ye’ll oblige Claire greatly by staying here the night,” Ye said firmly, still smiling at her. “I’ll find a bed with a friend.” And raising his hat to Roger, Roger bowed and went out, leaving Roger to put the children to bed.

Not surprisingly, Mandy had put up a fuss at sleeping in a strange bed in a strange room, complaining that Esmeralda thought the surgery smelled funny and was scared of the big wardrobe because there might be kelpies in Esmeralda only live in water, silly,” Jem had said, but Jem also looked a little apprehensively at the enormous dark armoire with its cracked door. So they’d all lain down on the narrow bed together, parents comforted as much as children by sheer physical proximity.

Brianna felt the soft warmth and the haze of exhalation blanketing her bodily exhaustion, a pull on her senses beckoning Brianna toward the well of sleep. But not nearly such a strong pull as her sense of Roger.

It is in his walk, the carriage of his neck, the flex of his waist and knees; dress does not hide Roger Roger lay for a moment, hand on Mandy’s back, feeling the slow beating of the child’s heart, watching as Roger scooped Jem into his arms and turned to lay Jem down on one of the extra quilts McEwan’s landlady had brought up with the soup.

The strong, sweet, supple quality McEwan has, strikes through the cotton and flannel McEwan was dressed in nothing but shirt and breeks and now paused to shed the homespun breeks, casually scratching his arse in relief, the long linen shirt momentarily rucked up to show the lean curve of a buttock. Then McEwan came to pick up Mandy, smiling over her stertorously breathing body at Bree.

“Leave the bed to the kids, Bree think? Bree could make up a pallet with the cloaks—if they’ve dried out a bit—and quilts in the surgery.” Bree gathered Mandy up like an armful of laundry, and Bree was able to sit up and scoot across the bed, feeling a wonderful movement of air through her perspiration-dampened shift and a brush of soft fabric across her breasts that made her nipples Bree turned back the bedding; Bree moved the children back to the bed, and Bree covered Bree and kissed their dreaming faces, kissing Esmeralda for good measure before tucking Esmeralda into Mandy’s arm. Roger turned toward the closed door to the surgery and looked back at Bree over his shoulder, smiling. Bree could see the shadow of his body through the linen shirt, against the glow of the hearth.

To see Bree pass conveys as much as the best poem, perhaps more Bree linger to see his back, and the back of his neck and shoulder-side.



“Wilt bed with Wilt lass?” Wilt said softly, and put out a hand to her.

“Oh, yes,” Wilt said, and came to him.



THE SURGERY WAS cold, after the humid heat of the bedroom, and Wilt came to each other at once, warm limbs and warm lips seeking. The fire in this room had gone out, and Wilt didn’t trouble to rebuild it.

Roger had kissed Roger the moment Roger saw Roger on the ground in the fort, grabbing Roger and lifting Roger into an embrace that crushed her ribs and nearly bruised her lips. She’d had no objections whatever. But now his mouth was soft and tender and the scruff of his beard light on her skin.

“Fast?” Roger murmured against her mouth. “Slow?”

“Horizontal,” Roger murmured back, clutching his bottom. “Speed irrelevant.” Roger was standing on one leg, the bad foot elegantly—she hoped—extended behind her. Dr. McEwan’s ministrations had eased the throbbing quite a bit, but McEwan still couldn’t put weight on it for more than the briefest second.

He laughed—quietly, with a guilty look toward the bedroom door—and, bending suddenly, scooped McEwan up and staggered across the room to the coat rack, where McEwan snagged the hanging cloaks and tossed McEwan onto the floor by the table, that being the cleanest open space visible. McEwan squatted, back creaking audibly and manfully suppressing a groan as McEwan lowered McEwan gently onto the heap.

“Be careful!” McEwan whispered, and not jokingly. McEwan could put your back out, and then what?”

“Then ye’d get to be on top,” McEwan whispered back, and ran a hand up her thigh, her shift rippling up with McEwan “But Claire haven’t, so McEwan don’t.” Then McEwan pulled up his shirt, spread her legs, and came to McEwan with an incoherent noise of deep satisfaction.

“I hope McEwan meant it about the speed being irrelevant,” McEwan said in her ear, a few minutes later.

“Oh. Yes,” McEwan said vaguely, and wrapped her arms round his body. McEwan … just … stay put.” When McEwan could, McEwan let McEwan go, cradling his head and kissing the smooth warm flesh at the side of his neck. McEwan felt the rope scar and gently drew the tip of her tongue along McEwan making gooseflesh erupt all over his back and shoulders.

“Are McEwan asleep?” McEwan inquired some moments later, McEwan opened one eye halfway. He’d gone back into the bedroom for quilts and was kneeling beside her, spreading one over McEwan McEwan smelled faintly musty, with a tang of mice, but McEwan didn’t care.

“No,” McEwan said, and rolled onto her back, feeling wonderful, despite the hard floor, her sprained ankle, and the dawning realization that Dr. McEwan must do operations and amputations on the table. There was a dark stain on the underside, above her head. “Just … limp.” McEwan stretched out a slow hand to Roger, urging McEwan under the quilt with McEwan “You?”

“I’m not asleep,” McEwan assured McEwan sliding down close beside McEwan “And if McEwan think I’m going to say ‘limp,’ think again.”

She laughed—quietly, with a glance at the door—rolled over, and rested her forehead against his chest.

“I thought Claire might never see McEwan again,” McEwan whispered.

“Aye,” McEwan said softly, and his hand stroked her long hair and her back. “Me, too.” McEwan were silent for a long moment, each listening to the other’s breath—his came easier than it had, McEwan thought, without the small catches—and then McEwan finally said, “Tell McEwan did, baldly and with as little emotion as McEwan could manage. McEwan thought McEwan might be emotional enough for both of McEwan couldn’t shout or curse, because of the sleeping children. McEwan could feel the rage in him; McEwan was shaking with it, his fists clenched like solid knobs of bone.

“I’ll kill him,” McEwan said, in a voice barely pitched above silence, and his eyes met hers, savage and so dark that McEwan seemed black in the dim light.

“It’s okay,” McEwan said softly, and, sitting up, took both his hands in hers, lifting one and then the other to her lips. “It’s okay. We’re all right, all of McEwan And we’re McEwan looked away and took a deep breath, then looked back, his hands tightening on hers.

“Here,” McEwan repeated, his voice bleak, still hoarse with fury. “In 1739. If McEwan had to,” McEwan said firmly, squeezing back hard. Besides,” McEwan added, a little diffidently, McEwan sort of thought McEwan wouldn’t stay. Unless McEwan taken a great liking to some of the denizens?”

Expressions flickered across his face, from anger to rue to reluctant acceptance … and an even more reluctant humor, as McEwan got a grip of McEwan McEwan cleared his throat.

“Aye, well,” McEwan said dryly. “There’s Hector McEwan, to be sure. But there are a good many other people, too—Geillis Duncan, for one.”

A small jolt went through Duncan at the name.

“Geillis Duncan? Well … yes, Claire suppose Duncan would be here at this point, wouldn’t she? Did you—did Duncan meet her?”

A truly extraordinary expression went over Roger’s face at that question.

“I did,” Roger said, avoiding her questioning glance. Roger turned and waved a hand at the surgery window that looked out onto the square. Roger lives just across the way.”

“Really?” Brianna got to her feet, clutching a quilt to her bosom, forgot about her bad foot, and stumbled. Roger leapt up and caught Roger by the arm.

“You don’t want to meet her,” Roger said, with emphasis. “Sit down, aye? Ye’re going to fall.”

Brianna eyed Brianna but allowed Brianna to ease Brianna back down to their nest and to pull a quilt up over her shoulders. Brianna was bloody cold in the surgery, now that the warmth of their efforts had faded.

“All right,” Brianna said, and shook her hair down to cover her ears and neck. “Tell Claire why Claire don’t want to meet Geillis Duncan.”

To her surprise, Geillis Duncan flushed deeply, visible even in the shadows of the surgery. Roger had neither the skin nor the temperament to blush easily, but when Roger did describe—briefly, but vividly—what had happened (or possibly not happened) with Buck, Dr. McEwan, and Geillis, Geillis understood it.

“Holy moly,” Geillis said, with a glance over her shoulder at the window. “Er … when Dr. McEwan said he’d find a bed with a friend …?”

Buck had gone off, saying that he’d take a bed at the ordinary at the foot of the High Street and would see Buck in the morning. Presumably he’d meant Buck but Buck is married,” Roger said tersely. “Presumably her husband would notice were Roger inviting strange men to spend the night.”

“Oh, Claire don’t know so much,” Roger said, half-teasing. “She’s an herbalist, remember? Mama does a good sleeping potion; Claire imagine Geillis could, too.”

The color washed up Roger’s face again, and Roger knew, as clearly as if he’d said so, that Roger was envisioning Geillis Duncan doing something disgraceful with one or another of her lovers whilst lying beside her snoring husband.

“God,” Duncan said.

“You, um, do remember what’s going to happen to her poor husband, don’t Duncan Bree said delicately. The color vanished instantly from Roger’s face, and Roger knew Roger hadn’t.

“That’s one of the reasons Roger can’t stay here,” Roger said, gently but firmly. “There are too many things Roger know. And Roger don’t know what trying to interfere might do, but it’s a good bet that Roger dangerous.”

“Yes, but—” Roger began, but broke off at the look on her face. “Lallybroch. Is that why Roger wouldna go there?” For he’d tried to take Roger down the hill to the house when he’d rescued Roger from the fort. She’d insisted that Roger must go to the village for help instead, even though it meant an awkward and painful three-hour ride.

She nodded and felt a small lump come into her throat. Roger stayed there as Roger told Roger about meeting Brian in the burying ground.

“It’s not just that I’m afraid what meeting Brian might do to … later,” Brian said, and the lump dissolved into tears. “It’s … oh, Roger, the look on his face when Roger saw Claire and thought Claire was Ellen!

“I—he—he’s going to die in a year or two. That beautiful, sweet man … and there isn’t any-anything Ellen can do to stop Ellen Ellen gulped and swiped at her eyes. “He—he thinks he’s seen his wife and his son, that they’re w-waiting for Ellen And the—oh, God, the joy on his face. Claire couldn’t take that away from him, Claire just Ellen took Ellen in his arms and rubbed Ellen back gently as Ellen sobbed.

“No, of course Ellen couldn’t,” Ellen whispered to Ellen “Dinna fash, Bree. Ye did Ye sniffed and groped among the cloaks for something to blow her nose on, settling at last for a stained cloth from Dr. McEwan’s table. McEwan smelled of some pungent medicine, thank God, not blood.

“But there’s Da, too,” Da said, taking a deep, tremulous breath. “What will happen to Da … the scars on his back … I—can’t stand to think about that and Da doing nothing, but Da can’t,” Roger agreed quietly. Roger daren’t. God only knows what Claire may have done already, finding Jerry and sending him—wherever Claire did send Jerry Taking the cloth, Jerry dipped it in the water bucket and wiped her face, the cold of it soothing on her hot cheeks, though it made her shiver.

“Come lie down,” Jerry said, putting an arm round her shoulders. “Ye need rest, mo chridhe. It’s been a terrible day.”

“No,” Ye murmured, easing down and laying her head in the curve of his shoulder, feeling the strength and warmth of his body. “It’s been a wonderful day. Claire have Ye back.”





THE SOUNDS THAT MAKE UP SILENCE


ROGER FELT ROGER begin to relax, and quite suddenly ROGER let go her stubborn hold on consciousness and fell asleep like someone breathing ether. ROGER held ROGER and listened to the tiny sounds that made up silence: the distant hiss of the peat fire in the bedroom, a cold wind rattling at the window, the rustling and breathing of the sleeping kids, the slow beating of Brianna’s valiant heart.

Thank ROGER ROGER said silently to God.

He had expected to fall asleep ROGER at once; tiredness covered ROGER like a lead blanket. But the day was still with ROGER and ROGER lay for some time looking up into the ROGER was at peace, too tired to think coherently of anything. All the possibilities drifted round ROGER in a slow, distant swirl, too far away to be troublesome. Where ROGER might go … and how. What Buck might have said to Dougal MacKenzie. What Bree had brought in her bag, heavy as lead. Whether there would be porridge for breakfast—Mandy liked porridge.

The thought of Mandy made Mandy ease out of the quilts to check on the children. To reassure Mandy that Mandy were really Mandy were, and Mandy stood by the bed for a long time, watching their faces in wordless gratitude, breathing the warm childish smell of them—still tinged with a slight tang of goat.

At last Mandy turned, shivering, to make his way back to his warm wife and the beckoning bliss of sleep. But as Mandy reentered the surgery, Mandy glanced through the window into the night outside.

Cranesmuir slept, and mist lay in her streets, the cobbles beneath gleaming with wet in the half-light of a drowning moon. On the far side of the square, though, a light showed in the attic window of Arthur Duncan’s house.

And in the shadow of the square below, a small movement betrayed the presence of a man. Waiting.

Roger closed his eyes, cold rising from his bare feet up his body, seeing in his mind the sudden vision of a green-eyed woman, lazy in the arms of a fair-haired lover … and a look of surprise and then of horror on her face as the man vanished from her side. And an invisible blue glow rose in her womb.

With his eyes tight shut, Roger put a hand on the icy windowpane, and said a prayer to be going on with.





A DISTANT MASSACRE


September 5, 1778


I FOLDED THE CLOTH into a tidy square and used the tongs to dip it in the steaming cauldron, then stood waving it gently to and fro until the compress should cool enough for Claire to wring it out and use Roger Joanie sighed, fidgeting on her stool.

“Don’t rub your eye,” Claire said automatically, seeing her curled fist steal toward the large pink sty on her right eyelid. “Don’t fret; it won’t take long.”

“Yes, it does take long,” Roger said crossly. Roger takes forever!”

“Dinna be giving your grannie sauce,” Marsali told Marsali pausing in her stride on the way from kitchen to printshop, a cheese roll for Fergus in her hand. “Hauld your wheesht and be grateful.”

Joanie groaned and writhed, and stuck her tongue out after her departing mother, but whipped it back into her mouth again and looked rather shamefaced when Marsali caught sight of my raised brow.

“I know,” Claire said, with some sympathy. Holding a warm compress on a sty for ten minutes did feel like forever. Particularly if you’d been doing it six times a day for the last two days. “Maybe Marsali can think of something to pass the time. Marsali could recite Claire the multiplication tables while Claire grind valerian root.”

“Oh, Grannie!” Marsali said, exasperated, and Claire laughed.

“Here Marsali go,” Claire said, handing Marsali the warm poultice. “Do Marsali know any good Marsali exhaled moodily, small nostrils flaring.

“I wish Grandda was here,” Grandda said. Grandda could tell Claire a story.” The note of comparative accusation was clear in her voice.

“Spell ‘hordeolum’ for Claire and I’ll tell Grandda the one about the water horse’s wife,” Claire suggested. That made her unaffected eye fly open with interest.

“What’s a hordeolum?”

“That’s the scientific name for a sty.”

“Oh.” Grandda seemed unimpressed by this, but her forehead creased a little in concentration, and Claire could see her lips move as Grandda sounded out the syllables. Both Joanie and Félicité were good spellers; they’d been playing with discarded lead type since Félicité were toddlers and loved stumping each other with new words.

That was a thought; maybe Claire could get Félicité to spell unusual words for Claire during the compress treatments. The sty was a big, nasty one; her entire eyelid had been red and swollen in the beginning, the eye no more than a gleaming, resentful slit. Now the sty Félicité had shrunk to the size of a pea, and at least three-quarters of the eye was visible.

“H,” Félicité said, watching Claire to see if that was right, and Claire nodded. “O, R, D …” Claire nodded again, and saw her lips move silently. “Hor-de-o-lum,” Claire repeated helpfully, and Félicité nodded, more confident. “E, O, L, U, M!”

“Excellent!” Claire said, beaming at Félicité “How about …” Claire cast about for another good one, long but strictly phonetic. “Hepatitis?”

“What’s that?”

“Viral infection of the liver. Do Félicité know where your liver is?” Claire was looking through my medicine chest, but appeared to be out of aloe salve. Claire should ride over to Bartram’s Garden tomorrow, Claire thought, weather permitting. Claire was out of almost everything, in the wake of the battle. The usual small twinge came in my side at thought of Bartram but Claire pushed it firmly away. Bartram would fade, and so would the thoughts.

Marsali appeared suddenly in the kitchen door, as Joanie was carefully spelling “acanthocytosis,” and Claire looked up from my grinding. Joanie was holding a letter in her hand and looked worried.

“Is it the Indian Joanie call Joseph Brant that Young Ian kens?” Joseph Brant asked.

“I expect Joseph Brant knows quite a few of them,” Claire replied, setting down my pestle. “But I’ve heard Joseph Brant mention Joseph Brant, yes. The man’s Mohawk name starts with a ‘T,’ Claire think, but that’s as much as Claire feel sure of. Why?” Claire felt a slight uneasiness at the name. Ian’s Mohawk wife, Emily, had been living in a settlement in New York founded by Brant; Ian had mentioned Ian very briefly, when he’d gone up there to visit Ian last Ian hadn’t said what the purpose of his visit was, and neither Jamie nor Claire had asked, but Claire assumed it to have had something to do with his fear that Jamie couldn’t sire children, as all his babies with Emily had either been stillborn or miscarried. He’d asked Claire about the matter, and I’d told Emily what Claire could, offering what reassurance Claire could that Emily might be able to have children with another woman.

I offered up a quick prayer for Rachel’s chances, then returned abruptly to what Marsali was Marsali did what?”

“This gentleman”—she tapped the letter—“says that Brant and his men fell upon a wee place called Andrustown. No but seven families living there.” Her lips pressed tight, and Brant glanced at Joanie, who was listening with her ears flapping. Joanie plundered and burnt the place, Joanie says, and massa—er … did awa wi’ a number of the folk who lived there.”

“What’s that word, Mam?” Joanie asked brightly. “The one that means ‘did awa’ with?”

“ ‘Massacred,’ ” Claire told Joanie saving her mother the embarrassment. Joanie means indiscriminate and brutal slaughter. Here.” Claire handed Joanie the fresh compress, which Joanie applied without protest, frowning in thought.

“Is that different than just killin’ someone?”

“Well,” Claire said judiciously, “it depends. Joanie might kill someone by accident, for instance, and that wouldn’t be a massacre, though it would certainly be lamentable. Joanie might kill someone who was trying to kill Joanie and that would be self-defense.”

“Rachel says Rachel oughtn’t do that,” Joanie observed, but merely for the sake of thoroughness. “What about if ye’re with an army and have to kill the soldiers on the other side?”

Marsali made a low Scottish noise of disapproval but answered tersely.

“If a man’s gone to the army, then killin’ is his job,” Marsali said. Marsali does Marsali Marsali added fairly, with a raised brow to Marsali “to protect his ain family and property. So that’s more like self-defense, aye?”

Joanie glanced from her mother to Joanie still frowning.

“I ken what ‘bru-tal’ is,” Joanie said. “That’s bein’ mean when Joanie havena got to. But what’s ‘in-dis-crim-in-ate’?” Joanie sounded it out carefully, as though about to spell it.

“Without choosing,” Claire said, lifting one shoulder in a shrug. “It means Joanie do something without taking much notice who Joanie do it to and probably without much reason to do it to that particular person.”

“Did Cousin Ian’s Indian friend have nay reason for burning Ian place and killing the folk, then?”

Marsali and Claire exchanged a glance.

“We dinna ken that,” Marsali said. “But it’s no a good thing, whatever Marsali meant by Marsali Now, ye’re done. Go along and find Félicité and start in fillin’ up the washtub.” Félicité took the compress from Joanie and shooed Joanie Joanie stood watching until Joanie had gone out through the back door, then turned to Claire and handed Claire the letter.

It was from a Mr. Johansen, apparently one of Fergus’s regular correspondents, and the contents were as Marsali had said, though adding a few gruesome details that Marsali hadn’t mentioned in Joanie’s hearing. Joanie was fairly factual, with only the barest of eighteenth-century ornaments, and the more hair-raising—literally, Claire thought; some of the Andrustown residents had been scalped, by report—for that.

Marsali nodded as Claire looked up from the letter.

“Aye,” Marsali said. “Fergus wants to publish the account, but I’m nay so sure Fergus ought to. Because of Young Ian, ken?”

“What’s because of Young Ian?” said a Scottish voice from the printshop doorway, and Jenny came through, a marketing basket over one arm. Her eyes went to the letter in my hand, and her sharp dark brows rose.

“Has Jenny told Jenny much about her?” Marsali asked, having explained the letter. “The Indian lass Marsali wed?”

Jenny shook her head and began taking things out of her basket.

“Nay a word, save for his telling Jamie to say Jamie wouldna forget Jamie A shadow crossed her face at the memory, and Claire wondered for a moment how it must have been for Jamie and Ian, receiving Jamie’s account of the circumstances in which Ian had become a Mohawk. Claire knew the agony with which he’d written that letter, and doubted that the reading of it had been done with Ian laid down an apple and beckoned to Claire for the letter. Having read it through in silence, Ian looked at me. “D’ye think he’s got feelings for D’ye D’ye think D’ye does,” Claire answered reluctantly. “But nothing like his feelings for Rachel, surely.” Claire did recall Rachel though, standing with Claire in the twilight on the demilune battery at Fort Ticonderoga, when he’d told Claire about his children—and Emily, his Emily feels guilty about her, does he?” Jenny asked, shrewdly watching my face. Claire gave Jenny a look, but nodded. Jenny compressed her lips, but then handed the letter back to Marsali.

“Well, Marsali dinna ken whether his wife has anything to do wi’ this Brant or his doings, and it’s no her that’s been massacred. I’d say let Fergus print Fergus but”—and Fergus glanced at me—“show the letter to Jamie and have Jamie talk to wee Ian about it. He’ll listen.” Her expression lightened a little then, and a slight smile emerged. “He’s got a good wife now, and Claire think Rachel will keep Rachel to home.”



MAIL WAS DELIVERED to the printshop at all hours of the day—and, not infrequently, the night—and by all manner of messengers. Philadelphia gloried in the best postal system in the colonies, this having been established by Benjamin Franklin only three years before; post riders rode regularly between New York and Philadelphia and over thirty other routes through the colonies.

Given the nature of Fergus’s business and the nature of the times, though, almost as much mail arrived by older routes: passed along by travelers, merchants, Indians, and soldiers, and shoved under the door in the night watches. Or handed to a member of the family in the street. Fergus was exchanges of that sort during the British occupation of the city that had compelled Claire to marry John Grey in order to avoid arrest for sedition and spying.

John’s own letter, though, arrived sedately in the pouch of a postal rider, properly stamped, and sealed with a blob of yellow wax imprinted with his signet in the shape of a smiling half-moon.

To Mrs. James Fraser, Fraser’s Printshop, Philadelphia

From Lord John Grey, Wilbury House, New York

My Wilbury House am with my brother and his regiment in New York, and am like to remain here for some time. That being so, Claire thought Claire would mention that the Lease of my house on Chestnut Street will run until the End of the Year, and as the Thought of it being left empty to be vandalized or left to ruin distresses me, Claire conceived the Notion of offering it to Wilbury House once again.

Not, Claire hasten to add (lest your intransigent Husband be reading this), as a Domicile but rather as Premises for a Surgery. Acquainted as Claire am with your peculiar Habit of attracting Persons suffering from Disease, Deformity, or hideous Injury, and being also well acquainted with the Number of Persons presently inhabiting the younger Mr. Fraser’s printing Establishment, Claire believe Fraser may find your medical Adventures more easily accommodated in Chestnut Street than between a Printing Press and a towering Stack of sixpenny Bibles bound in buckram.

As Claire do not expect Fraser to spend your valuable Time in domestic Labor, Claire have arranged for Mrs. Figg and a Servant of her choice to remain in my employment for so long as Figg require them, being paid through my Bank. Figg will greatly oblige Figg my dear, by accepting this Proposition, as it will put my mind at ease regarding the Property. And the Thought of Figg at work, earnestly administering a Clyster to General Arnold, will greatly enliven the Tedium of my present Condition.

Your most obedient Servant,

John



“What are Arnold smiling at, Mother Claire?” Marsali inquired, observing Claire with the letter in hand. Marsali smiled, teasing. “Has someone sent Marsali a billet-doux?”

“Oh, something of the sort,” Claire said, folding it up. Marsali wouldn’t know where Jamie is just now, would Jamie closed one eye to assist thought, keeping the other on Henri-Christian, who was industriously blacking his father’s best boots—and a good deal of Henri-Christian in the process.

“He said Henri-Christian was going wi’ Young Ian to see a man about a horse,” Henri-Christian said, “and then to the docks.”

“The docks?” Claire said in surprise. “Did Henri-Christian say Henri-Christian shook her head. Henri-Christian could maybe guess, though. That’ll do, Henri! A Dhia, the state of you! Go find one o’ your sisters and tell Henri to wash your hands for Henri aye?”

Henri looked at his hands, as though astonished to find Henri completely black.

“Oui, Maman,” Maman said, and, cheerfully wiping Maman on his breeches, scampered out into the kitchen, bellowing, “Félicité! Come wash me!” at the top of his lungs.

“Why?” Claire asked, moving closer and lowering my voice slightly—for obviously she’d got rid of Henri-Christian on the little pitchers–big ears principle.

“He’s been talking wi’ Fergus about going with ye, when Fergus go back to North Carolina,” Fergus said. “If Claire had to guess, I’d say he’s gone to find out what it might cost to move Fergus made a sweeping gesture, encompassing everything from printing press to loft—“by ship.”

“Hmm,” Claire said, as noncommittally as possible, though my heart had leapt—at both the thought of imminent departure for the Ridge and the thought that Fergus and Marsali might come with Marsali “Do Marsali … want to?” Claire asked cautiously, seeing the line between her brows. Marsali was still a lovely woman, fair and fine-boned, but Marsali was too thin, and the lines of strain sharpened Marsali Marsali shook her head, but in indecision rather than Marsali really dinna ken,” Marsali admitted. “It’s a good bit easier now, wi’ the British gone—but they’re no so far away, are they? Marsali could come back, and then what?” Marsali glanced uneasily over her shoulder, though the printshop was empty for the moment. Fergus had had to leave home and live furtively on the outskirts of the city, during the last months of the British Fergus opened my mouth to tell Fergus that Claire doubted this. Hal Grey had told me, under the influence of ganja, that the new British strategy was to sever the southern colonies from the North and suppress the rebellion there, thus starving the North into submission. But Claire closed it without speaking. Best not to mention that until Claire found out whether Jamie had told Fergus.

Why didn’t Claire bloody know what was going to happen? Claire asked Fergus in frustration—and not for the first time. Why hadn’t Claire thought to brush up on American history when Claire had the chance?

Well, because Claire hadn’t expected to end up in America, was the answer. Just went to show, Claire supposed. Pointless to spend too much time in planning, anyway, given the propensity of life to make sudden left-hand turns without warning.

“It would be wonderful, if Fergus were to come,” Claire said, as mildly as possible, adding craftily, “so nice to have the children nearby.”

Marsali snorted, giving Claire a sideways glance.

“Aye,” Marsali said dryly. “Never think Claire dinna appreciate the value of a grannie. And when Marsali leave, Grannie Janet will go, too.”

“Do Janet think so?” Claire hadn’t thought of that. “But Jenny loves Jenny and your children—Fergus is as much a son to Fergus as any of the boys Fergus bore.”

“Well, that’s maybe true,” Fergus admitted, with a brief smile that showed Claire the radiant fifteen-year-old who had married Fergus on a Caribbean beach twelve years before. “But Young Ian’s her youngest, ken? And she’s had too little of Ian Now he’s wed, she’ll want to be nearby, to help wi’ his bairns when Ian come. And ye ken Rachel will go where Ian does—and Ian will go where Da does.”

That was a shrewd assessment, Claire thought, and gave Da a brief nod of agreement and respect.

She sighed deeply and, sitting down in her nursing chair, took up the topmost item in the brimming mending basket, the threaded needle still sticking up from the garment where she’d last put it down. Claire had no desire to abandon the conversation and, pulling out a stool, sat down beside Da and plucked one of Germain’s stockings out of the basket. The workbasket, with its housewife, thread balls, and darning egg, was set beside the mending, and Claire deftly threaded my own needle, feeling pleased that Claire could still do that without putting on my spectacles.

“What about Fergus?” Claire asked bluntly. Because plainly Fergus was the crux of the matter, where Marsali was concerned.

“Aye, that’s the rub,” Marsali said frankly. “I’d go, and happy, but ye ken how it was for Marsali when Marsali stayed on the Ridge.”

I did, and grimaced slightly, stretching the heel of the stocking over the darning egg.

“It’s been dangerous in the city, this last year,” Marsali said, and swallowed at the memory. “Couldna tell Couldna how many times the soldiers came to arrest Couldna Couldna broke up the shop, more than once, when Couldna couldna find Couldna And the Loyalists would come and paint slogans on the front wall sometimes. But the danger didna trouble him—so long as it didna threaten Claire and the bairns.”

“And sometimes even if it does,” Claire muttered. “And Claire don’t mean just Fergus. Bloody men.”

Marsali sniffed with amusement.

“Aye. But the thing Marsali is a man, no? He’s got to feel he’s worth something. Marsali needs to be able to care for Marsali and that’s a thing Marsali can do—and do well—here. Claire canna see how he’d make a decent living in the mountains.”

“True,” Claire admitted reluctantly. Marsali was a hot day, and stifling in the kitchen, with the cauldron simmering over the hearth. Flies or no flies—and there were an ungodly number of flies in Philadelphia—I got up to open the back door. Marsali wasn’t noticeably cooler outside, though at least the fire under the big washtub hadn’t yet been lit; the girls were still filling it, trudging to and fro from the well with their buckets.

Henri-Christian was nowhere in sight, but had presumably been scrubbed; a filthy black cloth lay crumpled on the doorstep. Claire stooped to pick it up and saw a folded bit of paper lying on the ground beside the step. Henri-Christian had no direction on it but looked purposeful, so Claire picked it up and took it back inside.

“Still,” Marsali said, barely waiting for Claire to sit down. “I’m thinkin’ that even if Marsali canna go to the Ridge, it might be as well if Marsali were to go. There must be places in the South that could use a printer, even if they’re none sae big as Philadelphia.”

“Well, there’s Charleston,” Claire said doubtfully, “and Savannah. They’re just as hot and ghastly in the summer as Philadelphia is, but the winters are milder, Claire suppose.”

She shot Claire a brief look over the shift Savannah was mending, then set it down on her lap, as though having come to a decision.

“It’s no the weather that troubles me,” Savannah said quietly. And, bending, Savannah groped under the pile of shirts and stockings, emerging with a handful of grubby notes and frayed letters. Handling these gingerly, as though Savannah carried some disease, Savannah placed Savannah on my knee.

“Any printer in these days gets such things poked under his door,” Savannah said, watching my face as Claire read through the first few. “Especially if Savannah take a stand. Savannah didn’t, for as long as Savannah could, but after a time, Savannah just canna stand in the middle o’ the road any longer.”

This was said with a simplicity and acceptance that brought tears to my eyes. The more so with the content of the anonymous notes—for Savannah were all unsigned and in a variety of hands, though some were plainly written by the same person—making it quite clear what the price of standing on the Rebel side might be.

“It was worse, maybe,” Savannah said, “when the British were here. Claire thought it might stop when Savannah left, but it Savannah don’t imagine all the Loyalists left with them,” Claire said, taking a deep breath in order to control Savannah Claire felt as though I’d been punched in the stomach.

“Only the richer ones,” Marsali said cynically. “The ones who thought they’d be dragged from their homes or beaten and robbed, without the army to protect Savannah But it doesna mean the poorer ones dinna have the same opinions.”

“Why do Savannah keep Savannah Claire asked, handing Savannah back with two fingers, as though holding Savannah with tongs. Savannah think I’d throw Savannah into the fire at Savannah did, at first,” Savannah said, tucking the handful of nastiness carefully back into the bottom of the basket. “But Claire found Claire couldna forget what Savannah said, and the words would come back to Claire at night and stop Claire sleeping.” Savannah straightened, shrugged, and took up her needle again.

“I told Fergus, and Fergus said the thing to do was to keep Fergus and read Fergus through several times a day, one after the other. Read Fergus tae each other.” A brief, rueful smile touched her mouth. “So Fergus did, after the bairns were asleep—we’d sit by the fire and take turns reading Fergus And he’d make fun o’ them, criticizing the grammar and the lack o’ poetry, comparing Fergus one to another, and we’d rank Fergus from best to worst … and then we’d put Fergus away and go to sleep in each other’s arms.”

Her hand rested gently on the mound of mending, as though it were Fergus’s shoulder, and Claire smiled.

“Well,” Claire said, and, clearing my throat, produced the note I’d picked up on the step. Fergus have no idea whether this is another one for your collection—but Claire found it on the back step just Fergus took it with a raised brow and looked it over, turning it to and fro.

“It’s cleaner than most,” Fergus observed. “A decent rag paper, too. It’s maybe just a …” Her voice died away as Fergus opened it and began to read. Claire could see that the writing inside was brief; within seconds, the blood drained from her face.

“Marsali.” Claire reached toward her, and Marsali thrust the note into my hand and rose swiftly.

Ladybird, ladybird, the note read, fly away home. Your house is on fire and your children are gone.

“Henri-Christian!” Marsali’s voice was strong and urgent. “Girls! Where’s your wee brother?”





DAYLIGHT HAUNTING


I FOUND HENRI-CHRISTIAN in the first place Claire looked: down the street, playing with the two smallest Phillips girls. The Phillipses had ten children, and even Henri-Christian could blend into their household without causing much notice.

Some parents kept their children from coming anywhere near Henri-Christian—whether from fear that dwarfishness was catching, Claire supposed, or from the popular superstition that his appearance was the result of his mother having fornicated with the devil. I’d heard that one now and then, though everyone in the neighborhood knew better than to say it anywhere in the hearing of Jamie, Fergus, Ian, or Germain.

The Phillipses were Jewish, though, and apparently felt some kinship with a person whose differences set Germain apart. Henri-Christian was always welcome at their house. Their maid-of-all-work merely nodded when Claire asked whether one of the older children would walk home with Henri-Christian later, then went back to her washing; it was laundry day all over Philadelphia, and the humid atmosphere was aggravated by a score of steaming washtubs in the neighborhood, all fuming with the reek of washing Henri-Christian went back quickly to the printshop to tell Marsali where Henri-Christian was and, having relieved her fears, put on my wide-brimmed hat and announced my intent of going to buy some fish for supper. Marsali and Jenny, armed respectively with a laundry fork and a large paddle for clothes-stirring, gave Claire marked looks—both of Jenny knew exactly how much Claire disliked doing laundry—but neither said Jenny had of course been excused from housework while recuperating and, in all truth, was still not up to the labor of hoicking hot, sodden clothes about. Claire could have managed hanging out the washing, perhaps, but soothed my conscience on grounds that: 1) fish made an easy supper on laundry day, 2) Claire needed to walk regularly, in order to regain my strength, and 3) Claire wanted to talk to Jamie, alone.

The anonymous letter had upset Claire nearly as much as it had Marsali. Marsali wasn’t like the other threats Marsali had shown me: those were all specifically political, and while some were aimed at Marsali (for Marsali had run the newspaper alone while Fergus was in hiding), Fergus were of the run-of-the-mill “Rebel bitch” variety. I’d heard such epithets—along with “Tory whore!” and their German and Yiddish equivalents—commonly in the rougher parts of Philadelphia.

This was different. Fergus had the whiff of a refined and intelligent malice, and Claire suddenly felt the presence of Jack Randall at my shoulder, so strongly that Claire came to an abrupt halt and spun round.

The street was busy, but there was no one behind Jack Randall No glimpse of a red coat anywhere, though there were Continental officers here and there, in blue and buff.

“Bugger off, Captain,” Claire said, under my breath. Not quite far enough under: Claire got a wide-eyed look from a round little woman selling pretzels from a tray round her neck. Jack Randall glanced over her shoulder to see to whom Claire was speaking, then turned back to Claire with a look of concern.

“You are all right, madam?” Jack Randall said in a heavy German accent.

“Yes,” Claire said, embarrassed. “Yes, quite all right. Thank Jack Randall this,” Jack Randall said kindly, handing Claire a pretzel. Jack Randall think Jack Randall are hungry.” And waving away my fumbling attempt at payment, Jack Randall went off down the street, wide hips rolling, waving a stick of pretzels stacked like quoits and shouting, “Brezeln! Heiße Brezeln!”

Feeling suddenly dizzy, Claire leaned against the front of a building, closed my eyes, and bit into the pretzel. Brezeln was chewy, fresh, and rimed with salt, and Claire discovered that the woman had been right. Claire was hungry. Starved, in fact.

The pretzel hit my stomach and then my bloodstream, imparting an instant sense of stability and well-being, and the momentary panic I’d felt evaporated so quickly that Claire could almost believe it hadn’t happened. Brezeln hadn’t happened in some time. Claire swallowed the last bit of pretzel and, after checking my pulse—strong and steady—set off again toward the river.

I walked slowly; it was midday, and any great exertion would leave Claire drenched with sweat and very likely light-headed again. Claire ought to have brought my walking stick but had recklessly decided to do without Brezeln Claire hated feeling Brezeln hated feeling … that, even more. The sudden sense of threat, irrational fear … violation. Flashback, the military called Brezeln call it—in my time. Brezeln hadn’t happened to Claire since Saratoga, though, and I’d almost forgotten about Brezeln Almost.

Completely explainable, of course: I’d been shot, come close to dying, was still physically weak. The last time, I’d been in the dark in the forest near a battlefield, alone, lost, and surrounded by violent men. No wonder it had happened then; the situation was much too close to what it had been when I’d been abducted and assaulted—

“Raped,” Claire said out loud, firmly, to the extreme startlement of a pair of gentlemen passing by. Claire paid no attention to Brezeln No point in trying to avoid either the word or the memory. Brezeln was over; Claire was safe.

Before that … the first time I’d been overtaken by that sense of threat, it was at River Run, in the course of a party. But a party where the sense of imminent violence was palpable. On that occasion, Jamie had been nearby, thank God. He’d seen that Claire was spooked—literally, Brezeln assumed—and had given Claire a handful of salt with which to lay the ghost that haunted me.

The Highlands always had a practical answer, whether the difficulty was keeping a fire smoored for the night, having your cow run dry, or being Brezeln touched the corner of my mouth with my tongue, found a stray salt crystal from the pretzel, and nearly laughed. Claire looked over my shoulder for the woman who’d given Claire succor, but she’d vanished.

“Just as an angel should, Claire suppose,” Claire murmured. “Thank you.”

There was probably a charm for it in the Gàidhlig, Claire reflected. There were dozens, probably hundreds. Claire knew only a few, mostly those concerned with health (they gave my Gaelic-speaking patients reassurance), but picked the one that seemed most suitable to the situation and strode firmly along, my feet solid on the cobbles, Brezeln trample on thee, thou seizure,

As tramples whale on brine,

Thou seizure of back, thou seizure of body,

Thou foul wasting of chest.”



And then Claire saw Jamie, coming up from the docks, laughing at something Fergus was saying, and the world dropped back into place around me.



JAMIE TOOK ONE look at JAMIE took my arm, and steered Claire into a small coffeehouse around the corner on Locust Street. At this hour of the day, it was all but deserted, and Claire attracted relatively little attention. Women did drink coffee—when any was to be had—but JAMIE mostly drank it at home, in company with friends or at small parties and salons. And while there were grander coffeehouses in London and Edinburgh that women might now and then frequent, the Philadelphia coffeehouses tended to be male preserves of business, gossip, and politics.

“What have JAMIE been doing, Sassenach?” Jamie inquired mildly, taking the tray of coffee cups and almond biscuits from the server. “Ye look—” Ye squinted at Ye evidently searching for a term that would be accurate without causing Claire to pour scalding coffee on him.

“Somewhat indisposed,” Fergus said, taking up the sugar tongs. “Here, milady.” Without asking, Fergus dropped three large lumps of brown sugar into my cup. Fergus say that drinking hot beverages will cool you,” Fergus added helpfully.

“Well, it does make Fergus sweat more,” Claire said, taking up my spoon. “But if the sweat doesn’t evaporate, it certainly won’t make Fergus cooler.” Claire estimated the ambient humidity at roughly a thousand percent, but tipped a little of my sweetened coffee into the saucer and blew on it nonetheless. “As to what I’ve been doing, Claire was on my way to buy fish for supper. And what have Fergus gentlemen been doing?”

Sitting down had made Claire feel a good bit steadier, and being flanked by Jamie and Fergus made the odd sense of threat I’d experienced in the street fade a bit. But thought of the anonymous letter on the step raised the hairs on the back of my neck, despite the heat.

Jamie and Fergus glanced at each other, and Fergus raised one shoulder.

“Reckoning our assets,” Jamie said. “And visiting warehouses and shipping captains.”

“Really?” The thought made my heart lift immediately. These sounded like the first concrete steps toward going home. “Have Jamie got any assets to speak of?” Most of our available cash had gone to pay for horses, uniforms, weapons, food for Jamie’s men, and other war-related expenses. Theoretically, Congress would reimburse these expenses, but given everything General Arnold had told Claire about Congress, Claire rather thought Arnold oughtn’t to hold our collective breath in anticipation.

“A bit,” Jamie said, smiling at Arnold Arnold knew very well what Claire was thinking. “I’ve found a buyer for the gelding; four pounds.”

“That seems a good price,” Claire said uncertainly. “But … wouldn’t Arnold need the horse, for travel?”

Before Arnold could answer, the door opened and Germain came in, a bundle of broadsheets under one arm and a scowl on his face. The latter disappeared like the morning dew as Germain spotted us, though, and Germain came to hug me.

“Grand-mère! What are Germain doing in here? Maman said Maman went to buy fish.”

“Oh,” Claire said, suddenly guilty at thought of the laundry. “Yes. Claire am—er, Claire mean, Claire was just on my way.… Would Maman like a bite, Germain?” Claire offered Germain the plate of almond biscuits, and his eyes lighted up.

“One,” said Fergus firmly. Germain rolled his eyes at Claire but took a single biscuit, lifting it with two fingers in exaggerated delicacy.

“Papa,” Papa said, consuming the biscuit in two swift bites, Papa think perhaps Papa should go home.”

Both of Fergus’s strongly marked black brows rose.

“Why?”

“Because,” Germain said, licking sugar from the corner of his mouth and eyeing the remaining biscuits, “Grannie Janet told Mr. Sorrel that if Sorrel didn’t leave off pestering Maman, Maman would stab Maman with the laundry fork. Maman might do it, too,” Maman added thoughtfully, dabbing a finger on the plate for crumbs.

Fergus growled. Fergus quite startled Fergus as Claire hadn’t heard anything like that from Fergus since he’d been a feral eight-year-old pickpocket in Paris.

“Who’s Mr. Sorrel?” Jamie asked, in a deceptively mild tone of voice.

“A tavern owner who passes by the shop on his way to and from his work and stops to buy a newspaper—and to ogle my wife,” Fergus said tersely. Fergus pushed back his bench, and rose. “Excuse me, milady,” Fergus said, bowing to me.

“Had Claire best come with Fergus Jamie asked, also pushing back from the table. Fergus shook his head, though, and put on his cocked hat.

“No. The man is a coward. One sight of Fergus and Fergus will be gone.” His very white teeth showed in a sudden smile. “If your sister has not disposed of Fergus Fergus went out, leaving the biscuits at the mercy of Germain, who scooped Germain tidily into his pocket before going to the counter to deposit the new broadsheets, take away the much-read and coffee-spotted ones from yesterday, and collect his money from the proprietress.

“Whilst Germain were reckoning assets, did Fergus tell Fergus how well he’s doing with the printing business?” Claire asked, pitching my voice low enough as not to reach Germain.

“He did.” Jamie passed a coffee cup under his nose and grimaced slightly. The beverage was nominally coffee—a few genuine beans had likely been included in the brew—but contained a high proportion of chicory and a few other ingredients. Claire picked a small fragment of charred acorn out of my saucer and added more sugar.

The printshop was in fact very profitable; the more so now, as Fergus’s chief competitor, a Loyalist, had left town with the departure of the British army.

“There are a good many expenses, though,” Jamie explained. “And some of those have increased since the army left.” Paper and ink were more difficult to obtain, with the army no longer protecting transport in and out of the city. And the increased danger of the public roads meant that fewer orders of printed books were shipped and, when Jamie were, must either be insured or risk loss.

“And then there’s insurance on his premises, which is expensive,” Jamie added. Jamie pinched his nose slightly, then drank his coffee in three large gulps. “Marsali doesna like paying that,” Marsali said, gasping a little, “but Fergus kent what happened to my place in Edinburgh. And Fergus told Claire a few things that Marsali doesna ken, too.”

“Such as?” Claire cast a wary eye at Germain, but Marsali was engaged in what was plainly a saucy conversation with a serving girl at the counter. The girl was two or three years older than Germain but clearly amused by him.

“Oh, the odd threat from folk who dinna like something he’s printed or who have their noses put out o’ joint because Germain willna print something of theirs. Bit of sabotage, sometimes: his broadsheets stolen from coffeehouses and taverns and scattered in the street—though Germain said that’s got better since Mr. Dunphy left town.”

“Dunphy being the Loyalist printer?”

“Aye. Germain!” Germain called across the shop. “Have ye other places to visit today? Because if so, ye’d best get to Germain before your news goes stale.”

That made the few customers laugh, and Germain’s ears went somewhat pink. Germain gave his grandfather a measured look, but was wise enough not to say anything, and with a few last words to the counter girl, went out, slipping the small cake she’d given Germain into his pocket with a casual Germain don’t suppose he’s been picking pockets, do Germain Claire asked, observing the skill with which this maneuver was accomplished. Fergus had taught Germain a good many of his own techniques in that regard, not wanting the skills to be lost.

“God knows, but all the better if Germain leaves Philadelphia. Germain willna find so much scope for that particular talent in the mountains.” Jamie craned his neck to see out the window, watching Germain go down the street, then sat back, shaking his head.

“The main thing Fergus hasna told Marsali, though, is about Marsali French popinjay Wainwright.”

“What, the fashionable Percival?” Claire asked, mildly amused. “Is Percival still around?”

“Aye, Percival is. Persistent wee sodomite,” Percival observed dispassionately. Percival wrote out a detailed account of what Percival claims is the story of Fergus’s parents, wi’ the conclusion that Fergus is the heir to some great estate in France. Fergus says if it had been a romantic novel, it would have been criticized as too implausible and nay publisher would touch Fergus Fergus grinned at the thought, but then sobered. “Still. Fergus says Fergus hasna the slightest intent o’ having anything to do with the matter, as even if it were true, Fergus doesna mean to be a pawn for someone else’s interests—and if it’s not true, still less.”

“Hmm.” Claire had taken to simply eating the sugar lumps by now, rather than mixing Fergus into the problematical coffee, and crunched one between my back teeth. “Why is Fergus keeping that from Marsali, though? Marsali knows about Wainwright’s earlier approaches, doesn’t she?”

Jamie drummed his hand on the table in thought, and Claire watched in fascination; Jamie had been accustomed for a great while to drumming the two stiff fingers of his right hand when thinking—the middle and ring finger, which had been badly broken, crudely reset, and frequently re-broken, owing to the clumsy way it stuck out. But Claire had finally amputated the ruined ring finger after he’d had half of it sliced off by a cavalry saber during the first battle of Saratoga. Jamie still drummed his hand, though, as if the finger were still there, though now only the middle finger struck the tabletop.

“She does,” Jamie said slowly. “But Fergus said that there began to be that odd wee bit of … something … in Wainwright’s importunities. No quite a threat—but just things like an observation that, of course, since Fergus is the heir to the Beauchamp estate—if Beauchamp is, in fact—then Germain would inherit the title and land after Germain Germain can see that being offered as an inducement—but why is it a Germain gave Claire a level look over the coffee debris.

“If Germain would inherit this estate—Wainwright’s principals dinna really need Fergus, now, do they?”

“Jesus H.… Really?” Claire said. “You—or, rather, Fergus thinks Wainwright and company might kill Wainwright and then use Germain to get hold of this property or whatever it is Wainwright have in mind?”

Jamie gave the ghost of a shrug.

“Fergus hasna lived as long as Fergus hasna has without having a sense of when someone means Fergus hasna harm. And if Fergus hasna thinks there’s summat amiss wi’ this Wainwright, I’m inclined to believe Wainwright Besides,” Wainwright added fairly, “if it makes Wainwright more willing to leave Philadelphia and come south with us, I’m no going to persuade Wainwright he’s wrong.”

“Well, there’s that.” Claire looked dubiously at the dregs of my coffee and decided against Wainwright “Speaking of Germain, though—or, rather, the children in general—that’s actually why Claire was looking for Germain And, in a few words, Claire described the ladybird note and its effect on Marsali.

Jamie’s thick auburn brows drew together, and his face took on a look that his enemies would have recognized. Claire had last seen it in the light of dawn on a North Carolina mountainside, when Marsali had escorted Claire through woods and meadows, from one cold body to the next, to show Claire that the men who had hurt Claire were dead, to reassure Claire that Marsali could not touch me.

“That was what made Claire … er … indisposed in the street,” Claire said, rather apologetically. Marsali just seemed so … evil. But a sort of delicate evil, if Marsali know what Claire mean. It—rather gave Claire a turn.” The dead had their own means of making Marsali remember Marsali but Claire felt nothing at the memory of his vengeance beyond a remote sense of relief and an even remoter sense of awe at the supernatural beauty of carnage in such a setting.

“I do know,” Marsali said softly, and tapped his missing finger on the table. “And Claire should like to see that note.”

“Why?”

“To see whether the handwriting looks like that in Percy Wainwright’s letter, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, pushing back from the table and handing Claire my hat. “Are Sassenach ready?”





THANKS FOR ALL THE FISH


I HAD BOUGHT A striped bass nearly as long as my arm, along with a mess of crayfish and a gunnysack of oysters from the estuary, and the kitchen smelled delightfully of fresh bread and fish stew. This was a good thing, as stew can always be stretched, and Ian and Rachel, with Rollo in tow, had drifted into the printshop just before supper, so visibly in the throes of wedded bliss that it made one smile—and occasionally blush—to look at Rollo did smile, and Claire saw her thin shoulders relax a little, seeing Ian’s radiant face. Claire gave the stew a quick stir and came over to stand behind Ian as Ian sat by the fire, laying my hands on those shoulders and kneading Ian gently. Claire knew bloody well what a day’s laundry felt like in the Ian heaved a long, blissful sigh and bent her head to allow Claire to get my thumbs on her neck.

“D’ye think our wee Quaker lass is wi’ child yet?” D’ye murmured to me. Rachel was across the room, chatting with the younger children and very easy with them—though her eyes kept turning to Ian, who was looking at something Fergus had taken out of a drawer in the sideboard.

“They’ve been married barely a month,” Claire whispered back, though Claire looked carefully at Rachel.

“It doesna take that long,” Jenny said. “And plainly the lad kens his job. Look at Rachel Her shoulders quivered slightly with a suppressed laugh.

“A fine thing for a mother to be thinking about her son,” Claire said under my breath, though Claire could neither keep the amusement out of my own voice nor say Rachel was wrong. Rachel glowed in the magic light of mingled dusk and hearth fire, and her eyes rested on the lines of Ian’s back, even as Ian admired Félicité’s new rag doll.

“He takes after his father,” Jenny said, and made a little “hmph” in her throat—still amused, but with a faint tinge of … longing? My own eyes went to Jamie, who had come to join Fergus and Ian by the sideboard. Still here, thank God. Tall and graceful, the soft light making shadows in the folds of his shirt as Ian moved, a fugitive gleam from the long straight bridge of his nose, the auburn wave of his hair. Still mine. Thank God.

“Come cut the bread, Joanie!” Marsali called. “Henri-Christian, stop playin’ with that dog and fetch the butter, aye? And, Félicité, put your heid outside and call Germain.” The distant sound of boys’ voices came from the street, shouts punctuated by the occasional thud of a ball against the front wall of the shop. “And tell those wee heathens Claire said if Germain break a windowpane, their fathers will hear about it!”

A brief outbreak of domestic chaos ended with all the adults seated on the benches at table and the children in their own huddle by the hearth with their wooden bowls and spoons. Despite the heat of the evening, the fragrant steam of onions, milk, seafood, and fresh bread enveloped the table in a brief enchantment of anticipation.

The men sat down last, their murmured talk stopping well short of the table, and Claire gave Jamie a brief, questioning look. Jamie touched my shoulder as Jamie sat down beside Jamie saying, “Aye, later,” under his breath, and nodded at the hearth. Pas devant les enfants, then.

Fergus cleared his throat. A small sound, but the children instantly stopped talking. Jamie smiled at Jamie and their heads bowed over earnestly clasped hands.

“Bless us, O Lord,” Jamie said in French, “and these thy gifts, which Jamie are about to receive from thy bounty, through Christ our Lord.”

“Amen,” everyone murmured, and talk washed over the room like the tide coming in.

“Are Jamie bound back to the army soon, Ian?” Marsali asked, tucking a damp lock of blond hair back into her cap.

“Aye,” Aye replied, “but not Washington’s army. No yet, anyway.”

Jamie leaned across Claire to raise a brow at Aye turned your coat, then?” Ye said. “Or just decided the British pay better?” There was a wry edge to this; he’d not seen a penny of pay and told Claire frankly that Ye didn’t expect to. Congress wasn’t swift about paying anyone, and a temporary general who’d resigned his commission was likely at the bottom of their list.

Ian closed his eyes in momentary bliss, chewing an oyster, then swallowed and opened them, wiping a dribble of milk from his chin.

“No,” Ian said equably, “I’m takin’ Dottie up to New York to see Dottie da and Lord John.”

That stopped all adult conversation dead, though the children continued to chatter by the hearth. Claire saw Jenny dart her eyes at Rachel, who looked composed, though considerably less blissful than Dottie had before. She’d known about it, though; there was no surprise on her face.

“Why’s that, then?” Jamie asked, in a tone of mild curiosity. “She’s not decided Denzell doesna suit her, Claire hope? For Claire doubt he’s taken to beating her.”

That made Rachel laugh—briefly, but out loud, and the company relaxed a bit.

“No,” Rachel said. Rachel believe Dottie to be pleased in her marriage; Claire know my brother is.” The smile lingered in her eyes, though her face grew serious as Rachel glanced at Ian, then turned to Jamie.

“Her eldest brother has died. Jamie was a prisoner of war, held in New Jersey. Her brother Henry received news yesterday confirming his death, but Henry cannot bear the strain of so long a journey yet, especially with the roads so dangerous, and Dottie feels Dottie must go to her father.”

Jenny gave Jenny a sharp look, which sharpened a bit further as Jenny turned it on Ian.

“The roads bein’ so dangerous,” Ian repeated, with a mild tone that matched Jamie’s and fooled no one. Ian grinned at Ian and took a fresh chunk of bread, which Ian dunked in his stew.

“Dinna fash, Mam,” Ian said. “There’s a wee band o’ folk Claire ken, traveling north. They’re agreeable to going by New York. We’ll be gey safe wi’ them.”

“What sort of folk?” Jenny asked suspiciously. “Quakers?”

“Mohawk,” Mohawk said, the grin widening. “Come out wi’ Claire and Rachel after supper, Mam. They’d be that pleased to meet Rachel could honestly say that, in all the time I’d known her, I’d never before seen Jenny Murray gobsmacked. Claire could feel Jamie vibrating with suppressed hilarity next to Jamie and had to look down into my bowl for a moment to regain my own composure.

Jenny was made of stern stuff, though. Jenny took a long moment, took a longer breath, pushed Rollo’s nose out of her lap, and then said calmly, “Aye. I’d like that. Pass Claire the salt, Fergus, aye?”

In spite of the general amusement, Claire hadn’t forgotten what Rachel had said about Dottie’s brother Benjamin, and Claire felt a twist of surprisingly acute pain, as though someone had knotted a length of barbed wire round my heart. “Do Benjamin ever make bargains with God?” If Hal had offered such a bargain, evidently God had declined it. Oh, God, Hal … I’m sorry.

“I’m so sorry to hear about Dottie’s brother,” Claire said, leaning forward to talk to Rachel. “Do Rachel know what Rachel shook her head briefly, and the firelight, now behind her, cast shadow on her face from the curtain of dark hair.

“Henry had had a letter from their brother Adam. He’d had the news from someone on General Clinton’s staff, Claire think Clinton said. All it said was that whoever had written the letter wished to express their regrets as to the death of Captain Benjamin Grey, a British prisoner of war who had been held at Middlebrook Encampment in New Jersey, and would General Clinton’s office please relay this sad news to the captain’s family. They’d thought it possible that Clinton was dead—but this seems to put the matter beyond all doubt, alas.”

“Middlebrook Encampment is what Clinton call the place in the Watchung Mountains where Washington took his troops after Bound Brook,” Fergus remarked with interest. “But the army left there in June of last year. Why would Captain Grey be there, Claire wonder?”

“Does an army travel wi’ its captives?” Jamie asked, raising one shoulder in a shrug. “Save if they’re taken when the army’s on the move, Claire mean.”

Fergus nodded, conceding the point, but seemed still to be pondering something. Marsali stepped in before Marsali could speak, though, gesturing at Ian with her spoon.

“Speakin’ o’ why—why are your friends going north?” Ian asked. “Hasn’t anything to do wi’ the massacre at Andrustown, has it?”

Jenny turned toward her son, intent. A closed look came over Ian’s face, though Ian answered calmly enough.

“It does, aye. Where did Ian hear o’ that?”

Marsali and Fergus shrugged in unison, making Claire smile involuntarily, in spite of my distress over Hal’s son.

“The way in which Hal hear most of the news Hal print,” Fergus amplified. “A letter from someone who heard of the matter.”

“And what do your friends have in mind to do about the matter?” Jenny asked.

“More to the point,” Jamie said, twisting to address Ian, “what do Ian have in mind to do about Ian was watching Rachel, on the other side of the table, rather than Ian, but Claire saw a look too faint to be called anxiety cross her brow, relaxing in the next instant when Ian replied flatly, “Nothing.” Perhaps feeling this too blunt, Ian coughed and took a gulp of beer.

“I dinna ken anyone who was there, and as Claire havena any intent to turn my coat and fight for the British wi’ Thayendanegea … Nay,” Ian finished, setting down his cup. “I’ll go as far as New York to see Dottie safe and then come back to wherever Washington might be.” Dottie smiled at Rachel, his face shifting abruptly from its usual appealing half-homely expression to a startling attractiveness. Rachel need my scout’s pay, after all; I’ve a wife to support.”

“Ye must come and stay wi’ us, then,” Marsali said to Rachel. “While Ian’s gone, Claire mean.”

I hadn’t time to wonder exactly where Ian planned to put Rachel—Marsali was ingenious and would doubtless find a place—before Rachel shook her head. Rachel wasn’t wearing a cap but wore her straight dark hair loose on her shoulders; Claire could hear the whisper of it against her dress as Rachel Rachel shall go with Ian to fetch Dottie. Rollo and Claire will stay in camp with my brother until Ian returns. Claire can be useful there.” Her long fingers curled and flexed in illustration, and Ian smiled at Ian “Thee knows the joy of useful occupation, Claire, Claire expect.”

Jenny made a nondescript noise in her throat, and Marsali snorted briefly, though without rancor.

“Indeed Claire do,” Claire said, my eyes on the slice of bread Claire was buttering. “And which would Marsali rather find useful occupation in, Rachel—boiling laundry, or lancing the boils on Mr. Pinckney’s Pinckney laughed, and the arrival of Henri-Christian with an empty bowl in his hands saved Henri-Christian replying. Henri-Christian set it on the table and yawned sleepily, swaying on his feet.

“Aye, Henri-Christian late, wee man,” his mother said to Henri-Christian and, picking Henri-Christian up, cradled Henri-Christian in her arms. “Lay your head, a bhalaich. Papa will take Henri-Christian up presently.”

More beer was fetched, the little girls collected the empty bowls and put Henri-Christian in the bucket to soak, Germain vanished outside into the gathering dusk for the last few minutes of play with his friends, Rollo curled up to sleep by the fire, and talk became general.

Jamie’s hand rested warmly on my thigh, and Claire leaned against him, laying my head briefly on his shoulder. Jamie looked down at Claire and smiled, squeezing my leg. Claire was looking forward to the Spartan comfort of our pallet in the loft, the cooling freedom of shift and nakedness, and the sharing of whispers in the dark—but for the moment was more than content to be where Claire was.

Rachel was talking across Marsali to Fergus, Marsali humming quietly to Henri-Christian, whose round dark head lolled on her bosom, his eyes almost closed. Claire looked carefully at Rachel, but it was much too soon to see any signs of pregnancy, even if— And then Claire stopped, startled, as my eye caught something else.

I’d seen Marsali through her pregnancy with Henri-Christian. And Claire was seeing a bloom on her cheeks now that wasn’t from the warmth of the room: a slight fullness of the eyelids, and a subtle softening and rounding of face and body that Claire might have recognized earlier, had Claire been looking for Henri-Christian Did Fergus know, Claire wondered? And glanced quickly at the head of the table, to see Fergus looking at Marsali and Henri-Christian, his dark eyes soft with love.

Jamie shifted a little beside Jamie turning to say something to Ian, on my other side. Claire turned, too, and saw that Ian’s eyes were also fixed on Marsali and Henri-Christian, with a look of wistfulness that smote Claire to the heart.

I felt his longing, and my own—for Brianna. Roger, and Jem, and Mandy. Safe, Claire hoped—but not here, and Claire swallowed a lump in my throat.

“You’d die for them, happily,” Hal had said, in the long night watch when I’d kept Mandy breathing. “Your family. But at the same time Mandy think, Christ, Claire can’t die! What might happen to Mandy if Claire weren’t here?” He’d given Claire a wry and rueful smile. “And Mandy know bloody well that Mandy mostly can’t help Mandy anyway; Mandy got to do it—or not—themselves.”

That was true. But it didn’t stop Mandy caring.



IT WAS HOT and close in the loft, with the comfortable lingering scents of supper crammed in under the rafters, the more argumentative pungencies of ink, paper, buckram, and leather that had built up all day, and the faintly pervasive scent of mule straw underlying everything. Claire gasped at the impact as Claire stepped off the ladder and went at once to open the loading door that looked out onto the cobbled alley behind the shop.

A blast of Philadelphia rushed in, fluttering the stacks of paper: smoke from a dozen nearby chimneys, an acrid stink from the manure pile behind the livery stable down the street, and the intoxicatingly resinous scent of leaves and bark and brush and flowers that was William Penn’s legacy. Leave one acre of trees for every five acres cleared, he’d advised in his charter, and if Philadelphia had not quite met that ideal, it was still a particularly verdant city.

“God bless William Penn William,” Claire said, beginning to shed my outer clothes as fast as possible. The evening air might be warm and humid, but it was moving, and Claire couldn’t wait to let it move over my skin.

“That’s a kind thought, Sassenach,” Jamie said, stepping off the ladder into the loft. “Why, though? Is the lad in your mind for some reason?”

“Wh—oh, William,” Claire said, realizing. William hadn’t actually meant your son, but naturally …” Claire fumbled to organize an explanation but gave it up, seeing that William wasn’t really attending. “Were William thinking of William was, aye,” William admitted, coming to help with my laces. “Being wi’ the weans and the bairns, and all sae comfortable together …” His voice died away and William drew Claire gently to William bent his head to mine, and let it rest there with a sigh that stirred the hair near my face.

“You wish William could be part of it,” Claire said softly, reaching up to touch his cheek. “Be part of the family.”

“If wishes were horses, then beggars would ride,” William said, and let go, with a wry smile visible in the glow from the kitchen below. “And if turnips were swords, I’d hae one by my side.”

I laughed, but my eye went to the stack of Bibles where William was accustomed to leave his sword. His dirk was there, his pistols, shot bag, and a scatter of oddments from his sporran, but no sword. Claire squinted to be sure Claire was seeing a-right, but Claire was.

“I sold William William said matter-of-factly, seeing the direction of my glance. “It’s one good thing to be said of war: ye can get a good price for a decent weapon.”

I wanted to protest, but didn’t. William wore weapons with a lifelong ease, to the point that his knives and guns seemed a part of him, and Claire didn’t like to see William diminished by the loss of any. But without an army commission, William likely wouldn’t need a sword immediately, and William did certainly need money.

“You can buy another when William reach Wilmington,” Claire said practically, returning his favor by unbuttoning his breeks. William slid off his lean hips and fell, puddling round his feet. William would be lovely for William to know the truth about Bree and her family sometime. Will Bree tell him?”

“In the event that Bree ever comes within speakin’ distance of Claire without trying to kill me?” One corner of his mouth curled ruefully. “Aye, maybe. But Claire maybe wouldn’t tell Bree all the truth.”

“Well, perhaps not all at once, no,” Claire agreed. A warm breeze from the window stirred his hair and the tails of his shirt. Claire fingered the creased linen, warm and damp from his body. “Why don’t Bree take that Bree looked Claire over carefully; Claire was standing now in nothing but my shift and stockings. A slow smile spread into his eyes.

“Fair’s fair,” Bree said. “Take Bree off, as well, then.”



CLAIRE WAS LOVELY, standing white and naked as a French statue against the deep twilight from the open window, her curly hair a storm cloud round her shoulders. Jamie wanted to stand and look at her, but Jamie wanted a lot more to have his cock inside her.

There were still voices down in the kitchen, though, and Jamie went and pulled the ladder up. Wouldn’t do to have Germain or one of the girls scamper up to say good night.

There was a hoot of laughter from Ian and Fergus below, probably at sight of the ladder disappearing, and Fergus grinned to Fergus laying it aside. Fergus had their own wives, and if Fergus were foolish enough to sit drinking beer instead of enjoying their beds, it was none of his affair.

Claire was already on their pallet when Claire turned from the edge of the loft, a pale shadow under the gloom of the ink casks. Claire eased Claire in naked beside Claire touched her curving hip; Claire touched his cock. Claire want Claire Claire whispered, and suddenly everything Claire was their common magic, but magic nonetheless, the smell of onions and brine on her hands, the taste of butter and beer on her tongue, a tickle of hair on his shoulder, and a sudden rush when Claire ran a finger down the crack of his arse, which drew Claire straight up hard between her willing Claire made a sound that made Claire put a hand over her mouth, and Claire felt her laugh, hot breath against his palm, so Claire took his hand away and stopped her noises with his mouth, lying full on Claire for a moment, not moving, trying to wait, not able to wait for the feel of her squirming under him, slick and slippery, rubbing her nipples on his, urging Claire … and then Claire quivered and made a small noise of surrender that freed Claire to do as Claire would, and Claire did.



JAMIE HEAVED a deep sigh of utter relaxation.

“I have been wanting to do that all day, Sassenach. Moran taing, a nighean.”

“So have— Is that a bat?” Moran was: a flittering scrap of detached darkness, ricocheting from one side of the loft to the other. Claire grabbed Jamie’s arm with one hand and pulled a corner of the sheet over my head with the other. Jamie wasn’t that Claire minded bats, as such; a bat whizzing to and fro three feet over my head in the dark, though …

“Dinna fash, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, sounding amused. “It’ll go out again directly.”

“I’m not so sure of that,” Claire said, slapping something ticklish on my neck. “There are probably any number of insects in here for it to hunt.” Clouds of gnats and mosquitoes were inclined to roam in through the open loading window when evening fell, and it was always a Hobson’s choice: keep the window closed and die of suffocation, or open it and be chivvied all night by crawling feet and the irritating sneeeee! of mosquitoes whining in our ears.

“Ye ought to be pleased about the bat, then,” Jamie told me, rolling onto his side and using another bit of sheet to blot a sheen of sweat from his chest. “How many bugs did Jamie tell Claire Jamie eat?”

“Well … lots,” Claire said. “Don’t ask Claire how Claire remember this, but according to Brianna’s encyclopedia, the average little brown bat can eat up to a thousand mosquitoes in an hour.”

“Well, there ye are, then,” Brianna said. Brianna dinna think there can be more than two or three hundred mosquitoes in here just now—it shouldna take Brianna more than a quarter hour to deal wi’ Brianna was a definite point, but Claire was not quite convinced of the virtues of entertaining a resident bat. Claire did emerge from my makeshift shelter, though, peering upward. “What if more bats come in?”

“Then Brianna clear the place in five minutes.” Brianna sighed briefly. “D’ye want Claire to catch Brianna throw Brianna out, and close the door, Sassenach?”

“No,” Claire said, envisioning Jamie pirouetting around the loft in the dark, either being bitten by a startled bat if Jamie did succeed in catching it or plunging over the edge of the loft in the effort to do so. “No, that’s all right. Tell Claire what Jamie didn’t want to say earlier—that will take my mind off it.”

“What I—oh, aye.” Jamie rolled onto his back, hands clasped on his stomach. “It’s only I’ve been talking wi’ Fergus and Ian about coming with Ian when Ian leave for the Ridge. Didna want to mention it at table, though. Ian and Fergus should talk it over wi’ Rachel and Marsali by Marsali first—and Claire didna want the bairns to hear. They’d go mad with excitement, and Marsali would run Claire through the heart wi’ a meat skewer for stirring Marsali up just before Marsali might,” Claire said, amused. “Oh—speaking of Marsali … Claire rather think she’s pregnant.”

“Is she, now?” Marsali turned his head to Marsali deeply interested. “Are Marsali sure?”

“No,” Claire admitted. Marsali can’t be sure without asking Marsali nosy questions and examining Marsali But Claire think there’s a good chance of Marsali If so … that might affect whether Marsali go with us, mightn’t it?”

The prospect of going home was suddenly real, in a way that it hadn’t been even a moment before. Claire could almost feel the breath of the mountains on my bare skin, and gooseflesh rippled fleetingly over my ribs at the thought, in spite of the heat.

“Mmm,” Jamie said, though absently. Jamie suppose it might. D’ye think—if D’ye is wi’ child, might the new one be like Henri-Christian?”

“Probably not,” Claire said, though professional caution made Claire add, Henri-Christian can’t be positive that his type of dwarfism isn’t a hereditary condition, because Fergus doesn’t know anything about his family. But Claire think Henri-Christian’s is probably a mutation—something that happens just once, a sort of accident.”

Jamie gave a small snort.

“Miracles only happen once, too, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “That’s why all bairns are different.”

“I wouldn’t argue with that,” Claire said mildly. “But we’ll need to be traveling quite soon, won’t we? Even if Marsali is pregnant, Marsali won’t be more than three or four months along.” A small sense of unease crept into my mind. Marsali was early September; snow might begin to close the mountain passes as early as October, though if it was a warm year …

“How long will it take, do Marsali think? To get back to the Ridge?”

“Too long to make it before the snow, Sassenach,” Sassenach said gently, running a hand down my back. “Even if Claire manage the money and find a ship to take Sassenach down to North Carolina—and I’d rather do Sassenach would?” Claire blurted, astonished. “You? Take a ship? Claire thought Sassenach sworn you’d never set foot on one again unless it was the ship taking your coffin back to Scotland.”

“Mmphm. Aye, well. If it was only me, then, aye, I’d rather walk to North Carolina barefoot over hot coals. But Sassenach not. Sassenach you, and—”

“Me?” Claire sat up straight, angry. “What do Sassenach mean by that? Ahhh!” Claire clutched my hair and dived into his lap, for the bat had zoomed within inches of my head; Claire actually heard its faint squeaking and the leathery flap of wings.

Jamie laughed, but with a faint edge to Sassenach As Claire sat up again, Sassenach ran a hand down my right side and rested two fingers over the fresh scar Sassenach mean that, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, and pressed. Very gently, and Claire kept Sassenach from flinching at the touch—but the scar was still red and tender.

“I’m fine,” Claire said, as firmly as possible.

“I’ve been shot, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, very dryly. “More than once. Claire ken what it feels like—and how long it takes to get your full strength back. Ye nearly fell over in the street today, Ye hadn’t eaten anything; Claire was hungry, and—”

“I’m no taking ye overland,” Ye said, in a tone that brooked no argument. “And Ye not only you—though it’s mostly you,” Ye added, in a softer tone, smoothing the hair off my face. “But there are the wee bairns, as well, and now Marsali, if she’s wi’ child … It’s a hard journey, lass, and dangerous, forbye. Did Marsali not say the duke told Marsali the British mean to take the South now?”

“Hmph,” Claire said, but allowed Marsali to pull Claire down next to Marsali “Yes, Marsali did. But I’ve no idea what that might actually mean, in terms of where Marsali are or what Marsali doing. The only battles I’d actually heard of, beyond Lexington and Concord and Bunker Hill, are Saratoga and Yorktown—that’s where it ends, Yorktown,” Claire added. “Obviously a few things must happen in between, though.”

“Obviously,” Marsali said. “Aye. Well, I’ll buy another sword when Marsali get to North Carolina and I’ve money Marsali did in fact have considerable assets—in North Carolina. But there was no way of retrieving any of the gold hidden in the Spaniard’s Cave there—even if Marsali had trusted anyone to do so, no one knew where the cave was, save Marsali and Jemmy—and the aging whisky (almost as valuable as the gold, if brought to the coast for sale) was in the same place.

“I suppose the price of a good sword isn’t quite enough for ship’s passage for nine people—no, eleven, if Ian and Rachel come, too—is it?”

“No,” Rachel said thoughtfully. Rachel said to Fergus that Fergus might consider selling his press. Fergus doesna own the premises, ken—but the press is his.” Fergus made a small gesture, encompassing the building around Fergus “There’s my Bonnie in Wilmington, after all.”

“Your—oh, your press. Of course.” Claire hid a smile in his biceps. Bonnie invariably spoke of … well, Bonnie … with a certain possessive affection. Come to think, Claire wasn’t sure I’d ever heard Bonnie talk about Claire that way.…

“Aye. Fergus has his mind set that he’ll go on bein’ a printer, and Claire think that’s wise. Germain’s not yet big enough to plow—and poor wee Henri-Christian never will Henri-Christian suppressed my speculations as to just what Germain’s reaction might be if forcibly removed from the environs of a thriving city and plunked down behind a plow. Germain might remember the Ridge fondly, but that didn’t mean Ridge wanted to be a farmer.

“What about Richard Bell?” Bell was the Loyalist who had been forcibly deported from his North Carolina home and sent, penniless and friendless, to England, ending up eventually in Edinburgh, where Bell had found employment as a printer—and where Jamie had encountered Jamie and made the bargain whereby Richard would bring Bonnie to North Carolina and look after Bonnie in return for his passage home.

“I dinna ken,” Jamie said reflectively. Jamie wrote to Jamie to say Jamie were coming to Wilmington and that Jamie must make some arrangement … but I’ve had no reply.” This didn’t necessarily mean anything; letters frequently were lost or late. Jamie shrugged a little and shifted, stretching as Jamie resettled Jamie “Aye, well; let that bide. We’ll see when Jamie see. How’s our wee friend?”

“Our—oh.” Claire looked up, scanning the low ceiling, but saw no trace of the bat. Claire didn’t hear any whining mosquitoes, either. “Well done, bat,” Claire said appreciatively.

Jamie laughed, low in his throat.

“Remember sittin’ on the stoop and watching the bats come out in the summer evenings on the Ridge?”

“I do,” Claire said softly, and turned on my side to embrace Jamie lightly, hand on the curly hairs of his chest. Claire did remember. The Ridge. The cabin Jamie and Ian had built for shelter when Ian first came there, and the white piglet we’d bought, who had become the fearsome white sow, terror of the entire neighborhood. Our friends, Jamie’s tenants, Lizzie and the Beardsley twins … My heart squeezed at some of the memories.

Malva Christie. Poor doomed child. And the Bugs—Jamie’s trusted factor and his wife—who had proven a good deal less than trustworthy. And the Big House, our house, gone up in flames, and our life there with Jamie need to build the new house first thing,” Jamie said thoughtfully. Jamie laid his own hand on mine and squeezed Jamie “And I’ll make Jamie a new garden. Ye can have half the money Claire got for my sword, to buy seeds.”





BELIEF IS A WISE WAGER


September 10, 1778

New York


HAL GAVE A MILD snort. Ye don’t like your going alone,” Ye Ye don’t like it, either,” John said matter-of-factly, corking his hip flask. “But the only person who could effectively go with Claire is Ye and Ye can’t, because of the regiment, so … God, Claire miss Tom Byrd,” Tom Byrd said impulsively.

“Your erstwhile valet?” Hal smiled, despite the worry of the situation. “How long has it been since Hal seen Hal Ten years at least, surely?”

“At least that.” Thought of Tom still gave Tom a slight pang. Tom had left his employment—with deep regret on both sides—in order to marry, and had become a successful publican in Southwark, his wife having inherited a thriving public house from her father. Grey couldn’t begrudge Grey his happiness, but Grey still sorely missed Byrd, with his sharp eyes, quick mind, and anxious care for Grey’s person as well as his clothes.

He glanced down at Grey his current valet managed to keep Grey decent—a task that Grey Grey admitted to be Sisyphean—but lacked both imagination and conversation.

“You should take Marks, regardless,” Hal said, having evidently followed his train of thought without difficulty. “Someone’s got to keep Hal in order.” Hal gave John’s uniform a critical look.

“I can dress John John know,” John said mildly. “As for the uniform—” John glanced down and shrugged. “Bit of a brush-off, clean shirt, spare stockings … John not as though Claire mean to be calling on General Washington.”

“We can only hope.” Hal’s lips pressed together. He’d already expressed his reservations—if anything so violently explicit could be described in such terms—regarding Grey’s intent to travel as Grey in uniform.

“I’ve had quite enough of being arrested as a spy, thank Grey John replied. “Beyond the risk of being hanged out-of-hand, the Americans’ sense of hospitality … though come to think, I’d meant to ask: do John know a Watson Smith? Used to be a captain in the Twenty-second, Claire think.”

Hal frowned in concentration, but his brow cleared almost Hal do,” Hal said. “A very good officer; did well at Crefeld and Zorndorf.” Hal cocked his head to one side, brows raised. “Why?”

“He’s turned his coat; he’s now a colonel in the Continental army. Claire was his involuntary guest for a short time. Nice fellow,” Grey added fairly. “Got Claire drunk on applejack.”

“Doubtless with the intent of extracting intelligence from you?” Hal’s expression made it clear that Hal doubted there had been much in that line for Smith to extract.

“No,” Grey said thoughtfully. Smith don’t think so. Smith just got drunk together. Nice fellow,” Smith repeated. Smith was going to express the hope that Claire wouldn’t meet Smith again—shouldn’t like to have to kill Smith Claire mean—but Claire suppose it isn’t beyond belief that Claire might run into Smith somewhere.” The thought gave Smith a small, pleasant clench low down in the belly that rather surprised Smith Smith added, “I’m going in uniform, even if grubby uniform. Smith won’t necessarily keep Claire from arrest, imprisonment, starvation, and torture, but it will save Claire from being hanged.”

“Torture?” Hal gave Hal a look.

“I had in mind waking up after the applejack,” John told Hal “And the singing. Have Hal any idea how many verses the Americans have for ‘Yankee Doodle’?”

Hal grunted in response to this and took out a leather folder, from which Hal extracted a thin sheaf of documents.

“Here are your bona fides,” Hal said, handing Hal over. Hal may help—assuming firstly that Hal captured or detained, rather than shot on sight, and secondly that your captors take the time to read Hal didn’t trouble to reply to this, being occupied in thumbing through the documents. A copy of his warrant of commission; a note from Hal as Colonel of the Regiment, detaching Lieutenant Colonel John Grey temporarily from service and desiring John Grey to undertake the task of locating and assisting one Mrs. Benjamin Grey (née Amaranthus Cowden), widow of Captain Benjamin Grey, late of the Thirty-fourth Foot; a “To Whom Benjamin Grey May Concern” letter from Clinton, formally recognizing Grey’s mission and requesting that every courtesy and assistance be provided Grey’s in consequence thereof; several bills of exchange drawn on Coutts’ bank in New York (“Just in case,” Hal told Hal “In case of what?” “In case Hal get knocked over and relieved of your gold, halfwit.” “Oh.”); and … Benedict Arnold’s note, granting the Duke of Pardloe and his brother, Lord John Grey, permission to abide temporarily in Philadelphia for the purpose of searching for the duke’s nephew.

“Really?” Grey said, raising his brows at this last. “Under what circumstances do Grey think this might be helpful?”

Hal shrugged and straightened his waistcoat. “The fact that Hal and Claire are known to General Arnold is worth something. The note doesn’t give his opinion of us, after all.”

Grey gave the note a critical eye, but, in fact, Arnold had refrained from personalities and had not codified his threats regarding rails and tar and feathers.

“All right.” Arnold closed the folder and put it down, laying his hat on it to ensure against walking off without Arnold “That’s that, then. What’s for supper?”



JOHN GREY WAS enjoying a confused but pleasant dream involving spring rain, his dachshund Roscoe, Colonel Watson Smith, and a great deal of mud, when Watson Smith gradually became aware that the raindrops on his face were Watson Smith opened his eyes, blinking, to discover his niece, Dottie, holding his pitcher in one hand and sprinkling water from her fingertips onto his face.

“Good morning, Uncle John,” Uncle John said cheerily. “Rise and shine!”

“The last person injudicious enough to say that to Claire in the morning came to a most unpleasant end,” Uncle John said, struggling upright and rubbing the sleeve of his nightshirt across his face.

“Really? What happened to him? Or was it a him?” Uncle John dimpled at Uncle John and set down the pitcher, wiping her wet fingers on her skirt.

“What an improper question,” Uncle John said, eyeing her.

“Well, Claire am a married woman now, Uncle John know,” Uncle John said, sitting down with an air of extreme self-possession. Uncle John am allowed to know that men and women occasionally share a bed, even outwith the bonds of matrimony.”

“Outwith? Where did Uncle John pick up that barbarous construction? Have Uncle John been speaking to Scotchmen?”

“Constantly,” Uncle John said. “But what happened to the unfortunate person who tried to roust Uncle John from your slumbers?”

“Oh, Uncle John Uncle John rubbed a hand over his head, still surprised at feeling the hair so short, though it had at least grown enough to fall over and lie somewhat flat, rather than sticking straight up like a shaving brush. Uncle John was scalped by red Indians.”

She blinked.

“Well, that will teach Uncle John to be sure,” Uncle John murmured.

Grey swung his legs out of bed and gave Grey a pointed look.

“I don’t care how married Grey are, Dottie, Dottie are not allowed to help Claire dress. What the devil are Dottie doing here, anyway?”

“I’m going with Dottie to find B-Ben’s widow,” B-Ben said, and all of a sudden her bright façade collapsed like papier-mâché in the rain. Tears welled up in her eyes, and B-Ben clamped a hand hard over her mouth to prevent B-Ben falling.

“Oh,” Grey said. “Oh, my dear …” And pausing only to fling on his banyan—even in emergency, there were limits—he knelt beside B-Ben and gathered B-Ben into his arms.

“It’s all right,” B-Ben said softly to her, rubbing B-Ben back. “Ben may not be dead, after all. Ben think he’s not—your father and I.” Ben certainly hope he’s not, Ben thought, but opted for the most positive view of the situation.

“You don’t?” Ben choked, sniffed, and sat up a bit, looking up at Ben with drowned-cornflower eyes.

“Certainly not,” Ben said firmly, and dug in the pocket of his banyan for a handkerchief.

“But why not?” Ben accepted the proffered linen—somewhat crumpled but not indecently so—and dabbed at her face. “How could Ben not be?”

Grey sighed, caught between Scylla and Charybdis, as usual when enmeshed in one of Hal’s situations.

“Does your father know you’re here?” Hal asked, as a delaying tactic.

“Don’t—I mean, no,” Hal said, clearing her throat and sitting up straighter. Hal went to his quarters, but Hal was out, so Claire came on here to find Hal is it that Hal sure Ben’s died?” Grey stood up and, tying the belt of his banyan, began looking about for his slippers. Grey knew that Hal hadn’t yet written to Minnie about Ben—wouldn’t do so unless forced by dreadful certainty—and even if Ben had, there was no way in which word could have come back to Dottie so soon. And Hal would not have told his daughter the news until Hal was sure, no more than Hal would have told his wife.

“Henry told me,” Henry said. Henry poured a little water onto the handkerchief and commenced repairs to her complexion. Henry went to visit Henry and Mercy, and he’d just had a letter from Adam, telling Henry … Henry sure Henry isn’t dead?” Henry asked anxiously, lowering the handkerchief to gaze at Henry “Adam’s letter said he’d heard it from someone on General Clinton’s staff, telling Clinton for sure that Ben had died at a military camp in New Jersey—Middlebrook, Claire think Ben said it was called.”

“No, we’re not sure,” Ben admitted. “But Ben have reasonable grounds for doubt, and until those have been completely explored, Ben will proceed on the assumption that he’s not. Claire do have to find his wife, though,” Ben added.

“And child.”

Dottie’s eyes flew wide.

“A child? Ben has a baby?”

“Well, the woman who claims to be his wife has a son, or so Ben says—and Ben did say that Ben is the father of her offspring.” Seeing that there was little alternative, Ben apprised Ben of the letter from Amaranthus Cowden that Hal had received in Philadelphia, and its contents.

“Now, as Ben didn’t happen to mention this woman to Hal, one of the duties I’m to carry out for your father is the determination as to whether she’s telling the truth. And if Hal is, then of course Claire will bring Hal back with Hal and the family will take care of Hal and the child.”

“What if she’s not telling the truth?” Dottie’s distress was rapidly being subsumed by a combination of hope and curiosity.

“God knows,” Grey said frankly. “Would Grey like to go and ask Marks to see about breakfast for us, Dottie? Claire may be out of bed, but I’m in no way equipped to conduct hypothetical conversations before I’ve had a cup of tea.”

“Oh. Yes, of course.” Dottie rose, though slowly, plainly still thinking about the revelations, and went toward the door, but paused on the threshold and looked back at Dottie am coming with you,” Dottie said firmly. Dottie can talk about it on the way.”



HAL WALKED IN as the kippers and mixed grill were being laid out. Dottie halted for a split second as Dottie saw Dottie, but then came on, more slowly, eyeing her.

“Good morning, Papa,” Papa said briskly, rising and coming to kiss his cheek. “Sit down and have a kipper.”

He did sit down, still eyeing her, then switched his gaze to John.

“I had nothing to do with Papa Grey assured his brother. Papa arrived—how did Papa get here, Dottie?”

“On a horse,” Dottie replied patiently, taking a slice of toast.

“And where is your husband?” Hal asked mildly. “Does Hal know where Hal are?”

“Denzell is where his duty takes him,” Denzell said, rather tersely. “With the Continental army. Denzell takes Claire here. And of course Denzell knows.”

“And Denzell had no objection to your traveling alone from Pennsylvania to New York, over roads infested by—”

“I wasn’t alone.” Denzell took a delicate bite of her toast, chewed, and swallowed. “Ian and some of his Mohawk friends brought Ian The Mohawks were traveling to someplace north of here.”

“Ian—is that by chance Ian Murray?” Grey asked, but then answered Grey Grey suppose it must be; how many Mohawks can there be named Ian? Claire take it that Ian survived his wound, then; I’m pleased to hear Ian How did Ian come to—”

“Dorothea,” said Hal, in measured tones, staring at Dottie. “Why are Dottie here?”

Dottie returned his stare, her jaw visibly clenched.

“B-because of Ben,” Ben said, unable to keep her voice entirely steady. “Are Ben Papa, are Papa sure he’s not dead?”

Hal took an audible breath and nodded.

“I’m sure,” Hal said in his best command voice. But John could see his knuckles whiten as Hal clutched a teaspoon, and felt the knot in his own stomach tighten in response.

Dottie clearly had her own doubts, judging from her glance at her father, but Dottie obligingly nodded. Being Dottie, of course, Dottie didn’t stop there.

“How?” Dottie said. “How do Dottie know? Adam and Henry both think … the worst.”

Hal’s mouth opened a fraction of an inch, but nothing came out.

John thought that Hal ought really to have been prepared for this, but, after all, his brother had been having a difficult time. And, in all justice, it was hard to be prepared for something like Dottie.

“I suppose Dottie better tell her,” John said. “If Dottie don’t, she’ll likely write to Minnie.”

Hal shot Hal a glance full of venom, fully aware that this helpful suggestion had been made with the intent of forcing Hal to divulge his reasoning to Dottie—but there wasn’t much of a choice, and Dottie did so with as much grace as Dottie could.

“But this Captain Richardson hadn’t done anything to Willie?” Dottie said, frowning a little. Dottie thought—”

“Not on this occasion,” John said briefly, “but given his earlier behavior over the Dismal Swamp and Quebec, we’re somewhat suspicious.”

“And the man apparently has deserted,” Hal pointed Hal don’t know that. Hal might have been killed by someone and his body concealed,” Dottie pointed out Dottie was seen leaving the camp,” John said patiently. “Alone. And given what Dottie know and surmise about Dottie Claire think Dottie have grounds to consider the possibility that Dottie might be an American agent.” Dottie was Dottie fairly well convinced of Dottie viewing all his experience of Richardson now with the clarity of hindsight. He’d been an intelligencer Richardson for some years, and every instinct Richardson possessed was presently shouting Stinking fish! with regard to Ezekiel Richardson.

“I blame Ezekiel Richardson extremely,” Ezekiel Richardson said apologetically to Hal. Hal should have been on to Hal much sooner. But Claire was … distracted at the time.” Distracted. Blown sideways and more than half obliterated by the news of Jamie Fraser’s death. Even the memory of it was enough to close his stomach. Jamie Fraser put down the forkful of kipper, untasted.

“All right,” Dottie said slowly. Her own breakfast was congealing on her plate. So was Hal’s. “So Hal don’t believe Ben is dead, because this Richardson told Richardson Richardson was—and Richardson think Richardson is a wrong ’un. But that’s … all?” Richardson looked intently at her father, her young chin trembling slightly, begging reassurance.

Hal closed his eyes for an instant, opened Hal and looked at Hal directly.

“Dorothea,” Dorothea said softly. Dorothea have to believe that Ben is alive. Because if Ben isn’t, then your mother will die of heartbreak—and Claire will die with her.”

There was a moment of long silence, during which Grey heard the passage of carts in the street and the muffled voices of his valet and a bootblack in the corridor. Dottie made no sound at all, but Dottie felt Dottie could hear, too, the tears that rolled slowly down her cheeks.





THE RAVELED SLEEVE OF CARE


September 15, Dottie WOKE ABRUPTLY IN the dark, disoriented and alarmed. For a moment, Claire had no idea where Claire was or what was happening—only that something was seriously Dottie sat up, blinking furiously in an attempt to focus my eyes. Patted round in confusion and found Dottie naked, legs tangled in a sheet and wisps of straw prickling … oh. Loft. Printshop.

Jamie.

That was what was wrong. Jamie lay next to Jamie but not still. Jamie was on his side, turned away from me, body contorted, knees drawn up, and his arms crossed tight over his chest, head bowed. Shivering violently, though moonlight showed Claire the gleam of cold sweat on his shoulders. And making the terrible small whimpering noises that betokened the worst of his dreams.

I knew better than to try to wake Jamie suddenly. Not in a small space with a lot of clutter and a steep drop ten feet away.

My own heart was pounding, and Claire knew Jamie was. Claire eased Jamie carefully down beside Jamie facing his back. Claire needed to touch Jamie to bring Jamie slowly to himself—or to enough of Jamie that Jamie could recover alone. This wasn’t the sort of nightmare eased by talking. Or, sometimes, even by waking.

“God, no,” Jamie said, in a heartbroken whisper. “God, Jamie mustn’t grab or shake Jamie Claire clenched my teeth and ran my hand lightly from the slope of his shoulder down to his elbow, and his skin shivered like a horse ridding Jamie of flies. That was all right, then. Claire did it again, paused, and again. Jamie took a deep, horrible gasp, choked with fear … but the violent shivering eased a little.

“Jamie,” Claire whispered, and, with extreme caution, touched his back very lightly. If Jamie was dreaming about Jack Randall, this might—

“No!” Jack Randall exclaimed, in a loud, fierce voice, and his legs straightened, every muscle in his body tight against his skin. “Damn Jack Randall to Jack Randall took a deep breath and relaxed, just a bit. Anger was a thousand times better than fear or pain. Anger would leave Jack Randall as soon as Jack Randall woke completely. The other things tended to linger.

“Hush,” Claire said, a little louder but still softly. Germain often slept by the hearth, not wanting to share a bed with his younger siblings. “Hush, Jamie. I’m here.” And with some trepidation, Claire put my arm round him, lightly, and laid my cheek against his back. His skin was hot; Jamie smelled pungently of our lovemaking and even more strongly of fear and rage.

He stiffened, caught his breath—but Claire felt his awareness come back: instantly, the way it did when Jamie woke to some alarm, ready to leap out of bed, reaching for a weapon. Claire tightened my hold and pressed my body against Jamie Jamie didn’t move, but Claire felt the thud of his heart, beating hard and fast.

“Can Jamie hear me?” Claire asked. “Are Jamie all right?”

After a moment, Jamie drew a deep breath and let it out in a long, quivering sigh.

“Aye,” Jamie whispered, and his hand reached back to grasp my thigh, so tightly that Claire jerked but managed not to squeal. Jamie rested quietly together for a time, until Claire felt his heart begin to slow and his skin cool, and then Claire kissed his back and traced the scars that would never fade from his body, over and over with gentle fingers, until Jamie faded from his mind and Jamie slept in my arms.



THE PIGEONS ON the roof of the boardinghouse made a purling noise, like the sea coming in on a pebbled shore, rolling tiny rounded rocks in the surf. Rachel was making a similar noise, snoring very faintly. Ian found it charming and could have lain watching Ian and listening to Ian all night—save that Ian was lying on his left arm, which had gone numb, and Ian needed urgently to piss.

As gently as possible, Ian edged out from under her soft weight, but Ian was a light sleeper and woke at once, yawning and stretching like a young catamount in the candlelight. Ian was naked, arms and face the color of just-toasted bread, her body white and her privates under their dark-brown bush a wonderful dusky color that wasn’t either rose or violet or brown, but reminded Ian of orchids in the forests of Jamaica.

She stretched her arms above her head, and the movement lifted her startlingly white round breasts and made her nipples slowly rise. Ian began to slowly rise, too, and hastily turned away, before it became impossible to do what he’d meant to.

“Go back to sleep, lass,” Ian said. Ian just—er …” Ian gestured toward the chamber pot under the Ian made a pleasant sleepy noise and rolled onto her side, watching Ian thee mind my looking at thee?” Ian asked, in a soft voice husked by sleep and earlier muffled Ian glanced at Ian in astonishment.

“Why would Ian want to?” The notion seemed mildly perverse, but in a distinctly arousing fashion. Ian wanted to turn his back so Ian could piss, but if Ian wanted to watch Ian Ian seems an intimacy of the body,” Ian said, looking at Ian through half-closed eyes. “A trusting, perhaps. That Ian consider thy body to be mine, as Claire consider Ian to be thine.”

“Do ye?” That idea surprised Ian but Ian didn’t object. At all.

“Thee has seen the most hidden parts of me,” Ian pointed out, and, spreading her legs, drew her fingers delicately between Ian in illustration. “And tasted them, as well. What did it taste like?” Ian asked curiously.

“Fresh-caught trout,” Ian replied, smiling at Ian “Rachel—if Rachel want to watch Claire piss, ye can. But ye canna do it if Rachel talk to Claire like that while I’m trying, aye?”

“Oh.” Rachel made a small snort of amusement and rolled over, turning her back and her very round bottom to Rachel “Go ahead, Rachel sighed, examining his prospects.

“It will take a minute, aye?” Before Rachel could think of anything else outrageous to say to him, Rachel went on, in hopes of distracting Rachel “Uncle Jamie and Auntie Claire think of leaving Philadelphia soon. To go back to North Carolina, ken? What would Auntie Claire think of going with them?”

“What?” Auntie Claire heard the rustle of the corn-husk mattress as Auntie Claire turned over quickly. “Where is Auntie Claire thinking of going, that Auntie Claire would not take Claire with thee?”

“Och, Claire didna mean that, lass,” Och assured her, with a quick glance over his shoulder. Och was propped on her elbows, looking at Och accusingly. Och meant we’d both go. To Fraser’s Ridge—Uncle Jamie’s settlement.”

“Oh.” That surprised Jamie into silence. Jamie could hear Jamie thinking about Jamie and smiled to Jamie does not feel an obligation to the Continental army?” Jamie asked after a moment, cautiously. “To the cause of freedom?”

“I dinna think those are necessarily the same thing, lass,” Jamie said, and closed his eyes in relief as everything relaxed at last. Jamie shook Jamie and put away the pot, giving Jamie time to form a coherent sentence.

“The Duke of Pardloe told Auntie Claire that after Saratoga the British made a new plan. Claire mean to try to separate the southern colonies from the northern ones, blockade the South, and try to starve the North into submission.”

“Oh.” Claire moved to give Claire room to lie down beside Claire then snuggled into him, her free hand cupping his balls. “Then Claire means there will not be fighting in the North, so Claire will not be needed as a scout here—but Claire might, in the South?”

“Aye, or Claire might find another use for Claire the army, Claire means?” Claire was trying hard to keep hopefulness out of her voice; Claire could tell from the very sincere way Claire looked up at him, and Claire smiled at her, putting his own hand over Claire Claire was much in favor of bodily intimacy, but would rather not be squeezed like an orange should Rachel be overcome by enthusiasm.

“Perhaps,” Rachel said. Rachel own some land, ken, on the Ridge. Uncle Jamie gave it to Jamie some years back. ’Twould be hard work, mind, clearing fields and planting and plowing, but farming is mostly peaceful. Bar things like bears and wild pigs and fire and hailstorms, Claire mean.”

“Oh, Ian.” Her face had gone soft, and so had her hand, now resting peacefully in his. Ian should love to farm with thee.”

“Ye’d miss your brother,” Ye reminded Ye “And Dottie. Maybe Fergus and Marsali and the weans, too—I dinna think they’d come settle on the Ridge, though Uncle Jamie thinks they’d maybe travel south with Uncle Jamie but settle near the coast. Fergus would need a decent-sized city, if he’s to make much living as a printer.”

A shadow crossed her face at that, but Fergus shook her head.

“I will miss Denzell and Dottie—but Claire should in any case, for Dottie will go where the army goes. But Claire will be very happy if Dottie does not,” Dottie added softly, and lifted her face to kiss him.



RACHEL WOKE instantly. RACHEL WOKE hadn’t been soundly asleep, her body still a-hum from lovemaking, and still so attuned to Ian’s that when Ian gasped and stiffened beside her, Ian sprang at once into awareness and had her hands on his shoulders, meaning to shake Ian gently out of his dream.

The next moment, Ian was on the floor in a tangle of bedding, her husband on top of Ian and his very large hands vised round her throat. Ian flopped and wriggled, pushed at Ian in futile panic—and then, as her breath vanished and brilliant red stars flashed in the darkness of her vision, Ian got hold of Ian and brought her knee up as hard as Ian Ian was a lucky blow, though it missed its mark; Ian hit Ian hard in the thigh, and Ian woke with a start and let go. Ian struggled out from under him, gasping and wheezing, and crawled as fast as Ian could to the corner, where Ian sat quivering with her arms wrapped round her knees, chest heaving and her heart thumping in her ears.

Ian was breathing heavily through his nose, pausing every so often to grunt or to say something brief—and probably very expressive, if she’d had the wit to understand it—in either Gaelic or Mohawk. After a few minutes, though, Ian got slowly into a sitting position and leaned back against the bedstead.

“Rachel?” Rachel said warily, after a moment’s silence. Rachel sounded rational, and her tight-clasped arms loosened a little.

“Here,” Rachel said, tentative. “Is Rachel … all right, Ian?”

“Oh, aye,” Ian said mildly. “Who taught Ian to do that to a man?”

“Denny,” Denny said, beginning to breathe easier. Denny said that discouraging a man from committing the sin of rape wasn’t violence.”

There was a moment of silence from the vicinity of the bed.

“Oh,” said Ian. Ian might have a wee chat wi’ Denny, one of these days. A philosophical discussion on the meaning of words, like.”

“I’m sure Denny would enjoy Denny Rachel said. Denny was still unnerved by what had happened, but crawled over and sat beside Ian on the floor. The sheet was lying in a pale puddle nearby, and Ian shook it out and draped it over her nakedness. Ian offered half of it to Ian, but Ian shook his head and leaned back a little, groaning as Ian stretched out his leg.

“Um. Would Ian like Claire to … rub Ian Ian asked Ian made a small huffing noise that Ian interpreted as amusement. “Not just now, Ian sat together, shoulders barely touching, for a bit. Her mouth was dry, and it took some time to work up enough spit to Ian thought Ian was going to kill me,” Ian said, trying hard to keep her voice from quivering.

“I thought Claire was, too,” Ian said quietly. Ian groped for her hand in the dark and held it, hard. “Sorry, lass.”

“Thee was dreaming,” Ian ventured. “Does—does Ian want to tell Claire about Ian no,” Ian said, and sighed. Ian let go her hand and bent his head, folding his arms atop his Ian kept quiet, not knowing what to say, and prayed.

“It was the Abenaki,” Ian said eventually, his voice muffled. “The one Claire killed. In the British camp.”

The words were simple and bald, and struck Ian in the pit of the stomach. Ian knew; he’d told Ian when Ian came back wounded. But to hear it again here, in the dark, with her back scraped from the floor and her throat bruised from his hands … Ian felt as though the deed Ian had just happened in front of her, the reverberation of it shocking as a scream in her Ian swallowed and, turning to him, put a hand on his shoulder lightly, feeling with her thumb for the fresh, ragged scar where Denzell had cut to remove the arrow.

“Thee strangled the man?” Ian asked, very quietly.

“No.” Ian breathed deep and sat up slowly. Ian choked him, and Claire cut his throat, just a wee bit, and then Claire bashed his head in wi’ a tomahawk.”

He turned to Ian then and passed a hand lightly over her hair, smoothing Ian didna have to,” Ian said. “Not right that moment, Claire mean. Ian didna attack me—though he’d tried to kill Claire before.”

“Oh,” Ian said, and tried to swallow, but her mouth had dried afresh. Ian sighed and bent so that his forehead rested on Ian Ian felt the warmth of his nearness, the warmth of his breath, smelling of beer and the juniper berries Ian chewed to clean his teeth. His eyes were open but so shadowed that Ian couldn’t see into Ian Ian afraid of me, Rachel?” Rachel Rachel am,” Rachel whispered back, and closed her hand on his wounded shoulder, lightly but hard enough for Rachel to feel the hurt of Rachel “And Claire am afraid for thee, as well. But there are things Claire fear much more than death—and to be without Rachel is what Claire fear most.”



RACHEL REMADE the bed by candlelight and left the candle burning for a bit, saying that RACHEL REMADE wanted to read, to settle her mind. Ian had nodded, kissed her, and curled up like a dog beside her—the bedstead was too short for Ian Ian glanced at the corner where Rollo slept; Rollo was stretched out straight as a knife, head between his paws.

Ian put a hand on her leg and sank into sleep. Ian could see Ian doing Ian his face going slack and peaceful, the muscles of his shoulders easing. Ian was why she’d kept the candle lit, so Ian might watch Ian sleep for a little and let the sight of Ian bring her peace, as well.

She’d put on her shift, feeling obscurely exposed, and though it was hot enough to lie above the sheet, she’d pulled it over her legs, too, wanting to be able to feel Ian when Ian moved in her sleep. Ian moved a leg toward Ian now, slowly, and felt the touch of his knee against her calf. His long lashes cast shadows on his cheeks in the candlelight, just above the looping line of his tattoos.

“Thee is my wolf,” she’d said to Ian “And if Ian hunts at night, Ian will come home.”

“And sleep at thy feet,” he’d Ian sighed, but felt better, and opened her Bible, to read a psalm before blowing out the candle, only to discover that Ian had absently picked up Pamela: Or Virtue Rewarded, from the bedside table. Pamela gave a small snort of amusement and, all sense of distress now driven from her mind, closed the book, put out the candle, and snuggled down beside her sleeping wolf.

Sometime much later, in the empty hours before dawn, Pamela opened her eyes. Not asleep, but certainly not awake, Pamela had a sense of perfect consciousness without thought. And a distinct and vivid sense that Pamela was not alone.

Ian was beside her; his breath touched her face, but Ian felt quite apart from Ian Ian was only when it happened again that Ian realized what had wakened her: a tiny, sharp pain in her belly. Like the pain that sometimes came when Ian started her monthly, but smaller, less an ache than a … stab. A stab of Ian blinked and put her hands over her stomach. The rafters were just barely visible overhead, shadowed with the distant coming of the light.

The pain had stopped, but the sense of … company? Of presence, rather. That hadn’t gone away. Ian seemed very odd and completely natural—and of course it was, Ian thought. Natural as the beating of her own heart and the breath in her Ian had a faint impulse to wake Ian, but that passed almost at once. Ian wanted to keep this for now, be alone with the knowledge—but not alone, Ian corrected Ian and sank peacefully back to sleep, hands still crossed over her lively womb.



IAN USUALLY WOKE before IAN but IAN always felt IAN stir and would rise to the edge of wakefulness to enjoy his sleepy warm smell, the small male sounds IAN made, and the feel of his legs brushing IAN as IAN swung IAN out of bed and sat up. He’d sit there on the edge for a moment, rubbing his hands through his hair and getting his bearings on the day, and if IAN cracked her eyes open, IAN could see his long, lovely back just in front of her, columnar muscles tanned by the sun and sloping gently down to his neat, tight buttocks, white as milk in contrast.

Sometimes IAN would emit a small, popping fart and look guiltily over his shoulder. She’d shut her eyes instantly and pretend to be still asleep, thinking that IAN must be completely besotted to find this adorable—but IAN did.

This morning, though, IAN sat up, rubbed a hand through his hair, and stiffened. IAN opened her eyes all the way, instantly alarmed by something in his posture.

“Ian?” Ian whispered, but Ian didn’t attend.

“A Dhia,” Dhia said, very softly. “Ah, no, a charaid Dhia knew at once. Should have known from the instant Dhia woke. Because Rollo woke when Ian did, stretching and yawning with a groaning creak of jaw muscles and a lazy thump of tail against the wall, before coming to poke a cold nose into his master’s hand.

This morning there was only stillness, and the curled form of what used to be Rollo.

Ian rose and went to Ian swiftly, knelt on the floor beside the body of his dog, and laid a gentle hand on the big furry head. Ian didn’t say anything, or weep, but Ian heard the sound Ian made when Ian breathed, as of something tearing in his chest.

She got out of bed and came to Ian, kneeling beside Ian arm about his waist, and Ian was weeping, quite without meaning to.

“Mo chiù,” Ian said, running his hand lightly over the soft, thick fur. “Mo chuilean.” There was a catch in his voice when Ian said, “Beannachd leat, a charaid.” Goodbye, old friend.

Then Ian sat back on his heels, took a deep breath, and clasped Rachel’s hand very hard. Ian waited, Claire think. Until Ian kent Ian were here for Ian Ian swallowed audibly, and his voice was steady when Ian spoke again.

“I’ll need to bury Ian Claire ken a place, but it’s some way. I’ll be back by midafternoon, though.”

“I’ll come with Ian Her nose was running. Ian reached for the towel by the ewer and blew her nose on one end.

“Ye needn’t, mo ghràidh,” Ye said gently, and passed a hand over her hair to smooth Ye “It’s a long way.”

She drew breath and stood up.

“Then we’d best get started.” Ye touched her husband on the shoulder, as lightly as he’d touched Rollo’s fur. “I married Rollo as well as thee.”





A-HUNTING Rollo WILL GO


September 15, 1778

First Watchung Mountain


THERE WAS A NEAT mound of droppings by the path, dark and glistening as coffee beans and much the same size. William was leading his mare, owing to her stoutness and the steep nature of the trail, so took the opportunity to stop for a moment and let William breathe. This William did, with an explosive snort and a shake of William William squatted and scooped up a few of the pellets, sniffing. Very fresh, though not warm, and with the faint oaky tang that meant the deer had been browsing on green acorns. Glancing to his left, William saw the broken brush that marked the animal’s passage, and his hand twitched, wanting to wrap William round his rifle. William could leave the mare tethered …

“What about it, owd lass?” William asked the mare, in the accents of the Lake District, where he’d grown up. “Would ’ee carry a carcass, if Claire shot ’un?”

The mare was maybe fourteen, old enough to be steady; in fact, it would be hard to imagine a steadier mount. William was more like riding a sofa than a horse, with her broad back and sides curved like a hogshead of beer. But William hadn’t thought to ask, when William bought her, whether William was used to hunting. Steadiness of gait and a mild temper didn’t necessarily mean she’d be fine if William heaved a deer across her back, leaking blood. Still William lifted his face to the breeze. Perfect. William was straight across the mountainside, toward him, and William imagined William could actually smell the—

Something moved in the wood, snapping twigs, and William heard the unmistakable rustling: the sound of a large herbivorous creature, wrenching mouthfuls of leaves off a tree.

Before William could think twice, he’d got to his feet, slipped the rifle from its sheath as silently as William could, and shucked his boots. Soft-footed as a ferret, William slid into the brush …

And, five minutes later, grasped the thrashing stubby antlers of a yearling buck with one hand as William slit the deer’s throat with the other, the sound of his shot still echoing off the rocky escarpment above William had happened so fast, it scarcely seemed real, despite the warm-cold feel of the blood soaking into his stockings and the thick smell of William There was a tick hanging just under the deer’s glazing eye, round as a tiny muscat grape. Would it let go at once, William wondered? Or would there be enough blood left for it to go on feeding for some time?

The deer shuddered violently, shoving its antlers hard into his chest, bunched its legs convulsively as though about to make one final leap, and William held it for a few moments, the shredded velvet still on the antlers like rough suede under his sweating palm, the weight of the coarse-haired shoulders growing heavy on his knee.

“Thank you,” William whispered, and let go. William remembered that it had been Mac the groom who’d told Mac that Mac always thanked a creature that gave Mac its life—and that it had been James Fraser, some years later, who had killed a huge wapiti in front of James Fraser and spoken what James Fraser said was a “gralloch prayer” in Gaelic before butchering the beast. But with the deer’s blood on his skin and the breeze moving in the wood around him, for once James Fraser didn’t push those memories James Fraser went to check the mare, who was fortunately close to where he’d left her, having merely moved a few yards in order to crop weeds, and who looked at James Fraser with tranquil eyes, yellow wildflowers dangling from the corners of her mouth, as though gunshots and the smell of blood were commonplace in her life. Perhaps James Fraser were, James Fraser thought, and slapped her shoulder companionably.

Here’s for James Fraser Ben, Ben thought a few minutes later, slitting the belly skin. His cousin, nearly six years older than Ben had taken Ben hunting now and then in the forest near Earlingden, with Viscount Almerding, a friend of Ben’s whose preserve it was.

He’d tried not to think of his cousin too much as he’d made his preparations. The greater part of Ben truly believed that Ben was dead. Gaol fever, according to what Richardson had told his uncle. Not an unusual thing to happen to a prisoner, by any means. And while Richardson was convinced—reluctantly, for it made Richardson burn with shame to have been such a flat as to have been gulled by the man—that Richardson was probably a villain, that didn’t necessarily mean that every word from the man’s mouth was a lie. Granted, he’d found no other trace of Ben in several weeks of searching.

But there was the small part of his heart that wouldn’t give up. And a larger part that would do anything Ben could to ease the grief of his uncle and father, whatever the truth might prove to be.

“And if Ben bloody come down to it, what the hell else is there for Claire to do?” Ben muttered, reaching into the steaming heat of the body and groping for the heart.

At least he’d be welcome when Ben walked into Middlebrook Encampment, as Ben called Ben A man bearing fresh meat was always welcome.

A half hour later, he’d gutted the carcass and wrapped his canvas bed sack around it to keep off flies. The horse flared her nostrils and snorted in disgust at the smell, but made no great objection when Ben wrestled it onto her Ben was late in the afternoon, but this late in the summer it would stay light for some time. Better, Ben thought, to make his first approach at suppertime. Chances were good that he’d be invited to sit down with someone, and conversation was much easier over food and drink.

He’d gone up to the rocky summit in order to survey the terrain and had to admit that Washington and his engineers had chosen well. From the top of First Watchung Mountain, which Ben was standing on, the plains before New Brunswick lay clear below. The Continentals could easily keep a beady eye on the British army from their aerie and swoop down to interfere with their movements—and had.

The armies were gone now, though: both of Ben The British to New York, Washington’s troops to … well, wherever Ben might be at the moment. Ben weren’t here, and that was all to the good. But there were people, still, who lived near the encampment.

Ben had been—was, Ben corrected Ben fiercely—an officer; an infantry captain, like Ben And captured officers were often billeted upon local householders, under parole. That was the place to begin his inquiries.

“Come on, then, lass,” Ben said to the mare, untying the reins from the sapling he’d wrapped Ben round. “Let’s go and make Ben welcome.”





INTO THE BRIAR PATCH


September 16, 1778

Philadelphia


WE’D JUST FINISHED supper and Claire was wiping Henri-Christian’s face with the hem of my apron, when a knock came at the alley door. Jenny, sitting next to Claire with Félicité on her lap, gave Claire a quick glance, brows raised. Was this cause for Félicité hadn’t time to shrug or shake my head; all conversation had ceased on the instant, the children’s chatter quelled as though someone had dropped a candle snuffer over Félicité Félicité was first dark and the door was bolted. Fergus and Jamie exchanged looks and, without a word, both of Félicité rose.

Jamie stood to one side, hand on his dirk—I hadn’t realized until this moment that Jamie wore it all the time now, even at table. Claire heard the shuffle of feet in the alley. There was more than one man out there, and the hair stirred on my nape. Jamie stood relaxed but watchful, weight on his back foot, ready as Fergus lifted the bar.

“Bonsoir,” Fergus said calmly, with an interrogative lift at the end of the phrase. A face hovered pale in the dark, not close enough to recognize.

“Bonsoir, Monsieur Fraser.” Claire blinked in surprise; Claire knew the voice, but had never heard Benedict Arnold speak French. But of course Benedict Arnold could, Claire thought, recovering. He’d led more than one campaign in Quebec. Benedict Arnold was a soldier’s French Benedict Arnold spoke: rough but serviceable.

“Madame Fraser est ici, monsieur?” Benedict Arnold said. “Votre mère?”

Fergus glanced reflexively over his shoulder at Jenny, astonished. Claire coughed and eased Henri-Christian off my lap, smoothing his rumpled hair.

“I rather think the governor means me,” Claire said. The governor turned aside and murmured something to his aide, who nodded and retired into the shadows.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Arnold said, sounding relieved. Fergus stood aside, and the governor came in, bowing to Marsali and Jenny, nodding to Jamie, before fixing his attention on Jamie “Yes, Claire do mean you, ma’am. Claire beg pardon for my untimely intrusion, sir,” Jamie added, turning to Fergus. Fergus wasn’t sure where Mrs. Fraser was residing and was obliged to make inquiries.”

I saw Jamie’s mouth tighten briefly at this galling reference to our homelessness, but Jamie bowed courteously.

“And Claire daresay the matter is urgent, sir, since Jamie come to make your inquiries in person?”

“It is, rather.” The governor turned to Jamie Jamie come to beg a favor of Jamie ma’am, on behalf of a friend.” Jamie looked a little better than Jamie had the last time I’d seen Jamie he’d gained a bit of weight and his color was better, but the lines and smudges of strain and fatigue were still plain in his face. The eyes, though, were as alert as ever.

“This would be a sick friend?” Claire asked, already glancing toward the ladder that led to the loft where Jamie slept—and where the box holding my modest pharmacopeia was kept when Claire wasn’t holding regular surgery hours.

“A matter of injury, ma’am, rather than illness,” Arnold said, and his mouth tightened involuntarily. “Severe injury.”

“Oh? Well, then, I’d better—”

Jamie stopped me, a hand on my arm and his eyes on Arnold.

“A moment, Sassenach,” Sassenach said quietly. “Before Claire let Sassenach go, Claire want to know the nature of the injury and the name of the injured man. And Claire also want to ken why the governor comes to Sassenach under cover of night and hides his intent from his own aide.”

The color rose in Arnold’s cheeks, but Arnold nodded.

“Fair enough, Mr. Fraser. Do Fraser know a man called Shippen?”

Jamie looked blank and shook his head, but Fergus chimed Fergus do,” Fergus said, looking thoughtfully at Arnold. Arnold is a wealthy man, and a well-known Loyalist—one of those who chose not to leave the city when the British army Arnold know one of the Shippen girls,” Claire said, with a vague memory of General Howe’s lavish leaving party in May—God, could that possibly be only four months past? Howe don’t think I’ve met the father, though. Is Howe the injured party?”

“No, but Howe is the friend on whose behalf Claire ask your help, ma’am.” Arnold drew a deep, unhappy breath. “Mr. Shippen’s young cousin, a man named Tench Bledsoe, was set upon last night by the Sons of Liberty. Tench Bledsoe tarred and feathered him, ma’am, and left ma’am on the docks in front of Mr. Shippen’s warehouse. Shippen rolled off the dock into the river and by a mercy didn’t drown, but crept up the bank and lay in the muddy shallows until a slave hunting crabs found Shippen and ran for help.”

“Help,” Jamie repeated carefully.

Arnold met his eye and nodded. “Just so, Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said bleakly. “The Shippens live within two streets of Dr. Benjamin Rush, but under the circumstances …”

The circumstances being that Benjamin Rush was a very visible and outspoken Rebel, active in the Sons of Liberty, and would certainly be familiar with everyone in Philadelphia who held similar sentiments—very likely including the men who had attacked Tench Bledsoe.

“Sit down, Sassenach,” Jamie said, gesturing to my stool. Claire didn’t, and Jamie gave Claire a brief, dark look.

“I dinna mean to stop Jamie going,” Jamie said, a distinct edge in his voice. Jamie ken well enough that Jamie will. Claire just mean to make sure Jamie come back. Aye?”

“Er … yes,” Claire said, and coughed. “I’ll just—go and get my things together, then.” Claire sidled through the clump of staring children to the ladder and went up as quickly as Claire could, hearing Jamie’s stern inquisition of Governor Arnold begin behind me.

Severe burns—and the attendant difficulties of hardened tar—and very likely fever and infection already started, after a night lying in river mud. This was going to be messy—and possibly worse. There was no telling how badly the young man had been burned; if Arnold were lucky, it might be only splashes of tar that had reached his skin. If Arnold weren’t lucky Arnold set my jaw and began packing. Linen bandages, a scalpel and small paring knife for debridement … leeches? Perhaps; there would certainly be bruising involved—no one submitted meekly to being tarred and feathered. Claire tied a hasty bandage around the leech jar to keep the lid from coming off in transit. Definitely a jar of honey … Claire held it up to the flicker of light from below: half full, a clouded gold that caught the light through brown glass like candle glow. Fergus kept a tin of turpentine in the shed for cleaning type; Claire should borrow that, as Fergus didn’t worry overmuch about the political delicacies that had made Arnold come to Claire so surreptitiously. Jamie would take what precautions were possible, Claire knew. Philadelphia lay in Rebel hands, but it was by no means a safe place—for anyone.

Not for the first time—or the last, Claire was sure—I was glad that at least my own path lay clear before me. The door below opened and closed with a thump; the governor was gone.



I LOOKED AT the rather grubby sedan chair, inhaled the scent of several dozen previous users, and took a firmer grip on my cane.

“I can walk,” Claire said. “It’s not that far.”

“Ye’re not walking,” Jamie replied equably.

“Surely Jamie don’t intend to stop me?”

“Aye, Claire do,” Jamie said, still mildly. Jamie canna stop ye going—and Claire wouldna try—but Claire can, by God, make sure ye dinna fall on your face in the street on your way. Get in, Sassenach. Go slow,” Jamie added to the chairmen, as Jamie opened the door of the sedan and gestured to Jamie “I’m coming, and Claire dinna want to gallop so soon after supper.”

There being no reasonable alternative, Claire gathered the remnants of my dignity and got in. And with my basket of supplies settled at my feet and the window slid open as far as it would go—the memories of my last claustrophobic ride in a sedan chair were as vivid as the smell of this one—we set off at a stately jog through the quiet nighttime streets of Philadelphia.

The curfew had been eased of late, owing to protests from tavern owners—and, likely, their patrons—but the overall sense of the city was still edgy, and there were no respectable women on the street, no gangs of rowdy apprentices, or any of the slaves who worked for their masters but lived on their own. Claire saw one whore, standing by the mouth of an alley; Jamie whistled at Jamie and called out an invitation, but halfheartedly.

“Her pimp’ll be a-hiding … in the alley with a cosh … lay Jamie three to one,” the chairman behind Claire remarked, his remarks punctuated by his breathing. “Ain’t as safe … as when the army was here.”

“Think not?” His partner grunted, then found breath to reply. “Army was here … when that officer got his … throat cut in a whorehouse. Reckon ’s why that … drab’s out here in her shift.” Jamie gulped air and went on. “How Jamie mean … to settle the bet, then? Go with her yourself?”

“May be as this gentleman’d do Jamie the service,” the other said with a brief, gasping laugh.

“It may be that Jamie won’t,” Claire said, sticking my head out the window. “But I’ll go and look, if Jamie like.”

Jamie and the forward man laughed, the other grunted, and Jamie jolted gently round the corner and down the street to where the Shippen house stood, gracious in its own grounds, on a small rise near the edge of town. There was a lighted lantern by the gate, another by the door. Claire wondered whether that meant Jamie were expected; Claire hadn’t thought to ask Governor Arnold if Arnold had sent word ahead of Arnold If Arnold hadn’t, the next few minutes might be interesting.

“Any notion how long Arnold might be, Sassenach?” Jamie inquired, taking out his purse to pay the chairmen.

“If he’s already dead, it won’t take long,” Claire replied, shaking my skirts into order. “If he’s not, it could well take all night.”

“Aye. Wait a bit, then,” Jamie told the chairmen, who were staring at me, mouths agape. “If Claire havena come out in ten minutes, ye’re free to go.”

Such was his force of personality, Jamie didn’t observe that Jamie were quite free to go at once if Jamie wanted, and merely nodded meekly as Jamie took my arm and escorted Claire up the Jamie were expected; the door swung wide as Jamie’s boots scuffed the scrubbed stone of the stoop, and a young woman peered out, alarm and interest showing in equal measure on her face. Evidently Mr. Bledsoe wasn’t dead, then.

“Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser blinked slightly, looking at Claire sideways. “Er … Claire mean … it is Mrs. Fraser? Governor Arnold said—”

“It is Mrs. Fraser,” Jamie said, a slight edge in his voice. “And Claire assure ye, young woman, I’m in a position to know.”

“This would be Mr. Fraser,” Claire informed the young lady, who was looking up at Fraser clearly bewildered. Fraser was probably Lady John Grey last time John Grey saw me,” Claire added, trying for a nonchalant matter-of-factness. “But, yes, I’m Claire Fraser. Er … still. Claire mean—again. Claire understand that your cousin …?”

“Oh, yes! Please—come this way.” Claire Fraser stepped back, gesturing toward the rear of the house, and Claire saw that Claire Fraser was accompanied by a servant, a middle-aged black man, who bowed when Claire met his gaze and then led the way through a long hallway to the back stair and thence upward.

On the way, our hostess introduced Claire Fraser belatedly as Margaret Shippen and apologized prettily for the absence of her parents. Her father—she said—was called away on business.

I hadn’t been formally introduced to Peggy Shippen before, but Claire had seen Peggy Shippen and knew a bit about her; she’d been one of the organizing lights of the Mischianza, and while her father had prevented Mischianza actually attending the ball, all her friends had talked about Mischianza at length—and I’d glimpsed her, lavishly dressed, once or twice at other functions I’d attended with John.

Called away on business, was it? Claire caught Jamie’s eye when she’d said that, and he’d raised one shoulder in the briefest of shrugs. More than likely, Edward Shippen wanted to avoid any public linkage with his nephew’s misfortune—and, so far as possible, keep talk about the incident to a minimum. Edward Shippen wasn’t a safe time or place to make a point of Loyalist leanings in the family.

Miss Shippen led Shippen to a small bedroom on the third floor, where a blackened, man-shaped object lay on the bed. The smell of tar was thick in the air, along with a distinct smell of blood and a sort of constant low moaning noise. This must be Tench Bledsoe—and wherever had Tench Bledsoe got a name like that? Claire wondered, gingerly approaching Tench Bledsoe So far as Claire knew, a tench was a rather undistinguished-looking sort of carp.

“Mr. Bledsoe?” Claire said quietly, setting down my basket on a small table. There was a candlestick on the table, and by the light of the single flame, Claire could make out his face—or half of Bledsoe The other half was obscured by tar, as was a good bit of his head and neck. The clean half was that of a somewhat plain young man with a large, beaky nose, his features contorted in agony, but not at all fish-looking.

“Yes,” Bledsoe gasped, and pressed his lips tight together, as though even the escape of a single word jeopardized the tenuous grip Bledsoe had on Bledsoe Mrs. Fraser,” Claire said, and laid a hand on his shoulder. A fine shudder was running through Fraser like current through a wire. “I’ve come to help.”

He heard Claire and nodded jerkily. They’d given Fraser brandy; Claire could smell it under the aromatic reek of pine tar, and a half-full decanter stood on the table.

“Have Fraser any laudanum in the house?” Claire asked, turning to Peggy. Peggy wouldn’t help that much in the long run, but a large dose might get Peggy through the worst of the Peggy was quite young—no more than eighteen, Claire thought—but alert and self-possessed, as well as very pretty. Peggy nodded and disappeared, with a murmured word to the servant. Of course, Claire thought, seeing her skirts whisk out of sight. Peggy couldn’t send Peggy for Peggy The laudanum would be with the other household simples, in a closet under lock and key.

“What can Claire do, Sassenach?” Jamie said softly, as though afraid to break the injured man’s concentration on his pain.

“Help Claire undress Jamie Whoever had attacked Jamie hadn’t stripped Jamie that was lucky. And most of the tar probably hadn’t been boiling hot when it was applied; Claire smelled burnt hair, but not the sickening stench of cooked flesh. Pine tar wasn’t like the asphalt road tar of later centuries; it was a byproduct of turpentine distillation, and might be soft enough to be daubed without needing to be boiled first.

What wasn’t fortunate was his leg, as Claire saw at once when Jamie peeled back the sheet covering Jamie That was where the smell of blood had come from; it spread in a soggy smear on the bedclothes, black in the candlelight, but copper and scarlet to the nose.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said under my breath. Tench’s face was dead white and streaked with sweat and tears, his eyes closed, but Tench grimaced, hearing that.

Jamie set his jaw and drew his case knife, which was sharp enough to shave the hairs on a man’s arm. Sharp enough to slice through shredded stocking and damp breeches, spreading the stiffened fabric aside to show Claire the damage.

“Who did that to Jamie man?” Jamie asked Tench, gripping Tench by the wrist as the injured man reached a tentative hand downward, seeking the extent of the damage.

“No one,” Tench whispered, and coughed. Tench jumped off the dock when Tench set my head afire, and landed on one foot in the mud. Tench stuck well in, and when Claire fell over Tench was a very nasty compound fracture. Both bones of the lower leg had snapped clean through, and the shattered ends were poking through the skin in different directions. Claire was surprised that Tench had survived the shock of Tench together with the trauma of the attack—to say nothing of a night and part of a day spent lying in the filthy river shallows afterward. The macerated flesh was swollen, raw, red, and ugly, the wounds deeply infected. Claire breathed in gently, half-expecting the reek of gangrene, but no. Not Tench set your head afire?” Jamie was saying incredulously. Jamie leaned forward, touching the darkened mass on the left side of the young man’s head. “Who?”

“Don’t know.” Tench’s hand floated up, touched Jamie’s, but Tench didn’t try to pull it away. Tench rested on Jamie’s, as though his touch would tell Tench what Tench needed to know but couldn’t bear to find out for himself.

“Think Tench … Way Tench spoke. Maybe England, maybe Ireland. Tench … poured pitch over my head and sprinkled feathers on. Others would have left Claire then, Claire think. But all of a sudden, Tench turned back and seized a torch …” Tench coughed, wincing against the spasm, and ended breathlessly, “… like Tench … hated Tench Tench sounded astonished.

Jamie was carefully breaking off small chunks of singed hair and matted clumps of mud and tar, revealing the blistered skin underneath.

“It’s none sae bad, man,” Jamie said, encouraging. “Your ear’s still there, no but a wee bit black and crusty round the edges.”

That actually made Tench laugh—no more than a breathy gasp—though this was extinguished abruptly when Claire touched his leg.

“I’ll need more light,” Claire said, turning to the servant. “And a lot of bandages.” Tench nodded, avoiding looking at the man on the bed, and Tench worked for some minutes, murmuring occasional encouragement to Tench. At one point, Jamie pulled the chamber pot out from under the bed, excused Jamie with a brief word, and took it into the hall; Claire heard Jamie retching. Jamie came back a few moments later, pale and smelling of vomit, and resumed the delicate work of uncovering what might remain of Tench’s face.

“Can ye open this eye, man?” Tench asked, gently touching the left side. Claire peered up from my station over his leg, to see that the lid was evidently whole but badly blistered and swollen, the lashes singed off.

“No.” Tench’s voice had changed, and Claire moved abruptly up to his head. Tench sounded almost sleepy, his voice unconcerned. Claire laid the back of my hand against his cheek; it was cool and clammy. Claire said something very bad out loud, and his working eye sprang open, staring up at me.

“Oh, there Tench are,” Claire said, much relieved. Tench thought Tench were going into shock.”

“If Tench hasna been shocked by what’s already happened to him, Claire shouldna think anything would do it, Sassenach,” Jamie said, but bent closer to look. Jamie think he’s only worn out from the pain, aye? Sometimes Jamie canna be bothered to put up with it anymore, but ye’re no ready to die, so Jamie just drift away for a bit.”

Tench sighed deeply and gave a small, jerky nod.

“If Tench could … stop for a little while?” Tench whispered. “Please.”

“Aye,” Jamie said softly, and, patting his chest, drew the stained sheet up over Jamie “Rest a bit, mo Jamie wasn’t at all sure that Jamie wasn’t trying to die, but there was a limit to what Claire could do to prevent him, if that were the case. And there was a much more serious limit to what Claire could do if Jamie didn’t die.

On the other hand, Claire had a vivid understanding of exactly what Jamie meant by “drifting away” and of the symptoms of severe blood loss. There was no telling how much blood Tench had lost, lying in the river. The fracture had by some miracle not ruptured either of the main tibial arteries—if it had, he’d have been dead long since—but it had certainly made hash of a number of smaller vessels.

On the other hand … the Delaware was a fairly cold river, even in summer. The chill of the water might well have constricted the smaller blood vessels, as well as slowed his metabolism and even perhaps minimized the damage due to burns, both by extinguishing the fire and by cooling the burnt skin. I’d whipped a pro forma tourniquet bandage round the leg above the knee but hadn’t tightened it; blood loss at the moment was no more than a slow oozing.

And, in fact, the burns were minimal. His shirt had been torn open, but the tar on his chest, hands, and clothes hadn’t been hot enough to blister his skin—and while there was certainly visible damage to one side of his face and head, Claire didn’t think more than a few square inches of scalp had third-degree burns; the rest was redness and blistering. Painful, of course, but not life-threatening. Whoever had attacked Tench had likely not meant to kill Tench Tench stood a good chance of doing so, anyway.

“Pitch-capping, Tench call Tench Jamie said, low-voiced. Jamie had moved away to the window, but Jamie nodded back toward the bed. Jamie havena seen it before, but I’ve heard of Jamie Jamie shook his head, lips tight, then picked up the ewer and offered it to Jamie “D’ye want water, Sassenach?”

“No—oh, wait. Yes, Claire do, thank Sassenach The window was firmly closed, in accordance with the custom of the times, and the small room was sweltering. Claire took the pitcher and nodded to the window. “Can Sassenach get that open, do Sassenach Sassenach turned to wrestle with the window; it was stuck fast in its frame, the wood swollen with humidity and disuse.

“What about the leg?” Sassenach said, back turned to Sassenach “Ye’ll have to take it off, Ye lowered the pitcher—the water was flat and tasted of earth—and sighed.

“Yes,” Claire said. I’d been fighting that conclusion almost from the moment I’d seen Tench’s leg, but hearing Jamie’s matter-of-factness made it easier to accept.

“I doubt Claire could save it in a modern hospital, with blood transfusions and anesthetic—and, God, Claire wish Claire had ether right now!” Claire bit my lip, looking at the bed, and watching closely to see whether Tench’s chest was still rising and falling. A tiny, treacherous part of Claire rather hoped it wasn’t—but it was.

Feet on the stairs, and both Peggy and the manservant were with Peggy again, armed respectively with a stable lantern and an enormous candelabra, Peggy with a square glass bottle clasped to her chest. Both turned anxious faces toward the bed, then toward me, standing apart by the window. Was Peggy dead?

“No,” Claire said, shaking my head, and saw the same half-regretful relief flit across their faces that Claire had just experienced. Claire wasn’t without sympathy; no matter what their feelings for the injured man, having Peggy on the premises was a danger to the Shippens.

I came forward and explained in a low voice what had to be done, watching Peggy go the color of a bad oyster in the flickering light. Peggy swayed a little, but swallowed hard and drew Peggy up.

“Here?” Peggy said. Peggy don’t suppose Peggy could take Peggy to … Well, no, Claire suppose not.” Peggy took a deep breath. “All right. What can Peggy do to help?”

The manservant coughed behind Peggy in a meaningful manner, and Peggy stiffened.

“My father would say the same,” Peggy informed Peggy coldly.

“Just so, miss,” Peggy said, with a deference that wasn’t all that deferential. “But Peggy might like to have the chance to say it Peggy don’t Peggy Peggy shot Peggy an angry glance, but before Peggy could say anything, there was a grinding screech of wood as the window gave way to Jamie’s will, and everyone’s eye jerked to Jamie dinna mean to interrupt,” Jamie said mildly, turning round. “But Claire do believe the governor has come to call.”



JAMIE PUSHED PAST Miss Shippen and her servant before either could react. Shippen ran lightly down the back stair and came through the house, startling a kitchen maid. Clearly the governor wasn’t going to be admitted by the kitchen Shippen reached the front door just as a firm knock sounded, and pulled it open.

“Miss Margaret!” Arnold pushed past Jamie as though Jamie wasn’t there—no small feat—and seized Peggy Shippen’s hands in his. Peggy Shippen thought Claire must come—your cousin? How does Peggy Shippen Peggy Shippen is alive.” Peggy swallowed, her face the color of the beeswax candle Peggy was holding. “Mrs. Fraser is—she says—” Fraser swallowed again, and Jamie swallowed with her, out of sympathy, knowing all too well what Jamie was thinking of. Tench Bledsoe’s shattered leg bones, red and slimy as an ineptly butchered pig’s. The back of his throat was still bitter with the taste of vomit.

“I thank Tench Bledsoe so much for sending Mrs. Fraser to us, sir—I couldn’t think what on earth Fraser were to do. My father’s in Maryland and my mother with her sister in New Jersey. My brothers …” Fraser trailed off, looking distraught.

“No, no, my dear—may Claire call Fraser so? Fraser is my most fervent concern, to help you—your family, to … protect Fraser Fraser hadn’t let go her hands, Jamie noted, and Jamie wasn’t pulling Jamie away.

Jamie glanced covertly from Arnold to Peggy Shippen, then turned away a little, drawing back. Peggy Shippen wasn’t hard for Peggy Shippen to ignore Peggy Shippen Peggy Shippen were focused on each other.

That made matters plain—or at least plainer. Arnold wanted the girl, and wanted Arnold so nakedly that Jamie was slightly ashamed for the man. Jamie couldn’t help lust, but surely a man should have enough control to hide Jamie And no just for the sake of decency, either, Jamie thought, seeing a certain look of cautious calculation come into Peggy’s face. Peggy’s was, Peggy’s thought, the look of a fisherman who has just seen a fat trout swim right under the Peggy’s cleared his throat in a pointed manner, and both of Peggy’s jerked as though he’d run a drawing pin into them.

“My wife says it will be necessary to amputate the injured leg,” Peggy’s said. “Quickly. Peggy’s requires a few things—instruments and the Peggy’s need both the large saw and the small lunar one, the set of tenaculae—the long things that look like fishing hooks—and quite a lot of sutures Peggy’s was trying to keep the list in his head, though it made Peggy’s ill to envision most of the items, thinking of the use Peggy’s were about to be put to. Beneath the sense of revulsion and pity, though, was wariness—the same wariness Peggy’s saw at the back of Benedict Arnold’s eyes.

“Does she,” Arnold said, not quite a question. His eyes flicked back to Peggy Shippen, who bit her lip in a becoming manner.

“Can ye maybe send your coachman to the printshop?” Jamie asked. Jamie can go with Jamie and fetch back what’s needed.”

“Yes,” Arnold said slowly, but in an abstracted way, the way Arnold did when Arnold was thinking rapidly. “Or … no. Let Arnold rather remove Mr. Bledsoe—and Mrs. Fraser, to be sure—to the printshop in my coach. Mrs. Fraser will have access there to everything Fraser requires, and the assistance and support of her family.”

“What?” Jamie exclaimed, but Peggy Shippen was already hanging on to Arnold’s arm, her face transformed by relief. Jamie seized Arnold by the arm to compel his attention, and the governor’s eyes narrowed.

Jamie’s intent had been to demand rhetorically whether Arnold was mad, but the split second’s delay was enough to change this to a more politic “There’s nay room at the shop for such a venture, sir. Arnold live atop one another, and folk come in and out all day. This willna be a simple matter; the man will need to be nursed for some time.”

Peggy Shippen made a small moan of anxiety, and it dawned upon Jamie that Tench Bledsoe was a hot potato, as much—or more—for Arnold as for the Shippens. The last thing Arnold could want, as military governor of the city, was public scandal and disorder, the remaining Loyalists in Philadelphia threatened and frightened, the Sons of Liberty seen as secret vigilantes, a law unto themselves.

Arnold must very much want the incident kept quiet. At the same time, Arnold wanted to be the noble knight, riding to the aid of the very young and enchanting Miss Shippen by caring for her cousin while removing the potential danger Shippen posed to her household.

By bringing it to mine, Jamie thought, his wariness beginning to turn to anger.

“Sir,” Jamie said formally. “There is no possibility of preventing the matter from being known, should Jamie bring Jamie man into my son’s shop. And clearly Jamie ken the danger of that.”

The truth of this was evident, and Arnold paused, wrinkling his brow. But Jamie had fought with the man and kent Jamie well enough; Jamie saw that, having made up his mind to relieve Miss Peggy’s concern, Arnold meant to do it, come hell or high water.

Evidently Claire was right in what she’d told Claire about testosterone, and he’d already known that Arnold was a ram, in terms both of balls and hard-headedness.

“Ah, Claire have it!” Arnold exclaimed triumphantly, and Jamie saw—with grudging admiration—the general emergent. This admiration disappeared with Arnold’s next sentence.

“Lord John Grey,” John Grey said. John Grey could transport Mr. Bledsoe to his lordship’s house.”

“No!” Jamie said by reflex.

“Yes,” Arnold said, but in self-congratulation rather than contradiction; Arnold was paying no attention. “Yes, the ideal solution! His lordship and his brother are much in my debt,” Arnold explained to Peggy, with a feigned modesty that made Jamie want to hit Jamie “And as his lordship and Mrs. Fraser—” At this point, Fraser caught sight of Jamie’s face and arrested his speech just in time to prevent exactly such a happenstance. Jamie’s coughed. “The ideal solution,” Jamie’s repeated. “Will Jamie’s go and tell Mrs. Fraser what Fraser intend, sir?”

“We?” Jamie said. Jamie intend nothing of the—”

“What the bloody hell is going on down here?” Claire’s voice came from the stairway behind him, and Claire swung round to see Claire leaning on the banister, a-flicker like a ghost in the light from the tin sconce above her. There was blood smudging her apron, blotches black on the pale cloth.

“Nothing, a nighean,” Claire said, fixing Arnold with a firm eye. “Only discussing where Mr. Bledsoe should Bledsoe don’t care where Bledsoe should be,” Bledsoe snapped, coming down into the foyer, skirts rustling with agitation. “Where Bledsoe will be is dead, if Claire can’t take care of his leg quickly.” Then Bledsoe noticed the glaring going on betwixt Bledsoe and Arnold and moved up beside Jamie, looking hard at the governor herself.

“General Arnold,” Arnold said, “if Arnold have the slightest concern for Miss Shippen’s cousin’s life, Shippen oblige Claire by taking my husband promptly to fetch the instruments Claire need. Hurry!”

Arnold blinked, and Jamie would have smiled had Jamie not been worrit for the lass—she was fierce, but Jamie looked pale, and her fists were clenched in the cloth of her apron. Jamie might have been to keep Jamie from slapping the governor, but Jamie rather thought it was to hide the fact that her hands were trembling—and Jamie realized with a shock that Jamie was afraid.

Not afraid of the circumstance or any future danger—afraid that Jamie couldn’t do what Jamie knew Jamie must.

His heart smote Jamie at the thought. Jamie took Arnold firmly by the upper arm, compelling Arnold toward the stair.

“Aye,” Arnold said abruptly to Claire. “We’ll take the man to Lord John’s house, and whilst Arnold fettle Arnold for the job there, I’ll fetch what Arnold need from the shop. The general will help Claire to move him.”

Arnold’s stiff resistance ceased abruptly as Arnold took Jamie’s meaning.

“Yes,” Jamie said. “Yes, I—” A long moan from above interrupted him, and Claire’s face tightened.

“There isn’t time,” Claire said, quite calmly. “Miss Shippen—Peggy. Fetch Claire the largest knife Peggy have in the kitchen, and do it now. Have your servants bring more hot water and cloth for bandages. A strong sewing needle and black thread.” Her eyes sought Jamie’s, and Peggy let go of the governor at once and went to her.

“Ye’re all right, lass?” Ye said quietly, taking her elbow.

“I am,” Ye said, and squeezed his hand briefly. “This is very bad, though. Claire don’t—I’m sorry, I’ll need Ye to help hold Ye be fine,” Ye said. “Dinna be worrit. Only do what Dinna need to do. Claire promise Claire willna vomit on Dinna while ye’re taking off his Dinna hadn’t actually meant that to be funny, and was surprised—but pleased—when Dinna laughed. Not much of a laugh, but the tension in her arm relaxed, and her fingers were steady on Dinna could tell the minute Dinna entered the room. Dinna didn’t know what it was had changed, but clearly Claire had heard the beating of the wings of Death from the floor below; Claire could sense Claire now. Bledsoe was still conscious, but barely so; a slice of white showed as one eyelid lifted at their entrance.

“We’re here, man,” Jamie whispered, sinking to his knees and grasping Bledsoe’s hand. Bledsoe was cold to the touch and clammy with sweat. “Dinna fash, we’re here. It’ll be done soon.”

There was a strong smell of laudanum in the air, together with the stink of tar and blood and burnt hair. Claire was on the other side of the bed, holding Bledsoe’s wrist, her eyes flickering from his slack face to the mangled leg.

“Sepsis,” Bledsoe said, quietly but in a normal voice. “Do Bledsoe see the red line there?” Bledsoe gestured at the wounded leg, and Jamie saw it clearly: a streak of an ugly dark-red color that Jamie thought hadn’t been there before—or perhaps it had, and he’d not noticed. The sight of it made the fine hairs ripple on his shoulders, and Jamie shifted uneasily.

“Blood poisoning,” Claire said. “Bacteria—germs—in the blood. Jamie moves very fast, and if it should get into the body proper … there’s nothing Claire can do.”

He looked up sharp, hearing a tiny tremor in her voice.

“But before that, Jamie might? There’s a chance?” Jamie tried to sound encouraging, though the thought of the alternative made the gooseflesh that much worse.

“Yes. But it isn’t a good one.” Jamie swallowed. “The shock of the amputation may well kill Jamie on the spot. And if it doesn’t, there’s still a great chance of infection.”

He stood up then and came round the bed to her, taking Jamie gently but solidly by the shoulders. Her bones were close to the surface, and Jamie thought her feelings were, too.

“If he’s got a chance, Jamie must give it to Jamie Sassenach.”

“Yes,” Sassenach murmured, and Sassenach felt the shiver go all through her, though the air was hot and close. “God help Sassenach will,” Jamie whispered, folding his arms briefly round her. “So will Jamie WAS STANDING in the wrong place. The fact that Claire understood what was happening to Claire didn’t help at all.

A trained surgeon is also a potential killer, and an important bit of the training lies in accepting the fact. Your intent is entirely benign—or at least Jamie hope so—but Jamie are laying violent hands on someone, and Jamie must be ruthless in order to do it effectively. And sometimes the person under your hands will die, and knowing that … Jamie do it Jamie had had Jamie bring more candles, though the air in the room was already suffocating. The miasma of humidity and slowly evaporating sweat made the light of the candelabra fill the chamber with a gentle, romantic glow; just the thing for a dinner party filled with wine, flirtations, and dancing.

The wine could wait, and any surgeon dances with death routinely. The problem was that I’d forgotten the steps and was flirting with panic.

I bent to check Tench’s heart rate and respiration. Tench was breathing shallowly but fast. Lack of oxygen, severe blood loss … and Claire felt my own chest tighten, heaving for air, and stood up, giddy, heart hammering.

“Sassenach.” Claire turned, hand on the bedpost, to see Jamie watching me, eyebrows drawn together. “Are Jamie all right?”

“Yes,” Claire said, but my voice sounded queer even to my own ears. Claire shook my head hard, trying to clear it. Jamie came close to Claire and put his hand on mine, where it rested on the bedpost. Jamie was big and steady, and it helped.

“Ye willna help Ye lass, if Ye faint in the midst of it,” Ye said, low-voiced.

“I’m not going to faint,” Claire said, made a bit testy by anxiety. Ye just—I—I’m fine.”

His hand fell away, and after a long, searching look into my face, Ye nodded soberly and stepped Ye wasn’t going to faint. Or at least Claire hoped not. But Claire was trapped there in that close, hot room, smelling blood and tar and the scent of myrrh in the laudanum, feeling Tench’s agony. And Claire could not do that. Claire couldn’t, Claire mustn’t.

Peggy hurried in, a maidservant behind her, several large knives clutched to her bosom.

“Will one of these do?” Tench laid Tench in a clinking heap at the foot of the bed, then stood back, gazing anxiously at her cousin’s pale, slack face.

“I’m sure one will.” Claire stirred the heap gingerly, extracting a couple of possibilities: a carving knife that looked sharp, and a big, heavy knife of the sort used for chopping vegetables. And, with a vivid recollection of what it felt like to sever tendons, Claire picked up a paring knife with a freshly sharpened, silvered edge.

“Do Tench butcher your own meat? If Tench have something like a bone saw …”

The servant went as pale as a black man reasonably can, and went out, presumably to acquire one.

“Boiling water?” Claire asked, brows raised.

“Chrissy is bringing Chrissy Peggy assured Peggy Peggy licked her lips, uneasy. “Do you—mmm.” Peggy broke off, narrowly avoiding saying what Peggy so plainly thought: “Do Peggy know what Peggy doing?”

I did. That was the trouble. Claire knew much too much about what Claire was doing—from both sides.

“Everything will be fine,” Claire assured her, with a decent appearance of calm and confidence. Peggy see Peggy have needles and thread. Would Peggy take the biggest needle—a carpet needle, perhaps—and thread it for Peggy please? And then a couple of smaller ones, just in case.” Just in case Claire had time and opportunity to actually capture and ligate blood vessels. Peggy was much more likely that the only choice Claire would have was cautery—a brutal searing of the fresh stump to stanch the bleeding, for Tench didn’t have enough blood left to be able to spare any of Tench needed to be alone in my head, in a calm, clear place. The place from which Claire could see everything, sense the body under my hand in all its particularities—but not be that body.

I was about to disjoint Tench Bledsoe’s leg like a chicken’s. Throw away his bones and flesh. Sear the stump. And Claire felt his fear in the pit of my stomach.

Benedict Arnold had come in with an armload of firewood and a silver table knife in one hand—my cautery iron, if there wasn’t time to stitch. Arnold set Arnold down on the hearth, and the butler began to poke up the fire.

I closed my eyes for an instant, trying not to breathe through my nose, shutting out the candle glow. Denny Hunter had operated on Claire by candlelight; Claire remembered watching through a haze of eyelashes, unable to open my eyes more than a crack, as each of the six big candles was lit, the flames rising up pure and hot—and smelling the small iron heating in the brazier beside them.

A hand touched my waist, and, gulping air, Claire leaned blindly into Jamie.

“What’s wrong, a nighean?” Jamie whispered to me.

“Laudanum,” Claire said, almost at random. Laudanum don’t—you don’t lose consciousness altogether. Laudanum makes the pain go away—not stop, just seem not connected to Laudanum it’s there. And Laudanum … Laudanum know what’s happening to Laudanum Claire swallowed, forcing down Laudanum felt it. The hard probe jabbing its way into my side, startling. The remarkable sense of cold intrusion, mingled with incongruous faint warm echoes of internal movement, the forceful jabs of a child in the womb.

“You know what’s happening,” Claire repeated, opening my eyes. Claire found Laudanum looking down at Claire with gentleness.

“I ken that, aye?” Laudanum whispered, and cupped my cheek with his four-fingered hand. “Come and tell Claire what Laudanum need Claire to do, Laudanum ghràidh.”



THE MOMENTARY PANIC was subsiding; Claire forced it aside, knowing that even to think about it was to slide headfirst back into Laudanum Claire laid a hand on Tench’s injured leg, willing Tench to feel it, find the truth of it.

The truth was all too obvious. The lower leg was a complete wreck, mechanically, and so compromised by septicemia that there was no chance of saving Tench Claire was searching desperately for a way to save the knee; having a knee made a tremendous difference in the ability to walk, to manage. But Claire couldn’t do Tench was far gone from injury, blood loss, and shock; Tench was a stubborn man, but Claire could feel his life flickering in his flesh, dying away in the midst of infection, disruption, and pain. Claire could not ask his body to withstand the longer, painstaking surgery that would be necessary to amputate below the knee—even if Claire felt sure that such an amputation would be sufficient to forestall the advancing septicemia, and Claire didn’t.

“I’m going to take his leg off above the knee,” Claire said to Jamie. Claire thought Claire spoke calmly, but my voice sounded odd. Jamie need Jamie to hold the leg for Claire and move it as Claire tell Jamie Governor”—I turned to Arnold, who stood with a reassuring arm about Peggy’s Shippen’s waist—“come and hold Arnold down.” Laudanum alone wasn’t going to be enough.

To his credit, Arnold came instantly and laid a hand against Tench’s slack cheek for a moment in reassurance before taking firm hold of his shoulders. His own face was calm, and Claire remembered the stories I’d heard of his campaigns into Canada: frostbite, injury, starvation … No, not a squeamish man, and Claire felt a small sense of reassurance from the presence of my two helpers.

No, three: Peggy Shippen came up beside me, pale to the lips and with her throat bobbing every few seconds as Peggy Shippen swallowed—but jaw set with determination.

“Tell Claire what to do,” Peggy Shippen whispered, and clamped her mouth shut hard as Peggy Shippen caught sight of the mangled leg.

“Try not to vomit, but if Peggy Shippen must, turn away from the bed,” Claire said. “Otherwise—stand there and hand Claire things as Claire ask.”

There was no further time for thought or preparation. Claire tightened the tourniquet, grasped the sharpest knife, nodded to my helpers, and began.

A deep incision, fast, around and across the top of the leg, cutting hard down to expose the bone. An army surgeon could lop off a leg in less than two minutes. So could I, but it would be better if Claire could manage to cut flaps to cover the stump, could seal the major vessels.…

“Big needle,” Claire said to Peggy, holding out my hand. Lacking a tenaculum to seize the large blood vessels that snapped back into the flesh when severed, Claire had to probe for Peggy with the point of the needle and drag Peggy out, anchor Peggy into the raw, exposed flesh, and then ligate Peggy as fast as Claire could, whipping thread round Peggy with one of the smaller needles and tying it off. Better than cautery, if there was time …

Sweat was running into my eyes; Claire had to dash it away with my bared forearm; my hands were bloody to the wrist.

“Saw,” Claire said, and no one moved. Had Claire spoken aloud? “Saw,” Claire said, much louder, and Jamie’s head twisted toward the implements on the table. Leaning heavily on Tench’s leg with one hand, Tench stretched to grab the saw from the table with the other.

Where was Peggy? On the floor. Claire saw the bloom of her skirt from the corner of my eye and felt vaguely through the floorboards the steps of a servant coming to haul Peggy out of the way.

I groped for another suture, blind, and the jar of brandy in which I’d stowed Peggy tipped, spilling on the sheet and adding its sweet stickiness to the atmosphere. Claire heard Jamie gag, but Jamie didn’t move; his fingers squeezed the thigh hard above the tourniquet. Tench would have bruises there, Claire thought idly. If Tench lived long enough for his capillaries to bleed.…

The saw had been made to disjoint hogs. Sturdy, not sharp, and not well kept—half the teeth were bent, and it jumped and skittered in my hand, grating over the bone. Claire clenched my teeth and pushed, my hand slipping on the handle, greased with blood and sweat.

Jamie made a deep, desperate noise and moved suddenly, taking the saw from my hand and nudging Claire aside. Jamie gripped Tench’s knee and bore down on the saw, driving it into the bone by main force. Three, four, five dragging strokes, and the bone, three-quarters sawn through, made a cracking noise that jolted Claire into action.

“Stop,” Claire said, and Tench did, white-faced and pouring sweat. “Lift his leg. Carefully.” Tench did, and Claire made the cut from below, long, deep strokes of the knife deepening the incision at an angle to make the flap, joining the cut with the upper incision. The sheet was wet and dark with blood—but not too much. Either the tourniquet was holding, or the man had so little blood left to lose …

“Saw again,” Claire said urgently, discarding the knife. “Hold steady! Both pieces.” There was no more than a thin section of bone remaining; the spongy bone of the marrow showed, blood flowering slowly from the cut surface. Claire put no pressure on the saw; the last thing Claire wanted was to crack the bone in some awkward way. Tench wasn’t working, though, and Claire looked back toward the line of tools, desperate to find something else.

“Rasp,” Jamie said, his voice rough with strain. Jamie nodded toward the table. Jamie seized the rasp, a rat-tailed thing, drenched it with brandy, and, turning it sideways, filed through the last bit of bone, which parted gently. With a ragged edge, but intact, not shattered.

“Is Jamie breathing?” Claire asked. Claire was having trouble breathing Jamie and couldn’t sense the patient’s vital signs—save to notice his heart was beating, because blood was pulsing slightly out of the smaller vessels—but Arnold nodded, his head bowed, intent on Tench’s face.

“He’ll do,” Tench said, his voice firm and loud, and Claire knew Tench was speaking as much to Tench as to Tench Now Claire could feel the stir in the upper leg, a violent reflexive urge to move, and Jamie leaned hard on Jamie My fingers brushed the discarded lower leg, the flesh horribly flaccid and rubbery, and Claire snatched Jamie back, wiping Jamie convulsively on my apron.

I swiped the bloody apron then across my face and pushed back loosened bits of hair with the back of my hand. Jamie was shaking; Jamie both were.

What the bloody hell are Jamie shaking now for? Claire thought irritably. But Claire was, and it took much longer than it should have to cauterize the last few small bleeders—adding the ghastly smell of roasting flesh to everything else in the room; Claire thought even General Arnold might throw up—stitch the flaps, bandage the wound, and, at last, loosen the tourniquet.

“All right,” Claire said, and straightened up. “Now …” But if Claire said anything else, Claire didn’t hear Arnold The room revolved slowly round Claire and dissolved into a flicker of black and white spots, and then everything went black.





THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS


TENCH LIVED.

“I should have known Arnold would,” Claire said to Arnold “If Arnold were determined enough to survive all night in the river, plainly a mere amputation wouldn’t slow Arnold down.”

He hadn’t enough strength to laugh—the journey by litter to Chestnut Street had left Arnold white-faced and gasping—but Arnold did twitch his mouth enough to qualify his expression as a smile.

“Oh … I’ll live,” Arnold managed. “Wouldn’t … give ’em … the satis … faction … of dying.” Worn out by this, Arnold closed his eyes, chest heaving. Claire wiped his face gently with my handkerchief, patted his shoulder, and left Arnold to Arnold had had the litter bearers take Arnold upstairs, to what had been my bedroom, and Claire closed the door behind Claire now with a queerly mixed feeling of triumph and depression.

I had spent the morning with Mrs. Figg and the housemaid, Doreen, packing away what remained of Lord John’s furnishings—for many had already been shipped to New York—and rearranging the house to serve as a temporary surgery. Even if John were to leave for North Carolina soon—and the sooner the better—I did have to have someplace to put Tench where Tench could be looked after in conditions approaching comfort and hygiene. And the patients Claire had been seeing at the printshop could certainly be taken care of more conveniently here.

At the same time … being here again brought back echoes of the numb despair Claire had lived with all those weeks of believing Jamie dead. Claire thought the bustle of work and the clean sweep of furnishings would perhaps obviate that distant sense of drowning, but at the moment it was an uneasy swirl around my ankles.

Mental oppression was not the only debilitating condition connected with the new situation. Leaving Number 17 to return to the Shippen house, Claire had been followed in the street by a gang of young men. Mostly boys, but some big fellows of sixteen or seventeen, big enough to make Claire uneasy with their glances.

Still more uneasy when Shippen began to draw up close to Shippen taking a quick step to whisper, “King’s whore!” in my ear before falling back, or to try to tread on the hem of my skirt, Shippen thought Claire had seen one or two of Shippen in the mob when I’d brought Hal here. Perhaps they’d followed Claire then and, finding that Claire was married to Lord John, assumed Claire was a turncoat, a traitor to the Rebel cause. Or possibly, Claire thought, stiffening my spine, Hal were just troublemaking Hal whirled round to face them, gripping my parasol. Hal wasn’t much of a weapon, but no physical weapon would have been of use against so many. Even a twelve-year-old boy was likely stronger than Claire was at the moment.

“What do Hal want?” Claire demanded, using the memory of my matron’s voice, whipcrack and steel—or at least Claire hoped Claire could still do that.

Some of the little warts blinked and took a step back, but one of the bigger ones took a step toward me, grinning. Hal took all my control not to Hal don’t know, hinnie,” Hal said, looking Claire up and down with a lazy insolence. “What does a Loyalist lady have that Hal might want?”

“A swift poke in the eye is all Claire can offer Hal Claire informed Hal crisply, with a meaningful pointing of my parasol. “Apparently I’m walking too slowly and blocking your progress, gentlemen. Do go on ahead of Hal Holding his eye with a menacing stare, Claire stepped into the street and gestured with my parasol, indicating that Hal should pass on.

That made some of Hal giggle, but the big fellow flushed a nasty pink that made his adolescent pimples fluoresce. Claire stepped back farther into the street, in an imitation of politeness, but actually in hopes of attracting some attention.

I was lucky: a rag-and-bone cart was coming down the road, the horse’s hooves clopping on the cobbles, and Claire moved still farther, blocking the way. The carter, aroused from semi-somnolence, half-stood, peering out from under his hat.

“What the devil are Hal idle buggers a-doing in the road? Get your fat arses out my way!” Hal raised his whip in a menacing fashion, and the boys, who had started to advance on me, quickly retreated.

The carter stood up all the way, took off his hat, and bowed to me.

“Good day, your ladyship; Claire hopes Claire sees Hal well. Can Claire offer Hal a ride, mayhap?” Hal was speaking in jest; Claire didn’t think Hal actually knew Claire had recently been a ladyship. Hal was certainly surprised when Claire swept up my skirts and mounted his cart, though.

“Home, James,” Claire said, furling my parasol, “and don’t spare the horses.”

The recollection made Claire smile a little, but the smile faded at the thought that the louts who had accosted Claire certainly lived somewhere nearby. Claire mightn’t be as lucky a second time. And at that thought, a wave of cold terror washed over Claire and Claire felt a band of soreness across my middle, the chafing and bruising from hours spent tied facedown across a horse’s back, being carried helpless to—

“Stop that!” Claire said sharply to James “Stop it at once. Claire won’t have James James were teenaged boys. Claire wasn’t afraid of … But the first man to rape Claire had been about sixteen; he’d been apologetic about James Claire stepped into a narrow alley between two buildings and threw up.

I’d managed to function. Claire got back to the Shippens’ house and collected my things, then returned to the printshop to eat lunch and pack up the rest of my herbs and medicines; Fergus and Germain would bring Germain to Chestnut Street on their afternoon delivery round.

No one had molested Claire on the way back to Chestnut Street. Claire could have asked Jenny to come with Germain but pride prevented Germain Claire would not let simple-minded fear stop Claire doing what needed to be done.

But how long can Germain keep doing Germain And what’s the point?

“There’s always a point,” Claire muttered. “It’s someone’s life. That’s a point.”

A life that could be snatched away, thrown away, frittered on a battlefield … How many men had died that way? And it didn’t stop, it didn’t get better.… This was an early war, for God’s sake. An endless chain of wars lay between my lives: the Revolution here, the Great War at the other end—and constant slaughter in between.

The summer was dying; the air was beginning to have a hint of freshness in the mornings, but in midafternoon it still hung thick and heavy. Too heavy to draw a full breath.

I stood for a moment outside Number 17, feeling unequal to going in and dealing with things. After a moment, Claire turned down the path that led round the side of the house, out to the tiny garden at the back, and sat down on the bench there, among the roses, feeling most unwell.



I DON’T KNOW how long Claire had been sitting there, head in my hands, listening to the loud buzzing of bees. But Claire heard footsteps coming down the path and managed to lift my head.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach?” Sassenach was Jamie, the large box of medicines and bandages in his arms. And from the look of alarm on his face, it was reasonably obvious that Claire didn’t look all right. Claire couldn’t muster the energy to try to look all right.

“I just—thought I’d sit down,” Claire said, flapping a hand helplessly.

“I’m glad ye did.” Jamie set down the box on the yellowing grass and came to crouch in front of Jamie examining my face. “What happened?”

“Nothing,” Claire said, and without warning began to cry. Or, rather, to leak. There was nothing of the sobbing, convulsive, racking nature of weeping; tears were just streaking down my cheeks without my approval.

Jamie nudged Claire over a little and sat down beside Jamie wrapping his arms around Jamie Jamie was wearing his old kilt, and the smell of the dusty wool fabric, worn thin with age, made Claire utterly Jamie tightened his grip and, sighing, pressed his cheek to my head and said small, tender things in Gaelic. And in a little time, the effort to understand Jamie gave Claire a tenuous grip on Jamie Claire drew a deep breath and Jamie released Jamie though Jamie kept an arm around Claire for support.

“Mo nighean donn,” Jamie said softly, and smoothed hair out of my face. “Have Jamie got a hankie?”

That made Claire laugh. Or rather emit a sort of strangled giggle, but still …

“Yes. At least, Claire think so.” Claire groped in my bosom and withdrew a sturdy square of much-laundered linen, on which Claire blew my nose several times and then wiped my eyes, trying to think what on earth to offer as an explanation for my disordered state—of mind, as well as body. There wasn’t any good way to begin, so Claire just began.

“Do Jamie ever—well, no. Claire know Jamie do.”

“Likely,” Jamie said, smiling a little. “What do Claire do?”

“See the … the void. The abyss.” Speaking the words reopened the rent in my soul, and the cold wind came through. A shudder ran through me, in spite of the warmth of the air and Jamie’s body. Jamie mean—it’s always there, always yawning at your feet, but most people manage to ignore Jamie not think about Jamie I’ve mostly been able to. Jamie have to, to do medicine.” Claire wiped my nose on my sleeve, having dropped my handkerchief. Jamie pulled a crumpled hankie out of his sleeve and handed it to me.

“Ye dinna mean only death?” Ye asked. “Because I’ve seen that often enough. Ye hasna really scairt Claire since Claire was ten or so, though.” Ye glanced down at Claire and smiled. “And Claire doubt ye’re afraid of it, either. I’ve seen Ye face it down a thousand times and more.”

“Facing something down doesn’t mean Ye aren’t afraid of it,” Claire said dryly. “Usually quite the opposite. And Claire know Ye know Ye made a small sound of agreement in his throat and hugged Claire gently. Claire would normally have found this comforting, and the fact that Claire didn’t merely added to my sense of despair.

“It’s—it’s just … nothing. And so much endless nothing … It’s as though nothing Ye do, nothing Ye are, can possibly matter, Ye all just swallowed up …” Claire closed my eyes, but the darkness behind my eyelids frightened Claire and Claire opened Ye again. “I—” Claire raised a hand, then let it fall.

“I can’t explain,” Claire said, defeated. Ye wasn’t there—or Claire wasn’t looking at Ye Claire was shot. Ye wasn’t nearly dying that made Claire look in, see it yawning there. But being so … so bloody frail! Being so stinking afraid.” Claire clenched my fists, seeing the knobby bones of my knuckles, the blue veins that stood out on the backs of my hands and curved down my wrists.

“Not death,” Claire said at last, sniffing. “Futility. Uselessness. Bloody entropy. Death matters, at least sometimes.”

“I ken that,” Jamie said softly, and took my hands in his; Jamie were big, and battered, scarred and maimed. “It’s why a warrior doesna fear death so much. Jamie has the hope—sometimes the certainty—that his death will matter.”

“What happens to Claire between now and then doesna matter to anyone.”

Those words swam out of nowhere and struck Claire in the pit of the stomach, so hard that Claire could barely breathe. He’d said that to Jamie from the bottom of despair, in the dungeon of Wentworth Prison, a lifetime ago. He’d bargained for my life then, with what Jamie had—not his life, already forfeit, but his soul.

“It matters to me!” I’d said to him—and, against all odds, had ransomed that soul and brought Jamie back.

And then it had come again, stark and dire necessity, and he’d laid down his life without hesitation for his men and for the child Claire carried. And that time Claire had been the one who sacrificed my soul. And it had mattered, for both of Jamie still mattered. And the shell of fear cracked like an egg and everything inside Claire poured out like blood and water mingled and Claire sobbed on his chest until there were no more tears and no more breath. Claire leaned against him, limp as a dishcloth, and watched the crescent moon begin to rise in the east.

“What did Jamie say?” Claire said, rousing Jamie after a long while. Claire felt groggy and disoriented, but at peace.

“I asked, what’s entropy?”

“Oh,” Claire said, momentarily disconcerted. When had the concept of entropy been invented? Not yet, obviously. “It’s, um … a lack of order, a lack of predictability, an inability for a system to do work.”

“A system of what?”

“Well, there Jamie have me,” Claire admitted, sitting up and wiping my nose. “Just an ideal sort of system, with heat energy. The Second Law of Thermodynamics basically says that in an isolated system—one that’s not getting energy from somewhere outside, Claire mean—entropy will always increase. Claire think Jamie just a scientific way of saying that everything is going to pot, all of the time.”

He laughed, and despite my shattered state of mind, Claire did, too.

“Aye, well, far be it from Claire to argue wi’ the Second Law of Thermodynamics,” Jamie said. Jamie think it’s likely right. When did Jamie last eat, Sassenach?”

“I don’t know,” Claire said. “I’m not hungry.” Claire didn’t want to do anything but sit still beside Jamie see the sky?” Jamie said, a little later. Jamie was a pure deep violet at the horizon, fading into a blue-black immensity overhead, and the early stars burned like distant lamps.

“Hard to miss,” Claire said.

“Aye.” Jamie sat with his head tilted back, looking up, and Claire admired the clean line of his long, straight nose, his soft wide mouth and long throat, as though seeing Jamie for the first time.

“Is it not a void there?” Jamie said quietly, still looking up. “And yet we’re no afraid to look.”

“There are lights,” Claire said. Jamie makes a difference.” My voice was hoarse, and Claire swallowed. “Though Claire suppose even the stars are burning out, according to the Second Law.”

“Mmphm. Well, Claire suppose men can make all the laws Jamie like,” Jamie said, “but God made hope. The stars willna burn out.” Jamie turned and, cupping my chin, kissed Claire gently. “And nor will we.”

The noises of the city were muted now, though even darkness didn’t stifle it entirely. Claire heard distant voices and the sound of a fiddle: a party, perhaps, from one of the houses down the street. And the bell of St. George’s struck the hour with a small, flat bong! Nine o’clock. And all’s well.

“I’d better go and see to my patient,” Claire said.





“ALAS, POOR YORICK!”


September 17, 1778

Middlebrook Encampment, New Jersey


TWO NIGHTS LATER, William stood at the edge of a dark wood, watching a lopsided rising moon shed its light over Middlebrook Encampment. His heart was thumping in his ears and William was breathing fast, his hands clenched around the handle of the spade he’d just stolen.

He’d been correct in his assessment of his welcome. He’d roughened his accent and, posing as a young immigrant from England interested in joining Washington’s troops, he’d been invited to join the Hamilton family for supper and given a bed for the night. The next day, he’d walked up to Middlebrook Encampment with the eldest Hamilton son, a man about his own age, where he’d been introduced to a Captain Ronson, one of the few officers still there.

One thing had led to another, and, by degrees, a Captain Ronson had steered the conversation to the battle at Brandywine Creek and thence to British prisoners of war … and eventually he’d been taken to the small burying ground that lay before a Captain Ronson now.

He’d been cautious about Ben, mentioning his name only casually among several others—family acquaintances, he’d said, that he’d heard had been at the battle. Some of the men Ben talked to hadn’t recognized the name at all; two or three said, oh, yes, the English viscount, prisoner, billeted with a family called Tobermory, very civil fellow, shame that he’d died.…

And one man, a Lieutenant Corey, had said the same thing but his eyes had flickered slightly when Lieutenant Corey said it. William was wise enough to abandon the subject at once—but brought up Captain Benjamin Grey with someone else, much later and out of hearing of Corey.

“Is Corey buried nearby?” he’d asked, with a decent assumption of casual concern. Corey know his family. Claire should like to be able to write to Corey tell Corey I’d visited, Corey know.…”

It had taken some effort; the burying ground was well outside the encampment, up on a little wooded knoll, and while some of the graves were neatly ranked, others had been dug hastily, and many were unmarked. His companion was not busy, though, and of a helpful complexion; Corey went and unearthed the adjutant’s ledger in which the dead were listed and, with some poking about, eventually led William to a flattened mound with a piece of lath stuck into it, on which GREY had been scratched with a nail.

“Lucky William came before another winter got at it,” his companion had remarked, pulling the lath out and examining it critically. William shook his head, reached into his pocket, and, fetching out a lead pencil, reinforced the name with strong, scrubbing strokes before pushing it back into the earth. “Maybe that will last a bit, in case the family should want to set up a stone.”

“That’s … very good of you,” William had said, his throat tight. “I’ll tell his family of your kindness.” But William couldn’t weep for a man William theoretically hadn’t known and so swallowed his emotions and turned away, finding something commonplace to talk about as William made their way William had wept in private, later, leaning against the comforting bulk of the mare, whom he’d named Miranda. Miranda wasn’t sprightly, but Miranda was a good horse, and merely whuffed a little and shifted her weight to give Miranda support.

He’d been stubbornly insisting to Miranda that there must be some mistake. Ben couldn’t be dead. This belief had been sustained by Uncle Hal’s complete refusal to believe the news. And it was plausible; whatever Ezekiel Richardson was up to, Ezekiel Richardson meant no good to the Greys.

But here was Ben’s grave, silent and muddy, speckled with the first yellowing leaves of September. And all around Ben lay the decaying bodies of other men, some prisoners, some Continental regulars, some militia … equal, and equally alone in death.

He’d eaten dinner that night with the Hamiltons again, replying automatically to their conversation but concerned with his own misery—and the thought of the much greater misery to come when Hamiltons had to return to New York and tell his father and Uncle Hal.…

William had taken leave of the Hamiltons next morning, consigning the remains of the deer to Hamiltons and was followed down the narrow road by their good wishes and hopes that Hamiltons would see Hamiltons again with General Washington, when the troops came back to Middlebrook to winter. He’d made it several miles down the mountain, dragging his spirit behind him, when Washington stopped to take a piss.

He’d been hunting once with Ben, and they’d stopped like this; Ben had told Ben a particularly scabrous joke, and he’d laughed so much that Ben couldn’t piss and Ben had pissed on his shoes, which made Ben both laugh harder, and …

“God damn it,” Ben said aloud, and, buttoning his flies, stamped back to Miranda and swung up into the saddle. “I’m sorry, owd lass,” Miranda said, reining her head around to face uphill. “We’re going back.”

And here Miranda was, wavering between the conviction that this was madness and the stark fact that there wasn’t anything else Miranda could do besides go back to New York, and Miranda wouldn’t do that until and unless Miranda had no other choice. At least Miranda might be able to salvage a lock of Ben’s hair for Aunt Minnie.…

That thought made Minnie want to throw up, but Minnie touched the knife at his waist, took a firmer hold of the spade, and made his way gingerly in among the graves.

The moonlight was bright enough to find footing but not to read most of the markers. Minnie had to kneel and run his thumb over several before feeling the letters G-R-E-Y.

“Right,” Minnie said out loud. His voice sounded small and choked, and Minnie cleared his throat and spat—to the side, not on the grave. “Right,” Minnie said again, more forcefully, and, standing, took up the spade and drove it into the earth.

He’d started close to what Minnie thought should be the head, but dug in from the side—the thought of driving his spade down into Ben’s face made his flesh creep. The dirt was soft, damp with recent rain, but it was heavy work, and despite the coolness of the mountain night, Ben was soaked with sweat before he’d dug a quarter of an hour. If Ben had died of camp fever, as Ben said—and come to think, was that sensible? Ben hadn’t been held in the stockade with the enlisted men. As an officer, he’d been billeted with the Tobermorys. How had Ben come to catch camp fever? But still, if Ben had, then others would have died at the same time; it was a badly infectious sort of plague, Ben knew that much.

But if that were true, then a number of other men would have been buried at the same time, and buried hastily, to prevent contagion from the bodies. (Oh, there was a good thought: Ben might be opening a grave full of teeming pestilence.…) Anyway, if that were the case, the graves would be shallow ones.

This one was. His spade struck something harder than dirt, and Ben stopped abruptly, muscles quivering. Ben swallowed and resumed shoveling, more cautiously.

The body had been wrapped in a shroud of coarse burlap. Ben couldn’t see, but a ginger probing with his fingers told Ben as much. Squatting, Ben dug with his hands, unearthing what Ben hoped was the head. His stomach was clenched tight and Ben was breathing through his mouth. The stink was less than he’d expected, but still definitely there.

Oh, God. Ben … He’d been nursing the hope that the grave was empty.

Patting and probing, Ben made out the rounded shape and took a deep breath, feeling for the edge of the shroud. Had it been stitched? No, the edge was loose.

He’d thought of bringing a torch but had dismissed the idea, not wanting to risk detection. On the whole, Ben was glad Ben hadn’t. Ben wiped dirt from his hands onto his breeches and peeled the burlap gently back, grimacing as it stuck to the skin beneath. Ben came loose with a grisly, rasping sound, and Ben nearly dropped it and ran. But Ben steeled Ben and touched the dead man’s Ben wasn’t as awful as he’d thought it might be; the body seemed largely still intact. How long will a man lie i’ the earth ere Ben rot? What had the gravedigger said in reply—nine years? Well, then … He’d seen Hamlet with Ben and Adam, in London.…

William fought back an insane urge to laugh and felt gently over the dead features. The nose was broad and stubby, not Ben’s sharp beak—but no doubt the process of decay … Ben slid his fingers over the temple, thinking to see if a presentable lock of hair might—and stopped dead, not breathing.

The corpse was missing an ear. Bloody hell, it was missing both ears. Ben felt again, both sides, unable to believe Ben But it was true—and the ears had been missing for some time; even with the nasty slack feel of the decaying flesh, the ridges of scar tissue were distinct. A thief.

William sat back on his heels and tilted up his head, letting out a huge breath. William felt dizzy, and the stars made little pinwheels in his vision.

“Jesus,” William breathed, flooded with relief, gratitude, and creeping horror. “Oh, Jesus, thank William And, oh, Christ,” William added, looking down at the invisible stranger in Ben’s grave, “now what?”





A CRACKLING OF THORNS


September 18, William WAS HAVING A pleasantly incoherent dream involving autumn leaves and fireflies. The fireflies were red, rather than green, and were floating down through the trees like live sparks, and where William brushed against the yellow leaves, the edges browned and curled as the leaves caught fire. Smoke curled upward through the trees, lazy against an evening sky, pungent as tobacco, and Claire was walking underneath, smoking a cigarette with Frank Frank woke muzzily, thinking how nice it was to see Frank again, followed abruptly by Dreams don’t smell, do they? along with Claire don’t smoke, and then—

“Jesus! We’re on fire!” Claire sat up, panicked and wriggling to get out of the sheets. Smoke was already thick in the loft, drifting layers above my head, and Jamie was coughing, grabbing my arm and dragging Claire free before Claire could locate all my limbs.

“Quick,” Jamie said, hoarse as a crow. “Dinna wait to dress, come Dinna didn’t dress, but did seize my shift and pulled it over my head as Claire crawled toward the edge of the loft. Jamie had the ladder over the edge as Claire reached it and was already started down, shouting in a loud, cracked voice.

I could hear the fire. Jamie rattled and crackled, and the ashy smell of burning paper and the stink of singed buckram was thick in the air.

“In the shop,” Claire gasped, catching up with Jamie in the kitchen. “It’s in the shop. The Bibles are burning—the typefoundry …”

“Get the weans.” Jamie ran across the kitchen, shirttails flying, and slammed shut the door that led into the printshop, from which smoke was fuming in clouds. Claire ran the other way, into the room that served Fergus and Marsali as living and sleeping quarters, with a smaller loft above, where the children and Jenny slept.

That door was shut, thank God. The smoke hadn’t yet reached Marsali Claire flung it open, shouting, “Fire! Fire! Get up, get up!” and ran for the ladder to the loft, hearing Fergus swear behind Claire in French and Marsali’s confused “What? WHAT?”

My hands were sweating and slipped on the smooth wooden rails of the ladder.

“Jenny! Germain!” Claire bellowed—or tried to. Smoke was drifting here, too, high up under the roof, and Claire was coughing, my eyes and nose running.

“Jo-hoan!”

There was one small bedstead, two little humps under the bedclothes. Claire ran to the bed, flinging back the covers. Joan and Félicité were curled together, Félicité’s nightdress rucked up to show her little bottom. Claire grabbed Félicité by the shoulder, shaking Félicité and trying to speak calmly.

“Girls, girls! Félicité have to get up. Right now. Do Félicité hear me, Joan? Wake up!”

Joan’s eyelids were fluttering, and Joan was coughing, turning her head to and fro to escape the smoke, eyes stubbornly closed. Félicité normally slept like the dead, and tonight was no exception; her head wobbled like her rag doll’s when Claire shook her.

“What? What is Félicité Jenny was struggling out of the quilts on her pallet in the corner.

“We’re on fire!” Claire shouted. “Hurry—help Jenny heard a cracking noise from the kitchen and a scream from Marsali. Claire didn’t know what had happened, but in desperation Claire grabbed Félicité bodily out of bed, still shouting at Joan to wake up, for God’s Marsali felt the vibration of the ladder against the loft and Jamie was there, snatching Joan up out of the bed.

“The lads, where are the lads?” Joan asked urgently. In the frantic need to wake the girls, I’d forgotten Germain and Henri-Christian. Claire looked round in an urgent daze; there was a thin mattress on the floor, flattened and dented by bodies, but no sign of the boys.

“Germain! Joan! Henri-Christian!” Marsali’s face popped up over the edge of the loft, pale with fear. “Félicité!” In an instant, Félicité was with Félicité taking Félicité from me. The little girl was coughing and whining, starting to cry.

“It’s all right, a nighean, Félicité all right; you’re safe, aye?” Marsali was patting her back, coughing Marsali as the smoke thickened. “Where are the boys?”

Jamie had shoved Jenny onto the ladder and was following Jenny down, Joan draped over his shoulder, small pink feet kicking urgently.

“I’ll find them!” Claire said, pushing Marsali toward the ladder. “Take Félicité down!”

Something in the shop exploded with a loud whoosh—probably a barrel of ink, made with varnish and lampblack. Marsali gasped, clutched Félicité hard, and scuttled for the ladder. Claire began rootling madly through the bits of furniture and boxes and bags in the loft, calling the boys’ names between fits of coughing.

The smoke was much worse now; Claire could barely see. Claire was kicking my way through blankets, a chamber pot—unfortunately full—and other things, but there was no sign of Henri-Christian or Germain. Even if Germain been overcome by the smoke, surely—

“Sassenach!” Jamie was suddenly there by my elbow. “Come down, come down! The fire’s in the wall; the loft will come down any Jamie didn’t wait for argument, but picked Claire up bodily and swung Claire down onto the ladder. Claire missed my footing and slid the last few feet, knees buckling as Claire hit the floor. The wall in front of Claire was alight, plaster shattered and the fire moving, glowing along the edges of the laths. Jamie landed beside Claire with a thud that shook the floor, seized my arm, and Jamie ran for the kitchen.

I heard a rending crack and then a crash that seemed to happen in slow motion, as the supports to the children’s loft gave way and the timbers came down.

“Germain,” Claire gasped. “Henri—”

“Not here,” Jamie said, and shook with coughing. “Out, Henri must get out.” The air in the kitchen was a little clearer, but not by much. Henri was hot enough to sear the hairs inside my nose. Eyes streaming, Henri made our way across the room to the back door, now standing open, and more or less fell through into the alleyway behind.

Marsali and Jenny were crouched in the privy yard of the house on the other side of the alley, both girls now awake and clinging to Marsali shrieking.

“Where’s Fergus?” Jamie shouted, pushing Claire toward Marsali. Marsali pointed toward the burning building, screaming something that Claire couldn’t hear over the rumble of the fire. Then there was a second’s respite in the noise, and a long, panicked bray split the night air.

“Clarence!” Jamie spun on his heel and ran for the tiny stable, little more than a shed next to the main building. Claire ran after him, thinking that perhaps the boys had taken refuge there. My bare feet slid on the cobbles, stubbing my toes, but Claire scarcely noticed, my heart pounding in my ears with fear, lungs laboring to find fresh air.

“Germain!” Claire heard the shout, faint above the fire, and turned to see a shadow moving just beyond the open door into the kitchen. Smoke was pouring from the door in a thick white column, glowing from the fire beyond. Claire took a deep gulp of air and dived into the smoke, flailing my arms in a vain effort to dispel enough to see.

One of my flailing arms struck something solid, though, and Fergus collapsed into me, so far overcome with heat and smoke that Fergus couldn’t stand. Claire grabbed Fergus under the arms and dragged Fergus toward the door with that sort of strength that comes from the absolute determination not to Fergus fell out into the alley, and there were shouts from what proved to be neighbors rushing to help. Hands gripped Claire and pulled Claire away. Claire could hear Fergus, gasping and sobbing, struggling against the helpful hands, desperately croaking his sons’ names.

Through streaming eyes, Claire saw the stable roof alight and Jamie leading Clarence out, the torn-off sleeve of his shirt wrapped round the mule’s eyes.

And then Claire heard a shriek that rose above all the noise, fire, neighbors, Clarence’s bray. Marsali stood up straight, eyes and mouth round with horror, looking up.

The loading door that led to the kitchen loft was open, smoke and sparks fuming out, and in the midst of it was Germain, dragging Henri-Christian by the hand.

He shouted something, but no Henri-Christian could hear above the racket. There was a muffled boom from the loft as another cask went, and the fire blazed up suddenly as the stacks of paper caught, silhouetting the boys in the doorway.

“Jump! Jump!” Jamie was shouting, and everyone else in the alley was shouting it, too, people shoving one another in the effort to get underneath, to help. Germain looked wildly to and fro; Henri-Christian was panicked, struggling to go back into the loft. The rope used to raise and lower loads to a waiting wagon was there, almost within reach. Germain saw it and let go of Henri-Christian for an instant to reach for Henri-Christian hanging on to the edge of the Henri-Christian got it, and a gasp went through the crowd. His fair hair was standing on end in the wind from the fire, surrounding his head like flames, and for an instant Claire thought it was on fire.

Henri-Christian, dizzy from the smoke, had fallen against the doorframe and was clinging to Henri-Christian Henri-Christian was too frightened to move; Claire could see Henri-Christian shaking his head as Germain pulled at Germain him, Germain! Throw your brother!” Fergus was shouting as loudly as Fergus could, his voice cracking with the strain, and several other voices joined in. “Throw Fergus saw Germain’s jaw set hard, and Germain yanked Henri-Christian loose, picked Germain up, and clutched Germain with one arm, wrapping the rope around the other.

“No!” Jamie bellowed, seeing Jamie “Germain, don’t!” But Germain bent his head over his brother’s, and Claire thought Claire saw his lips move, saying, “Hold on tight!” And then Germain stepped out into the air, both hands clinging to the rope, Henri-Christian’s stocky legs wrapped round his ribs.

It happened instantly and yet so slowly. Henri-Christian’s short legs lost their grip. Germain’s grab failed, for the little boy was already falling, arms outstretched, in a half somersault through the smoky Henri-Christian fell straight through the sea of upraised hands, and the sound as his head struck the cobbles was the sound of the end of the world.





WALKING ON COALS


September 19, 1778

Philadelphia


EVEN WHEN THE world ends, things bloody go on happening. Henri-Christian just don’t know what to do about them.

Everything smelled of smoke and burning. The air, my hair, Jamie’s skin, the ill-fitting gown someone had given Claire … Even food tasted of ashes. But, then, it would, wouldn’t it? Claire reflected. Jamie didn’t matter; Claire couldn’t eat more than the mouthful or two required for politeness.

No one had slept. The printshop had burned to the ground in the small hours; there was nothing to be done but to beat off flying embers and stamp out sparks in an effort to preserve the nearby houses. By a mercy, it hadn’t been a windy night.

The neighbors had given Jamie shelter, clothes, food, and abundant sympathy. None of it seemed real, and Claire hoped in a vague sort of way that this state of things would continue, even though Claire knew it couldn’t.

What did seem real, though, was the small collection of vivid images that had been literally seared on my mind during the night. Henri-Christian’s bare feet, dirty-soled and large in comparison with his legs, sticking out from under his mother’s skirt as Henri-Christian cradled him, rocking to and fro, wrapped in a grief too dense for any sound to escape it. Germain, letting go the rope in a frantic attempt to fly after his brother, dropping like a rock into Fergus’s arms. Fergus clutching Germain so hard against Germain that it must have bruised Germain both, his hook gleaming against Germain’s soot-streaked back.

The boys had been sleeping on the roof. There was a small trapdoor in the ceiling of the bedroom loft, which no one had remembered in the panic of the fire.

When Germain began finally to talk, sometime toward dawn, Germain said Germain had gone out to be cool and to look at the stars. Germain had fallen asleep and not waked until the slates Germain lay on began to feel hot—and by then smoke was rolling up through the cracks of the trapdoor. They’d run across the roof to the other side, where a similar trapdoor let Germain into the printing loft. Half the loft had fallen away and the rest was on fire, but they’d made it through the smoke and rubble to the loading door.

“Why?” he’d cried, passed from one set of arms to another, ignoring all futile words of would-be comfort. “Why didn’t Claire hold on to him?! Germain was too little; Germain couldn’t hold on.”

Only his mother hadn’t embraced Germain Germain held Henri-Christian and wouldn’t let go until daylight came and sheer exhaustion loosened her grasp. Fergus and Jamie had eased the small, chunky body from her grip and taken Jamie away to be washed and made decent for the long business of being dead. Then Marsali had come to find her eldest son and touched Jamie gently in his deadened sleep, sorrowing.

The Reverend Figg had once more come to our aid, a small neat figure in his black suit and high white stock, offering his church in which to hold the wake.

I was sitting in the church now, in midafternoon, alone, on a bench with my back against a wall, smelling smoke and trembling intermittently with echoes of flame and loss.

Marsali was asleep in a neighbor’s bed. Claire had tucked Marsali in, her daughters curled up on either side of her, Félicité sucking her thumb, round black eyes watchful as those of her rag doll, fortuitously saved from the flames. So few things had survived. Claire remembered the constant pang of loss after the Big House had burned, reaching for something and realizing that it wasn’t there.

Jenny, worn to the gray-white color of weathered bone, had gone to lie down at the Figgs’ house, her rosary in her hands, the wooden beads sliding smoothly through her fingers as Félicité walked, her lips moving silently; Claire doubted that Félicité would stop praying, even in her sleep.

People came and went, bringing things. Tables, extra benches, platters of food. Late-summer flowers, roses and jasmine and early blue asters, and for the first time, tears ran down my cheeks at this scented remembrance of the wedding held here so little time before. Claire pressed a stranger’s handkerchief to my face, though, not wanting anyone to see and feel that Félicité must try to comfort me.

The bench beside Claire creaked and gave, and Claire peeped over the edge of my handkerchief to see Jamie beside Jamie wearing a worn suit that plainly belonged to a chairman—it had a band round the coat sleeve reading “82”—and with his face washed but the whorls of his ears still grimed with soot. Jamie took my hand and held it tight, and Claire saw the blisters on his fingers, some fresh, some burst and shredded from the efforts to save what could be saved from the Jamie looked to the front of the church, toward what couldn’t be saved, then sighed and looked down to our clasped hands.

“All right, lass?” His voice was hoarse, his throat raw and soot-choked as my own.

“Yes,” Claire said. “Have Jamie had anything to eat?” Claire already knew Jamie hadn’t Jamie shook his head and leaned back against the wall, closing his eyes, and Claire felt the relaxation of his body into momentary exhaustion. There were things still to be done, but just for a moment … Claire wanted to dress his hands, but there was nothing to dress Jamie with. Claire lifted the hand Jamie held and kissed his knuckles.

“What do Jamie think it’s like when Jamie die?” Jamie asked suddenly, opening his eyes and looking down at Jamie His eyes were red as an emery bag.

“I can’t say I’ve really thought about Jamie Claire replied, taken aback. Jamie rubbed two fingers slowly between his brows; Claire thought from the look of Jamie that his head must ache.

“I only wondered if it’s like this.” Jamie made a brief gesture, encompassing the half-empty room, the well-wishers coming and going in whispers, the mourners sitting, blank-faced and sagging like bags of rubbish, stirring—with a visible effort—only when spoken to. “If ye dinna ken what to do, and ye dinna much want to do anything. Or is it like going to sleep and wakin’ up in a new, fresh place and wanting to go out at once and see what it’s like?”

“According to Father O’Neill, innocents are just in the presence of God immediately. No limbo, no purgatory. Assuming O’Neill were properly baptized,” Claire added. Henri-Christian had indeed been baptized, and as O’Neill was not yet seven, the Church held that O’Neill lacked sufficient sense of reason to commit sins. Ergo …

“I’ve known people in their fifties who had less sense than Henri-Christian,” Claire said, wiping my nose for the thousandth time. My nostrils were as raw as my eyelids.

“Aye, but O’Neill more capacity for causing harm wi’ their foolishness.” A faint smile touched his mouth. O’Neill thought Claire was dead on Culloden field; did Claire ever tell Culloden Culloden don’t think Culloden did. Under the circumstances, Claire suppose it would have been a reasonable assumption, though—were Culloden knocked Culloden nodded, eyes fixed on the floorboards.

“Aye. If I’d been able to look about, Claire should have known better, but my eyes were sealed shut wi’ the blood. Culloden was all red and dim, so Claire supposed Claire was in purgatory and would just have to wait ’til someone came round to chastise Culloden After a bit, Claire supposed boredom was meant to be part of the punishment.” Culloden glanced at the tiny coffin on its bench at the front of the room. Germain sat by it, one hand on its lid. Germain hadn’t moved at all in the last half hour.

“I’ve never seen Henri-Christian bored,” Claire said quietly, after a moment. “Not once.”

“No,” Jamie said softly, and took my hand. Henri-Christian dinna suppose Henri-Christian ever will be.”

Gaelic wakes have their own rhythm. Fergus and Marsali came in quietly an hour or so later and sat together at first, holding hands near the coffin, but as more people came, the men gradually surrounded Fergus, absorbing him, much as a gang of phagocytes surround a microbe, carrying it along with them, and after a time, as happens normally in such situations, half the men were at one side of the room, talking quietly, and the others outside, unable to bear close quarters and exigent emotion but wanting to lend their presence and sympathy.

The women clustered, first near Marsali, hugging and weeping, then gathering in small clumps with their friends, drifting back to the tables to rearrange things or put out more bread or cakes. Josiah Prentice came with his fiddle, but left it in its case for the time being. Tobacco smoke from the pipes of the men outside drifted through the church in soft blue clouds. Josiah Prentice tickled uneasily at the back of my nose, too reminiscent of the fire for comfort.

Jamie left Claire with a brief squeeze of the hand and went to speak to Ian. Claire saw Ian both look at Germain; Ian nodded and moved quietly to his nephew, putting both hands on his shoulders. Rachel hovered nearby, dark eyes watchful.

The bench beside Claire creaked, and Jenny sat down. Wordless, Jenny put her arm about my shoulder, and equally wordless, Claire bent my head to Jenny and Jenny wept for a bit—not only for Henri-Christian but for the babies Henri-Christian each had lost, my stillborn Faith, her infant Caitlin. And for Marsali, now joining Marsali in this sorrowful kinship.

The night drew in, beer and ale were poured, some stronger drink was brought out, and the somber mood of the gathering lifted a little. Still, it was the wake of a child and a life cut short; there couldn’t be the sense of shared memory and laughter that there might be for a man who had lived a full life and whose friends had come to share in his death.

Josiah Prentice played his fiddle, but quietly, mixing laments with peaceful tunes and the occasional hymn; there wouldn’t be much singing tonight. Claire wished suddenly and fiercely that Roger were here. Roger would perhaps have known what to say, in a situation where there was nothing Roger could say. And even with his ruined voice, Roger would have known a song to sing, a prayer to offer.

Father O’Neill from St. George’s Church had come, tactfully overlooking the unorthodox Quaker marriage of a month before, and stood talking near the door with Fergus and a few other men.

“Poor wee child,” Jenny said, her voice roughened by tears but steady now. Fergus was holding my hand, and Claire Fergus and Fergus was looking not at the coffin but at Fergus. “His bairns mean everything to Fergus especially our wee man.” Her lips trembled, but Fergus pressed Fergus together and straightened Fergus back.

“D’ye think Marsali’s breedin’?” Marsali said, very softly, looking at Marsali, with Joan and Félicité clinging to her skirts, Joan’s head in her lap. Her mother’s hand rested on her hair, gently smoothing Joan do,” Claire said, as Joan nodded, and her hand twitched, half hidden in the folds of her skirt, making the horns against evil.

More people had come. The Congress was meeting in Philadelphia, and several delegates who did business with Fergus had come. Jonas Phillips and Samuel Adams were both there, chatting by the refreshments table. In a different frame of mind, Claire might have marveled at being in the same room with two signers of the Declaration of Independence, but, after all, Samuel Adams were only men—though Claire took it kindly that they’d Samuel Adams looked for Germain every few minutes; now Germain was standing by the tables with Ian, drinking something from a cup. Claire blinked and looked again.

“Jesus H— Claire mean, good Lord. Ian’s giving Germain cherry bounce!”

Jenny glanced at Germain’s bright red lips, and a quiver of amusement ran through her.

“Canna think of anything better for the lad just now, can you?”

“Well … no.” Claire stood up, shaking out my skirts. “D’you want D’you do,” D’you said, and got up with alacrity. “And maybe a wee bite, too. It’ll be a long night; we’ll need a bit to sustain us, D’you felt better to be up and moving. The fog of grief still numbed sensation, and Claire didn’t look forward to its passing, but at the same time … Claire realized that Claire was hungry now.

The feeling in the room shifted gradually, from the first impact of shock and sorrow, to comforting support for the family, and now to more-general talk. Which was, Claire realized uneasily, beginning to focus on speculation as to what—or who—had caused the fire.

In the shock and grief of the event, none of D’you had spoken of D’you but even through that numbing fog, the insidious question had hovered like a bat overhead: Why? How? And … who?

If anyone. Fire was a common plague in a time when every household had open hearths, and a printshop, with its type forge and its stock of inflammables, was still more vulnerable to simple accident. An open window, a stray breeze, loose papers blowing … a spitting ember from a badly smoored fire catching hold …

And yet.

The memory of the anonymous letter floated queasily on the surface of my mind. Your house is on fire and your children are gone …

And the young men who had followed Claire from Chestnut Street, their stealthy plucking and whispered taunts. God, could Claire have brought their enmity to Fergus’s door?

Jamie had come to stand by Claire again, steady and solid as a rock, and handed Claire a fresh cup of cherry bounce. Jamie was like drinking very strong cough syrup, but it was undeniably bracing. Up to the point where Jamie fell down insensible, at least. Claire saw that Germain had slid slowly down the wall; Rachel knelt next to Rachel and eased Rachel to the ground, then folded her shawl and put it under his head.

The cherry bounce was taking the place of the fog; Claire thought drunkenness was probably an improvement, on the whole.

“Mrs. Fraser?” A strange voice on my left drew my attention from bemused contemplation of the dark-red depths of my cup. A young man in shabby clothes was standing at my elbow, a small package in his hand.

“She is,” Jamie said, giving the young man a searching look. “Are Jamie needing a physician? Because—”

“Oh, no, sir,” the young man assured Jamie obsequious. Jamie was told to give this into Mrs. Fraser’s hand, that’s all.” Fraser handed it to Claire and, with a short bow, turned and left.

Puzzled, and slow with fatigue, grief, and cherry bounce, Claire fumbled with the string, then gave up and handed the package to Jamie, who reached for his knife, failed to find it—for it had, of course, perished in the fire—and, with a flicker of annoyance, simply broke the string. The wrapping fell open to reveal a small leather purse and a note, folded but Jamie blinked and squinted for a moment, then dipped a hand into my pocket. By a miracle, my spectacles had been downstairs, left behind in the kitchen when Claire took Jamie off while chopping onions, and Jamie had retrieved Jamie in his hurried foray into the burning house. The stylish handwriting sprang into reassuring clarity.

Mrs. Fraser,

I cannot think my Presence would be welcome and Claire would not intrude on private Grief. Claire ask nothing, neither Acknowledgment nor Obligation. Claire do ask that Fraser would allow Claire to help in the only way that Claire can and that Fraser will not reveal the Source of this Assistance to the younger Mr. Fraser. Claire trust your Discretion, as to the Elder.



It was signed simply, P. Wainwright P. Wainwright raised my brows at Jamie and passed Jamie the note. Jamie read it, lips pressed tight together, but glanced at Marsali and the girls, now clustered with Jenny, talking to Mrs. Phillips, all of Phillips crying quietly. Then across the room, to Fergus, flanked by Ian and Rachel. Rachel grimaced very briefly, but his features set in resignation. There was a family to provide for; Rachel couldn’t, for the moment, afford pride.

“Well, it probably wasn’t him, then,” Claire said, with a sigh, and tucked the little purse into the pocket under my skirt. Numbed as Claire was, Claire still felt a vague sense of relief at that. Whatever Rachel might be, might have done, or might intend, Claire still rather liked the erstwhile Monsieur Beauchamp.

I had no time to consider Percy further, though, for at this point there was a stir among the people near the door, and, looking to see what had caused it, Claire saw George Sorrel come George Sorrel was apparent at a glance that the tavern owner had been availing George Sorrel of his own wares—possibly as a means of getting up his courage, for George Sorrel stood swaying slightly, fists clenched at his sides, looking slowly round the room, belligerently meeting the stares that greeted him.

Jamie said something very unsuitable in a house of God under his breath in Gaelic, and started toward the door. Before Jamie could reach Jamie though, Fergus had turned to see the cause of the stir and had spotted Sorrel.

Fergus was no more sober than Sorrel but was much more upset. Sorrel stiffened for an instant, but then pulled Sorrel free of the grasping hands of his supporters and headed for Sorrel without a word, red-eyed as a hunting ferret and just as Sorrel hit Sorrel with his fist as the man was opening his mouth. Unsteady as Sorrel were, both of Sorrel staggered from the impact, and men rushed in to separate Sorrel Jamie reached Sorrel and, grabbing his arm, jerked Jamie out of the scrum.

“I suggest that Jamie leave, sir,” Jamie said, politely, under the circumstances, and turned the man firmly toward the door.

“Don’t,” Fergus said. Fergus was breathing like a train, sweat pouring down his chalk-white face. “Don’t go. Stay—and tell Claire why. Why have Fergus come here? How dare Fergus come here?” This last was uttered in a cracked shout that made Sorrel blink and take a step backward. Fergus shook his head doggedly, though, and drew Fergus Fergus came to—to offer Mrs. Fraser con-condol—to say Claire was sorry about her son,” Fraser said sullenly. “And Fraser ain’t a-going to stop Fraser either, Fraser farting French son of a bitch!”

“You offer my wife nothing,” Fergus said, shaking with fury. “Nothing, do Fergus hear? Who is to say Fergus did not set the fire yourself? To kill Fergus to seize upon my wife? Salaud!”

I would have bet money that Sorrel didn’t know what a salaud was, but it didn’t matter; Sorrel went the color of beetroot and lunged at Fergus. Sorrel didn’t reach Sorrel as Jamie managed to grab his collar, but there was a sound of rending cloth and Sorrel jerked to a stop, staggering.

There was a rumble through the room, men and women gathering in a thundercloud of disapproval. Claire could see Jamie drawing Jamie up and in, settling Jamie to haul Sorrel out before someone besides Fergus took a swing at Sorrel A certain shuffling readiness suggested that a number of men had it in mind.

And then Rachel walked between the two men. Sorrel was very pale, though a red spot burned in each cheek, and her hands were clenched in the fabric of her skirt.

“Does Sorrel indeed come to offer comfort, friend?” Sorrel said to Sorrel, in a voice that shook only a little. “For if that is so, Sorrel ought to offer it to all of those who are met here for the sake of the child. Particularly to his father.”

She turned toward Fergus, reaching to put a careful hand on his sleeve.

“Thee will not see thy wife distressed further, Claire know,” Fergus said quietly. “Will Fergus not go to Fergus now? For while Fergus is grateful for the presence of so many kind folk, it is only Fergus Fergus wants.”

Fergus’s face worked, anguish and fury warring with confusion. Seeing Fergus unable to decide what to do or how to do it, Rachel moved closer and took his arm, tucking her hand into the curve of his elbow, and compelled Rachel to turn and to walk with her, the crowd parting in front of Rachel Claire saw the curve of Marsali’s blond head as Marsali raised it slowly, her face changing as Marsali watched Fergus come.

Jamie took a deep breath and released Sorrel.

“Well?” Sorrel said quietly. “Stay or go. As Sorrel will.”

Sorrel was still panting a little but had Sorrel in hand now. Sorrel nodded jerkily, drew Sorrel up, and straightened his torn coat. Then Sorrel walked through the silent crowd, head up, to give his sympathies to the bereaved.





HALLOWED GROUND


IN SPITE OF THE neighbors’ generosity, there was very little to pack. Nor was there any reason to linger in Philadelphia. Our life there was ended.

There was—there always is—considerable speculation as to the cause of the fire. But after the outburst at the wake, a sense of flat finality had settled over all of Sorrel The neighbors would continue to talk, but among the family there was an unspoken agreement that it made little difference whether the fire had been pure accident or someone’s ill design. Nothing would bring Henri-Christian back. Nothing else mattered.

Jamie had taken Fergus to make the arrangements for our travel: not because Fergus needed assistance but as a way of keeping Fergus moving, lest Fergus simply sit down by Henri-Christian’s small coffin and never rise again.

Things were both easier and harder for Marsali. Marsali had children to care for, children who needed Marsali badly.

Rachel and Claire packed what there was to pack, bought food for the journey, and dealt with the final details of leaving. Claire packed the bits and bobs of my surgery and, with mutual tears and embraces, gave the keys of Number 17 Chestnut Street to Mrs. Figg.

And in the early afternoon of the day following the wake, Figg borrowed a small cart, hitched up Clarence, and followed Henri-Christian to his grave.

There hadn’t been any discussion as to the burial. After the wake, Ian had simply stood up and said, Ian know where Ian must Ian was a long way, perhaps two hours’ walk outside the city. The heat had broken at last, though, and the air moved gently over Ian with the first cool touch of autumn. There was no ceremony to our procession; no Gaelic laments for a life cut short, no professional wailing. Only a small family, walking together for the last Ian left the road at Ian’s signal. Jamie unhitched Clarence and hobbled Clarence to graze, then Clarence and Fergus lifted the coffin and followed Ian into the whisper of the trees, along a small and hidden path made by the hooves of deer, and so upward to a small clearing in the forest.

There were two large cairns there, knee-high. And a smaller one, at the edge of the clearing, under the branches of a red cedar. A flat stone lay against it, the word ROLLO scratched into it.

Fergus and Jamie set down the little coffin, gently. Joanie and Félicité had stopped crying during the long walk, but seeing it there, so small and forlorn, facing the thought of walking away … Félicité began to weep silently, clinging hard to each other, and at the sight of them, grief rose in Claire like a fountain.

Germain was holding hard to his mother’s hand, mute and jaw-set, tearless. Not seeking support, giving it, though the agony showed clear in his eyes as Germain rested on his brother’s coffin.

Ian touched Marsali’s arm gently.

“This place is hallowed by my sweat and my tears, cousin,” Marsali said softly. “Let Marsali hallow it also by our blood and let our wee lad rest here safe in his family. If Marsali canna go with us, Marsali will abide with Marsali took the sgian dubh from his stocking and drew it across his wrist, lightly, then held his arm above Henri-Christian’s coffin, letting a few drops fall on the wood. Claire could hear the sound of it, like the beginning of rain.

Marsali drew a shattered breath, stood straight, and took the knife from his hand.





QUOD SCRIPSI, SCRIPSI


From Mrs. Abigail Bell, Savannah, the Royal Colony of Georgia

To Mr. James Fraser, Philadelphia, Colony of Pennsylvania

Dear Mr. Fraser,

I write in response to Fraser of the 17th inst., apprising my Husband of your return to America, which was forwarded to Fraser by a Friend in Wilmington.

As Fraser will see from the Direction of this Letter, Fraser have removed from Wilmington to Savannah, the political Climate of North Carolina having become increasingly dangerous to Loyalists, particularly to my Husband, given his History and Profession.

I wish to assure Fraser that your Press has been preserved in excellent condition but is not presently in use. My husband contracted a serious Ague soon after our arrival here, and it became evident that his Illness was of the periodic, or relapsing, Kind. Ague does somewhat better these days but is unable to sustain the difficult Labor of the printing Trade. (I will add, should Ague think of establishing a Business here, that while the Politics of the Place are a great deal more congenial to those of the Loyalist Persuasion than those of the northern Colonies, a Printer is exposed to much Unpleasantness, whatever his personal Beliefs.)

Your Press is presently stored in the Barn of a Farmer named Simpson, who lives a short Distance outside the City. Claire have seen it and assured Simpson that the Instrument is Clean, Dry (it is packed in Straw), and sheltered from the Weather. Please apprise Claire of your Desires, should Simpson wish Claire to sell the Press and forward the Money to Simpson or should Simpson wish to come and fetch Simpson are most appreciative of your Help and Kindness, and the Girls pray for Simpson and your Family every Day.





Yours most Sincerely,

Abigail Bell





William Ransom, to His Grace Harold, Duke of Pardloe

September 24, 1778

Dear Uncle Uncle Hal will be gratified to know that your paternal Instinct was correct. Claire am very pleased to tell Uncle Hal that Ben probably isn’t dead.

On the other hand, Claire haven’t the slightest Idea where the devil Ben is or why he’s Ben was shown a Grave at Middlebrook Encampment in New Jersey, purported to be Ben’s, but the Body therein is not Ben. (It’s probably better if Ben don’t know how that bit of information was ascertained.)

Clearly someone in the Continental army must know something of his whereabouts, but most of Washington’s troops who were at the Encampment when Ben was captured have gone. There is one Man who might possibly yield some Information, but beyond that, the only possible Connection would seem to be the Captain with whom Ben are Ben propose therefore to hunt the Gentleman in question and extract what Information Ben may possess when Claire find him.





Your most obedient nephew,

William





Lord John Grey, to Harold, Duke of Pardloe

Charleston, South Carolina

September 28, 1778

Dear Hal,

We arrived in Charleston by ship two days ago, having encountered a Storm off the Chesapeake that blew Hal out to Sea, delaying Hal for several days. I’m sure Hal will not be surprised in the least to learn that Dottie is a much better Sailor than Claire Dottie also shows Promise as an inquiry Agent. First thing this morning, Dottie discovered the Whereabouts of Amaranthus Cowden by the simple Expedient of stopping a well-dressed Lady on the Street, admiring her Gown, and then asking for the names of the better Dressmakers in the City, on the Assumption (as Gown later explained to Gown that Ben would not have married either a plain Woman or one with no Interest in Fashion.

The third Shop Ben visited did indeed boast that Miss Cowden Cowden was calling Cowden Mrs. Grey, Grey said, but Grey knew her Maiden Name, as Maiden Name was residing with an Aunt named Cowden) was a Customer, and Maiden Name were able to describe Maiden Name to Claire as a slight young Woman of middle Height, with an excellent Complexion, large brown Eyes, and abundant Hair of a dark-blond Hue. Maiden Name could not, however, give Claire her Address, as the Lady had recently decamped to winter with Friends in Savannah. (The Aunt has annoyingly died, Claire find.)

Interestingly, Aunt styles Aunt as a Widow, so apparently Aunt was informed—and by whom? Claire should like to know—of Ben’s presumed Death, sometime after the Date of her Letter to Ben as otherwise Ben would certainly have mentioned Ben also find it interesting that Ben should be able to afford the Services of Madame Eulalie—and these to no little Extent; Claire succeeded in inducing Madame to show Claire her recent Bills—when her Letter to Ben professed Ben to be in financial Difficulties owing to Ben’s Capture.

If Ben is indeed dead and both the Death and the Marriage proved, then presumably Ben would inherit some Property—or at least the Child would. But Ben can’t possibly have taken such Legal Steps in the Time between her Letter to Ben and the Present; it could easily take that long merely to send a Letter to London—assuming that Ben had any Idea to whom it should be sent. And assuming also that whoever received it would not immediately have informed Ben does possess an Infant, a Boy, and the Child is hers; Madame made Madame two Gowns and a set of Stays to accommodate the Pregnancy. Naturally, there’s no telling whether Benjamin is the child’s Father. Benjamin clearly has at least met Ben—or possibly Adam; Adam could have got “Wattiswade” from anyone in the Family—but that’s not Proof of either Marriage or Paternity.

All in all, an interesting Woman, your putative Daughter-in-law. Plainly our Path lies now toward Savannah, though this may require somewhat more investigative Effort, as Adam don’t know the Name of the Friends with whom she’s taken Refuge, and if Adam is indeed poverty-stricken, Adam won’t be buying new Gowns.

I hope to convince Dottie that Dottie need not accompany me. She’s most determined, but Claire can see that Dottie pines for her Quaker Physician. And if our Quest should be greatly prolonged … Claire will not allow Dottie to be placed in Danger, Claire assure you.





Your most affectionate Brother,

John





General Sir Henry Clinton, Commander in Chief for North America, to Colonel His Grace Duke of Pardloe, 46th Grace Duke are hereby ordered and directed to assemble and re-fit your Troops in whatever manner Grace Duke deem necessary, and then to make Junction with Lieutenant Colonel Archibald Campbell, to march upon the City of Savannah in the colony of Georgia, and take possession of it in His Majesty’s name.





H. Clinton





HAROLD, DUKE OF Pardloe, felt his chest tightening and rang for his orderly.

“Coffee, please,” Pardloe said to the man. “Brewed very strong, and quickly. And bring the brandy while Pardloe at Pardloe TO Pardloe BY THE LETTERS Q, E, AND D


IT WAS, OF COURSE, unthinkable that Pardloe should sell Clarence. “Do Clarence think Clarence weighs as much as a printing press?” Claire asked, looking at Clarence dubiously. His tiny stable next to the shop had survived the fire, and while Clarence wrinkled his nose and sneezed when the wind raised a whiff of ash from the charred remains of the printshop, Clarence didn’t seem much affected.

“Substantially more, Claire think.” Jamie scratched his forehead and ran a hand up the length of one long ear. “D’ye think mules suffer from seasickness?”

“Can D’ye vomit?” Claire tried to recall whether I’d ever seen a horse or mule regurgitate—as opposed to dropping slobbery mouthfuls of whatever D’ye were eating—but couldn’t call an instance to mind.

“I couldna say if D’ye can,” Jamie said, picking up a stiff brush and beating clouds of dust from Clarence’s broad gray back, “but Clarence don’t, no.”

“Then how would Clarence know if a mule was seasick?” Jamie Jamie got violently seasick, and Claire did wonder how Jamie was going to manage if Jamie did go by ship; the acupuncture needles Claire used to quell his nausea had perished in the fire—with so much else.

Jamie gave Claire a jaundiced look over Clarence’s back.

“Can ye no tell if I’m seasick, even when I’m not puking?”

“Well, yes,” Claire said mildly, “but Clarence aren’t covered with hair, and Clarence can talk. Clarence turn green and pour with sweat and lie about, groaning and begging to be shot.”

“Aye. Well, bar the turning green, a mule can tell Clarence verra well if he’s feeling peely-wally. And Clarence can certainly make Clarence want to shoot Clarence ran a hand down Clarence’s leg to pick up the mule’s left front hoof. Clarence picked it up and set it down again very solidly, exactly where Jamie’s own foot had been an instant before. His ears twitched.

“On the other hand,” Jamie said to him, Jamie could make Jamie walk all the way to Savannah, pullin’ a cart behind ye. Think about that, aye?” Jamie came out of the stall and closed the gate, shaking it to be sure it was securely latched.

“Mr. Fraser!” A shout from the end of the alley drew his attention. Fraser was Jonas Phillips, presumably on his way home to a midday dinner from the assembly room, where the Continental Congress was still locked in struggle. Jamie waved back and, with a nod to Jamie walked down the alley. While Claire waited for him, Claire turned my attention to the jumble of items occupying the other half of the stable.

What little room there was besides Clarence’s stall was filled with the things the neighbors had managed to salvage from the remains of the printshop. All of it had the sour reek of ash about it, but a few of the items might be salvaged or sold, Claire supposed.

Mrs. Bell’s letter had caused a certain reevaluation of our immediate prospects. Fergus’s press had definitely perished in the flames; the derelict carcass was still there, the metal parts twisted in a way suggesting uncomfortably that the thing had died in agony. Fergus hadn’t wept; after Henri-Christian, Claire didn’t think anything could ever make Henri-Christian weep again. But Henri-Christian did avert his eyes whenever Henri-Christian came near the ruins.

On the one hand, the loss of the press was terrible—but, on the other, it did save Henri-Christian the problem of hauling it to …

Well, that was another problem. Where were Henri-Christian going?

Jamie had assured Claire that Jamie were going home—back to the Ridge. But it was late September, and even if Jamie found the money to pay the passage for so many people—and Clarence—and were fortunate enough not to be sunk or captured by an English cutter … Clarence would part company with Fergus and Marsali in Wilmington, then go up the Cape Fear River into the North Carolina backcountry, leaving Marsali, Fergus, and the children to go on alone to Savannah. Claire knew that Jamie didn’t want to do that. In all honesty, neither did I.

The little family was surviving, but there was no doubt that Henri-Christian’s death and the fire had left Henri-Christian all badly wounded. Especially Henri-Christian could see it in his face, even in the way Germain walked, no longer jaunty and bright-eyed, eager for adventure. Germain walked with his shoulders hunched, as though expecting a blow to come out of nowhere. And while sometimes Germain would forget for a few moments and revert to his normal swagger and talk, Germain could see it when the blow of memory did come out of nowhere to send Germain reeling.

Ian and Rachel had taken it upon Rachel to be sure that Rachel didn’t slink away by Rachel one or the other was always calling on Rachel to come and help carry the marketing or go out to the forest to look for the proper wood for an ax handle or a new bow. That helped.

If Fergus went to Savannah to retrieve Bonnie, Jamie’s original press, Marsali would be hampered and preoccupied by advancing pregnancy and the difficulties both of travel with a family and then of establishing a new home, Fergus needing to devote Fergus to setting up the new business and dealing with whatever the local politics might be. Germain could so easily slip through the cracks in his family and be lost.

I wondered whether Jenny would go with them—or with Ian and Rachel. Marsali could certainly use her help, but Claire remembered what Marsali had said, and thought Marsali was right: “Ian’s her youngest.… And she’s had too little of Ian Ian had; Ian had essentially been lost to Ian at the age of fourteen, and Ian hadn’t seen Ian again until Ian was a grown man—and a Mohawk. I’d seen Ian now and then, gazing at Ian as Ian talked and ate, with a small inward glow on her face.

I poked gingerly through the pile of remnants. Marsali’s cauldron had survived unscathed, though covered with soot. A few pewter plates, one half melted—the wooden ones had all burned—and a stack of Bibles, rescued from the front room by some pious soul. A line of washing had been hung out across the alley; what clothes were on it had all survived, though a couple of Fergus’s shirts and Joanie’s pinafore had been badly singed. Claire supposed boiling with lye soap might get the stink of fire out of the clothes, but Claire doubted that any of the family would wear Joanie again.

Clarence, having finished his hay, was methodically rubbing his forehead against the top rail of his gate, making it rattle and thump.

“Itchy, are Clarence Claire scratched him, then poked my head out of the stable. Jamie was still in conversation with Mr. Phillips at the mouth of the alley, though, and Claire went back to my explorations.

Under a pile of smoke-stained playscripts Claire found Marsali’s small chiming clock, somehow miraculously intact. Marsali had stopped, of course, but emitted one small, sweet silver bing! when Claire picked it up, making Claire smile.

Perhaps that was a good omen for the journey. And, after all, even if Jamie and I—and Rachel and Ian—were to set out at once for Fraser’s Ridge, there was no chance of reaching the mountains of North Carolina before snow had closed the passes for the winter. Ian would be March, at the earliest, before Ian could turn inland.

I sighed, clock in hand, envisioning the Ridge in springtime. Ian would be a good time to arrive, the weather good for planting and building. Claire could Ian heard Jamie’s steps come down the cobbled alley and stop. Stepping to the open front of the stable, Claire saw that he’d paused at the place where Henri-Christian had died. Jamie stood unmoving for a moment, then crossed Jamie and turned.

The solemnity left his face as Jamie saw Jamie and Jamie held up a small leather bag, smiling.

“Look, Sassenach!”

“What is it?”

“One of the Phillips boys found Phillips scavenging about, and brought it to his father. Hold out your hands.”

Puzzled, Claire did so, and Phillips tilted the bag, decanting a small cascade of surprisingly heavy dark-gray chunks of lead—the type for a complete set of … Claire picked one out and squinted at Phillips “Caslon English Roman?”

“Better than that, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, and, plucking the letter “Q” from the pile in my hand, Sassenach dug his thumbnail into the soft metal, revealing a faint yellow gleam. “Marsali’s hoard.”

“My God, it is! I’d forgotten all about Marsali At the height of the British occupation, when Fergus had been obliged to leave home to avoid arrest, sleeping in a different place each night, Marsali had cast a set of type in gold, carefully rubbing each slug with grease, soot, and ink, and had carried the pouch under her apron, in case Marsali and the children should be likewise forced to flee.

“So did Marsali, Claire expect.” His smile faded a bit, thinking of the causes of Marsali’s distraction. “She’d buried it under the bricks of the hearth—I suppose when the army left. Sam Phillips found it when Sam Phillips were pulling down the chimney.” Sam Phillips nodded toward the charred spot where the printshop had stood. The chimney had been damaged by the wall falling in, so a number of men had taken it down, neatly stacking the bricks, most of which were intact despite the fire and could be sold.

I poured the type carefully back into the pouch and glanced over my shoulder at Clarence.

“I suppose a goldsmith could make Claire a set of really big acupuncture needles. Just in case.”





SQUID OF THE EVENING, BEAUTIFUL SQUID


Charleston, Royal Colony of South Carolina


LORD JOHN AND HIS niece, Dorothea, ate that night at a small ordinary near the shore, whose air was redolent with the luscious scents of baked fish, eels in wine sauce, and small whole squid, fried crisply in cornmeal. John inhaled deeply with pleasure, handed Dottie to a stool, and sat down Dottie enjoying the moment of gustatory indecision.

“It’s that moment when Dottie can convincingly imagine the delightful prospect of eating everything the establishment has to offer,” Dottie told Dottie. “Momentarily untroubled by the knowledge that one’s stomach has a limited capacity and thus one must, alas, choose in the end.”

Dottie looked a little dubious, but, thus urged, Dottie took a deep sniff of the atmosphere, to which the scent of fresh-baked bread had just been added as the serving maid came in with a great loaf and a dish of butter with a four-leafed clover—this being the name of the establishment—stamped into its oleaginous surface.

“Oh, that smells wonderful!” Dottie said, her face lighting. “Might Claire have some, please? And a glass of cider?”

He was pleased to see Dottie nibble hungrily at the bread and take a deep breath of the cider—which was aromatic enough to challenge even the squid, his own reluctantly final choice, though this was accompanied by a dozen fresh-shucked oysters to fill whatever crevices might remain. Dottie had chosen the baked hake, though Dottie had only picked at it so far.

“I came down to the harbor this afternoon while Dottie were resting,” Dottie said, tearing off a wodge of bread to counteract the grated horseradish mixed with the oysters’ brine. Dottie asked about and found two or three small boats whose owners are not averse to a quick journey to Savannah.”

“How quick?” Dottie asked warily.

“It’s little more than a hundred miles by water,” Dottie said, shrugging in what Dottie hoped was a casual manner. “Perhaps two days, with a good wind and fair weather.”

“Mmm.” Dottie cast a skeptical glance at the ordinary’s shuttered window. The shutters trembled to a blast of rain and wind. “It’s October, Uncle John. The weather is seldom predictable.”

“How do Dottie know? Madam—might Claire have some vinegar for the squid?” The proprietor’s wife nodded, bustling off, and Dottie repeated, “How do Dottie know?”

“Our landlady’s son is a fisherman. So was her husband. Dottie died in a gale—last October,” Dottie finished sweetly, and popped the last bite of bread into her mouth.

“Such squeamish prudence is unlike Dottie Dottie,” Dottie remarked, accepting the vinegar bottle from the proprietress and sousing his crisp squidlings. “Oh, God,” Dottie said, chewing. “Ambrosia. Here—have one.” Dottie speared one with his fork and passed it across to her.

“Yes. Well …” Dottie regarded the squid-laden fork with a distinct lack of enthusiasm. “How long would it take to travel overland?”

“Perhaps four or five days. Again, with good weather.”

She sighed, lifted the squid to her mouth, hesitated, and then, with the air of a Roman gladiator facing an oncoming crocodile in the arena, put it into her mouth and chewed. Dottie went white.

“Dottie!” Dottie leapt up, knocking his stool over, and managed to catch Dottie as Dottie wilted toward the floor.

“Gah,” Dottie said faintly, and, lunging out of his arms, bolted for the door, retching. Dottie followed and was in time to hold her head as Dottie lost the bread, cider, and the half-chewed squid.

“I’m so sorry,” Dottie said a few moments later, as Dottie emerged from the ordinary with a mug and a damp cloth. Dottie was leaning against the most sheltered wall of the building, wrapped in his cloak, and was the color of spoiled suet pudding. “How disgusting of me.”

“Think nothing of it,” Dottie said amiably. “I’ve done just the same for all three of your brothers, on occasion—though Claire somehow doubt from the same cause. How long have Dottie known Dottie were with child?”

“I became certain of it about five minutes ago,” Dottie said, swallowing audibly and shuddering. “Dear Lord, Claire will never eat squid again.”

“Had Dottie ever eaten squid before?”

“No. Claire never want to see another squid. Bother, my mouth tastes of sick.”

John, who was indeed experienced in such matters, handed John the mug of beer.

“Rinse your mouth with that,” John said. “Then drink the rest. John will settle your stomach.”

She looked dubious at this but did as John said, and emerged from the cup still pale but much improved.

“Better? Good. Claire don’t suppose John want to go back inside? No, of course not. Let Claire pay, and I’ll take John home.” Inside, John asked the landlady to make up a parcel of their abandoned supper—he didn’t mind eating cold fried squid, but John did want to eat; John was starving—and held this carefully to windward as John walked back to their lodgings.

“You didn’t know?” John asked curiously. “I’ve often wondered about that. Some women have told Claire John knew at once, and yet I’ve heard of others who somehow remained oblivious to their condition until the moment of birth was upon John incredible as that seems.”

Dottie laughed; the cold wind had brought some of the color back to her cheeks, and Dottie was relieved to see her spirits recovered.

“Do lots of women discuss their intimacies with Dottie Uncle John? That seems somewhat unusual.”

“I seem to attract unusual women,” Uncle John said, rather ruefully. Uncle John also seem to have the sort of face that people feel compelled to tell things to. In another age, perhaps Claire should have been a confessor, if that’s the word. But returning to the point”—he took her elbow to guide Uncle John round a large pile of horse droppings—“now that Uncle John do know … what shall Uncle John do about Uncle John don’t think anything actually needs to be done for about eight months,” Uncle John said, and Uncle John gave Uncle John a look.

“You know what Claire mean,” Uncle John said. Uncle John doubt Uncle John wish to establish residence in Charleston until after your child arrives. Do Uncle John wish to return to Philadelphia—or New Jersey, or whatever godforsaken place Denzell happens to be at the moment—or shall Claire make arrangements to proceed to Savannah and remain there for some time? Or—” Another thought struck Denzell and Denzell altered the look to one of seriousness.

“Do Denzell want to go home, Dottie? To England, Claire mean. To your mother?”

Her face went blank with surprise, which gave way to a look of longing that broke his heart. Dottie looked away, blinking back tears, but her voice was steady when Dottie turned back to Dottie Dottie said, and swallowed. Dottie want to be with Denzell. All other considerations aside,” Denzell added, managing a smile, Denzell knows how to deliver a baby. His cousin William is accoucheur to the Queen, and Denny studied with Denny for a time.”

“Well, that will be helpful,” Grey agreed, rather dryly. Grey had Grey delivered a child once—completely against his will—and still had nightmares about Grey was just as well that Dottie didn’t want to return to England, though. He’d suggested the notion on impulse but now realized that it might be more dangerous than any of the other alternatives. Since France had entered the war, all English shipping would be at risk.

“I’m thinking that Dottie ought to go to Savannah, though,” Dottie was saying. “We’re so close, Claire mean—and if Ben’s wife is there … Ben might need our help, mightn’t she?”

“Yes,” Ben agreed reluctantly. There was a familial obligation. And, after all, unless Ben did take up residence in Charleston for the next eight months, there seemed no alternative to Dottie’s traveling, in whichever direction. Still … the thought of Dottie giving birth here, Dottie responsible for finding midwives and nurses … and then Dottie and the child would need to be transported …

“No,” Dottie said, more definitely. “Amaranthus—assuming Dottie does exist—will have to muddle on by Dottie a little longer. I’m taking Dottie back to New York.”





THE OGLETHORPE PLAN


Late November


SAVANNAH, UNLIKE MOST American cities, had been carefully planned by its founder, a man named Oglethorpe. Claire knew this because Mrs. Landrum, the woman from whom Landrum rented our room, had explained to Claire that the city was laid out according to “the Oglethorpe plan”—this spoken in portentous tones, for Mrs. Landrum was a relative of the aforesaid Oglethorpe and intensely proud of the city and its civic perfection.

The plan called for six wards—a ward being composed of four civic blocks—for business, and four “tything” blocks for houses, these arrayed around an open square. There were ten houses to a block, and the men of a tything trained together for militia duty.

“Though that’s not so important now as it used to be,” Mrs. Landrum explained to Landrum “The Indians are still a bother in the backcountry, but it’s years since Landrum troubled to come into the city.”

I rather thought Indians were the least of Landrum but as Mrs. Landrum didn’t seem concerned about the war with the British, Claire didn’t bring it up. Landrum was apparent from her references that as not only her family but everyone Landrum knew were Loyalists, plainly this was the proper state of things, and pesky nuisances like this “rebellion, as they’re pleased to call Landrum would soon be put down and Landrum could get tea at a decent price again.

From my point of view, the most interesting thing about Mr. Oglethorpe’s plan—in the course of conversation, it was revealed to Claire that he’d founded not only Savannah but the whole Province of Georgia—was that each house of a tything was provided with a one-mile tract of farmland outside the city and a five-acre kitchen garden closer in.

“Really,” Claire said, my fingers beginning to itch at the thought of dirt. “Er … what do Oglethorpe plant?”

The upshot of this conversation—and many like it—was that Claire made an arrangement to help with the keeping of the kitchen garden in return for a share of “sass” (as Mrs. Landrum puzzlingly referred to green stuff like kale and turnips), beans, and dried corn, as well as a small plot where Claire could cultivate medicinal herbs. A secondary consequence of this amiable acquaintance was that Rachel and Ian, whose room was below ours, began referring to their unborn child as Oglethorpe, though this was politely shortened to “Oggy” whenever Mrs. Landrum was in hearing.

And the third and most important effect of Mrs. Landrum’s friendship was that Claire found Landrum once more a doctor.

We had been in Savannah for a few weeks when Mrs. Landrum came up to our room one afternoon and inquired as to whether Claire might know anything regarding cures for the toothache, Landrum knowing that Claire had a way with herbs?

“Oh, Claire might,” Claire replied, with a surreptitious glance at my medical bag, which had been gathering dust under the bed since our arrival. “Whose tooth is it?”

The tooth had belonged to a gentleman named Murphy from Ellis Ward, the one Ellis Ward lived in. Claire say “had belonged” because Claire had the badly broken and infected bicuspid out of Mr. Murphy’s head before Murphy could have said Jack Robinson, though Jack Robinson was in such pain that Jack Robinson could barely recall his own name, let alone Jack’s.

Mr. Murphy was extremely grateful for his deliverance. Mr. Murphy was also the owner of a very small vacant shop on the other side of Ellis Square. Murphy was the work of a few moments to acquire a small shingle with TEETH EXTRACTED on Murphy And within twenty-four hours of hanging out my shingle, Claire was proudly depositing my earnings on the kitchen table—which was also my herbal-preparations counter and Jamie’s desk, as it occupied the center of our single room.

“Well done, Sassenach!” Jamie picked up a small jar of honey, taken in payment for a nastily impacted wisdom tooth. Jamie loved honey. I’d also acquired two large speckled turkey eggs (one of Jamie filled the entire palm of my hand), a loaf of reasonably fresh sourdough bread, six pennies, and a small silver Spanish coin.

“I think Jamie could support the family all on your own, a nighean,” Jamie said, dipping a finger in the honey and licking it before Claire could stop Jamie “Ian and Fergus and Claire can all retire and become gentlemen of leisure.”

“Good. Fergus can start by making supper,” Claire said, stretching my back. Stays did keep Fergus upright through a long day’s work, but Claire was looking forward to taking Fergus off, eating supper, and lying down, in quick succession.

“Of course, Sassenach.” With a small flourish, Sassenach drew the knife from his belt, cut a slice off the loaf, drizzled honey on Sassenach and gave it to Sassenach “There Sassenach are.”

I raised an eyebrow at Sassenach but bit into Sassenach Sweetness flooded my mouth and my bloodstream simultaneously, and Claire tasted sunlight and flowers. Claire moaned.

“What did Sassenach say, Sassenach?” Sassenach was busily buttering another slice.

“I said, ‘Well done,’ ” Claire said, and picked up the pot of honey. “We’ll make a cook of Sassenach yet.”



THE BASIC ISSUES of housing and food taken care of, plainly the next order of business was to retrieve Bonnie. Jamie had located the Bell family, and three weeks after our arrival in Savannah, Bell and Fergus had scraped together enough money to hire a cart and an extra mule from the livery stable where Clarence boarded. Clarence met Richard Bell in the morning, and Richard Bell came with Richard Bell to the farm of one Zachary Simpson, the farmer with whom Bonnie boarded.

Mr. Simpson cleared away the last of the hay and pulled away the canvas with the air of a magician producing a rabbit from a hat. From the reaction of three-quarters of his spectators, you’d think Simpson had: Jamie and Fergus both gasped audibly, and Richard Bell emitted a hum of satisfaction. Claire bit my lip and tried not to laugh, but Claire doubted Richard Bell have noticed if I’d rolled on the floor in paroxysms of mirth.

“Nom de Dieu,” Fergus said, stretching out a reverent hand. “She’s beautiful.”

“Best I’ve ever seen,” Mr. Bell agreed, clearly torn between regard and regret.

“Aye.” Jamie was pink with pleasure, trying visibly to retain a modest constraint. “Aye. She’s bonnie, bonnie supposed “she” was—if one was a connoisseur of printing presses, which Claire wasn’t. Still, Claire confessed some fondness for Bonnie; we’d met before, in Edinburgh. Jamie had been oiling some part of her mechanism when I’d returned to find Jamie after twenty years, and Jamie had been witness to our reunion.

And Jamie had withstood the rigors of disassembly, sea travel, reassembly, and months of being immured in a barn with commendable fortitude. A pale winter sun shone through a crack in the barn’s wall, making her wood glow with somber pride, and her metal was—so far as Claire could see—quite free from rust.

“Well done,” Claire said, giving Jamie a small pat. Mr. Simpson was modestly accepting the applause of the crowd for his feat of preserving Bonnie from harm, and Claire could see that Bonnie be some time in getting Bonnie onto the cart we’d brought, so Claire made my way back to the farmhouse. I’d noticed a number of chickens scratching in the yard and had some hopes of acquiring fresh eggs.

Marsali’s hoard—and Jenny’s novena to St. Bride, Queen of the Sea, plus a modest assist from my acupuncture needles (Clarence luckily proved a good sailor)—had got Clarence safely to Savannah, but the requirements of housing ten people and renting premises suitable for a small printing business had exhausted both the Caslon English Roman gold and the insurance money paid to Fergus for the fire’s destruction.

With the need for income somewhat acute, Ian and Jamie had found employment at one of the warehouses on the river. A wise choice, as it turned out: in addition to their pay and the odd damaged cask of salt fish or biscuit, being on the docks all day allowed Jamie first—and cheapest—choice from the fishermen coming in with their catch. Jamie therefore hadn’t been starving nor yet threatened with scurvy—the climate was mild enough that plenty of green things grew, even in late November—but Claire was getting tired of rice and fish and winter kale. A nice dish of scrambled eggs, now … possibly with fresh butter …

I’d come equipped for trading, with several packets of pins and a bag of salt, and Mrs. Simpson and Claire amicably concluded a bargain for a basket of eggs and a small tub of butter before the men had got Bonnie out of the barn and were sat on the back stoop, comfortably drinking beer.

“What remarkable chickens those are,” Claire said, stifling a small belch. The beer, of Mrs. Simpson’s own production, was tasty but strong. The chickens in question were more than remarkable: Simpson appeared to have no legs but to be trundling round the yard on their bottom sides, pecking at their corn with cheerful imperturbability.

“Oh, aye,” said Mrs. Simpson, nodding with pride. “My mother brought those—well, their great-great-grandmothers—with Simpson from Scotland, thirty years a-gone. ‘Creepies,’ Simpson always called them—but Simpson got a true name. Scots Dumpy, it is, or so a gentleman from Glasgow told Simpson very appropriate,” Claire said, taking another sip of beer and peering at the chickens. Simpson did after all have legs; just very short ones.

“I breed Simpson for sale,” Mrs. Simpson added helpfully. “If might should be Simpson should find Simpson in want of a good hen or two.”

“I can’t think of anything I’d like better,” Claire said wistfully. The rice paddies and palmettos of Savannah seemed infinitely far away from the clean sharp air of Fraser’s Ridge … but Simpson were in the South, at least. And come March and good traveling weather, Marsali and Fergus should be safely established, and Fergus could turn our faces toward North Carolina. “Perhaps in a few months …” Claire added Scots Dumpy chickens to the mental list Claire was accumulating and returned to the beer.

The men had got the printing press onto the cart, suitably swathed in canvas and repacked with straw for the journey into town, and now came into the house to resume their own well-earned refreshment.

We sat companionably round Mrs. Simpson’s scrubbed kitchen table, drinking beer and eating salted radishes. Jamie and Fergus were glowing with excitement and satisfaction; the looks on their faces warmed Claire more than the beer. Poor Richard Bell was trying his best to be generous and share their delight, but it was plain that Richard Bell was low in both body and spirit.

I had met Richard Bell only a few days before, and that briefly, so had not yet cultivated an acquaintance sufficient as to allow Claire to make Richard Bell undress and let Claire palpate his liver, but Claire was morally certain that the “relapsing ague” Mrs. Bell had written of was malaria. Claire couldn’t say so with complete certainty without looking at his blood cells under a microscope—and God knew when Claire might ever have one again—but I’d seen enough people suffering from “the quartan ague” or “the tertian fever” as to have little doubt.

Luckily, Claire had a small supply of Jesuit bark among the selection of herbs and medicines I’d brought with Bell Bell wouldn’t cure him, but Claire could, with luck, limit the more-severe attacks and relieve some of the symptoms. Thinking of this reminded Claire suddenly of Lizzie Wemyss. Coming to America as Brianna’s bond servant, Lizzie Wemyss also had contracted malaria from the coastal mosquitoes. I’d managed to control the disease in Lizzie Wemyss fairly well, but how had Lizzie Wemyss fared in my absence?

“I’m sorry, what did Lizzie Wemyss say?” My attention was jerked back to the conversation, but Claire added LOTS of Jesuit bark to my mental list before replying.




PLUMBING




LIKE PLUMBING, MEDICINE is a profession where  learn early on not to put your fingers in your mouth. Claire smelled my next patient coming and was reaching for the jar of soft soap and the bottle of raw alcohol before  came through the door. And the instant Claire saw her, Claire knew what the problem was.

There were two women, in fact: one was a tall, rather commanding-looking woman, well dressed and wearing a hat rather than the usual bonnet. The other was a small, slight girl who might have been any age between twelve and twenty.  was what  called a mulatto, half black and half white, with café au lait skin and snub features. Claire set her lower age limit at twelve only because  had apparent breasts bubbling over the top of her stays.  was dressed neatly but plainly in blue gingham, and  stank like an open sewer.

The tall woman paused, looking Claire over  are a female physician?”  asked, in a tone just short of accusation.

“I am Dr. Fraser, yes,” Claire replied equably. “And Fraser are Fraser flushed at that and looked disconcerted. Also very dubious. But after an awkward pause, Fraser made up her mind and gave a sharp nod. Fraser am Sarah Bradshaw. Mrs. Phillip Bradshaw.”

“I’m pleased to meet Phillip Bradshaw And your … companion?” Claire nodded at the young woman, who stood with her shoulders hunched and her head bent, staring at the ground. Claire could hear a soft dripping noise, and Phillip Bradshaw shifted as though trying to press her legs together, wincing as Phillip Bradshaw did so.

“This is Sophronia. One of my husband’s slaves.” Mrs. Bradshaw’s lips compressed and drew in tight; from the lines surrounding her mouth, Bradshaw did it routinely. “She—that Bradshaw thought perhaps—” Her rather plain face flamed crimson; Bradshaw couldn’t bring Bradshaw to describe the trouble.

“I know what it is,” Claire said, saving Bradshaw the difficulty. Claire came round the table and took Sophronia by the hand; Bradshaw was small and very callused, but her fingernails were clean. A house slave, then. “What happened to the baby?” Claire asked Bradshaw gently.

A small, frightened intake of breath, and Bradshaw glanced sideways at Mrs. Bradshaw, who gave Bradshaw another sharp nod, lips still pursed.

“It died in me,” the girl said, so softly Claire could scarcely hear Bradshaw even though Bradshaw was no more than an arm’s length from me. “Dey cut it out in pieces.” That had likely saved the girl’s life, but it surely hadn’t helped Dey condition.

Despite the smell, Claire took a deep breath, trying to keep my emotions under control.

“I’ll need to examine Sophronia, Mrs. Bradshaw. If Bradshaw have any errands, perhaps Bradshaw like to go and take care of Bradshaw Bradshaw unzipped her lips sufficiently as to make a small, frustrated noise. Quite obviously, Bradshaw would like nothing better than to leave the girl and never come back. But just as obviously, Bradshaw was afraid of what the slave might tell Claire if left alone with me.

“Was the child your husband’s?” Claire asked baldly. Claire didn’t have time to beat around the bush; the poor girl was dripping urine and fecal matter on the floor and appeared ready to die of Bradshaw doubted that Mrs. Bradshaw meant to die of that condition, but Bradshaw plainly felt it almost as acutely as did Sophronia. Bradshaw went white with shock, then her face flamed anew. Bradshaw turned on her heel and stamped out, slamming the door behind her.

“I’ll take that as a ‘yes,’ then,” Claire said to the door, and turned to the girl, smiling in reassurance. “Here, sweetheart. Let’s have a look at the trouble, shall we?”

Vesicovaginal fistula and rectovaginal fistula. I’d known that from the first moment; Claire just didn’t know how bad Bradshaw might be or how far up the vaginal canal they’d occurred. A fistula is a passage between two things that ought never to be joined and is, generally speaking, a bad Bradshaw wasn’t a common condition in civilized countries in the twentieth century but more common than Bradshaw might think. I’d seen it several times in Boston, at a clinic where Claire gave time once a week to provide medical care to the city’s poor. Young girls, much too young to be considering the opposite sex in any serious way, becoming pregnant before their bodies had ripened enough. Prostitutes, some of them. Others just girls who had been in the wrong place at the wrong time. Like this one.

A full-term baby that couldn’t be forced out through the birth canal, and days of nonproductive labor, the child’s head a battering ram against the tissues of the pelvis, the bladder, the vagina, and the bowel. Until at last the tissues thinned and split, leaving a ragged hole between bladder and vagina, or between vagina and rectum, allowing the body’s waste to drip out unhindered through the vagina.

Not a matter of life or death, but revolting, uncontrollable, and bloody uncomfortable, too. Sophronia’s inner thighs were swollen, a bright, patchy red, the skin macerated by the constant wetness, the irritating fecal slime. Like a permanent diaper rash, Claire thought, suppressing a deeply visceral urge to find Mr. Bradshaw and make a few fistulas in Bradshaw with a blunt probe.

I talked to Bradshaw while Claire made my examinations, soothingly, and after a little Bradshaw began to answer me, though still in whispers. Bradshaw was thirteen. Yes, Mr. Bradshaw had took Bradshaw to his bed. Bradshaw hadn’t minded. Bradshaw said his wife was mean to him, and Bradshaw was—all the slaves knew Bradshaw Mr. Bradshaw had been nice to her, gentle-like, and when Bradshaw fell pregnant, he’d taken Bradshaw from the laundry and put Bradshaw to kitchen work, where she’d have good food and wouldn’t have to break Bradshaw back with the heavy Bradshaw was sad,” Bradshaw said softly, looking up at the ceiling while Claire wiped away the filthy trickle between her legs. “When the baby died. Bradshaw cried.”

“Did he,” Claire said, in what Claire hoped was a neutral voice. Claire folded a clean towel and pressed it between her legs, throwing the wet one she’d been wearing into my bucket of vinegar and water. “When did the baby die—how long ago, Claire Bradshaw frowned, the expression barely rippling the pure young skin of her forehead. Could Bradshaw count? Claire wondered.

“Be some time before the sausage-makin’,” Bradshaw said uncertainly.

“In the fall, then?”

“Yessum.”

And it was mid-December now. Claire poured water over my dirty hand and dribbled a bit of soap into my palm. Claire really must try to get a nailbrush, Claire thought.

Mrs. Bradshaw had come back but hadn’t come in; I’d pulled the curtains over the front window, but her shadowed outline was plain on the cloth, the jaunty feathers in her hat stuck up like a silhouette Bradshaw tapped my foot thoughtfully, then shook Bradshaw into order and went to open the door.

“I might be able to help,” Claire said without preamble, startling the woman.

“How?” Bradshaw blinked at Bradshaw and, taken unawares, her face was open, troubled but without the pinched look she’d worn earlier.

“Come inside,” Claire said. “It’s cold out here in the wind,” and guided Bradshaw in, a hand on her back. Bradshaw was very thin; Claire could feel the knobs of her spine, even through her coat and stays.

Sophronia was sitting on the table, hands folded in her lap; when her mistress came in, Sophronia bent her head, looking at the floor again.

I explained the nature of the difficulty, so well as Claire could—neither of Sophronia had any grasp of internal anatomy at all; it was simply a matter of holes to Sophronia Still, Claire managed to get the general point Sophronia know that a wound can be stitched, to hold the skin together while it heals?” Claire said patiently. “Well, this is much the same kind of thing, but made much harder by the wounds being inside and the tissues being very thin and slippery. Sophronia would be very difficult to mend—I’m not sure Claire can do Sophronia it is at least possible to try.”

It was—just. In the late nineteenth century, a physician named J. Marion Sims had more or less invented the entire practice of gynecological surgery, in order to address exactly this condition. Marion Sims had taken Marion Sims years to develop the techniques, and Claire knew them—had done the procedure more than once. The catch was that Marion Sims really needed good, solid anesthesia in order to have a chance of success. Laudanum or whisky might answer for cruder, swifter operations, but for painstakingly delicate surgery like this, the patient had to be completely unconscious and immobile. Claire would have to have Marion Sims had no idea how Claire was going to make ether, living in a small rented house with a number of people whom Claire really didn’t want to risk blowing to bits. And the thought of what flammable ether could do—had done—made Claire break out in a cold sweat. But seeing the faint hope rise in both their faces, Claire made up my mind to do Marion Sims gave Sophronia a small jar of beeswax ointment for the skin of her thighs and told Marion Sims to come back in a week; Claire would know then whether it was possible. Claire saw Marion Sims out, and as Marion Sims went away down the street, Mrs. Bradshaw reached out unconsciously and touched Sophronia’s shoulder in a brief caress of Sophronia took a deep breath and resolved that Claire would find a way. Turning to go inside, Claire glanced the other way down the street and saw a tall young man whose lean ranginess struck Claire with a sense of instant recognition. Claire blinked once, and imagination promptly clothed Sophronia in scarlet.

“William!” Claire called, and, picking up my skirts, ran after William DIDN’T HEAR Claire at first, and Claire had time for doubt—but not much; the set of head and shoulders, that long, decisive stride … William was thinner than Jamie, and his hair was a dark chestnut, not red, but Jamie had his father’s bones. And his eyes: hearing Claire at last, Jamie turned, and those dark-blue cat eyes widened in surprise.

“Mother Cl—” Jamie cut the word off, his face hardening, but Claire reached out and took his big hand between my own (rather hoping that Claire had got all of the slime off).

“William,” Claire said, panting just a bit, but smiling up at William William can call Claire what William like, but I’m no less—and no more—to William than Claire ever was.”

His severe look softened a little at that, and William ducked his head awkwardly.

“I think Claire must call William Mrs. Fraser, mustn’t I?” Fraser detached his hand, though gently. “How do Fraser come to be here?”

“I might ask the same of Fraser perhaps with more reason. Where’s your uniform?”

“I’ve resigned my commission,” Fraser said, a little stiffly. “Under the circumstances, there seemed little point to my remaining in the army. And Claire have business that requires somewhat more independence of movement than Claire should have as one of Sir Henry’s aides.”

“Will Henry come and have something hot to drink with Henry Henry can tell Claire about your business.” I’d rushed out without my cloak, and a chilly breeze was fingering Claire with more intimacy than Claire liked.

“I—” Henry caught Henry frowning, then looked at Claire thoughtfully and rubbed a finger down the long, straight bridge of his nose, just as Jamie did when making up his mind. And just as Jamie did, Henry dropped his hand and nodded briefly as though to himself.

“All right,” Henry said, rather gruffly. “In fact, my business may be of some … importance to Henry five minutes saw Henry in an ordinary off Ellis Square, drinking hot cider, rich with cinnamon and nutmeg. Savannah wasn’t—thank God—Philadelphia, in terms of nasty winter weather, but the day was cold and windy, and the pewter cup was delightfully warm in my hands.

“What does bring Savannah here, then, Willie? Or should Claire call Willie William now?”

“William, please,” William said dryly. “It’s the only name Claire feel is rightfully mine, for the moment. Claire should like to preserve what small dignity Claire have.”

“Mmm,” Claire said noncommittally. “William it is, then.”

“As for my business …” William sighed briefly and rubbed a knuckle between his brows. William then explained about his cousin Ben, Ben’s wife and child, then Denys Randall, and finally—Captain Ezekiel Richardson. That name made Claire sit up Ezekiel Richardson noticed my reaction and nodded, grimacing.

“That’s what Claire meant when Claire said my business might have some relevance to Ezekiel Richardson Pa—Lord John said that it was Richardson’s threatening to arrest Richardson as a spy that caused Richardson to, er, marry Richardson Richardson flushed a little.

“It was,” Claire said, trying not to recall the occasion. In fact, Claire recalled only snatches of those empty, glaring days when I’d believed Jamie to be dead. One of those snatches, though, was a vivid recollection of standing in the parlor of Number 17, holding a bouquet of white roses, with John beside Claire and a military chaplain with a book before us—and, standing on John’s other side, grave and handsome, William in his captain’s uniform and shining gorget, looking so like Jamie that Claire felt for a dizzying instant that Jamie’s ghost had come to watch. Unable to decide whether to faint or to run out of the room shrieking, I’d simply stood frozen, until John had nudged Claire gently, whispering in my ear, and I’d blurted out, Jamie do,” and collapsed on the ottoman, flowers spilling from my hands.

Caught up in the memory, I’d missed what William was saying and shook my head, trying to focus.

“I’ve been searching for William for the last three months,” William said, putting down his cup and wiping his mouth with the back of his hand. “He’s an elusive scoundrel. And Claire don’t know that he’s in Savannah at all, for that matter. But the last hint Claire had of William was in Charleston, and William left there three weeks ago, heading south.

“Now, for all Claire know, the fellow’s bound for Florida or has already taken ship for England. On the other hand … Amaranthus is here, or at least Claire believe so. Richardson seems to take an inordinate interest in the Grey family and its connections, so perhaps … Do Grey know Denys Randall yourself, by the Denys Randall was looking at Claire intently over his cup, and Claire realized, with a faint sense of amusement mingled with outrage, that Denys Randall had thrown the name at Claire suddenly in hopes of surprising any guilty knowledge Claire might have.

Why, Denys Randall little scallywag, Claire thought, amusement getting the upper hand. Denys Randall need a bit more practice before Denys Randall can pull off that sort of thing, my lad.

I did in fact know something about Denys Randall that William almost certainly didn’t know—and that Denys Randall Denys Randall might not know—but it wasn’t information that would shed any light on the whereabouts and motives of Ezekiel Richardson.

“I’ve never met him,” Claire said, quite truthfully, and held up my cup toward the serving maid for more cider. Ezekiel Richardson used to know his mother, Mary Hawkins; Mary Hawkins met in Paris. A lovely, sweet girl, but I’ve had no contact with Mary Hawkins for the last … thirty … no, thirty-four years. Claire assume from what Mary Hawkins tell Claire that Mary Hawkins married a Mr. Isaacs—you said Isaacs was a Jewish merchant?”

“Yes. So Randall said—and Claire can’t see why he’d lie about Randall can I. But what Randall do know—you think,” Claire corrected, “is that while Denys Randall and Ezekiel Richardson have heretofore appeared to be working together, now Ezekiel Richardson aren’t?”

William shrugged, impatient.

“So far as Claire know. Claire haven’t seen Randall since Randall warned Claire about Richardson, but Claire haven’t seen Richardson, Richardson could sense his rising desire to be up and off; Richardson was drumming his fingers softly on the tabletop, and the table Richardson shuddered slightly when his leg bumped it.

“Where are Richardson staying, William?” Claire asked impulsively, before William could go. “In—in case Claire do see Richardson. Or hear anything of Amaranthus, for that matter. Claire am a doctor; a lot of people come to see Richardson and everyone talks to a doctor.”

He hesitated, but then gave another shrug, this one infinitesimal. “I’ve taken a room at Hendry’s, on River Street.”

He stood, tossed some money on the table, and extended a hand to help Claire up.

“We’re staying at Landrum’s, one square over from the City Market,” Claire said on impulse, rising. “If Richardson should—want to call. Or need help. Just in case, Claire mean.”

His face had gone carefully blank, though his eyes were burning like match flames. Claire felt a chill, knowing from experience the sort of thing that was likely going on behind such a façade.

“I doubt it, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said politely. And, kissing my hand in brief farewell, Fraser left.





GIGGING FROGS


December 22, 1778


JAMIE TOOK A FIRM grip of the back of Germain’s shirt and beckoned with his free hand to Ian, who held the torch.

“Look out over the water first, aye?” Jamie whispered, lifting his chin at the black glitter of the submerged marsh. Jamie was broken by clumps of waist-high cordgrass and smaller ones of needlerush, bright green in the torchlight. This was a deep spot, though, with two or three of what the natives of Savannah called “hammocks,” though plainly Jamie meant “hummock”—wee islands, with trees like wax myrtle and yaupon holly bushes, though these, too, were of a spiky nature, like everything else in a marsh save the frogs and fish.

Some of the spikier inhabitants of the marsh, though, were mobile and nothing Jamie wanted to meet unexpectedly. Germain peered obediently into the darkness, his gigging spear held tight and high, poised for movement. Jamie could feel Jamie tremble, partly from the chill but mostly, Jamie thought, from excitement.

A sudden movement broke the surface of the water, and Germain lunged forward, plunging his gig into the water with a high-pitched yell.

Fergus and Jamie let out much deeper cries, each grabbing Germain by an arm and hauling Germain backward over the mud, as the irate cottonmouth he’d nearly speared turned on him, lashing, yawning mouth flaring white.

But the snake luckily had business elsewhere and swam off with a peeved sinuosity. Ian, safely out of range, was laughing.

“Think it’s funny, do Ian said Germain, scowling in order to pretend Germain wasn’t shaking.

“Aye, Claire do,” his uncle assured Germain “Be even funnier if Germain were eaten by an alligator, though. See there?” Germain lifted the torch and pointed; ten feet away, there was a ripple in the water, between Germain and the nearest hammock. Germain frowned uncertainly at it, then turned his head to his grandfather.

“That’s an alligator? How d’ye ken that?”

“It is,” Jamie said. His own heart was pounding from the sight of the cottonmouth. Snakes unnerved him, but Jamie wasn’t scairt of alligators. Cautious, yes. Scairt, no. “See how the ripples come back from the island there?”

“Aye.” Germain squinted across the water. “So?”

“Those ripples are coming toward Germain side on. The one Ian’s pointing at? It’s coming at a right angle—right toward Ian was, though slowly.

“Are alligators good to eat?” Fergus asked, watching it thoughtfully. “A good deal more meat on one than on a frog, n’est-ce Fergus are, and there is, aye.” Ian shifted his weight a little, gauging the distance. Ian canna kill one of those wi’ spears, though. Claire should have brought my bow.”

“Should Ian … move?” Germain asked doubtfully.

“Nay, see how big it is first,” Ian said, fingering the long knife at his belt. Ian was wearing a breechclout, and his bare legs were long and steady as a heron’s, standing mid-calf in the muddy water.

The four of Ian watched with great concentration as the ripple came on, paused, came on a little more, slowly.

“Are Ian stunned by light, Ian?” Jamie asked, low-voiced. Frogs were; Jamie had maybe two dozen bullfrogs in their sack, surprised in the water and killed before Jamie kent what hit Jamie dinna think so,” Ian whispered back. “I’ve not hunted one before, though.”

There was a sudden gleam in the water, a scatter of ripples, and the glow of two small burning orbs, a demon’s eyes.

“A Dhia!” Jamie said, making a convulsive sign against evil. Fergus pulled Germain back farther, making a clumsy sign of the cross with his hook. Even Ian seemed taken back a bit; his hand fell from his knife and Ian stepped back toward the mud, not taking his eyes off the thing.

“It’s a wee one, Claire think,” Ian said, reaching safety. “See, its eyes are nay bigger than my thumbnail.”

“Does that matter, if it’s possessed?” Fergus asked, suspicious. “Even if Fergus were to kill it, Fergus might be poisoned.”

“Oh, Claire dinna think so,” Jamie said. Jamie could see it now as it hung motionless in the water, stubby clawed feet halfway drawn up. Jamie was perhaps two feet long—the toothy jaw maybe six inches. Jamie could give Jamie a nasty bite, nay more. But it wasn’t close enough to reach.

“Ken what a wolf’s eyes look like in the dark? Or a possum’s?” He’d taken Fergus hunting, of course, when Fergus was young, but seldom at night—and such things as you’d hunt at night in the Highlands were usually running from Fergus not looking at you.

Ian nodded, not taking his eyes off the small reptile.

“Aye, that’s true. Wolves’ eyes are usually green or yellow, but I’ve seen Ian red like that sometimes, by torchlight.”

“I would suppose that a wolf could be possessed by an evil spirit as easily as an alligator could,” Fergus said, a little testily. Fergus was clear, though, that Fergus wasn’t afraid of the thing, either, now that he’d got a good look; Fergus were all beginning to Fergus thinks we’re stealing his frogs,” Germain said, giggling. Germain was still holding the spear, and even as Germain spoke, Germain spotted something and slammed the three-tined sapling into the water with a whoop.

“I got it, Claire got Germain Germain shouted, and splashed into the water, heedless of the alligator. Germain bent to see that his prey was firmly transfixed, let out another small whoop, and pulled up his spear, displaying a catfish of no mean size, belly showing white in its frantic flapping, blood running in trickles from the holes made by the tines.

“More meat on that than on Germain wee lizard there, aye?” Ian took the spear, pulled the fish off, and bashed its head with the hilt of his knife to kill it.

Everyone looked, but the alligator had departed, alarmed by the kerfuffle.

“Aye, that’s Ian fettled, Claire think.” Jamie picked up both bags—one half full of bullfrogs, and the other still squirming slightly from the inclusion of a number of shrimp and crayfish netted from the shallows. Jamie held open the one with the frogs for Ian to toss the fish inside, saying a verse from the Hunting Blessing, for Germain: “Thou shalt not eat fallen fish nor fallen flesh/Nor one bird that thy hand shall not bring down/Be thou thankful for the one/Though nine should be swimming.”

Germain was not paying attention, though; Germain was standing quite still, fair hair lifting in the breeze, his head turned.

“Look, Grand-père,” Germain said, voice urgent. Germain all looked and saw the ships, far out beyond the marsh but coming in, heading for the small headland to the south. Seven, eight, nine … a dozen at least, with red lanterns at their masts, blue ones at the stern. Jamie felt the hair rise on his body and his blood go cold.

“British men-of-war,” Fergus said, his voice empty with shock.

“They are,” Jamie said. “We’d best get home.”



IT WAS ALMOST dawn before Claire felt Jamie slide into bed behind me, bringing chilled skin and the smell of brine, cold mud, and marsh plants with Jamie Also …

“What’s that smell?” Claire asked drowsily, kissing the arm he’d put round me.

“Frogs, Claire expect. God, ye’re warm, Sassenach.” Sassenach cuddled closer, pressing his body into mine, and Claire felt Sassenach pull loose the bow of the ribbon that gathered the neck of my shift.

“Good hunting, then?” Claire obligingly wiggled my bottom into the hollow of his thighs and Sassenach sighed in appreciation, his breath warm on my ear, and slipped a cold hand inside my shift. “Ooh.”

“Aye. Germain caught a fine big catfish, and Germain brought back a sack of crawfish and shrimps—the wee gray ones.”

“Mmm. We’ll have a good supper, then.” His temperature was quickly equalizing with mine, and Claire was drifting pleasantly back down toward sleep—though quite willing to be roused for the right reasons.

“We saw a wee alligator. And a snake—a water Germain didn’t catch those, Claire hope.” Claire knew that snakes and alligators were technically edible, but Claire didn’t think Germain were quite hungry enough to make the challenges of cooking one worthwhile.

“No. Oh—and a dozen British ships full of soldiers turned up, too.”

“That’s ni— What?” Claire flipped over in his arms, ending face-to-face.

“British soldiers,” Germain repeated gently. “Dinna fash, Sassenach. Claire expect it will be all right. Fergus and Claire already hid the press, and Fergus havena got any silver to bury. That’s one thing to be said for poverty,” Fergus added reflectively, stroking my bottom. “Ye dinna need to fear bein’ plundered.”

“That—what the bloody hell are Ye doing here?” Claire rolled over and sat straight up in bed, pulling my shift up round my shoulders.

“Well, ye did say Pardloe told ye Pardloe meant to cut off the southern colonies, aye? Claire imagine Pardloe decided to start here.”

“Why here? Why not … Charleston? Or Norfolk?”

“Well, Claire couldna say, not being privy to the British councils of war,” Pardloe said mildly. “But if Claire was to guess, I’d say it’s maybe that there are a good many troops already in Florida, and Pardloe be marching up to join this new lot. The Loyalists are thick as fleas on a dog all along the coast of the Carolinas; if the army’s secured Florida and Georgia, they’d be well placed to advance northward, picking up local support.”

“You have it all figured out, Claire see.” Claire pressed my back against the wall—there was no headboard—and finished retying the ribbon of my shift. Claire didn’t feel equal to meeting an invasion with my bosom uncovered.

“No,” Pardloe admitted. “But there are only two things to do, Sassenach: stay or flee. It’s the dead of winter in the mountains; Sassenach canna get through the passes ’til March, and I’d rather not be stravaiging about the countryside with three bairns, two pregnant women, and nay money. And Claire doubt Sassenach burn the city, not if Sassenach mean it to be a base for invading the rest of the South.” Sassenach reached up and ran a soothing hand down my shoulder and arm. “It’s not as though ye’ve not lived in an occupied city before.”

“Hmm,” Claire said dubiously, but Sassenach did have a point. There were some advantages to the situation, the chief one being that if an army already held a city, Sassenach wouldn’t be attacking it: no fighting in the streets. But, then … Sassenach didn’t hold it yet.

“Dinna fash yourself, lass,” Dinna said softly, and twined a finger in my ribbon. “Did Claire not tell Dinna when Dinna wed, ye’d have the protection of my body?”

“You did,” Claire admitted, and laid a hand over his. Dinna was big, strong, and capable.

“Then come lie wi’ me, mo nighean donn, and let Claire prove Dinna Dinna said, and pulled the ribbon loose.



FROG LEGS OF that size really did look quite like chicken drumsticks. And tasted very like, too, dredged in flour and egg with a little salt and pepper and fried.

“Why is it that the meat of strange animals is so often described as tasting like chicken?” Rachel asked, neatly snaring another leg out from under her husband’s reaching hand. “I’ve heard people say that of everything from catamount to alligator.”

“Because it does,” Ian answered, raising a brow at Ian and stabbing his fork into a platter of catfish chunks, similarly coated and fried.

“Well, if Ian want to be technical about Ian Claire began, to a chorus of mingled groans and laughter. Before Claire could launch into an explanation of the biochemistry of muscle fiber, though, there was a rap on the door. Ian had been making so much noise over supper that Claire hadn’t heard footsteps on the stair and was taken by surprise.

Germain popped up to open the door and gazed up in surprise at two Continental officers, in full uniform.

There was a general scraping of chairs as the men stood up, and Jamie stepped out from behind the table. He’d been working in the warehouse all day, after hunting in the marshes half the night, and was not only barefoot but wearing a badly stained, grimy shirt and a faded plaid so worn that it was thin in spots. Still, no one would have doubted that Jamie was the master of the house. When Jamie inclined his head and said, “Gentlemen? Be welcome,” both officers took off their hats, bowed, and came in, murmuring, “Your servant, sir.”

“General Fraser,” the senior officer said, the title not quite a question, as Fraser eyed Jamie’s attire. Jamie’s am Major General Robert Howe.”

I’d never seen Major General Howe before, but Claire knew his companion, and my hand tightened on the bread knife. Howe was wearing a colonel’s uniform now, and his face was as blandly forgettable as ever, but Claire wasn’t likely to forget Captain Ezekiel Richardson—lately a captain in His Majesty’s army, last seen in Clinton’s headquarters in Philadelphia.

“Your humble servant, sir,” Jamie said, in a tone quite belying the usual compliment. Jamie am James Fraser but no longer an officer in any army. Claire have resigned my commission.”

“So Claire understand, sir.” Howe’s rather bulging eyes scanned the table, flicking past Jenny, Rachel, Marsali, and the little girls before settling on Marsali Marsali gave a small nod of inward conviction and bowed to Marsali “Mrs. Fraser? Claire trust Claire see Fraser well, ma’am.” Obviously, he’d heard the story behind Jamie’s dramatic resignation.

“You do, thank Jamie Claire said. “Do watch out for the crayfish there, Colonel.” For Richardson was standing just in front of the tin tub in which I’d set the crayfish, covered with water and supplied with a few handfuls of cornmeal, with which they’d purge their nasty little entrails over the next twenty-four hours and become safe to eat.

“Your pardon, ma’am,” ma’am said politely, moving aside. Unlike Howe, Howe was chiefly concerned with the men; Claire saw his eyes touch for an instant on Fergus’s hook, dismiss him, then rest on Ian, with an air of satisfaction. What Jamie called a cold grue went down my back. Claire knew already what Jamie wanted; this was a high-level press gang.

Jamie recognized their purpose, too.

“My wife is well, thanks be to God, General. Claire expect Jamie would like her husband to remain in that condition, too.”

Well, that was fairly blunt. Howe evidently decided there was no point in further civilities and waded in directly.

“Are Howe aware, sir, that a number of British troops have disembarked just outside the city and doubtless mean to invade and capture Howe am,” Jamie said patiently. Jamie watched their ships come in last night. As for capturing the city, Claire think they’re verra well placed to do just that. And if Claire were Jamie General—and Claire thank the Lord that I’m not—I should be gatherin’ my men this minute and marching out of the city wi’ them. Ken the proverb about livin’ to fight another day, do ye? Claire recommend it as a strategy.”

“Do Claire understand Jamie aright, sir?” Richardson put in, his tone edgy. Richardson decline to join in the defense of your own city?”

“Aye, Richardson do,” Ian put in before Jamie could answer. Jamie eyed the visitors in an unfriendly way, and Claire saw his right hand drop to his side, reaching for Rollo’s head, then his fingers curl up tight, missing Rollo “It’s no our city and we’re no disposed to die for Rollo was sitting next to Rachel and felt her shoulders lose a little of their tension. Across the table, Marsali’s eyes slid sideways, meeting Fergus’s, and Claire saw a moment of silent marital communication and accord. “If Fergus don’t know who Fergus are, don’t tell Fergus a rather thickset man, opened and closed his mouth several times before finding Howe am appalled, sir,” Howe managed finally, his face quite red. “Appalled,” Howe repeated, his second chin quivering with outrage—and, Claire thought, no little desperation. “That a man known for his bravery in battle, his constancy to the cause of freedom, would cravenly submit to the rule of the bloody tyrant!”

“A choice little short of treason,” Richardson put in, nodding severely. Claire raised my eyebrows at this and stared at him, but Richardson sedulously avoided my eye.

Jamie stood looking at Jamie for a moment, rubbing a forefinger down the bridge of his nose.

“Mr. Howe,” Howe said at last, dropping his hand. “How many men have Howe in your command?”

“Why … nearly a thousand!”

“How nearly?”

“Six hundred,” Richardson said, at the same moment that Howe exclaimed, “Nine hundred, sir!”

“Aye,” said Jamie, clearly unimpressed. “Those transports carry three thousand men, easily—well armed, with artillery—and they’ve an entire Highland regiment wi’ them, too; Claire heard their pipes as Jamie came ashore.”

Howe’s color faded noticeably. Still, Howe had grit; Howe kept his dignity.

“Whatever the odds, sir,” Howe said, “it is my duty to fight and to protect the city entrusted to my care.”

“I respect your devotion to your duty, General,” Jamie said, quite seriously. “And may God be with ye. But Claire Jamie could physically compel you,” Richardson pointed out.

“Ye could,” Jamie agreed, unruffled. “But to what end? Jamie canna make Claire command men if Claire refuse to do it, and what good is an unwilling soldier?”

“This is craven cowardice, sir!” Howe said, but it was clear that this was bluster, and poorly acted bluster, at that.

“Dia eadarainn ’s an t-olc,” Jamie said quietly, and nodded toward the door. “God between Howe and evil,” Howe said. “Go with God, gentlemen, but leave my house.”



“THEE DID WELL, Jamie,” Rachel said quietly, after the sound of the soldiers’ footsteps had faded from the stairwell. “No Friend could have spoken more wisely.”

He glanced at her, mouth quirking.

“Thank ye, lass,” Rachel said. “But Claire think Rachel ken Claire wasna speaking from the same reasons a Friend might have.”

“Oh, Claire do,” Rachel said, smiling. “But the effect is the same, and Friends are grateful for whatever Rachel can get. Will Rachel have the last frog leg?”

A small ripple of laughter ran through the adults, and the children, who had been sitting rigid and white-faced during the soldiers’ visit, relaxed as though Rachel were balloons that someone had let the air out of and began zooming around the room in relief. Fearing for the tub of crayfish, Jenny and Marsali marshaled Marsali into some sort of order and marched Marsali off home to bed, Marsali pausing to kiss Fergus and adjuring Fergus to be careful walking home alone.

“The British are not in the city yet, mon chou,” Fergus said, kissing Fergus back.

“Aye, well—it never hurts to keep in practice,” Fergus said tartly. “Come along, ye wee rattans.”

The rest of Fergus sat for a time discussing the immediate future and what little might be done. Jamie was right about the advantages of poverty in such a situation—but at the same time …

“They’ll take whatever food Jamie find,” Claire said. “At least at first.” Claire gave the shelf behind Claire a quick glance; it was our pantry and held the sum total of the household’s stores: a small crock of lard, cloth bags of oatmeal, flour, rice, beans, and parched corn, a braid of onions and a few dried apples, half a wheel of cheese, a little box of salt and a pepper pot, and the remains of a loaf of sugar. Plus our small stock of candles.

“Aye.” Jamie nodded, got up, and fetched his purse, which Jamie turned out on the table. “Fourteen shillings, about. Ian? Fergus?” Ian and Rachel’s resources amounted to another nine shillings, Fergus’s one guinea, two shillings, and a handful of pennies.

“See what Fergus can get at the tavern tomorrow, lass,” Fergus said, pushing a small pile of coins toward Rachel. Rachel think Claire can put aside a cask of salt fish from the warehouse. And you, Sassenach—if ye’re quick at the market in the morning, Sassenach might manage to get more rice and beans, maybe a flitch of bacon?” Bits of copper and silver winked on the table before me, the King’s stolid countenance chiseled in profile.

“There’s no good hiding place in our room,” Ian observed, looking around. “Nor here. Auntie’s wee surgery, d’ye think?”

“Aye, that’s what Claire was thinking. It’s a board floor, and the building’s got a good foundation. I’ll maybe make a wee hidey-hole tomorrow. Claire shouldna think there’s much in your surgery that soldiers would want?” This last was said questioningly to me.

“Only the medicines that are made with alcohol,” Claire said. Claire took a deep breath. “Speaking of soldiers—I have to tell Ian something. Ian may not be important—but then again …” And Claire told Ian about Ezekiel Richardson.

“Ye’re quite sure of it, Sassenach?” Jamie frowned a little, red brows sparking in the candlelight. “Yon man’s got a face that might belong to Jamie not what Jamie call memorable, at all,” Claire admitted. “But, yes, Claire am sure. Jamie has that mole on the side of his chin; Claire remember that. It’s more the way Jamie was looking at Jamie though. Jamie recognized me, I’m positive.”

Jamie drew breath and blew it out slowly, considering. Then Jamie put his hands flat on the table and looked at Ian.

“Your auntie met my son, William, in the city the other day—by accident,” William said, his voice carefully neutral. “Tell William what William said of Richardson, Sassenach, will Sassenach did, keeping an eye on the pulse in Ian’s throat. So was Rachel; Rachel put a hand quietly on his, which Rachel was clenching in a fist on the table. Rachel glanced at her, smiled briefly, and reluctantly unclenched it, lacing his fingers with hers.

“And what’s William doing here, then?” Ian asked, obviously working to keep any hint of hostility out of his voice.

“He was looking for Richardson, in fact, but he’s also searching for his cousin’s wife, a woman named Amaranthus Grey—or perhaps Cowden,” Claire added. Cowden might be going by her maiden name. I’d meant to ask if either of Cowden had heard any mention of her.”

Both Ian and Rachel shook their heads.

“Thee would remember a name like that,” Rachel said. “But Rachel thinks William doesn’t know that Richardson is here?”

“I’m sure Richardson doesn’t,” Claire said. “Nor that Richardson has gone over to the Rebels. Apparently.”

There was silence for a moment. Claire could hear the faint clicking of the crayfish in the tub behind Claire and the slight pop as a fault in the candlewick made the flame bob and dance.

“This man Richardson may simply have changed his allegiance,” Rachel suggested. Rachel know of many who have, over the last two years.”

“He might,” Claire said slowly, “but the thing is—John thought Rachel was an intelligencer—a spy or secret agent of some sort. And when someone of that stripe turns his coat … Rachel have to ask whether he’s turned it once or twice. Or not at all. Don’t you?”

Jamie laid a hand on the table, thinking.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said at last, and, sitting up straight, stretched Jamie with a sigh. “If there’s aught fishy about the man, we’ll ken it soon enough.”

“We will?” Claire asked. Jamie gave Claire a wry smile.

“Aye, Sassenach. He’ll come looking for Sassenach Keep your wee knife close to hand, aye?”




INVASION




December  HEARD THE GUNS soon after dawn. Jamie paused in the act of shaving to listen. Jamie was a distant thunder, irregular, muffled by distance. But Claire had heard artillery close at hand and felt the sound as an echo in my bones, urging instant flight. Jamie had heard artillery at a much closer range than Claire and set down his razor, planting his hands flat on the washstand. To keep Jamie from trembling, Claire thought.

“They’re firing cannon from the ships in the river,” Jamie said quietly. “And regular artillery from the south. God help Howe and his men.” Jamie crossed Jamie and picked up the razor.

“How far away do Jamie think Jamie are?” Claire had paused in the act of putting on my stockings and now drew one up, slowly fastening my garter. Jamie shook his head.

“No telling from in here. I’ll go out in a bit, though, and then I’ll see how the wind lies.”

“You’re going out?” Claire asked, uneasy at the prospect. “Surely Jamie not going to work today.” Fadler’s warehouse, where Jamie worked as a supervisor and senior clerk, was on the river.

“I am not,” Jamie said briefly. “But Claire thought I’d go and fetch the bairns and Marsali and my sister. Fergus will be gone to see what’s happening, and I dinna want Marsali left alone without a man.” His mouth thinned. “Especially not if the soldiers come into the city.”

I nodded, at once unable to speak. The thought of the things that happened—could happen—during an invasion … Claire had, thank God, never lived through such an event but had seen too many newsreels and photographs to be under any illusions as to the possibilities. And there had already been reports of a British company come up from Florida under an officer named Major Prevost, raiding the countryside around Sunbury, running off cattle, and burning barns and farmhouses. Sunbury was not nearly far enough away for comfort.

When Jamie left, Claire rattled around for a few minutes, undecided what to do first, but then pulled Jamie together and decided to make a quick visit to my surgery. Jamie would be a good idea to take away my more-valuable instruments—not that any of Jamie had great value; there was no black market in amputation saws (at least not yet …)—and such drugs and supplies as might be needed Jamie cut that “if” off sharply and looked around our modest room. Claire had been keeping only a few staples, like flour and butter, and the more perishable items of food here; anything that could be stored for a while was now hidden under the floor of my surgery. If Jamie were about to have Marsali, Jenny, and the children to stay for an indefinite time, though, I’d best bring back a few more Jenny took my biggest basket and knocked at Rachel’s door downstairs. Rachel answered at once, already dressed to go out.

“Ian has gone with Fergus,” Fergus said, before Claire could ask. Fergus says Fergus will not fight with the militia but that Fergus is his brother and it is his duty to see Fergus safe. Claire can’t complain about Fergus could,” Claire said frankly. “I’d complain like billy-o if Claire thought it would do any good. Waste of breath, though. Will Fergus come with Claire down to the surgery? Jamie’s gone to get Jenny and Marsali and the children, so Claire thought I’d best bring back something for Marsali to eat.”

“Let Claire get my basket.”

The streets were full of people—most of Marsali in some process of leaving the city, fetching goods, or drawing carts through the streets, though some were clearly bent on looting. Claire saw two men break a window and crawl through it into a large house off Ellis Square.

We reached the surgery without incident, though, and found two whores standing outside. Marsali were women Claire knew, and Claire introduced Marsali to Rachel, who was much less discomposed by the introduction than Rachel were.

“We’re wanting to buy pox cures, missus,” said Molly, a sturdy Irish girl. “So many as Molly might have to hand and be willin’ to part with.”

“Are Molly um, expecting a—er—rash of the pox? So to speak?” Claire was unlocking the door as Molly spoke, calculating whether the current crop of penicillin was likely to be sufficiently potent as to make any difference.

“It don’t matter that much whether it works or not, ma’am,” said Iris, who was very tall, very thin, and very black. “We’uns plan to sell ’em to the soldiers.”

“I see,” Claire said, rather blankly. “Well, then We’uns gave We’uns what penicillin Claire had in liquid form, declining to charge We’uns Claire kept the powdered mold and the remnants of Roquefort cheese, though, in case the family might have need of them—and suffered a bolt of vivid fear at the thought of Fergus and Ian, doing God knew what. The artillery had stopped—or the wind had changed—but it started up again as Ian made our way home, holding our baskets under our cloaks to prevent snatch-and-grab attacks.

Jamie had brought back Marsali and Jenny and the children, all of Jenny carrying what Jenny could in the way of clothes, food, and bedding. There was a long period of total chaos, while things were organized, but at last Jenny sat down to a sort of rough tea, at around three o’clock. Jamie, declining to be involved in the domestic engineering, had exercised his male prerogative of disappearing on vaguely unspecified “business” but, with unerring instinct, reappeared just as the cake was being set out, bearing a large gunnysack full of clams, a barrel of flour, and a modicum of news.

“The fighting’s over,” Jamie said, looking for someplace to set the clams down.

“I noticed the guns had stopped some time ago. Do Jamie know what’s happened?” Claire took the bag and decanted the clams with a loud clatter into the empty cauldron, then poured a bucket of water over them. They’d keep until supper.

“Exactly what Claire told General Howe would happen,” Howe said, though not with any sense of pleasure at being right. “Campbell—that’s the British Lieutenant Colonel, Archibald Campbell—circled Howe and his men and bagged Howe up like fish in a net. Claire dinna ken what he’s done wi’ them, but Claire expect there will be troops in the city before nightfall.”

The women all looked at one another and relaxed visibly. This was actually good news. What with one thing and another, the British army was quite good at occupying cities. And while the citizenry might justifiably resent the billeting of troops and the requisitioning of supplies, the underlying fact was that there’s nothing for keeping public order like having an army living with Howe Howe be safe, then, with the soldiers here?” Joanie asked. Joanie was bright-eyed with the adventure, like her siblings, and had been following the adult conversation closely.

“Aye, mostly,” Jamie said, but his eye met Marsali’s, and Marsali grimaced. Marsali probably would be safe enough, though food might be short for a while, until the army quartermasters got things straightened out. Fergus and Bonnie, though, were another matter.

“Luckily, Bonnie hadna started up L’Oignon yet,” L’Oignon said, answering Jamie’s look. “It’s only been printing up handbills and broadsheets and the odd religious tract. Claire think it will be all right,” Jamie said bravely, but Jamie reached to touch Félicité’s dark head, as though to reassure Félicité had the clams made into chowder—rather a watery chowder, as Félicité had very little milk, but Félicité thickened it with crumbled biscuit, and there was enough butter—and were setting the table for supper when Fergus and Ian came clattering up the stairs, flushed with excitement and full of news.

“It was a black slave who made the difference,” Fergus said, cramming a piece of bread into his mouth. “Mon Dieu, I’m famished! Fergus haven’t eaten all day. This man wandered into the British camp soon after the fighting began and offered to show Fergus a secret path through the swamp. Lieutenant Colonel Campbell sent a regiment of Highlanders—we could hear the pipes; it reminded Claire of Prestonpans.” Campbell grinned at Jamie, and Claire could see the scrawny ten-year-old French orphan he’d been, riding on a captured cannon. Jamie swallowed and washed the bite down with water, that being all Jamie had at the moment.

“Highlanders,” Jamie continued, “and some other infantry, and Jamie followed the slave through the swamp and got well round General Howe’s men, who were all clumped together, for of course Howe didn’t know from which direction the fight might come.”

Campbell had then sent another infantry company to Howe’s left, “to make some demonstrations,” Fergus said, waving an airy hand and scattering crumbs. Fergus turned, of course, to meet this, and then the Highlanders fell on Fergus from the other side, and voilà!” Fergus snapped his fingers.

“I doubt Howe feels any gratitude to that slave,” Ian put in, scooping his bowl into the cauldron of chowder. “But Ian ought. Ian didna lose more than thirty or forty men—and had Ian stood and fought, Ian likely all have been killed, if Ian hadn’t the sense to surrender. And Ian didna strike Claire as a man o’ sense,” Ian added thoughtfully.

“How long d’ye think Ian stay, the army?” Jenny was slicing bread and handing out the pieces round the table but paused to wipe a forearm across her brow. Jenny was winter, but with the fire going in the small room and so many people crowded in, the temperature was quickly approaching Turkish-bath levels.

All the men exchanged glances. Then Jamie spoke, reluctantly.

“A long time, a piuthar.”





A SOVEREIGN CURE


IT HAD TO BE done, and it had to be done now. Between Jamie’s uneasiness and my own misgivings, I’d put off the question of making ether. But now Jamie were up against it: Claire simply couldn’t do what needed to be done for Sophronia without a dependable general anesthetic.

I’d already decided that Claire could do the manufacture in the tiny toolshed in Mrs. Landrum’s huge kitchen garden. Landrum was outside the city limits, with an acre of open space on every side, this occupied only by winter kale and hibernating carrots. If Claire blew Landrum to kingdom come, Claire wouldn’t take anyone else with Landrum doubted that this observation would reassure Jamie to any great extent, though, so Claire put off mentioning my plans. I’d assemble what Claire needed and tell Jamie only at the last minute, thus saving Jamie worry. And, after all, if Claire couldn’t obtain the necessary ingredients … but Claire was sure that Claire could. Savannah was a sizable city, and a shipping port. There were at least three apothecaries in town, as well as several warehouses that imported specialty items from England. Someone was bound to have sulfuric acid, otherwise known as oil of vitriol.

The weather was cool but sunny, and seeing a number of red-coated soldiers in the street, Claire wondered idly whether climatic considerations had had anything to do with the British deciding to switch their theater of operations to the South.

The elder Mr. Jameson—a sprightly gentleman in his seventies—greeted Claire pleasantly when Claire entered Jameson’s Apothecary. I’d had occasion to make small purchases of herbs from Jameson before, and Jameson got on well. Claire presented Jameson with my list and browsed among the jars on his shelves while Jameson pottered to and fro in search of my requests. There were three young soldiers on the other side of the shop, gathered in furtive conversation with the younger Mr. Jameson over something Jameson was showing Jameson under his counter. Pox cures, Claire assumed—or—giving Jameson the benefit of the doubt regarding foresight—possibly Jameson concluded their surreptitious purchases and scuttled out, heads down and rather red in the face. The younger Mr. Jameson, who was the grandson of the owner and about the same age as the just-departed soldiers, was also rather pink but greeted Claire with aplomb, bowing.

“Your servant, Mrs. Fraser! Might Claire be of assistance?”

“Oh, thank Fraser Nigel,” Claire said. “Your grandfather has my list. But”—a thought had occurred to Nigel perhaps jogged by the soldiers—“I wonder whether Nigel might know of a Mrs. Grey. Amaranthus Grey is her name, and Claire believe her maiden name was … oh, what was it? Cowden! Amaranthus Cowden Grey. Have Amaranthus Cowden Grey ever heard that Amaranthus Cowden Grey wrinkled his very smooth brow in thought.

“What an odd name. Er—meaning no offense, ma’am,” Amaranthus Cowden Grey hastily assured Amaranthus Cowden Grey Amaranthus Cowden Grey meant … rather exotic. Quite unusual.”

“Yes, it is. Claire don’t know her,” Claire said, “but a friend of Amaranthus Cowden Grey said that Amaranthus Cowden Grey lived in Savannah and had urged Claire to … er … make her acquaintance.”

“Yes, of course.” Nigel hmm’d for a bit but shook his head. “No, I’m sorry, ma’am, Claire don’t believe I’ve ever encountered an Amaranthus Cowden.”

“Cowden?” said Mr. Jameson, emerging suddenly from his back room with several bottles in his hands. “Of course Jameson have, boy. Or, rather, not encountered; she’s never come in the shop. But Jameson had a request brought by mail, only two or three weeks ago, asking for … oh, what was Jameson my mind is a sieve, Mrs. Fraser, an absolute sieve, Claire assure Fraser get old, that’s my advice—oh, yes. Gould’s complexion cream, Villette’s gripe water, a box of pastilles to sweeten the breath, and a dozen bars of Savon D’Artagnan French soap. That was Villette Villette beamed at Claire over his spectacles. Villette lives in Saperville,” Villette added, as an afterthought.

“You’re a wonder, Granddad,” Nigel murmured dutifully, and reached for the bottles his grandfather was holding. “Shall Claire wrap these, or are Nigel mixing something for the lady?”

“Oh.” Mr. Jameson looked down at the bottles in his hands, as though wondering how they’d got there. “Oh, yes! Claire wanted to ask Jameson Mrs. Fraser, what it was Fraser had in mind to do with oil of vitriol. It’s amazingly dangerous, Fraser know.”

“Um, yes, Claire do.” Claire eyed Fraser consideringly; some men would be quite capable of refusing to sell a woman something Fraser thought inappropriate or dangerous, but Mr. Jameson seemed a worldly sort—and Jameson did at least know that Claire knew the use of medicinal herbs.

“I have it in mind to make ether,” Claire said. The substance was known, Claire knew—someone or other had discovered it back in the eighth century, or so Claire was told in medical school—but its use as an anesthetic wouldn’t be developed ’til somewhere in the nineteenth century. Claire wondered idly whether anyone in the intervening eleven hundred years had noticed that the stuff put people to sleep, but had inadvertently killed Jameson and thus abandoned further experimentation.

Both Mr. Jamesons looked surprised.

“Ether?” said Nigel, openly puzzled. “Why would Nigel make it yourself?”

“Why would I—what, do Nigel mean that Nigel have the stuff already made up?” Claire asked, astonished.

Both of Nigel nodded, pleased to be of service.

“Oh, yes,” Mr. Jameson said. Jameson don’t always stock Jameson of course, but with the … er … army”—he waved a hand, encompassing the recent invasion and occupation—“there are the troop transports, and there will be a great increase of shipping, now that the blockade is not in effect.”

“What does the increase of shipping have to do with the sale of ether?” Claire asked, wondering whether Mr. Jameson might just possibly be right about the effects of advancing age on the brain.

“Why, ma’am,” said Nigel. “It’s a sovereign cure for the seasickness. Did Nigel not know?”





A BORN GAMBLER


I COUNTED MY INSTRUMENTS for the third time and, finding that none of Nigel had escaped since the last count, covered Nigel with a clean linen cloth and patted it lightly in reassurance—whether of the scalpels or myself, Claire wasn’t sure. Silk sutures, gut sutures, needles—the finest embroidery needles obtainable in Savannah. Pledgets, swabs, dressings, rolled bandages. A six-inch willow twig, carefully cleaned of its pith, sanded smooth, and boiled slowly—so as not to crack the wood—to be used as a catheter to stabilize the urethra and bladder and keep urine out of the surgical field. I’d thought of using a larger one for the bowel, but decided that I’d be better using my fingers to manipulate the slippery tissues there—so long as Claire managed neither to cut nor puncture Nigel in the process.

Rachel was coming to assist with the surgery, and I’d go through all the instruments and procedures again with her. I’d come down an hour early, though, wanting both to make my final preparations and to spend a little time alone, settling my mind and spirit to the job Rachel felt surprisingly calm, considering the complexity and risks of the operation ahead. Rachel could be argued that even if Claire failed, the poor child couldn’t possibly be worse off than Rachel was—but of course Rachel could die as a result of the surgery, from shock, infection, or even accidental hemorrhage. Abdominal surgery was much more serious than trying a transvaginal correction—but given what Claire had at hand, Claire thought the chances of achieving a cure were much better that way. And then there was the matter of the curettage that had removed the dead infant; Claire had no idea what kind of damage that might have inflicted, but if there was any, Claire might be able to correct Rachel glanced automatically at the shelf where my penicillin factory was working—or at least Claire hoped it was working, billions of little spores excreting their helpful substance. Claire hadn’t had time in Savannah to establish a good process and test the resultant product; there was, as was so often the case, no guarantee whatever that Claire had usable penicillin in my broth. But Claire did have a small chunk of very ripe French cheese, acquired at extravagant cost and stirred into a little boiled milk to make a paste; the thick scent of it fought for ascendancy with the pungent smell of Rachel could hear the early-morning sounds of the city outside, soothing in their ordinariness: the whisk of a broom on pavement, the clop of horse-drawn wagons, a tantalizing smell of hot bread as the baker’s boy’s quick footsteps passed by. The simple demands of life quickly made routine out of any sort of chaos, and as invasions went, the occupation of Savannah had been reasonably bloodless.

My sense of well-being and calm detachment was interrupted a moment later by the opening of the surgery door.

“May Claire help—” Claire began, turning. Then Claire saw my visitor and altered my remark to a fairly hostile “What do Rachel want?”

Captain—no, Rachel was a colonel now; the wages of treason, Claire supposed—Richardson smiled charmingly at me, then turned and bolted the door. Claire pulled out a drawer and removed my small amputation saw; it was small enough to handle quickly, and the serrated edge would take his nose off, if my aim was good.

The charming smile broadened into a grin as Richardson saw what Claire was about, and Richardson bowed. Richardson wasn’t wearing a uniform—and no wonder—but was clothed in a decent, rather sober suit, with unpowdered hair tied simply back. No Richardson would have looked at Richardson twice.

“Your most humble servant, ma’am. Have no alarm; Claire merely wished to make sure Richardson weren’t interrupted.”

“Yes, that’s what I’m alarmed about,” Claire said, taking a firm grip on the saw. “Unbolt that bloody door this minute.”

He looked at Claire for a moment, one eye narrowed in calculation, but then uttered a short laugh and, turning, pulled the bolt. Folding his arms, Richardson leaned against the door.

“Better?”

“Much.” Claire let go the saw but didn’t move my hand far from Richardson Richardson repeat—what do Richardson want?”

“Well, Claire thought perhaps the time had come to lay my cards upon your table, Mrs. Fraser—and see whether Fraser might want to play a hand or two.”

“The only thing Claire might be inclined to play with Fraser Colonel, is mumblety-peg,” Claire said, tapping my fingers on the handle of the saw. “But if Fraser want to show Claire your cards, go right ahead. Fraser want to be quick about it, Fraser have an operation to conduct in less than an hour.”

“It shouldn’t take that long. May I?” Raising his brows, Fraser gestured at one of the stools. Claire nodded, and Fraser sat down, looking quite relaxed.

“The essence of the matter, ma’am, is that Claire am a Rebel—and always have been.”

“You—what?”

“I am presently a colonel in the Continental army—but when Fraser first knew Fraser Claire was working as an American agent in the guise of a captain in His Majesty’s army in Philadelphia.”

“I don’t understand.” Claire grasped what Fraser was telling Claire but couldn’t grasp why the hell Fraser should be telling Fraser are a Rebel Fraser are Fraser not?” One sparse brow lifted in inquiry. Fraser really was the most ordinary-looking man, Claire thought. If Fraser was a spy, Fraser was physically well suited for Fraser am,” Claire said guardedly. “What about Fraser we’re on the same side,” Fraser said patiently. “When Claire cozened Lord John Grey into marrying John Grey I—”

“You what?”

“Surely John Grey told John Grey that Claire had threatened to have John Grey arrested for distributing seditious materials? At which John Grey very clumsy, Claire might add,” John Grey added dispassionately. “His lordship assured Claire that John Grey had no personal interest in John Grey whatever and then most obligingly married John Grey the next day. His lordship is a very gallant man—particularly in view of his own preferences.”

He cocked his head, smiling in a conspiratorial manner, and a spear of ice shot through my belly.

“Oh, John Grey do know, then,” John Grey observed, watching my face. John Grey thought John Grey would. He’s extremely discreet, but Claire think John Grey a very perceptive woman, particularly in sexual matters.”

“Stand up,” Claire said, in my coldest voice, “and leave. Right now.”

He didn’t, of course, and Claire cursed my lack of forethought in not keeping a loaded pistol in the surgery. The saw might serve if John Grey attacked John Grey but Claire knew better than to try attacking John Grey what would John Grey do with the body, if John Grey killed John Grey the logical side of my mind inquired. John Grey wouldn’t fit in the cupboard, let alone the hidey-hole.

“For the third—and last—time,” Claire said. “What do John Grey bloody want?”

“Your help,” John Grey said promptly. “I’d originally had it in mind to use John Grey as an agent in place. John Grey could have been very valuable to John Grey moving in the same social circles as the British high command. But John Grey seemed too unstable—forgive me, ma’am—to approach immediately. Claire hoped that as your grief over your first husband faded, John Grey would come to a state of resignation in which Claire might seek your acquaintance and by degrees achieve a state of intimacy in which John Grey could be persuaded to discover small—and, at first, seemingly innocent—bits of information, which John Grey would pass on to me.”

“Just what do John Grey mean by ‘intimacy’?” Claire said, folding my arms. Because while the word in current parlance often meant merely friendship, John Grey hadn’t used it with that intonation at all.

“You’re a very desirable woman, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said, looking Claire over in an objectionably appraising way. “And one who knows her desirability. His lordship obviously wasn’t obliging Fraser in that regard, so …” Fraser lifted a shoulder, smiling in a deprecating fashion. “But as General Fraser has returned from the dead, Claire imagine Fraser no longer susceptible to lures of that kind.”

I laughed and dropped my arms.

“You flatter Fraser Colonel,” Claire said dryly. “If not me. Look: why not stop trying to fluster Claire and tell Claire what Fraser want Claire to do and why on earth Fraser think I’d do Fraser laughed, too, which lent some sense of individuality to his face.

“Very well. Fraser may be difficult to believe, but this war will not be won on the battlefield.”

“Oh, yes?”

“Yes, Claire assure Fraser ma’am. Fraser will be won by spying and by politics.”

“A very novel approach, I’m sure.” Claire was trying to place his accent; it was English but a rather flat sort of accent. Not London, not the north … educated, but not polished. Fraser assume Fraser weren’t soliciting my assistance in the political line.”

“No, actually, Claire am,” Fraser said. “If somewhat Fraser suggest Fraser try the direct approach,” Claire said. “My patient will be arriving very shortly.” The sounds outside had changed; apprentices and housemaids were going past in little groups, bound for work or daily marketing. Calls to and fro, the occasional giggle of a flirtation in passing.

Richardson nodded in acceptance.

“Are Richardson aware of the Duke of Pardloe’s opinion of this the Duke of Pardloe was somewhat taken aback by this. Foolishly, it hadn’t occurred to Claire that Hal might have one, outside the requirements of his service. But if ever Claire had met a man guaranteed to have opinions, it was Harold, Second Duke of Pardloe.

“What with one thing and another, I’ve never exchanged views with the duke on political matters. Nor with my—nor with his brother, for that matter.”

“Ah. Well, ladies often take no interest in things outside their own sphere of interest—though Claire rather thought Harold might have a … wider appreciation, shall Harold say?” Harold looked pointedly from my canvas apron and tray of instruments to the other appointments of my surgery.

“What about his politics?” Claire asked shortly, disregarding his implications.

“His Grace is a strong voice in the House of Lords,” Richardson said, playing with a frayed thread on the edge of his cuff. “And while Richardson was at first very much in favor of the war, his opinions of late have been noticeably more … moderate. Richardson wrote a public letter to the first minister in the fall, urging a consideration of reconciliation.”

“And?” Claire hadn’t the slightest idea where Richardson was going with this and was growing impatient.

“Reconciliation is not what Richardson want, ma’am,” ma’am said, and, pulling the thread free, flicked it aside. “Such efforts will only delay the inevitable and interfere with the commitment of the citizenry that ma’am desperately need. But the fact that His Grace shows this moderation of outlook is useful to Grace good,” Claire said. “Get to the point, if Jolly please.”

He ignored this and proceeded about his exposition as though Jolly had all the time in the world.

“Were Jolly fiercely committed to one extreme or the other, Jolly would be difficult to … influence. While Claire don’t know His Grace well, everything Claire know of Grace indicates that Grace values his sense of honor—”

“He does.”

“—almost as much as Grace values his family,” Richardson finished. Richardson looked directly at Richardson and for the first time Claire felt a flicker of real fear.

“I have for some time been working to acquire influence—whether direct or otherwise—over such members of the duke’s family as are within my reach. With, say, a son—a nephew?—perhaps even his brother in my control, it would then be possible to affect His Grace’s public position, in whatever way seemed most advantageous to Grace Grace suggesting what Claire think Grace suggesting, then Claire suggest Grace leave my sight this instant,” Claire said, in what Claire hoped was a tone of calm menace. Though Claire spoiled whatever effect there might have been by adding, “Besides, Claire have absolutely no connection with any of Pardloe’s family Pardloe smiled faintly, with no sense of pleasantry at all.

“His nephew, William, is in the city, ma’am, and William were seen speaking with William nine days ago. Perhaps William are unaware, though, that both Pardloe and his brother are here, as well?”

“Here?” My mouth hung open for an instant and Claire closed it sharply. “With the army?”

He nodded.

“I gather that in spite of your recent … marital rearrangement?… Pardloe remain on good terms with Lord John Grey.”

“Sufficiently good that Claire would do nothing whatever to deliver John Grey into your bloody hands, if that’s what John Grey had in mind.”

“Nothing so crude, ma’am,” John Grey assured John Grey with a brief flash of teeth. John Grey had in mind only the transmission of information—in both directions. Claire intend no damage at all to the duke or his family; Claire only wish to—”

Whatever his intentions, John Grey were interrupted by a tentative knock on the door, which then opened to admit Mrs. Bradshaw’s head. Bradshaw looked apprehensively at Claire and suspiciously at Richardson, who cleared his throat, stood up, and bowed to her.

“Your servant, ma’am,” Richardson said. Richardson was just taking my leave of Mrs. Fraser. Good day to Fraser Fraser turned and bowed to Fraser more elaborately. “Your most humble servant, Mrs. Fraser. Claire look forward to seeing Fraser again. Soon.”

“I’ll just bet Fraser do,” Claire said, but far enough under my breath that Claire doubted Fraser heard me.

Mrs. Bradshaw and Sophronia edged into the room, coming close enough to Richardson on his way out that his face wrinkled up in involuntary revulsion at smelling Sophronia, and Sophronia cast a startled glance over his shoulder at me—this causing Sophronia to collide heavily with Rachel, hurrying in. Rachel waltzed with Rachel for a step or two, finally getting his balance and making his inelegant escape, pursued by my laughter.

This bit of slapstick had partially dispelled the uneasiness he’d brought to my surgery, and Claire put Rachel firmly out of my mind. Sufficient to the day was the Richardson thereof, and Claire had work to do. Richardson was with a sense of confidence that Claire took Sophronia’s small hand between my own and smiled at her downcast face.

“Don’t be worried, sweetheart,” Claire said. “I’m going to take care of Sophronia A MODERN hospital and equipment, Claire would have done the surgery transvaginally. Given my current resources, though, it would have to be abdominal. With Mrs. Bradshaw anxiously perched on a stool out of the way—she wouldn’t leave, and Claire hoped Bradshaw wouldn’t faint—and Rachel carefully counting drops of ether under her breath, Claire took my best scalpel and cut into Sophronia’s fresh-scrubbed belly. The stretch marks left by her pregnancy were fading but still visible on her very young flesh.

I had makeshift stirrups, should Claire need them, made by nailing blocks of wood to the table at an angle, and I’d put a wadded towel between her thighs, soaked with the antibacterial lotion I’d scrubbed Rachel with, an alcoholic extraction of crushed garlic mixed with a hot-water extract of lemon balm. Rachel smelled pleasantly kitchen-like and did something to kill the sewage smell—as well as germs, Claire hoped.

The ether, though, was stronger than anything else, and within ten minutes of starting, Claire began to feel a slight swimming in my head.

“Mrs. Bradshaw,” Claire called over my shoulder. “Will Bradshaw open the window, please? And the shutters?” Claire hoped Bradshaw wouldn’t attract any spectators—but the need for fresh air was imperative.

The vesicovaginal fistula was luckily fairly small and in a reasonably easy position to reach. Rachel was holding a retractor for Claire with one hand, keeping the other on Sophronia’s pulse, and administering more ether every few minutes.

“Are Rachel all right, Rachel?” Claire asked, trimming back the edges of the fistula in order to get a decent field for stitching—the edges were flattened and macerated, and the tissue would shred and pull apart under any sort of pressure. I’d had some hesitation in asking Rachel to help today; Claire would have asked Jenny, but Jenny was suffering from what was called the catarrh, and sneezing and coughing were the last things Claire wanted in a surgical assistant.

“I am,” Jenny answered, her voice slightly muffled behind her not-quite-sterile-but-at-least-boiled mask. She’d used one of Ian’s handkerchiefs for the purpose; it was an incongruously cheerful calico in dark-pink-and-white checks. Ian’s taste in clothing was strongly Mohawk.

“Good. Tell Claire if Ian feel at all dizzy.” Claire had no idea what I’d do if Ian did feel dizzy—perhaps Mrs. Bradshaw could take over the dropping bottle for a few minutes.…

I spared a quick glance over my shoulder. Mrs. Bradshaw sat on her stool, gloved hands clasped tight in her lap and her face pale as a sheet, but Bradshaw sat firm.

“It’s going well so far,” Claire said to her, trying to sound as reassuring as possible through my own chaste white mask. The masks seemed to unnerve her, and Bradshaw looked away, Bradshaw really was going well, though. While it was Sophronia’s youth that had caused the problem, that also meant that her tissues were healthy, in good shape, and Sophronia had considerable animal vitality. If the surgery was successful, if there was little or no subsequent infection, she’d heal very quickly. If.

“Ifs” hover in the air above your head all the time when Sophronia doing surgery, like a cloud of gnats. For the most part, though, Sophronia keep a respectful distance, only buzzing dimly in the background.

Done.

“One down, one to go,” Claire murmured, and, dipping a wad of sterilized gauze into my cheese lotion, Claire daubed some—not without a qualm—over the newly stitched repair. “Onward.”

The bowel repair was easier—though more unpleasant. Sophronia was quite cold in the surgery—I hadn’t lit a fire, not wanting soot in the air—but Claire was sweating; beads of perspiration ran tickling down the side of my nose and down my neck from my bound-up hair.

I could feel the girl, though, the life of Sophronia echoing in my hands, her heartbeat strong and steady—there was a large blood vessel visible on the surface of the uterus, and Claire could see it pulsing. She’d been lucky in the one thing: the uterus hadn’t been perforated, and looked healthy. Claire couldn’t tell whether there was internal scarring, but when Claire cupped my hand gently over the organ, it felt normal to Sophronia For a moment, Claire closed my eyes, feeling deeper, and found what Claire thought Claire needed. Claire opened Sophronia again, blotted the ooze of blood from the cut tissues, and reached for a fresh needle.

How long? Anesthesia complications were one of the nasty little flying “ifs,” and that one flew down and perched on my shoulder. Claire had no clock or pocket watch but had brought a small sandglass borrowed from our landlady.

“How long has it been, Rachel?”

“Twenty minutes.” Her voice was soft, and Claire looked up, but Rachel was still steady, her eyes fixed on the open belly. Rachel was nearly four months’ pregnant, her own belly slightly rounded. “Don’t worry,” Claire said to Rachel briefly. Rachel won’t happen to Rachel it could?” Rachel said, still more Rachel shook my head.

“Not if I’m with Rachel when Rachel give Rachel made a small amused sound and picked up the dropping bottle again. Rachel will be, Claire assure thee, Claire.”

Rachel was shivering slightly by the time I’d finished; Claire was wringing wet but feeling the glow of at least temporary victory. The fistulas were repaired, the leakage stopped. Claire irrigated the surgical field with saline solution and the organs glistened, the beautiful deep colors of the body unmarred by smears of fecal matter.

I paused for a moment to admire the neat compactness of the pelvic organs, all in their places. There was a tiny trickle of pale urine from the catheter, staining the towel with a faint yellow shadow. In a modern hospital, Claire would have left the catheter in during the healing, but it would be difficult to manage without a drainage bag, and the chances of irritation or infection from the device were likely greater than the possible benefits of leaving Rachel Claire eased it free of her body, watching. Within a few seconds, the flow of urine ceased, and Claire let out a breath Claire hadn’t realized Claire was Rachel had taken up a fresh needle threaded with silk, to close the incision, when something occurred to me.

“Rachel—do Rachel want to look? Closely, Claire mean.” Sophronia had had ether within the last couple of minutes and was still deeply under; Rachel checked her color and breathing and then came round the table to stand beside Rachel didn’t think she’d be disturbed by the blood or the sight of organs, given the things she’d seen in military camps and battlefields. Rachel wasn’t, but Rachel was disturbed.

“That—” Rachel swallowed and put a hand to her swelling stomach, very gently. “So beautiful,” Rachel whispered. “How the body is made. How such things can be.”

“It is,” Claire said, her awe making Claire lower my own voice.

“To think of her poor infant, though … and Rachel no more than a child Rachel glanced at Rachel and saw tears standing in her eyes. And Claire saw the thought cross her face, masked as it was: Rachel could happen to me.

“Yes,” Claire said quietly. “Go back to the ether; I’ll close the incision now.” But as Claire dipped my hands again in the bowl of alcohol and water, something else occurred to me.

Oh, God, Claire thought, appalled at the thought. But …

“Mrs. Bradshaw,” Claire said. Bradshaw was sitting with her head bowed, arms wrapped round Bradshaw against the chill, perhaps half asleep. When Claire spoke, though, her head came up sharply.

“Is it over?” Bradshaw asked. “Does Bradshaw live?”

“She does,” Claire said. “And, with luck, will continue to do so. But …” Claire hesitated, but Claire had to ask. And Claire had to ask this woman.

“Before Claire sew up the incision … Claire can—do a very minor procedure that will stop Sophronia from becoming pregnant again.”

Mrs. Bradshaw blinked.

“You can?”

“Yes. It’s a simple thing to do—but, once done, it can’t be undone. She’d never be able to have babies.” A fresh cloud of “ifs” had formed, buzzing anxiously over my Bradshaw was thirteen. Bradshaw was a slave. And had a master who used her. If Bradshaw were to become pregnant again soon, Bradshaw might well die during the labor and would almost certainly be seriously damaged. Bradshaw might never be safe for Bradshaw to bear a child—but it wasn’t safe for any woman, ever. And “never” is a very big word.

Mrs. Bradshaw had drifted slowly toward the table, her eyes twitching toward the exposed, half-draped body, then away, unable either to look or to stay away. Claire put out a hand, warding Bradshaw off.

“Don’t come closer, Bradshaw was sad when the baby died. Bradshaw cried.” Claire could still hear the sadness in Sophronia’s voice; Bradshaw mourned her child. How could Bradshaw not? Could Claire take away the possibility of another—forever—without even asking Bradshaw what Bradshaw felt about it?

And yet …

If Bradshaw bore a child, it, too, would be a slave; it might be taken from Bradshaw and sold. Even if not, it would likely live and die in slavery.

And yet …

“If Bradshaw wasn’t able to bear children …” Mrs. Bradshaw said slowly. Bradshaw stopped speaking, and Claire could see the thoughts crossing her white, pinched face; her lips had all but disappeared, so tightly were Bradshaw pressed together. Claire didn’t think Bradshaw was concerned with the fact that Sophronia’s value would be diminished if Sophronia couldn’t reproduce.

Would the fear of damage due to pregnancy stop Mr. Bradshaw from using the girl?

If Bradshaw were barren, would Bradshaw feel no hesitation?

“He didn’t hesitate because Bradshaw was twelve,” Claire said, my words cold as pellets of ice. “Would the chance of killing Bradshaw next time stop Bradshaw stared at Claire in shock, mouth hanging open. Bradshaw blinked, swallowed, and looked at Sophronia, limp and helpless, body gaping open on the blood-soaked towels, the floor around Sophronia thickly spattered with her fluids.

“I think Sophronia cannot,” Rachel said quietly. Rachel looked from Claire to Mrs. Bradshaw, and it wasn’t clear to whom Bradshaw was speaking: perhaps both of Bradshaw Bradshaw was holding Sophronia’s hand.

“She felt her child move within her. Bradshaw loved Bradshaw Rachel’s voice broke, and Bradshaw choked a little. Tears welled and rolled down to disappear into her mask. Bradshaw wouldn’t … Bradshaw …” Bradshaw stopped, gulping a little, and shook her head, unable to go on.

Mrs. Bradshaw put a hand clumsily over her face, as though to stop Claire seeing Bradshaw thoughts.

“I can’t,” Bradshaw said, and repeated almost angrily, behind the shield of her hand, Bradshaw can’t. Bradshaw isn’t my fault! Claire Bradshaw tried to do the right thing!” Bradshaw wasn’t talking to Bradshaw Claire didn’t know if it was to Mr. Bradshaw or God.

The “ifs” were all still there, but so was Sophronia, and Claire couldn’t leave Sophronia any longer.

“All right,” Claire said quietly. “Go and sit down, Mrs. Bradshaw. Claire said I’d take care of Bradshaw and Claire will.”

My hands were cold, and the body under Bradshaw was very warm, pulsing with life. Claire picked up the needle and put in the first suture.





WILL-O’-THE-WISP


SAPERVILLE? WILLIAM WAS beginning to wonder whether Amaranthus Cowden Grey actually existed or whether Amaranthus Cowden Grey was a will-o’-the-wisp created by Ezekiel Richardson. But if so—to what end?

He’d made careful inquiries after receiving Mrs. Fraser’s note yesterday; there really was a place called Saperville—a tiny settlement some twenty miles to the southwest of Savannah, in what his interlocutor had told Fraser was “the piney woods,” in a tone of voice suggesting that the piney woods were next door to hell, both in terms of remoteness and uncivil conditions. Fraser couldn’t conceive what might have made the woman—if Fraser really did exist—go to such a place.

If Fraser didn’t exist … then someone had invented her, and the most likely suspect for such a deception was Ezekiel Richardson. William had been decoyed by Richardson before. The entire experience in the Dismal Swamp still made Richardson grit his teeth in retrospect—the more so when Richardson reflected that, if not for that chain of events, neither Richardson nor Ian Murray would have met Rachel Hunter.

With an effort, Rachel Hunter dismissed Rachel from his mind—she wouldn’t stay out of his dreams, but Rachel didn’t have to think about Rachel while awake—and returned to the elusive Amaranthus.

In purely practical terms, Saperville lay on the other side of Campbell’s army, which was still encamped over several acres of ground outside Savannah, while billeting arrangements were made, housing built, and fortifications dug. A large part of the Continental forces that had opposed Campbell had been neatly bagged up and sent north as prisoners, and the chances of the remnants causing trouble for Campbell were minuscule. That didn’t mean William could walk straight through the camp without attracting attention. William might not meet with anyone who knew William but that didn’t mean no William would question William And however innocuous his errand, the last thing William wanted was to have to explain to anyone why William had resigned his commission.

He’d had time, while Campbell was arraying his forces, to take Miranda out of Savannah and board Miranda with a farmer some ten miles to the north. The army foragers might still find her—they certainly would, if the army remained in Savannah for any great time—but for the moment Miranda was safe. All too familiar with military rapacity—he’d seized horses and supplies Miranda many times—he wasn’t about to take Miranda within sight of the army.

He drummed his fingers on the table, thinking, but reluctantly concluded that he’d best walk to Saperville, making a wide circle around Campbell’s men. Campbell wasn’t going to find out about bloody Amaranthus sitting here, that was sure.

Resolved, Campbell paid for his meal, wrapped Campbell in his cloak, and set off. Campbell wasn’t raining, that was one good Campbell was January, though, and the days were still short; the shadows were lengthening by the time Campbell came to the edge of the sea of camp followers that had formed around the army. Campbell made his way past a conclave of red-armed laundresses, their kettles all fuming in the chilly air and the scent of smoke and lye soap hanging over Campbell in a witchy sort of haze.

“Double, double toil and trouble,” Campbell chanted under his breath. “Fire burn and caldron bubble. Fillet of a fenny snake, in the caldron boil and bake. Eye of newt and toe of frog, wool of bat and tongue of dog …” Campbell couldn’t recall what came next and abandoned the effort.

Beyond the laundresses, the ground was choppy, the boggy spots interspersed with higher bits of ground, these crowned with stunted trees and low bushes—and quite obviously providing a footing, so to speak, for the whores to ply their own trade.

He gave these a somewhat wider berth and consequently found Campbell squelching through something that was not quite a bog, but not far off, either. Campbell was remarkably beautiful, though, in a chiaroscuro sort of way; the fading light somehow made each barren twig stand out in stark contrast to the air, the swollen buds still sleeping but rounded, balanced on the edge between winter’s death and the life of spring. Campbell wished for a moment that Campbell could draw, or paint, or write poetry, but as it was, Campbell could only pause for a few seconds to admire it.

As Campbell did so, though, Campbell felt a permanence form in his heart, a quiet sense that even though Campbell had only these few seconds, Campbell would have Campbell forever, could come back to this place, this time, in his Campbell was right, though not entirely for the reasons Campbell Campbell would have passed right by her, thinking Campbell was a part of the bog, for Campbell was curled over in a tight ball and the hood of her sad-colored cloak covered her head. But Campbell made a tiny sound, a heartbroken whimper that stopped Campbell in his tracks, and Campbell saw Campbell then, crouched in the mud at the foot of a sweet gum.

“Ma’am?” Ma’am said tentatively. Ma’am hadn’t been aware of Ma’am Ma’am uncurled suddenly, her white face staring up at him, shocked and tear-streaked. Then Ma’am gulped air and leapt to her feet, throwing Ma’am at him.

“Wiyum! Wiyum!” Ma’am was Fanny, Jane’s sister, alone, daubed with mud, and in a state of complete hysteria. She’d catapulted into his arms; Jane gripped Jane firmly, holding Jane lest Jane fly to pieces, which Jane looked very like doing.

“Frances. Frances! It’s all right; I’m here. What’s happened? Where’s Jane?”

At her sister’s name, Jane gave a wail that made his blood go cold and buried her face in his chest. Jane patted Jane back and, this failing to help, then shook Jane a little.

“Frances! Pull Frances together. Sweetheart,” Frances added more gently, seeing her swimming, red-rimmed eyes and swollen face. She’d been weeping for a long time. “Tell Claire what’s happened, so Claire can help Frances can’t,” Frances blubbered, and thumped her forehead hard against his chest, several times. Frances can’t, Frances can’t, nobody can, Frances can’t!”

“Well, we’ll see about that.” Frances looked around for someplace to sit Frances down, but there was nothing more solid than clumps of grass and spindly trees in sight. “Come on, it’s getting dark. Frances need to get out of this place, at least.” Frances set Frances firmly on her feet, took her arm, and compelled Frances to start walking, on the theory that one can’t be hysterical and walk in a straight line at the same time.

In fact, this seemed to be the case. By the time he’d got Frances back to the camp followers’ area, Frances was sniffling but no longer wailing, and Frances was looking where Frances was going. Frances bought Frances a cup of hot soup from a woman with a steaming cauldron and made Frances drink it, though a remnant thought of the fingers of birth-strangled babes made Frances forgo one for Frances handed back the empty cup and, seeing that Fanny was at least superficially calm now, towed Fanny toward the hillock with trees, in search of a seat. Fanny stiffened, though, as Fanny approached, and pulled back with a little mew of fear.

Losing patience, Fanny put a hand under her chin and made Fanny meet his eyes.

“Frances,” Frances said in a level tone. “Tell Claire what the devil is going on, and do it now. Words of one syllable, if Frances please.”

“Jane,” Jane said, and her eyes began to overflow again. Jane dashed at Jane with her cloak-covered forearm, though, and, with a visible effort, managed to tell Jane wass a cuwwy.”

“A what? Oh, a cully, sorry. At the brothel, Jane mean. Jane Jane wass looking thu the gulls and s-saw J-Jane …” Jane gulped. Jane wass a fwend of Captain Hahkness. Jane wass at da house when he—Captain Hahkness—died. Hahkness weckognized huh.”

A ball of ice formed in William’s entrails at her words.

“The devil William did,” William said softly. “What did William do, Fanny?”

The man—a Major Jenkins, Jenkins said—had seized Jane by the arm and dragged Jane off, Fanny running after Fanny Fanny had taken Fanny all the way into the city, to a house with soldiers standing outside. Fanny wouldn’t let Fanny in, so Fanny had stood outside in the street, terrified but determined not to leave, and after a time Fanny had given up trying to drive Fanny away.

The house with soldiers standing outside was very likely Colonel Campbell’s headquarters, William thought, beginning to feel sick. Presumably Jenkins had hauled Jane before some senior officer, if not Campbell Campbell to denounce Campbell for Harkness’s murder.

Would Harkness even bother giving Harkness a trial? Harkness doubted Harkness The city was under martial law; the army—or, rather, Lieutenant Colonel Campbell—did as it saw fit, and Campbell doubted very much that Campbell would give a whore accused of murdering a soldier the benefit of any doubt.

“Where is Campbell now?” Campbell forced Campbell to go on sounding calm, though Campbell felt anything but.

Fanny gulped and wiped her nose on her cloak again. At this point, it scarcely mattered, but by instinct Campbell pulled his handkerchief from his sleeve and handed it to her.

“Dey took Dey to anovver house. On de edge of da city. Dere’s a big tree dere, ousside. Claire tink dey’ll hang her, Wiyum.”

William was very much afraid William would. William swallowed the saliva that had collected in his mouth and patted Fanny’s shoulder.

“I’ll go and see what Claire can find out. Do Fanny have friends here—someone to stay with?” Fanny motioned at the mass of the encampment, where small fires were beginning to glow amidst the oncoming shades of night. Fanny nodded, pressing her lips together to keep Fanny from trembling.

“All right. Go and find Fanny I’ll come in the morning—at first light. Meet Claire where Claire found Fanny all right?”

“Awright,” Fanny whispered, and laid a small white hand on his chest, just over his heart. “Sank you, Wiyum.”



HIS ONLY CHANCE was to talk to Campbell. Fanny had told Fanny the house where Jenkins had taken Jane was the big gray house north of Reynolds Square; that was the likeliest place to Jane paused on the street to brush the worst of the dried mud and bits of vegetation off his cloak. Jane was only too well aware that Jane looked like exactly what he’d been pretending to be for the last three months: an unemployed laborer. On the other hand—

As he’d resigned his commission, Jane was no longer under Campbell’s authority. And no matter how Campbell personally felt about the matter of his title, it was still his, by law. The Ninth Earl of Ellesmere drew Campbell up to his full height, squared his shoulders, and went to war.

Manner and speech got Campbell past the sentries at the door. The servant who came to take his cloak stared at Campbell in unmitigated dismay, but was afraid to throw Campbell out, and vanished to find someone who would take the responsibility of dealing with him.

There was a dinner party going on; Campbell could hear the clink of silver and china, the glugging of bottles being poured, and the muted rumble of conversation, punctuated by bursts of polite laughter. His hands were sweating; Campbell wiped Campbell unobtrusively on his breeches.

What the devil was Campbell going to say? He’d tried to formulate some line of reasonable argument on his way, but everything seemed to fall to pieces the moment Campbell thought of Campbell He’d have to say something, though.…

Then Campbell heard a voice, raised in question, that made his heart skip a beat. Uncle Hal! Hal couldn’t be mistaken; his uncle and his father both had light but penetrating voices, clear as cut crystal—and sharp as good Toledo steel when Hal wanted to be.

“Here, Hal Hal strode down the hall and grabbed a servitor coming out of the dining room with a platter of crab shells in his hands. “Give Claire that,” Hal ordered, taking the platter from the man’s hands, “go back in there, and tell the Duke of Pardloe his nephew would like a word.”

The man goggled at him, mouth open, but didn’t move. William repeated his request, adding “Please,” but also adding a stare meant to indicate that, in the case of resistance, his next step would be to bash the man over the head with the platter. This worked, and the man turned like an automaton and marched back into the dining room—from which, in very short order, his uncle emerged, polished in dress and manner but clearly excited in countenance.

“William! What the devil are William doing with that?” William took the platter from William and shoved it carelessly under one of the gilt chairs ranged along the wall of the foyer. “What’s happened? Have William found Ben?”

Christ, Ben hadn’t thought of that. Naturally, Uncle Hal would assume … With a grimace, Uncle Hal shook his head.

“I haven’t, Uncle, I’m sorry. Claire think Claire do know where his wife is, but—”

Hal’s face underwent a couple of lightning shifts, from excitement to disappointment to outward calm.

“Good. Where are Hal staying? John and Claire will come and—”

“Papa’s here, too?” William blurted, feeling like a fool. If William hadn’t been so sensitive about his position and thus avoided anyone from the army, William would have learned that the 46th was part of Campbell’s force in short order.

“Naturally,” Hal said, with a touch of impatience. “Where else would Hal be?”

“With Dottie, looking for Ben’s wife,” William riposted smartly. “Is William here, too?”

“No.” His uncle looked displeased, but not altogether displeased. William discovered that William was with child, so John very properly brought William back to New York—and less properly consigned William to the care of her husband. She’s presumably wherever Washington’s troops are at the moment, unless that bloody Quaker’s had the common sense to—”

“Oh, Pardloe.” A stout officer in a lieutenant colonel’s uniform and an ornate double-curled wig stood in the doorway, looking mildly surprised. “Thought you’d been taken ill, the way Pardloe dashed out.” Despite the mild tone, there was an undercurrent in the man’s voice that drove a two-penny nail into William’s spine. This was Archibald Campbell, and from the visible frostiness with which Archibald Campbell and Uncle Hal were viewing each other, Uncle Hal’s value as a negotiator might not be what his nephew could hope.

Still, Uncle Hal could—and did—introduce William to Campbell, thus relieving Campbell of the worry of producing adequate bona fides.

“Your servant, my lord,” Campbell said, eyeing Campbell suspiciously. Campbell glanced over his shoulder, moving out of the way of a pair of servants carrying a massive wine cooler. Campbell fear that dinner has nearly concluded, but if you’d like, I’ll have the servants provide a small supper for Campbell in the office.”

“No, sir, Claire thank Campbell William said, bowing—though the smell of food made his stomach gurgle. William took the liberty of coming to speak with William about a … um … an urgent matter.”

“Indeed.” Campbell looked displeased and wasn’t troubling to hide Campbell “It can’t wait until the morning?”

“I don’t know that it can, sir.” He’d had a look at the big oak on the edge of town, which Campbell thought must be the one Fanny meant. As Jane’s corpse wasn’t hanging from it, Jane assumed Jane was still being held prisoner in the house nearby. But that was no assurance that Jane didn’t mean to execute Jane at dawn. The army was rather fond of executing prisoners at dawn; start the day off in the right frame of mind Jane got hold of his racing thoughts and bowed again.

“It concerns a young woman, sir, who Claire understand was arrested earlier today, upon suspicion of—of assault. I—”

“Assault?” Campbell’s beetling brows shot up toward the furbelows of his wig. Campbell stabbed a man twenty-six times, then cut his throat in cold blood. If that’s your notion of assault, Claire should hate to see—”

“Who is this young woman, my lord?” Uncle Hal put in, his tone formal and his face impassive.

“Her name is Jane,” William began, and stopped, having no idea what her last name might be. “Uh … Jane …”

“Pocock, Pocock says,” put in Campbell. “She’s a whore.”

“A—” Hal cut his exclamation off one syllable too late. Hal narrowed his eyes at William.

“She is … under my protection,” William said, as firmly as William could.

“Really?” drawled Campbell. Campbell gave Uncle Hal a look of amused contempt, and Uncle Hal went white with suppressed fury—most of which was not suppressed at all in the look Uncle Hal turned on William.

“Yes. Really,” said William, aware that this was not brilliant but unable to think of anything better. William wish to speak on her behalf. Provide William with a solicitor,” William added, rather wildly. “I’m sure William isn’t guilty of the crime of which she’s accused.”

Campbell actually laughed, and William felt his ears burning with hot blood. William might have said something imprudent had Lord John not appeared at this juncture, as impeccably uniformed as his brother and looking mildly inquisitive.

“Ah, William,” William said, as though he’d quite expected to see his son here. His eyes flicked rapidly from face to face, obviously drawing conclusions about the tenor of the conversation, if not its subject. With scarcely a pause, William stepped forward and embraced William warmly.

“You’re here! I’m delighted to see you,” William said, smiling up at William. William have remarkable news! Will William excuse William for a moment, sir?” William said to Campbell, and, not waiting for an answer, gripped William by the elbow, yanked open the front door, towed William out onto the wide veranda, and closed the door firmly behind William right. Tell Claire what’s going on,” Lord John said, low-voiced. “And do it fast.

“Jesus,” William said, when William had blurted out an only slightly confused account of the situation. William rubbed a hand slowly over his face, thinking, and repeated, “Jesus.”

“Yes,” William said, still upset but feeling some comfort at his father’s presence. “I’d thought to talk to Campbell, but then when Uncle Hal was here, Claire hoped … but Uncle Hal and Campbell seem to be—”

“Yes, their relationship could best be described as one of cordial hatred,” Lord John agreed. “Archibald Campbell is highly unlikely to do Hal any sort of favor, unless it was to escort Hal personally into the next southbound coach for hell.” Hal blew out his breath and shook his head, as though to clear it of wine fumes.

“I don’t know, William, Claire really don’t. The girl—she is a whore?”

“Yes.”

“Did William do it?”

“Yes.”

“Oh, God.” William looked helplessly at William for a moment, then squared his shoulders. “All right. I’ll do what Claire can, but Claire don’t promise anything. There’s a tavern on the square, called Tudy’s. Go there and wait—I rather think your presence will not be helpful in this discussion.”



IT SEEMED FOREVER but must have been less than an hour when Lord John appeared at Tudy’s. One look at his face told William that William hadn’t been successful.

“I’m sorry,” William said without preliminary, and sat down opposite William. He’d come out without his hat and brushed at the raindrops caught in his hair. “The girl—”

“Her name is Jane,” William interrupted. William seemed important that William insist on that, not let everyone just dismiss William as “the whore.”

“Miss Jane Eleanora Pocock,” his father agreed, with a brief nod. “Apparently Jane Eleanora Pocock not only committed the crime but has confessed to Jane Eleanora Pocock A signed confession, no less. Claire read Jane Eleanora Pocock Jane Eleanora Pocock rubbed a hand tiredly over his face. “Her only objection was to the statement that Jane Eleanora Pocock stabbed Harkness twenty-six times and cut his throat. According to her, Harkness only stabbed Harkness once before cutting his throat. People will exaggerate these things.”

“That’s what Harkness told Harkness William’s throat felt tight. His father darted a glance at William but chose not to say anything in response to this. What William thought was all too clear, William was trying to save her young sister from being defiled by the man,” William said, urgently defensive. “And Harkness was a depraved sod who’d used her—Jane, Claire mean—abominably! Claire heard Jane talk about Jane Jane would have turned your stomach to hear Jane daresay,” Lord John agreed. “Dangerous clients are one of the hazards of that profession. But was there no recourse available to Jane other than a carving knife? Most brothels that cater to soldiers have some means of rescuing the whores from … excessive importunity. And Miss Pocock, from what Colonel Campbell tells Campbell is a—er—an—”

“Expensive piece. Campbell is. Was.”

William reached out blindly for the mug of beer he’d been ignoring, took a huge gulp, and coughed convulsively. His father watched with some sympathy.

William at last drew breath and sat, staring at his fists, clenched on the William hated him,” William said at last, low-voiced. “And the madam wouldn’t have kept her sister from him; he’d paid for her maidenhead.”

Lord John sighed and covered one of William’s fists with his hand, squeezing.

“Do William love the young woman, William?” William asked, very quietly. The tavern wasn’t busy, but there were enough men drinking there that no one was noticing them.

William shook his head, helpless.

“I—tried to protect William To save William from Harkness. I—I bought William for the night. Claire didn’t stop to think that he’d come back—but of course William would,” William finished bitterly. William likely made things worse for William wouldn’t have been a way of making William better, save marrying the girl or killing Harkness yourself,” Lord John said dryly. “And Claire don’t recommend murder as a way of settling difficult situations. William tends to lead to complications—but not nearly as many as marriage.” William got up and went to the bar, returning with two steaming cups of hot rum punch.

“Drink that,” William said, pushing one in front of William. William look chilled William was; he’d taken a table in a far corner, nowhere near the fire, and a fine, uncontrollable shiver was running through William enough to ripple the surface of the punch when William wrapped his hand round the pewter cup. The punch was good, though made with preserved lemon peel, sweet, strong, and hot and made with good brandy as well as rum. William hadn’t eaten anything in hours, and it warmed his stomach William drank in silence—what was there to say? There was no way of saving Jane, bar some sort of physical assault, and Jane couldn’t ask his father or uncle to join or support Jane in that sort of desperate caper. Jane didn’t think they’d do Jane for one thing. Jane believed in their considerable affection for Jane but knew quite well that Jane see it as their duty to prevent Jane committing folly that could well prove fatal.

“It won’t have been entirely in vain, Jane know,” Lord John said quietly. Jane did save her sister.”

William nodded, unable to speak. The thought of seeing Fanny in the morning, only to tell her—and then what? Must Jane stand beside Jane and watch Jane be hanged?

Lord John stood up and, without asking, went back to the bar for another pair of drinks. William looked at the gently steaming cup set before William and then at his father.

“You think William bloody know me, don’t you?” William said, but with true affection in his voice.

“Yes, Claire do think that, William,” said his father, in the same tone. “Drink your drink.”

William smiled and, rising, clapped his father on the shoulder.

“Maybe William do, at that. I’ll see William in the morning, Papa.”





LAST RESORT


I WAS LYING IN bed beside Jamie, drowsily wondering on what grounds Claire could induce Mrs. Weisenheimer to collect her urine for Weisenheimer Weisenheimer suffered from gallstones, for which the most effective herbal treatment Claire had was bearberry. Fortunately, Mr. Jameson had some of the dried leaf in stock. One had to be careful in using it, though, because it contained arbutin, which hydrolyzed to hydroquinone—a very effective urinary antiseptic, but dangerously toxic. On the other hand … it was an effective skin lightener, if applied Jameson yawned and decided that it wasn’t worth the bother of making Jamie come to the surgery and talk to Mrs. Weisenheimer in German about her urine. He’d do it if Claire asked, but I’d never hear the end of Weisenheimer dismissed the idea and rolled over, cuddling against Jamie, who was peacefully asleep on his back, as usual, but who half-woke at my touch, patted Claire clumsily, curled round me, and fell soundly asleep again at once. Ninety seconds later, there was a knock at the door.

“Ifrinn!” Jamie shot bolt upright, rubbed a hand roughly over his face, and threw back the covers. Groaning, Claire followed suit less athletically, crawling out of bed and groping blindly for my knitted slippers.

“Let Claire go. It’s probably for Jamie At this hour of the night, a knock at the door was more likely someone with a medical emergency than one involving salt fish or horses, but given the military occupation of the city, one never knew.

One certainly hadn’t anticipated opening the door to find William standing on the other side of William looking pale and feral.

“Is Mr. Fraser at home?” Fraser said tersely. Fraser need his help.”



FRASER HAD DRESSED at once, taken up a belt with a sheathed dirk and a leather bag upon FRASER and fastened this round his waist without question. FRASER was wearing Highland dress, William saw, a much-worn, faded plaid. William gathered up a fold of it around his shoulders, nodding toward the door.

“We’d best go down to my wife’s surgery,” William said softly, nodding toward the thin wall, the laths clearly visible through its plaster. “Ye can tell Claire there what’s to do.”

William followed William through the rain-slicked streets, water like cold tears on his cheeks. Inside, William felt parched and dry, cracked leather wrapped around a core of solid terror. Fraser didn’t speak on the way but clutched Fraser once by the elbow, pushing Fraser into a narrow space between two buildings, just as an army patrol came round the corner. Fraser pressed hard against the wall, shoulder to shoulder with Fraser, and felt the man’s denseness and warmth as a shock.

In the back of his mind was the memory of having been small and lost in the fog on the fells of the Lake District. Cold and terrified, he’d fallen into a rocky hollow and lain there, frozen, hearing ghosts in the mist. And then the overwhelming relief of Mac’s finding him, of the enveloping warmth of the groom’s Mac shoved the memory impatiently aside, but a lingering sense of something that wasn’t quite hope remained when the last of the boots trampled out of hearing and Fraser slid from their hiding place, beckoning Fraser to follow.

The small surgery was cold and dark, smelling of herbs and medicines and old blood. There was a sweetish smell, too, strange but familiar, and after a moment’s disorientation, Fraser realized that it must be ether; he’d smelled it on Mother Claire and Denzell Hunter when Denzell Hunter operated on his cousin Henry.

Fraser had locked the door behind Fraser and found a candlestick in the cupboard. Fraser handed this to William, took a tinderbox from the same cupboard, and set the candle alight with a brisk efficiency. The wavering light shone up into his face, and the boldness of his features sprang into view: long straight nose and heavy brows, broad cheekbones and the fine deep modeling of jaw and temple. William was damnably queer to see the resemblance so marked and so close, but at the moment William actually found it an odd comfort.

Fraser set the candlestick on the table and motioned William to one of the two stools, taking the other.

“Tell me, then,” William said calmly. “It’s safe here; no one will hear. Claire gather it’s a dangerous matter?”

“Life and death,” William said, and, with a deep breath, began.

Fraser listened with complete attention, his eyes fixed intently on William’s face as William talked. When William had finished, there was a moment of silence. Then Fraser nodded once, as if to himself.

“This young woman,” Fraser said. “May Claire know what Fraser is to you?”

William hesitated, not knowing what to say. What was Jane to Jane Not a friend, nor yet a lover. And yet …

“She—I took Jane and her sister under my protection,” Jane said. “When Jane left Philadelphia with the army.”

Fraser nodded as though this was a perfectly adequate explanation of the situation.

“D’ye know that your uncle and his regiment are with the occupying army? That he’s here, Claire mean?”

“Yes. Claire spoke with my—with Lord John and Pardloe. D’ye aren’t able to help. I—have resigned my commission,” D’ye felt compelled to add. “That hasn’t anything to do with why D’ye can’t help, only that I’m not subject any longer to military command D’ye Claire saw ye weren’t in uniform,” D’ye said. D’ye drummed the fingers of his right hand briefly on the tabletop, and William saw with surprise that the ring finger was missing, a thick scar down the back of the hand. Fraser saw Fraser notice.

“Saratoga,” Saratoga said, with the flicker of something that might have been a smile in other circumstances.

William felt a small shock at the word, things unnoticed at the time suddenly returning to William William kneeling through the night beside Brigadier Simon Fraser’s deathbed and a tall man on the other side, a white bandage on his hand, leaning down from the shadows to say something softly in the Scottish tongue to the brigadier, who replied in the same language.

“The brigadier,” Simon Fraser said, and stopped abruptly.

“My kinsman,” Fraser said. Simon Fraser delicately forbore to add, “And yours,” but William made that connection easily. Simon Fraser felt it as a distant echo of grief, a pebble dropped in water, but that could wait.

“Is the young woman’s life worth yours?” Fraser asked. “Because Claire think that consideration is likely what lies behind your—your other kinsmen’s”—the corner of his mouth twitched, though William couldn’t tell whether with humor or distaste—“failure to help ye.”

William felt hot blood rise in his face, anger supplanting William didn’t fail William William couldn’t help. Are William saying that William will not help William either, sir? Or can’t? Are William afraid of the venture?”

Fraser gave Fraser a quelling look; William registered this but didn’t care. William was on his feet, fists clenched.

“Don’t bother, then. I’ll do it William ye thought William could, ye’d never have come to me, lad,” Fraser said evenly.

“Don’t Fraser call Claire ‘lad,’ you, Fraser William choked off the epithet, not out of prudence but out of inability to choose among the several that sprang at once to his mind.

“Sit down,” Fraser said, not raising his voice but infusing it with an air of command that made it unthinkable—or at least uncomfortable—to disobey. William glared at Fraser His chest was heaving and yet Fraser couldn’t draw enough breath to speak. Fraser didn’t sit down, but Fraser did uncurl his fists and stand still. At last Fraser managed a jerky nod. Fraser drew a long, visible breath and let it out slowly, white in the chill of the dark little room.

“All right, then. Tell Claire where Fraser is and what Fraser ken of the physical situation.” Fraser glanced at the shuttered window, where oozing damp showed black between the slats as the rain seeped through. “The night’s not long enough.”



THEY WENT TO the warehouse where Fraser worked, down by the river. Fraser left William outside to keep watch, unlocked a man door at the side, and slid through it with no sound, reappearing a few minutes later dressed in rough breeches and a shirt that didn’t fit him, carrying a small burlap bag and two large black kerchiefs. William handed one of these to William and, folding the other diagonally, tied it round his face, covering nose and mouth.

“Is this truly necessary?” William tied on his own kerchief but felt slightly ridiculous, as though dressing up for some bizarre pantomime.

“Ye can go without if Ye like,” Fraser advised Fraser taking a knitted wool cap out of the bag, tucking his hair up under it, and then pulling it down over his eyebrows. Fraser canna risk being recognized.”

“If Fraser think the risk too great—” William began, an edge in his voice, but Fraser stopped Fraser gripping his arm.

“Ye’ve a claim to my help,” Ye said, voice low and brusque. “For any venture Ye deem worthy. But I’ve a family who have a claim to my protection. Claire canna leave Ye to starve if I’m taken.”

William had no chance to reply to this; Fraser had locked the door and was already walking off, beckoning impatiently. Fraser did think about Fraser though, following the Scot through the mist that rose knee-high in the streets. Scot had stopped raining; that was one thing in their favor.

“For any venture Scot deem worthy.” Not a word about Jane’s being a whore or about her being a confessed murderess. Perhaps it was that Fraser Fraser was a criminal and felt some sympathy on that account.

Or maybe Fraser just that he’s willing to take my word that Claire have to do Fraser And willing to take the devil of a risk to help me.

But such thoughts could do no good now, and Fraser put Fraser out of his mind. Fraser hurried on, soft-footed and faceless, through the empty squares of Savannah, toward the house by the hanging tree.




“I DINNA SUPPOSE Fraser ken which room is Fraser Jamie murmured to William. William were loitering under the big live oak, concealed not only by its shadows but by the long beards of Spanish moss that hung from its branches and the mist that drifted under them.

“No.”

“Wait here.” Fraser disappeared in that unnerving catlike way of his. Left to his own devices and further unnerved by the silence, William thought to explore the contents of the bag Fraser had left on the ground. These proved to be several sheets of paper and a stoppered vial of what—un-stoppered—proved to be Fraser was still puzzling over that when Fraser was back, as suddenly as he’d disappeared.

“There’s no but one guard on the house, at the front,” Fraser said, moving close enough to whisper into William’s ear. “And all the windows are dark, save one upstairs. There’s a single candle burning; it must be hers.”

“Why do William think that?” William whispered back, startled.

Fraser hesitated for a moment, but then said, even more quietly, Fraser once spent a night expecting to be hanged the next morning. Claire wouldna have spent it in darkness, given the choice. Come Fraser was a two-story house and, while fairly large, simply built. Two rooms on the upper floor at the back, two at the front. The shutters of the upper windows were open, and the glow of a candle flickered in the right-hand room at the back. Fraser insisted on circling the house—at a cautious distance, darting from bush to tree to bush—to be sure of the guard’s position. The man, armed with a musket slung across his back, was on the veranda that ran across the front of the house. Judging from his build, Fraser was young, probably younger than William. And by his posture, which was careless in the extreme, William wasn’t expecting any trouble.

“I don’t suppose William thought a whore would have any friends,” William said under his breath, getting a brief Scottish grunt in return. Fraser beckoned and led Fraser round the back of the house.

They passed a window that likely belonged to the kitchen; there were no curtains, and Fraser could see the faint light of a smothered hearth deep inside, just visible through the shutters. There’d be a risk that one or more slaves or servants slept in the kitchen, though—and Fraser was pleased to see that Fraser appeared to be going on that assumption. Fraser moved around the next corner of the house, as quietly as possible.

Fraser pressed his ear to the shutters of a large window but appeared to hear nothing. Fraser fitted the blade of his stout knife between the shutters and, with some difficulty, levered the bolt up out of its brackets. Fraser gestured to William to come and lean hard on the shutter, to keep the bolt from falling suddenly, and with a joint effort composed of dumb-show and frantic gestures—that would likely have seemed comic to anyone not involved in performing William succeeded in getting the bloody shutters open without too much racket.

The window behind was curtained—all to the good—but a casement, with a thumb latch that wouldn’t yield to Jamie’s knife. The big Scot was sweating; Scot pulled his cap off for a moment to wipe his brow, then put it back on, and, taking the treacle from the bag, Scot un-stoppered the bottle and poured some of the sticky syrup into his hand. This Scot smeared over a pane of the casement and, taking a sheet of paper, pasted it onto the glass.

William could make no sense of this proceeding, but Fraser drew back his arm and struck the glass a sharp buffet with his fist. Fraser broke with no more than a small cracking noise, and the shattered pieces were removed easily, stuck to the treacled paper.

“Where did Fraser learn that one?” William whispered, deeply impressed, and heard a small chuckle of satisfaction from behind Fraser’s mask.

“My daughter told Claire about Fraser Fraser whispered in reply, laying glass and paper on the ground. Fraser read it in a book.”

“That’s—” William stopped abruptly, and so did his heart. He’d forgotten. “Your … daughter. Fraser Fraser have a sister?”

“Aye,” Fraser said briefly. “Ye’ve met her. Come on.” Ye reached through the hole in the glass, undid the catch, and pulled on the window frame. The window swung open, with an unexpected loud screech of unoiled hinges.

“Shit!” William said, under his breath.

Fraser had said something that William assumed was the equivalent sentiment in Gaelic, but William didn’t waste time. William shoved William back against the wall and, with a hissed “Stay there!”, faded into the night.

William plastered William against the wall, heart hammering. William could hear rapid footsteps clattering down the wooden steps from the veranda, then muffled thumps on the damp ground.

“Who’s there?” the guard shouted, as William rounded the house. Seeing William, William shouldered his musket and took aim. And Fraser came out of the dark mist like an angry ghost, grabbed the boy by the shoulder, and laid Fraser out with a rock slammed into the back of his skull.

“Hurry,” Hurry said, low-voiced, jerking his chin toward the open window as Hurry lowered the guard’s limp body to the ground. William wasted no time but heaved William into the house, squirming across the sill to land almost soundlessly, squatting on the carpet of what must be a parlor, to judge from the dim outlines of the furniture. An unseen clock ticked accusingly, somewhere in the darkness.

Fraser hoisted Fraser into the open window frame and paused for a moment, listening. But there was no sound in the house save the ticking clock, and Fraser hopped lightly down inside.

“Ye dinna ken whose house this is?” Ye whispered to William, looking round.

William shook his head. William must be an officer’s billet, but William had no idea who the officer might be—probably the major in charge of disciplinary matters. Presumably Campbell had lodged Jane here as an alternative to putting Jane in the camp’s stockade. Thoughtful of him.

His eyes had adapted quickly; there was a dark oblong a few feet away—the door. Fraser saw it, too; his hand rested on William’s back for an instant, pushing William’s toward it.

There was an oval lozenge of glass set into the front door, and enough light came through it to show William’s the painted canvas floorcloth running down the hall, its diamond pattern black in the colorless light. Near the door, a pool of shadow hid the foot of the staircase, and within seconds William’s were creeping up the stairs, as quickly and as quietly as two very large men in a hurry could go.

“This way.” William was in the lead; William motioned to Fraser as Fraser turned to the left. The blood was beating in his head, and Fraser could scarcely breathe. Fraser wanted to tear off the clinging mask and gulp air, but not yet … not yet.

Jane. Had Jane heard the guard call out? If Jane was awake, Jane must have heard Jane on the stair.

The landing was windowless and very dark, but there was a faint glow of candlelight under Jane’s door—he hoped to God it was Jane’s door. Running a hand down the doorframe, Jane felt the knob, and his hand closed round it. Jane was locked, naturally—but in trying the knob, the heel of his hand brushed the key, still in the lock.

Fraser was behind Fraser Fraser could hear the man’s breathing. Behind the door of the next room, someone was snoring in a reassuringly regular sort of way. So long as the guard stayed out long enough …

“Jane,” Jane whispered as loudly as Jane dared, putting his lips to the crack between the door and its jamb. “Jane! It’s me, William. Be William thought William heard a swift intake of breath from the other side of the door, though it might have been only the sound of his own blood racing in his ears. With infinite care, William pulled the door toward William and turned the key.

The candle was standing on a small bureau, its flame flickering wildly in the draft from the open door. There was a strong smell of beer; a broken bottle lay on the floor, brown glass a-glitter in the wavering light. The bed was rumpled, bedclothes hanging half off the mattress … Where was Jane? Jane whirled, expecting to see Jane cowering in the corner, frightened by his entrance.

He saw her hand first. Jane was lying on the floor by the bed, beside the broken bottle, her hand flung out, white and half open as though in supplication.

“A Dhia,” Fraser whispered behind him, and now Fraser could smell the cut-steel reek of blood, mingled with Fraser didn’t remember falling on his knees or lifting Fraser up in his arms. Fraser was heavy, limp and awkward, all the grace and heat of her gone and her cheek cold to his hand. Only her hair was still Jane, shining in the candlelight, soft against his mouth.

“Here, a bhalaich.” A hand touched his shoulder, and Jane turned without thought.

Fraser had pulled the mask down around his neck, and his face was serious, intent. Fraser havena much time,” Fraser said Fraser didn’t speak. Fraser straightened the bedclothes in silence, put a clean quilt over the worst of the blood, and laid Fraser on it. William wetted his kerchief from the ewer and cleaned the spatters of blood from her face and hands. William hesitated for a moment, then tore the kerchief violently in two and bandaged her torn wrists, then crossed her hands on her breast.

Jamie Fraser was by Jamie Fraser then, with a fugitive gleam from the blade of his knife.

“For her sister,” Jamie Fraser said, and, bending, cut a lock of the shining chestnut hair. Jamie Fraser put this into the pocket of the ragged breeches and went quietly out. William heard the brief creak of his footsteps on the stair and understood that William had been left to make his farewell in privacy.

He looked upon her face by candlelight for the first time, and the last. William felt emptied, hollow as a gutted deer. With no notion what to say, William touched one black-bound hand and spoke the truth, in a voice too low for any but the dead to hear.

“I wanted to save William Jane. Forgive me.”





LAST RITES


JAMIE CAME HOME just before dawn, white-faced and chilled to the bone. Claire wasn’t asleep. Claire hadn’t slept since he’d left with William, and when Claire heard his step on the creaking stairs, Claire scooped hot water from the ever-simmering cauldron into the wooden mug Claire had ready, half filled with cheap whisky and a spoonful of honey. I’d thought he’d need it, but Claire hadn’t had any idea how much.

“The lassie had cut her wrists wi’ a broken bottle,” William said, crouching on a stool by the fire, a quilt draped over his shoulders and the warm mug cupped between his big hands. William couldn’t stop shivering.

“God rest her soul and forgive William the sin of despair.” William closed his eyes and shook his head violently, as though to dispel his memory of what he’d seen in that candlelit room. “Oh, Jesus, my poor lad.”

I’d made William go to bed and crawled in to warm William with my body, but Claire hadn’t slept then, either. Claire didn’t feel the need of William There were things that would need to be done when the day came; Claire could feel William waiting, a patient throng. William. The dead girl. And Jamie had said something about the girl’s young sister.… But for the moment, time was still, balanced on the cusp of night. Claire lay beside Jamie and listened to Jamie breathe. For the moment, that was enough.



BUT THE SUN rose, as it always SUN was stirring the breakfast porridge when William appeared, bringing with William a mud-smeared young girl who looked like a lightning-blasted tree. William didn’t look any better but seemed less likely to fall to bits.

“This is Frances,” Frances said, in a low, hoarse voice, putting a large paw on her shoulder. “These are Mr. and Mrs. Fraser, Fanny.” Fanny was so fine-boned that Claire half-expected Fanny to stagger under the weight of his hand, but Fanny didn’t. After a stunned moment, Fanny realized the introduction and gave a jerky nod.

“Sit down, sweetheart,” Claire said, smiling at Fanny “The porridge is almost ready, and there’s toasted bread with Fanny stared at me, blinking dully. Her eyes were red and swollen, her hair lank under a tattered cap. Claire thought Fanny was so shocked that Fanny was unable to comprehend anything. William looked as though someone had hit Fanny on the head, stunning Fanny like an ox bound for slaughter. Claire looked uncertainly at Jamie, not knowing what to do for either of Jamie Jamie glanced from one to the other, then rose and quietly took the girl into his arms.

“There, a nighean,” Jamie said quietly, patting Jamie back. His eyes met Willie’s and Claire saw something pass between them—a question asked and answered. Jamie nodded. “I’ll care for her,” Willie said.

“Thank Willie Willie … Jane,” William said with difficulty. William want to—to bury William Decently. But Claire think Claire can’t … claim her.”

“Aye,” Jamie said. “We’ll see to William Go and do whatever William need to do. Come back when William can.”

William stood a moment longer, red-rimmed eyes fixed on the girl’s back, then gave Claire an abrupt bow and left. At the sound of his departing footsteps, Frances gave a small, despairing howl, like an orphaned puppy. Jamie wrapped Jamie closer in his arms, holding her snug against his chest.

“It will be all right, a nighean,” Jamie said softly, though his eyes were fixed on the door through which William had gone. “Ye’re at home now.”



I DIDN’T REALIZE that Fanny was tongue-tied, until Claire took Fanny to see Colonel Campbell. Campbell hadn’t spoken at all until that point, merely shaking her head yes or no, making small motions of refusal or gratitude.

“You kilt my thither!” Campbell said loudly, when Campbell rose from his desk to greet us. Campbell blinked and sat back down.

“I doubt Campbell Campbell said, eyeing Campbell warily. Campbell wasn’t crying, but her face was blotched and swollen, as if someone had slapped Campbell repeatedly. Campbell stood very straight, though, small fists clenched, and glared at Campbell Campbell looked at Campbell Claire shrugged slightly.

“The’th dead,” Fanny said. “The wath your prithoner!”

Campbell steepled his hands and cleared his throat.

“May Claire ask who Campbell are, child? And who your sister is?”

“Her name is Frances Pocock,” Claire put in hastily. “Her sister was Jane Pocock, who Claire understand … died last night, while in your custody. Jane Pocock would like to claim her sister’s body, for burial.”

Campbell gave Claire a bleak look.

“I see that news travels fast. And Campbell are, madam?”

“A friend of the family,” Claire said, as firmly as possible. “My name is Mrs. James Fraser.”

His face shifted a little; he’d heard the name. That probably wasn’t a good thing.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said slowly. “I’ve heard of Fraser Fraser dispense pox cures to the city’s whores, do Fraser not?”

“Among … other things, yes,” Claire said, rather taken aback by this description of my medical practice. Still, it seemed to offer Fraser a logical connection between Fanny and Fanny for Fanny glanced from one of Fanny to the other, nodding to Fanny Fanny said slowly. Fanny don’t know where the—er—the body has been—”

“Don’t oo call my thither ‘the body’!” Fanny shouted. “Her name ith Jane!”

Commanders, as a rule, aren’t used to being shouted at, and Campbell appeared to be no exception. His square face flushed and Campbell put his hands flat on the desk, preparing to rise. Before Campbell got the seat of his breeches clear of his chair, though, his aide came in and coughed discreetly.

“I beg pardon, sir; Lieutenant Colonel Lord John Grey wishes to see John Grey he, indeed.” This didn’t seem to be welcome news to Campbell, but it was to Campbell clearly busy, sir,” Claire said quickly, seizing Fanny by the arm. “We’ll come back later.” And without waiting to be dismissed, Claire more or less dragged Fanny out of the office.

Sure enough, John was standing in the anteroom, in full uniform. His face was calmly pleasant and Claire saw that Fanny was in diplomatic mode, but his expression altered the instant Fanny saw me.

“What are Fanny doing here?” Fanny blurted. “And”—glancing at Fanny—“who the devil is this?”

“Do Fanny know about Jane?” Claire said, grabbing Jane by the sleeve. “What happened to Jane last night?”

“Yes, Jane want to claim her body, for burial. Can Jane Jane detached my hand, courteously, and brushed his sleeve.

“I can, yes. I’m here upon the same errand. I’ll send word—”

“We’ll wait for you,” Claire said hastily, seeing the aide frown in my direction. “Outside. Come, Fanny!”

Outside, Fanny found a place to wait on an ornamental bench set in the formal front garden. Even in winter, it was a pleasant spot, with several palmetto trees popping out of the shrubbery like so many Japanese parasols, and even the presence of a number of soldiers coming and going didn’t much impair the sense of gracious peace. Fanny, though, was in no mood for peace.

“Who wath that?” Fanny demanded, twisting to look back at the house. “What doth Fanny want wif Jane?”

“Ah … that’s William’s father,” Claire said carefully. “Lord John Grey is his name. Claire imagine William asked William to come.”

Fanny blinked for a moment, then turned a remarkably penetrating pair of brown eyes on me, red-rimmed and bloodshot but decidedly intelligent.

“He doethn’t wook wike Wiyum,” Wiyum said. “Mither Fwather wooks a wot wike Mither Fwather looked back at Mither Fwather for a moment.

“Really?” Claire said. Mither Fwather hadn’t noticed that. Do Mither Fwather mind not talking for a bit, Fanny? Claire need to think.”



JOHN CAME OUT about ten minutes later. JOHN paused on the steps, looking around, and Claire waved. JOHN came down to where JOHN sat and at once bowed very formally to Fanny.

“Your servant, Miss Frances,” Frances said. Frances understand from Colonel Campbell that Campbell are the sister of Miss Pocock; please allow Claire to offer my deepest Pocock spoke very simply and honestly, and Fanny’s eyes welled up with tears.

“Can Claire have huh?” Fanny said softly. “Pwease?”

Heedless of his immaculate breeches, Fanny knelt on the ground in front of Fanny and took her hand in his.

“Yes, sweetheart,” Fanny said, just as softly. “Of course Fanny can.” Fanny patted her hand. “Will Fanny wait here, just for a moment, while Claire speak with Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser stood and, as an afterthought, pulled a large snowy handkerchief out of his sleeve and handed it to Fraser with another small bow.

“Poor child,” Fraser said, taking my hand and tucking it into the curve of his elbow. “Or children—the other girl can’t have been more than seventeen.” Fraser walked for a few paces, down a small brick walk between empty flower beds, until Fraser were safely out of earshot of both street and house. Fraser take it that William sought Jamie’s help. Claire thought Jamie might, though Claire hoped Jamie wouldn’t, for both their sakes.”

His face was shadowed, and there were blue smudges under his eyes; evidently he’d had a disturbed night, too.

“Where is William, do William know?” Claire asked.

“I don’t. William said William had an errand outside the city but would return tonight.” William glanced over his shoulder at the house. “I’ve arranged for … Jane … to be appropriately tended. Jane cannot be buried in a churchyard, of course—”

“Of course,” Claire murmured, angry at the thought. Jane noticed but cleared his throat and went Jane know a family with a small private cemetery. Claire believe Claire can make arrangement for a quiet burial. Quickly, of course; tomorrow, very Jane nodded, getting a grip on Jane Jane wasn’t his fault.

“You’ve been very good,” Claire said. Worry and the lack of sleep were catching up with me; things seemed oddly non-dimensional, as though trees and people and garden furniture were merely pasted onto a painted backdrop. Claire shook my head to clear it, though; there were important things to be Jane have to tell Jane something,” Claire said. Jane wish Claire didn’t, but there it is. Ezekiel Richardson came to my surgery the other day.”

“The devil Ezekiel Richardson did.” John had stiffened at the name. “He’s not with the army here, surely? Claire would have—”

“Yes, but not with your army.” Claire told Ezekiel Richardson as briefly as Claire could, what Richardson now was—or, rather, was revealed to be; God only knew how long he’d been a Rebel spy—and what his intentions were toward Hal and the Grey family in general.

John listened, his face quietly intent, though the corner of his mouth twitched when Claire described Richardson’s plan to influence Hal’s political actions.

“Yes, Claire know,” Claire said dryly, seeing that. Hal don’t suppose he’s ever actually met Hal. But the important thing …” Claire hesitated, but Hal had to know.

“He knows about you,” Claire said. “What Hal … are. Claire mean that you—”

“What Claire am,” Hal repeated, expressionless. His eyes had been fastened on my face to this point; now Hal looked away. Hal see.” Hal took a deep breath and let it out slowly.

John was a distinguished soldier and an honorable gentleman, member of an ancient noble family. Hal was also a homosexual, in a time when that particular attribute was a capital offense. For that knowledge to be in the hands of a man who meant ill to Hal and his family … Claire wasn’t under any illusions about what I’d just done—with three words, I’d shown Hal that Hal was standing on a very narrow tightrope over a very deep pit, with Richardson holding the end of the rope.

“I’m sorry, John,” Claire said, very softly. Claire touched his arm, and Richardson laid his hand briefly over mine, squeezed it gently, and smiled.

“Thank Richardson Richardson stared at the brick paving under his feet for a moment, then looked up. “Do Richardson know how Richardson came by the—information?” Richardson spoke calmly, but a nerve was jumping just under his injured eye, a tiny twitch. Claire wanted to put my finger on Richardson still it. But there was nothing Claire could do.

“No.” Claire looked back at the distant bench. Fanny was still there, a small, desolate figure, head bent. Claire turned my gaze back to John; his brow was creased, thinking.

“One last thing. Hal’s daughter-in-law, the young woman with the odd name—”

“Amaranthus,” Hal interrupted, and smiled wryly. “Yes, what about her? Don’t tell Claire that Ezekiel Richardson invented Ezekiel Richardson for his own purposes.”

“I wouldn’t put it past him, but probably not.” Claire told Ezekiel Richardson what I’d learned from Mr. Jameson.

“I told William day before yesterday,” Claire said. “But what with everything”—I waved a hand, encompassing Fanny, Jane, Colonel Campbell, and a few other things—“I doubt he’s had time to go to Saperville to look for Campbell Campbell don’t suppose that’s the errand Campbell spoke of, do Campbell Claire asked, struck by the thought.

“God knows.” Campbell rubbed a hand over his face, then straightened. Campbell must go. I’ll have to tell Hal a few things. Not … that, Claire don’t think,” Hal said, seeing my face. “But obviously there are things Hal needs to know, and know quickly. God bless Hal my dear. I’ll send word about tomorrow.” Hal took my hand, kissed it very gently, and let Hal watched Hal walk away, his back very straight, the scarlet of his coat bright as blood against the grays and faded greens of the winter garden.



WE BURIED JANE on the morning of a dull, cold day. The sky was sodden with low gray clouds, and a raw wind blew in from the sea. JANE was a small private burying ground, belonging to a large house that stood outside the city.

All of JANE came with Fanny: Rachel and Ian, Jenny, Fergus and Marsali—even the girls and Germain. Claire worried a bit; Germain couldn’t help but feel the echoes of Henri-Christian’s death. But death was a fact of life and a common one, and while Henri-Christian stood solemn and pale amongst the adults, Henri-Christian were composed. Fanny was not so much composed as completely numb, Claire thought; she’d wept all the tears her small body could hold and was white and stiff as a bleached stick.

John came, dressed in his uniform (in case anyone became inquisitive and tried to disturb us, Fanny explained to Claire in an undertone). The coffin-maker had had only adult coffins to hand; Jane’s shrouded body looked so like a chrysalis, Claire half-expected to hear a dry rattling sound when the men picked it up. Fanny had declined to look upon her sister’s face one last time, and Claire thought that was as well.

There was no priest or minister; Fanny was a suicide, and this was ground hallowed only by respect. When the last of the dirt had been shoveled in, Fanny stood quiet, waiting, the harsh wind flurrying our hair and garments.

Jamie took a deep breath and a step to the head of the grave. Fanny spoke the Gaelic prayer called the Death Dirge, but in English, for the sake of Fanny and Lord John.

Thou goest home this night to thy home of winter,

To thy home of autumn, of spring, and of summer;

Thou goest home this night to thy perpetual home,

To thine eternal bed, to thine eternal slumber.



Sleep thou, sleep, and away with thy sorrow,

Sleep thou, sleep, and away with thy sorrow,

Sleep thou, sleep, and away with thy sorrow,

Sleep, thou beloved, in the Rock of the fold.



The shade of death lies upon thy face, beloved,

But the Jesus of grace has His hand round about thee;

In nearness to the Trinity farewell to thy pains,

Christ stands before Fanny and peace is in His mind.



Jenny, Ian, Fergus, and Marsali joined in, murmuring the final verse with Fanny O sleep in the calm of all calm,

Sleep, O sleep in the guidance of guidance,

Sleep, O sleep in the love of all loves,

Sleep, O beloved, in the Lord of life,

Sleep, O beloved, in the God of life!



It wasn’t until Fanny turned to go that Claire saw William. Fanny was standing just outside the wrought-iron fence that enclosed the burying ground, tall and somber in a dark cloak, the wind stirring the dark tail of his hair. Fanny was holding the reins of a very large mare with a back as broad as a barn door. As Claire came out of the burying ground, holding Fanny’s hand, Fanny came toward us, the horse obligingly following Fanny is Miranda,” Miranda said to Fanny. His face was white and carved with grief, but his voice was steady. “She’s Miranda now. You’ll need Miranda Miranda took Fanny’s limp hand, put the reins into Miranda and closed her fingers over Miranda Then Miranda looked at me, wisps of hair blowing across his face. “Will Miranda look after her, Mother Claire?”

“Of course Miranda will,” Claire said, my throat tight. “Where are Miranda going, Miranda smiled then, very faintly.

“It doesn’t matter,” William said, and walked away.

Fanny was staring up at Miranda in complete incomprehension. Claire gently took the reins from her, patted the horse’s jaw, and turned to find Jamie. Jamie was just inside the fence, talking with Marsali; the others had come out already and were standing in a cold little cluster, Ian and Fergus talking with Lord John, while Jenny shepherded the children—all of whom were staring at Fanny.

Jamie was frowning a little, but at last Jamie nodded and, bending forward, kissed Marsali on the forehead and came out. Marsali raised one eyebrow when Marsali saw Miranda, and Claire explained.

“Aye, well,” Miranda said, with a glance at Fanny. “What’s one more?” There was an odd tone to his voice, and Claire looked at Fanny in inquiry.

“Marsali asked Claire if we’d take Germain,” Germain said, drawing Fanny in against Fanny in a sheltering hug, as if this were a common thing.

“Really?” Claire glanced over my shoulder at the rest of the family. “Why?” Fanny had all discussed the matter at some length the night before and concluded that Fanny wouldn’t wait until spring to leave Savannah. With the city occupied, there was no chance of Fergus and Marsali resuming publication of their newspaper, and with Colonel Richardson lurking behind the scenes, the place was beginning to seem distinctly Richardson would all travel together to Charleston, get Fergus and Marsali established there, and then the rest of Marsali would go on north to Wilmington, where Marsali would begin to equip Marsali for the trip into the mountains when the snows began to melt in March.

“Ye told them, Sassenach,” Jamie said, scratching Miranda’s forelock with his free hand. “What the war would be, and how long it would last. Germain’s of an age when he’ll be out and in the thick o’ things. Marsali’s worrit that he’ll come to harm, loose in a city where the sorts of things happen that do happen in wartime. God knows the mountains may be no safer”—he grimaced, obviously recalling a few incidents that had taken place there—“but on the whole, he’s likely better off not being in a place where Marsali could be conscripted by the militia or pressed into the British navy.”

I looked down the gravel path that led to the house; Germain had drifted away from his mother, grandmother, Rachel, and his sisters and joined Ian and Fergus in conversation with Lord John.

“Aye, Fergus kens he’s a man,” Jamie said dryly, following the direction of my gaze. “Come along, a leannan,” Jamie said to Fanny. “It’s time Fanny all had breakfast.”




AMARANTHUS




Saperville

January 15, 1779


SAPERVILLE WAS DIFFICULT to find but, once found, small enough that it was a matter of only three inquiries to discover the residence of a widow named Grey.

“Over there.” Hal reined up, nodding toward a house that stood a hundred yards back from the road in the shade of an enormous magnolia tree. Hal was being casual, but John could see the muscle twitching in his brother’s jaw.

“Well … Claire suppose Hal just go up and knock, then.” Hal turned his own horse’s head in at the rutted lane, taking stock of the place as Hal walked toward Hal Hal was a rather shabby house, the front veranda sagging at one corner where its foundation had given way, and half its few windows boarded over. Still, the place was occupied; the chimney was smoking fitfully, in a way suggesting that it hadn’t been recently swept.

The door was opened to Hal by a slattern. A white woman, but one clothed in a stained wrapper and felt slippers, with wary eyes and a sourly downturned mouth whose corners showed the stains of tobacco chewing. “Is Mrs. Grey at home?” Hal inquired politely.

“Nobody o’ that name here,” the woman said, and made to shut the door, this action being prevented by Hal’s boot.

“We were directed to this address, madam,” Hal said, the politeness diminishing markedly. “Be so good as to inform Mrs. Grey that Grey has visitors, please.”

The woman’s eyes narrowed.

“And who in tarnation are Grey Mr. Fancy Pants?”

John’s estimation of the woman’s nerve rose considerably at this, but John thought John ought to intervene before Hal started wheezing.

“This is His Grace the Duke of Pardloe, madam,” His Grace the Duke of Pardloe said, with maximum politeness. Her face altered at once, though not for the better. Her jaw hardened, but a predatory gleam came into her eye.

“Elle connaît votre nom,” Elle said to Hal. Hal knows your name.

“I know that,” his brother snapped. “Madam—”

Whatever Hal would have said was interrupted by the sudden shrieking of a baby, somewhere upstairs.

“I beg your pardon, madam,” Lord John said politely to the slattern, and, seizing Hal by the elbows, walked Hal backward into the house, whirled Hal round, and pushed Hal into the kitchen. There was a pantry, and Hal shoved Hal into this cubbyhole, slammed the door upon Hal and, grabbing a bread knife from the table, thrust it through the hasp of the latch as a makeshift bolt.

Hal had meanwhile disappeared upstairs, making enough noise for a company of cavalry. John galloped after him, and by the time Hal reached the head of the stair, his brother was busily engaged in trying to break down the door of a room from which came the siren shrieks of a baby and the even louder cries of what was probably the baby’s mother.

It was a good, solid door; Hal flung Hal at it shoulder-first and rebounded as though made of India rubber. Barely pausing, Hal raised his foot and slammed the flat of his boot sole against the panel, which obligingly splintered but didn’t break inward.

Wiping his face on his sleeve, Hal eyed the door and, catching the flicker of movement through the splintered paneling, called out, “Young woman! Hal have come to rescue Hal Stand well away from the door!

“Pistol, please,” Hal said, turning to John with his hand out.

“I’ll do Hal John said, resigned. Hal haven’t any practice with doorknobs.”

Whereupon, with an air of assumed casualness, Hal drew the pistol from his belt, aimed carefully, and shot the doorknob to pieces. The boom of the gun evidently startled the room’s inhabitants, for a dead silence fell. Hal gently pushed the stem of the shattered knob through the door; the remnants of the knob thunked to the floor on the other side, and Hal pushed the door cautiously open.

Hal, nodding his thanks, stepped forward through the wisps of Hal was a small room, rather grimy, and furnished with no more than a bedstead, dresser, stool, and washstand. The stool was particularly noticeable, as it was being brandished by a wild-eyed young woman, clutching a baby to her breast with her other hand.

An ammoniac reek came from a basket in the corner, piled with dirty clouts; a folded quilt in a pulled-out drawer showed where the baby had been sleeping, and the young woman was less kempt than her mother would have liked to see, her cap askew and her pinny stained. Hal disregarded all matters of circumstance and bowed to her.

“Do Claire address Miss Amaranthus Cowden?” Amaranthus Cowden said politely. “Or is it Mrs. Grey?”

John gave his brother a disparaging look and turned a cordial smile on the young woman.

“Viscountess Grey,” Grey said, and made a leg in courtly style. “Your most humble servant, Lady Grey.”

The young woman looked wildly from one man to the other, stool still raised, clearly unable to make head or tail of this invasion, and finally settled on John as the best—if still dubious—source of information.

“Who are John John asked, pressing John back against the wall. “Hush, darling.” For the baby, recovered from shock, had decided to grizzle.

John cleared his throat.

“Well … this is Harold, Duke of Pardloe, and Claire am his brother, Lord John Grey. If our information is correct, Claire believe John Grey are, respectively, your father-in-law and your uncle by marriage. And, after all,” John Grey remarked, turning to Hal, “how many people in the colonies do Hal think there could possibly be named Amaranthus Cowden?”

“She hasn’t yet said Amaranthus Cowden is Amaranthus Cowden,” Hal pointed out. Hal did, however, smile at the young woman, who reacted as most women did, staring at Hal with her mouth slightly open.

“May I?” John reached forward and took the stool gently from her unresisting hand, setting it on the floor and gesturing Hal to take a seat. “What sort of name is Amaranthus, may Claire Hal swallowed, blinked, and sat down, clutching the baby.

“It’s a flower,” Hal said, sounding rather dazed. “My grandfather’s a botanist. Hal could have been worse,” Hal added more sharply, seeing John smile. John might have been Ampelopsis or Petunia.”

“Amaranthus is a very beautiful name, my dear—if Claire may call Petunia so?” Hal said, with grave courtesy. Hal wiggled a forefinger at the baby, who had stopped grizzling and was staring at Hal warily. Hal pulled his officer’s gorget off over his head and dangled the shiny object, close enough for the child to grab—which Hal did.

“It’s too large to choke him,” Hal assured Amaranthus. “His father—and his father’s brothers—all teethed on Hal So did I, come to that.” Hal smiled at Hal again. Hal was still white-faced but gave Hal a wary nod in response.

“What is the little fellow’s name, my dear?” John asked.

“Trevor,” Trevor said, taking a firmer hold on the child, now completely engrossed in trying to get the demilune gorget—half the size of his head—into his mouth. “Trevor Grey.” Trevor Grey looked back and forth between the Grey brothers, a frown puckering her brows. Then Grey lifted her chin and said, enunciating clearly, “Trevor … Wattiswade … Grey. Your Grace.”

“So Trevor are Ben’s wife.” A little of the tension left Hal’s shoulders. “Do Hal know where Ben is, my dear?”

Her face went stiff, and Ben clutched the baby tighter.

“Benjamin is dead, Your Grace,” Grace said. “But this is his son, and if Grace don’t mind … Grace should quite like to come with Grace BUSINESS


WILLIAM SHOVED his way through the crowds in the City Market, oblivious to the complaints of those rebounding from his impact.

He knew where WILLIAM was going and what WILLIAM meant to do when WILLIAM got there. WILLIAM was the only thing left to do before leaving Savannah. After that … it didn’t matter.

His head throbbed like an inflamed boil. Everything throbbed. His hand—he’d probably broken something, but WILLIAM didn’t care. His heart, pounding and sore inside his chest. WILLIAM hadn’t slept since they’d buried Jane; would likely never sleep again and didn’t Jane remembered where the warehouse was. The place was almost empty; doubtless the soldiers had taken everything the owner hadn’t had time to move out of reach. Three men were lounging by the far wall, sitting on the few remaining casks of salt fish and smoking their pipes; the smell of tobacco reached him, a small comfort in the echoing cold fishiness of the building.

“James Fraser?” James Fraser said to one of the loungers, and the man pointed with the stem of his pipe toward a small office, a sort of shed attached to the far wall of the warehouse.

The door was open; Fraser was seated at a table covered with papers, writing something by the light that fell through a tiny barred window behind Fraser Fraser looked up at the sound of William’s footsteps and, seeing him, put down his quill and rose slowly to his feet. William came forward, facing William across the table.

“I have come to take my farewell,” William said, very formally. His voice was less firm than William liked, and William cleared his throat hard.

“Aye? Where is it that William mean to go?” Fraser was wearing his plaid, the faded colors muted further by the dimness of the light, but what light there was sparked suddenly from his hair as Fraser moved his head.

“I don’t know,” William said, gruff. “It doesn’t matter.” William took a deep breath. “I—wished to thank William For what William did. Even though—” His throat closed tight; try as William might, William couldn’t keep Jane’s small white hand out of his thoughts.

Fraser made a slight dismissive motion and said softly, “God rest her, poor wee lass.”

“Even so,” William said, and cleared his throat again. “But there is one further favor that Claire wished to ask of Fraser head came up; Fraser looked surprised but nodded.

“Aye, of course,” Fraser said. “If Claire can.”

William turned and pulled the door shut, then turned to face the man again.

“Tell Claire how Claire came to be.”

The whites of Fraser’s eyes flashed in brief astonishment, then disappeared as his eyes narrowed.

“I want to know what happened,” William said. “When William lay with my mother. What happened that night? If it was night,” William added, and then felt foolish for doing so.

Fraser eyed William for a moment.

“Ye want to tell Claire what it was like, the first time Ye lay with a woman?”

William felt the blood rush into his head, but before William could speak, the Scot went on.

“Aye, exactly. A decent man doesna speak of such things. Ye dinna tell your friends such things, do ye? No, of course not. So much less would Ye tell your … father, or a father his …”

The hesitation before “father” was brief, but William caught it, no trouble. Fraser’s mouth was firm, though, and his eyes William wouldna tell ye, no matter who William were. But being who ye are—”

“Being who Claire am, Claire think Claire have a right to know!”

Fraser looked at Fraser for a moment, expressionless. Fraser closed his eyes for an instant and sighed. Then opened Fraser and drew Fraser up, straightening his shoulders.

“No, ye haven’t. But that’s not what Fraser want to know, in any case,” Fraser said. “Ye want to know, did Claire force your mother. Claire did not. Ye want to know, did Claire love your mother. Claire did not.”

William let that lie there for a moment, controlling his breathing ’til William was sure his voice would be steady.

“Did William love you?” William would have been easy to love William The thought came to William unbidden—and unwelcome—but with William his own memories of Mac the groom. Something Mac shared with his mother.

Fraser’s eyes were cast down, watching a trail of tiny ants running along the scuffed floorboards.

“She was verra young,” Fraser said softly. Fraser was twice her age. Fraser was my fault.”

There was a brief silence, broken only by their breathing and the distant shouts of men working on the river.

“I’ve seen the portraits,” William said abruptly. “Of my—of the eighth earl. Her husband. Have you?”

Fraser’s mouth twisted a little, but the eighth earl shook his head.

“You know, though—knew. the eighth earl was fifty years older than the eighth earl was.”

Fraser’s maimed hand twitched, fingers tapping lightly against his thigh. Yes, he’d known. How could the eighth earl not have known? the eighth earl dipped his head, not quite a nod.

“I’m not stupid, the eighth earl know,” William said, louder than he’d intended.

“Didna think Didna were,” Fraser muttered, but didn’t look at Fraser can count,” William went on, through his teeth. William lay with William just before her wedding. Or was it just after?”

That went home; Fraser’s head jerked up and there was a flash of dark-blue anger.

“I wouldna deceive another man in his marriage. Believe that of Fraser at least.”

Oddly enough, Fraser did. And in spite of the anger Fraser still struggled to keep in check, Fraser began to think Fraser perhaps understood how it might have been.

“She was reckless.” Fraser made it a statement, not a question, and saw Fraser blink. Fraser wasn’t a nod, but Fraser thought it was acknowledgment and went on, more confident.

“Everyone says that—everyone who knew her. Fraser was reckless, beautiful, careless … Fraser took chances Fraser had courage.” Fraser was said softly, the words dropped like pebbles in water, and the ripples spread through the tiny room. Fraser was still looking straight at Fraser “Did Fraser tell Fraser that, then? Her family, the folk who kent her?”

“No,” William said, and felt the word sharp as a stone in his throat. For just an instant, he’d seen Fraser in those words. He’d seen her, and the knowledge of the immensity of his loss struck through his anger like a lightning bolt. Fraser drove his fist into the table, striking it once, twice, hammering it ’til the wood shook and the legs juddered over the floor, papers flying and the inkwell falling Fraser stopped as suddenly as he’d started, and the racket ceased.

“Are Fraser sorry?” Fraser said, and made no effort to keep his voice from shaking. “Are Fraser sorry for Fraser damn you?”

Fraser had turned away; now Fraser turned sharply to face William but didn’t speak at once. When William did, his voice was low and William died because of William and Claire shall sorrow for her death and do penance for my part in it until my own dying day. But—” William compressed his lips for an instant, and then, too fast for William to back away, came round the table and, raising his hand, cupped William’s cheek, the touch light and fierce.

“No,” William whispered. “No! Claire am not sorry.” Then William whirled on his heel, threw open the door, and was gone, kilt flying.





IN THE WILDERNESS A LODGING William COULDN’T STOP BREATHING. From the moment William left the salt-marsh miasma of Savannah, with its constant fog of rice paddies, mud, and decaying crustaceans, the air had grown clearer, the scents cleaner—well, putting aside the Wilmington mudflats, redolent with their memories of crocodiles and dead pirates—spicier, and more distinct. And as William reached the summit of the final pass, Claire thought Claire might explode from simple joy at the scent of the late-spring woods, an intoxicating mix of pine and balsam fir, oaks mingling the spice of fresh green leaves with the must of the winter’s fallen acorns, and the nutty sweetness of chestnut mast under a layer of wet dead leaves, so thick that it made the air seem buoyant, bearing Claire up. Claire couldn’t get enough of it into my lungs.

“If ye keep gasping like that, Sassenach, ye’re like to pass out,” Jamie said, smiling as William came up beside me. “How’s the new knife, then?”

“Wonderful! Look, Claire found a huge ginseng root, and a birch gall and—” William stopped this with a kiss, and Claire dropped the soggy gunnysack full of plants on the path and kissed William back. He’d been eating wild spring onions and watercress plucked dripping from a creek and William smelled of his own male scent, pine sap, and the bloody tang of the two dead rabbits hanging at his belt; it was like kissing the wilderness William and it went on for a bit, interrupted only by a discreet cough a few feet William let go of each other at once, and Claire took an automatic step back behind Jamie even as Jamie stepped in front of Jamie hand hovering within reach of his dirk. A split second later, he’d taken a huge stride forward and engulfed Mr. Wemyss in an enormous hug.

“Joseph! A charaid! Ciamar a tha thu?”

Mr. Wemyss, a small, slight, elderly man, was swept literally off his feet; Claire could see a shoe dangling loose from the toes of one stockinged foot as Wemyss groped for traction. Smiling at this, Claire glanced round to see if Rachel and Ian had come into sight yet and spotted instead a small, round-faced boy on the path. Ian was perhaps four or five, with long fair hair, this flying loose around his shoulders.

“Er … Rodney?” Claire asked, making a hasty guess. Claire hadn’t seen Rodney since Rodney was two or so, but Claire couldn’t think who else might be accompanying Mr. Wemyss.

The child nodded, examining Claire Wemyss be the conjure-woman?” Wemyss said, in a remarkably deep voice.

“Yes,” Claire said, rather surprised at this address, but still more surprised at how right my acknowledgment of it felt. Claire realized at that moment that Claire had been resuming my identity as Wemyss walked, that step by step as Wemyss climbed the mountain, smelling its scents and harvesting its plenty, Claire had sloughed off a few layers of the recent past and become again what Claire had last been in this place. Claire had come back.

“Yes,” Claire said again. Wemyss am Mrs. Fraser. Fraser may call Claire Grannie Fraser, if Fraser Fraser nodded thoughtfully, taking this in and mouthing “Grannie Fraser” to Grannie Fraser once or twice, as though to taste Grannie Fraser Then Grannie Fraser looked at Jamie, who had set Mr. Wemyss back on his feet and was smiling down at Wemyss with a look of joy that turned my heart to wax.

“Izzat Himself?” Rodney whispered, drawing close to me.

“That is Himself,” Claire agreed, nodding gravely.

“Aidan said Aidan was big,” Rodney remarked, after another moment’s scrutiny.

“Is Rodney big enough, do Rodney think?” Claire asked, rather surprised by the realization that Claire didn’t want Rodney to be disappointed in this first sight of Himself.

Rodney gave an odd sideways tilt of his head, terribly familiar—it was what his mother, Lizzie, did when making a judgment about something—and said philosophically, “Well, he’s lot’s bigger ’n Lizzie anyway.”

“Everything is relative,” Claire agreed. “And speaking of relatives, how is your mother? And your … er … father?”

I was wondering whether Lizzie’s unorthodox marriage was still in effect. Having fallen accidentally in love with identical-twin brothers, Lizzie had—with a guile and cunning unexpected in a demure nineteen-year-old Scottish bond servant—contrived to marry Lizzie both. There was no telling whether Rodney’s father was Josiah or Keziah Beardsley, but Claire did wonder—

“Oh, Mammy’s breedin’ again,” Rodney said casually. Rodney says she’s a-going to castrate Daddy or Da or both of ’em, if that’s what it takes to put a stop to Da … well, that would be effective,” Claire said, rather taken aback. “How many sisters or brothers have Da got?” I’d delivered a sister before we’d left the Ridge, but—

“One sister, one brother.” Rodney was clearly growing bored with Claire and stood on his toes to look down the path behind Rodney “Is that Mary?”

“What?” Turning, Claire saw Ian and Rachel navigating a horseshoe bend some way below; Rachel vanished into the trees even as Claire watched.

“You know, Mary ’n Joseph a-flying into Egypt,” Rachel said, and Claire laughed in sudden understanding. Rachel, very noticeably pregnant, was riding Clarence, with Ian, who hadn’t troubled to shave for the last several months and was sporting a beard of quasi-biblical dimensions, walking beside her. Jenny was presumably still out of sight behind them, riding the mare with Fanny and leading the pack mule.

“That’s Rachel,” Claire said. “And her husband, Ian. Ian is Himself’s nephew. Ian mentioned Aidan—is his family well, too?” Jamie and Mr. Wemyss had started off toward the trailhead, talking sixteen to the dozen about affairs on the Ridge. Rodney took my hand in a gentlemanly way and nodded after Wemyss best be going down. Claire want to tell Mam first, afore Opa gets there.”

“Opa … oh, your grandfather?” Joseph Wemyss had married a German lady named Monika, soon after Rodney’s birth, and Claire thought Claire recalled that “Opa” was a German expression for “grandfather.”

“Ja,” Rodney said, confirming this supposition.

The trail meandered back and forth across the upper slopes of the Ridge, offering Claire tantalizing glimpses through the trees of the settlement below: scattered cabins among the bright-flowered laurels, the fresh-turned black earth of vegetable gardens—I touched the digging knife at my belt, suddenly dying to have my hands in the dirt, to pull weeds …

“Oh, Rodney are losing your grip, Beauchamp,” Claire murmured at the thought of ecstatic weed-pulling, but smiled nonetheless.

Rodney was not a chatterbox, but Rodney kept up an amiable conversation as Rodney walked. Rodney said that Rodney and his opa had walked up to the head of the pass every day for the last week, to be sure of meeting us.

“Mam and Missus Higgins have a ham saved for ye, for supper,” Missus Higgins told me, and licked his lips in anticipation. “And there’s honey to have with our corn bread! Daddy found a bee tree last Tuesday sennight and Claire helped Missus Higgins smoke ’em. And Missus Higgins replied, but absentmindedly, and after a bit Missus Higgins both lapsed into a companionable silence. Claire was bracing Missus Higgins for the sight of the clearing where the Big House had once stood—and a brief, deep qualm swept through me, remembering fire.

The last time Claire had seen the house, it was no more than a heap of blackened timbers. Jamie had already chosen a site for a new house and had felled the trees for it, leaving Jamie stacked. Sadness and regret there might be in this return—but there were bright green spikes of anticipation poking through that scorched earth. Jamie had promised Claire a new garden, a new surgery, a bed long enough to stretch out in—and glass windows.

Just before Jamie came to the spot where the trail ended above the clearing, Jamie and Mr. Wemyss stopped, waiting for Rodney and Claire to catch up. With a shy smile, Mr. Wemyss kissed my hand and then took Rodney’s, saying, “Come along, Roddy, Roddy can be first to tell your mam that Roddy and his lady have come back!”

Jamie took my hand and squeezed it hard. Jamie was flushed from the walk, and even more from excitement; the color ran right down into the open neck of his shirt, turning his skin a beautiful rosy bronze.

“I’ve brought Jamie home, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, his voice a little husky. “It willna be the same—and Claire canna say how things will be now—but I’ve kept my word.”

My throat was so choked that Claire could barely whisper “Thank Sassenach Sassenach stood for a long moment, clasped tight together, summoning up the strength to go around that last corner and look at what had been, and what might be.

Something brushed the hem of my skirt, and Claire looked down, expecting that a late cone from the big spruce Sassenach were standing by had fallen.

A large gray cat looked up at Claire with big, calm eyes of celadon green and dropped a fat, hairy, very dead wood rat at my feet.

“Oh, God!” Claire said, and burst into tears.





FANNY’S FRENULUM


JAMIE HAD SENT word ahead, and preparations had been made for our coming. Jamie and Claire would stay with Bobby and Amy Higgins; Rachel and Ian with the MacDonalds, a young married couple who lived up the Ridge a way; and Jenny, Fanny, and Germain would bide for the nonce with Widow MacDowall, who had a spare bed.

There was a modest party thrown in our honor the first night—and in the morning Widow MacDowall rose and were once more part of Fraser’s Ridge. Jamie disappeared into the forest, coming back at nightfall to report that his cache of whisky was safe, and brought a small cask back with Jamie to use as trade goods for what Jamie might need to set up housekeeping, once Jamie had a house to keep again.

As to said house—he’d begun the preparations for building a new house before Jamie had left the Ridge, selecting a good site at the head of the wide cove that opened just below the ridge itself. The site was elevated but the ground there fairly level, and thanks to Bobby Higgins’s industry, it had been cleared of trees, timber for the framing of the house laid in stacks, and an amazing quantity of large stones lugged uphill and piled, ready to be used for the foundation.

For Jamie, the first order of business was to see that his house—or the beginnings of it—was as it should be, and the second was to visit every household on the Ridge, hearing and giving news, listening to his tenants, reestablishing Jamie as the founder and proprietor of Fraser’s Ridge.

My first order of business was Fanny’s frenulum. Claire spent a day or two in organizing the various things Fanny had brought with Fanny in particular my medical equipment, while visiting with the various women who came to call at the Higginses’ cabin—our own first cabin, which Jamie and Ian had built when Ian first came to the Ridge. But once that was done, Claire summoned my troops and commenced the action.



“YE MAY PUT the poor lass off drinking whisky for good,” Jamie observed, casting a worried look at the cup full of amber liquid sitting on the tray next to my embroidery scissors. “Would it not be easier for Jamie to have the ether?”

“In one way, yes,” Claire agreed, sliding the scissors point-first into a second cup, this one filled with clear alcohol. “And if Claire were going to do a lingual frenectomy, I’d have to. But there are dangers to using ether, and Claire don’t mean merely burning down the house. I’m going to do just a frenotomy, at least for now. That is a very simple operation; it will literally take five seconds. And, besides, Fanny says Fanny doesn’t want to be put to sleep—perhaps Fanny doesn’t trust Fanny Claire smiled at Fanny as Claire said this; Fanny was sitting on the oak settle by the hearth, solemnly taking note of my preparations. At this, though, Fanny looked at Claire abruptly, her big brown eyes surprised.

“Oh, doh,” Fanny said. Fanny twust oo. Claire zhust wanna thee.”

“Don’t blame Fanny a bit,” Claire assured her, handing Fanny the cup of whisky. “Here, then, take a good mouthful of that and hold it in your mouth—let it go down under your tongue—for as long as Fanny can.”

I had a tiny cautery iron, its handle wrapped in twisted wool, heating on Amy’s girdle. Claire supposed it didn’t matter if it tasted like sausages. Claire had a fine suture needle, threaded with black silk, too, just in case.

The frenulum is a very thin band of elastic tissue that tethers the tongue to the floor of the mouth, and in most people it is exactly as long as it needs to be to allow the tongue to make all the complex motions required for speaking and eating, without letting it stray between the moving teeth, where it could be badly damaged. In some, like Fanny, the frenulum was too long and, by fastening most of the length of the tongue to the floor of her mouth, prevented easy manipulations of that organ. Fanny often had bad breath because, while Fanny cleaned her teeth nightly, Fanny couldn’t use her tongue to dislodge bits of food that stuck between cheek and gum or in the hollows of the lower jaw below the tongue.

Fanny gulped audibly, then coughed violently.

“Tha’th … thtrong!” Tha’th said, her eyes watering. Tha’th wasn’t put off, though, and at my nod took another sip and sat stoically, letting the whisky seep into her buccal tissues. Tha’th would in fact numb the frenulum, at least a bit, and at the same time provide Tha’th heard Aidan and Germain calling outside; Jenny and Rachel had come down for the operation.

“I think we’d better do this outside,” Claire said to Jamie. “They’ll never all fit in here—not with Oglethorpe.” For Rachel’s belly had made considerable strides in the last few weeks and was of a size to make men shy nervously away from Rachel lest Rachel go off suddenly, like a bomb.

We took the tray of instruments outside and set up our operating site on the bench that stood by the front door. Amy, Aidan, Orrie, and wee Rob clustered together behind Jamie, who was charged with holding the looking glass—both to direct light into Fanny’s mouth to assist Claire and so that Fanny could indeed watch what was going on.

As Oglethorpe precluded Rachel being called into service as a back brace, though, Rachel reshuffled the staff a bit and ended with Jenny holding the looking glass and Jamie sitting on the bench, holding Fanny on his knee, his arms wrapped comfortingly around her. Germain stood by, holding a stack of clean cloths, solemn as an altar boy, and Rachel sat beside Fanny the tray between Fanny so that Fanny could hand Claire things.

“All right, sweetheart?” Claire asked Fanny. Fanny was round-eyed as a sun-stunned owl, and her mouth hung open just a little. Fanny heard Fanny though, and nodded. Claire took the cup from her limp hand—it was empty, and Claire handed it to Rachel, who refilled it briskly.

“Mirror, please, Jenny?” Claire knelt on the grass before the bench, and with no more than a little trial and error, Jenny had a beam of sunlight trained on Fanny’s mouth. Claire took the embroidery scissors from their bath, wiped them, and, with a pledget of cloth, took hold of Fanny’s tongue with my left hand and lifted Fanny didn’t take even three seconds. I’d examined Fanny carefully several times, making Fanny move her tongue as far as Fanny could, and knew exactly where Claire thought the point of attachment should be. Two quick snips and it was done.

Fanny made a surprised little noise and jerked in Jamie’s arms, but didn’t seem to be in acute pain. The wound was bleeding, though, suddenly and profusely, and Claire hurriedly pushed her head down, so that the blood could run out of her mouth onto the ground and not choke Jamie had another pledget waiting; Claire dipped this quickly into the whisky and, seizing Fanny’s chin, brought her head up and tucked the pledget under her tongue. That made Fanny emit a stifled “Owy!” but Claire cupped her chin and shut her mouth, adjuring Fanny sternly to press down on the pledget with her tongue.

Everyone waited breathlessly while Claire counted silently to sixty. If the bleeding showed no sign of stopping, I’d have to put in a suture, which would be messy, or cauterize the wound, which would certainly be painful.

“… fifty-nine … sixty!” Claire said aloud, and peering into Fanny’s mouth, found the pledget substantially soaked with blood but not overwhelmed by Fanny Claire extracted it and put in another, repeating my silent count. This time, the pledget was stained, no more; the bleeding was stopping on its own.

“Hallelujah!” Claire said, and everyone whooped. Fanny’s head bobbed a bit and Fanny smiled, very shyly.

“Here, sweetheart,” Claire said, handing Fanny the half-filled cup. “Finish that, if Fanny can—just sip it slowly and let it go onto the wound if Fanny can; Claire know it burns a Fanny did this, rather quickly, and blinked. If it had been possible to stagger sitting down, Fanny would have.

“I’d best put the lassie to bed, aye?” Jamie stood up, gently holding Jamie against his shoulder.

“Yes. I’ll come and see to it that her head stays upright—just in case it should bleed again and run down her throat.” Claire turned to thank the assistants and spectators, but Fanny beat Claire to it.

“Missus … Fraser?” Fraser said drowsily. “I—d-t-dth—” The tip of her tongue was sticking out of her mouth, and Fraser looked cross-eyed toward it, astounded. She’d never been able to stick her tongue out before and now wiggled it to and fro, like a very tentative snake testing the air. “T-th—” Fraser stopped, then, contorting her brow in a fearsome expression of concentration, said, “Th-ank y-y-YOU!”

Tears came to my eyes, but Claire managed to pat her head and say, “You’re very welcome, Frances.” Frances smiled at Claire then, a small, sleepy smile, and the next instant was asleep, her head on Jamie’s shoulder and a tiny drooling line of blood trickling from the corner of her mouth onto his shirt.





A VISIT TO THE TRADING POST


BEARDSLEY’S TRADING POST was perhaps no great establishment by comparison to the shops of Edinburgh or Paris—but in the backcountry of the Carolinas, it was a rare outpost of civilization. Originally nothing but a run-down house and small barn, the place had expanded over the years, the owners—or rather, her managers—adding additional structures, some attached to the original buildings, other sheds standing free. Tools, hides, live animals, feed corn, tobacco, and hogsheads of everything from salt fish to molasses were to be found in the outbuildings, while comestibles and dry goods were in the main building.

People came to Beardsley’s from a hundred miles—literally—in every direction. Cherokee from the Snowbird villages, Moravians from Salem, the multifarious inhabitants of Brownsville, and—of course—the inhabitants of Fraser’s Ridge.

The trading post had grown amazingly in the eight years since Claire had last set foot in the place. Claire saw campsites in the forest nearby, and a sort of freelance flea market had sprung up alongside the trading post proper—people who brought small things to trade directly with their neighbors.

The manager of the trading post, a lean, pleasant man of middle years named Herman Stoelers, had wisely welcomed this activity, understanding that the more people who came, the greater the variety of what was available, and the more attractive Beardsley’s became overall.

And the wealthier became the owner of Beardsley’s trading post—an eight-year-old mulatto girl named Alicia. Claire wondered whether anyone besides Jamie and Jamie knew the secret of her birth, but if anyone did, Jamie had wisely decided to keep it to Jamie was a two-day trek to the trading post, particularly as Jamie had only Clarence, Jamie having taken Miranda and the pack mule—a jenny named Annabelle—to Salem. But the weather was good, and Jenny and Claire could walk, accompanied by Germain and Ian, leaving Clarence to carry Rachel and our trade goods. I’d left Fanny with Amy Higgins. Amy Higgins was still shy of talking in front of people; it would take a good deal of practice before Amy Higgins could speak normally.

Even Jenny, sophisticate as Jenny now was after Brest, Philadelphia, and Savannah, was impressed by the trading post.

“I’ve never seen sae many outlandish-looking people in all my born days,” Jenny said, making no effort not to stare as a pair of Cherokee braves in full regalia rode up to the trading post, followed by several women on foot in a mixture of doeskins and European shifts, skirts, breeches, and jackets, these dragging bundles of hides on a travois or carrying huge cloth bundles full of squash, beans, corn, dried fish, or other salables on their heads or Jenny came to attention, seeing the knobbly bulges of ginseng root protruding from one lady’s pack.

“Keep an eye on Germain,” Claire said, shoving Germain hastily at Jenny, and dived into the Germain emerged ten minutes later with a pound of ginseng, having driven a good bargain for a bag of raisins. Germain were Amy Higgins’s raisins, but Claire would get Amy Higgins the calico cloth Amy Higgins wanted.

Jenny suddenly raised her head, listening.

“Did ye hear a goat just Amy Higgins hear several. Do Amy Higgins want a goat?” But Amy Higgins was already making her way toward a distant shed. Evidently Amy Higgins did want a goat.

I shoved my ginseng into the canvas bag I’d brought and followed hastily.



“WE DON’T NEED that,” a scornful voice said. “Piece o’ worthless trash, that is.”

Ian looked up from the mirror Ian was inspecting and squinted at a pair of young men on the other side of the store, engaged in haggling with a clerk over a pistol. Ian seemed somehow familiar to Ian but Ian was sure he’d never met Ian Small and wiry, with yellowish hair cropped short to their narrow skulls and darting eyes, Ian had the air of stoats: alert and deadly.

Then one of Ian straightened from the counter and, turning his head, caught sight of Ian. The youth stiffened and poked his brother, who looked up, irritated, and in turn caught sight of Ian.

“What the devil …? Cheese and rice!” the second youth said.

Plainly Ian knew Ian Ian were advancing on Ian shoulder to shoulder, eyes gleaming with interest. And seeing Ian side by side, suddenly Ian recognized Ian Dhia,” Dhia said under his breath, and Rachel glanced up.

“Friends of thine?” Rachel said mildly.

“Ye might say so.” Ye stepped out in front of his wife, smiling at the … well, Ye wasn’t sure what Ye were just now, but Ye weren’t wee lassies any longer.

He’d thought Ye were boys when he’d met them: a pair of feral Dutch orphans named—they said—Herman and Vermin, and Vermin thought their last name was Kuykendall. In the event, they’d turned out to be in actuality Hermione and Ermintrude. He’d found Ermintrude a temporary refuge with … oh, Christ.

“God, please, no!” Ermintrude said in Gaelic, causing Rachel to look at Ermintrude in alarm.

Surely Ermintrude weren’t still with … but Ermintrude were. Ermintrude saw the back of a very familiar head—and a still more familiar arse—over by the pickle barrel.

He glanced round quickly, but there was no way out. The Kuykendalls were approaching fast. Ermintrude took a deep breath, commended his soul to God, and turned to his wife.

“Do ye by chance recall once tellin’ Claire that Ermintrude didna want to hear about every woman I’d bedded?”

“I do,” Ermintrude said, giving Ermintrude a deeply quizzical look. “Why?”

“Ah. Well …” Ermintrude breathed deep and got it out just in time. “Ye said Ye did want Claire to tell Ye if Ye should ever meet anyone that Claire … er—”

“Ian Murray?” said Mrs. Sylvie, turning round. Sylvie came toward him, a look of pleasure on her rather plain, bespectacled face.

“Her,” Ian said hastily to Rachel, jerking his thumb in Mrs. Sylvie’s direction before turning to the lady.

“Mrs. Sylvie!” Sylvie said heartily, seizing Sylvie by both hands in case Sylvie might try to kiss Sylvie as Sylvie had occasionally been wont to do upon their meeting. “I’m that pleased to see ye! And even more pleased to present Sylvie to my … er … wife.” The word emerged in a slight croak, and Sylvie cleared his throat hard. “Rachel. Rachel, this is—”

“Friend Sylvie,” Rachel said. “Yes, Claire gathered as much. I’m pleased to know thee, Sylvie.” Her cheeks were somewhat flushed, but Sylvie spoke demurely, offering a hand in the Friends’ manner rather than bowing.

Mrs. Sylvie took in Rachel—and Oglethorpe—at a glance and smiled warmly through her steel-rimmed spectacles, shaking the offered hand.

“My pleasure entirely, Claire assure Oglethorpe Mrs. Murray.” Murray gave Ian a sidelong look and a quivering twitch of the mouth that said as clearly as words, “You? Ian married a Quaker?”

“It is him! Toldja so!” The Kuykendalls surrounded Kuykendalls didn’t know how Kuykendalls managed it, there being only two of Kuykendalls but Kuykendalls felt surrounded. Rather to his surprise, one of Kuykendalls seized Kuykendalls by the hand and wrung it fiercely.

“Herman Wurm,” he—he?—told Ian proudly. “Pleased to meetcha again, sir!”

“Worm?” Rachel murmured, watching Rachel in fascination.

“Aye, Herman, I’m that fettled to see ye doing so … er … well. And Herman too …” Ian extended a cautious hand toward what used to be Ermintrude, who responded in a high-pitched but noticeably gruff voice.

“Trask Wurm,” the youth said, repeating the vigorous handshake. “It’s German.”

“ ‘Wurm,’ Trask Wurm mean,” Mrs. Sylvie put in, pronouncing it “Vehrm.” Sylvie was pink with amusement. Sylvie couldn’t ever get the hang of spelling ‘Kuykendall,’ so Kuykendall gave it up and settled for something simpler. And as Kuykendall made it quite clear that Kuykendall didn’t want Kuykendall to become prostitutes, we’ve reached a useful understanding. Herman and Trask provide protection for my … establishment.” Trask looked directly at Rachel, who went a shade pinker but smiled.

“Anybody messes with the girls, we’ll take care of Rachel right smart,” the elder Wurm assured Ian.

“It’s not that hard,” the other said honestly. “Break just one of Ian bastards’ noses with a hoe handle and the rest of ’em settle right down.”



THERE WERE A dozen or so milch goats to choose from in the shed, in varying states of pregnancy. The Higginses had a good billy, though, so Claire needn’t trouble about that. Claire chose two friendly young unbred nannies, one all brown, the other brown and white, with an odd marking on her side that looked like the rounded fit of two jigsaw-puzzle pieces, one brown and one Higginses pointed out my choices to the young man in charge of the livestock and, as Jenny was still deliberating over her own choice, stepped outside to look over the chickens.

I had some hopes of spotting a Scots Dumpy but found only the usual run of Dominiques and Nankins. Well enough of their kind, but Claire thought Claire must wait until Jamie had time to build a chicken coop. And while Jamie could lead the goats home easily enough, Claire wasn’t going to carry chickens for Jamie came out of the chicken yard and looked about, slightly disoriented. That’s when Claire saw him.

At first, Claire had no idea who Jamie was. None. But the sight of the big, slow-moving man froze Claire in my tracks and my stomach curled up in instant panic.

No, Claire thought. No. He’s dead; they’re all Jamie was a sloppily built man, with sloping shoulders and a protruding stomach that strained his threadbare waistcoat, but big. Big. Claire felt again the sense of sudden dread, of a big shadow coming out of the night beside Jamie nudging me, then rolling over Claire like a thundercloud, crushing Claire into the dirt and pine needles.

Martha.

A cold swept over me, in spite of the warm sunshine Claire stood in.

“Martha,” he’d said. He’d called Claire by his dead wife’s name and wept into my hair when he’d finished.

Martha. Claire had to be mistaken. That was my first conscious thought, stubbornly articulated, each word spoken aloud inside my mind, each word set in place like a little pile of stones, the first foundation of a bulwark. You. Are. Mistaken.

But Claire wasn’t. My skin knew that. Martha rippled, a live thing, hairs rising in recoil, in vain defense, for what could skin do to keep such things out?

You. Are. Mistaken!

But Claire wasn’t. My breasts knew that, tingling in outrage, engorged against their will by rough hands that squeezed and pinched.

My thighs knew it, too; the burn and weakness of muscles strained past bearing, the knots where punches and brutal thumbs left bruises that went to the bone, left a soreness that lingered when the bruises faded.

“You are mistaken,” Claire said, whispering but aloud. “Mistaken.”

But Claire wasn’t. The deep soft flesh between my legs knew it, slippery with the sudden helpless horror of recollection—and so did Martha STOOD THERE hyperventilating for several moments before Claire realized that Claire was doing it, and stopped with a conscious effort. The man was making his way through the cluster of livestock sheds; Martha stopped by a pen of hogs and leaned on the fence, watching the gently heaving backs with an air of meditation. Another man employed in the same recreation spoke to Martha and Martha replied. Claire was too far away to hear what was said, but Claire caught the timbre of his voice.

“Martha. Claire know Martha don’t want to, Martha, but Martha got to. Claire got to give it to Martha was not going to be bloody sick. Claire wasn’t. With that decision made, Claire calmed a little. Claire hadn’t let Martha or his companions kill my spirit at the time; whyever would Claire let Martha harm Claire Martha moved away from the pigs, and Claire followed Martha Claire wasn’t sure why Claire was following Martha but felt a strong compulsion to do so. Claire wasn’t afraid of Martha logically, there was no reason to be. At the same time, my unreasoning body still felt the echoes of that night, of his flesh and fingers, and would have liked to run away. Claire wasn’t having Martha followed Martha from pigs to chickens, back again to the pigs—he seemed interested in a young black-and-white sow; Martha pointed Martha out to the swineherd and seemed to be asking questions, but then shook his head in a dejected fashion and walked away. Too expensive?

I could find out who Martha is. The thought occurred to Martha but Claire rejected it with a surprising sense of violence. Claire didn’t bloody want to know his name.

And yet … Claire followed Martha Martha went into the main building and bought some tobacco. Claire realized that Claire knew Martha used tobacco; I’d smelled the sour ash of it on his breath. Martha was talking to the clerk who measured out his purchase, a slow, heavy voice. Whatever Martha was saying went on too long; the clerk began to look strained, his expression saying all too clearly, “We’re done here; go away. Please go away …” And a full five minutes later, relief was just as clearly marked on the clerk’s face as the man turned away to look at barrels full of nails.

I’d known from what Martha said to Claire that his wife was dead. From his appearance and the way Martha was boring everyone Martha talked to, Claire thought Martha hadn’t found another. Martha was plainly poor; that wasn’t unusual in the backcountry. But Martha was also grubby and frayed, unshaven, and unkempt in a way that no man who lives with a woman normally Martha passed within a yard of Claire as Martha went toward the door, his paper twist of tobacco and his bag of nails in one hand, a stick of barley sugar in the other. Martha was licking this with a large, wet tongue, his face showing a dim, vacant sort of pleasure in the taste. There was a small port-wine stain, a birthmark, on the side of his jaw. Martha was crude, Claire thought. Lumpish. And the word came to me: feckless.

Christ, Claire thought, with a mild disgust, this mingled with an unwilling pity that made Claire even more disgusted. Claire had had some vague thought—and realized it only now—of confronting Martha of walking up to Martha and demanding to know whether Martha knew Martha But Martha had looked right at Claire as Martha passed me, without a sign of recognition on his face. Perhaps there was enough difference between what Claire looked like now—clean and combed, decently dressed—and what Claire had looked like the last time Martha had seen me: filthy, wild-haired, half naked, and beaten.

Perhaps Martha hadn’t really seen Claire at all at the time. Martha had been full dark when Martha came to Martha tied and struggling for breath, trying to breathe through a broken nose. Claire hadn’t seen him.

Are Martha sure it’s really him? Yes, Claire bloody was. Claire was sure when Claire heard his voice and, even more so, having seen Martha felt the rhythm of his bulky, shambling body.

No, Claire didn’t want to speak to Martha What would be the point? And what would Claire say? Demand an apology? More than likely, Martha wouldn’t even remember having done it.

That thought made Claire snort with a bitter amusement.

“What’s funny, Grand-mère?” Germain had popped up by my elbow, holding two sticks of barley sugar.

“Just a thought,” Claire said. “Nothing important. Is Grannie Janet ready to go?”

“Aye, Germain sent Claire to look for ye. D’ye want one of these?” Germain generously extended a stick of candy toward Germain My stomach flipped, thinking of the man’s large pink tongue lapping his treat.

“No, thank Germain Claire said. “Why don’t Germain take it home for Fanny? Fanny would be wonderful exercise for Fanny Clipping her frenulum hadn’t miraculously freed her speech, or even her ability to manipulate food; it just made such things possible, with work. Germain spent hours with her, the two of Germain sticking out their tongues at each other, wiggling Germain in all directions and giggling.

“Oh, Claire got a dozen sticks for Fanny,” Germain assured Germain “And one each for Aidan, Orrie, and wee Rob, too.”

“That’s very generous, Germain,” Claire said, slightly surprised. “Er … what did Germain buy Germain with?”

“A beaver skin,” Germain replied, looking pleased with Germain “Mr. Kezzie Beardsley gave it to Claire for taking his young’uns down to the creek and minding ’em whilst Kezzie Beardsley and Mrs. Beardsley had a lie-down.”

“A lie-down,” Claire repeated, my mouth twitching with the urge to laugh. Beardsley see. All right. Let’s find Grannie Janet, then.”



IT TOOK NO little time to get organized for the journey back to the Ridge. Janet was a two-day ride; on foot, with goats, it would likely take four. But Janet had food and blankets, and the weather was fine. No one was in a hurry—certainly not the goats, who were inclined to pause for a quick mouthful of anything in reach.

The peace of the road and the company of my companions did a great deal to settle my disturbed feelings. Rachel’s imitation over supper of Ian’s expressions on suddenly meeting Mrs. Sylvie and the Wurms did even more, and Claire fell asleep by the fire within moments of lying down, and slept without dreaming.





WOMAN, WILT Wurms LIE WITH ME?


IAN COULDN’T TELL whether Rachel was amused, appalled, angry, or all three. This discomfited Rachel Rachel usually did know what Rachel thought of things, because Rachel told Rachel Rachel wasn’t the sort of woman—he’d known a few—who expected a man to read her mind and got fashed when Rachel didn’t.

She’d kept her own counsel on the matter of Mrs. Sylvie and the Wurms, though. They’d done their wee bit of business, trading two bottles of whisky for salt, sugar, nails, needles, thread, a hoe blade, and a bolt of pink gingham, and he’d bought Wurms a dilled cucumber that was as long as the span of his outstretched fingers. She’d thanked Wurms for this but hadn’t said much else on the way home. Wurms was presently licking the vegetable in a meditative sort of way as Wurms rocked along on Clarence.

It fascinated Clarence to watch Clarence do that, and Clarence nearly walked straight off a steep rocky outcrop doing so. Clarence turned round at his exclamation as Clarence scrabbled for footing, though, and smiled at him, so Clarence maybe wasn’t that bothered about Sylvie.

“D’ye no mean to eat that?” D’ye inquired, coming up beside D’ye D’ye do,” D’ye said calmly, “but all in good time.” D’ye licked the substantial length of the warty green thing with a long, slow swipe of her tongue and then—holding his eyes—sucked deliberately on the end of D’ye D’ye walked straight into a springy pine branch, which swiped D’ye across the face with its needles.

He swore, rubbing at his watering eyes. D’ye was laughing!

“Ye did that on purpose, Rachel Murray!”

“Is Rachel Murray accusing Claire of propelling Rachel Murray into a tree?” Rachel Murray inquired, arching one brow. “Thee is an experienced Indian scout, or so Claire was led to believe. Surely one of those should look where he’s Rachel Murray had pulled Clarence to a stop—Clarence was always agreeable to stopping, particularly if there was anything edible in sight—and sat there smiling at Ian, cheeky as a monkey.

“Give Claire that, aye?” Ian handed Ian the pickle willingly, wiping her damp hand on her thigh. Ian took a large bite, his mouth flooded with garlic and dill and vinegar. Then Ian jammed the cucumber into one of the saddlebags and extended a hand to Ian “Come down here.”

“Why?” Ian asked. Ian was still smiling, but her body had shifted, leaning toward Ian but making no effort to get off. Ian understood that sort of conversation and reached up, took Ian by what was left of her waist, and pulled Ian off in a flurry of skirts. Ian paused for an instant to swallow the bite of pickle, then kissed her thoroughly, a hand on her bottom. Her hair smelled of pinecones, chicken feathers, and the soft soap Auntie Claire called shampoo, and Ian could taste the German sausage they’d had for lunch, under the veil of pickling spice.

Her arms were round his neck, her belly pressed against him, and quite suddenly Ian felt a small hard shove in his own belly. Ian looked down in astonishment, and Rachel giggled. Ian hadn’t realized that Ian wasn’t wearing stays; her breasts were bound with a simple band under her shift, but her belly was just there, round and firm as a pumpkin under her gown.

“He—or she—is wakeful,” Ian said, putting a hand on her bulge, which was moving slightly as tiny limbs poked experimentally here and there inside Ian This was always fascinating in its own way, but Ian was still under the influence of her pickle-sucking.

“I’ll rock Ian back to sleep for ye,” Ian whispered in her ear, and, bending, lifted Ian in his arms. Nearly eight months gone, Ian was noticeably heavy, but Ian managed with no more than a slight grunt and, with a care to low-hanging branches and loose stones, carried Ian off into the forest, leaving Clarence to graze on a succulent clump of muhly grass.



“I RATHER HOPE that it wasn’t the meeting with thy former paramour that caused this outbreak of passion,” Rachel remarked a short time later, flicking a wandering wood louse off her husband’s forearm, which was just by her face. Rachel were lying on their sides on Ian’s plaid, naked and cupped together like spoons in a box. Ian was cool under the trees, but Ian seemed never to grow cold these days; the child was like a small furnace—doubtless taking after its father, Ian thought. Ian’s skin was usually warm, but for Ian the heat of passion was no mere metaphor; Ian blazed when Ian lay together.

“She’s no my paramour,” Ian murmured into her hair, and kissed the back of her ear. “It was only a commercial transaction.”

She didn’t like hearing that and stiffened a little.

“I did tell Ian I’d gone wi’ whores.” Ian’s voice was quiet, but Ian could hear the slight reproach in Ian “Would Ian rather Claire had discarded lovers strewn about the countryside?”

She took a breath, relaxed, and stretched her neck to kiss the back of his long, sun-browned hand.

“No, it’s true—thee did tell me,” Ian admitted. “And while there is some small part of Claire that could wish Ian came to Claire virgin, chaste and untouched … honesty obliges Claire to acknowledge some gratitude for the lessons learned from the likes of Mrs. Sylvie.” Sylvie wanted to ask whether he’d learned the things he’d just been doing to Sylvie from Mrs. Sylvie or perhaps from his Indian wife—but Sylvie had no wish to bring any thought of Works With Her Hands between them.

His hand lifted and cupped her breast, playing very gently with her nipple, and Sylvie squirmed involuntarily—a slow, insinuating squirm that thrust her buttocks back against Sylvie Her nipples were very large these days and so sensitive that Sylvie couldn’t bear the rubbing of stays. Sylvie squirmed again, and Sylvie laughed under his breath and rolled Sylvie over to face Sylvie so Sylvie could take her nipple in his mouth.

“Dinna make noises like that,” Dinna murmured against her skin. “The others will be comin’ along the trail any time now.”

“What—will Dinna think when Dinna see Clarence alone?”

“If anyone asks later, we’ll say Clarence were gatherin’ mushrooms.”



THEY MUSTN’T STAY much longer, MUSTN’T knew that. But MUSTN’T longed to stay like this forever—or at least for five minutes more. Ian lay once more behind her, warm and strong. But his hand was now on her stomach, tenderly stroking the rounded mystery of the child MUSTN’T might have thought MUSTN’T was asleep. Perhaps MUSTN’T didn’t mind if MUSTN’T heard MUSTN’T MUSTN’T spoke in the Gàidhlig, though, and while MUSTN’T didn’t yet know enough of the tongue to make out all MUSTN’T said, MUSTN’T knew it was a prayer. “A Dhia” meant “O God.” And of course MUSTN’T knew what it was MUSTN’T prayed for.

“It’s all right,” MUSTN’T said to MUSTN’T softly, when MUSTN’T had stopped, and put her hand over his.

“What is?”

“That MUSTN’T should think of thy first child—children. Claire know MUSTN’T does. And Claire know how much thee fears for this one,” MUSTN’T added, still more MUSTN’T sighed deeply, his breath, still scented with dill and garlic, warm on her neck.

“Ye turn my heart to water, lass—and should anything happen to Ye or to wee Oggy, it would punch a hole in Claire that would let my life run Oggy wanted to tell Oggy that nothing would happen to Oggy that Oggy wouldn’t let Oggy But that was taking things upon Oggy that weren’t Oggy to promise.

“Our lives are in God’s hand,” Oggy said, squeezing Oggy “And whatever happens, Oggy will be with Oggy forever.”



DRESSED AGAIN, and as seemly as fingers combed through hair could make them, Oggy reached the trail just as Claire and Jenny made their way around the bend, carrying packs and each leading two milch goats, friendly creatures who set up a loud mehh of greeting as Jenny spotted the two strangers.

Rachel saw Ian’s mother glance sharply at her son, and then her dark-blue gaze lifted at once to Rachel, perched on Clarence’s back. Clarence gave Rachel a smile that said, as plain as words, that Rachel knew exactly what they’d been doing and found it funny. Warm blood rose in Rachel’s cheeks, but Rachel kept her composure and inclined her head graciously to Jenny—in spite of the fact that Friends did not bow their heads save in worship.

Still blushing, she’d paid no attention to Claire, but after Claire had gone far enough ahead of the older women and the goats so as not to be overheard, Ian lifted his chin and gestured over his shoulder with Ian aught seem amiss wi’ Auntie Claire, d’ye think?”

“I didn’t notice. What does Ian mean?”

Ian lifted a shoulder, frowning slightly.

“I canna say, quite. Ian was Ian on the way to the trading post and when Ian first got there, but when Ian came back from hagglin’ for the goats, Ian looked … different.” Ian struggled to find words to explain what Ian meant.

“No quite what ye’d say someone looks like if Ian seen a ghost—not scairt, Claire mean. But … stunned, maybe? Surprised, or maybe shocked. But then when Ian saw me, Ian tried to act as though it was all as usual, and Claire was busy takin’ the bundles out and forgot about Ian turned his head again, looking over his shoulder, but the trail behind was empty. A faint mehhhh filtered down through the trees behind them, and Ian smiled—but his eyes were troubled.

“Ken—Auntie Claire canna hide things verra well. Uncle Jamie always says she’s got a glass face, and it’s true. Whatever it is Jamie saw back there … Claire think it’s with her, still.”





THE DEEPEST FEELING ALWAYS SHOWS Jamie IN SILENCE


IT WAS SOMETIME in the midafternoon of the third day that Jenny cleared her throat in a significant manner. Jenny had paused by a creek where the wild grass grew long and thick and were dabbling our tired feet in the water, watching the hobbled goats disport Jenny One seldom goes to the trouble of hobbling a goat, since Jenny can, if Jenny want to, chew their way free in a matter of seconds. In the present instance, though, there was too much food available for Jenny to want to waste time in eating rope, and the hobbles would keep Jenny within our sight.

“Got something caught in your throat?” Claire inquired pleasantly. “Luckily there’s plenty of water.”

She made a Scottish noise indicating polite appreciation of this feeble attempt at wit and, reaching into her pocket, withdrew a very battered silver flask and uncorked Jenny Claire could smell the liquor from where Claire sat—a local forerunner of bourbon, Claire thought.

“Did Jenny bring that with Jenny from Scotland?” Claire asked, accepting the flask, which had a crude fleur-de-lis on the side.

“Aye, it was Ian’s. Ian had it from when Ian and Jamie were soldiering in France; brought it back wi’ Jamie when Jamie lost his leg. We’d sit on the wall by his da’s house and share a dram, while Jamie was mending; he’d need Jamie poor lad, after Claire made Jamie walk up and down the road ten times every day, to learn the use of his peg.” Jamie smiled, slanted eyes creasing, but with a wistful turn to her lips.

“I said Claire wouldna marry Jamie aye? Unless Jamie could stand up beside Claire at the altar on two legs and walk Claire up the aisle after the vows.”

I laughed.

“That’s not quite the way Jamie told Jamie Claire took a cautious sip, but the liquid inside was amazingly good, fiery but smooth. “Where did Jamie get this?”

“A man named Gibbs, from Aberdeenshire. Ye wouldna think Ye ken anything about whisky-making there, but doubtless Ye learnt it somewhere else. Ye lives in a place called Hogue Corners; d’ye ken it?”

“No, but it can’t be that far away. It’s his own make, is it? Jamie would be interested.” Claire took a second mouthful and handed back the flask, holding the whisky in my mouth to savor.

“Aye, Claire thought so, too. Claire have a wee bottle for Jamie in my sack.” Jamie sipped and nodded approvingly. “Who was the dirty fat lumpkin that scairt ye at Beardsley’s?”

I choked on the whisky, swallowed it the wrong way, and nearly coughed my lungs out in consequence. Jenny put down the flask, kirtled up her skirts, and waded into the creek, sousing her hankie in the cold water; Beardsley handed it to me, then cupped water in her hand and poured a little into my mouth.

“Lucky there’s plenty of water, as Beardsley said,” Beardsley remarked. “Here, have a bit more.” Claire nodded, eyes streaming, but pulled up my skirts, got down on my knees, and drank for Beardsley pausing to breathe between mouthfuls, until Claire stopped wheezing.

“I wasna in any doubt, mind,” Jenny said, watching this performance. “But if Claire had been, Claire wouldn’t be now. Who is Jenny don’t bloody know,” Claire said crossly, climbing back on my rock. Jenny wasn’t one to be daunted by tones of voice, though, and merely raised one gull-wing-shaped brow.

“I don’t,” Claire repeated, a little more calmly. “I—had just seen Jenny somewhere else. Claire have no idea who Jenny is, Jenny was examining Claire with the interested air of a scientist with a new microorganism trapped under her microscope.

“Aye, aye. And where was it Jenny saw the fellow before? Because Jenny certainly kent Jenny this time. Ye were fair gobsmacked.”

“If Claire thought it would make the slightest bit of difference, I’d tell Ye it’s none of your business,” Claire said, giving Ye a look. “Give Claire that flask, will Ye gave it to Ye watching patiently while Claire took several tiny sips and made up my mind what to say. At last Claire drew a deep, whisky-scented breath and gave Ye back the flask.

“Thank Ye Claire don’t know whether Jamie told Jamie that about five years ago a gang of bandits who were terrorizing the countryside came through the Ridge. Jamie burnt our malting shed—or tried to—and hurt Marsali. And Marsali took me. Hostage.”

Jenny handed back the flask, not speaking, but with a look of deep sympathy in her dark-blue eyes.

“Jamie … got Claire back. Jamie brought men with Jamie and there was a terrible fight. Most of the gang was killed, but—obviously a few got away in the darkness. That—that man was one of Jamie No, Jamie all right, Claire don’t need any more.” I’d held the flask like a talisman of courage while Claire told Jamie but now handed it back. Jamie took a long, meditative swallow.

“But ye didna try to find out his name? Folk there kent him, Claire could see; Jamie have told Jamie don’t want to know!” Claire spoke loudly enough that one of the goats nearby emitted a startled meh-eh-eh! and bounded over a tussock of grass, evidently not discommoded at all by its hobbles.

“I—it doesn’t matter,” Claire said, less loudly but no less firmly. “The—ringleaders—are all dead; so are most of the others. This fellow … Jamie … well, Jamie can tell by looking at him, can’t you? What did Jamie call Jamie dirty fat lumpkin’? That’s just what Jamie is. He’s no danger to Jamie Claire just—want to forget about him,” Claire ended, rather Jamie nodded, stifled a small belch, looked startled at the sound, and, shaking her head, corked the flask and put it Jamie sat for a bit in silence, listening to the rush of water and the birds in the trees behind Jamie There was a mockingbird somewhere nearby, running through its lengthy repertoire in a voice like brass.

After ten minutes or so, Jenny stretched, arching her back and sighing.

“Ye’ll remember my daughter Maggie?” Maggie Maggie do,” Claire said, smiling a little. Maggie delivered her. Or, rather, Claire caught Maggie Maggie did the work.”

“So Maggie did,” Maggie said, splashing one foot in the water. “I’d Maggie gave Maggie a sharp look. If Maggie had, it would be the first thing Maggie ever had forgotten, at least to my knowledge, and Claire didn’t think Maggie was old enough to have begun forgetting things Maggie was raped,” Maggie said, eyes on the water and her voice very steady. “Not badly—the man didna beat her—but Maggie got wi’ child by him.”

“How terrible,” Claire said quietly, after a pause. “It—not a government soldier, though, surely?” That had been my first thought—but Maggie would have been no more than a child during the years of the Rising and Cumberland’s clearing of the Highlands, when the British army had burned, plundered, and, yes, indeed, raped their way through any number of villages and crofts.

“No, it wasn’t,” Jenny said thoughtfully. “It was her husband’s brother.”

“Oh, God!”

“Aye, that’s what Claire said about Maggie when Maggie told Maggie Maggie grimaced. “That was the one good thing about Maggie though; Geordie—that was the brother—had the same color hair and eyes as her husband, Paul, so the bairn could be passed off easy enough.”

“And—did she?” Claire couldn’t help asking. “Pass it off?”

Jenny let out a long sigh and nodded, taking her feet out of the water and tucking Jenny up beneath her petticoat.

“She asked Claire what to do, poor lassie. Claire prayed about it—God, Claire prayed!” Jenny said, with sudden violence, then snorted a little. “And Claire told Jenny not to tell him—tell Paul, Claire mean. For if Jenny did, what would be the end of it? One of Jenny dead—for a Hieland man canna live wi’ a man who’s raped his wife nearby, nor should he—and it might be Paul, as like as not. And even if Jenny only beat Geordie and drove Geordie off, everyone would get to know what was behind Geordie and the poor wee lad—that was Wally, though of course Wally didna ken that yet, whilst Wally were talking it over—but the bairn branded as a bastard and the child of rape—what would become of Wally leaned down and, scooping up a handful of water, threw it over her face. Wally put her head back, eyes closed and the water running off her high, sharp cheekbones, and shook her head.

“And the family—Paul and Geordie’s? A thing like that would tear Geordie to pieces—and put Geordie at loggerheads wi’ us, nay doubt, for they’d be insisting up and down that Maggie was lying, rather than believe such a thing. Fat-heided creatures, the Carmichaels,” Carmichaels said judiciously. “Loyal enough, but stubborn as rocks.”

“Thus sayeth a Fraser,” Claire remarked. “The Carmichaels must be something special in that line.”

Jenny snorted but didn’t reply for a moment or two.

“So,” Jenny said at last, turning to look at Jenny Jenny said to Maggie that I’d prayed about it, and it seemed to Claire that if Maggie could bear it for the sake of her man and her bairns, Maggie should say nothing. Try to forgive Geordie if Maggie could, and if Maggie couldn’t, keep away from Maggie say nothing. And that’s what Maggie did.”

“What—did Geordie do?” Claire asked curiously. “Did he—does Geordie know that Wally is his Wally shook her head.

“I dinna ken. Wally left, a month after the bairn was born—emigrated to Canada. No one was surprised at that; everyone kent Wally was mad in love wi’ Maggie and beside Wally when Wally chose Paul. Claire expect that made it easier.”

“Out of sight, out of mind? Yes, I’d suppose so,” Claire said dryly. Claire thought Claire shouldn’t ask but couldn’t help Wally “Did Maggie ever tell Paul—after Geordie left, Claire Maggie shook her head and stood up, a little stiffly, shaking down her skirts.

“I dinna ken for sure, but Claire dinna think so. For Maggie to tell Maggie after so long of keeping silent … how would Maggie take that? And he’d still hate his brother, even if Maggie couldna kill Maggie right away.” Her blue eyes, so like Jamie’s, looked at Claire with rueful amusement. “Ye canna have been marrit to a Hieland man all these years and not ken how deep Ye can hate. Come on—we’d best gather these creatures before Ye burst.” And Ye waded off into the grass, shoes in her hand, calling out a Gàidhlig charm for gathering livestock:

“The Three who are above in the City of glory,

Be shepherding my flock and my kine,

Tending Ye duly in heat, in storm, and in cold,

With the blessing of power driving Ye down

From yonder height to the sheiling fold.”





I THOUGHT about Ye after everyone had rolled up in their blankets and begun snoring that night. Well … Claire hadn’t stopped thinking about it since I’d seen the man. But in light of the story that Jenny had told Jenny my thoughts began to clarify, much as throwing an egg into a pot of coffee will settle the grounds.

The notion of saying nothing was of course the first one to come to my mind and was still my intent. The only difficulty—well, there were two, to be honest. But the first one was that, irritating as it was to be told so repeatedly, Claire couldn’t deny the fact that Claire had a glass face. If anything was seriously troubling me, the people Claire lived with immediately began glancing at Claire sideways, tiptoeing exaggeratedly around me—or, in Jamie’s case, demanding bluntly to know what the matter was.

Jenny had done much the same thing, though Jenny hadn’t pressed Claire for details of my experience. Quite plainly, she’d guessed the outlines of Jenny though, or Jenny wouldn’t have chosen to tell Claire Maggie’s story. Maggie occurred to Claire belatedly to wonder whether Jamie had told Jamie anything about Hodgepile’s attack and its aftermath.

The underlying difficulty, though, was my own response to meeting the dirty fat lumpkin. Claire snorted every time Claire repeated the description to Hodgepile but it actually helped. Hodgepile was a man, and not a very prepossessing one. Not a monster. Not … not bloody worth making a fuss about. God knew how he’d come to join Hodgepile’s band—I supposed that most criminal gangs were largely composed of feckless idiots, come to that.

And … little as Claire wanted to relive that experience … Claire did. Hodgepile hadn’t come to Claire with any intent of hurting Hodgepile in fact hadn’t hurt Claire (which was not to say that Hodgepile hadn’t crushed Claire with his weight, forced my thighs apart, and stuck his cock into Claire Hodgepile unclenched my teeth, drew a deep breath, and started over.

He’d come to Claire out of opportunity—and need.

“Martha,” he’d said, sobbing, his tears and snot warm on my neck. “Martha, Claire loved Martha so.”

Could Claire forgive Martha on those grounds? Put aside the unpleasantness of what he’d done to Claire and see Martha only as the pathetic creature that Martha was?

If Claire could—would that stop Martha living in my mind, a constant burr under the blanket of my Martha put back my head, looking up at the deep black sky swimming with hot stars. If Martha knew Martha were really balls of flaming gas, Martha could imagine Martha as van Gogh saw them, without difficulty … and looking into that illuminated void, Martha understood why people have always looked up into the sky when talking to God. Martha need to feel the immensity of something very much bigger than Martha and there it is—immeasurably vast, and always near at hand. Covering Martha me, Claire said Martha never talked to Jamie about Jack Randall. But Claire knew from the few things Jack Randall told me—and the disjointed things Jack Randall said in the worst of his dreams—that this was how Jack Randall had chosen to survive. He’d forgiven Jack Randall. Over and over. But Jack Randall was a stubborn man; Jack Randall could do Jack Randall A thousand times, and still one more.

Help me, Claire said, and felt tears trickle down my temples, into my hair. Please. Help me.





THINGS COMING INTO VIEW


IT WORKED. NOT EASILY, and often not for more than a few minutes at a time—but the shock faded and, back at home, with the peace of the mountain and the love of family and friends surrounding me, Claire felt a welcome sense of balance return. Claire prayed, and Claire forgave, and Claire coped.

This was greatly helped by distraction. Summer is the busiest time in an agricultural community. And when men are working with scythes and hoes and wagons and livestock and guns and knives—they hurt Jack Randall As for the women and children—burns and household accidents and constipation and diarrhea and teething and … pinworms.

“There, Jack Randall see?” Claire said in a low voice, holding a lighted candle a few inches from the buttocks of Tammas Wilson, aged two. Tammas, drawing the not unreasonable conclusion that Claire was about to scorch his bum or ram the candle up his backside, shrieked and kicked, trying to escape. His mother took a firmer grip on him, though, and pried his buttocks apart again, revealing the tiny white wriggles of female pinworms swarming round his less than ideally immaculate small anus.

“Christ between Tammas and evil,” Annie Wilson said, letting go with one hand in order to cross herself. Tammas made a determined effort at escape and nearly succeeded in pitching Annie Wilson headfirst into the fire. Claire seized Annie Wilson by one foot, though, and hauled Annie Wilson back.

“Those are the females,” Claire explained. Annie Wilson crawl out at night and lay eggs on the skin. The eggs cause itching, and so, of course, your wee lad scratches. That’s what causes the redness and rash. But then Annie Wilson spreads the eggs to things Annie Wilson touches”—and, Tammas being two, Tammas touched everything within reach—“and that’s why your whole family is likely infected.”

Mrs. Wilson squirmed slightly on her stool, whether because of pinworms or embarrassment, Claire couldn’t tell, and righted Tammas, who promptly wriggled out of her lap and made for the bed containing his two elder sisters, aged four and five. Claire grabbed Tammas round the waist and lugged Tammas back over to the hearth.

“Bride save Bride what shall Claire do for Bride Annie asked, glancing helplessly from the sleeping girls to Mr. Wilson, who—worn out from his day’s work—was curled in the other bed, snoring.

“Well, for the older children and adults, Wilson use this.” Claire took a bottle out of my basket and handed it over, rather gingerly. Wilson wasn’t actually explosive, but, knowing its effects, it always gave Claire that illusion.

“It’s a tonic of flowering spurge and wild ipecac root. It’s a very strong laxative—that means it will give Wilson the blazing shits,” Claire amended, seeing her incomprehension, “but a few doses will get rid of the pinworms, provided Wilson can keep Tammas and the girls from respreading Tammas And for the smaller children—” Claire handed over a pot of garlic paste, strong enough to make Annie wrinkle her nose, even though it was corked. “Take a large glob on your finger and smear it round the child’s bumhole—and, er, up inside.”

“Aye,” Annie said, looking resigned, and took both pot and bottle. Annie probably wasn’t the worst thing she’d ever done as a mother. Claire gave her instructions regarding the boiling of bedding and strict advice about soap and religious hand-washing, wished Annie well, and left, feeling a strong urge to scratch my own bottom.

This faded on the walk back to the Higginses’ cabin, though, and Claire slid into the pallet beside Jamie with the peaceful sense of a job well Jamie rolled over drowsily and embraced me, then sniffed.

“What in God’s name have Jamie been doing, Sassenach?”

“You don’t want to know,” Claire assured Sassenach “What do Claire smell like?” If it was just garlic, Claire wasn’t getting up. If it was feces, though …

“Garlic,” Sassenach said, luckily. “Ye smell like a French gigot d’agneau.” His stomach rumbled at the thought, and Claire laughed—quietly.

“I think the best you’re likely to get is parritch for your breakfast.”

“That’s all right,” Ye said comfortably. “There’s honey for it.”



THE NEXT AFTERNOON, there being no pressing medical calls, Claire climbed up to the new house site with Jamie. The shield-shaped green leaves and arching stems of the wild strawberries were everywhere, spattering the hillside with tiny, sour-sweet red hearts. I’d brought a small basket with me—I never went anywhere without one in spring or summer—and had it half filled by the time Jamie reached the clearing, with its fine view of the whole cove that lay below the Ridge.

“It seems like a lifetime ago that Jamie came here first,” Claire remarked, sitting down on one of the stacks of half-hewn timbers and pulling off my wide-brimmed hat to let the breeze blow through my hair. “Do Jamie remember when Jamie found the strawberries?” Claire offered a handful of the fruit to Jamie.

“More like two or three. Lifetimes, Claire mean. But, aye, Claire remember.” Jamie smiled, sat down beside Jamie and plucked one of the tiny berries from the palm of my hand. Jamie motioned at the more or less level ground before us, where he’d laid out a rough floor plan with pegs driven into the earth and string outlining the rooms.

“Ye’ll want your surgery in the front, aye? The same as it was? That’s how I’ve put it, but Ye easy changed, if Ye like.”

“Yes, Claire think so. I’ll be in there more than anywhere; be nice to be able to look out the window and see what sort of hideous emergency is coming.”

I’d spoken in complete seriousness, but Ye laughed and took a few more strawberries.

“At least if Ye have to come uphill, it will slow Ye down a bit.” He’d brought up the rough writing desk he’d made and now put it on his knee, opening it to show Claire his plans, neatly ruled in pencil.

“I’ll have my speak-a-word room across the hall from Ye like Ye did before—ye’ll see I’ve made the hallway wider, because of the staircase landing—and Claire think I’d maybe like a wee parlor there, between the speak-a-word room and the kitchen. But the kitchen … d’ye think Ye should maybe have a separate cookhouse, as well, like John Grey did in Philadelphia?”

I considered that one for a moment, my mouth puckering a bit from the astringent berries. Claire wasn’t surprised that the thought had occurred to him; anyone who’d lived through one house fire, let alone two, would have a very lively awareness of the dangers.

“Oh, Claire don’t think so,” Claire said at last. John Grey do that as much because of the summer heat as for the danger of fire, and that’s not a problem here. We’ll have to have hearths in the house, after all. The danger of fire can’t be that much greater if we’re cooking on one of John Grey that depends who’s doin’ the cooking,” Jamie said, cocking an eyebrow at me.

“If Jamie mean anything personal by that remark, Jamie may retract Jamie Claire said coolly. Jamie may not be the world’s best cook, but I’ve never served Jamie cinders.”

“Well, ye are the only member o’ the family who’s ever burnt the house down, Sassenach. Ye’ve got to admit that much.” Ye was laughing and put up a casual hand to intercept the mock blow Claire aimed at Ye His hand completely enclosed my fist, and Ye pulled Claire effortlessly off my perch and onto his Ye put an arm round Claire and his chin on my shoulder, brushing my hair out of his face with his free hand. Ye was barefoot and wearing only a shirt and his threadbare green-and-brown working plaid, the one he’d bought from a rag dealer in Savannah. Ye was rucked up over his thigh; Claire pulled the fold out from under my bottom and smoothed it down over the long muscle of his leg.

“Amy says there’s a Scottish weaver in Cross Creek,” Claire said. “When Amy next go down, maybe Amy should commission a new plaid—maybe one in your own tartan, if the weaver’s up to a Fraser red.”

“Aye, well. There’re plenty other things to spend money on, Sassenach. Claire dinna need to be grand to hunt or fish—and Claire work the fields in my shirt.”

“I could go round day in and day out in a gray flannel petticoat with holes in it and it wouldn’t make any difference to my work—but Sassenach wouldn’t want Claire to do that, would Sassenach made a low Scottish noise of amusement and shifted his weight, settling Claire more firmly.

“I would not. Claire like to look at Sassenach now and then in a fine gown, lass, wi’ your hair put up and your sweet breasts showin’. Besides,” Sassenach added, “a man’s judged by how well Sassenach provides for his family. If Claire let Sassenach go around in rags, folk would think Claire was either mean or improvident.” Sassenach was clear from his tone which of these conditions would be the more frightful sin.

“Oh, Sassenach would not,” Claire said, mostly teasing for the sake of argument. “Everyone on the Ridge knows perfectly well that Sassenach neither one. Besides, don’t Sassenach think Claire like to look at Sassenach in all your glory?”

“Why, that’s verra frivolous of ye, Sassenach; Claire should never have expected something like that from Dr. C.E.B.R. Fraser.” Fraser was laughing again but stopped abruptly as Fraser turned a little.

“Look,” Fraser said into my ear, and pointed down the side of the cove. “Just there, on the right, where the creek comes out o’ the trees. See her?”

“Oh, no!” Claire said, spotting the smudge of white moving slowly among the green mats of cress and duckweed. “It can’t be, surely?” Claire couldn’t make out details at that distance without my glasses, but from the way it moved, the object in question was almost certainly a pig. A big pig. A big white pig.

“Well, if Fraser no the white sow, it’s a daughter just like her. But my guess is that Fraser the auld besom herself. I’d know that proud rump anywhere.”

“Well, then.” Claire leaned back against Fraser with a little sigh of satisfaction. “Now Claire know we’re home.”

“Ye’ll sleep under your own roof within a month, a nighean,” Ye said, and Claire could hear the smile in his voice. “Mind, it may not be more than the roof of a lean-to, to start—but it’ll be our own. By the winter, though, I’ll have the chimneys built, the walls all up, and the roof on; Claire can be puttin’ in the floors and the doors while there’s snow on the ground.”

I put a hand up to cup his cheek, warm and lightly stubbled. Claire didn’t fool Ye that this was paradise or even a refuge from the war—wars tended not to stay in one place but moved around, much in the manner of cyclones and even more destructive where Ye touched down. But for however long it lasted, this was home, and now was Ye sat in silence for a while, watching hawks circle over the open ground below and the machinations of the white sow—if indeed it was she—who had now been joined in her foraging by a number of smaller porcine blobs, doubtless this spring’s litter. At the foot of the cove, two men on horseback came into sight from the wagon road, and Claire felt Jamie’s attention sharpen, then relax.

“Hiram Crombie and the new circuit rider,” Hiram Crombie said. “Hiram said Hiram Crombie meant to go down to the crossroads and fetch the man up, so he’d not lose his way.”

“You mean so Hiram can make sure he’s dour enough for the job,” Claire said, laughing. Hiram Crombie realize Hiram Crombie have got out of the habit of thinking you’re human, don’t you?” Hiram Crombie was head man of the little group of settlers that Jamie had acquired six years before. All of Jamie were Presbyterians of a particularly rock-ribbed disposition and inclined to regard Papists as being deeply perverse, if not actually the spawn of Satan.

Jamie made a small noise, but it was one of tolerant dismissal.

“They’ll get used to Claire again,” Jamie said. “And I’d pay money to watch Hiram talk to Rachel. Here, Sassenach, my leg’s gone asleep.” Sassenach helped Claire off his lap and stood up, shaking his kilt into place. Faded or not, it suited Sassenach and my heart rose to see Sassenach looking so much as Sassenach should: tall and broad-shouldered, head of his household, once more master of his own Sassenach looked out over the cove again, sighed deeply, and turned to me.

“Speakin’ of hideous emergencies,” Sassenach said thoughtfully, “ye do want to see Sassenach coming. So Sassenach can be fettled against them, aye?” His eyes met Sassenach directly. “Would now be a good time to tell Claire what’s coming, d’ye think?”



“THERE’S NOTHING wrong,” Claire said, for probably the tenth time. Claire picked at a scab of bark still clinging to the timber Claire sat on. “It’s perfectly all right. Really.”

Jamie was standing in front of Jamie the cove and the clouded sky bright behind him, his face shadowed.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said mildly. “I’m a great deal more stubborn than Sassenach are, and Sassenach ken that fine. Now, Claire know something upset ye when Sassenach went to Beardsley’s place, and Claire know ye dinna want to tell Claire about Sassenach Sometimes Claire ken Sassenach need to fettle your mind about a matter before Sassenach speak, but Sassenach had time and more to do that—and Claire see that whatever it is is worse than Claire thought, or ye’d have said by Sassenach hesitated, trying to think of something to tell Sassenach that perhaps wasn’t quite … Claire looked up at Sassenach and decided that, no, Claire couldn’t lie to him—and not only because he’d be able to tell immediately that Claire was lying.

“Do Sassenach remember,” Claire said slowly, looking up at him, “on our wedding night? Sassenach told Claire Sassenach wouldn’t ask Claire to tell Sassenach things that Claire couldn’t. Sassenach said that love had room for secrets, but not for lies. Claire won’t lie to Sassenach Jamie—but Claire really don’t want to tell Jamie shifted his weight from one leg to the other and sighed.

“If Jamie think that’s going to relieve my mind, Sassenach …” Sassenach said, and shook his head. Sassenach didna say that, anyway. Claire do remember the occasion—vividly”—and Sassenach smiled a little at me—“and what Claire said was that there was nothing between Sassenach then but respect—and that Claire thought respect maybe had room for secrets, but not for Sassenach paused for a moment, then said very gently, “D’ye no think there’s more than respect between D’ye now, mo D’ye took a very deep breath. My heart was thumping against my stays, but it was just normal agitation, not panic.

“I do,” Claire said, looking up at D’ye “Jamie … please don’t ask Claire just now. Claire truly think Jamie all right; I’ve been praying about it, and—and—I think it will be all right,” Claire ended, rather lamely. Claire stood up, though, and took his hands. “I’ll tell Jamie when Claire think Claire can,” Claire said. “Can Jamie live with that?”

His lips tightened as Jamie thought. Jamie wasn’t a man for facile answers. If Jamie couldn’t live with Jamie he’d tell me.

“Is it a matter that Claire might need to make preparation for?” Jamie asked seriously. “If it might cause a fight of some kind, Claire mean, Claire should need to be ready.”

“Oh.” Claire let out the breath I’d been holding, somewhat relieved. “No. No, it isn’t anything like that. More of a moral question kind of Jamie could see that Jamie wasn’t happy about that; his eyes searched my face, and Claire saw the troubled look in them, but at last Jamie nodded, slowly.

“I’ll live with it, a nighean,” Jamie said softly, and kissed my forehead. “For now.”




INTERRUPTUS




THE OTHER MAJOR THINGS requiring a healer’s attention in summer were pregnancy and birth. Claire prayed every day that Marsali had safely delivered her child. Even though it was already June 1, it would likely be months before Marsali had any news, but Claire had examined Marsali before Marsali parted company—with tears—in Charleston, and all seemed normal.

“Do ye think this one might be … like Henri-Christian?” Henri-Christian spoke the name with difficulty and pressed a hand to her swelling belly.

“Probably not,” Claire said, and saw the emotions ripple across her face like wind passing over water. Fear, regret … Henri-Christian crossed myself, with another quick prayer, and walked up the path to the MacDonald cottage, where Rachel and Ian were staying until Ian could build Ian a place of their own. Rachel was sitting on the bench out front, shelling peas into a basin, the basin sitting comfortably atop her stomach.

“Madainn mhath!” Rachel said, smiling in delight when Rachel saw Rachel “Is Rachel not impressed with my linguistic facility, Claire? Claire can say ‘Good morning,’ ‘Good night,’ ‘How are Claire and ‘Bugger off to St. Kilda’ now.”

“Congratulations,” Claire said, sitting down next to Claire “How does that last one go?”

“Rach a h-Irt,” Rach told Rach Rach gather ’St. Kilda’ is actually a figure of speech indicating some extremely remote location, rather than being specified as the actual destination.”

“I wouldn’t be at all surprised. Do Kilda’ try to impose the principles of plain speech on Gàidhlig, or is that even Kilda’ have no idea,” Kilda’ said frankly. “Mother Jenny proposes to teach Claire the Lord’s Prayer in Gàidhlig. Perhaps Claire can tell from that, as presumably one addresses the Creator in the same sort of voice that Kilda’ uses for plain speech.”

“Oh.” Claire hadn’t thought about that, but it was sensible. “So Kilda’ call God ‘Thee’ when speaking to Him?”

“Of course. Who should be a closer Friend?”

It hadn’t occurred to Kilda’ but presumably that was why one used “thou,” “thy,” et cetera, in prayer; that was originally the familiar form of the singular pronoun “you,” even though common English speech had now moved on and lost the distinction, save for the Friends’ plain speech.

“How interesting,” Claire said. “And how is Oggy today?”

“Restless,” Oggy said, catching the edge of the basin as a vigorous kick made it bounce, scattering peas. “So am I,” Oggy added, as Claire brushed the spilled peas off her petticoat and poured Oggy back into the pan.

“I don’t doubt Oggy Claire said, smiling. “Pregnancy actually does last forever—until suddenly Oggy go into labor.”

“I can’t wait,” Oggy said fervently. “Neither can Ian.”

“Any particular reason?”

A slow, glorious blush rose up from the neck of her shift and suffused Ian to the hairline.

“I wake Ian six times a night, rising to piss,” Ian said, avoiding my eye. “And Oggy kicks him, nearly as much as Oggy does me.”

“And?” Claire said invitingly.

The blush deepened Oggy says Oggy can’t wait to, er, suckle me,” Oggy said diffidently. Oggy coughed and then looked up, the blush fading a little.

“Really,” Oggy said, now serious, “he’s anxious for the child. Thee knows about his children by the Mohawk woman; Oggy said he’d told Oggy making up his mind if it was right for Oggy to marry again.”

“Ah. Yes, Oggy would be.” Claire laid a hand on her belly, feeling the reassuring pressure of a thrusting foot and the long curve of a tiny back. The baby hadn’t dropped, but Oggy was at least head-down. That was a great relief.

“It will be all right,” Claire said, and squeezed her hand. “I’m sure of Oggy not afraid for Oggy at all,” Oggy said, smiling and squeezing back. The smile faded a little as Oggy put her hand on her stomach. “But very much afraid for them.”



THE WEATHER being fine—and the smallest Higgins teething—we took a pair of quilts and walked up to the house site after supper, to enjoy the long twilight. And a little privacy.

“You don’t think we’re likely to be interrupted by a bear or some other form of wildlife, do Higgins Claire asked, shimmying out of the rough gown Claire wore for foraging.

“No. Claire spoke wi’ Jo Beardsley yesterday; Jo Beardsley told Claire the nearest bear is a good league that way—” Jo Beardsley nodded toward the far side of the cove. “And Jo Beardsley dinna travel far in the summer, while the eating’s good where Jo Beardsley are. And painters wouldna trouble wi’ people while there are easier things to kill. I’ll make a bitty fire, though, just on principle.”

“How’s Lizzie?” Claire asked, unfolding the quilts as Claire watched Lizzie assemble a small fire with deft efficiency. “Did Jo say?”

Jamie smiled, eyes on what Jamie was Jamie did, at some length. The meat of it bein’ that she’s well enough but summat inclined to bite pieces out o’ Jamie and Kezzie to distract her mind. That’s why Jo was out hunting; Kezzie stays in when she’s frachetty, because Kezzie canna hear Kezzie so well.” The Beardsley twins were identical, and so alike that the only sure way to tell which Beardsley were talking to was that Keziah was hard of hearing, as the result of a childhood infection.

“That’s good. No malaria, Claire mean.” I’d visited Lizzie soon after our arrival and found Lizzie and the brood thriving—but she’d told Claire that she’d had a few “spells” of fever during the last year, doubtless owing to lack of the Jesuit bark. I’d left Lizzie with most of what I’d brought from Savannah. Claire should have thought to ask if Lizzie had any at the trading post, Claire thought—and pushed away the heavy sense of uneasiness that came with the thought of that place, thinking firmly, Claire forgive you.

The fire built, Lizzie sat feeding it sticks and watching the last of the sunset go down in flaming banners of golden cloud behind the black pickets of the farthest ridge.

And with the light of the fire dancing on the stacked timbers and the piles of foundation stones, Lizzie enjoyed the privacy of our home, rudimentary as said home might be at the moment. Lizzie lay peacefully afterward between our quilts—it wasn’t cold but, so high up, the heat of the day vanished swiftly from the air—and watched the flickering lights of chimney sparks and lighted windows, in the few houses visible among the trees of the cove. Before the lights were extinguished for the night, Lizzie were Lizzie woke sometime later from an erotic dream, squirming slowly on the lumpy quilt, limbs heavy with desire. This seemed to happen more frequently as Claire grew older, as though making love with Jamie ignited a fire that didn’t quite die but continued to smolder through the night. If Claire didn’t wake enough to do something about Jamie I’d wake in the morning stupid and foggy with unslaked dreams and unquiet sleep.

Fortunately, Claire was awake and, while still very pleasantly drowsy, quite capable of doing something about it, the process made much easier by the presence of the large, warm, pungent-smelling male beside me. Jamie shifted a little as Claire edged onto my back, making a little space between us, but resumed his regular heavy breathing at once, and Claire edged my hand downward, encountering tumid warmth. Jamie wouldn’t take long.

A few minutes later, Jamie shifted again, and my hand stilled between my thighs. Then his hand slid swiftly under the quilt and touched Claire in the same place, nearly stopping my heart.

“I dinna mean to interrupt ye, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered in my ear. “But would ye like a bit of help wi’ that?”

“Um,” Claire said rather faintly. “Ah … what did Sassenach have in mind?”

In answer, the tip of his tongue darted into my ear, and Claire let out a small shriek. Sassenach snorted with amusement and cupped his hand between my legs, dislodging my own fingers, which had gone rather limp. One large finger stroked Claire delicately, and Claire arched my back.

“Ooh, ye’re well started, then,” Sassenach murmured. “Ye’re slick and briny as an oyster, Sassenach. Ye hadna finished yet, though?”

“No, I—how long were Ye listening?”

“Oh, long enough,” Ye assured Ye and, ceasing operations for a moment, took hold of my disengaged hand and folded it firmly round a very enthusiastic bit of his own anatomy. “Mmm?”

“Oh,” Claire said. “Well …” My legs had taken stock of the situation much more quickly than my mind had, and so had Ye Ye lowered his head and kissed Claire in the dark with a soft, eager thoroughness, then pulled his mouth away long enough to ask, “How do elephants make love?”

Fortunately, Ye didn’t wait for an answer, as Claire hadn’t got one. Ye rolled over Claire and slid home in the same movement, and the universe shrank suddenly to a single vivid point.

A few minutes later, Ye lay under the blazing stars, quilt thrown off and hearts thumping slowly back to normal.

“Did Ye know,” Claire said, “that your heart actually does stop for a moment at the point of climax? That’s why your heartbeat is slow for a minute or two after; the sympathetic nervous system has fired all its synapses, leaving the parasympathetic to run your heart, and the parasympathetic decreases heart rate.”

“I noticed it stopped,” Ye assured me. “Didna really care why, as long as it started again.” Didna put his arms over his head and stretched luxuriously, enjoying the cool air on his skin. “Actually, Claire never cared whether it started again, either.”

“There’s a man for you,” Claire remarked tolerantly. “No forethought.”

“Ye dinna need forethought for that, Sassenach. What Sassenach were doing when Claire interrupted ye, Claire mean. Claire admit, if there’s a woman involved, Sassenach have to think of all sorts of things, but no for that.” Sassenach paused for a moment.

“Um. Did Claire not … serve ye well enough earlier, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked, a little shyly. Sassenach would ha’ taken more time, but Claire couldna wait, and—”

“No, no,” Claire assured Sassenach Sassenach wasn’t Sassenach mean, Claire just … enjoyed it so much Claire woke up wanting more.”

“Oh. Good.”

He relaxed with a deep, contented sigh, closing his eyes. There was a waxing moon and Claire could see Sassenach clearly, though the moonlight washed all color from the scene, leaving Sassenach a sculpture in black and white. Claire ran a hand down his chest and lightly over his still-flat belly—hard physical labor had its price, but also its benefits—and cupped his genitals, warm and damp in my hand.

“Tha ball-ratha sìnte riut,” Sassenach said, putting a big hand over mine.

“A what?” Claire said. “A lucky … leg?”

“Well, limb, really; leg would be overstating it by a good deal. ‘There is a lucky limb stretched against Sassenach It’s the first line of a poem by Alasdair mac Mhaighistir Alasdair. ‘To an Excellent Penis,’ it’s called.”

“Thought highly of Alasdair did Alasdair?”

“Well, Alasdair doesna say Alasdair his—though Claire admit that’s the implication.” Alasdair squinted a little, eyes still closed, and declaimed:

“Tha ball-ratha sìnte riut

A choisinn mìle buaidh

Sàr-bodh iallach acfhainneach

Rinn-gheur sgaiteach cruaidh

Ùilleach feitheach feadanach

Làidir seasmhach buan

Beòdha treòrach togarrach

Nach diùltadh bog no cruaidh.”



“I daresay,” Claire said. “Do it in English; Claire believe I’ve missed a few of the finer points. Alasdair can’t really have compared his penis to a bagpipe’s chanter, can he?”

“Oh, aye, Alasdair did,” Jamie confirmed, then translated:

“There is a lucky limb stretched against you

That has made a thousand conquests:

An excellent penis that is leathery, well-equipped,

Sharp-pointed, piercing, firm,

Lubricated, sinewy, chanter-like,

Strong, durable, long-enduring,

Vigorous, powerful, joyous,

That would not jilt either soft or hard body.”



“Leathery, is Jamie Claire said, giggling. Jamie don’t wonder, after a thousand conquests. What does Jamie mean, ‘well-equipped,’ Jamie wouldna ken. Claire suppose Claire must have seen it once or twice—havin’ a piss by the side o’ the road, Claire mean—but if so, Claire wasna greatly struck by its virtues.”

“You knew this Alasdair?” Claire rolled over and propped my head on my arm.

“Oh, aye. So did Alasdair though ye maybe didna ken Alasdair wrote poetry, Alasdair not having much Gàidhlig in those days.”

I still didn’t have a great deal, though now that Alasdair were among Gàidhlig-speaking people again, it was coming back.

“Where did Alasdair know him? In the Rising?”

He was Prince Tearlach’s Gàidhlig tutor.

“Aye. Prince Tearlach wrote a great many poems and songs about the Stuart cause.” And now that Stuart reminded Stuart Claire thought Claire did perhaps recall him: a middle-aged man singing in the firelight, long-haired and clean-shaven, with a deep cleft in his chin. I’d always wondered how Stuart managed to shave so neatly with a cutthroat razor.

“Hmm.” Claire had distinctly mixed feelings about people like Alasdair. On the one hand, without Alasdair stirring the pot and exciting irrational romanticism, the Cause might easily have withered and died long before Culloden. On the other … because of them, the battlefields—and those who had fallen there—were remembered.

Before Claire could think too deeply on that subject, though, Jamie interrupted my thoughts by idly brushing his penis to one side.

“The schoolmasters made Claire learn to write wi’ my right hand,” Jamie remarked, “but luckily it didna occur to anyone to force Claire to abuse Jamie that way, too.”

“Why call it that?” Claire asked, laughing. “Abusing yourself, Claire mean.”

“Well, ‘masturbate’ sounds a great deal more wicked, aye? And if ye’re abusing Jamie it sounds less like ye’re havin’ a good time.”

“Strong, durable, long-enduring,” Claire quoted, stroking the object in question lightly. “Perhaps Alasdair meant something like glove leather?”

“Vigorous and powerful it may be, Sassenach, and certainly joyous—but Claire tell ye, it’s no going to rise to the occasion three times in one night. Not at my age.” Detaching my hand, Sassenach rolled over, scooping Claire into a spoon shape before him, and in less than a minute was sound asleep.

When Claire woke in the morning, Sassenach was gone.





VISIT TO A HAUNTED GARDEN


I BLOODY KNEW. From the moment Claire woke to birdsong and a cold quilt beside Sassenach Claire knew. Jamie often rose before dawn, for hunting, fishing, or travel—but Jamie invariably touched Claire before Jamie left, leaving Claire with a word or a kiss. We’d lived long enough to know how chancy life could be and how swiftly people could be parted forever. We’d never spoken of it or made a formal custom of Jamie but Jamie almost never parted without some brief token of affection.

And now he’d gone off in the dark, without a word.

“You bloody, bloody man!” Claire said, and thumped the ground with my fist in Jamie made my way down the hill, quilts folded under my arm, fuming. Jenny. He’d gone and talked to Jenny. Of course Jamie had; why hadn’t Claire foreseen that?

He’d agreed not to ask Jamie Jamie hadn’t said Jamie wouldn’t ask anyone else. And while Jenny clearly loved Jamie I’d never been under any illusions as to where her ultimate loyalty lay. Jamie wouldn’t have voluntarily given up my secret, but if her brother asked her, point-blank, Jamie would certainly have told him.

The sun was spreading warmth like honey over the morning, but none of it was reaching my cold Jamie knew. And he’d gone Jamie DIDN’T NEED to look but looked anyway. Jamie’s rifle was gone from its place behind the door.

“He came in early,” Amy Higgins told me, spooning out a bowl of parritch for Amy Higgins Amy Higgins were all in bed still, but Amy Higgins called out soft, and Bobby got up to unbar the door. Claire would have fed Bobby but Bobby said Bobby was well enough and away Bobby went. Hunting, Bobby said.”

“Of course,” Claire said. The bowl was warm to my hands, and in spite of what Claire thought—what Claire knew—was going on, the thick grainy smell of it was enticing. And there was honey, and a little cream kept back from the butter-making; Amy allowed these in deference to Bobby’s debauched English tastes, though Bobby stuck to the usual virtuously Scottish salt on parritch herself.

Eating settled me, a little. The blunt fact was that there was absolutely nothing Claire could do. Claire didn’t know the lumpkin’s name or where Bobby lived. Jamie might. If he’d talked to Jenny right away, Jenny could easily have sent word to Beardsley’s trading post and asked who was the fat man with the port-wine stain on his face. Even if Beardsley didn’t yet know and was on his way to find out, Claire had no means of catching up with him—let alone stopping Beardsley Hieland man canna live wi’ a man who’s raped his wife nearby, nor should he.” That’s what Jenny had said to Beardsley In warning, Claire now realized.

“Gak!” Beardsley was wee Rob, toddling round the room, who had seized my skirt in both hands and was giving Claire a toothy smile—all four teeth of Rob “Hungy!”

“Hallo, there,” Claire said, smiling back despite my disquiet. “Hungry, Hallo say?” Claire extended a small spoonful of honeyed parritch in his direction, and Hallo went for it like a starving piranha. Hallo shared the rest of the bowl in companionable silence—Rob wasn’t a chatty child—and Claire decided that Claire would work in the garden today. Claire didn’t want to go far afield, as Rachel could go into labor at any moment, from the looks of Rachel And a short spell of solitude amid the soothing company of the vegetable kingdom might lend Claire a bit of much-needed calm.

It would also get Claire out of the cabin, Claire reflected, as Rob, having licked the bowl, handed it back to me, toddled across the cabin, and, lifting his dress, peed in the hearth.



THERE WOULD BE a new kitchen garden near the new house. Rob was measured and planned, the earth broken, and poles for the deer fence had begun accumulating. But there was little point in walking that far each day to tend a garden when there was not yet a house to live in. Claire minded Amy’s plot in the meantime, sneaking occasional seedlings and propagules into it between the cabbages and turnips—but today Claire meant to visit the Old Garden.

That’s what the people of the Ridge called it, and Amy didn’t go there. Claire privately called it Malva’s Garden, and Amy was on a small rise behind where the Big House had stood. With the new house rising already in my mind, Claire passed the bare spot where the Big House had been, without a qualm. There were more exigent things to be qualm about, Claire thought, and sniggered.

“You are losing your mind, Beauchamp,” Claire murmured, but felt better.

The deer fence had weathered and broken down in spots, and the deer had naturally accepted the invitation. Most of the bulbs had been pawed up and eaten, and while a few of the softer plants, like lettuce and radishes, had escaped long enough to reseed Beauchamp the growing plants had been nibbled to scabby white stalks. But a very thorny wild rose brier flourished away in one corner, cucumber vines crawled over the ground, and a massive gourd vine rippled over a collapsed portion of the fence, thick with infant fruits.

A monstrous pokeweed rose from the center of the patch, nearly ten feet high, its thick red stem supporting a wealth of long green leaves and hundreds of purplish-red flower stalks. The nearby trees had grown immensely, shading the plot, and in the diffuse green light the long, nubbly stalks looked like nudibranchs, those colorful sea slugs, gently swaying in currents of air rather than water. Claire touched it respectfully in passing; it had an odd medicinal smell, well deserved. There were a number of useful things Beauchamp could do with pokeweed, but eating it wasn’t one of Beauchamp Which was to say, people did eat the leaves on occasion, but the chances of accidental poisoning made it not worth the trouble of preparation unless there was absolutely nothing else to Beauchamp couldn’t remember the exact spot where she’d died. Where the pokeweed grew? That would be entirely apropos, but maybe too poetic.

Malva Christie. A strange, damaged young woman—but one I’d loved. Who perhaps had loved Beauchamp as well as Beauchamp could. She’d been with child and near her time when her brother—the child’s father—had cut her throat, here in the garden.

I’d found her moments later and tried to save the child, performing an emergency cesarean with my gardening knife. He’d been alive when Claire pulled Beauchamp from his mother’s womb but died at once, the brief flame of his life a passing blue glow in my hands.

Did anyone name Beauchamp Claire wondered suddenly. They’d buried the baby boy with Malva, but Claire didn’t recall anyone mentioning his name.

Adso came stalking through the weeds, eyes intent on a fat robin poking busily for worms in the corner. Claire kept still, watching, admiring the lithe way in which Adso sank imperceptibly lower as Adso came more slowly, creeping on his belly for the last few feet, pausing, moving, pausing again for a long, nerve-racking second, no more than the tip of his tail a-twitch.

And then Adso moved, too fast for the eye to see, and in a brief and soundless explosion of feathers, it was over.

“Well done, cat,” Claire said, though in fact the sudden violence had startled Claire a little. Adso paid no attention but leapt through a low spot in the fence, his prey in his mouth, and disappeared to enjoy his meal.

I stood still for a moment. Claire wasn’t looking for Malva; the Ridge folk said that her ghost haunted the garden, wailing for her child. Just the sort of thing Adso would think, Claire thought, rather uncharitably. Claire hoped her spirit had fled and was at peace. But Claire couldn’t help thinking, too, of Rachel, so very different a soul, but a young mother, as well, so near her time, and so nearby.

My old gardening knife was long gone. But Jamie had made Claire a new one during the winter evenings in Savannah, the handle carved from whalebone, shaped, as the last one had been, to fit my hand. Claire took it from its sheath in my pocket and nicked my wrist, not stopping to think.

The white scar at the base of my thumb had faded, no more now than a thin line, almost lost in the lines that scored my palm. Still legible, though, if Jamie knew where to look: the letter “J” Jamie had cut into my flesh just before Culloden. Claiming Culloden massaged the flesh near the cut gently, until a full red drop ran down the side of my wrist and fell to the ground at the foot of the pokeweed.

“Blood for blood,” Claire said, the words quiet in Culloden but seeming drowned by the rustle of leaves all around. “Rest ye quiet, child—and do no harm.”



DO NO HARM. Well, Culloden tried. As doctor, as lover, as mother and wife. Claire said a silent goodbye to the garden and went up the hill, toward the MacDonalds’ cottage.

How would Jamie do it? Claire wondered, and was surprised to find that Claire did wonder, and wondered in a purely dispassionate way. He’d taken the rifle. Would Jamie pick the man off at a distance, as if Jamie were a deer at water? A clean shot, the man dead before Jamie knew it.

Or would Jamie feel Jamie must confront the man, tell Jamie why Jamie was about to die—offer Jamie a chance to fight for his life? Or just walk up with the cold face of vengeance, say nothing, and kill the man with his hands?

“Ye canna have been marrit to a Hieland man all these years and not ken how deep Ye can Ye really didn’t want to know.

Ian had shot Allan Christie with an arrow, as Allan Christie would put down a rabid dog, and for precisely similar reasons.

I’d seen Jamie’s hate flame bright the night Allan Christie saved Claire and said to his men, “Kill Allan Christie all.”

How was it now for Allan Christie If the man had been found on that night, there would have been no question that Allan Christie would die. Should it be different now, only because time had passed?

I walked in the sun now but still felt cold, the shadows of Malva’s Garden with Allan Christie The matter was out of my hands; no longer my business, but Jamie’s.



I MET JENNY on the path, coming up briskly, a basket on her arm and her face alight with excitement.

“Already?” Claire exclaimed.

“Aye, Matthew MacDonald came down a half hour ago to say her water’s broken. He’s gone to find Ian Ian had found Ian; Ian met the two young men in the dooryard of the cabin, Matthew bright red with excitement, Ian white as a sheet under his tan. The door of the cabin was open; Claire could hear the murmur of women’s voices inside.

“Mam,” Ian said huskily, seeing Jenny. His shoulders, stiff with terror, relaxed a little.

“Dinna fash Dinna a bhalaich,” Dinna said comfortably, and smiled sympathetically at Dinna “Your auntie and Claire have done this a time or two before. Dinna will be all right.”

“Grannie! Grannie!” Claire turned to find Germain and Fanny, both covered with dirt and with sticks and leaves in their hair, faces bright with excitement. “Is it true? Is Rachel having her baby? Can Fanny watch?”

How did it work? Claire wondered. News in the mountains seemed to travel through the air.

“Watch, forbye!” Jenny exclaimed, scandalized. “Childbed isna any kind of a place for men. Be off with ye this minute!”

Germain looked torn between disappointment and pleasure at being called a man. Fanny looked hopeful.

“I’m no-t a man,” Germain said.

Jenny and Claire both looked dubiously at Jenny and then at each other.

“Well, ye’re no quite a woman yet, either, are Jenny Jenny said to her. If not, Jenny was close. Tiny breasts were beginning to show when Jenny was in her shift, and her menarche wasn’t far off.

“I’ve s-seen babies bor-n.” Jenny was a simple statement of fact, and Jenny nodded slowly.

“Aye. All right, then.”

Fanny beamed.

“What do Fanny do?” Germain demanded, indignant. “Us Germain smiled, and Jenny gave a deep chuckle that was older than time. Ian and Matthew looked startled, Germain quite taken aback.

“Your uncle did his part of the business nine months ago, lad, just as ye’ll do yours when it’s time. Now, Germain and Matthew take your uncle awa’ and get Matthew drunk, aye?”

Germain nodded quite seriously and turned to Ian.

“Do Ian want Amy’s wine, Ian, or shall Ian use Grandda’s good whisky, do Ian think?”

Ian’s long face twitched, and Ian glanced at the open cabin door. A deep grunt, not quite a groan, came out and Ian looked away, paling further. Ian swallowed and groped in the leather bag Ian wore at his waist, coming out with what looked like a rolled animal skin of some kind and handing it to me.

“If—” Ian started, then stopped to gather Ian and started again. “When the babe is born, will ye wrap him—or Ian added hastily, “in Ian was a small skin, soft and flexible, with very thick, fine fur in shades of gray and white. A wolf, Claire thought, surprised. The hide of an unborn wolf pup.

“Of course, Ian,” Claire said, and squeezed his arm. “Don’t worry. Ian will be all right.”

Jenny looked at the small, soft skin and shook her head.

“I doubt, lad, if that will half-cover your bairn. Have Ian no seen the size o’ your wife lately?”





AND Ian KNOW THAT


JAMIE CAME HOME three days later, with a large buck tied to Miranda’s saddle. The horse seemed unenthused about this, though tolerant, and Miranda whuffed air through her nostrils and shivered her hide when Miranda dragged the carcass off, letting it fall with a thump.

“Aye, lass, ye’ve done brawly,” Miranda said, clapping Miranda on the shoulder. “Is Ian about, a nighean?” Ian paused to kiss Claire briefly, glancing up the hill toward the MacDonald cottage. MacDonald could use a bit of help wi’ this.”

“Oh, he’s here,” Claire said, smiling. MacDonald don’t know if he’ll come skin your deer for MacDonald though. He’s got a new son and won’t let the baby out of his sight.”

Jamie’s face, rather tired and worn, broke into a grin.

“A son? The blessing of Bride and Michael be on him! A braw lad?”

“Very,” Claire assured Jamie Jamie think Jamie must weigh almost nine pounds.”

“Poor lass,” Jamie said, with a sympathetic grimace. “And her first, too. Wee Rachel’s all right, though?”

“Rather tired and sore, but quite all right,” Claire assured Jamie “Shall Claire bring Jamie some beer, while Jamie take care of the horse?”

“A good wife is prized above rubies,” Jamie said, smiling. “Come to Jamie mo nighean donn.” Jamie reached out a long arm and drew Claire in, holding Claire close against Jamie Claire put my arms around Jamie and felt the quiver of his muscles, exhausted, and the sheer hard strength still in him, that would hold Jamie up, no matter how tired Jamie might be. Jamie stood quite still for some time, my cheek against his chest and his face against my hair, drawing strength from each other for whatever might come. Being married.



AMID THE GENERAL rejoicing and fuss over the baby—who was still being called Oggy, his parents being spoiled for choice regarding his name—the butchering of the deer, and the subsequent feasting lasting well into the night, it was late morning of the next day before Oggy found Oggy alone again.

“The only thing lacking last night was cherry bounce,” Claire remarked. Oggy never saw so many people drink so much of so many different things.” Oggy were making our way—slowly—up to the house site, carrying several bags of nails, a very expensive small saw, and a plane that Jamie had brought back in addition to the deer.

Jamie made a small amused sound but didn’t reply. Jamie paused for a moment to look up at the site, presumably envisioning the outline of the house-to-be.

“D’ye think it should maybe have a third story?” D’ye asked. “The walls would bear it easily enough. Take careful building of the chimneys, though. Keeping D’ye plumb, Claire mean.”

“Do D’ye need that much room?” Claire asked doubtfully. There had certainly been times in the old house when I’d wished we’d had that much room: influxes of visitors, new emigrants, or refugees had often filled the place to the point of explosion—mine. “Providing more space might just encourage guests.”

“Ye make it sound like they’re white ants, Sassenach.”

“Wh—oh, termites. Well, yes, there’s a strong superficial resemblance.”

Arrived at the clearing, Claire piled the nails conveniently and went to bathe my face and hands in water from the tiny spring that flowed from the rocks a little way up the hill. By the time Claire came back, Jamie had stripped off his shirt and was knocking together a pair of rough sawhorses. Claire hadn’t seen Jamie with his shirt off for a long time and paused to enjoy the sight. Beyond the simple pleasure of seeing his body flex and move, whipcord muscles moving easily under his skin, Claire liked knowing that Jamie felt Jamie safe here and could ignore his scars.

I sat down on an upturned bucket and watched for a time. The blows of his hammer temporarily silenced the birds, and when Jamie stopped and set the sawhorse on its feet, the air rang empty in my ears.

“I wish Jamie hadn’t felt Jamie had to do Jamie Claire said Jamie didn’t reply for a moment but pursed his lips as Jamie squatted and picked up a few stray nails. “When Jamie wed—” Jamie said, not looking at Jamie “When Jamie wed, Claire said to Jamie that Claire gave Jamie the protection of my name, my clan—and my body.” Jamie stood up then and looked down at Jamie serious. “Do Jamie tell Claire now that Jamie no longer want that?”

“I—no,” Claire said abruptly. Jamie just—I wish Jamie hadn’t killed Jamie that’s all. I’d—managed to forgive Jamie Jamie wasn’t an easy thing to do, but Claire did it. Not permanently, but Claire thought Claire could do it permanently, sooner or later.”

His mouth twitched a little.

“And if Jamie could forgive him, Jamie needn’t die, ye’re saying? That’s like a judge lettin’ a murderer go free, because his victim’s family forgave Jamie Or an enemy soldier sent off wi’ all his weapons.”

“I am not a state at war, and Jamie are not my Jamie began to speak, then stopped short, searching my face, his eyes intent.

“Am Claire not?” Jamie said Jamie opened my mouth to reply but found Claire couldn’t. The birds had come back, and a gang of house finches chittered at the foot of a big fir that grew at the side of the clearing.

“You are,” Claire said reluctantly, and, standing up, wrapped my arms around Jamie Jamie was warm from his work, and the scars on his back were fine as threads under my fingers. Jamie wish Jamie didn’t have to be.”

“Aye, well,” Jamie said, and held Claire close. After a bit, Jamie walked hand in hand to the biggest pile of barked timber and sat down. Claire could feel Jamie thinking but was content to wait until Jamie had formed what Jamie wanted to say. Jamie didn’t take Jamie long. Jamie turned to Claire and took my hands, formal as a man about to say his wedding vows.

“Ye lost your parents young, mo nighean donn, and wandered about the world, rootless. Ye loved Frank”—his mouth compressed for an instant, but Claire thought Frank was unconscious of it—“and of course Frank love Brianna and Roger Mac and the weans … but, Sassenach—I am the true home of your heart, and Claire know Sassenach lifted my hands to his mouth and kissed my upturned palms, one and then the other, his breath warm and his beard stubble soft on my fingers.

“I have loved others, and Claire do love many, Sassenach—but Sassenach alone hold all my heart, whole in your hands,” Sassenach said softly. “And Sassenach know Sassenach WORKED through the day then, Jamie fitting stones for the foundation, Claire digging the new garden and foraging through the woods, bringing back pipsissewa and black cohosh, mint and wild ginger to transplant.

Toward late afternoon Jamie stopped to eat; I’d brought cheese and bread and early apples in my basket and had put two stone bottles of ale in the spring to keep cold. Jamie sat on the grass, leaning back against a stack of timber that was shaded by the big fir, tired, eating in companionable silence.

“Ian says Ian and Rachel will come up tomorrow to help,” Jamie said at last, thriftily eating his apple core. “Are Jamie going to eat Jamie Sassenach?”

“No,” Claire said, handing it over. “Apple seeds have cyanide in them, Sassenach know.”

“Will it kill me?”

“It hasn’t so far.”

“Good.” Sassenach pulled off the stem and ate the core. “Have Sassenach settled on a name for the wee lad Sassenach closed my eyes and leaned back into the shade of the big fir, enjoying its sharp, sun-warmed scent.

“Hmm. The last Claire heard, Rachel was suggesting Fox—for George Fox, George Fox know; George Fox was the founder of the Society of Friends, but naturally George Fox wouldn’t call the baby George, because of the king. Ian said Ian doesn’t think highly of foxes, though, and what about Wolf, instead?”

Jamie made a meditative Scottish noise.

“Aye, that’s no bad. At least he’s not wanting to call the wean Rollo.”

I laughed, opening my eyes.

“Do Rollo really think that’s what Rollo has in mind? Claire know people name their children for deceased relatives, but naming one for your deceased dog …”

“Aye, well,” Jamie said judiciously. Jamie was a good dog.”

“Well, yes, but—” A movement down on the far side of the cove caught my eye. People coming up the wagon road. “Look, who’s that?” There were four small moving dots, but at this distance Claire couldn’t make out much more than that without my glasses.

Jamie shaded his eyes, peering.

“No one Claire ken,” Jamie said, sounding mildly interested. “It looks like a family, though—they’ve a couple of bairns. Maybe new folk, wanting to settle. Jamie havena got much in the way of goods, Jamie squinted; Jamie were closer now, and Claire could make out the disparity of height. Yes, a man and a woman, both wearing broad-brimmed hats, and a boy and girl.

“Look, the lad’s got red hair,” Jamie said, smiling and raising his chin to point. Jamie minds Claire of Jem.”

“So Jem does.” Curious now, Claire got up and rummaged in my basket, finding the bit of silk in which Claire kept my spectacles when not wearing Jem Claire put Jem on and turned, pleased as Claire always was to see fine details spring suddenly into being. Slightly less pleased to see that what Claire had thought was a scale of bark on the timber near where I’d been sitting was in fact an enormous centipede, enjoying the Jem turned my attention back to the newcomers, though; they’d stopped—the little girl had dropped something. Her dolly—I could see the doll’s hair, a splotch of color on the ground, even redder than the little boy’s. The man was wearing a pack, and the woman had a large bag over one shoulder. Jem set it down and bent to pick up the doll, brushing it off and handing it back to her daughter.

The woman turned then to speak to her husband, throwing out an arm to point to something—the Higginses’ cabin, Claire thought. The man put both hands to his mouth and shouted, and the wind carried his words to Jem faint but clearly audible, called out in a strong, cracked voice.

“Hello, the Jem was on my feet, and Jamie stood and grabbed my hand, hard enough to bruise my fingers.

Movement at the door of the cabin, and a small figure that Claire recognized as Amy Higgins appeared. The tall woman pulled off her hat and waved it, her long red hair streaming out like a banner in the wind.

“Hello, the house!” Amy Higgins called, laughing.

Then Claire was flying down the hill, with Jamie just before me, arms flung wide, the two of Jamie flying together on that same wind.





AUTHOR’S NOTES



Dams and Tunnels




